HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal English blazon or coat of arms A NOTABLE
TREATISE OF THE CHVRCH, IN which are handled all the principal questions,
that have been moved in our time concerning that matter.

BY PHILIP OF MORNAY, Lord of Plessis Marlyn, Gentleman of France.

And translated out of French into English by Io. Feilde.

APOCAL. 18.4.5. Go out of Babylon my people, that you be not partakers in her
sins, and that ye receive not of her plagues. For her sins are come up into
heaven, and God has remembered her iniquities.

Imprinted at London by Christopher Barker, Printer to the Queens Majesty.

ANNO. DOM. 1579.

decorated border

THE BRIEF CONTENTS OF THE CHAPTERS OF this present treatise.
1 WHat the visible Church is, and what are the diverse states thereof. 2 That
of the visible and universal Church, some parts are pure, and other some
impure, and what are the infallible marks of the pure Churches. 3 That the
other marks which our adversaries allege, are common both to the pure and
impure Churches, and which are they that most commonly deceive us. 4 That the
holy Scripture is the undoubted touchstone, to prove the purity of doctrine,
which doctrine is the mark of the pure Churches. 5 That there can be no other
Judge of the controversies of this time, but the holy Scripture, and how every
one may judge them by it. 6 That the visible Church may err, yea and that in
matters of Faith and salvation, and that is proved in every of her particular
states. 7 That the Pope or bishop of Rome is not head of the visible and
universal Church, by Gods Law. 8 That the Pope or Bishop of Rome is not head
of the visible universal Church by man's law, and how he has usurped this
power. 9 That the Pope in calling himself head of the Church, and not being
head, is the Antichrist in the Church, and that Antichrist cannot be received
into the Church with any other then the Popish doctrine. 10 That every one is
bound to separate himself from the communion of Antichrist, and that the
Romanists are Schismatickes, and not they which separate themselves from the
same. 11 That the Ministers of the reformed Churches have a lawful vocation to
redress and reform the Church. 12 The recapitulation or brief rehearsal of
the principal conclusions of this treatise.
To the right honorable, and my very good Lord, the Lord Robert Dudley, Earl
of Leycester, Baron of Denbigh, Knight of the most noble order of the Garter,
Master of the Queens Majesty's Horses, and one of her Graces most honorable
privy Council: Io. Feilde wissheth increase of grace, and all spiritual
gifts by Jesus Christ our Lord.
BEing willing (Right Honorable, and my very good Lord) in the sight of all
the world, to leave some public testimony of my humble duty and unfeigned
good will toward your Honor: I thought I could no better way perform it,
then by dedicating these poor labors of mine to be shrouded and harbored
under your good and favorable protection. And albeit I must confess that my
translation is not worthy such a Patron, yet this I must needs say, that the
work it self, both in respect of the Aucthour that wrote it, and also of the
matter, is worthy not only of your Honors defense, but also of the defense of
all noble men, yea of the greatest Princes in the world, if they will answer
their calling, and hold of God to maintain his Church and truth, and will
set greatest price upon things that are most precious. For concerning the
Author, though I be not acquainted with his person, yet this is sufficient,
that I know him by his virtue, and by this excellent work: who as he is a
Gentleman of a noble house, and employed in weighty affairs, which
sufficiently commends his credit and wisdom to the world, so, which is a
thing to be marueiled at, amiddest all his business, whilst he lay here, he
set forth this notable treatise, wherein he has showed such learning and
reading, with judgment and sincerity to the Church of God, as I know not
whether from a man of his place any has ever been more learnedly and piththily
published, and that more may make to the edifying of the Church of God, and
confuting the adversary. The Lord send many such Ambassadors, that evermore
their policy may be guided by divinity. And thus much both for the person and
the work. Now touching the translation. In very deed, I have therein studied
to be plain and simple, keeping my self to mine Aucthour, both in words and
meaning, so far forth as the propriety of the tongue would suffer me.
Wherefore (good my Lord) I most humbly beseech your Honor to accept this my
humble and bounden duty: and as by your Honor I dedicate it to the Church of
England, so I humbly crave that it may be defended: for hereunto is your Honor
called of God, and therefore has he given you your authority, that you
should maintain his Church, love his religion, set your self against
Popery, and live and die to his glory. He has honored you, that you should
honor him, and has set you up, that you should maintain him. And wholly to
trust in him, and to live to him, is a stay that can never fail, neither in
this world, nor in the world to come. All other things shall fail, for all
flesh is grass, and the glory of man is as the flower of the field: but God
is everlasting, his word is everlasting, and they that are begotten to him by
the immortal seed of his word, shall live for ever. And this life begins
and grows in us, as we grow and increase in the true knowledge of God, to
the increasing of our faith, and working in us, as the seal of our adoption,
that true sanctification, that makes us to live unto God by righteousness,
purely to worship him according to his word: and with brotherly love deuoyde
of all hypocrysie, from a pure heart to love our neighbors. This (my Lord) is
true religion, whereunto as God in great mercy has called your Honor, so go
cherefully forward: beware of this vain world, and of that vain trust that
wicked men are wont to put in it. Lean not upon it, but stop your ears
against the enchaunting and fawning whisperings of hollow hearted Papists, and
dissolute professors: for there can be no greater trespass against the Lord,
then to lean upon Assyria, to rest in the strength of Egypt, to go down into
Ethiopia. Cursed is that man that puts his trust in man, and makes flesh
his arm, he shall be like the heath that grows in the wilderness: but
contrariwise, he that trusts in the Lord, mercy shall embrace him on every
side, he shall never be confounded, he shall be as Mount Sion, and shall never be
removed: For the Lord is his secret place, and is with him, therefore who can
be against him? what is a man's bow? what are his legs? what is the
swiftness of Horses, or the strength of an hoaste, or the favor of all the
princes of the world in comparison of God, in whom is only the assurance of
that everlasting inheritance? It is the God of Jacob that must be our defense,
our strong tower and rock, the Chariot and horsemen of Israel, the testimony
of his presence and favor, that only can make us glad. Wherefore, again and
again I most humbly beseech your Honor, beware of the vain trust and
confidence of men in men, and in things that are less worth then men. And as
God has in mercy bestowed upon your Honor great wisdom, so pray that you
may have a discerning spirit, that the deceyueable glory of your prosperity
and high authority, make you not forget your greatest duty: that you may
shine in Christ's Church to the benefit of the whole body, defending Christ
his poor members, to the uttermost of your power, and punishing all his
adversaries: that Agag, upon whom God has given sentence, may not be spared,
nor good Jeremy buffeted: that Michee may be preferred, yea though there be
four hundred false prophets against him. O (my Lord) God asks this at your
Honors hands, and this Church of England craves it, that his ministry may be
mainteyned, his truth may be preserved and continued, the poor people may be
taught and enstructed, wicked heretics may be confuted and abondoned, which
(alas) increase and grow to infinite nombers daily amongst us. For where
through impunitie men may profess what they list, and no trial and
examination is had, according to God his word: there is it any marvel if
Papists, Arrians, Anabaptists, Libertines, and other heretics of al sorts do
daily multiphe and increase? Will they not creep in there, where they may have
greatest rest and quietness? Who sees not that after the preaching of the
Gospel of Christ so many years, amiddest the great peace and blessings God in
mercy has bestowed upon us, because we have been negligent to answer our
callings, to put in practice that we have learned, with bringing forth the
fruits of faith and true repentance, and making conscience of our knowledge,
that the Papists, those enemies of God, and of her royal Majesty, are now
more in number, more obstinate and froward, more malicious, then they were at
her Majesty's most joyful and happy entrance to her scepter and crown? Did
not many more go to Church, and show their conformity (as they call it)
sixteen years ago, then now? And whereto may all this be attributed, but to
impunitie, for that they have been winked at, favored, and spared? which with
what meaning soever it has been done, yet how they have profited thereby, all the world may see, and their treasonable practices may sufficiently witness.
And surely, had not the only hand of God, in mercy been our defense against
them, they had long ere this put us to our shifts, if not prevailed against us.
And though they have been from time to time confuted by such learned and
notable works as this is, against which they are not able once to hiss with
any color of reason: though they have been (I say) courteously and gently
entreated, yet are they never the better, but the worse, only like frogs
that keep a great crooking, and stir against the light of the Sun: so do
they against the glorious and comfortable beams of Christ his Gospel. Seeing
therefore they will not be satisfied with truth, but abuse the merciful
lenity of their gracious Sovereign, it is more then high time (my Lord) that
ye Lords discipline be restored, and that their spreading poison be restrained,
least it be to the hazard, not only of the Church of God amongst us, which can
not thrive amiddest such pestilent and co^bersome weeds, but eue^ to the
endangering (which the Lord of glory turn from us) this flourishing common
weal, and her Majesty's most royal person, crown and dignity. Your
Lordship, I am sure, for your wisdom and great experience, which you have had
this long time, can not but know what dangers their cursed practices, as
Cocatrises, have brought forth and hatched. Their holy league of Trident, for
the dispatch of all Christians, what lamentable effects it has wrought in
France, Spain, Flaunders, and diverse parts in Germany, as also in Scotland,
and even in England amongst our selves, and amiddest our own bowels, I need
not to declare. What has thrust forth unto us from our English fugitives such
pestiferous and traitorous books, defacing Gods holy truth, the Queen her
royal Majesty, many of her honorable Council, and sundry of her loving and
faithful subjects, but the hope of bringing that to pass, which that holy
league had before determined? Have they not discharged (if their discharge
might have been credited) her highness subjects from their loyalty and
obedience to her Majesty their natural prince? have not their Bulls
pronounced her Majesty to be no lawful Queen, whom God has placed over us?
have not their attempts been the seed of rebellion, and caused many to
practice her Graces destruction? Let the rebellion in the North speak for
them, and seal the truth hereof. Let Felton, Story, Madder, Wodhouse, and one
Maine lately executed in Devonshire (amongst whose papers mention was made of
certain hallowed grains, to be given to timeseruing Papists, as tokens for a
Passover, in the day of our general execution, when we should have been al
slain and murdered) bear witness. I say nothing of their diuinations for
their golden day, of their sorceries, witchcrafts, charms, and conferences
they have had with the devil their great master, least I should be to tedious
to your Honor: only let this witness their loyalty and fidelity to their
natural prince, that to have their superstitious idolatry and cursed
religion, their pompeous glory and proud Hierarchy, they would have her
Majesty's life, and adventure not only their bodies, goods and lands, but
even their souls, to bring about their malicious purposes. Of Arrians I would
not willingly write any thing, nor of the other Heretics (I mean)
Anabaptists, Libertines, (which are in deed at this day al shrouded and
fostered under that name of the family of love) but that I know al these
heresies do mischeuously increase amongst us. But I will leave them, and their
pestilent positions, which both by reading their books, and by the confession
of some that have returned from their errors, I have observed and gathered,
and will reserve them to a more fitter treatise: praying your Honor by all
means, both to procure me that favor, that I lose not my labors by Satan's
malice, and also specially to be careful for the preservation of the Church of
GOD, that his Gospel having a free course amongst us, these Dagons may fall
down, and break their necks, by the power of his presence, and your Lordship
be discharged before God: which if your Honor do not, and that to the
uttermost of your power, your sin lies before the door ready to devour
you.

The Lord Jesus bless your Honor, and make you zealous and faithful for the
Gospel, that the canker of these heresies fret no farther, but may in time be
stayed, that God may be glorified, his poor Church preserved, and his gracious
blessings fealed amongst us, not only in our days, but in the days of our
childrens children after us. Amen.

Your good Lordships most bounden and faithful, Io. Feilde.

To the most excellent Prince Henry King of Navarre, Prince and Sovereign Lord
of Bearne, etc. Peer and chief Prince of the blood royal of France.
THIS little book which I presume to offer to your majesty (my very good Lord)
belongs unto you by a double right. First in respect of the matter: for it
entreats of the Church, whereof it has pleased God to raise you up to be a
defender in our country of France. Then in respect of the Author himself:
for seeing that he has vowed and given himself to your majesty, with all
that by Gods grace he is able to bring forth, the propriety and right is in
you. Wherefore, if it shall please you to read, you shall find herein a little
after, what ought to be the right condition of the Church of God, and what now
at this present it is under the tyranny of the Pope, in the Church of Rome,
and consequently, what honor God has showed unto you in our time, choosing
you out from amongst so many great Princes, to deliver it from such a bondage.
The world will make no account of these honors: neither is it of the world.
But to a Christian Prince, who will consider that God does hold his Church so
dear, that he has given his dearly beloved son to the death, and to the
contempt of the world for her sake, this honor shall be more precious in his
sight, then the whole world. This undoubtedly is a great work, and wherein
verily there is much toil: for the word of God is certain, that the nations
and kings of the earth for the most part, will band themselves together, to
maintain and underprop the kingdom of Antichrist. But beyond this, as in
all great things, so in this there remains at the end of this toil, a most
assured victory. For this thing the word of God tells us, that it must
needs be that that kingdom must fall, and that Christ must be acknowledged
through all, to be the King of kings, and Lord of lords, yea that they
themselves which shall have mainteyned Antichrist, shall hew him in pieces. Of
this travel the worst and greatest brunt is already past, God having for the
comfort of his children, divided it amongst so many great and notable
personages, which in our time have travailed therein, and now have rested
themselves from their travails, in that same blessed happiness. And if so be
any thing yet remain, it behooves that you take good courage: For God who has
crowned you, will also crown this good work by you, and as for the forces
which now they do seem to make, what are they else but the gry^ng wringings
of Antichrist? And these griping, ^^^gings are evident and undoubted tokens
that hi^ ^^^^h draws near. God has made you (my very good lord) to know his
truth even from your childhoode, and he has employed you in his work in
your first youth. He has beautified you with great gifts to this end, as
strength of body, quickenes of spirit, valiancie of courage. And employing
these in his service, he will crown them in you with happiness, honor, riches,
and high aduauancements. For these are no other then accessories, and he who
has given you the principal, can give you these: and by him alone also it is
that kings reign, and that princes Judge the earth. And (Sir) this is that
which he requires of you. This is it, that Christendom looks for at your
hands. This is that, which all good men do promise themselves. This then is
the alone and only mark that your majesty must ame at. And therefore (Sir)
as one of your most lowely servants, I make this humble petition, that day and
night you may lively represent and keep before your presence, the dignity and
greatness of this charge, to which God has called you: that you may employ
those rare gifts which he has given unto you for the establishing of his
kingdom, that you may think then to reign most safely, when he shall reign
by his word in the midst of you. This is the most sure and short way, that
your trusty servants can direct you in for the establishing of your highness.
I beseech God therefore (Sir) that it will please him to assist you through his
spirit, in this work, to govern your heart, and all your actions, and to
heap upon you his blessings both spiritual and temporal, to his own glory,
and the benefit of his Church.

Your most humble, obedient, and faithful servant. Du Plessis.

To the Reader.
I Pray thee (gentle Reader) to read this treatise, not as having already
found the truth, but seeking for it likewise, and I pray thee to read it out
before thou judge of it. And if it accord as the doctrine of the truth, I
adjure thee in the name of God, and by thine own salvation, that thou openly
declare it. For it behooves that we wait no longer to speak, seeing once,
that wincking at the kingdom of Antichrist, our kingdom falls to ruin, in
the ruin whereof is the danger of us all. If yet there be found any doubt,
they showing it by writing, we shall by the grace of God endeavor to make it
clear. But if there be any, which will improve the whole, I pray them that
they will answer point by point, and reason by reason, in the spirit of
sincerity and gentleness, seeking in stead of the prise of victory, the
salvation of the people, and not the glory of this world. For I protest before
God, that in this treatise, I have aimed at no thing else but their salvation.

What the visible Church is, and what are the sundry states thereof. CHAP. I.
GOD, through his might the Creator of mankind, vouchsauing of his own good
will, to be the Father thereof, would that the Church should be honored and
acknowledged as mother of all those, of whom he vouchsaueth to be Father, in
his Son Jesus Christ our Lord: And forasmuch as we are not saved, but in this
that God has allowed us for his children, and that he has allowed none to be
such, but those that are regenerated, and nourished up in his Church: if we
desire our salvation, it is necessary that we acknowledge her, in whose lap
we have it. And if we will be heirs of the Father, we must be united in the
family of the mother, in which it has pleased him to beget those again, whom
he has ordained to be hetres of his kingdom, and coheires of his dearly
beloved son Jesus Christ our Lord.

All they that are knit and incorporated into this Church in true faith and
charity, are partakers of this inheritance, because they are members of the
body of Christ: and without her, as there is no true faith, nor charity, nor
Christ, so also we ought not to seek any salvation, but in her. And therefore
if a man would speak properly, we should call the Church, a company only of
those, whom God has chosen to everlasting life, in all times and places, which
is to man invisible, who can not enter so far as to know Gods will, neither
the heart of man himself, but is only visible to God, 2. Tim. 2.19.
who knows those that are his (as the Apostle says) and has sealed them
with his own seal. Notwithstanding, forasmuch as charity has commanded us
to presume particularly of all those that are called the Church of Christ,
that they are of the number of his elect, and that as they are bodily there
assembled together, so also that they are there spiritually incorporated,
albeit on the contrary part the doctrine of faith generally teaches us, that
the wicked to the end of the world, are mingled with the good, the Goats with
the Sheep, the chafe with the grain, and the tares with ye good corn: yet
will we commit unto God, the searcher of hearts, the knowledge of the invisible
Church, and will content our selves to search for the visible in his word, into
which all they must retire themselves in this world, which will be gathered into
the invisible Church in the world to come.

Notwithstanding, by the way we will note the differences that are between
these two. The invisible Church contains none but the good. The visible
Church contains both the good and the bad, to wit, that only the elect,
this all those indifferently, which are brought into her by the preaching of
the truth. And for this cause S. Augustine says of that, August. vp^^ the 64.
Psalm.
that she took her beginning by Abel and not by Caine, who was the elder: and
contrariwise of the other he says, August. lib. 1 de Baptism. contra Donatist
cap. 16
that the self same begat Abel and Enoch, Simon Peter, and all Christians etc.
as one people, having also begotten Caine and Cham, Ismael and Esau, and Simon
the sorcerer with his co^federates. The invisible Church is partly considered
in heaven, and partly in earth, co^prehending as well those which triumph
already with their head Jesus Christ our Lord, as those which yet fight here
beneath in the earth for his name, against ye world and against themselves, and
which shall fight in ye same church after us. The visible church is considered
properly to consist in them, who not only fight here in earth for the name of
Christ, but as well those that fight under his name, with false marks and
standerds and ensigns. And for this cause, that is considered even from the
first faithful unto the last, bringing all the states and ages of the church
into one: this according to certain places and times, forasmuch as she is not
universally visible (and to be seen) at one push, but according to the ages,
and in her degrees. In the invisible, there is a great many sheep, which never
were gathered into the visible, and contrariwise in the visible, a great many
wolves which never shall be received into ye invisible. And therefore S.
Augustine says, August. homil. in Joan. 45. and ca. 20. lib. 5. de bapt. etc.
Romans 9.6.
that there are a great many sheep without, and a great many woolues within:
and S. Paul says also they are not al Israel which are of Israel. For to be in
the church, or rather to say, of ye church, is to be united with Christ, and
incorporated in the company of the faithful, through true faith toward God,
and charity toward our neighbor. And there is no doubt, but that many here
and there under Paganism it self, had this desire, which yet bodily they
could not accomplish, the which notwithstanding they are bound to do with all
their power: as contrariwise, to be separated from the church, is not only to
be without the assembly, but to have no participation of Christ, nor union of
faith and charity with his faithful. Of the invisible it is said, Mat. 16.
Mat. 24.11
that ye gates of hell shall not prevail against her. Of the visible, that she
shall be so troubled, that a man shall not find faith on the earth, Luke. 8.8.
that charity shall be as it were quenched, insomuch that the elect themselves,
if it were possible, should utterly quail. And therefore it is not without
cause that we say in our Creed, that we believe the church. For if we ought to
hold nothing for certain, but that which we see with these carnal eyes, there
is no dout, but that in all the states and ages of ye church, there should many
times be found such a confusion, as ye good grain should be altogether hid
under the chafe, without any appearance of the Church, and yet
notwithstanding this was then, when God said to Elias, that he had reserved in
the same 7000. whereof the chariot of Israel, the Seer of the Lord, I say, he
to whom the good people ought especially to have been known, could not
outwardly know one: and even then and there when the state of the Church was
such, as God could not be served visiblye, but in Iewrie.

All these differences notwithstanding, we do not believe two Churches, nor two
espouses of Christ, but we believe one only considered diuersely: one in the
blade, and the other in the grain, one in the threshing floor, another in the
garner, one in the mine, another now already fined, the one inwrapped yet in
the minglings of the world, the other before her husband without spotte or
wrinckle. Altogether like as by a family, we properly understand the children
only, although speaking more generally we comprehend the servants them selves,
and by a City we understand the union of Citizens, albeit many times one part
be at contention, and considered apart by it self, deserves not but to be
rooted out.

Returning then to our purpose we will call ye visible church, the company of
those, which make profession to serve the true God in Christ, of which we have
presently to entreat. This Church has had three principal states or ages,
one without the law, then (say some of the ancient Fathers) when man was but
in some sort corrupted by the sin of the first, when he was notwithstanding
in some sort a law to him self, and naturally felt himself convinced of his
sin, that is to say, he felt his evil, to seek for remedy for the same:
although in very truth this state and age of the Church, found it self no
less corrupted then ye rest. The second was under the law, when it began in
such sort to accustom it self to sin, that it grew into a natural habit
through the same: and then for to show the sin thereof, the law was given as
a glass, in which she might consider her filthiness, and how far of she was
from that she presumed, to the end she might return again to be cleansed. The
third was under grace, in Jesus Christ promised to our first parents by and by
after their fall, and who, when the fulness of time was come, was sent of the
Father, who brought remedy to all them, that before either had, or presently
did feel their evil, and sought remedy in his merit. Under the first, the
Church was visible amongst men, but if you compare those which served God in
purity, with the others, we shall find that they were entangled in a wonderful
confusion. Under the second, the Church was visible in one people, issued from
the loins of Abraham, to wit, the people of Israel, but not so eminent, if
we consider not so much what the country, as the people themselves were, in
comparison of the rest of the whole world, and the great Empires that flourished
at that time. Under the third, is comprehended all peoples and nations without
any exception or acception whatsoever, being now visible in one Country, or
other, few or many, and therefore we call her Catholic, or universal, to
wit, which is to ^^ore tied to the family of Jacob, nor to Jerusalem: as
under the second estate or age (for from all parts it ought to be gathered
there) but who adopteth for children of Israel and of Abraham, in all places
those that have the faith of Abraham, and for citizens of Jerusalem, all the
citizens of ye world, which serve God in spirit and truth. Mat. 28. Galat.
3.28
This is yt which Christ has taught us, when he sent forth his Apostles into
all ye world, and S. Paul, when he says, that the wall is broken down, Ephe.
2.14
that there is no more Jew nor Greek, but yt al are one in Jesus Christ: Apo.
21 13
and yt which is noted unto us in the Apocalypse, by ye City having xii.
gates, three into every quarter of the world. In which also, after the Prophets
and Apostles, the ancient doctors of the Church agree: that after the vocation
of the Gentiles, there is not any nation or city more privileged then
another, but that all the world is the threshing floor, Cypri. de simplicitate
prelatorum. August. passim contra Don atistas.
the field and inheritance of the Lord. All peoples is Judah and Israel, all
cities Jerusalem, all houses the house of God, so yt he be there worshipped and
served: so far is it of yt at this day, any place what soever it be, may
attribute any spiritual prerogative more to it self, the^ to another.

This universal Church comprehends under her, all the particular Churches,
gathered together in diverse parts of ye world, the which likewise we call ye
Christian Churches, yt is to say, assemblies which call upon one only God by
Jesus Christ, as the East Church and West Church, ye Greek Church, and the
Latin Church, the Church of Corinth, the Church of Galatia, of Ephesus, of
Rome, of Carthage: notwithstanding to speak properly, not Catholic or
universal, but parts of the Catholic or universal. No more then when we
speak of some parts of the Ocean sea, we call all those the sea, as the South
sea, the North sea, the Athlantique sea, the Cantabrique sea, and the
Britannique sea, etc. and we say of al these, it is the Ocean sea. And yet
notwithstanding we know that there is but one Ocean, and not many, whereof by
these names we make many distinctions, seeing it is but one body and uniform,
from which the union cannot be severed, but only distinguished, as we ought
also to acknowledge in the Church. And therefore he that says that the Church
of Rome, and ye Catholic Church is al one, he speaks no less improperly,
the^ he that should say, that the Britannique sea were ye whole Ocean sea, or
the Tyrrhene sea it self, which yet is but a part of the Mediterraneu^ sea.

Now the visible Church is in the world, and the world as we may feel in
our selves, is an unclean world, and therefore living under such an infected
air, it is impossible, but that she should be defiled, and draw unto her
much corruption. It is also compounded of men, and outwardly governed by men,
and all men are flesh and blood, and by a consequent corrupt and imperfect,
subject to ignorance and malice. It is then possible that sometimes she be
corrupted, and impossible that in this world she appear in any sound
perfection. Notwithstanding, because the Scripture sometimes in speaking,
having regard to that which is reputed unto her (in consideration of Jesus
Christ her husband) before God, and sometimes also not according to that she
is, but according to that she ought to be, not so much to praise her, as to
provoke her to make her self worthy of that praise, she is granted these
titles of the Church, to which she is not always conformed: be it that we
consider her in the men, whereof she is composed, or the doctrine it self that
is taught in her. She is called the kingdom of heaven, or the kingdom of
Christ: Mat. 13.47
but Christ Jesus, which is the king himself that reigns in her, compares
her unto a net cast into the sea, which draws up to him both good and bad
fish. This then is as much to say, as in this kingdom of heaven the devil
has his subjects, which perteyne to his tyranny. Saint Paul also there
calls us the house of God, 1 Timothy 3.15.
and exhorts us to take heed how we there behave our selves: but the self
same Paul would not hide this from us, 1. Tim. 2.20.
that in the same house there are not only vessels of gold and of silver, but
also of wood and of earth, the one (I say) to honor, and the other to
dishonor: whereof Saint Augustine has taken his distinction of those that are
in the house, August. lib. 7. cap. 51. de Baptismate, and libro de vnitate
ecclesiae cap. 4.
and yet are not of the house. And this that we confess in our Creed it
self, that the Church is the Communion of Saints, it is not meant that all
they which are there assembled, are sanctified by the spirit of God in Christ,
but rather that there is no true Communion, no true holiness, but in the
Church, calling it, as we are always accustomed, by the best part. And thus
much of the corruption of the persons.

Concerning the doctrine she is called his spouse, Cant. 4.6. Isa. 1.21. 1.
Tim. 3.
altogether fair and without spotte, the faithful City, the City of
righteousness, the temple of God, and the pillar of truth. By these goodly
titles she should be stirred up to please him, who vouchsafes to call her by
these names, and to be obedient unto him. In mean time it oftentimes falls
out, that the Church governed by naughty Pastors, presumes to be such, as her
titles set her forth to be, and that she can never be any other, so that she
dares to say, I am a Queen, and can be no widow, and so makes void the
goodness of God, through which alone she is decked with all these titles.
She neglects the voice of her husband, and makes laws at her own pleasure:
her governors will govern her after their guise, thinking that they are wise
enough of them ^^ies. And hereupon the Prophets have have constrained to change
their speech, according as she changes her government. This is the cause why
they have called her strumpet and adulteress, that they have reproched her,
that she has played the harlot under every busshie and green tree, that they
call her Princes the Princes of Sodom, Ier. 3.12. Ezech. 18.23.
and her people the people of Gomorrhe: to be short, that they threaten her
that God will remove his tabernacle from thence to others. 2 Thessalonians. 2.
And Saint Paul says that they should be so deceived, for having neglected
the truth of God, that they shall worship Antichrist in the Church. The reason
hereof is very clear, that the Church is as the moon, a body thick and
cloudie, which has no light but from Christ the sun thereof. By means that
she looks toward him, she is bright and clear, and the more she turns
away from him, the less brightness she has, and sometimes she withdraws
her self so far from him, and so great a mass of earth sets it self
between them, that she seems altogether eclipsed.

Hereof it is, that of this universal Church dispersed throughout the whole
world, and gathered together into particular Churches of all the nations
thereof, we may see some utterly rooted out by the just judgment of God, as
the Philippians, Colossians, and many others of the East, which were erected by
the Apostles themselves: others to be erected else where, through the
everlasting goodness of God toward mankind: Some by the corruption of men,
to be corrupted both in manners and doctrine, as those of Greece, of Egypt, of
Affrike, etc. Others by the presumption of their leaders, having nothing left
sound, as the Church of Rome at this day. To be short, some other gone from
heresy to infidelity, as in the countries where Mahomet begun his sect,
which are altogether the fruits of the first sin of man, who of him self
turned away from God to himself, and was blinded in his own love, thinking
to be wise enough to guide himself without the word of God. Thus much in few
words, concerning the parts of this visible Church, now universal. But let it
suffice for this time, that we resolve our selves, that this Church is the
Assembly or Congregation of all those which make profession of Christ,
throughout the whole world: that under her are comprehended all the particular
churches, to which the promises of Christ, made to this universal Church,
belong equally: That of the same some are pure, and some impure, according as
they are turned away from God to themselves: to be short, that the purer
churches are impure before God, seeing he has not found purity in his
angels, saving that he supporteth them in mercy, in Jesus Christ his son our
Lord.

That of the visible and Catholic Church, some parts of it are pure, and
some impure, and which be the infallible marks of the pure Churches. CHAP. II.
THe Catholic or universal visible Church is the assembly of all those
which make profession of the Gospel of Jesus Christ throughout the whole
world, distinguished (as we have said) into many particular Churches, all
which do make but one body. Of all these particular, as members and parts of
one and the self same body, some are pure, other some are impure, some more,
and some less sound, and some at this day are sick even unto death, which in
times past were more healthful, according as all are composed of men, and
therefore are subject to be partakers with their faults. Those that are of the
purer and sounder Churches, we call them sound and true Churches, co^senting to
the true doctrine, which is the name, that for the most part, the ancient
fathers have given them. The others we call the erring, heretical or
schismatical Churches, according as they err, either in faith or in charity,
against the square and right rule of Christ, or against the rule of his Church,
either in the one or in the other, notwithstanding every one in his degree. And
yet for all this, both the one and the other are truly Churches, that is to
say assemblies, that make profession of Christ: but they are not pure Churches,
that is to say, serving God in Christ only, in purity and verity: even like
as a lying person is truly a man, albeit he be not a true man, and a man
cease not to be a man, howsoever he be disfigured without, and inwardly
infected with leprosy, and in such sort benommed of his members, or else
troubled in his senses, that he is deprived of the principal actions of a man,
yea, and of those things also, in outward appearance, that make difference
between a man and a beast, I mean, speech and reason.

I know very well that the ancient fathers, and principally the Latins, they
commonly call the pure Church Catholic, by excellency, to distinguish it from
the congregation of heretics: but to speak properly, there is no particular
Church, how pure and sound soever it be, that can be called universal: And if
we give them their name, because they are parts of the universal Church, by
the self same reason, it should agree as well to the most impure Churches
themselves. And in deed this word (Catholic) was not put in our Creed, for
to distinguish a pure Church from an impure, but to distinguish the Jewish
Church, in times past tied to Jerusalem, from the Christian Church, which by
the coming of Jesus Christ, was spread throughout the whole world, that is to
say, to authorize the vocation of the Gentiles against the pretended
prerogatives of the Jews, Romans 9.10.11. cap.
against which S. Paul has written in the three first whole chapters of the
Epistle to the Romans: and to show that according to that, that was
foretold by all the Prophets, that all people were made one in Jesus Christ,
which was the principal controversy that made greatest broyle in the
primitive Church. And if a man shall deeply way this thing, he shall find
that this manner of speaking used of the ancient fathers, calling the sound and
true Church Catholic, came of the reasoning they had against ye Schismatikes,
as against the Nouatians, Donatistes and others, who took upon them to bind
the whole Church to themselves, and shut out all the rest of the world besides:
as namely the Donatistes, who tied it to a little corner of Affrike, Augustine.
pastin. contra Donatist.
under the color that they presumed that they themselves were more holy then
the rest, against whom, to ye end to stop their mouths, they opposed the
Catholic or universal Church according to the Scripture, spredde throughout
the whole world.

Now it follows that we search out the true marks of this Church, which we
call the true and pure Church, or if we like better, ye Catholic Church, to
distinguish it from the impure and erroneous Church. We have said already yt
God, vouchsafing through his goodness to be ye father of one sort of men, would
also that his Church should be the mother, and we know very well, that it
belongs not to the mother alone, to bringforth children into the world, but
she is a true mother who also nourishes them, and cares for them, after she
has brought them forth. Now through Baptism we are auowed to be the children
of God, and of children of wrath which we were, we are through his word
cherished and nourished up in the faith: and she at the first giving us suck,
and afterward more fast and strong meat, through the Communion of Christ his
body in the Supper, we are more and more united to him, and by this mean
invested into that heavenly inheritance. It follows then, that she is the
pure Church and true mother, who brings: forth us her children through
Baptism, regenerateth and norisheth us through the word, knitteth us to
Christ, and so aamongst our selves one to another, through the Sacrament of his
Supper: that is to say, she is the true mother, in which the word of God is
purely preached, and the Sacraments according to the same word duly
administered. In the Church of Judah and Israel, Circumcision occupied the place
of Baptism, and the Passover of the Supper, the word of God always keeping
his place, as the ordinary nourishment of the children of God: and therefore
we see, that after their entry into the land of Canaan, Iosue being admonished
by ye Lord, to repair those faults committed in the desert, Iosue. 1.18 and
19. cap.
made the people to be circumcised, and bound them by an oath (if they would be
his people) to keep the word of God, that is to say, if they would be his
Church. Likewise Josias, after so great confusions and mingle mangles, when he
would reform the Church, in which there was not so much as yt visible mark,
which circumcision had left in ye flesh, we see that he began there, first
digging up as it were the law, which had been buried, and published the same,
and made the people to swear solemnly unto it. And consequently he caused a
Passover to be proclaimed in these words: Celebrate the passover of the
Lord your God, 2. King. 23. 2. Chr. 34. 2. Chro. 35
as it is written in ye book of this covenant, that is to say, according to
the ordinance of the Lord your God. Esdras also after he was returned from
Babylon, for to reedifie the temple, and to restore the Church, he began at
these foundations: he expounds the law unto the people, and makes the^ to
swear in the form of that covenant, and after to nourish and fortify them in
ye hope of their salvation to come, he restores again the true use of the
Paschall, according to those things (says he) which were written in the book
of Moses. To be short, al ye true servants of God, after that there came any
great scattering of the Church, Nehem. 8. and 9.3. Esdras. 7.6
and being willing to redress it, they have always before al other things
restored these marks, no otherwise then a good Captain, who after a great
slaughter and confusion, raungeth his men into an array, and planteth his
standerds in some high place, to the end they may show them selves to all
sides. Jesus Christ, who is the true husband, has given us no other marks, to
know his espouse by. For this cause that he calls the Church his wife, he
teaches her her duty, which is to obey his word, and not to hearken to the
voice of a stranger, not to lose the tokens, nor to defile the Jewels and
pledges of her marriage: but mark how he speaks in express words, He that
is of the truth hears my voice. And again, Ioh. 18.37.
My sheep hear my voice, and I know them, and they follow me: and in
another place, Ye hear not, Ioh. 8.47.
because you are not of God. The pure wife and Church then of the truth, is
only she which hears the voice of Christ. Not a voice in the air, or an
imaginatiue voice, but that voice which has it Echo out of ye scriptures, and
which will resound until ye end, to wit, the same that is pronounced by the
mouth of his Prophets and Apostles, upon which Saint Paul teaches us, Ephe.
2.20
that the Church is founded, Christ Jesus being the chief corner stone. This
is the cause why sending forth his Apostles to erecte the Christian Churches,
he says unto the^, Matthew. 28.19.
Go and teach all nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father, Mark.
16.15.
etc. and teaching them to keep all that I have commanded you. And in the
Acts we read, that the faithful continued in the doctrine of the Apostles,
Acts. 2.42.
in the Communion, and breaking of bread, and in prayers, which is no other
thing but a brief description of the true Church of Christ, instructed by the
word, in true faith, and knit together in true charity, through ye Communion
yt is in him. The which thing S. Ambrose teaches us, Ambros. lib. de salubr.
cap. 7.
saying, that the Catholic Church is yt, where God speaks with his servants:
and S. Augustine also, August. contra Cresco. Gra^mat. lib. ^. cap. 11 etc.
when he places ye ministry of ministers and pastors of ye Church, in the
word of God and Sacraments. Let us yet add hereunto ye third mark of this
church, albeit it be not of ye substance, but outward, to wit, ye lawful
vocation of pastors and ministers of ye Church, which have the administration
of ye things aforesaid. For seeing yt there is question of preaching, be it by
the word, or by ye Sacraments, which are unto us as a word yt may be felt, Romans
10.15.
and yt to preach, it behooves yt the ministers be sent: it is very necessary
yt the Church of God have an order, to send forth their pastors. But more
shall be seen of this point in another place.

We will call then the true and pure Churches all those, wherein we find the
word of God, and Sacraments purely and lawfully administered, that is to say,
(as Cyprian says) according to the institution of the Lord. And we nothing
doubt to communicate with them, and that God is there president, howsoever in
some certain points of doctrine there have been some error, and in the
outward policy some abuse, and corruption, and impuritie in manners: for it
behooves that always we resort thither, when the chief points of the
foundation of our salvation be there truly taught, seeing we are men, and the
Churches are compounded of men, as speech and language consist of syllables
and letters: of the qualities of which men, as long as the Church is in this
world, she is always a partaker. As concerning the false and impure Churches,
they are not so easily to be defined. Truth, soundnes and right, are but of
one sort: but errors, diseases, and crookednesses are without number. Again,
there are many kinds and degrees of impure Churches: notwithstanding, we can
say in one word, that al those Churches are impure, in which the word of the
Lord, and his Sacraments are impurely ministered, that is, are administered both
against the honor of God, and the salvation of our neighbor: and because that
the whole Gospel is nothing else but faith and charity, and whole Christ,
nothing but head and body, we may make two principal kinds thereof, calling
those Heretics which err in ye faith and doctrine of Christ, and those
schismatikes, which sunder themselves from charity, and from ye communion of
his body which is the Church, yea although they agree otherwise to the truth
of doctrine in all points.

Now as there are many points, in the Christian doctrine, so also there are
many kinds of heresies, some in one point, and some in another, and some in
one point more heinous and grievous then another, and furthermore, some in one
point alone, and others in more points then one. No otherwise then in a
natural body, some sickness is in the vital part thereof, another in the
isntrumental, one a simple heat of the liver, another a burning in all parts
of the body alike: to be short, one a distemperance in some one part, another
distemperature, or evil disposition of all the body. Such a Church then, as has
played the harlot with false gods, and has believed the noughtie counsel of
men, may be in such sort infected with heresy, that even from the crown of
the head, to the sole of the foot, a man shall not see one sound place.
Notwithstanding, these cease no more to be the Churches of Christ, because
they are heretics, then a man that is diseased, ceasseth therefore to be a
man: but in this that they are Heretics in the doctrine of Christ, this
shows unto us that they are yet Churches, howsoever we distinguish the
disease from the body, altogether like as we know that a sick man is a man,
and not yet the carcass of a man. But then they are not any more Churches,
when they come to the heresy of infidelity, when Christ, who is the soul of
the Church is no more accounted for a Savior an^ Mediator, when this
mediation which joins Christ to his Church, as the neck does the head to
the body, is cut of: as for example. When the Christians of Asia in many
places, of Nestorians became Mahomites, that is to say, of Heretics became
Infidels (what praise soever the Alcoran gives to Jesus Christ) because then
the soul is out of the body, and the wind pipe is cut, and the bill of
divorce is published betwixt Christ and them, after they have once openly
married themselves to another, and have sought their happiness and salvation,
without him.

This is to come again to that I have before spoken of, that the marks of the
true Church are these, that of a pure and chaste wife of Christ, and the mother
of the heirs of the father, she engender children to God, yt she nourish them
up unto him, and that she unite them unto Christ: for one of these points
alone, makes her not worthy of this title, but all together: for she is not a
true mother, who engenders children, and afterward leaves them at randon,
and yet she is truly a mother. Ezech. 16.20.
Now such a one was the Church of Samaria, or the Church of Israel, Ezech.
23.37.
in which there was remaining circumcision and also the law, but this was in
name only. She was (says the Lord) an adulteress, and played the harlot with
every one that came, that is, there was no idolatry which was not welcome
thither: and yet a little after, he says she engendered children unto him. She
engendered (I say) children to God, who accounted them his own through
circumcision (although she had deserved by these adulteries to be rejected)
forasmuch as ye divorce was not yet made with her, and they as yet were in the
covenant: but having brought forth children to God, she offreth them up to
Moloch, she makes them to pass through the fire, she enstructeth them in all
idolatry, that is to say, she gives them to the devil, and made them
inheritours of hell, as much as lay in her. Now it is said in the self same
places, that Jerusalem, sister unto Aholibah, in which also God had chosen his
tabernacle, had done much worse, in such sort that she was made lower the^
Sodom. This the^ is that, Mat. 23.15
that Jesus Christ says to ye Pharisees, Ye travel by sea and by land to make a
proselyte, that is, to the end you may circumcise a Painime, and bring him
into the Church, and when this is done, ye make a double child of hell: for ye
teach him as ill, that circumcision is worse to him then uncircumcision,
because that his knowledge which he has of the true God, turns to his
condemnation. That the like should come to pass to ye Church of Christ, there
is no doubt at all: for in the beginning there have been heresies in the chief
articles of our faith, that is, diseases in the principal and vital parts of
the body, as namely, in the doctrine of the God head and eternity of Jesus
Christ. The sin of man deserved death: It must needs be then, that the
mediator was very God and very man, Man, for to die the death, and God, to
overcome death. And therefore they which deny the divinity of Christ, they
deny the principal quality of ye mediator, through which we obtain
salvation. Now the divinity is made nothing, when ye eternity is made void.
For where we find the beginning, there naturally we need not doubt of an end.
This heresy and many such like were scattered throughout many notable
Churches: Notwithstanding, forasmuch as the ancient Church has judged that
their baptism ought not therefore to be rejected, she has showed by
consequence, that she has holden them for Churches, for all their deadly
diseases, forasmuch as Christ, from whom true Baptism and the efficacy
thereof is, baptizeth not but in the Church, showing thereby, that there may be
found Christian Churches which bring forth their children as mothers, and yet
nourrish and instruct their children worse then stepmothers. And therefore they
add, that this Baptism which profited them in their infancy, falls out to
their further hurt, when they come to years of discretion, when they come to
taste on these heresies, whereof they had no sense or feeling.

The Latin Church, as Jerusalem to Samaria, set it self then very
courageously against such errors, and healed many of them, whereupon it got
great authority amongst all: but afterward, a worse evil came unto it, and
that was this, that having through Gods goodness, (who always preserves his
truth in some place) been exempted from the foresaid heresy and sickness,
she was borne in hand that it came of her own strength, and that she could
not any more be deceived, as he, who for having his health one year, gives
him self to all disorder, thinking that it can nothing hurt him, whereupon we
say, that she is fallen into a general distemperance, and is so laden with
heresies, that she is not only thoroughly sick, but she is as it were sickness
it self, not feeling her evil at all. We say then of her, the same that the
Prophet Ezechiel said of Jerusalem, who was the only seat of ye Lord:
Samaria has not offended to the one half of thy sins: Ezech. 15.48.
Sodom thy sister has not done, neither she nor her daughters, as thou have
done and thy daughters. Thou have justified thy sisters, in all the
abominations which thou have done, and therefore I will bring again thy
captivity, and thou shall bear thy villainy. The word of God is the only
meat which God has given for the ordinary nourishment of his children. The
Latin Church, to the end she might nourish them with husks and shales, has
hidden it from them, and buried it in the earth, or if for shame she hau^
sometimes delivered it unto them, it has been altogether covered with poison.
In stead that this word should have directed us to God for our salvation,
she has sent us to men, which are nothing but perdition, yea to the son of
perdition him self. Whereas she should have assured us in the infinite merits
of one Christ ye infinite God, ye papacy has turned us to our own merits,
which merit nothing but hell and death. The whole law was given to no other
end, but to make us feel our sins, and to search the remedy thereof in the
grace of Christ: but contrariwise the Roman Church makes us to play ye Jews,
more then the Jews, promising us salvation of our selves, to the end that
making us to search for it that ways more fervently, she might therein show
us hell. She has received the devil into the Lords house, she has mingled
in his bread of life, death, and into his cup she has put poison: to
conclude, if through Baptism, which she has notwithstanding many ways
profaned, she enrouleth children to God as a mother, yet is it certain on the
contrary part, that through her false worships, she nourishes them up to the
devil. And as concerning salvation in Jesus Christ, which is the neck that
joins the head with the body, Jesus Christ with his Church, it is so cut of
by man's merits, by the merits of Saints, by the Popes pardons, and such other
wickednesses, that the life of the Church holds but by a very little thread,
the which had been straightway quite cut off (Antichrist had so well labored
therein) had not God through his great mercy sent his servants in time to
repress him. As long then as this threade remained there, we deny it not the
name of the Church, no more then unto a man, the name of a man, as long as he
lives, what sickness soever he have: yea, we are content to call her the
spouse, so that therewithal she suffer us in like manner to call her an
adulteress. But we say that she is an heretical Church worse then all the
Churches that ever have been, a wife which provoke God to a divorce, a mother
which nourishes up her children to the devil, and we pray God, that he will
vouchsafe to take her in childhood, being defiled in her blood, Ezech. 16.
and that he will wash her in her old age in the blood of his son, and that
he will remember, as he promises to Jerusalem and Samaria, the covenant made
with her from her youth, and that as he has done already in a good part of
her members, it would please him to restore her again to her first purity
and integrity. See then as concerning the heretical and impure Churches in
doctrine, whereof we mayntaine the Roman and Latin Church to be in the
chiefest degree.

Concerning ye Schismatical Churches, whether they are plainly schismatical,
or whether heresy follows after a schism, as a fever does after a wou^d,
heretics and schismatikes in this sense are all one. Of Heretics we have
spoken as before. Of Schismatikes we make here two distinctio^s. The cause
(says the Canon) makes a schismatike, and not the separation: and therefore we
say, that they which have given others a just occasion to separate the^ selves
from their corruptions, are ye schismatikes, and not they who have taken it.
For this cause, the Apostles were not schismatikes, although they separated
them selves from ye Scribes and Pharisees, and cut themselves of from their
assemblies: But rather the Priests and Scribes, which put them to death, when
they submitted them selves to verify the coming of Christ amidst the Church:
and we shall prove in his proper place, that ye self same in like manner is
come to pass in our time, of those which have verified Antichrist in an open
council. For ye second, we say, that we must distinguish betwixt ye author of
a schism, and those which follow it. That the authors of Schism, forasmuch
as they rent themselves from charity, and so by consequence from the body of
Christ, they may be compared to Dathan, Core, and Abiram, cutting themselves
(as much as in them lies) out of the book of life. Concerning the others, we
say that they are the flock of Christ, but evil governed by their pastors, and
principally those which are borne under the Schism, forasmuch as neither of
both are without blame, neither can in any wise excuse themselves. And
therefore Dathan and his companions were swallowed up, Nomb. 16.
and the congregation which cleaued unto him was spared: but in that it saw
the horrible punishment of those whom it had followed, it was warned to
separate it self for fear of the like. In like manner Jeroboam and his
successors, which through ambition had made a schism in the Church, were
accursed, and yet Samaria ceased not therefore at the least to be in the
covenant of God, neither by reason of her false worships, half Jewish and
half heathenish. To be short, ambition and ye want of charity whereof it
proceeds, these make schismatikes, and therefore the poor people which do
not hold thereof, but are carried away with the faction of ye mightiest, as it
were with a stream, this although it be a separation, yet properly it is not a
schism. And even as in factions which are made in a kingdom against ye common
wealth, a good prince punishes the Captains, and through his cleme^cie
pardons ye people, who were let alone either to go through ignorance, or in
respect of their authority etc. even so it is to be presumed yt the father of
mercy does toward his poor children, which for ye most part do mourn under
the ambition of the prelates, and are not partakers of their subtle councils.
This be simply spoken of the Schismatic Churches, that is to say, which have
no notable heresies joined with their schisms. The like thing also may be
found in ye Churches of the heretics: for oftentimes the leaders of ye Church
are heretics by their subtilties in certain things, and not ye people who
understand the^ not, contenting themselves with the simplicity of the word
which always is most true. But we will speak of this more amply in another
place.

We will conclude then that the works of the pure Church are faith and
charity, the word and the Sacraments purely and lawfully administered.
August. contra Faustu^, lib. 19. ca. 11.
The marks of ye impure Churches are, when therein they fail in part, or be
impure: the which thing many times falls out ordinarily together. To be
short, howsoever it be, when it has no religion, nor no doctrine, nor no
visible signs, to distinguish it from others. We say yt the Christian Churches
have their doctrine comprised in the old and new Testament, and their
Sacraments, which are Baptism and the Supper, that those which minister the
one and the other purely, are yt pure Churches: yt those which minister them
impurely, are the impure Churches, and the Church of Rome, the most impure of
all others, which has so villanously defiled both the one and the other, that
there remains not any more so much as any show of the institution of Christ.

That the other marks which our adversaries allege, are common both to the
pure and the impure Church, and such as for the most part hold not. CHAP. III.
THey that perceive themselves vanquished in this, that they have not the
essential marks of the pure and sound Church, they would quite contrary make
us believe, yt the true Church can not be known by the pure and sincere
administration of ye word and Sacraments, but by certain outward marks, to
wit, by antiquity, multitude, succession of places and persons, by miracles
and reuelatio^s: no otherwise then false coyners, which will not have men to
know their money by the finenes of Gold, and by the touchstone, but by the
wayght, by the sound, and by the coin and the color, which they may easily
falsify.

They allege therefore unto us antiquity, Antiquity.
following yt which is said unto Job of one of his friends, Job. 8.8. Job. 32.7.
Ask for the ancient generation, and prepare thy self to seek after the
fathers. Again days shall speak, or the multitude of years shall teach
wisdom. To who^ I could answer by Job him self, even in the verse next
following: The masters are not always wise, neither do yt old men always
understand judgment. Also it is the spirit of God, and not years yt ought to
speak in man. But forasmuch as they make an instance so low, it behooves
that we give them a more full answer. The question is here of the purity of
the Church. Now the Church is compared to a little bark or ship, and the more
she is upon the Sea, the more she leaketh: and unto a house, which with age
decays, and falls to ruin: and to a City, and the policy of it
corrupted, if once a man draw it to any other beginning: and to a man's body,
to which years do bring an heap of al kind of evils. To be short, to the
most healthful and temporate body in the world, age is even as sickness it
self. I say then that antiquity alone, ought to make us think that in the
Church there is a great sickness and much filthynes, and that even for this
cause alone without any longer confutation, it behooves us to bring a broom
to purge it, and to call for a Physician: so far is it of, that for these
things a man should maintain that she is pure and sound, as they do.
Furthermore I demand how they will answer unto the heathen, yea to Saint
Austine him self, August. super Psalm. 64.
who says that Jerusalem began by Abel, and Babylon by Rain. Also that the
promise was by Isaac, and the bastardise by Ismael which was the elder.
Consequently what would they have answered unto the Jews in the time of our
Savior Jesus Christ, if that antiquity had been a true mark of the Church?
They said that they were the children of Abraham. Now he was called the
Father of the believers. For they had their genealogy from the creation of the
first man. They could have alleged the couenantes that were made of old
between God and them. And after that Christ was sent unto them according to
these promises, under the shadow of this antiquity, they called him the
Carpenters son, a Samaritan, one that has the devil, a Preacher of
novelty: and there is great likelihood, that if our masters had been then
there in that time (seeing that they keep the self same arguments) they
would have helped to have crucified him. Now we say likewise that Antichrist
who was foretold unto us, entered into this ruinous house, whiles the most
part was a sleep in this dead sleep of antiquity, in stead of that was said
unto them, Watch and pray: and that the subtillest lent him their hand till he
had turned all topsituruie, and yet men would not know him. Furthermore I
demand what they will answer unto the Greek Churches, the Armenians,
Ethiopians etc. founded by the Apostles, and as old as the Church of Rome, yea
and elder too, seeing yt the Church of Christ, as we know, took her beginning
from the East to the West? If antiquity be a mark of purity, they are pure:
and if they be pure, the Latin Church in comparison and to their judgment, is
most impure. If they be heretics and impure, as the Latin Church does hold
them, then it follows yt antiquity is not a mark to prove the purity or
verity of ye Church. How then? shall we reject antiquity? nay rather we
embrace it with all our hearts, and a great deal better then our adversaries:
but in such fort we embrace it, as the auncientest of times be asked, Dan. 8.
and heard before al our fathers, and always according to this most certain
rule, that Primum quodque verissimu^, that ye first things are truest, that is
to say, that when there shall be any question of a pure Church, we look into the
word of God what she has been of old time, and that we draw her from ye rust
of our evils which she has gotten through age, and so restore her unto ye
beauty and integrity of her youth. See then how we ought to honor antiquity,
to reform our selves according unto it, and not to suffer our selves to be
corrupted with the rust, and so to perish under the shadow of it. This is the
rule which our master has given us. When there was question concerning
divorce, that Moses had agreed unto ye people for the hardness of their hearts,
they had a prescription long enough, if prescriptio^ might have had place
against the institution of God: Notwithstanding he answers in one word, It
was not so from the beginning: Mar. 10.4.
that is to say, there was no such ordinance of god. Tertullian says,
Prescriptio^ is nothing against the truth, neither time, Yert. de virginibus
velandis.
nor authority of persons, nor privileges of kingdoms. For there is no
foolish custom which can have authority against the truth. Now Christ is
called the truth, and not custom. And if Christ be always, and more ancient
then al, then also is truth more ancient then al customs. Heresies have
always bin vanquished by ye truth, and not by novelty, and whatsoever is
contrary to this truth, it is heresy, although it be never so old a
custom. Cyprian says we must not regard yt, Cipr. lib. 2. epist. 3.
which any other has done before us, but we must regard yt which Christ has
do^e, De seipso ad Pompeian. episto. 9. and in episto. ad Quirin. in sentent,
episco. and in* August de Bapt. lib. 5. cap. 23. Ignatius ad Philadelph. canon.
Consuetud. did. 11.
which is before all, for we must not follow the custom of men, but the
truth of God. Again he says, custom without truth is an old error, and
the Lord has said, I am the truth, and not, I am custom. Ignatius says; all
my antiquity is Jesus Christ, who^ not to hear is manifest perdition. See
then how the most ancient send us always to lay hold upon the truth,
which is most ancient of all. For this is always a right rule, L. Quae ab
initio. D. de regulis iuris.
and to be received, that those things which are naught worth in the
beginning, are no whit better in the continuance of time, and if a man cannot
prescribe against kings, and against the Church in their possessions, much
less he can do it against God and against the truth, which is the only
treasure of the Church.

Now let us come to multitude, Multitude Exodus 23.
it is said expressly, thou shall not follow a multitude to do evil. Mat.
7.13. Luke 12.32.
Also the gate is wide that leads to perdition. Contrary wise, fear not my
little flock: for it is my fathers pleasure, to give you a kingdom. Deuteronomy.
4.2^ and. 7.17. and. 9.1. and. 11.23.
Moreover we see that all the world was brought to one only Noah, and
afterward to Abraham. Then God chose one people of Israel, the least, as he
has said, of al peoples, and finally of all peoples the least part, to wit,
Christendom, which for this cause he calls a little flock. According to
which S. Austin says, Augustine. super. psalm. 128.
that the Church was sometimes in one Abel, and in one Enoch. Multitude then
should be rather a presumption of the false then of the true Church, of
impuritie rather then of purity, for as much also as man in all things is prone
by nature to evil, and tends not unto good, unless he be as it were drawn
by force unto it. If we look to the number of Painims, they will set against
us in all nations almost, many against one, and again all nations against one
only nation, yea, and in that nation it self all the families of one time
against one or two: as namely in the time of Noah, those which were called the
children of God, Genesis 6.
mocked him and his religion. Likewise amongst this chosen people of God, 1.
Reg. 29.10.
the Samaritans bare themselves against Judah, for there were ten tribes against
two, 1. Kin. 22.8
and in Judah and Israel the idolaters gained against the people of God, for
Elias co^plaineth that he was left alone, Iere. 4.
and against the good Prophet Micheas, there arose up four hundred false, and
the Prophets cry that all the people were deceived, even from the Kings, Iere.
18.18.
to the Priests and Prophets. In the Christian Church also there shall be as
few in that place, for even at the beginning it was said, Isai. 53.
Who has believed our word, and to whom has the arm of the Lord bin
reueiled? and we read that it was brought to a small number of persons, and the
schoolmen themselves hold, that after the death of our Savior, in one instant
it consisted in the virgin Marie alone. In the greatest flower of it, we read
that after the death of Constantine, Thedoret. lib. 2. cap. 16.
his son being of the same name, favoring ye Arrians, there were so few
sound professors amongst the Christians, that ye Emperor reproched the^, that
four or five persons with their Athanasius, would trouble the peace of the
whole world, to whom Liberius the Bishop of Rome answered, that his solitude
or fewenesse did no whit diminish the word of faith. In the end we are
advertised that when yt son of man shall come (before which that son of
perdition must seduce the world) he shall find neither faith nor charity on
the earth, Mat. 24.
and that those days shall be as the days of Noah, and Lot etc. The eclipse
the^ of this Moon shall be as it were universal, all the whole earth being put
between ye Church and the Sun: and therefore if we have no other direction
in these darkenesses, then the multitude, we shall have no part with that
little number. Moreover, the Christians which reject the Pope in Asia, and in
Africa, are a great many more in number then the others. If the Pope hold them
for pure Churches, then is ye Roman Church an heretic, for she condemns
them, and exco^municateth them for diverse points of doctrine. If not, then
multitude, which is a common argument to the impure Churches themselves, can
not be alleged for a mark of purity. And yet for all this, we cease not to
praise GOD, for the blessing which he has given unto his word, making the
same to fructify, and increase to hundreds and to thousands: likewise we
pray, that as he has already drawn a part of Christendom from under the yoke
of Antichrist, so it will please him to continue it more and more. But we say
that if in certain places it seem that God do retire but few, Amos. 3.12.
as the Pastor that saves from the mouth of the Lion, an ear of his sheep,
as says the Prophet Amos, or according to Jeremy, Iere. 3.16.
taking one of one town, and two of one tribe, for to retire them into the
restauratio^ of his Church, yet for this cause we must not call the truth into
doubt, for as much as the self same truth has foretold us this, and the
great number is no mark of purity and verity, nor the little number of
falsehood and heresy.

Succession of place.
Now follows the succession of place and of persons, which they allege
against the succession of true doctrine which we require in the Church. As
concerning ye place, there is no doubt but that this is to play the Jews, to
enclose Orbem in Vrbe, that is, ye whole world in one city. For the Church is
not any longer tied to Jerusalem, but we see every day that God calls his
people, even those which seemed not to be his people, and contrariwise he has
permitted by his righteous will, that many Christian Churches have been turned
into the Temples of the Turks, Apo. 12.6. etc.
as that of Ephesus founded by S. Paul and S. John, and that of Bo^ne in
Barbary where S. Austin preached etc. And further that is said expressly,
Glossa communis in esi versiculum.
that the Church of God for a long time by reason of the persecution of
Antichrist, shall retire her self into the wilderness, as the common gloss it
self does expound. Moreover the Church is a city, that is to say, one vnio^
of Citizens under the just government of Christ. Now between a city and a
town there is this difference, yt the one consists in walls, and the other
in the union of the people governed under ye same laws, and therefore ye city
of Rome was at Veies with Camillus being a banished man, Deies was a little town
not far from Rome. Plutarch. in Themist. Dion lib. 41. Appian in libic.
Plorus. cap. 49.
though ye town of Rome was in ye hand of the enemy. And Themistocles said
that Athens was in ships which the Romans had taught the poor Carthagians
to their cost, when they made their City to be carried out of their town. To
be short, ye Popes the^ selves have maintained for lxxx. years together, that
the Romish Church had her sea in Auignio^ although they had forsaken Rome.
Moreover this argument is common to the Churches, Greeks, Syrians, Armenians,
Ethiopians, etc. whom the Pope condemns in many points of doctrine. To
conclude, if ever there were Church that might allege succession of place, it
was Jerusalem. For of it was said, The Lord will evermore dwell in this Temple:
2. Chro. 33 Psalm. 33. 2. Chro. 7.
Also I have chosen, and sanctified this house, to the end that my name may
dwell there for ever. And therefore the priests had no other answer to all the
Propheres that reproved them, but this: Iere. 7. and. 26.
The Temple, the Temple, the Temple of the Lord. But see what the Lord him
self answers unto them: Go says he, and see Shiloh, I have chosen it from
the beginning, for my house. Now see what I have done unto it for the wickedness
of my people, I will do even so to the place, which I have given unto you and to
your fathers. But if you will that I dwell there, amend your ways, and turn
from your evil deeds. Now if he have forsaken his own temple for the
iniquity of the priests, besides which he had none erected in ye whole world,
must we tie our selves to the Church of Rome, or to any other place, seeing
that all the Elimates of the world are equally his temple?

Succession of persons.
Concerning the succession of persons, yt is no less frivolous then the other.
In all estates and commonweals, there is one perpetual sequel of
magistrates, either by succession or by election. Now if there be any question
of reforming the estate according to the laws, there is no way so ill, as to
use these arguments, I am a magistrate as was my predecessor, or from ye
father to the son, ergo ye common wealth has not to make any reformation.
None ever douted, but yt Nero was a tyrant although he was descended from
Augustus, neither would any man affirm yt Commodus was a good prince, although
Marcus Aurelius was his father. In like manner every one will accord yt Manasses
defiled ye church, and violated al justice, Zackar. in tractatu de regimine
principum. Bald. de Schism.
albeit he was ye son of good Ezechias: and Josias, he reformed ye Church and
the laws, who was ye son of Manasses himself. And ye civil lawiers
themselves which make two sorts of tyrants, the one sort without title, and ye
other of exercise, that is, one sort unjust usurpers, the other unjust
governors, so we also make two kinds of Popes playing the tyrants over the
Church, one sort which they call intruders, which are thrust in there
unlawfully, the other abusers, abusing their authority, showing thereby, that
that which may fall out in the succession of magistrates in the common wealth,
may also fall out in the succession of prelates in the Church. Furthermore if
ever any might allege the succession of pastors, they were the Jews: for they
were of the house of Aaron from the father to the son, and besides them none
might sacrifice. Moreover to them it was promised, that they should so
continue for ever. And hereof it was, that when the Prophets exhorted them to
reformation, they had no other thing in their mouth, The law shall not perish
from the Priest, nor the council from the wise, nor the word from the
Prophet. But the spirit of the Lord answered them, Ierem. 8.8.
Say not, We are wise, and the law of the Lord is with us. For it is in vain,
that the pen is made, and that there is a scribe. The wisemen are confounded.
And seeing that they have rejected the word of the Lord, what shall be their
wisdom any more? Likewise when they boasted to Jesus Christ, Io. 8.44.
yt they were ye seed of Abraham. I know it well (says he) but the devil is
your father. And in very deed this successiue and hereditarie wisdom
crucified Christ, and rejected it salvation, as also this self same
succession, but yet only pretended, worshippeth Antichrist and e^tertaineth it
own perdition. Moreover I demand what these alledgers of succession would have
answered to ye Samositans, Nestorians, Arrians, etc. who had their beginning
continued from ye first Bishops, even to themselves, and namely from Nestorius,
and Samosatenus, both which were lawfully called to ye patriarchal churches,
the one to Constantinople, and the other to Antioche. Also what will they
answer to the succession alleged by all the Greek and East Churches? to be
short, to ye reformed churches of England, Denmark, Swethen, a great part of
Almaigne etc. through all which, there is at this day this succession from
Bishop to Bishop, and from pastor to pastor. If they will allege the Popes
supremacy, a man may deny it them, and this is another question. If simply
succession, then they have lost their cause: If yt doctrine, the^ we gain this
point, yt the simple succession of persons without the succession of doctrine, is
nothing worth.

They allege that the ancient Doctors have used this argument, and we deny it
not. But they must mark therein either that this was against heretics that
denied the holy scriptures, or else there was always adjoining the succession
of doctrine. S. Augustine enferreth it against ye Manichees: but they rejected
the greatest part of the scriptures, and manifestly the book of the Acts of
the Apostles, to the end to deny the descending of the holy Ghost, and to
establish Manichee in his place. He alleged also unto them miracles,
antiquity etc. but he adds immediately after. You on your part allege
nothing like, but only you hold a promise of the truth amongst you.
Notwtsta^ding if you could evidently prove it, August. contra Epist. fundam.
cap. 4. Idem contra petib. ca. 16.
I suppose it ought to be preferred before succession, antiquity, miracles and
al things else. This is as we dispute against the^ that deny the scriptures,
by probable reasons and by authorities of profane books, albeit we hold them
not for rules of ye truth. Against ye Donatists, Arrians, Pelagians and
others, who accept the scriptures, August. Epist. 156.
he disputes by ye scriptures. In a certain place he alleges amongst other
things the succession of 39. Bishops of Rome, but this was with this caveat. In all this company there was not one Donatist, that is, there was not one that
held any such doctrine as you do. Iren. lib. 4. cap. 44.
Irenee says, that they are not always true priests, which seem so to be:
but they which keep the doctrine of the Apostles. Tertull. de prescript.
aduersus hereticos.
Tertullian presses the heretics of his time, who for the most part denied
the Scriptures, to show that their predecessors were the Apostles or the
Apostles scholars: but by and by afterward he requires consanguinitatem
doctrinae, the consanguinitie or kindred of doctrine, and prefers it before
all succession, that is to say, that they only were not the sons of ye
Apostles, but also their doctrines were the daughters of the Apostolical
doctrine, Chrysostom says, that ye pulpit makes not a priest, but a priest
ye pulpit. To be short, a man shall not find any which has spoken in any other
sense. And now seeing yt none can transfer that to his successor, which of
right does not belong unto him, and that S. Paul has forbidden us to hear ye
Apostles, and the Angels themselves, preaching any other Gospel then his own,
does it not follow that the successors of the Apostles are rejected if they
preach otherwise? It follows then that the succession neither of place nor
of persons is any thing worth, but only the succession of doctrine, which we
have said before, to be the true and infallible mark of the pure Church.

Concerning miracles, if a man speak of those which were wrought either in the
publication of the law by Moses, Miracles.
or in the confirmation of the Gospel by Jesus Christ and his Apostles, it is
certain that they were generally wrought, as well for the Samaritans as for the
Jews, for heretics as for sincere and sound professors, for ye pure
churches, as for the impure, forasmuch as the only question is toward one to
show the true God giving forth the law, and toward the others, the true
Christ promised in the law, whom both the one and the other make profession to
receive and worship. And therefore this argument is common to both two.
Concerning the other which they allege, specially in that same state in which
we say Antichrist hears dominion, I say they are false in effect, Titus
Liuius in many places.
because they hear witness to falsehood: but if they had any true, yet they
are not therefore sure testimonies of the truth. The heathen had their
deuilish miracles in the temples of their false gods, and some in effect true,
as may appear by all their histories. Simon Magus, who would be ack nowledged
for Christ, wrought miracles. So likewise did Apollonius Tianeus and Apuleus of
Madaure. But these for the most part might be illusio^s, ye which ye devil
wrought to abuse fools, having nothing (as S. Augustine says) more agreeable
to this, Augustine de vtilitate credend. cap. 16. 2. Kin. 18.24.
then their outward senses. But God wrought those great miracles among the
Samaritanes, in their strongest Idolatry, as when he made the Assyrians to be
eaten of Lions, for to revenge his contempt among his enemies, and not to
authorize the faults and abuses of the people. He wrought some in the time of
those heresies next before ye coming of Christ, to show the power of his name
to al nations. Yea it should not seem strange, when he will work such in
lands newly found, for to va^quish the devils which reigned there. All this then
is too little to be a mark of the pure Church, unless ye churches of ye
Samaritans, and the heretics of ye former times had been pure churches. This
is yt which S. Augustine answered to ye Donatists, August. lib. de vnitate
Ecclesiae. cap. 46.
which would prove their doctrine by miracles. You allege (says he) miracles,
in which a man is not to be heard in respect of the place, but in regard of his
desire. We will not prove our church, neither by succession of Bishops, neither
by the authority of councels, nor by the number of miracles, nor by visions
nor dreams. All such things are to be allowed so far forth as they are done
in the Catholic Church, but they prove not that ye Church is Catholic, for
that depends upon the scriptures. Our Savior Christ hides not this from us,
yt he will cast into everlasting fire those yt have wrought miracles in his
name. Mat. 7.
This is not then as our adversaries say, a gift that sanctifies them that do
them. It is also foretold us that many false Christ's shall come with miracles,
Mat. 24.
to seduce if it were possible, even ye elect. 2 Thessalonians. 2.
And S. Paul says, yt Antichrist shall come according to the efficacy of
Satan, in all power, and signs and miracles of deceit. This then is as little,
Hierom. upon the 7. of Mat. Chrisost. upon the 1. Epist. 2 Thessalonians. August. lib.
20. cap. 19. De ciuitate Dei.
a gift of the spirit sa^ctifying and purifying the Church. This is more: for
some of these miracles shall not be altogether false in effect, but only in
their end, that is, because they tend to a false end, to establish the seat of
Antichrist, as saint Augustine has taught us upon this place: and Saint John
Chrysostom, when he says, that there are miracles not only of illusion,
August. super. psalm. 9.
but true and effectual, tending to bring in falsehood. Now if miracles approve
the purity of the Church, and the truth of doctrine, then Antichrist has
gained his cause, if not, it is so far of that ye miracles wrought under the
Papal sea, ought to be alleged for confirmation of purity, that rather quite
contrary, seeing yt no other miracles are promised before the coming of Christ
but his own, we should suspect, that the Roman Sea is that prodigious sea of
Antichrist, which was before foretold us. Let us follow the^ amiddest these
difficulties, Luke 24.
the instruction that Jesus Christ has given to all Christians in the person
of his Disciples. There were miracles wrought before his birth, but none were
nere acco^panying his own birth, and therefore there could be no abuse in it.
In his life time there were an infinite sort wrought, of which they were made
eye witnesses: he being fastened to ye cross, dead, and buried, and
afterward they saw him eat and drink with them. But of al those famous
Magicia^s, their enchantments died with them, neither was there ever one raised
up again. For it was enough for him to say unto them at his departure, You
have seen the singular miracles which I have wrought. You ought therefore no
more to doubt, that I am that same anointed, which was promised unto you.
Contrariwise, he sends them to the Prophets, to Moses, to the Psalms, and
to be short, to ye holy Scriptures, to the end they may there mark what they
have seen, and what was therefore told them by the Spirit of God, and yt what
he had foretold them, was now also accomplished.

Touching revelations and visions which are a kind of miracles, Revelations.
we have the plain text which decideth this matter. Deuteronomy. 13.
If there shall arise (says the Lord) amiddest thee, a false propher, or a
dreamer of dreams, and that the sign or miracle which he has told thee come
to pass, saying, Let us follow strange gods, etc. hearken not to the words
of this Prophet etc. There are then both Prophets, and visions, true in effect,
and yet false in their end and trial: which trial is doctrine, as is to be
seen in this place. Likewise when Saint John, to the end to keep us from
false prophets, exhorts us to prove the Spirits, by and by he adds, 1.
John. 4.
Hereby shall you know the Spirit of God: Every Spirit that confesses that
Jesus Christ is come in the flesh, is of God etc. that is to say, prove the
spirits by the doctrine which they preach. Therefore Saul and Cayphas have
prophesied, but as S. Augustine says, August. lib. 2 ad Simplic. quae. 1.
as Balaa^s Ass once spoke, and yet for all that, they might have once spoken
the truth. For the devil him self to couller his lying, some times speaks
truth.

We conclude then that all the foresaid marks are not the infallible marks
of the sound and pure Church. First, because they be not substantial but
outward. Secondly, because they are common, as well to falsehood as to truth.
But that they may be marks, they ought to put a difference. Thirdly, they
need to be proved and approved by another mark, to wit, doetrine: to be
short, seeing it is said, that in the end Antichrist shall come, and seduce
the greatest part of the people, and that he shall sit in the Temple of GOD,
that is to say, in the Church it self, and in one of the most famous places,
and that be shall work strange signs and wonders: we conclude on the contrary
part that antiquity, multitude, succession, and miracles, are rather at this
day the marks of the seat of Antichrist, and of that whore, then of Christ and
of his chaste spouse, of whom Christ has given us this one mark, He that is
of the truth, hears my voice. He that is my Disciple, abides in my word.

That the holy scripture is the undoubted touchstone, to try the purity of
doctrine, which is the mark of the pure Churches. CHAP. 4.
Our adversaries do thereupon object unto us, that doctrine as a common
argument, and that every one says, that he has the pure doctrine on his side,
and therefore that it can not be alleged as a mark of the pure Churches. I
answer, that this is in deed a common brag of all heretics, but it is not
always a common mark, but peculiar and proper to the pure Churches. For both
the true Christians and heretics, may have antiquity, multitude, succession,
and miracles, as we have already proved: but there is none but the sound and
Catholic Church that can have truth, and true doctrine, which consists in
faith and charity, forasmuch as she is one, and if the other boast of it, they
have nothing else but the sound, the which by and by vanishes, if it be once
put to the touch. Likewise we see commonly that they which plead together,
pretend every one yt right is on their side. In mean time who will say, yt
seeing both twain say they have right, yt there is no question to dispute of
ye right but only yt he which is in possession should keep it. He that should
say so, he should make him self a laughing stock, and should often times give
authority, and title to the unjust possessor against the right owner: For
besides the opinions of parties, there are advocates to debate the right, and
law that must judge thereof. Now for to decide ye matter whereof there is
question, thanks be to God we have a good Judge. The question between us is of
ye pure service of God. Now it is not in man's power to judge, how God must be
served, much less for a poor pesaunt to make books, how Princes should be
dutifully served. For between man and man there is always a proportion, but
between man and God there can be none. For it is God alone which ought only to
be heard in this matter, and not men, whose ordinances of ye service toward
god is for their own turn, and serve only for their own fantasies. This is
ye cause why God himself would be ye only law giver unto his people, Iere.
33.22 Iam. 4.12. Deuteronomy. 12.8 and. 32. Iere. 7.21.
giving the^ a law which contains whatsoever he requires of men, as well in
general as in particular. And to cut of al man's inue^tio^s, he expressly
forbids the^ to add any thing thereto, or to take any thing therefro: for
he says, that he will be served according to his pleasure, and not according
to that which is good in men's eyes, which he has knit up for us in one word,
1. Sa^. 15.22 Prou. 30.
I will obedience, and not sacrifice. The Priests were men, and very oftentimes
they could not content themselves with this: but the example of the sons of
Aaron may be an horror unto every one, who for offering strange fire unto the
Lord, and not being commanded, they were consumed with fire sent from heaven.
And whilst men have loved their own inventions, they have laden the people
with traditions, ceremonies, and gloses, and whereas the law was given to
convince them of sin, to the end they might seek mercy in Christ, they
have found out other means for their salvation. But God by his Prophets,
which he has sent from time to time, between the publishing of the law and
the Gospel, has always held them to the law. To the law and the testimony
says Esai: Iere. 7.21. Isai. 8.20.
hide my law amongst my Disciples. And if they speak not according to this
word, the morning light shall not be given unto them. And because they
observed not this sacrifice, it was turned to them into a curse, and God was
ready to make a divorce with his people, and therefore to cut of at one
blow all their madnesses, Mal. 2. and. 4 Osc. 2.
Malachi recommendeth to the Church, the observation of the law, and the
ordinances given from Moses, until the coming of Elias, that is, of John the
forerunner of Jesus Christ. See then the law of the Church, even until the
Gospel of grace was given, whereof the Prophets were expositers: by which a
man may distinguishe the false service from the true, without having any
recourse to the long possession thereof, which had but small authority to give
power to Ismael him self against Israel. To be short, he, of whom it is only
said, Hear him, to teach us by his example, has given so great authority to
the law, that he will have the people thereby to judge whether he be Christ or
no: Mat. 17.
Search (says he) diligently the Scriptures: for you think that by the^ you
shall have everlasting life, and they are they, which bear witness of me. The
judge of the world attributes so much to ye la^w, Ioh. 5.39. Luke 16.16. Luke
24.
that he will have ye world to judge by the same law, whether he be the true
Messiah, a deceiuer of the people or ye savior of ye world. And why so?
because it is not the word of Moses nor of Esai, nor of any men, but even his,
who sent him.

Now by the coming of our Savior Christ, ye holy scriptures have lost
nothing, but rather have the greater authority, Hebr. 2.
God which has spoken to our fathers (says the Apostle) sundry times and in
diverse manners, has in these last times spoken unto us, by his own son. This
son is God himself, this is yt esse^tial word, this is he by whose coming
ye Church waits for the manifestation of al things. John. 4.25.
The word then yt proceeds from him, ought to have an infinite and absolute
authority, and theru^to must me^ add nothing. For it is the infinite wisdom
of the infinite father, and can teach us whatsoever is necessary for our
salvation. And seeing he has so loved us, that he came into the world to dye
for us, he would not then hide from us the word of life. To be short, he came
to lighten us in darkness, and has promised never to forsake us. He has
then left us some light to guide us, and seeing he is that same light it self,
it is such a light, as we following it, we cannot be deceived. Now this then
is that same written word of God, which is the true image of that essential
word, in which he has imprinted all that is necessary for us to the glory
of God, and all that is expedient for our salvation. The Apostles received this
word from his mouth, to preach the same to all the world, and herein they
were true and faithful Ambassadors. Again, the spirit of God, through which
they preached, indicted it, and taught them what they should say, to the end
it should be delivered unto the posterity, so as we have it there registered by
four sworn Notaries of the holy Ghost, and expounded in many Epistles of the
Apostles. Finally, these Registers of the kingdom of heaven, have gathered
them together by the common care of the Churches, wherein they have been kept,
the which have witnessed, that this word proceeded from them, and thereto have
put to their seal: and to the end that no Scripture might be made equal unto
them, and to take away also the foundation of all heretics, which every where
allege it, and bring in, to serve every turn, the traditions of the Apostles,
the Churches have brought them into one book, which they call the Canon, that
is, the rule, and the Canonical Scriptures. See then that in the Christian
Church, we have now as was under the law, one rule to judge the right from the
crooked, a squire to direct our buylding, a compass to guide our bark, a law
to judge controversies, and a God in his word to determine all matters which
shall arise in the Churches. All that is agreeable to this word of God, is of
God, for that it is his own word. All that is not agreeable to this word, is
of man, and no man has any voice in the Church, to make any laws concerning
the service of God. The son of man alone, God and man, has only this power,
of whom it is only said, Hear him. Matthew. 17.
Al then that is over and besides this, ought to have no place in the Church.

By this word thus limited within the books of the Canonical Scripture, the
primative Church has taken away an infinite number of traditions, which
heretics have made to pass under the name of the Apostles, allowing nothing
but that which they have found contained in the foresaid books. By the same
also they have stopped the mouth of heresies, which sprung up of the noughtie
and unsound interpretations thereof: to be short, they never complained, when
they had any thing to do with heretics, who agreed of this Judge, accompting
their matter won, but rather when they vanquished them which refused the same
word: forasmuch as it is impossible to find a Judge, to them that refuse to
be judged of God.

Our adversaries always cry with open mouth, The Fathers, Fathers, Fathers:
but behold whereby the Fathers would be judged, and before whom they would
plead. This controversy (says S. August. Augu. epist. 166. and lib. de
unit. Eccles. cap 3. and 16. per totum aduersus Donatistas.
) requires a Judge: let Christ then be Judge himself, and tell us himself,
wherefore he dyed. Let the Apostle also be judge together with him: for in the
Apostle also Christ himself speaks. It is said, that he has not spared his
own son, etc. but has given him to the death for us. See then the Judge
before whom he calls the Pelagians, from whom our adversaries have borrowed
their doctrine. Against the Donatistes his ordinary words are, August. de
pastoribus cap. 4.
We have found Christ in the scriptures, there also must we find the Church.
Also let it not be heard any more between us, I say this, thou say that, but
rather see what the Lord says, for we have (says he) the books of the Lord,
to which we both give consent, we both believe and keep. Again, the
canonical Scripture is the rule of all. The epistles of Bishops give place one
to an other, and Councels are amended and corrected one by an other, but that
must correct all. Also where shall we feed the sheep of the Lord? Upon the
mountains of Israel: these mountains of Israel, are the altars of the
Scriptures of God. When any man shall preach according to that, from thence
take taste thereof, and all that is not from thence, cast it away, for fear
of straying in the mystes. And when the Donatistes alleged Saint Cyprian unto
him, of whom notwithstanding he makes a great account in all his works, and
specially through whom he might have overcome them in many matters, I (says
he) allow not the wrytings of Saint Cyprian for canonical. And yet herein I
do him no wrong: for not in vain was this so healthful a Canon made, August.
contra Cresconium lib. 2. cap. 21.32.38. lib. 5. cap. 17. de baptism. co^tra
Donatist.
in which are comprehended the books which we dare not judge, and through
which notwithstanding we judge of all books, as well of infidelles as of
Christians. That which I find there agreeable with Scripture, I accept it with
praise, that which I find not agreeable to the Scripture, by his good leave I
reject it. And there is no doubt, says he in another place, but that now he
sees all more clear and bright then when he was conversant in darkness, that
he will rather be glad to know how comfortable it is for us, that in the
writings of Christian orators and learned preachers, a man may find things to
be reproved, and that in the writings of those poor fishers, that is to say,
of the Apostles, a man shall find no such thing in them. Allege not therefore
to me, says he, in this case their writings, but the Law, the Prophets, the
Psalms, the Gospel, and the Apostle. For from hence it is, that I hold the
Church is spread over all, and is not tied unto any certain place. And the
rule which he gives us out of the books of Cyprian, August. 13. ad Hieron.
in prolog. lib. 3. de Trinitat. distin. lib. Canoni.
he has also given out of his own, and out of all the rest, and the places
also repeated by Gratian in his Decretalles. I know very well, that Gratian, to
get credit to himself, gives no less authority to the decretall Epistles
of the Pope, then to the Canonical books of the scripture, impudently
corrupting a place taken out of the books of Christian doctrine, Lib de doct.
Christ. 2.18.
where he speaks the quite contrary. But this is not worth the confutation.
And Alfonsus de Castro himself, who is one of the chief pillars of the
Papacy, does acknowledge this fault, and very lively reproves him for it. The
Arria^s in a more high matter of the Christian faith, would escape by the
Councilles: but he always draws them to this. Let us not allege (says he,
disputing against Maximine their Bish.) neither thou the Council of Ariminium,
nor I the Council of Nicee: August. contra Maximinu^ Arrianu^, lib. 3 cap. 14.
for neither I am bound to the authority of that there, nor thou to ye
authority of this here: but let us dispute by the authority of the
Scriptures, which are common witnesses to us both, cause against cause, and
reason against reason, etc. All his books are full of such places, especially
against the Manichees, who denied one part of the Scriptures: following the
example of Christ, August. contra Faustum Manich. lib. 11. cap. 5.
who vanquished the Sadduces in the matter of ye resurrection, specially by ye
books of Moses, because they rejected all the others. And yet this is he, that
so astonished all the heretics of his time, that he put them to utter silence.
But to the end that they condemn him not for an heretic, whom they have
already so sore suspected, it is necessary to see what others do hold
concerning this matter. Basilius contra Eunom. Apol epist. lib. 2. Idem epist.
8.
Basil the great would that we examine all doctrines by ye Scriptures, which
were given unto us by the holy Ghost, rejecting whatsoever is not agreeable to
them, as enemy to our salvation. And against all heretics he demands that
only the Scripture be vmpire. Chrysostom calls it the most exact balaunce,
Chrisost. in 2. Cor. homi. 13 in fine. Ide^ in ferm. de sancto. and ader. spiri.
the squire, the rule, and judge of all doctrine. And in a certain other place
the same says, that the Scripture is the accomplishment of the holy Ghost,
as Christ is of the law, and that without it we may not allege the spirit.
Irenaeus lib. 5. cap 1.
Irence calls it the foundation and pillar of our faith. Tertullian says,
Take from heretics the books of Ethnikes, and win so much of them, that
they will rest upon the Scriptures, and they can not stand. Also let the
shop of Hermogenes show that it is written: if they cannot, let them fear
the curse which is appointed for them that add to or diminishe. To be short,
they all drive to this point, that to examine all doctrine, to maintain the
true, Council. Carthag. 3. L. Cunctos populos. C. de summa Trinit. and side
Catholic.
to vanquishe the false, we must have no other touchstone, no other Buckler or
sword, but this. And this was the cause in the third Council of Carthage, it
was forbidden to read any thing in the Church, but the Canonical Scriptures.
And the Imperial law distinguishes Catholics from heretics, Socrat. lib.
1. cap. 8. Hist. tripar. lib. 2. cap 5. lib. 1. cap. 14.
by the Apostolical and Evangelical doctrine: and Constantine the great the
first Christian Emperor, having assembled that famous Council of Nicee,
wherein there were three hundredth and eyghtene Fathers, to dispute against the
heresy of Arrius, he prescribed them this rule. We have (says he) the books
of the Evangelists, Apostles and Prophets, which instruct us in the holy
law. By these books then it behooves us to resolve all doubts and
questions: And this rule also was there so exactly kept, that one Minister
alone, Paphnutius by name, alleging the Scripture, made all the rest to
change their opinion, who without any ground of the Scripture, for certain
politic and humane considerations, were ready to have abolished the marriage
of Ministers. To be short, Gerson and Panormitane, L. Abbas Panormitanus in
cap. signif. extrauag. de electis. Gerson part. 1. de exami. doctr.
even when the Popes thunderbolts and lyghtning excommunications were most
hot, durst yet say and write, that one poor lay man alleging a text of the
old or new Testament, ought to be preferred before the Pope, yea and before a
general Council, erring through ignorance, or of malice, against the text of
Gods word: which ought to be thought no more strange, then if they had
said, that the word of God alone has more wayght, then all the Doctors of
the world together, who are nothing else with all their knowledge, but
ignorance and vanity. I have been long in this point, because now a days,
they always speak unto us of the fathers, and I pray the readers to take a
little pain, to read the places themselves, because they shall find them yet
more plain and full, then the desire that I have to be short, suffers me to
write at large. Isa. 8.20.
With Isaie the Prophet therefore we call our adversaries to the Law, Luke
16. John. 5.39.
with Abraham to Moses and the Prophets, with Christ to the Scriptures, with
all the fathers and Christian Doctors to the old and new Testament. If this
Judge then, which heretofore has decyded all controversies, and which has
been so reverently accepted even of the greatest part of heretics themselves,
can not please the^, either they must allege great causes of refusal against
it, or else all the world will hold their doctrine more suspect, then the
doctrine of all the heretics that ever were.

The scripture is perfect and sufficient to salvation.
Their first cause of refusing the holy Scriptures, is for that they are
imperfect. But I demand of them, if they will require any other perfection,
then a doctrine sufficient to salvation. If they content themselves to be
saved, Saint John has told us, that, Ioh 20.3^. And Augustine upon that place.
that which he has written, is sufficient to believe in Christ, and to have
life in his name: and as concerning the things which are omitted, S. Augustine
pronounces yt he is rash, which presumes to guess what they are. Saint Paul
also says, 2. Tim. 3. Marsil. lib. intitul defensor pacis. part. 1. cap 9.
that the holy Scriptures are sufficient to make the man of God perfect, and
wise to salvation. That they comprehend sufficiently the rule of faith, and
whatsoever belongs to ye service of God. Behold then sufficiently
wherewithal to save them. If they will not content themselves with salvation,
but call the Scriptures imperfect, because they find not there the
determination of certain curious questions which they handle in their
schools, and yet they do the Scriptures wrong, for there they shall find
their condemnation. Moreover I demand of them, from whence this imperfection
can come: Is this of Christ: nay rather he is perfection it self. And seeing
he came to accomplish our salvation, it must needs be he, of whom the
Church must wait for the revelation of all things. He then could being
perfectly wise, and would being perfectly good, teach his Church whatsoever
might belong unto her salvation. Or is this imperfection of the Apostles: but
they received this word of life from his mouth, and after he sent unto them
his holy Spirit, Ioh. 16.13. Iren. lib. 3. cap. 2.
to record it, and to put them in mind thereof, in such sort that they
preached salvation to all nations, and as Ireneus says, that which they
preached by mouth, they have left unto us by writing, to be the pillar and
foundation of our faith. The whole fault then comes not that ways: it
remains then that the whole imperfection be in men, who not fynding in the
Scriptures their imperfections, they esteem it imperfect, as they that have
swilled in the snow waters from the mountains, call those imperfect, which
have not wide and hanging throtes like themselves, for that they have not their
superfluous imperfection.

We find in the Scriptures the invocation of one God alone, by means of Jesus
Christ alone, but they would find there the invocation of Saints. We there
find, that purgatory cleansing is in the only blood of Jesus Christ, they
would find there that purgatory, which they have taken out of Virgill and
Plato. We there find one only Mediator: but they would find as many there,
as there are saints in their calendar. They call these things imperfections in
the Scripture, which are rather so many infections in their Church.

Furthermore I demand, be it that a man think that there wants something,
who shall be so hardy, after such a workman, to put to his hand to make it
perfect? If a man say the Doctors, why then quite contrary find it only
perfect, and in it as in a glass they acknowledge the imperfections both of
others, and of themselves. Mat. 15.9. John. 8.
If they will bring in the Church through her traditions, why it is she that
has taught us to cut of by the books of this Canon, all that we find not
therein, and further she is forbidden to serve God according to her
traditions, and commanded to be a scholar of this word, and we know that this
is not the part of a scholar, to usurp above the master. If the Pope do it,
he is no longer a scholar of Christ, but in this point he declares himself to
be Antichrist, lifting up himself above all that is God, and by such a like
gate the Alcoran of Mahomet has entered into the world. The more safe way
then, is to follow this word, and to believe yt that perfect lawegiuer has
given unto us a perfect law by the mouth of his Son, to the which we ought a
great deal less to presume to add any thing of our own, then to that which
was delivered to Moses. And if there were never found Paynter, which durst
take upon him to finishe the image of Apelles, nor Poet the Aeneides of
Virgill, which were but the works of vain men, what man shall be so
arrogant, unless it be that son of perdition, which dares put to his hand
to the work of him which has made man, and all that which a man loves and
beholds in this world:

The scripture is plain and manifest to salvation.
Their second refufall is, that the holy Scripture is obscure, and thereupon
they call it doubtful, a dead letter, a letter which kills, a matter of
contention, and not the voice of the Judge, riddles or dark speeches, and such
other like names whereof their books are full: yea one of the great Masters of
this time, Xanctes in lib. 1. de Atheist.
could not abstain from saying, that Paul went so far beyond himself, that
he entangled himself with many matters. But the holy Ghost calls the
Scripture the Testament and covenant. And we know yt a good prince, dealing
with his subjects, will not have them to be circumuented and caught in words: as
also a good father making his last will, endeuoreth to set his children at one,
and not to sow discord, and to give occasion of going to law, and quarrels
amongst them. The presumption then ought to be on the contrary, to wit, that
he which has vouchsafed to save his people so mercifully, and which only may
be called a true father, has also delivered his covenant in as clear terms
and express clauses as he could. And in deed in all our Scriptures the
Ethnikes have not blamed any thing so much as to great playnenesse of them,
which is far otherwise then that they would make men believe, that they are
riddles or dark speeches. Again I demand of them, whether the obscurity of
Christian doctrine be in the matter it self, or in the manner of handling it:
In the matter they dare not say, for there is nothing more clear and more
simple then the doctrine of salvation, and this is the answer of Origin to
Celsus, who blamed the simplicity of it, Origin contra Celsum.
because that it must be such as it was, because it was not such a philosophy
as was brought to a little number of men, as that of Pythagoras, of Plato, or
of Aristotle, but a salvation taught and preached to the whole world, which ye
whole world great and small, learned and unlearned might easily comprehend. If
it be in the manner of handling, such obscurity of any author must arise
either of ignorance or of malice. Of ignorance, because that, that which a man
understands but darkely, a man can not teach plainly. Of malice, when we
will boaste our cunning, and not teach it, as Aristotle says that he did
expressly, in those same books of his natural philosophy, which yet
notwithstanding all the world boast to understand, and as also certain other
authors of profounde Sciences in our time, have done, of set purpose. Now of
ignorance there can be none, in that wisdom which has spoken to the
Apostles, nor in that spirit which has inspired them. Of envious malice,
there can be as little in him which dyed to accomplish our salvation, and in
them which have published the same, even unto their suffering after him. It
remains then, for to avoid these blasphemies, that either ignorance, or much
rather malice be in our adversaries, and not in him which is wisdom, and
goodness it self.

Again I demand, whether in their judgment is more obscure, the Gospel or
the Prophets: They will not say, I am sure, that it is the Gospel, for then
little children would laugh them to scorn. And moreover Saint Peter says, 2.
Pet. 1.19
The Prophets were as shining candles in a dark place, in stead whereof
Christ is the true Sun, John. 1.9.
and that light that lighteneth every man that comes into the world.
Moreover both in the one and the other we find Christ, in the one promised, in
the other given, in the one to come, in the other come, in the one foretold,
in the other speaking him self of him self. It is therefore sure, that the
doctrine of salvation in Jesus Christ, is less dark in the Gospel then in
the Prophets, in the New Testament, then in the Old, which is expounded and
declared by the New. Psalm. 119.
Now David says that this word is unto him as a lantern for his feet,
and not only a lantern, but which serves to lead him in the path, yea in
the path it self which can not lead astray. That by the same he is more wise
then they that are elder. Contrariwise Esaye pronounces, that the watchemen of
the house of GOD, Isa. 56.10.11.
who thought them selves very clear sighted, were blind, because they had no
regard thereto. Moreover Christ sends not his hearers to the gloses of the
Rabbis, to traditions, John. 5.39.
to the Thalmud, to the Law not written, wherewith the Pharisees were puffed
up: but to the Scriptures, Luke. 24.
to the Law written, and he never alleges Testimonies from any other
place. Saint Luke also prayseth those of Beroa, which searched them, Acts. 17.
and they which searched them, found there their salvation, whereas they which
gave them selves egarly to the speculations of men, crucified him. It follows
then that by a more strong reason, we ought at this day, to search our
salvation in the Scriptures, having the Old and New Testament together, the
shadow and the body, the stars and the sun, the messages of salvation, and
salvation it self. If any man yet find obscurity in the doctrine of
salvation, I leave it to be judged of all, which of the two is more plain,
either that which is in ye word of him which is the light of light, John. 1
and 8. and 12.
or in the blindness of those, whose spirits naturally are nothing else but
darkness.

But putting the case there were such great obscurite as they say, let us see a
little by whom they would make it brighter. Shall it be by the doctors? Nay
rather contrariwise, as we shall see hereafter, they rejoice not but in the
brightness of this sun. What the^: shall it be by ye Church: But the Church
is the moon, a body shadowed and dark of it self, which has no light, but
that which it gives her. What then: shall it be Thomas: shall it be Scotus:
shall it be Bricot and a rablement of such like? I report me to al men of
judgment, whether they darken, or make more bright the word of God. It
remains then that we search in this light, the light of all our thoughts,
and that we conclude that if we see nothing, the fault thereof is in our
eyes, and not in the light.

They allege that the Scripture is doubtefull, because that Satan alleged it
unto Jesus Christ. I answer, that there is no law that a man may not reject
by this argument: for all laws are subject to be alleged both by good and
bad. But let them also mark, that by the same Jesus Christ stopped his mouth.
Also, your Savior Christ has spoken in parables and similitudes: we know that
similitudes are to make clear, and not to darken: and I make their own
consciences judges, whether those parables of Christ, so expounded as we have
them in the scriptures, tend to any other end. When he would teach us who is
our neighbor, he makes it plain by the similitude of the man descending from
Jericho: what the kingdom of heaven is, by the similitude of the sower: Luke.
10. Luke. 8. Mat. 13. Luke. 15.
what the vocation of the Gentiles is, by the prodigal child, and so likewise
of other. I ask if by these parables we may judge more clearly or more
darkely, and whether all the gloses or long commentaries of the Pharisees, were
able so clearly to expound this matter: But they will say, you cannot deny, but
ye there are many dark places: for S. Peter himself says, 2. Pet. 3.16.
yt there are such in the epistles of S. Paul: nay but rather we may say, yt
forasmuch as there are only certain places dark, it follows contrariwise
that the Scripture is not dark. For this is an evil argument, to reason from
some to all, and he that says that upon a garment there are black spots,
he says by consequence that that garment is not all black. And as concerning
those, we say that the light of the Scripture, is sufficient for to give them
such light, as they need not dwell any more in darkness: unless it be
those whom the God of this world has blinded in their understanding, as
Saint Paul says, 1. Cor. 4.
to the end they should perish, and that the light of the Gospel should not
shine unto them, 2. Pet. 3.16
or as Saint Peter says, in the self same place which they allege, to the
unstable and unlearned, which pervert the Scriptures to their own destruction.
This is the sentence of all the ancient fathers, with whom we conclude this
point. There are (says Saint Augustine) handling this matter, August. libr.
2. de doctr. Christ. cap. 2, and libr. 2. cap. 9.
certain hard places in the Scripture, and yet notwithstanding there is no
other thing, but that which is expounded in most express words in other
places, whereby the holy Ghost has wonderfully measured, and tempered the
holy Scriptures, to the end that those clear places should serve healthfully
to satisfy the hunger of the readers, and those darker places should increase
their appetite, to take away all contempt: but in that that is spoken clearly
in the Scriptures, they shall find all things which conteyne faith and the
way to live well, to wit, hope and charity. And he that will have more
examples hereof, in the foresaid places he alleges more. Saint Ambrose:
There is (says he) much obscurity in the Prophetical writings, Ambro. in
Psalm. 119. sermon. 8.
(he speaks namely of the Prophets) but if thou knock at the door of the
Scriptures, with the hand of thine own understanding, thou shall gather the
sense of the dark places, and the word of God it self shall be that, that
shall open it unto thee. The most obscure and dark then that is therein, may be
made plain by it self. S. Basil: If we be commanded to do any thing, and we
know not how, Basil. lib. 2. de Baptism, quest. 4.
let us take the LORD for our guide, who says unto us, Search the
Scriptures: and let us follow the Apostles who asked him self of the
interpretation of those things, which he had spoken unto them: and of those
things which he has spoken to us in one place, let us learn to understand
those things which he has spoken in another. Marsilius de Padua, in. lib.
defens. pacis part 1. cap 9.
This is that which Marsilius of Padua disputed against the Pope 300. years
ago: that the Law of the Gospel is sufficient, perfect and plain of it
self, immediately to direct us to everlasting salvation, and to turn us away
from the path of misery. But to the^ which find nothing in the light but
darkness, I fear that it is to no purpose to allege plain places out of the
ancient doctors. The mischief is, that we find not in the Scriptures in any
place, neither the Mass, nor Purgatory, neither the papacy, nor the power of
one man alone over the whole Church, and such other inventions of the prince of
darkness: and therefore we accuse Gods word to be dark, to the end we may
fetch these goodly doctrines from thence by mean of some cold Allegory, that
wheresoever this light shines not unto us in the Church, we should know
that there is nothing but darkness.

But yet see a farther matter then the former: for it is so far of, that they
will accept the Scriptures for their judge, that they them selves will be
Judges over the Scripture. If the Church (say they) had not kept the
Scriptures, The church is not judge over the Scripture.
and witnessed of them, they had been of no more authority then any other
writing. Therefore the Church is Judge over the Scripture, and not the
Scripture over the Church. First, I demand what that Church is, which has
kept the Scriptures, whether this be only the Christian Church, or the
Jewish Church also? Now we know that the Old Testament was delivered from
hand to hand unto us by the Jews, and therefore the ancient doctors called
them the book keepers of the Church. For they were so curious, that they
would enter every tittle, and point, both the accentes and letters, and made
a Register of them. Therefore the Iewishe Church was judge of the Old
Testament when Jesus Christ came, and therefore to very evil purpose our
Savior Christ sends the people to the Scriptures, who might more safely
have been sent to the high Priests and Pharisees. But these Judges of the
Scriptures, they judged Christ to death, and the Scholars and Students of the
Scriptures acknowledged him for their life. And at this day, even by this
argument, the Jews should win the victory. It follows then, whether they
renounce this Sophistrye, or whether they will mainetayne it, that they
renounce their Salvation. Consequentlye I demand of them, Whether the Church
of Rome aloue have kept the Scriptures, or other Churches also: They can not
say that it was the Church of Rome, or the Latin Church alone: For the
Ecclesiastical storye witnesses, that the Primitive Church gathered the
Canon of the Registers, of those Churches which were founded by the Apostles,
and to which the same Apostles had written. Now there is but one Epistle
written to the Romans, and all the rest are written to the East Churches. In
like manner the Gospel of John was kept at Ephesits, and that of Saint Mark at
Alexandria, etc. If then the East Churches had a greater part in keeping the
Scriptures, then the Roman, and therefore by this argument as much, or more
authority over the Scriptures then it: I ask of the indifferentest amongst
them, who shall judge but the Scriptures? And if they judge the Scriptures, who
shall pronounce sentence over them: If the East Churches shall, then the
Romish Church has lost her Cause. If the Church of Rome, then this shall
he in another respect, then of keeping the Scriptures. If they say it be by
their pretended prerogative of Saint Peter's Seat, it is meet that they prove
it by the Scriptures. And therefore mark Peter's Sea, which does take upon it
to judge the Scriptures, being yet subject to the Scripture it self.

Furthermore I pray every man to examine this conclusion. The Church of GOD
has kept the Scripture: The Church bears witness of the Scripture: Ergo
she is above the Scripture. The edictes of a Prince are registered in all his
Countries. The laws are gathered together and written by Clerks. All
Contractes and bargains are subsigned by witnesses. And yet for all that, he
that would say, that they were above the Kings, above the laws and
contracts, he should make him self a laughing stock. If they say that the
Laws of God have no place, neither more nor less then edictes of some
Princes, except they be agreeable to the word of God: I answer them, that it
is not the Church of God that has this privilege: for she is the Spouse of
Christ, and has learned to obey her husband without any examination of his
commandment, and must by and by hold her peace, as soon as she hears his
word. For she knows also, that the wisdom of her husband (whose will is
the rule of doctrine) is not like that of Princes, which it is necessary to
examine, whether it be honest and profitable, Civil or uncivil: but if they
be so stiff for the obteyning of this privilege, yet let them agree with me
herein: that this is that assembly, which has lyfted up it self above all
that is called GOD, which fearing to be discomfited by the Spirit of his
mouth, would therefore moussell and stop up his mouth, all that it might.

The place of Saint Augustine which they allege, makes nothing against that
which has been said before. I would not (says he) believe the Gospel,
unless the aucthoritye of the Church constrained or moved me. Ni me Ecclesiae
Catholicae commoueret authoritas: where it is specially to be noted, that
according to the style of Affricke, Commoueret is taken for commouisset, that
is to say, I had not believed the Gospel, unless the consent of the
universal Church had moved me thereto: he means not that the holy Ghost
had not such a style, Contra epist funda. cap 5.
as might make it self sufficientlye known from other wrytings of men: For he
him self instructs us in this matter, in many places. Much less means
he, that the Church should be above the Gospel. For it is by the Gospel
that he examineth all the Churches of his time: but rather that the universal
consent of the Churches, the which received such and such books for the
Gospels of Christ, made that he could not doubt, but that they were so, and
that the apostles, whose names they did bear, were true authors of them. No
otherwise then as ye consent of many ages, acknowledging such and such books
to be Ciceroes, Hippocrates and Platoes, do assure us that they were theirs.
These were his very words against the Manichees themselves, who denied part of
the holy scriptures in another place: Oh unhappy enemies (says he) of your
own souls! August. lib. ^3. contra Manich. and ^ib. 28. cap. 2.
What Scriptures shall be had in price, if the Evangelical and Apostolical be
not? Of what book shall men hold the certain author, if a man doubt that
those holy books, which the Church holds were of the Apostles, should not be
theirs? Who shall know whether the books of Plato, Hippocrates, Aristotle and
Cicero, were theirs, unless it be for that from their time even unto ours,
always me^ have been persuaded yt they came from hand to hand? etc. Like as
then I believe that ye books of Manichee are his, because men have believed yt
they came thence from hand to hand: so also I believe ye book of S. Matthew.
because eue^ until us the church has so held. The question is not the^ in this
place, whether the writings of ye Apostles have any voice to determine matters
in the church: for as we have already showed, S. Aug. teaches us yt, in a M.
places: but only whether such and such scriptures were the Apostles, yea or no.
For the heretics denied not, but yt the books of the Apostles had such
authority, as they must be obeyed, but they denied that they were theirs,
because that if they had once allowed the^, they knew, yt they must of
necessity rest in them: And yet they pretended that they were never a whitte
less the church, then the Roman church does. For they held that Manichee the
chief of their sect, was the holy Ghost him self. But this was a
blasphemy, not yet known to the most damnablest heretics that ever were:
that the holy Scripture was subject to the Church, and that without her (as
one of the Popes Cha^pions of our time says), Wolffgang. Herman.
it has no more aucthority the^ Esops fables. The Jews have taught the
Gentiles, that the Old Testament was the word of God, and many of the
Gentiles believed it better the^ the Jews. The Gentiles have kept for the
Christians many good and ancient books, and have taught them that such and
such were the authors of them, and yet for all that, they have not given any
credyte unto them. The bookeseller will teach us that such a book is
Hippocrates work, and yet for all that, he shall not be a physician as
Hippocrates was. For it is one thing to believe the word of any some man, and
an other thing to be the author of a book. This is that which was said long
ago by a great learned man: Marsil. de Padua part. 2. cap. 19.
That the Church is true or undoubted, but as we say, by occasion, because she
believes ye truth of ye Scripture: but the holy Scripture is simply true,
and of it self. For it is the truth it self.

There follows another argument, that the Church is before the Scripture:
Whether the Church be before the Scripture.
Ergo it is above ye Scripture. When we speak of the Scripture, we understand
the word of God, the which at the first was not written, and afterward was
written as well by Gods own finger, as by the pens of his servants, inspired
by his holy spirit, as we have before declared. But now I would demand of
them, from whence they fetch the beginning of the Church. If from the creation
of man, and before sin entered: immediately after they were created, God gave
them a commandment, that they should not touch the tree of knowledge of good
and evil, and we must not dispute whether they had authority above this word,
for why, they having disobeyed it, all the world from man to beasts sighs and
groans for it. But will they not deny that the old and new testament had
equal authority with this commandment? If they take it after sin entered,
God blames and conuinceth our first parents of their fault: and this is the
Law. And after he promises unto them the seed, which shall bruise the head of
the serpent: and this is the Gospel. Behold them then dead in sin by the
Law, and as it were new borne by the promise of Christ to come, in whom,
they hoping after this word, were made the beginning of the Church, and
without this they had been lost with all their posterity. Wherefore whether we
fetch the Church from before the fall of man, she has no power above the word
of God, but is judged by it, and therefore the conclusion is false: Or whether
we derive it after, yet the word is before the regeneration of the Church, that
is to say, before the Church, and that antecedent it self shall be false.
Moreover this is an ill argument. It was ye first in time, Ergo the first in
authority. For we have a hundred Cities in France more ancient then our
first kings, and yet notwithstanding without any gainesaying they obey their
laws. And ye word of God of it self is given to command, whereas the Church
is placed in the world but to obey. And though it be so yt the word of God be
in power eternal, yet it is most certain yt it must be last in this action,
because yt before he command, it must needs be, yt it should first create some
men whom it might command. This then is nothing but plain sophistry, which
is not worthy to be heard in the Church. Moreover I demand of them when they
make this argument, whether they mean to speak of the whole Church,
comprehending al ye states and particulars of the Church into one, or whether
they speak of particular Churches, or of ye church of Rome alone: If they
understand the whole Church, as it is like they do: then they speak nothing yt
makes for them: for ye church of Rome and the whole Church, are things far
differing, and before that Rome was, or any Wolf there gave suck, more then
700. years the law of Moses was published in the Church. If they speak of
particular Churches, the Cast churches will demand ye same prerogative, and by
the self same argument, they will set themselves above ye church of Rome. For
they are before them in time, as every man knows. If the church of Rome
alone, by the virtue of ye institution of Christ, yet they are to bring forth
the titles and right thereof, and then they cannot bring forth one, that has
so much as any outward show. To be short, all this is nothing else, but a
manifest dotage: for if they look to the beginning of the Church, they shall
find neither Rome, nor the Pope, neither the Sea of S. Peter, nor consequently
any authority above the word of God. If they look to the beginning of Rome,
they shall there find the word, the law, the prophets expositors of long time
before: and therefore an authority far above their church. But in this a man
may see ye poor defense of their Church, when for the establishing thereof,
the word of God must fall down, which is the foundation of ye pure Church.

Now in this whole disputation, they can not find one only word out of the
ancient doctors, for there was never yet any heretic so monstrous, which
durst set it forth, till the Council of Constance, where it was first set out
by the doctors of ye Church of Rome. There was the question moved concerning
the taking away of the cup of our Lord from the people, expressly against the
institution of ye Son of God. There could not one place be found out in the
Scriptures, which might favor directly or indirectly, plainly or darkely so
damnable a sacrilege. John Hus called them to the holy Scripture, and they
knew well that that was full against them. Then first they began to advise of
those goodly Maxims or grounds, Nicol. Cusan. Cardin. epist. 2. de vsu
Communion. ad Bohem.
which they have maintained even until this day: that the Church is above the
holy Scripture: that the Scripture has no other authority, then yt which the
Church gives it: that ye Scripture is, as they say, De been esse, of the well
being, Hossius Cardin. in Petroco. confess.
but not of ye essence or being of ye Church: that such should be ye
interpretation as seems good to the Church: to be short, that the word of God
was more long and large then the word written, and that the Church is more
worthy the^ it: to which some have since added, that ye Church should be in
better case, if there were no Gospel written. These are ye intolerable
blasphemies which sprang up in this council, Council. Trident. session. 5. cap.
2.
who also were authors of one other goodly canon forsooth, that overthrows al
christianity, That we must not keep faith or promise with heretics. John Hus
notwithstanding presses them yet somewhat more nearly. Though it were so
(says he) that the Church should be above the word of God, to which you shall
never have me to agree: Show me yet that the mind of the ancient Church was
ever so, that it ever so ordained, or so interpreted: Name me one only
ancient doctor, which is not wholly and plainly against it. That it is so, yea
our own canons do excommunicate all those which communicate not under both
kinds: and therefore to communicate under one, is not to be partaker of the
communion, Cardinal. Cusan. Epist. 2. and 3. ad Bohem.
but of excommunication. To this argument they yet find another shift more
mischievous then the former: that albeit that of one commandment of the
Gospel, there be at this day another interpretation, then was in the ancient
Church: notwithstanding that, yt meaning which is received in the Church, must
be accepted as the way to salvation, in as much as ye holy Ghost has inspired
it to the Church: That is to say, yt the Pope and his mainteyners, according to
their good pleasure, may cry down all the ancient interpretatio^s of the
Scripture, as coins are, and put them into the Mint, to make theirs current.
Also that as the judgment of the Church is changed in the Scripture, so we
must presume that the judgment of God is changed. And therefore when that good
man John Hus could not content himself with these horrible blasphemies, their
last argument was the halter and the hang man to cast him into the fire. To
make Gods spirit cha^geable, his word a nose of wax, God himself inconstant
in his purpose, and changing himself according to the vanity and ambition of
men: will there be found in the traditions of the Pharisees, in the
speculations of the Cabalists and Thalmud, in the Alcoran of Mahomet, any such
execrable blasphennes as these are? I leave to the judgment of every one,
whether the spirit of God, or the spirit of Satan ruled there in those
cou^cills.

That there can be found no other Judge of the controversies of this time, but
the holy Scripture, and how every one may judge them by the same. CHAP. V.
NOw seeing then that they do doubt that the Scripture is not on their side,
let us bear at their hands that they refuse it, and that they slander it as
much as they can: let us also see now whether they can allow of any other
Judge besides it. I would demand of them, if of all the ancient doctors they
would choose any one, which has been free from those refusals, which they
propounde against ye word of God, or else whether they will allow al? Concerning
any one alone they cannot, for in every one of them, there may easily be found
either one error or an other: but they have so many errors to defend, that to
defend all, all the errors of all times and ages would not suffice. Moreover
they would be ashamed to deny, that their style is more obscure then the style
of the Scripture. Also they know in their own conscience, that in the most
principal points they are on our side, and yet there is not any one of them,
which they will accept in and through al things, for as much as they condemn
in Irenee the error of ye Chiliasts, and the interpretation which he made of ye
Apocalypse concerning ye church of Rome, in Cyprian Anabaptisine, in Tertullian
the heresy of Montanus, in S. Austine predestination, and so like wise of
others. Will they then receive all alike for Judges? but then who shall be
president in the contrarieties of their doctrine and interpretations? For every
one knows that there shall be found some every where. If it be the holy
Scripture, that is the thing which we desire. But if they refuse the Scripture
as party or partial, by a more strong reason then, we will not accept them
for Judges, which are parties against us. In like manner shall it be with the
schoolmen, if they take them for Judges, although that they be the principal
authors of the errors of the Church of Rome: for between Thomas, and Scotus,
and their armies set in battle raye, and fighting one against an other, who
shall be judge? It remains then that they choose either one of the Councils,
or else all the Councils together. If they choose one, we know that in every one
lightly, there is handled as yet but one thing, as for example: in ye Council
of Nice, the matter of Arrius: in the Council of Ephesus, and of Chalcedon,
the matter of Nestorius, and Eutyches, and so likewise of others: but of these
points, there is no contention between us. If they will have all, I demand
who shall be president in the errors which the ancient fathers confess,
August. in the 2. book of Baptism against the Donatists.
and in the contrarieties which they number, who shall redress them? The
second Council of Ephesus approves Eutyches, the Council of Chalcedon
condemns him. The second Council of Nice mainteyneth the worshipping of
Images, but that of Frankford, assembled about the same time by Charles the
great, pulls them down. The first Council of Nice, according to the use of
the primitive Church, permits the marriage of ministers, the Councilles of
Neocesaria, Mentz, and the second of Carthage forbids it. The Councils of
Constance, and of Basil, do subject the Pope under the Church, yea they make
him equal with other Bishops: those of Florence and of Trent, upon pain of
the black curse, have set him above all. To be short, the Council of Carthage
excommunicateth and curses him to the devil that calls him self universal
Bishop, or chief Priest: and the Council of Trident, excommunicateth all
those which hold not ye Bishop of Rome for such a one. I demand then in these
contrarieties, and a thousand others of like consequence, who shall determine
the matter? shall it be the Church? Now the Church is that which has said
sometimes one thing, and sometimes another: for they hold that the Church is
represented by general Councils, and those for the most part are such as we
have spoken of. These are then Churches contrarying one an other, or rather one
contrary to it self. Moreover, if it be the Church, yet we deny that it
should be the Church of Rome: for it does not belong (say they) to a
particular Church, to judge of the universal, which is represented by general
Councils. It remains then that they prove the supremacy of the Church of
Rome, above the universal Church of Christ: but if they cannot prove it by
the holy Scripture, none of the other Churches will believe them: for they did
not believe Christ himself, bearing witness of himself, but God whom they by
the holy Scriptures knew to have sent him. And seeing other Churches have
their Doctors, Councils, and Traditions, as well as the Church of Rome: It must
follow, that the Church of Rome must prove her proud prerogative and title
by the Scriptures. And if the Scriptures must be judges of the Church of Rome,
and her prerogative, the which pretends and bears men in hand to judge all
other Churches, then there can not be a more competent Judge, then the holy
Scripture, without which the Church of Rome is nothing more then others, and
from whom, whatsoever she has, she must, will she nill she, fetch her
pretended pre-eminence and authority.

Now if they object, that there is no more need to judge of our
controversies, and that they have been oftentimes judged already by Councils:
August. cap. 3. and 16. de vnitat. etc.
Saint Augustine teaches us, that Councils may err, and that the former
Councils were amended by the latter, and therefore he presses not the Arrians
with Councils. Secondly, if this point have any place, what will they say then
unto us, why they have derogated from ye first Council of Nice, which is the
first Decomenicall Council, in the marriage of Ministers, and in the
supremacy of the Pope, who there was made equal with the other Patriarchs?
And wherefore after the matter was so decided, would they have it yet pleaded
again in the Council of Carthage? etc. Why would they have the Pope to be
declared the Vicar of God in earth, in the Council of Trent, seeing that the
Council of Carthage had already pronounced him excommunicated out of ye
Church, which would call himself the chief Bishop and head thereof? Moreover
in the most approved Councils, the greatest part of the points which we
dispute of, were not yet set out: for errors were not hatched, but by little and
little, and they began to grow and increase, after that the tyranny of the
Pope was brought into the Church, who in like manner also played the tyrant over
the Councils. Moreover, we make a great difference between Councils and
Councils: for we willingly accept ye first Council of Nice and such like,
because that the word of God governed there, the which word God always
accompanies with his Spirit. But we do not so receive the second Council of
Nice, where Idols were established, were the holy Scripture was alleged as it
were in mockery, and which by consequent could not be accompanied with any
other then the spirit of Satan. It is said (say they) God created man to his
own image, therefore we ought to have Images. Also no man lights a candle,
for to hide it under a bushel: Therefore we ought to set Images upon altars.
Also God is named marvelous in his Saints: therefore we ought to behold his
glory in Images. I ask of them what man he is, that will rest him self upon
a sentence given upon these proofs for Images? Now there are an infruite
number of the like, where a man may plainly see the style of the spirit of
Antichrist, alleging the Scriptures much worse then Satan did to our Lord
Jesus Christ. To be short, if a man will not judge in a Court, by former
sentences, is there any reason to refuse the self same order in matters of
conscience, and against the sentences themselves, that a man knows to have
been given, the parties being therein neither heard nor called:

But admit, that the holy Scriptures be the rule to compass all doctrines:
they will yet ask me foran end, in so great contrariety which is amongst us,
who he shall be that shall expound and apply them: Concerning us, we are parties
against them, and as couching them, they are parties against us, who shall be
judge here then: for say they, Let the Scripture be so great a Judge as men
would have it, yet it speaks not for to determine and pronounce the sentence.
To this I answer, first that when a man is assured of the squeere in the
measure, or of the compass in the ship, there is no Mason so sclender
witted, which does not know in applying it, which is straight, and which is
crooked: nor Mariner so unskillful, that does not perceive, whether the ship
keep her right course or not. And therefore let them only grant us, to guide
the precepts of our salvation, according to the rule of salvation, contained
in the old and new Testament, and we will therein submit our selves, not
only to a free and lawful Council, but also to learned and unlearned, to the
ministers and common people, and to all Christians, for whose salvation it was
written, who by them selves shall find in this word, the judgment of the
word, and shall pronounce definitive sentence for the same.

Furthermore, in every art there are certain principles and grounds,
whereupon undoubtedly depend all the rest. Geometry has her Axioms, Physic
her Aphorisms, and the Eiuill and Canon law their general rules, by which
they will scanne all difficulties, which shall arise in their laws. Now, say
I, that divinity also has her rules and grounds, and the law of God, has
her certain principles, able to decide al controversies which are amongst us:
yea and those so much the more strong and easy, as we are most assured, that
there is no kind of doubt, contradiction, or contrariety in them, to make
them void or unstable.

Now we have three sorts of differences, or controversies with the Church of
Rome: the one sort consists in things plainly forbidden in the word of
God, the other in things which are not commanded, and the last in the
interpretation of certain points, which are either forbidden or commanded,
which both of us receive, but diversely. Concerning the first kind, Acts. 4.19.
we have a rule in the law of God, that we must rather obey God then man. This
is so easy, that even little children may comprehend it. When then we shall see
that men command one thing, and God another, we cannot doubt which we ought to
obey. By this rule we cut of images, relics, and all kinds of idolatry which
are committed in the Papacy, which are expressly forbidden in an hundred
places of the word of God.

Concerning the second we have an other rule, God is the only lawgiuer unto
his people. Deuteronomy. 4. Ioh. 20. 2. Tim. 3. Matthew. 15. Ier. 16.12.
Thou shall not (says he) neither add, nor diminish from my law. Christ
says, God will not be served according to our traditions, but according to his
commandments. S. John and S. Paul say, that the holy Scripture is sufficient
for our salvation. Chrysostom says, Where ye Scripture holds it peace,
Chrysostom. in sermo. de sancto and adora* spirit.
there man must hold his peace. S. Hierome, Prattling without proof of the
Scripture ought to be of no credit. This is a rule commonly given to all
peoples, and whereof also the people are capable. Let the people now read the
old and new testament, and let them mark if they find any one word directly
or indirectly, secretly or plainly, which speaks nie or far of, of the
sacrifice of the Mass, of Purgatory, of the invocation of Saints, and such
other points, which are in controversy between us: Contrary wise if they shall
not find therein from line to line, that Christ is the only sacrifice once
offered up for all, that there is one only washing in the blood of Christ,
that there is one only God to be called upon in the name of Jesus Christ. If
they find there the doctrines which we condemn, then let them condemn us,
and cry faggot and fire against us. If not, then let them be judged by the rule
which is before touched, which they have abused, and have caused men to search
their salvation in those things, which ye Doctor of their salvation has not
taught them, and consequently wherein they can find nothing but destruction.
Yea I say more, that if the learned would take pains to read (after the holy
Scripture) the doctors of the primitive Church, they shall not find there any
one word thereof, or if they do find any such place, it shall be in such sort, yt
they shall be in more doubt the^ if they had spoken nothing. Whereof then they
will of them selves conclude, (forasmuch as Christ and his Apostles have taught
nothing thereof, nor the primitive Church has believed nothing, nor they that
came long after have written any thing but that which is doubtful) yt these are
such things, whereof we ought not only to doubt with the doctors, but also
whereof the Church ought to keep silence with Jesus Christ. As for example,
400. years after the death of Christ, ye Church knew not what it was to call
upon Saints, there was not found one word in the ancient writers, vulesse it
were for the condemnation of those, which did it according to the imitation of
ye Painims, in serving their gods. August. de cura pro mortuis gerendo. August
in euchirid. ad Laurentium cap. 67. and 68. lib. de side and operibus si ad
Dulc. q. 1. and passim.
Of Purgatory the first doctors of ye Church speak not one word. S.
Augustine, who was long after, sometimes says that there was one, sometime yt
there might well be one, sometime that it was no great matter whether there were
one, or whether there were none. And S. Gregory, who was after him, he began
to believe by certain visions that there was one, and this was 500. years
after the death of Christ. Of the Mass it was altogether like, for we may
mark the beginninges, proceedinges and increase, piece by piece even until
our time: and yet forsooth these were made articles of our faith, and for
these, men burned the Christians, for which even by as good reason, they might
have burned all the primitive Church. By this one only rule therefore
comprised in a few words, and easy for every one to understand, we cut of
the Mass, Purgatory, prayers for the dead, invocation of Saints, the Pope,
his pardons, indulgences, and almost all that has troubled Christendom for
this long time.

But to defeat this rule, they would draw certain places by the hair, to
the end, to make us to find therein their lewd inventions. As for example, It
shall not be forgiven in this world, Matthew. 12.31. Mark. 3.28 Luke 12.10
nor in the world to come, Ergo there is a purgatory, which must be
understood, as S. Mark has expounded it by these words, It shall never be
pardoned, according to the Hebrew phrase. Also, if Moses and Samuel were before
me to pray for this people, I would not forgive them. Ergo (say they) we must
pray unto Saints. Whereas quite contrary, by the plain words of the text, a
man shall rather gather, that it is a vain thing to call upon them, and the
meaning of the Prophet is clear: that as God says, If Moses and Samuel were
alive, and should entreat as sometime they did, for the sins of that people,
they were become so heinous, that yet he would not forgive them. To be short,
even altogether like as it was, that Jeremy in the chapter aforegoing, when
he had made earnest prayer unto God for the people, he answered him, that if
Moses himself who was most dear unto him, should pray unto him for this
people, he would not hear him. Again sometime they have certain Allegories,
to prove these matters by. But we demand of them whether these doctrines are
necessary to salvation, yea or no: If they be necessary, then we have another
certain rule, That the word of God is clear to salvation. For that same light
it self is come down from heaven for to teach us, and that has it not done
darkely, or about the bush. The holy Ghost came down upon Christ in the
likeness of a dove, and upon the Apostles in great brightness: their doctrine
therefore was plain and evident, and they were not doctors or teachers of
darkness. Let them therefore allege one plain and manifest place, and not
bring places wrested from their proper meaning, and altogether from the
purpose, and we are ready to yield unto them. And this is the rule which S.
Hierome gave: That Allegories and dark places prove nothing. Hieron. in cap.
4. ad Galat. Augustine. lib. 2 de doctrine. Christ. cap. 24.9.
And S. Augustine says: That all that perteyneth to salvation is plainly and
clearly set down in the Scripture, and that that which is dark in one place,
is plain and clear in another.

August. loco codem. Ambr. in Psa 119 sermon. 9. Basil. lib 2. de Baptism. quest
4.
Now as concerning the third point, we have a rule which all the ancient
fathers have given us: That the holy Scripture is the light to it self. And
that which is dark in it, is plain by it self in another place, and that
therefore the determination of all matters, must be drawn from the conference
of such places, where they are handled. Besides we have two marks to direct
our selves by, to which the whole Scripture tends: and they are, the glory
of God, and charity toward our neighbor. Moreover we boldly admittte all
the doctors of the ancient Church for the interpretation of matters belonging
to this third kind, namely in the places and treatises, where they
expresselye handle them. And wheresoever they are or shall seem to be
contrary, we willingly refer therein our selves to every man, according to
his own common sense and meaning, that shall have readde the holy Scripture. As
for example, there is a controversy betwixt us, whether these words, This is
my body, be a figurative speech or no. First of all I confer, or way
together the places of the Evangelists, and I find in Saint Luke: This Cup
is the new Testament in my blood, Luke 12.
which cannot be expounded without a figure, and I know that flesh and blood,
are both of like importance in the Sacrament. Further I consider, that the
question is here of a Sacrament, and that this is the accustomable manner of
speaking, common to all Sacraments. The rock was Christ, this is one place:
Baptism is regeneration, that is another, etc. Finally I find in S. Augustine
these words: In figurative speeches, August. lib. 3. de doctr. Christ. cap. 15.
(says he) always keep this rule: If it be a manner of speech that according
to ye letter commands thee to do yt which is good, or forbids thee to do
that which is evil, straight way thou may judge, that there is no figure.
For thou have found there the scope and butt of the Scripture, to wit, the
glory of God, and charity. But if thou shall take it according to ye letter,
and it seems to command thee to do that which is evil, or to forbid that
which is good, then thou shall straight way judge, that in very deed there is
a figure. For example, says he, Except you eat my flesh and drink my blood,
you have no life in you. According to ye letter, it seems that Christ
commands us a foul and an heinous thing. This therefore (says he) is a
figurative manner of speech, by which he commands us to communicate with the
passion of the Lord, and thoroughly to fix in our memory, that his flesh was
pierced and crucified for us. When I see then, that it is in such sort figured,
that S. Augustine himself alleges it unto us for example of figurative
speeches, I resolve my self yt this with other textes of Scripture, conferred
in like sort together, prove such manner of speeches in the matter of the
Supper, cannot be otherwise taken but figuratively. Now by these rules then
shall the matter of ye supper, justification of faith and works, free will, and
such other be determined, which stand upon the interpretation of the textes of
Scripture, which both the one and the other would draw to their own meaning
and intention.

I demand then of every Christian man, what we may justly attribute more to
the judgment of the ancient fathers: for where we have a plain forbidding
from God, every one will agree unto us, that men can do nothing, and that
there need no interpreters. Again, where we have no commandment from his
mouth, there it less behooves: for where there is no text, there can be no
gloss. Those matters then remain, out of which these commandments are taken,
and interpreted diversely, in which we most gladly admit the interpretations of
the doctors of the primitive Church, and the most notable in all ages. To
conclude then this article, we say, that the infallible mark of the pure
Church, is the pure doctrine thereof duly administered: and the undoubted
touchstone of pure doctrine, is the pure word of God, contained in the holy
Scripture, which God has delivered to be the rule of his Church. That the same
is perfect, and to be understood of those that desire their salvation, yea
as well of it self, as conferred with it self: albeit for the decyding of
controversies founded upon the same, we wyllingly admit the interpretations of
the most ancient. Briefly, because we find not this purity in the Church of
Rome, but the quite contrary, neither the law of God obeyed, by made subject
to the will of the Pope and his vpholders: we hold the Church of Rome most
impure, and we mark the Pope that governs there, for a notable mark of
Antichrist, lifting up him self above GOD, for that he sets the law of
God, behind his own commandments and vain inventions.

That the visible Church may err, yea, and that in matters of faith, and those
which concern our salvation. CHAP. VI.
BEcause our adversaries know very well, that they can not defend, neither by
the holy Scripture, nor by the example of the primitive Church, the false
doctrine which bears swaye amongst them, in the most principal points of
Christian religion, if a man should examine them by piecemeale: therefore they
have thought good to defend all at once, to wit, to maintain that the Church
can not err, especially in matters that do concern salvation. For (say they)
seeing that Christ is the head of the Church, he guides the same by his
spirit, and this spirit is the spirit of understanding, which inspireth into
her in time and place, all that is necessary for to lead her, in such sort,
that she can not err. But as they defe^ding this bulwark, assure themselves
to defend all their Babylon: so is it also as certain, that this being once
won, they can not any longer stand. When they speak of the Church in this
matter, Petrus de Aliaco. lib. de reco^mend. scriptur. Marsil Pataui. 2. p.
cap. 2.
they understand properly the Clergy, represented by a general Council, and
not the common people, of whom they make no state, the which thing many of
themselves condemn as repugnant to holy Scripture: notwithstanding, I am
content in this matter to speak after their manner, to the end to avoid all
cauils and starting holes.

The spirit and the word are insepably joined together.
Jesus Christ is the head of the Church, as of one body: not of that there, nor
of this here, neither of one nor of other, but of all Churches alike. Now this
head is unto the Church, as reason unto a man: to wit, to rule, and to guide ye
same by his commandment. Now so far forth as desire does obey reason, and the
body the head, man is in good case: his senses, his mouings and accions are in
their perfection, and there is nothing in him, which sauoureth not the good
government of reason. Contrariwise, when the desire will cast of obedience to
reason, and will not be subject to his government, but gives it self to
drunkenness, riot, and all kind of excess: then enters he into a
distemperature of all his body, the vital parts are therewith offended, he
loses one member, and one sense after an other, sight, hearing, and all the
powers depart away from him. To be short, by the just judgment of God, reason
it self oftentimes is taken from him, because he made no account to obey it. I
say, that the self same may fall out, and many times does fall out in the
Church. Now so far forth as ye Church does obey unto Jesus Christ her head,
he arkeneth unto his commandments, which is reason it self, and follows
his government, which is set forth in the Scripture, she can not err in the
path of salvation: she is sound, pure, and perfect: and also he takes
pleasure to lead her, and inspireth into her his holy Spirit, to the end to
inlighten her in the midst of darkness it self. But when she treads his
government under her feet, and makes no account to hearken unto him, but
presumes to be wise enough of her self, to govern her self: then is it no
marvel if she fall as it were in pieces, and lose one sense after an other,
if her eyes lead her into the pit, and if the spirit of God abandon himself
and forsake her, because she made no account of the word, with which he is
inseparably joined and knit together. For as it is most certain, that Christ
does not suffer his flock to err, so is it also as certain on the other
part, that he does not account any for his sheep, but chose which hear his
voice: and those hear his voice, which hearken unto him, speaking in the
Scriptures, and making them clearly to understand his will. God having first
sent his Prophets, has now in the end sent from heaven his own word, which
has said to us, Search the Scriptures: and this is that same word also which
has sent the holy Spirit to the Apostles. If we then will feel the Spirit,
it behooves that we hear the word, for the Spirit is sent from the word: but
the clergy of Rome do make no account of this word. In stead of hearkening
unto it, it will be heard before it, in stead of obeying unto it, it will make
commandments of it self, in respect of which, those of Gods have been
neglected: yea it has abolished and cut of certain commandments wholly, and
that openly. It follows then, that it can not boast neither of the spirit,
neither of the leading thereof, forasmuch as this spirit proceeds from the
sending of ye essential word, who has left us his word in ye holy Scriptures.
So we see ye a king will communicate his authority to a parliament, to ye end
to make them obey his laws, and to distribute them to his people: but if ye
parliament shall abuse them, to the end to make it self obeyed above the king,
and the laws themselves, he will straightwayes take his authority from it.
Now God and his law, in respect of the Church, are far greater then these:
for there can be no proportion of that which is infinite, to that which is
finite. And therefore, is it any wonder if he have taken from the prelates of
the Church of Rome, the gifts of his spirit, when they would give authority
to their vain traditions, above the law it self, and that under the shadow
of his Spirit?

We say that the spirit and the word are inseparably joined and knit together,
and that without great sacrilege they cannot be separated, forasmuch as Jesus
Christ, who is the word it self, has so taught us. When that same co^forter
shall come, Ioh. 16.13. Ioh. 14.26.
that same spirit (I mean) of truth, he shall lead you (says he) into all
truth: for he shall not speak of himself, but whatsoever he shall hear,
that shall he speak. He shall glorify me, for he shall receive of mine, and
shall show it unto you, and shall bring all things to your remembrance, which
I have told you, etc. If this spirit hear the word, and speak nothing of
his own: by a more strong reason the Church should, if she be governed and
lead by the same spirit. He says also unto his Apostles, I will be with you
till the end of the world. Mat. 28.20
This he understands by the virtue of his spirit: but he had said before in
the self same verse, Teaching them to observe al things whatsoever I have
commanded, that is to say, my word. And therefore Saint Paul preaching the
word, both by lively voice, and also by writing, does nevertheless call his
ministry, The ministry of the spirit: because it is the spirit, 2. Cor.
3.8.
that gives efficacy and power to this word. The Scripture is called the
old and new Testament, or Covenant: and in all couenaunts there are
conditions of both parties. Concerning the old, we see that ye saw was kept in
the Arc, upon which God manifested his presence unto his people, when he gave
them counsel, and in all that time wherein the people forsook the law of
God, to serve Baal, we see that God likewise answered not unto their
demaundes, not vouchsafing to assist those by his spirit, which made no account
of his word. And as concerning the new, Behold my covenant that I make with
them, (says the Lord: Isai. 59.21.
) My Spirit that is in thee, and my words which I have put in thy mouth,
shall not depart out of thy mouth, nor out of the mouth of thy seed for ever,
etc. He joins the spirit with the word in plain words, as if the
covenant were conceived in these words: My spirit shall be in thee, but mark
this, that the words that I have put in thy mouth, do not depart out of thy
mouth for ever. Neither ought we to say, that this is to much to abase the
spirit of God, to bring it back to the word. For this is always to measure
God by himself, and this also is the only measure that he has given us. 1.
Ioh. 4.
For if spirits are to be discerned by doctrine, (as Saint John teaches us,)
and doctrine, (as we have already proved) by the word contained in the holy
Scriptures, it follows then, that the spirit of God must be considered in
the holy Scriptures, the which were left unto us by the Apostles, and gathered
by the primitive Church, to the end that there we might have a lively
portraiture and drafte of the Spirit, who had taught the Apostles according to
the word, to discern the spirits of Satan, who without any allowance of this
word, durst teach false doctrines in the Church. The Church then is led by
the Spirit of God in the understanding of his will, but in as much as she
searches for it in his word, that is to say, to him that searches the will
of the Lord in his word, the Spirit is therein given unto him for an
interpreter. But to those that make no account of the text, there needs no
interpreter, and therefore to those that neglect the word, to follow their
own inventions, the Spirit of God is not given for an interpreter. For the
spirit of man and the Spirit of God are not mingled together, unless that a
man forsake his own spirit, and his own fancies, to be led and conducted by
the Spirit of God. To all those therefore that allege ye leading of the
Spirit without the word, we will answer with Saint John Chrysostom that which
follows. Chrysostom. se^. de sanct and ador. spi.
Many (says he) boast of ye Spirit, but they which bring their own, pretend
the spirit falsely. As Christ witnesses, that he spoke not of himself, in
as much as his doctrine was taken out of the Law and the Prophets: in such
sort if any man bring unto us under the title of the spirit, any doctrine not
contained in the Gospel, we believe it not. For as Christ has fulfilled the
Law and the Prophets, so the holy spirit has fulfilled the Gospel. Now
Chrysostom had in hand in this Sermon to extol the Spirit, for there he
taught that the holy Ghost ought to be worshipped as the true God. And yet
notwithstanding, Chrysostom thought it no abasing to the Spirit, when he
measured it according to the Gospel, no more then did our Savior Jesus Christ
when he measured it according to the Law and the Prophets.

They object unto us that GOD is sure in his promises, and that therefore he
keeps the covenant that he has made with his Church. We answer, that in
very deed the word of GOD endures for ever: but in all these said
couenauntes, there is always a condition, If ye keep my word, how soever
through his mercy he many times bears long with our iniquities. And therefore
we must not conclude, God is sure: therefore the Church cannot err. But much
rather to say, Seeing that the Church erreth so greatly, and so oftentimes
forsakes hun, it must needs be that God is sure in his promises, and full of
mercy. For it is certain that very often he keeps his covenant with her,
how corrupt and diseased soever she be, and even then when she provoke him
to a divorce, so as she treads the contracte of marriage under her feet, and
when she has enlarged her bed (as the Prophet says,) to all comers, as it
may plainly be showed in all times and states of the Church.

When our adversaries will prove that the Church is before the Scripture, The
church which was before the law has erred. Genesis. 3.
they begin it at Adam. This therefore is the place from whence we must
begin. God having created Adam, he forbad him to eat of the fruit of the
tree of the knowledge of good and evil: that is to say, He commanded him to
order all his affections and desires according to his holy will, and to seek
all his felicity and all his knowledge, in this only point of cleaving unto
God. If he did not, he signified unto him by this that he shall die the death,
that is to say, he shall be separated, from God, which is the soul of our
soul, as our soul is in our bodies. In this covenant we see a plain
condition. Adam altogether full of graces, as he was then, loved rather to
follow his fantasy, then to be ordered according to the word of God, and to
hearken rather to the voice of Satan, then of his Creator. Just punishment
followed upon him and upon all his posterity, man remaining corrupted, not
only in his body and outward senses, but also in his reason, and in his
understanding, in such sort that reason it self, for the most part, served to
no other end but to make them so much the more unreasonable, and understanding
nothing, but to make them search curiosities that might withdraw them from
their salvation. And yet for all this, we may mark, in our foolish
inconstancy, the constant love and goodness of our Creator, toward us his
unworthy treasures, when he promised even presently after to our first parents,
ye seed that should brufe the head of the serpent, in which alone they might
obtain mercy. This then was a conditional covenant, broken of man's part, by
the sum of ye first Adam, and repaired again in the person of the second, by
the assured goodness and only bounty of the Creator. Now if this Church even
from her first root was thus polluted, if from her beginning, even then when
she was full of knowledge and incegritie, and when she enjoyed the presence of
God, she failed so shamefully, because she turned away from the word of her
God, to her own desires: can it be that any man now a days, in obscurity,
ignorance and vanity, (wherein we are all borne,) can vaunt them selves, that
they are able to walk uprightly without this word?

Our adversaries for to avoid this place, do lessen ye sin of Adam as much as
they can: Iesuita Graecensis in asseti. Romans 5.19.
lyking rather to accuse God of ^uiltie (who for biting of an Apple through
simple disobedience, has punished al mankind) and to make of no effect the
Cross of his dearly beloved Son, whom he has delivered to death, for the
reconciliation of the world, then to confess that the Church can err in ye
matter of salvation. But the doctors of the Christian Church, and those that
are most sound amongst the Jews themselves, do teach us far otherwise, to
wit, that ye sin of Adam was specially in this, that he was turned wholly
from God, and that he more believed the promises of the devil, then the
threatenings of his Creator, that he pretended to make him self equal with
God, that he sought his felicity, and his knowledge without him, and without
his word. To be short, that this was an heresy so near to infidelity, and
a sin linked with so many sins, that none other but the Son of the
eternal God, by the only sacrifice of his death, could be able to repair and
redeem it. August. li^ 14. de ciui Dei. cap. 1 and 15.
He forsook (says Saint Augustine) his God, for to be of him self, and such
condemnation followed his pride, that he who otherwwyse had a spiritual
flesh, had now a carnal soul. Some man will say, that this was a great
punishment: but he that shall think it great, cannot be able to measure what a
great iniquity that was, to sin, seeing it was so easy for him not to have
sinned. For as Abraham's obedience is praised, because when he was commanded to
offer up his son, being a thing so hard, which notwithstanding he obeyed:
even so also as great and as incomprehensible a disobedience must it be in
Paradise, where the commandment had not any kind of difficulty. Now the
obedience of Abraham (says the Scripture,) proceeded from faith, whereof it
is, that he was called the father of the believers. The disobedience then of
Adam proceeded from infidelity, whereof it is, that he is father of all
infidelity, which since that time has been and is in all mankind. See then
for the first sort of the Church, in which one shall see nothing but a growing
and continuance from worse to worse, even till the second: as may be seen in
the corruption and confusion which was in the time of Noah and Abraham, and
amongst the Israelites in Egypt, where GOD reprocheth them that they were
bestayned and defiled with all kind of idolatry. Ezech. 20.


The church under the law has erred. Exo. 19 4.
Now the whole second state of the Church, to wit, under the law, is full of
such like examples. God made a covenant with his people of Israel, to be their
God, and that they should be his people: the promises of this same covenant,
they are very great and excellent. Leui. 26.12 Deu. 28. and 29.12. Psalm. 68. 2.
Chr. 33. 2. Chro 7. 1. Sam. 2.30. 1. Reg. 2.27. 2. Reg. 23.27.
I will walk in the midst of you, I will have my tabernacle amongst you for
ever, my name shall be in Jerusalem, I have sanctified it, to the end it may be
there always, I will answer between the two Cherubins. But always this
condition was set to this covenant: If you shall be my people, if you shall
serve me, if you shall walk in my commandments, if you shall ask counsel
at my mouth, etc. otherwise he says first, I will chastise you with my rods,
to cause you to return unto me, but if you shall make no account of it, Ierem.
7.
he adds straightway afterward, I will reject the people that shall forsake
my law. I will cast of Judah from before my face, as I have rejected Israel, 2.
Chr. 15.
and I will reprove the City of Jerusalem which I have chosen, and the house
whereof I have said, my name shall be there: Even as I have done to Silo (says
he) even so will I do to you, yea even unto you. This is that that the Spirit
of God says in the time of Asa, by the Prophet Azarias, The Lord is with you,
because you are with him. If you seek him, you shall find him: If you forsake
him, he will forsake you. And a little after he adds, Wherefore have ye
been so long time without the true God, without a Priest, without a Teacher,
and without the Law? etc. Now when the Lord says in a thousand places, If
ye shall forsake me, he puts not down any false matter, nor impossible
thing, but a thing that not only oftentimes comes to pass and is possible,
but also is so easy and so ordinary, or rather so natural to every assembly of
men, that in this same Church here, which may enjoy the manifest presence of
the Lord, and may hear his voice when it took counsel at his mouth, we see
by a great many of examples. Exodus 31.
Aaron was a Prophet, and a little after was made high Priest: he had seen ye
wonderful works of God, and though he had seen them both day and night to go
both before and behind him, yet notwithstanding he made unto himself a golden
Calfe, and he says unto ye people, Behold O Israel, the gods which brought
thee out of Egypt. If in this question they will understand by the Church the
people, behold then a strange Idolatry: if they will understand (as they
speak) the Clergy, then behold, not only Idolatry, but the Church of God
even prostituted to Idols, that is to say, behold an adulterous wife,
provoking her husband as much as lies in her, to make a divorce from her. Deuteronomy
32.
Under the judges also so many tyrants as there were, which oppressed the
Church of Israel, so many marks there were of their adulteries. Gedeon
himself, Judge. 8. and 17.6. and. 28
after he had felt the power of God by his hand, he made an Ephod, and the
people went a whoring after it. Michas also did even the like, and the spirit
of God has told us the cause thereof, because yt there was not any to govern
in Israel, and every one did yt which was right in his own eyes, 1. Sam. 3.1
and for yt the word of ye Lord was rare and scant in this time amongst them.
They had notwithstanding ye law of God, and the arc of the covenant: but ye
mischief was, yt they did neither read it nor take counsel of it. Now this is
not only said, John. 12.
Have the light, but walk in it and follow it. In the days of Saul it is
said, 1. Chro. 13 3.
that no man sought the Lord in the arc of the covenant, that is to say, that
no man took counsel of God in his word: and herein we may see the judgment of
God, when the Arc was taken by the Philistines, 1. Sam. 4.
to wit, that it was for ye contempt of God and his word. Under Joram, Baal
was worshipped in Judah, 1. king. 11.
even until the time of Ioas, who renewed the covenant with the Lord. Under
King Achas, 2. King. 16.
there was a strange altar, even within ye Temple it self, upon which he
sacrificed to false gods: and Vriiah the Priest was he, which made it to be set
up. Under Manasses, 2. King. 21. and 23.
Idolatry was so monstrous, so public, and so smitter sall, that there
appeared not any face of the people or Church of God: and the cause thereof is
by and by added as before, to wit, that the law of God had been a long time
hidden and buried, in such sort, that none could know any more what it was.
And if men mark what was the state of the Church of Israel; he shall see that
it was nothing but public and continual Idolatry, even from the beginning
of their schism, until their utter overthrow. These impieties then in ye
visible Church of that time, were not as a folly or sickness which passes
lightly away, but rather (which is here clearly seen, under the reign of
three or four Kings the true servants of God) was tanquam lucida quaedam in
furiosis interualla, that is to say, were as certain good modes and seasons of
right reason in a common rage and folly. This is that time of which the
Prophets cried out, You, you are called by the name of Israel, Esai. 48.1. and
18. and 7. and in many othee places. Iere. 2.3.13.14.
and you swear by the name of the Lord, but you serve him not in truth and
in righteousness. You have said unto a piece of wood, thou art my father, and
to a stone, thou have begotten me. You, you have prostituted your selves under
every green tree. You have abandoned me by the space of innumerable days, and
you have gods according to the number of your Cities, etc. To be short, all the
Prophets which were sent even until the coming of Christ, and in all the
Prophets, all the Chapters are in a manner nothing else but testimonies of the
idolatries and adulteries of the Church with strange gods, who for the same
threatten her, and signify unto her a divorce, if she do not return unto ye
Lord. In mean while, he yt shall mark what manner of band and company yt was,
in this time, which our adversaries call ye Church, understanding ye Clergy,
ye Priests, ye Scribes, and the ordinary prophets, a man shall find yt the true
Prophets, which were sent from God, had no greater enemies then they were: that
they were these yt imprisoned them, and put them to death, as troublers of ye
Church, yea so far forth, that our savior Christ says, that it could not
be that a prophet must be murdered out of Jerusalem. And when they said unto
them, Turn you unto the law of the Lord, reform the Church, forsake your
Idolatries, Iere. 16.12 etc.
burden not the people with so many of your vain traditions, etc. they had the
self same answer that our adversaries have, Iere 7. and. 18.18.
We are the temple of ye Lord, we are the Church, we are the watchmen of the
people: the law shall not perish from the Priest, nor the counsel from the
wise, nor the word from yt Prophet: our Church (whatsoever they say) cannot
fail. Come then and let us strike them with our tongue, and let us not harken
to their words. But the Prophets show them very well how the promises of God
ought to be understood. Say ye not, Here is the temple of the Lord, Iere. 7.
for I have abandoned Silo, which I have chosen, and I will reject you also, if
you continue, etc. Say ye not that the law shall not perish from the priest
etc. for, 2. Chr. 15.3
for a long season Israel and Judah was without the true God, without a Priest,
without a Teacher, etc. Seek therefore the Lord, Ezec. 22.
etc. Your Priests (says the Lord) have broken my law, and they have
defiled my holy places. They have not said, Where is the Lord, Iere. 2.8.
they understood not my word, and they have not known me. Ezec. 7.
Your Prophets have prophesied lies, saying, The Lord has said thus, whereas
the Lord never spoke it. Ose 9.8.
They have prophesied in Baal, and have gone after the things that are vain.
Isai 16.10.
Your watchmen are blind, and your prophets are snares of the fouler. Thou
vvilt demand a vision of the prophet, but the law shall perish from the
Priest, and the counsel from the ancient, and the night shall be unto you for a
vision, etc. The Sun shall go down over the prophets, and the day shall be
dark over the^. Mich. 3.6.
They shall all cover their lips, because they shall receive no answer from
God. Seek therefore the Lord, and you shall find him, etc. Behold how the true
Prophets, who in comparison of these prelates were accounted the of scouring and
muck of the world, beat back all their vain presumptions, that they had of
not being deceived. To be short, the Church of that time was thrown down
far beneath that of Samaria and of Sodom. Isai. 1. Ezech. 21. Iere. 18.
Her prelates were called the princes of Gomorrha, her Councils and assemblies,
conspiracies and coniurations against the Prophets of God, her sacrifices,
whorish and adulterate: And of all those that the Lord sent to exhort them to
reformation, there can hardly be found any one, that a little while escaped the
cruelty of this assembly, which drew all the titles and prerogatives of the
Church to it self. In the midst notwitstandyng of this horrible confusion,
God knew his Church: For if the Lord (says Esai the Prophet) had not restored
even a small remnant, Isai. 1.
they had been as Sodom, and should have been like unto Gomorrha. And he says
in another place, Isai. 8.
Behold me Lord, and my children, that is to say, the disciples that thou have
given me.

Finally, when ye Jews would not hearken to the wholesome exhortations of the
Prophets, God would even constrain them by his mercy, and therefore sent them
even salvation it self from heaven, to wit, Jesus Christ his only Son our
Lord. But the Church behaved it self toward him even likewise. He had no
greater enemies then the Priests, the Scribes, the Doctors, the Pharisees,
that is to say, (as our adversaries speak,) the clergy, and those which had
the Law committed unto them, and those which seemed to be the light of the
Iewishe Church. If he spoke any thing of the reformation of ye Church, then
said they he would destroy the Temple: if of the grace of God by the Messiah,
then he blasphemed against the Law: if of the kingdom of heaven, then he
struck at the majesty of Caesar: if he wrought any miracles, that was by the
devil: if he alleged the Scriptures, then they demanded of him where were the
letters of his Doctourship, reproching him, that he was a Carpenters son. To
be short, all their arguments against Christ, are even the same that our
masters use against us. We are the children of Abraham: we are the keepers of
the Scriptures. It belongs to us to expound them: and not to you, who have
not received holy orders as we have done. And yet notwithstanding all this,
these were they, that with their gloses, traditions, and unwritten verities,
with their successions, interpretations and councills most cruelly persecuted
him, even to the snatching him out of the hand of the heathen magistrate, who
judged him innocent, that they might crucify him. Now I demand of our
adversaries, what they can require in the outward estate of a Church, that was
not in this Church here. If it be antiquity, they were from Abraham: If it
were calling, they were Priests and Scribes: If it be a place, this was the
Lords house: If it be a council, Ioh. 11.47.
this was solemnly holden against Christ in Jerusalem, who was there
expressly condemned. Be it whether they consider the assemblye of the people,
or of the Prelates, this was the visible Church. And yet they cannot deny but
this Church has most foullie erred in the matter of salvation, crucifying
Salvation himself, unless they will deny that Christ was our salvation. But
the reason hereof is very apparent, which is, that they sought him not in the
Law and the Prophets, but in their traditions, Caballs, or unwritten
verities. For the shepherds in ye fields knew him: and the pastors of the
people set their dogs upon him. This also is the reason that they were likened
to an earthly King, dividing the kingdoms of ye earth among their own,
whereof it came to pass; that there was not any one, which promised not
himself acrowne, or ye government of some country, whereas they saw that the
true Christ was poor, naked, evil entreated, Ioh. 12.38.
not so much as promising to his a place to lay their heads in. To be short,
it is so far of, Isay. 53.10.
that they should have acknowledged him for the true Christ, for that (as they
pretended) they were the visible Church, that if they had accounted any for
such a one, this should have been an infallible argument to them that had
readde the Scriptures, Isay. 6.9.
that he could not have been ye Christ, forasmuch as it was expressly foretold
by the Prophets, that they should not know him. Behold then what is fallen
out to the Jews (says Saint Paul,) Romans 9.
To whom be longs the adoption, and the glory, and the couenauntes, and the
ordinance of the Law, and the service of God, and the promises. Of whom also
the fathers are descended, Romans 6. and 11. and 12. cap.
and of whom also according to the flesh Christ himself came, etc. To wit,
that for having rejected the Lord of glory, their poverty was made the riches
of the Gentiles, and their reiection, the reconciliation of the world, In such
sort, that God in stead of turning away from mankind, for the blindness of
his own people, has taken occasion thereby to adopt al peoples for his
people. Let us not say therefore any more, that the Church cannot err, because
that God is firm in his promises: but rather that God is truly sure in his
promises, and constant in his mercies, forasmuch as he makes no divorce with
her, albeit she has abandoned him, and strangely played the harlot, so
enlarging the bowels of his compassion toward mankind, and turning his great
wrath into so inspeakeable mercy: as at this day we see in our time, in the
great number which he has withdrawn, and dailye does withdraw, from the
Swynishe filthe of the Popedom.

It remains then now that we see, That the Church under grace has erred.
whether that the Christian Church which is under grace, has had any more
special grace not to err: wherein we have always to call to our remembrance,
that the Church at this day is universal, that is to say, spread throughout the
whole world, and that the promises of God are not any longer tied to any one
place, or to any one people, Acts. 10
but are stretched over all peoples and places, where he is served and
worshipped. Now this universal Church has goodly and great promises: I will
make an everlasting covenant with them, says the Lord, Ezech. 37.26.
I will put my sanctuary in the midst of them for ever. I will be their
God, and they shall be my people. Behold that which Ezech. the Prophet has
foretold, of the covenant made by the coming of Christ with his universal
Church. Jesus Christ also says himself: I will be with you until the end
of the world. Also, Matthew. 28. Ioh. 14.23. Ioh. 8.
I will send you my spirit which shall teach you all things, etc. But to the
end that hereby we do not imagine, as the Jews did, our selves to be a
visible Church, which is always of one sort whatsoever she do, the condition
is evermore added, If you shall hear my voice, if you be my people, if you
shall teach that which I command you, if you shall love me and abide in my
word. For if you shall not abide therein (says our Lord) you are not my
disciples, and those which are not his disciples cannot boast yt they are
taught by his Spirit, to the end not to be deceived. The prerogative then
that is in the visible Christian Church, is not that she cannot err in her
particular parts, but rather that being universal, when one part does fall,
the other does help it up, and when the one does go astray, the other may
bring it into the way again, yea, and the particular members do their duty
when the more apparent leaders of the Church do guide it to destruction. Again
on the other side, in that she is universal, it ought a great deal rather to
beat down this same particular presumption, of not being deceived in the whole
Church, forasmuch as when there is a temple either overthrown or profaned, yt
sacrifices, as in times past, cease not any more, but rather of ye ruins and
remainders, others may be else where builded up again where there was never any
such. S. Paul feared lest that the Serpent which seduced Eve, through his
subtlety should turn the Church of ye Corinthians from Christ and his
simplicity, 2. Cor. 11.3.
if she were turned away from his Gospel. He means then that she might err.
He also chideth ye Galathians, who after they had Christ drawn as it were
lively before their eyes, Gal. 1.6. and 3.1.
and crucified amongst them, that they were so suddenly carried away to an
other Gospel. This therefore is not only a thing possible, but a thing (I
say) which heretofore has come to pass, even whiles ye Apostles lived. To be
short, he warns ye Thessalonians, 2. These. 2
that Antichrist yt son of perdition, should sit in the temple of God, yt is
to say, in the Church, there to confound al things: and yt even in his time
this mystery of iniquity began to work. It could not be then, that she erred
in light matters only, but even in ye matter of salvation, forasmuch as she
had received and embraced her perdition even in the midst of her own
bowelles. The which thing if we shall mark by experience, we shall find that
every where, where Jesus Christ sowed the truth and the good grain, by the
hands of his Apostles, the devil that watches, whiles that the husbandmen
slept, sowed there his darnell and lying, and finally there so besturred
himself in tilling and plowing it, that he choked ye seed of our Lord in many
places, until that he had brought to pass, that he was acknowledged for the
master of the harvest. The zeal of those of the circumcision, in ye time of
the Apostles, began that medley in the Christian religion: S. Peter himself
winking at it, S. Paul calls this to make the Cross of Christ of none
effect, and S. Augustine in many places calls it heresy. Now from hence it
came, that the disciples of the circumcision, who went to preach the Gospel to
many peoples of the East and of the South, there reared up Churches in such
sort, that the doctrine of grace was mingled with the law, the shadows with
the body, whereof it is, that many yet do hold circumcision with baptism. I
speak nothing of the infinite heresies which put up their heads under diverse
names, making their several factions, but of yt which then came to pass in
the bodies of the most flourishing Churches, which afterward greatly
increased and multipled. On the other side, the people which were called from
Paganism to Christ, then principally when the Church had some little rest, and
consequently less zeal, care, and purity, coming out of such a bottomless
pit of Idolatry, they could not altogether forsake their old customs. They
had builded many beautiful Temples to their Idols, and it seemed a goodly
thing unto them, to dedicate them unto Saints and Martyrs. In stead of their
hunting places, they honored the relics of Saints: in place of ye Images of
Mars, of Jupiter, of Ianus, they took pleasure to have those of S. Paul, and
of S. Peter, etc. And whereas they had a custom, to make for their fathers yt
died, prayers, sacrifices, lights, following ye opinion of Plato concerning
purgatory, they willingly continued it, least they should fall from their
humanity, and therein only changed ye form. The pastors some of them, because
they were come out from ye same Paganism, thought it good, other some did
bear with it, least they should at the beginning go back, hoping in time
utterly to remove it from them, as S. Paul did the ceremonies of the law, from
those of the circumcision, and to convert their zeal and humanity into a
better custom. Iusomuch yt their successors, ascribing impude^tly to much to
their predecessors, and not examining ye reason yt moved them to bear with these
things, they continued it of themselves, and builded so much upon this rotten
fundatio^, yt superstition came to this, that we see it at this day. The
vanity of the one part, and the humane wisdom of the other, has brought us
to this, and he that shall well consider, what man is, and how an old custom yt
has but a little show, may prevail, how much it will cost ye changing, he will
easly grant, that those which have to bring in a through mutatio^, do think to
have gained much when they could bring to pass to change ye principal, in
forsaking, as seemed to them, certain accessories: as in our time we our
selves have proved, not regarding that the devil knows so well how to husband
the^ afterward, whilst we are negligent to water ye true plants, that in ye
end they come to be quite stifeled and choked. By these means errors first
entered into ye churches of ye Ethiopia^s, Syrians, Armenia^s, Greeks, Russians,
Scythia^s, etc. for ye more part. But which is more, by the self same means
entered Mahomet with his doctrine, who about ye declining of ye Roman Empire,
found out ye controversies of ye Jews and Christans, and joined himself to a
Monk of the heresy of Nestorius, named Sergeus, who coined his Alcoran in
such sort, yt many Christians of Nestorius heresy, partly seeing his force,
and partly because it seemed yt he consented with them in the essence of Christ,
they left of to go forward in ye true religion, and the Jews, for ye
circumcision and ceremonies which he left freely unto the^, and the safety
which he promised them by force of arms, received him in the beginning, as
their Messiah. Behold then how heresies entered into ye christian Church, and
yt those so increased, as it easily comes to pass always when good
decaieth, and evil increases, yt from heresy they came even unto infide
litie: and yet notwithstanding these Churches were there founded by the
Apostles, received ye holy scriptures, believed salvation in Christ (except
those which have cleaued unto Mahomet, which have lost ye name of the Churches)
have a succession of their bishops and patriarks folowi^g in good order, have
an ordinary vocation in their ministry, and hold a great sort more countries
the^ those, that have acknowleged yt Pope. Now I demand of ye prelates of ye
Church of Rome, whether yt these Churches have erred in ye matters which
concern salvation, or no. They will say, yt they have erred in the matter of
salvation, because yt they have rejected Images, because they worship not the
bread, because they communicate under both kinds, because their ministers
marry, because they know not any thing concerning Purgatory, etc. To be
short, because they do not only err in many not able articles as these are,
but above all, because they do not acknowledge ye domination of their Pope,
which is (to hear themselves speak) ye principal article that men ought to
believe, to ye end to be saved. It follows then by their own confession, yt the
Christian Catholic visible Church has no such privilege by the coming of
Christ, which does exempt it from being deceived and erring, yea in that which
concerns salvation, notwithstanding al yt promises, and pretended covenants,
which we have already mentioned before. But if now it do not err in the matter
of salvation, then it must needs follow, that the Church of Rome it self must
err, which has so long time excommunicated and cut of from salvation, as much
as in her lies, so many peoples and nations which have not erred in the way of
salvation, and which is more, yt she is justly excommunicated by ye foresaid
Churches, for those damnable doctrines which they condemn in her.

That the Church of Rome has erred.
To this they will answer us, that these Churches had no such privilege as the
Church of Rome, and that the Sea of S. Peter has this prerogative, being ye
chief amongst the Apostles, yt it could not err. Without entering into ye
bottom of these goodly prete^ces, which shall be gauged in ye chapter following,
it must follow then, yt those Sees which had so great authority, as yt of
Jerusalem, which is called ye seat of God, could not err. That ye Church also
of Christ, being there gathered together, had this prerogative, seeing yt
Christ ye head of ye Church there preached and accomplished the work of
salvation. Likewise yt the Church of Antioch must have it much more then yt of
Rome, seeing that, that was ye first See of S. Peter, and the first Church
where the name of a Christian was heard. And yet Jerusalem which crucisted
Christ, and the Christians of Palestina, and of Antioch, and of the countries
round about, in ye judgment of ye church of Rome, are out of ye way of
salvation. It follows then, that Saint Peter's See prete^ted to be at Rome,
although it be granted them, exempteth it not from error. Besides, omitting
yt, that S. Peter himself has erred and was reproved of S. Paul, I demand if
S. Peter's See gives this prerogative to ye Pope, Hierony. in Catalogo
illustri. viroru^. Damasus in Pontificali. Platina in vitis Pontifi. Marianus
Scotus. Volateranus in Anthropol. Gratianus in decreto Cardinalis Benno, and
Petrus Premo^stratensis in vitis Grego. 7. and Syluestr. 2. etc. Concilium
Constanti. fessi. septima.
or rather to ye Church of Rome. If to ye Pope, Marcel. has sacrificed to ye
idols of ye Painims, Liberius was an Arria^, and Anastatius an Acatia^.
Moreover, each one delighted to abrogate ye decrees of his predecessor, as
Nicolas of John ye 22. Gregory of Pelagius, and Innocentius of Gregory, and
that in matters (according to their own judgments) concerning ye faith.
Syluester the 2. John the 19. Gregory the 7. (witness all ye histories of their
times) were magicians, that is, the successors of Simon Magus, which was at
Rome as well as they, and not of Simon Peter, and the disciples of Satan, and
not of Christ. John ye 23. held opinion that there was no life after this,
whereupon the Council of Consta^ce called him a devil incarnate: and many other
were deposed by ye Councils, not only in quality Heretics, but also
Atheists. John ye 8. also was found to be a woman and an harlot, Theodorus de
Niein scriba Pontific s in lib. Nemus vnionis. tract. 4. and 7.
deluding both ye seat, and al ye college of Cardinals. Briefly, they say yt
the virgin Marie told S. Bridget, yt the most part of ye Popes are in hell, and
the Cardinal of Ragousia, in ye time of the great schism, maintained yt the
Pope might err in ye faith, and Cardinal Cusan, Cardinalis Cusanus lib. 2.
cap. 17. de concord. catholic. Magister John Parisiencis, ordine predict. cap.
23.
yt he might be an infidel: which thing also the Divines of Paris have always
maintained. It follows then that this See neither exempteth them from error,
heresy, nor infidelity, but augmenteth unto them their own condemnation. If
the privilege be given to ye Church of Rome, I ask them, if they teach not,
that the Church is represented by a general Council? August. cap. 3. and 16.
de vnitate ecclesi.
S. Augustine says, that one general Council is corrected by another, and
correction presupposes error. Gregory Nazianzen, in whose time many Councils
were holden, says that the Church was then so full of ambition, that none was
ever seen to return any whit the better. Gerson and Panormitan say, yt one
lay man alleging the Scripture, ought to be preferred before a whole
Council being out of ye way. Moreover, see ye second Council of Nice, which
maintained Images against ye Cou^cil of Constantinople, and that of Frankford
about ye self same time, which threw them down to the ground. See ye third
Council of Carthage, and another holde^ at Carthage it self under ye Emperor
Mauritius, which excommunicated him, and declared him to be Antichrist, which
should call himself universal Bishop, at the pursuit of S. Gregory himself,
whereas that of Rome a very little while after, and that same of Trent in our
time, has declared ye Bishop of Rome to be universal Bishop, and has
excommunicated al those yt will not so account of him. The Cou^cills also of
Florence and of Basil, brideleth the Pope with other Bishops, and brings the^
under ye Church, whereas they of Florence and Tre^t, lift him again aloft, and
published him to be a God in earth. And Pope Pius ye second, who stuck to ye
Council of Consta^ce, a little while after pronounced all them to be heretics,
which held yt men might appeal from ye Pope to a Cou^cil, yt is to say, those
present Councils there which were general, and al those yt follow them. It
follows then, either yt truth is double, which neither is, nor ever shall
be, or else that these Councils contrary one to the other, have erred, and so
consequently that the Church may err. Also, that either the Pope is
Antichrist, or else the Church which has published such a one, that takes upon
him the title of universal Bishop, has shamefully erred. Also, either to
believe yt the pope is head of the Church, is not necessary to salvation, the
which the decretalles allowed of the church of Rome, do allow, delivering it
for an article of our faith, and the Council of Trent has confirmed it: or
else the Councils which have denied him to be such a one, have erred in the
matter of Salvation, that is to say, the first general council of Nice, which
made him but equal and like to the other patriarchs, the Council of Sardis,
the Council of Carthage, and the universal Church for the space of six hundred
years. To be short, it must needs be that our adversaries confess, either
that their Church at this day holds that for necessary to salvation, which is
contrary to salvation: or else that the ancient Church, so long time was
ignorant of that which was necessary to salvation, that is to say, her own
salvation, who has refelled it in a plain and open council: whereof it must
follow that the Catholic church may err in general councils, yea, and the
Roman Church it self, notwithstanding the pretended See of Peter, and moreover
that the Roman is contrary to the ancient church, to which we desire at this
day to conform our selves. Now if ye pope and the Roman church have erred in
matters of salvation, it follows then that the Christian visible church may
err, and that a man may seek for the reformation thereof. But to them which
know how ye councils of our time have been holden, as that before they have
been assembled, the controversies have been concluded at Rome: and that
notwithstanding all the arguments and proofs they could make to the contrary,
they have passed things by their special authority: and knowing how that
same holy spirit, or rather that spirit of Satan has been brought from Rome
in a Caskat: and moreover, seeing they are such that govern there, that there
dispute and conclude, it needs not greatly, that men prove that such
assemblies may err, but contrariwise it might be found a strange thing, if
they could conclude any thing without error.

But now contrary to these so urgent and weighty proofs, they allege unto us,
that Jesus Christ prayed yt Peter's faith might not fail, Luke. 22.
whereupon they conclude with open triumph, that the Romish Church can not
err. First, the matter is of great importance, for it is a question concerning
a great number of articles, for which, as for articles of faith, we have been
burned for the space of these fifty years, which have no other foundation but
this. It must be therefore that this fundation be fast and undoubtful, if we
will not do him open wrong, who has taught us our salvation. Add also
hereunto, that all the jar of the Greek and East Churches with the Romish,
do depend wholly upon this point. For if it can not err, then they which are
contrary to her, have erred greatly. But these things are far enough one
from the other, (I have prayed yt thy faith should not fail, though Satan sift
thee) and ye conclusion which they draw thence, the church of Rome cannot err.
Secondly, Jesus Christ prayed for Peter, and Peter yet after this prayer denied
him thrice, trusting to much in him self, whereas he should have prayed to
God, and acknowledged his own infirmity: and hereof also it came, that he
that esteemed more of him self then al his companions, should stumble, and
fall more shamefully then all they. The Church of Rome therefore should
rather draw this conclusion from thence, which is more agreeable to the text:
that as he, trusting to much to himself, renounced God, and did worse then all
the rest, so likewise it may do, when it is made to believe, that it can not
err. And therefore it should follow, that according to his example, it should
weep at the crowing of the cock, and acknowledge all the faults thereof.
Thirdly, if this follow, Christ prayed for Peter, Ergo the Church of Rome
which is founded by him, can not err: then must it follow also, that the
Churches which were founded by the other Apostles, can not err. For Jesus
Christ drawing near to his Cross, Ioh. 17.20.
prayed most earnestly for his Apostles, and for all those, which should
believe in him through their preaching, to the end they might be one in the
Father and in him, that is to say, that they might be inseparably knit unto
him. And yet the Romish Church has excommunicated them as heretics, and has
holden them as cut of from salvation. It follows then, either that this
conclusion is false: Jesus Christ prayed, Ergo it can not err, or else that
he meant the invisible Church, against which hell gates cannot prevail.
Fourthly, S. Paul understood not this subtlety, forasmuch as we see, that he
admonishes the Romans, called from amongst the Gentiles, that they should
not proudly aduau^ce them selves against the Jews, under this shadow, that
they were entered into their place. Romans 11.
For (says he) the natural branches were cut of through unbelief, and thou
art engrafted in by faith, and if God have not spared them, take heed, least
he also spare not thee: that is to say, take heed that thou fall not from faith,
as they have done: he means then, that he thought them not to be without the
compass of the danger. Neither did Cyprian likewise, writing to the clergy of
Rome, saying, Cypr. lib. 2. epist. 17.
That ye praise which S. Paul attributed to the Church of Rome, that their
faith was made known throughout the world, should be turned to their shame,
if they did not persevere to inherit this faith. Nor S. Hierom also when he
says, Hieron. in epist. ad Rusticum.
That after that covetousness was entered into the Church, as it was into the
Empire, the Law should perish from the Priests, and the vision from the
Prophets. Nor all the ancient fathers, when they took Rome for that Babylon in
the Apocalypse. and for ye seat of Antichrist, as we shall see hereafter. And
therefore they should do a great deal better to follow their old gloss upon
this place of S. Luke, Luke 22. glossa ibi.
yt as in praying for him, he says, O Peter, I have kept thee, that thy faith
should not fail, even so also comfort the poor weak ones by thy example of
repentance, to the end, that by their sins they fall not into despair, but
that they hope for mercy, as has been showed unto thee. Finally, besides all
these foresaid reasons, betweent the Antecedent: Christ prayed for Peter, and
the consequent: The Church of Rome can not err, there are infinite things to
prove, between these two sentences, to wit, That S. Peter was head of the
Apostles and of ye church: That he was at Rome: That he was B. there: That he
particularly founded any church there: That he had this prerogative above the
rest, yt he could not err: That he either tied it, or could tie it to that
chair, either for the popes, or for the Romish Church: The which things ought
first to be plainly proved, before we can come to any such conclusion. Let us
come then to ours, following our promises, and notwithstanding their objection
of this place, let us conclude with the holy Scriptures, and the practice of
all times, this present disputation. Our Lord Jesus Christ has delivered to
his Church the holy Scripture, as a compass to a ship, for to conduct and
guide it to Salvation. Looking unto this compass, she can not be deceived, for
it shows always unto her, her mark, whatsoever wind do drive her: and not
looking unto it, she can not but err, and go out of the way, no more then all
the pilots or Shipmasters of the world together know, without a good compass,
to keep their course one only hour. To ye churches which follow his word, he
has promised the^ the presence of his spirit. From these which make no account
of it, he withdraws him self, accompting the^ unworthy of his presence,
which disdain to harken to his voice. Hereof it is, that the Church in all her
estates and places has greatly erred and gone out of the way: but more this
then all the rest, which has been more bold to intermedle without ye leading of
the word, and which has most presumed of her own ability, to wit, the
Romish Church. If she have no other privileges and promises then the visible
and universal Church, there is no doubt but she may err. For we have seen by
her own confession, that she has erred even in the matters of salvation, in
her most notable members. If she have any special privilege, as that which
she alleges of Saint Peter's Seat: yet for all that, as we have proved,
that exempteth her not, neither from error nor heresy. But to the end men
may see how vain and weak this foundation is, whereupon they would build
an article of so great weight, it follows that we examine those titles, by
virtue whereof she pretends this privilege.

That the Pope, or Bishop of Rome is not head of the universal visible Church,
by any right of the law of God. CHAP. VII.
WHen we demand of our adversaries, upon what their traditions are founded,
which they make equal with the articles of our faith, which have not any
show of foundation in the holy Scripture: they answer us, that they are the
ordinances of the Church. If hereupon we will beat them down, alleging that
the Church must be governed after God his will, contained in his word, and
that such doctrines are not agreeable thereunto: they reply, that the Church
can not err in the matters of Salvation. If we prove farther unto them by the
discourse of all times, that often times she has abandoned the pure service
of God, to follow her own inventions, even until she has been defiled with all abominable idolatries: they reply, that the Romish church has this
particular privilege, that it can not err, because it is S. Peter's seat, the
head of the Apostles, and of al ye Church. And therefore by this means all the
controversies in a manner, that we have with the^, come to be brought to this
question: Whether the B. of Rome, or the sea of Rome, (for they are different
in themselves) be head of the church. Council. Co^stantiense.
In this quality, there is attributed to the pope, power to change the
institution of Christ in the Sacraments, to change according to the time, the
interpretation of the holy scripture, to make new articles of the faith,
Decisiones rote.
to derogate from the old Testament, and from S. Paul his epistles, as the
vicar of Christ, and successor of S. Peter. This then according to their
judgment, is an article of great importance to salvation, upon which all other
articles necessary to salvation are founded. In the self same quality,
jurisdiction is given unto him over all the East churches, and to cut them of
from the Communion of the Church, and to leave them for a pray to the Turk,
because they will not acknowledge him. To be short, it is come to this point,
that he calls himself king of kings, to establish empires at his own will, to
set out kingdoms for a pray, to dispense with subjects for their oath made to
their prince. This therefore is an article, not only belonging to the salvation
of every Christian particularly, and to all in general, for that same union
which is so much commended unto us: but also necessary to policy, to the
obedience due to magistrates, and to the whole life of man. But now we see
that Jesus Christ and his Apostles have delivered unto us the articles of our
faith, the doctrine of the Sacraments, and of the obedience which is due to our
superiors, in plain and express terms, and those very often repeated in many
places. It follows then, that this article, by the which new articles of
faith are established, the changing of the Sacraments, the setting up and
deposing of princes, the subiecting of heaven and earth under the power of one
only man, must be there plainly set forth. Now if it be not there expressly
contained, one of these two things must follow, either yt our Lord and his
apostles took pleasure to hide these things from us, to make a math and
confusion of heaven and earth together, which to think were very execrable
blasphemy: or else it must be altogether false, and consequently all that is
builded upon it, must quite fall down, and be utterly razed to the ground.
Now I do adjure every one, even as they love their salvation, that they
weygh well the proofs of this article. For if the very foundation of the
popish doctrine, which is this here, have no foundation in Christ, it
follows that the pope has laid another foundation in the Church then Christ,
contrary to that which the Apostle says: 2. Cor. 3.
and by consequent that he is none of those, which has builded upon the
foundation of Christ, wood, hay and stone, but the Antichrist him self,
which has settled him self in the place of the chief corner stone, which is
the only fundation of the Church.

We say that Jesus Christ is the head of the Church: our adversaries say that
it is S. Peter in his successors, or rather the pope, and the Church of Rome,
because of S. Peter his seat. Now as we have found the body out of the
Scriptures, to wit, the church, Ephesians. 1.23. and 4.16. and 5.23.
so likewise we ought not to search for the head any where else. S. Paul says
that Christ is the head of the church, and the church the acco^plishme^t of him
which has accomplished all in all. Also that Christ is the head of the
Church, as the husband of the wife, and the Savior of his body. Col. 1.18.
Romans 12.5.
Also, we which are many are one body in Christ, and every one of us are
members one of another. These places are so clear, ye our proposition can not
be denied. Thereupon they will grant us, that Christ is the head of the
Church: but they will say, that there must be a head, and general lieutenant
in the government thereof: and that this is S. Peter in his Successors, whom
they call for distinction sake, the ministerial head of the Church. This is it
yt they must prove unto us by plain textes, for we flatly deny it unto them.

S. Augustine upon these words, any kingdom is not of this world. The kingdom
of Christ are the faithful which believe in him. Romans 14.
First of all, we must not here imagine an earthly kingdom. For Jesus Christ
has taught us, that his kingdom is not of this world: and if his be not of
this world, then much less shall his be, whosoever shall enterprise to be his
lieutenant. This lieutenantshippe then is neither temporal nor secular,
neither can it be stretched over the empires of the earth, neither can the B.
of Rome in this quality call him self the Monarch or only governor both of
the spiritual and temporal. But as the kingdom of Christ is spiritual, to wit,
the government of the souls of the faithful, who^ he fedeth by his word, (as
S. Paul says, that it is peace, joy and righteousness through his spirit) so
must it be likewise, that the administration or government of his servants must
be spiritual, to wit, the ministry of ye word, from whence proceed those
forenamed effects: much less ought we to imagine an earthly king. For Christ
is the Son of ye eternal God, who styles every thing with his power, who by
the virtue of his spirit is present to all things, and is present with those
that consent in his name to the end of the world. He needs not therefore any
lieutenant, as do other earthly princes, for to win the hearts of his
people: for these are the effects of his Spirit, giving efficacy to his
word, the which no man, how great and holy* soever he seem, can attribute to
him self. And if they find it strange, that our Lord by his spirit, in that
he is God, does govern his Church, forasmuch as he has promised so to do:
Let them not think it more strange, yt we deny his corporal and carnal
presence in their mass, which he has not instituted.

Again, here is no question of a kingdom which may be governed by a
lieutenant alone: but of preaching the Gospel throughout the whole world, of
reconciling all the people of the world by ye word unto God: in a word of the
Ministerye of the Gospel, which consists in administering the word and
Sacraments in all places. Now it is certain, that no man can accomplish this,
but only he, who is the word it self, and the alone sacrifice, because that
with his manhood he has Godhead, and power that is infinite. 1. Pet. 2.25.
Therefore there can none but he, be the Bishop of Bishops, the Pastor of
Pastors, and the high Priest, Heb. 6.20. and 7.26. and 9.11.
and none can be this Ministerial head, or Lieutenant in his offices. But
rather every Bishop and pastor amongst his flock, may represent Christ in
exercising his charge, without acknowledging of the Bishop of Rome to be above
him, as has been most largelye disputed by Cusan the Cardinal in the time of
the Council of Constance. Card. Cusar. libr. 1. de Concordia Cath. cap. 6.


That which they allege of Moses and Aaron, that they were heads, the one of
the common wealth, and the other of the sacrifices, whilst yet God walked in
the midst of his people, is but naughtely drawn into a consequence. For
besides that there was the express institution of God in their persons, and in
the successors of Aaron for the service of God, there was this other thing in
it, that it was but a little country, and in that country one only City
Jerusalem, and in that City but one Temple, where men ought to sacrifice, so
that there one governor and one high Priest might suffice: in stead whereof,
the whole world, by the coming of Christ the Messiah, is become one Temple,
and all the people but one flock, which must be fed by the word of God, a
thing that no one man may presume to do. Not that I would deny, but in the
heart of one Pope, there may be ambition enough to covet the whole world: for
this were to deny ye truth of all histories: but rather I would say that
there was not any one of the^, that was not ready to have forfaited and lost ye
crown, if he failed to instruct by the preaching of the word of god, ye least
diocese in ye world. Of this allegation then, they conclude nothing to their
advantage, unless they will become Jews, and enclose ye whole world in one
City, and make void the benefit of the death of Jesus Christ which is common
to all the world. But contrariwise we may by the way draw this consequence:
That seeing Moses (as they say) was head of ye common weal, and Aaron of the
service of God, that the Pope ought to content him self with the one, without
farther intermedling with the other, to the prejudice of all the princes and
kings of the earth. Now if they reply, that they are able enough to exercise
the estate of the general lieutenantshippe of Christ throughout ye whole
world, without calling them to ye practice which yet never was seen, I demand
whether this be by the spirit of Christ, or by their own. If by theirs, why
then, this is the spirit of the prince of this world, for to covet and not to
conduct: and miserable is yt Church, which is left to be guided by the vain
spirit of these men, who think themselves to have such abundance. Now if it
be by the spirit of Christ, I do require the^, either that they will agree,
that this spirit following the promise of Christ to his ministers, does give
power to the ministry of the word pronounced by them, whereof follows that
every Bishop and pastor in his ministry, occupies the room of Christ
visibly: or else that they prove unto us by fit and agreeable texts, that
Christ has enclosed the root of his spirit so in the heart of the Pope, yt
none can be partaker of it besides himself. To be short, the kingdom of
Christ consists in this, that he governs his own, giving power to the
preaching of his word, and to his Sacraments by the virtue of his spirit:
and the ministry of his Gospel, consists in the administration of that
word, and of his Sacraments. Now there is not any man that can boast to give
and dispense the holy Ghost, for he proceeds not but from the Father and the
Son: None then, unless it be Christ, God and man, can be the essential head
of the Church. Likewise no man can preach the word, and exercise the
ministry throughout the world: none therefore can be the Ministerial head
of the whole Church: But rather each minister and pastor in his own right,
under the Pastor of pastors Jesus Christ our Lord.

Now let us come to that which our adversaries say, that Saint Peter was the
ministerial head of the Church. If he were so, they must needs grant that
this was by the institution of Christ: for otherwise, and without his
commandment, he would never have presumed to have taken upon him such a
dignity. Likewise if our Lord have placed him in any such degree, and so
necessary as they say, for the Church: they will grant me that Saint Peter
has exercised this office: for otherwise it had been to leave the Church for a
pray and confusion. If then Christ have not instituted it, nor S. Peter
exercised it, it must follow, that he was never the ministerial head of the
Church.

Concerning the first point. Mat. 18.3. Etibiglossa.
The whole Gospel throughout teaches us nothing but humility, that we should
become little children, and poor in spirit etc. Christ sets forth himself
for an example to his Apostles, Mar. 20.25
and wills that his Apostles be examples to the whole world. I am (says he)
your master, and yet notwithstanding, I am amongst you to serve you. Also,
Luke. 21. Vbi Chrysostom. and Origin. Mat. 21.25 Luke 22.25.
when there was strife amongst the Apostles at two sundry times, who should be
chief, Christ pronounces this determination, He yt will be ye greatest or
chief amongst you, let him be a servant to al. And he says unto them, Learn
of me. Mat. 10. August. sermon. 10. de verbis domini.
He says not (says Saint Augustine) to work miracles, nor to make a new
world, but that I am mild and humble of heart. And as touching S. Peter, he
is brought unto Christ by his brother Andrewe, to the end to be his companion,
and not to be called the chief, or to have any primacie attributed unto him.
Again, when they were sent forth to preach, Luke 22.30
they went two by two, as companions, which excludes all superiority. When
Christ promises that they shall judge the twelve tribes of Israel, Mat. 19.30
sitting upon twelve thrones, he gives not him a place above the rest to
govern in. When the triumphant Church likewise is described unto us by Saint
John, Apoca. 21.
it is said, that the City has twelve foundations, and upon them the names of
the twelve Apostles of the lamb, without mentioning of any great stone, for
Peter's throne above the rest. To be short, when the Apostles received the holy
Ghost, John. 20.
the power of binding and loosing, Mat. 28.
commandment to preach throughout all the world, and when the holy Ghost
it self descended down upon them, Acts. 1.
this was when they were al gathered together, and without any prerogative of
one more then the other. Hitherto then in the principal places, where the
primacie should have been showed, we see not so much as any appearance thereof.

Against these places plainly denying and forbidding the primacie, they
allege unto us that which Jesus Christ has said unto Peter. Tu es Petrus,
Thou art Peter, and upon this rock. Mat. 16.
and super hanc petram etc. Thou art Peter and upon this rock I will build my
Church, and the gates of hell shall not prevail against it. Now upon this
place our adversaries ground this proposition: The Church is founded upon Saint
Peter. And we will draw another, 1. Cor. 10.
The Church is founded upon Christ, which is the rock, and upon the confession
of his name. That of theirs is founded upon this, yt it is said: Tu es Petrus,
that is to say, Thou art Peter. That of ours upon this, yt it is said, Super
hanc Petram, and non super te Petru^, that is to say, Upon this rock, and
not, Upon thee Peter. And hereof it is that our Savior Christ has clearly
distinguished Petrum a Petra, that is to say, Simon Peter, from the lively
rock whereupon he has builded his Church, changing both ye name and the
person, ye which our text plainly shows us, the which he would never have
done, if it ought to have been understood of Peter, and not of ye confession
of Peter. Again, I leave it to ye judgment of every Christian: whether it be
more agreeable to the faith, and more healthful for ye Church, either that ye
Church be founded upon Christ, or upon Peter: upon the Son of the living God
whom Peter confessed, or upon Peter, who a little while after, denied the son
of the living God: upon him yt vanquished Satan, or upon him, whom Christ
himself in the very same Chapter calls Satan himself: Mat. 16. Mark. 8 33
upon him who is called ye chief corner stone of the building, or upon him who
was an offense unto him, that is to say, a stone of great stumbling. 1. Cor. 3.
None (says S. Paul) can lay any other foundation, but that which is laid,
which is Christ. Also, S. Peter says: 1. Pet. 2.
You are as living stones built upon the chief corner stone, in whom whosoever
believes, he shall not be confounded, that is to say, in that confession of
Christ which he called the rock and foundation of his Church, It appears
then by this place, that Christ has builded it upon himself, and not upon
Simon Peter, and upon the confession of faith which Peter made, and not upon
the faith of Peter, which was too much wavering and unsteadfast. And in very
deed where Saint John recyteth this story, he rests wholly upon Peter's
confession. But to the end they abuse not the people under the visard of
antiquity, we must see what the ancient Doctors have taught upon this place.

Chrysostom upon Saint Matthewe: Chrysoft. homil. 55 super Matthew.
Upon this stone, that is to say, upon the faith of this confession. Also, he
has set our feet upon the rock, Idem in Psalm. 32.
that is to say, upon faith: For faith in Christ by good right, is called a
rock that cannot be broken: and therefore when Saint Peter had confessed: Idem
sermon 21. de pentecost.
Thou art Christ the son of the living God: Christ added, Thou art Peter, and
upon this rock, that is to say, upon this faith which thou have confessed etc.
Saint Ambrose: Jesus Christ has said unto Peter, Ambros in Epist. ad Ephesians.
cap. 2.
and upon this rock etc. that is to say, upon the confession of the Catholic
faith, I will establish the faithful unto everlasting life. Saint Augustine:
August. contra Iudaeos, Paganos, and Arrianos.
Peter was founded upon the rock, to the end he should suffer death for the
love of him, whom through fear he had thrice denied. Also, the Church likewise
is founded upon the rock, whereof also Peter had his name. In Ioha^nem tract.
124. In Iohannem tract. 10
For a rock or stone comes not of Peter, but rather Peter of the rock, as
Christian comes of Christ, and not Christ of Christian. And because Peter had
said, Thou art Christ etc. Our Savior added, upon this rock which thou have
confessed, will I build my Church. Christ then is the rock, upon which S.
Peter himself was founded and builded. For none can lay any other foundation,
then yt which is already laid, to wit, Christ. Again he will not say, upon this
Peter I will build my Church, August. de verbis Dom.
but upon this faith: upon yt which he had said: Thou art Christ the son of
the living God etc. Here upon this rock (says he) I will found my Church.
Also: Upon this rock which thou have confessed, upon this stone which thou
have acknowledged will I build my church, I will build my Church upon me, and not
upon thee: but thee upon me. The me^ yt will build upon men, they will say, I
hold of Cephas, yt is to say, of Peter, of Paul, and of Apollo: but they who
will not be builded upon Peter, but upon ye rock, they will say, I hold of
Christ. This is ye interpretation of S. Augustine, repeated in many places of
his books of the city of God, every where, where he handles this matter.

Hieronim. upon Mat.
Saint Hierome upon this place: By the rock we understand Christ, whom Peter
confessed. For if we take Peter for a stone of the foundation, all the Apostles
shall be alike according to that which we see in the Apocalypse. And this is
the very opinion of Cardinal Cusan, Cusanus Cardinal. lib. 1. cap. 3.
in his book of the Catholic Concord presented to the counsel of Constance,
who proves it even by the Canon law it self, and maintains it against the
Pope.

Saint Bernard: Sermon. 61.
The rock is in heaven: In the same is steadfastness and assurance. And in
deed where else can it be, but in our Savior? The world roareth, the flesh
oppresses me, the world doggeth and hangs upon me, and yet for all this I
fall not: for I am founded upon a sure rock. To be short, let them read their
own common gloss, The common gloss and the interlineall gloss upon Mat. 16.16
Super hanc Petram, upon this rock, that is to say, upon Christ, in whom thou
beleeuest: and the interlineall gloss, Thou art Peter, but from me which am the
rock, and always in such sort as I reserve to my self the dignity of the
foundation of the Church. Behold then, that by the interpretation of the
ancient fathers, none need to dashe against this stone. Now if our
adversaries reply that some of the ancient fathers interpret it, as they do,
and namely Saint Augustine in some place: I answer, that if a man read those
places, he shall find that it was but by the way, and as it were, in handlying
another thing. And in deed Saint Augustine in his book of retractations has
retracted it in these words: August. lib. 2. retract.
It fell out that I said in a certain place, yt in the Apostle Saint Peter the
Church was buyled, as upon a rock, but for the most part I have expounded it
of him, whom Peter confessed. I was abused by an Hymn of Saint Ambrose,
common enough, where he says, that at the crowing of the Cock the rock wept.
This is a Poetical manner of speaking, and therefore Christ said not unto him,
Tu es Petra: but Tu es Petrus. For the rock is Christ, whom Simon had
confessed. Besides, he is so far of from taking Peter for the foundation of
the Church, that in another place he says, that James, Peter, and John,
August. ad Galat cap. 2
seemed to be the pillars of the Church, but that in truth they were not.
Hieron. ad Galat. cap. ^
And Saint Hierome says, that the Apostles are pillars of the Church,
principally Peter, James, and John, but that all they which overcome the Devil
by faith, may be so as well as they. But here they run to their ordinary
distinction. That it is certain that Christ is the essential head of the
Church, but yet that Peter is the Ministerial head, that is to say, that he is
likewise called so by reason of his ministry. But we demand in what place
either of the Scriptures, or of the fathers them selves, they find this. And
we have already proved, that there can be had no ministerial head which is
the self same thing. But again let them answer us, whether Peter had any
other Ministry besides his Apostleshippe? If he had any other, let them take
it, and show us wherein it consisted. If they can not, then it follows, that
all the Apostles were ministerial foundations, as well as he, and not founded
upon him, and so likewise must it be of all the Churches which were founded by
them: as Saint Jerome says upon the second Chapter to the Galatians. And
according to this S. Paul says, that the faithful are builded upon the
foundation of the Prophets and Apostles, Ephesians. 2. Romans 15. Apoc. 22.
Christ being the chief corner stone. And he gloryeth that he had preached the
Gospel in many places, without buylding upon the foundation of any other. Saint
John likewise: That the City of God is set upon twelve foundations, wherein
are the names of the twelve Apostles of the Lamb. Whereof it follows, that
all the Apostles are the foundation of the Church, as well one as another, and
moreover yt Saint Paul has builded without any foundation, Hieron. in epist.
ad Titu^ cap. 1.
not building upon Peter's ministry, or else ye Peter was not that foundation.
Again we demand of them, if this ministry consist not in the edifying of
the Church, by the preaching of the Gospel, Forasmuch as the Apostles which
were all preachers of salvation in Christ, were therein master buylders: and
all they are buylders, which build upon the foundations which were laid by
them, upon that living rock. Now if they were all master buylders, why then,
Saint Peter was not the foundation, for he could not be both the foundation,
and a master buylder both together.

The power of ye keys.
It follows in the self same place, Tibi dabo etc. I will give thee the keys
of the kingdom of heaven. That which thou shall bind in earth etc. Of this
text we further draw two contrary propositions. Theirs is, Christ has given
here to Peter alone, the keys of the kingdom of heaven, and so consequently
to the Bishop of Rome and to his successors. Ours contrariewise is, that
Christ here has promised the keys to all in the name of Peter, and has given
them to all his Apostles, and after them to all those, which lawefully exercise
the Ministry of his Gospel. If we know what is meant by the keys, and what
it is to bind and to loose, it will be easy for us to judge, whether of these
two propositions be true. Christ Jesus pronounces, Woe be to you Doctors of
the law, Luke 11.51
because you have taken away the keye of knowledge: ye have not entered in your
selves, and those which would wyllyngly have entered in, ye have forbidden.
Now these Doctors were those who had charge to teach the word of GOD. These
keys then are no other thing, but the charge to preach the kingdom of
heaven, and to open the gate thereof by the preaching of the Gospel. And
concerning byndyng and loosing: Saint John expounds what they mea^t by these
words, to retain and to remit sins, Mat. 28.18 Ioh. 20.23.
the which is not done but in preaching the forgiveness of sins, displayed
in Jesus Christ to all those that believe the preaching of the Gospel. The
keys then, is the charge to preach the word: to bind and to loose, is the
effect of this word, which to one sort, turns to their salvation, to the
other to their greater damnation: Whereupon Saint Paul calls his Ministry,
2 Cor. 5.18.
The Ministry and word of reconciliation, and else where, The Ministry of
vengeance upon the disobedient, Isai. 61.2.
which Esai before had called the acceptable year of the LORD, and the day of
vengeance. Now forasmuch as no one alone can exercise this Ministry in
every place, nor toward all: It follows therefore that one alone can not
have these keys, nor this charge of byndyng and loosyng, which by the coming
of Christie extends it self to all places. They demand then wherefore it
was say to Peter, I will give thee. JESUS Christ had said unto all: Whom
think ye that I am? And he in ye name of all had answered, Thou art Christ
etc. And therefore in his name he promises to all his Church the power of the
keys, which he promises also afterward to all, in the eyghtenth Chapter,
and after his resurrection delivered them to all the Apostles equally, and
without any difference, in these words: Mat. 16. Mat. 18. Ioh. 6. Ioh. 20.
Receive the holy Ghost. To all those to whom you shall remit their sins,
they shall be remitted etc. That then that was promised here in these words: I
will give unto thee etc. and not, I do give thee, which shows the time to
come, was then fully accomplished universally to all, as in the person of Peter
it was there promised to all. To be short, If (as Saint Gregory says) Saint
Peter was not head of the Apostles, C. Consid. did. 50.
til it was after his repentance, in vain then do they upon this place trouble
their brain, pretending that by that place this power was given unto him. And
if they will say yt ye same was mea^t there by the keys promised unto him: by
the deliverance of the keys, which was after his repentance given unto all, we
conclude yt they were here promised unto all. The which we say not to the end
to derogate any thing from S. Peter, whose readiness to confess the son of
God, and zeal toward our Savior was incomparable, but to discover ye
subtlety of the Pope, and of his poleshorne generation, that of the keye of
knowledge given to Saint Peter, has made a key of power, and of the preaching
of the word, a tyranny over all the princes and people of the earth: and of ye
kingdom of heaven, a temporal monarchy, notwithstanding that there is
nothing more contrary to ye whole doctrine that Christ has taught his
Apostles. As for the ancient doctors, they have understood it no otherwise
then we do.

In libr. de simplicitat. praelatoru^.
Saint Cyprian: Our Lord in the person of one man, gave the keys to all, to
show the unity of all. The others nevertheless were even the same that Peter
was, companions in like equal honor, and in equal power, but he would
begin by one man, to show that the Church is one. Saint Hierome expounding
this self same place: The ignorant Bishops and elders (says he) took hereby
occasion to usurp, I know not what manner of Pharisaicall authority, Hieronym.
in Mat. c. 16. versu code^.
thinking that they had power to bynd and loose at their pleasure. But to bind
and loose ought to be no other thing, but to declare by the word of God, Gods
sentence. Behold then the Pope in ye stead of Cephas, a Caiphas, even by the
difinitiue sentence of S. Hierom, a minister of the Roman Church. And else
where: All the Apostles had one, and the self same judicial power. For Christ
after his resurrection says unto them: Receive the holy Ghost, whose sins
ye shall remitte, they shall be remitted in heaven etc. All the Church likewise
in his elders, and Bishops, but specially Peter received it, to the end that
every one should understand, that he that separateth himself from the unity
of faith, cannot be absolved from his sins, nor enter into heaven. He says,
from the unity of faith, and not from ye unity of Peter, nor from the unity
of the Bishop of Rome. Also, the elders and ministers of the Gospel have ye
same right and office, which the priests of the law had in the case of those
yt were Lepers. They remitte then, or hold sins, according as they judge and
show yt they are remitted or holde^ before God. Saint Augustine: August.
homil^in 10.11.50. and 124.
The Lord calls the keys of the kingdom of heaven, the knowledge and virtue
to discern those, who are worthy to be received, or else to be shut out of the
kingdom. Now howsoever it seems at the first sight, that he gave this power
to Peter alone, yet we must acknovvledge without all doubt, that he has
given it to all the Apostles, as it appears after his resurrection, when he
says unto them: That which ye remit in earth etc. Also: It is said unto him,
I will give thee the keys, as though that power had been given to him alone:
but as he ansvvered for all, so he likewise received the keys together with
all, as bearing the person of the unity. He is named therefore alone for all,
forasmuch as there was unity amongst all. And therefore Augustines ordinary
manner of speech is, August. cap. 18 lib. 1. de Doctrina Christ and per omnia
opera
that in Peter's person the keys are promised to all, and in the person of all
them, to all the Ministers of the Church. Leo the Bishop of Rome, at the time
that this question was handled, disputing with the Bishops of Constantinople,
although in his works he has left sufficient show of the traces of ambition,
Leo Episcopus Romans in ferm. de natruitare.
yet he speaks not otherwise thereof. This power (says he) of the keys, is
likewise passed over to all the Apostles, and transferred to all the
governors of the Church. And in that it is particularly recommended unto
Peter, it is because the example of Peter is set forth to all the governors of
the Church. In every place therefore, where men judge according to the equity
of Peter, there Peter's privilege is found, but contrariwise, it has no place
where Peter's equity is not found. Hitherto then we find not ye keys of power,
but of knowledge only, to wit, the ministry of the Gospel, the which is
common to al ministers, and so likewise are the keys, which are thereto
annexed. This is that which is repeated by Gratian in the Decretals: Gratian in
Decret. distinct. 21. in nouo 24. q. 1. lo quitur. Joan in ca. 1. de
renu^eratiombus lib. 6. de poen^s distinct. 1. verbu cum similib us.
That Saint Peter received no more power then the other Apostles, and by the
chiefest Canonists in the Decretalles themselves. That the power of bynding
and loosing, in which is founded all the jurisdiction of the Church, proceeds
immediately from Christ, and not immediately from S. Peter or his successors:
Cardinal. Cusan. lib. de concordia Catholica 2. ca. 13. fusissime.
ye which also Cardinal Cusan maintained in the time of the Council of
Constance, against those which alleged the key of power pretended by the Pope.
But let us go yet somewhat farther. They hold that the power of bynding and
loosing is practiced principally in their sacrament of Penance, when their
priest inioyneth satisfaction, and afterward gives absolution to those that
have satisfied. Now I demand of them: whether it be God that forgiueth, or
the priest that gives absolution? They will say it is God that forgiueth, and
yt the priest by his word does declare it, the which the master of the
sentences proves very well, Chrysostom. lib. 20. Magister se^te^t. lib. 4.
distinct. 18. ca. 4. ex Ambr. August. Chrysostom. etc.
by many places drawn out of the ancient Fathers, in his fourth book,
following yt which Chrysostom says, yt in these things Neither man, Angel, nor
Archangel ca^ do any thing. And in very deed this is an assured Maxim of
Christian religion (as he there says) That none can take away sins, but
Jesus Christ alone, who is the lamb that has borne the sins of the world.
Now if God be he which binds and loses. And the priest, he which
pronounces them that are bound and loosed.
I demand what more power can remain in the Pope, who does neither the one
nor ye other? And whether we may not come to the conclusion of Marsilius of
Padua: Magist. Ioannes parisiens. in lib. de potestat. Regia and papal. ca. 23.
Marsilius cap. 6. lib. 2. and cap. 15. Magist. d. cap 8.
That the Pope ca^release no more neither from the punishment, nor from the
fault, then any other poor priest? Also: If God then exercise his authority,
(as Saint Ambrose says) and the priest his knowledge in doing his office by
the key of discretion, What shall remain for ye Pope to do, unless he will
break in upon ye authority of God, and what key remains for him, not having
any office to exercise, unless it be the key of indiscretion? To conclude
then, the interpretation of this place of S. Marthew, according to the force of
ye words, the conference of the scriptures, the analogy or proportion of
faith, the opinion of ye ancient Doctors, and ye Canons themselves of ye
Romish church: Jesus Christ is ye stone, or rather ye lively rock, upon which
the Church is founded, by ye ministry of ye Apostles, who were no other but
master Masons. To this church, which is one under ye name of Peter, who
answered for all, the power of the keys was promised, to open the gate of the
kingdom of heaven to all those, which obey ye preaching of the gospel. Al they
which exercise ye ministry of ye Gospel, have these keys, so far forth as
their ministry extends, and it cannot be attributed to the^ that do not
exercise any: whereof it ensues, yt it is so far of, yt the Pope should have
the^ alone, or al ye rest from him, yt the poorest priest doing his duty in
his parish, has the^ better the^ he. And if because this word was spoken to
Peter, they will restrain this place to Peter's person, I say then, yt it is
rashly done of the^, to extend to all the Bishops of Rome, yt which was spoken
to Peter. Or if they will be yet of this tough opinion, the^ they must permit yt
these words: Come behind me Satan, Mat. 16.
thou art an offense unto me: which follow in ye verses next after, spoken to
Pet. alone, must be understood of him, and al his pretended successors: whereof
must follow this special privilege, yt the successors of Peter and none others
may become devils, and that the Church of Rome, is beco^e in Christendom ye
stone of offense, because for taking care for nothing but ye great things of ye
world, it has forsaken those which are of God.

They make an argument afterward by another place. Ioh. 21: it is said three
times to S. Peter, Love thou me, then feed my sheep: Feed my sheep. Ioh.
21.
Therefore he was universal pastor of the Church. If they concluded, he is
commanded to feed, therefore he was a pastor of ye flock of Christ, ye
conclusion were good. But yt therefore he was an universal pastor, or ye pastor
of pastors, there is nothing in ye text from whence they may fetch it. To
feed, (says their own gloss upon yt word) is to teach by word and by
example, Glossa ordinaria in verbo pasce. Mat. 28. Ioh. 20.
and not to govern over all the world: How it was said to all ye Apostles,
Teach, go ye into the whole world. Also, Even as my father sent me, so send I
you. Therefore it was said unto all, Feed my sheep. S. Paul says in many
places, That he is the Apostle of the Gentiles, and thereupon he adds: Which
feeds the flock, and yet eat not of the milk. He was then a pastor
thereof: and yet noue will deny, but yt all the rest were pastors as well as he. To
him it was said by ye spirit of God: Thou shall be a witness for me before
all men: Acts. 9.21.
which is a great deal more general, Then feed my sheep, and yet
notwithstanding none will conclude that ye other were but under witnesses. For
our Lord like wise had said universally to all: You shall be witnesses unto
me even to the end of the world. Wherefore then, say they, are these words
here directed to Peter alone: Because that as Peter alone had denied him
thrice, so likewise he asks three times whether he loved him, and for yt by
his triple denial, he had lost his Apostleship, so by that threefolde
commandment his commission was renewed, to the end his companions should
nevertheless esteem him for an Apostle. This therefore was rather a
consolation for his infirmity, then a mark of dignity. Saint Augustine, who
was otherwise curtous enough, found out no other meaning of this place. For see
what he says upon Saint John, August. in Io. tract. 12; cap. 21. Item
Hilarious and Cyrillus in eundem locum.
where he has plainly expounded this place: In stead (says he) of that
threefolde denial, behold a triple confession, to the end the tongue should
not less serve to love then to fear, and that it seemed not, that present
death drue from him more words, then present life, that is to say, Christ.
That this then should be the office of love, to feed the flock of our Lord,
seeing that that was the office of fear, to have denied the pastor himself.
What means this then, If thou love me, feed my sheep: that is to say, Feed
not thou thy self, but feed my sheep: feed the^ not for thy self, but for me,
not for desire to bear dominion, but for charities sake to help the^. This
exposition also both Hylarius and Cyril have upon ye same place: August. de
verbis Domini sermon. 62.
Also Christ recommended his Lambs to Peter, eue^ he which fed Peter himself.
Understand the^ brethren, with obedience, that you are the sheep of Christ, as
all we which hear his word: Feed my sheep. S. Aug. therefore thought it to
be as much spoken unto him who was B. of Bo^ne in Affrike, as to the B. of
Rome, following ye admonition of our Savior himself. Mark. 13. Cyprian. de
simplicitate praelatoru^.
That which I say unto one, I say unto al. S. Cypria^: Al are pastors, but
there is but one flock, which all the Apostles have fed with one whole
consent. Gratian in Decret. 7. q. 1. Nouatianus verse. Item. Episcopatus.
Magister Ioannes Parisiensis. lib. 3. cap. 41.
Also, there is but one Bishopprick, vvherof every B. in solidum, and without
separation holds his part: and this is repeted by Gratian in his decretalles
in express words, which some of ye schooleme^, yea and ye sorbonists
themselves have expounded in these words: The priesthood or ministry is the
soul of the Church, the which is whole in all, and whole in every part. To
be short, it cannot be found, for many ages after the death of our Savior, yt
this place has been alleged by the Bishop of Rome, for any strength or
power, that he should be acknowledged pastor of pastors. And if they will in
this behalf believe their own Mass book, In Miss.
behold what they sing every day: It is very meet, right and healthful to
pray unto thee at al times (O eternal pastor) yt thou should not forsake
thy flock, but should keep it by thy holy Apostles with a continual
protection, to the end that it may have for gouerners and guides, such as thou
have established unto it, for vicars of thy work and pastures. Behold therefore
al ye Apostles, eue^ by their own Mass it self, to be rectors, pastors and
vicars, immediately from Christ, and immediately established from him. And if
in Peter's own cause they will be content to have Saint Peter judge him self:
The Elders which are among you I beseech, which also am an Elder (says he.)
Feed the flock of Christ which is committed unto you, 1. Pet. 5.^, 2, 3, 4.
etc.
not as having lordship over the heritages of the Lord, but as examples of the
flock: And when the chief shephearde shall appear, ye shall receive an
incorruptible crown of glory. He that will play ye Sophister as they do upon
these words, feed the flock, will conclude yt Peter has resigned his Church
to the^. But it suffiseth us, that S. Peter calls not himself pastor of
pastors, but sendes them to ye principal pastor, who is Jesus Christ our Lord.
And in yt, Ioh. 10.
some object these words: There shall be one fold and one shepherd, applying it
to the Pope, they do yet worse. The scope of the text shows us, yt Christ
speaks of the vocation of ye Gentiles, and thereupon S. Gregory in their
gloss says, Greg. and Theoph. Fiet vnum ouile etc. that is to say: there
shall be one fold.
That this is spoken because Christ has joined both the Jew and the Gentile
in his faith, and Theophilus: because all the sheep have but one mark, to
wit, Baptism, and but one pasture, that is to say, the word of God.

But see one other place, from whence they have not feared to begin to
triumph, as if they had gotten a sword in their hand to defend this
interpretation. Jesus Christ drawing near unto his passion, says unto his
Apostles, Behold 2. swords. Luke 22.33.
When I sent you without bag or scrip etc. lacked you any thing: they
answered, Nothing. But now he that has a bag, let him take it, and
likewise a scrip, and he that has none, let him sell his coat and bye a
sword. For I say unto you, that the same which is written, must be fulfilled in
me: he was reputed with the wicked. Then the Apostles said, Behold here two
svvords. And he said unto the^, It is enough. There is none but clearly sees
by ye drift of the text alone, that he forewarneth his disciples of the
enterprise yt should be made against him, for which notwithstanding they must
not provide any carnal weapons. In mean season, see the wandering conclusion
which the Popes fetch from thence in their extrauagaunts. It is said: Behold
here two svvords, ergo Saint Peter, that is to say, the Pope and his
successors are heads all the world through, as well of the Temporal as of
the Spiritual. This is that goodly decree of Boniface the eight, for which
king Philip the fair was excommunicated: which decree begins, Vnam sanctam
ecclesiam etc. that is to say, Vnam sanctam Extr. de maiorita te and obedientia.
that we must believe one holy universal church, and ends with this
conclusion, we declare, say, dispute of, and determine, that for to obtain
salvation, it is necessary to every creature to be subject to the Pope of
Rome. But here is no question of S. Peter, for he is not particularly named,
but of al. Also there is no question of bearing rule, but to be persecuted. And
Jesus Christ him self cutteth of all this at one blow, when he made Peter to
put up his sword into his sheath. And yet notwithstanding they have been so
impudent, that they have enterprised upon the sight of this place, to bear
jurisdiction over the whole world, and both Princes and people have been such
noddies and so ignorant, that they have suffered them selves to be trodden under
their feet. Ambrose in Lue. and glossa super eu^dem locum.
And this were to do the ancient doctors great wrong, to apply the^ to the
refuting of this place, whereupon some by the two swords understand ye old and
new Testament, others, sound doctrine and good example of life, as also their
own gloss does. But I report me to every man, if this be not openly to deride
Christ and his word, and to say unto him, Hail king of the Jews, as the
Pharisees did, and whether these goodly swords deserve any otherwise to be
refuted then by ye lawful sword of all Princes, which bear ye title of
Christians. And eue^ as well grosided is that: God has made two lights: the
Pope is ye Sun, and ye Emperor ye Moon. Ergo the Pope, I know not how many
thousand times, is greater then ye Emperor. Against which I will oppose none
but their own I sidore, alleged by a Sorbonist, who by ye Sun understands
a kingdom, Extrauagde cadem, and ibi glossa. Magister Ioh. paris. cap. 25.
Isidorus super Genes. cap. 1 Mat. 11.23
and by ye Moon the priesthood. Also Jesus Christ commanded ye devils to enter
into ye swine, ergo the Pope is lord of ye Temporaltie. This passes al kind
of blasphemy. Our Lord says, Al power is given to me from ye father, as well in
heaven as in earth. The Pope has therefore an absolute commandment over
heaven and earth. And yet are these the ordinary allegations of their
decretals.

But they are now better advised in their last disputations, touching certain
other places, but as ill to the purpose and as blasphemous as the other. It is
written, say the Jesuits of our time, I will judge says the Lord, betwixt the
sheep and the sheep, betwixt the Ra^mes and the Goats. Therefore S. Peter
and his successors are judges of al ye earth. Ezech 34. August. lib. pastoribus.
S. August. has made an whole book upon this Chap. of Eze. and yet never
thought of this article of faith, which was hidden in this verse. But let us
reason of their words quite contrary. Ezechiel says, that God vvil judge
between the sheep and the sheep etc. and the Pope says yt he will be he,
and therefore he sets himself in Gods seat. It follows therefore that
the Pope is he, of who^ S. Paul has foretold us, that would lift up himself
above all yt is called God. Also S Peter says yt baptizme was represe^ted by
ye Arc, whereof this conclusion follows, Turria. p. 50 51.52. 1. Pet. 3.
yt as by ye Arc mankind was saved, and as it were begotten again: even so
Christians are regenerated by baptizme etc. They reason thereupo^ quite
contrary. Baptizme was figured by ye Arc. Turria. P. 26. etc.
Noah was head of his sons in the Arc, ergo Saint Peter and his sons in
the Arc, ergo Saint Peter and his successors are heads of ye church. I ask
the^ in what Lorgicke school this manner of reasoning may be allowed. But with
their leave, Justinius Martyr in Tryph.
we will conclude otherwise. Iustine Martyr one of yt auncie^tst doctors of the
Church, expounding this place, He says, that Noah was a figure of Christ,
because he was the beginning of another generation, regenerated by water. And
ye Pope says that he was a figure of him. It follows then, either that the
Pope is Christ, or else that he cannot be any other, but he who would advance
himself to that place in the Church, to wit, Antichrist. I would have been
ashamed to have alleged these places for them, were it not, that they which
have no shame to defend the Pope in this time, are so impudent to allege
them, and to make great books thereof. And by this a man may see how
destitute they are of plain places, when they are driven to have recourse to
such.

But forasmuch as it appears not by the holy Scripture, that our Lord has
ordained Peter head of the Church, but altogether the contrary, It follows
then that we see, if S. Peter before his death has ever exercised this charge,
and also if the other Apostles have yielded so much unto him. Acts. 8. Acts. 11.
He was sent with John into Samaria by the Apostles. Now amongst men, he that
sends, is above him that is sent: he was accused amongst the brethren, for
having conversation amongst the Gentiles. This went fore, and yet
notwithstanding he excuses himself toward them. Acts. 15.
He did not then, what seemed good to himself, without being answereable for
it to the brethren. In the Council at Jerusalem, 1. Pet. 5.
he propounded his opinion concerning the matter of the Gentiles, whose
vocation was reueyled unto him, and James there concludes as President, and
letters are dispatched away in the name of the whole assembly. And yet this
should have been the place where this preeminence ought to have appeared. To
be short, he calls himself a companion or fellow of the Elders of the
Church, and lovingly exhorts them as his equalles, and not by decrees and
commandments, etc. If we should go any further, Gal. 1. and 2.
Saint Paul in two first chapters of the Epistle to the Galatians, declares
that he was not subject unto him, that Saint Peter required it not of him, but
only that he gave him the hand of fellowshippe, to travail in the Lords
vineyarde, and that he reproved him to his face, and that he resisted him as
his fellow and companion. And their ordinary gloss says upon this place,
Glossa ordi^^cund. August. Glossa ordinar. secundu^ Hieronym.
The other Apostles seemed to be more worthy then Paul, because they were sent
by Jesus Christ, but he was a great deal more worthy then they, because he
was sent by Christ altogether immortal, whereas they were but sent by Christ
then a mortal man. Also he learned nothing of Peter, nor of the rest, but
contrariwise he taught Peter, and they conferred not any thing to him, but he
rather conferred and profited Peter. Also the Lord Jesus, says Saint Paul,
which is in us all, has ordained some Apostles, some Prophets, Hieronym. epist
ad Gal. cap. 21. Ephesians. 4.
some Doctors, etc. for the Ministry of his Gospel. Also: we are one body
and one spirit, having the same hope of calling, one God, one faith, one
Baptism. It should have followed, that he should have adjoined in
recommendation of this unity, a ministerial head of the Church, Peter and his
successors in the Sea of Rome. Hitherto then we have not so much as any
appearance of primacie. Yea but Peter is sometime first named, A poor
foundation of so monstrous a buylding. And the Uirgine Marie is named in some
places the last, and Saint Peter himself by Paul, Acts. 1.
after S. James. Galat. 1.
But he was wont oftentimes to speak first, and he was endowed with great
gifts, and oftentimes he is called by the fathers, the chief amongst the
Apostles: And who of us is there, that does deny S. Peter's excellency, that
does not wonder at his incomparable zeal, that does not place him in the
uppermost seat of the Church: And contrariwise who is he, that does more
dishonor him, then the Pope, who hides his filthinesses and vilanies under S.
Peter's Cloak, and under the color of his name, fills all the world full of
tyranny. That Saint Peter was the first amongst the Apostles, either it was
for his age, Marsil. lib. 2. cap. 16. Card. Cuson. lib. 2. ca. vlt. de concord.
Catholie. Aug. in Io. sermon. vlti. Hieron. contra Iouinia. lib. 1.
or for his zeal, as Marsilius of Padua says, or for his abundance of
grace, as says Cusan the Cardinal, and before him S. Augustine. And admit
that he were president in their assemblies, what should there follow of this?
In all companies there is a chieftie of order, but that does not therefore
import, that there should be a chieftie of power, nor any superiority in
respect of the one over the other. In the empire of Germany, there are seven
Electors. The Archbishop of Mentz, and the County Palatine are the chiefest,
the one amongst the Ecclesiastical persons, the other of the civil. Have they
therefore power over their fellow Electors, to wit, over the other princes that
have not that degree? That is a toye. Also there is no well governed assembly,
where some one is not president, to propound the matters they have in hand, to
gather the voices, to pronounce sentence according to them. Shall such a one
therefore establish and dispose all at his pleasure? all the world will say
contrary. Also Peter was president among twelve persons, and that by the
electio of ye Apostles, and not otherwise. Whosoever therefore will conclude,
that it is very good, that in all companies there be some one to govern their
actions, and to keep order, the conclusion shall be very good. But that therefore
the Pope as his successor, should govern over all the world, this should be
no more order, but the confusion of the whole world. Moreover, as it has bin
notably disputed long ago against the Pope, If S. Peter according to the decree
of Anaclet cited by Isiodore, was elected president by the Apostles, 22.
Distinct. sacros.
it follows not, that his successor should be over the successors of the
Aposties, Marsil. Pad. lib. 2. cap. 16. and 18.
unless he be chosen by their successors themselves. For Saint John might have
had better successors then Saint Peter, all which together, might have had
power to choose one to govern. And these are those personal dignities, which
descend not from the father to the sons, and are not tied to one chair, but
depend upon the common consent of those which have instituted them, according
to that which Cardinal Cusan durst well say, Card. Cusan lib. 2. cap. 13. and
cap. vlt.
that if by consent of the Christian Church, the Bishop of Treues were chosen
president of the Church, he should have far more right then the Bishop of
Rome, who has it not but through sufferance, and that the Bishop of Rome
should be bound to acknowledge him for such a one, and to yield him obedience.
We see then by the Scriptures that S. Peter was never ordained head of the
Church by Jesus Christ, and that he was never taken for such a one, and also
was never acknowledged in this quality or office by the Apostles, Card. Cusan
lib. 2. cap. 17. and 15.
as also we find not that in any one Council that ever the Pope has alleged
(I mean within 500. years after Christ Jesus) one only place of scripture
when the primacie was builded. Whereupon we conclude with all antiquity, that
the Pope in respect that he is Peter's successor, cannot be called the
Ministerial head of the Church: that he is equal to all other Bishops: that
the primacy which he exercises, is not in any wise founded upon Gods law: and
consequently that all the articles which are founded thereupon, for which, as
necessary to salvation, the Popes have brought to confusion all Christendom,
have not any foundation in Jesus Christ.

That the Pope or Bishop of Rome is not the Ministerial head of the universal
Church, by any right of man's law: and how he has usurped this title and
power. CHAP. VIII.
But forasmuch as there is question of the succession of Saint Peter, having
seen in what it consists, let us see now what titles they bring forth, to
the end they may be received into possession. They allege every where, that
S. Peter was at Rome, Whethre Peter have been at Rome, and how.
and hereof they conclude at one iumpe, that the Pope is head of the Church. We
might deny that he was at Rome, the which they can not prove by the holy
Scripture: whereof every one may see, what the foundation is of so wayghtie a
buylding. But contrariwise we find great conjectures that he was never there,
of which we were not the first searchers out, but the greatest personages that
were in many ages before us. Betwixt the death of our Lord, Marsil. Pad. lib.
1. cap. 16.
and the death of Nero, there were 37. years. By the holy Scripture it
appears, Gal. 1. and 2.
that Peter was at Jerusalem twenty years after. From thence he came to
Antioch, where Gregory says, that he was seven years, and Eusebius says 25.
He that shall believe Eusebius, he could not be martyred under Nero, though he
himself say it. For betwixt the passion of Christ and the death of Nero,
there was but thirty seven years, and by Eusebius account, there must be at
the least xlvi. years. And if we shall believe Gregory, there remain but ten
years, during which time Peter could be at Rome. But forasmuch as Peter and
Paul were seen in Jerusalem, S. Paul writing a long Epistle to the Romans,
would he have abstayned from him, if he had been there then? Likewise he
saluteth a great number of persons, without making any mention of him. Besides
he writes many Epistles from Rome, in some of which, a man shall find some
places, that necessarily should have made mention of him. And in one place he
complayneth, that all had forsaken him, being a prisoner for the Gospel. Phil.
2.20. 2. Tim. 4.16.
And the 2. Epistle to Timothy was written the same year, where a little
after S. Paul was beheaded by the commandment of Nero. To be short, whether S.
Peter were at Rome before S. Paul, or after. If before, (as their legend
says, that Saint Paul arrived there after) and that they two together had
such combats against Simo^ Magus, whence comes it, that Saint Paul did not
salute him in his Epistle to the Romans? Whence also comes it, that he
makes no mention of him, in the other Epistles? and which is more, whence
comes it, and how can that accord to that which S. Luke says in the
Acts, The last Chapter of the Acts.
That the Jews said unto Paul, that they had understood nothing of him, and
they desire him to declare unto them his opinion of that sect, against which
every man spoke? Is this credible unto any, that S. Peter, who came thither
before, and was the Minister of Circumcision, that he had taught them nothing
of him? Also whence comes it, 1. Cor. 3. Galat. 2.
that S. Paul, who is wont diligently else where to rehearse their meetings, as
when they met at Antioch, makes no mention of this meeting, being in one of
the most famous Cities in the world?

Now if Saint Peter came thither after Saint Paul, besides that it is a great
marvel, that no mention is made thereof, yet then the legende is false,
whereupon the primacie is founded: and as it is false in one point, so it may
be in another. Moreover the Legende says, that they were beheaded both
together, and the Canon says, the same year, in the same day, and at the
same hour. Eusebius says, that the one was beheaded, and the other was
crucified, Linus in passione beati Pauli.
and Linus, who has written the suffering of Saint Paul, he (I say) whom
they hold to have been the next that succeeded Saint Peter, has made no
mention of Saint Peter's suffering. One says, that Linus was his successor,
another that it was Clemens. To be short, they are not yet agreed, neither of
the time of his coming, nor of the time of his death, nor of the manner
thereof, nor of his successor, nor of any thing. And yet for all that they are
so impudent, that they will draw all stay of the Christian faith, unto the
faith of a lying legende. Now against these proofs, they can allege but one
place of Scripture, whereof they may be ashamed, to wit, that which is in the
later end of the first Epistle of S. Peter: The Church which is in Babylon
saluteth you: I will not deny unto them, that Eusebius, and Beda, Eusebius. lib.
2.
and Saint Hierome has interpreted the date of this letter to be from Rome:
but I do rather willingly accept that which they confess, that they are not
able to aucthorize the Sea of Rome by the scripture, otherwise the^ by
acknowledging it to be called Babylon, even by their pretended founder himself.
Now if they will allege unto me, that this is a common and received opinion,
that S. Peter was at Rome, besides the diversities that we have noted before, I
answer, that the question is not of the opinion, but of an article of faith,
upon which they would buyld many others of like sort. That S. Hierome a Roman
elder, expou^ding this place: Hieronym. in Matthew. lib. 4. cap. 23.
Behold, I have sent you Prophets, wise men and Scribes, etc: alleges for
example, Saint Stephen stoned, and S. Peter crucified by the Jews: to be
short, that the popedom then is founded upon opinion, and not upon a certain
and an undoubted faith.

But granting that opinion, that he was there, (for I will not now debate the
matter, to show the uncertainty of that which they pretend to be most
certain) I demand whether he were there in the state of a Bishop, or of an
Apostle. If as Bishop or elder, (for then we know that both these were one)
they were bound every one to their own city or town, and to his own
Church, Acts. 14. Tit. 1.
as may appear by the Acts, and in the Epistle to Titus, and therefore the
Bishop of Rome could not pretend any authority over others: for none could
transfer that right which he had. Again, why should they not rather have
chosen Paul for their Bishop, seeing that it appears by the holy scripture,
Acts. 10.
that he had preached there a long time? Moreover what will they answer to the
Bishop of Antioch, who is more clearly founded in the scripture, then the
Bishop of Rome, that is to say, even in the express text of the Scripture?
for, alleging that goodly revelation of translating Peter's See from Antioch to
Rome, which is read in Gratians decretal, 12. q. 1. Rogamus.
they shall be derided, as for an idle dream. And what will they answer to S.
Gregory himself, who says that the Bishops of Alexandria and of Antioch, are
as well Peter's successors as he of Rome, and that they sit in Peter's chair?
If as an Apostle, Gregor. in Registr. 99. ad Eulog. Alexandr.
we know that the charge of the Apostleshippe was not tied to any city,
town, or province, no nor to any one nation, but was extended throughout the
whole world, and if they will have it any manner of way limited, this must be by
the spirit of God, who had appointed Peter's Apostleship amongst the Jews, and
Paul's amongst the Gentiles, sending the one (says S. Hierome) to the Gentiles,
Galat. 1.
and placing the other by the singular providence of God in Jury. Whereupon it
will follow then, that by the same right, all places where Peter has preached,
shall have a primacie, that is to say, there shall be primacies and popedomes
without number, and so consequently not one alone. Also, that ye succession of
Rome ought rather to be taken of Paul then of Peter: Hieron. in Epist. ad Galat
cap. 2.
for Rome is of the Gentiles. Also, that all the places spoken of Peter, are
ill alleged by them, forasmuch as the succession is not drawn from him. This
is beside. For Cardinal Cusan maintayneth unto them, Card. Cusan lib. 2. de
concord. Catholic. cap. 13. Marsil. Pad. lib. 2. cap. 17
that all Bishops are equally of S. Peter, whereof it follows, that they have
all the privilege of his See, and that as one may err, so likewise may
another. If they say, that S. Peter has founded the Church of Rome, that is
false: for long time before that they say it should be founded by him, S. Paul
wrote unto them, Romans 16.
that ye renown of their faith was spread throughout ye whole world. Now if
it be in respect only that Peter there dyed, they say that so did Paul also,
who went thither by the express commandment of God: I say that S. Jerome
writes that he was crucified in Judea: to be short, I say that the Apostle S.
John, Hieron in Matthew. lib. 4. cap. 23.
who lived longer then all the Apostles, and thirty years at the least after
S. Peter, according to their own reconing, and who wrote ye last of all, says
rather, that Christ foretold Peter, that he should be glorified by his death,
but he makes no mention of the place, where he should thereby glorify the
Pope: which without doubt he would not have concealed, for the benefit and
salvation of all the world, if the state of the Church had depended upon this
supremacy. But I demand farther, who ca^ vau^t to be Peter's heir, whether ye
Church of Rome, or ye Pope? If ye church of Rome, as it seems ye Pope Calixte
gave place to it: then there is no more question of a Pope, Canon: (...) dicet
distin.
nor of one man alone, nor of one personal succession: For the Church is a
body, and a body dies not, but successively in his parts and there needs no
successor to him yt dies not. If it be the Pope, then ought not the Church of
Rome any more to say, that she is the head of the Church, Magist. Io^.
Parisien. lib. de potesta^e regia and Papali.
neither that she say any more as the schole of Sorbonistes noth. That Peter's
chair is for the Church, and not the Church for Peter's chair. For she is but
a part of the succession. And if this come to pass, I demand, what shall
become of the Church, Liter Acad. Parisiensis apud Theod. a Nicens. tract. 6.
cap. 15.
and of the Ministry of the same, when the head thereof shall become an
heretic and an Atheist, when there shall be a Schism of thirty or forty
years continuance without a Pope, as often has been seen, Council. Gallicanu^
anno Dom. 1407. and 1408.
when Joan shall be in Peter's place, etc. But before they answer us, they must
make void this broyle amongst themselves, and if it please God, before they
agree therein, their pretended succession must fall to the ground.

Now albeit we could reject all in one word, being not grounded upon any one
word of Gods law, yet it shall be good to see from time to time, how they are
grounded upon man's law, and that which we call positive.

They hold that S. Peter was crucified under Nero, in the year of our Lord
69, and that Clement succeeded him. Others say, that Linus succeeded him, then
Saint John, yea and James himself: If we believe those books supposed to be
Clements, they should have obeyed Clement as head of the Church: for he
succeeded, as they say, in Peter's Authority, and he ought to have no less
authority then the popes at this day, who can dispense with Paul's epistles.
A wonderful case that the primitive Church, when they made the Canon of those
books that should have authority in the Church, that they should rather put
in those books of James and John, then of Clement the principal heir and
successor of the holy ghost, by the virtue of Saint Peter's chair. A
wonderful matter further, Clemens epist. 3.
that this Clement made so small account of succession, so necessary in the
Church, seeing that in his epistle which he writes to James Bishop of
Jerusalem, he calls him our Lords brother, the Bishop of Bishops, and
governor of the Church of Jerusalem, and of all others throughout all the
world. But, yet a more wonderful matter, that they should be found so
impudent, in the light of good learning that at this day shines, as to found
the papacy upon those gaye books of Clement, in which there are so many
falsehoodes. Clement writes to Saint James after Peter's death, and teaches
him the institution of our Lord, when as the Scripture witnesses that S.
James was martyred long before in Jerusalem, and that as long as he lived, he
was to teach Clement such matters, and not to learn them of him. And yet this
is one of the notablest authors that they can allege. But let us proceed.

We hold the Apostles Creed from the beginning of the Christian Church. And
we there find the Catholic church. But this article of the faith, that pope
Boniface the eight made, is not therein: That if we will be saved, we must
acknovvledge the pope to be the sovereign Lord.

Saint Cyprian says, Cyprian. de simplicitate praelatorum. Idem in sententiis
episcopo. Idem. lib. 1. epist. 5.
That there is but one Bishoppricke, of which every Bishop holds his part,
wholy without any division. Also, that none of his time, either called, or
made him self Bishop of Bishops, either made through tyranny his companions
subject to his obedience. Also he complains, that certain profane men and
Schismatikes with drew them selves to the bish. of Rome, who (says he) has
none but certain desperate and wicked fellows that stay upon him, making
the^ selves believe that the Bishops of Affricke have less power then the
Bishops of Rome. And in very deed he calls not Stephen and Cornelius bishops
of Rome, other the^ brethren and companions, and handles Stephen rudely enough
in many places. To be short, a little after his death, Council. Affrican. can.
primae sedis,
ye church of Affricke decreed in the council of Carthage, that none should be
called the prince or chief of ministers, or the first Bishop, but only
according to the dignity of Cities, the Bishop of the first See. Irenee very
lively reproves Victor the Bishop of Rome, Ireneus ex Eusebius. lib. 5. cap. 20.
and epist. 24.
who through a certain shameless ambition, had excommunicated the Churches of
Asia, for disagreeing about ye Passover. The Ministers, says he, which have
held the eldershippe of the Church over which thou now do govern,
Anicetus, Pius, Higinus etc. have not done as thou have done, neither they also
which were with them. Tertullian. de praescriptione haere*
Tertullian who otherwise is wont to attribute very much to Saint Peter,
scorneth ye Bishop of Rome and his great ambition, which then began to show it
self: and albeit in a certain place he makes a long narration of the praises
of the Church of Rome, yet he teaches not, neither near nor far of, that
which is the principal, to wit, that it was the infallible seat of the holy
Ghost, by Peter's succession. And yet these are for all that, the very first of
all antiquity, and in whose time the Church of Christ more flourished, then at
any time.

In the time of Constantine, as the church had more liberty, so it had also
more ambition, and then Bishops began first to think on miters, that before
time thought nothing else but to be martyrs. That same famous Council of Nice
was then called together by Constantine the Emperor, Can. 6. Nice^. synodi.
to the end to decide the matter of Arrius. The B. of Romes deputies were
there: but they sat only in the fourth place. Yea one decree was there made,
Eusebius. lib. 10 cap. 6.
by which certain limits were attributed to every patriarch, over which the
Canon gave them equal authority, which the Bishop of Rome was wont to have
over ye neighbor Churches of his city. They went about by infinite means to
corrupt the canons of this council, as the histories do witness unto us. But
Cusan the Cardinal alleging this Council, acknowledges the truth in these
words: By this we see, Card. Cusan. lib. 2. de concord. Cath. cap. 1^
(says he) how much authority the Pope has gotten in our time, against the
sacred ancient constitutions, and altogether through the length of time and
custom of a slavish subiectionall obedience. And yet in mean time Julius with
stands it not, neither do his Legates allege to the fathers of the Council
their Tibi dabo, I will give unto thee, nor their Pasce oues meas, Feed my
sheep: for as yet they were not studied so deeply therein, but they rested only
in the ordinance of the Council, which afterward was confirmed by the
Councils of Antioche, Council. Antioch. cap. 23. Constan. cap. 2.
and of Constantinople. And this was about the time that they would devise the
donation of Constantine to pope Syluester, confuted by so many learned men, so
long time ago, that none but such as are ignorant will believe it. But if they
will believe the original, An extract of Vatican.
which is kept in Vatica^ in ye popes library in golden letters, let the^ also
believe these words which are written and added in ye end: Quam fabula^ longi
te^poris me^dacia finxit, yt is to say, in the proper words of ill latin, This
is a fable which an old lie has forged. Or if they will therein believe the
legend of Pope Syluester, then let them also believe that which it says,
Legenda Syluestri.
that then was heard a voice from heaven, saying, Hodie effusum est venenum in
Ecclesiam: that is to say, At this day poison is shed into the midst of the
Church.

In the first and second Council of Ephesus, Cyrillus and Dioscorus,
Patriarchs of Alexandria did govern there, though the Bishop of Rome there
had his deputies. Leo papa epist 45.
And it forces not to say, that the second was not lawful. For this can not
be known but by the issue, but it suffices that in the beginning, and then
when men thought that it was very lawful, and that in such a time, as the
ceremonies were kept there, Leo the Bishop of Rome, Leo papa in epistolis.
neither his deputies, did not there strive for the chief place, because they
thought it to have no good ground. In the Council of Chalcedon, called
together by the Emperor Martian, Leo the Bishop of Rome being there
president, he was called Archbishop as were the others. But the history
says, that he required the Emperor and the Empress to govern there,
because that in the second Council of Ephesus, Dioscorus the Patriarch of
Alexandria, abusing his authority, had approved the heresy of Eutyches,
whereof then there was question. Now in that he demands this favor, it
sufficientlye declares that it was not done unto him, and if this might once
be drawn into consequence, as well also must this, that Cyrill was President
over the first council of Ephesus, for all the Bishops of Alexandria. Leo in
epist. poposcera^ and multa mihi in omnibus ad Martianu^ August.
And in very deed in the fifth Council of Constantinople, his successor
withstoode it not, when Menas the patriarch of that place was there president.
In the general Council of Aquilie, S. Ambrose the B. of Millane was
president, and there was not any mention made of ye B. of Rome, although this
was in Italy. But behold ye question was determined, ye parties being heard, by
the determinate se^te^ce of a cou^cill. The B. of Rome took upon him a goodly
large title of being patriarch over the churches of Affrike, and the
schismatikes of Affrike willingly departed to go to him to find there aid,
whereupon the cou^cil of Mileuitane, where S. Aug. was with a good number of
fathers, pronounced all them for excommunicate, that had or should appeal
beyond the Sea. The Bishop of Rome finding him self grieved, Volum. Con. in
Concilio Mileuitano. and council. Carth ag. 6.
sent to the sixth council of Carthage, where also Saint Augustine was, that
he might have redress in this matter, the which was so long time in debating,
that Zosinius, Boniface, and Celestine, Bishops of Rome succeeded one
another, during this Council. Aurelius the Archbishop of Carthage,
notwitstanding that their legates were there, was president there, and in the
end the definitive sentence was pronounced in this force. That the Bishop of
Rome should not receive those that were excommunicated by the Bishops of
Affrike, neither should he receive the appellations of those that by them
should be cond^ened, and that all they which should appeal to him, should be
holde^ for excommunicated persons. The reasons of this council contained in
the 105. chapter, by the letters of the council to Celestine Bishop of Rome,
Cap. 105. Council. Car. thag. 6.
are these: that there is no cou^cil, that had so decreed: Contrariwise yt the
Council of Nice, had put the Clergy and the Bishops of each province under the
Metropolitan: That the grace of the holy Spirit had not withdrawn it self
from every Province, to discern the right of all causes. That any might
appeal to a Provincial council, if he felt him self grieved, and that it
was more credible, that GOD vvoulde inspire a great assembly of ministers in
a Council, then one man alone. And because that the B. of Rome required to
send his legates to be over those places to enquire of matters and causes, they
made answer that they could not find any council that had so decreed, and
likewise that they would not suffer it. In this council, where they had time
enough to dream all their forbidding, yet shall you not find that the
primacie was founded upon any law of God: much less, that which they call
the fulness of power. And in very deed, for to decide the matter, men were not
sent to search the scriptures, in which S. Augustine (who was present there)
was well able to have found it, if it had been there, but rather to the four
originals of the cou^cill of Nice, which were kept in the four patriarchall
Sees. In mean while Gratian the Compiler of their decree, was so sottishly
malicious, Can. placuit 2. q. cap. 4.
that reciting this Canon of the Council of Carthage, That men should not
appeal beyond the Sea, he added, unless to the B. of Rome: as though the
Canon had been made quite contrary to it self, all the reasons being heard and
concluded to the contrary. And by this place a man may very well gather what to
account of their Canons, being rehearsed with such fidelity. In the Council
of Carthage, holden under the Emperor Mauricius about the year of Christ,
six hundred, the matter of the Supremacy was also largely debated, Council.
Carth. 7.
because that the^ the B. of Constantinople, favored of the Emperor Mauricius,
by prerogative of ye City of Constantinople, called him self Bishop of
Bishops, and universal Bishop. And Mauricius vphelde and aided him to beat
down old Rome, because the^ the empire was translated into ye East, and Italy
left for a pray to ye Northern people. Let a man read over all the Canons of yt
council, and they pronounce a curse, not only upon the B. of Constantinople,
but generally upon al those who shall take the title of an universal B.

All the ancient doctors, who lived during the time of these Councils, yea ye
Latins, that yielded very much to the Bishopric of Rome, as being their most
near patriarchshippe, do witness the self same thing unto us. Athanasius,
Athanasius in epist. ad liberum Hpisco. Romans
albeit he was greatly bound to the Sea of Rome, which had received him in his
exile, he says that all the Apostles were equal in honor and power: S. Hierom
a minister of Rome he says, If there be any question of the authority of all
the world, the world is greater then one City. Wherefore vvilt thou bring the
order of the Church into the subjection of a fevve persons: Whence comes this
presu^ption? Wheresoever there is a Bishop, be he at Rome, or at Agubiu^, be he
at Constantinople or at Rhegiu^, Hieron. in epist. ad Euagrium. Repetitur in
decret. Gratiani. Hieron. ad Nepotianu^.
he is of one and the same dignity and Ministry. Riches or pouertye neither
make one superior nor inferior. Again there is (says he) in every Church
a Bishop, one chief amongst the Deacons, and another amongst the Elders,
and all the order of the Church consists in these governors. It should follow
thereupon, seeing ye the question was of unity, yt he should add and say, a B.
over the other Bishops: but he speaks nothing. August epist 162. in breuiculo
collationis contra Donat. and passim.
S. August. has written a story, which makes this matter most clear. Donate
of the black cotages, a Numidian, of who^ the Donatists took their name, had
grievously accused Cicilia^ the Archbishop of Carthage. Constantine the Emperor
committed this cause, which was merely ecclesiastical, to Miltiades B. of Rome,
and to certain other Bishops of Italy, Gaul and Spaigne. Now if this had
been his ordinary Jurisdiction, there needed not any Commission of the
Emperor, and it had belonged to him to have chosen unto himself his
assistants, and not to have received them. But see further. Donate being
condemned, appealed to the Emperor, who sent his appellatio^ to the Archb. of
Arles, either to prove or disalow the B. of Romes sentence. I demand then in
this fact, which in this case is worth a million, Where is the Supremacy, where
is the Jurisdiction without appeal, and where is this same knowledge of all
appellations, and this fulness of power, whereof they speak so much? And yet this
is that Constantine of whom they boast so much, and who, as they deem, spoiled
him self of his Empire, to enriche them. Chrysostom. says, Homil. 43. in mat.
cap. 23.
Whosoever of the Bishops shall desire primacye in earth, he shall find
confusion in heaven, and he that shall desire to be the chief, he shall not be
reputed in the number of the servant of Christ. Gregory ye great, Bishop of
Rome, when the Bishop of Constantinople would attribute unto him self that
Supremacy, Greg. Mag. lib. 4. epist. 76 78.80.85. lib. 6. epist. 188. and 194.
he says not, that he does wrong to Saint Peter, or that he withholdeth and
usurps the right of the Bishops of Rome, but rather he protests, that
this was a profane title, full of sacrilege, and the forerunning of
Antichrist, and that this was to say with Lucifer, I will ascend above the
clouds, and will make my self equal to the high God. Can. Nullus ex epist.
Pelagii papae did. 99.
That none of his predecessors took upon them to be above their brethren and
companions. And if there were any such amongst the^, he falling down, all the
Church should stu^ble and fall with him. That this were to destroy all
christianity. And after many such other words, he pronounces this general
sentence: That whosoever shall call himself universal Bishop, or shall desire
to be so called, that he is the forerunner of Antichrist, forasmuch as through
pride, he axalteth him self above all. As touching him self he flatly refused
it, Epist. ad Eulogiu^ lib. 7.30. in Regist.
and prayed Eulogius the Bishop of Alexandria, not to give him this proud
name. He acknowledges that the Bishops of Alexandria and Antioche, are as
well in Peter's chair, as they of Rome: to be short, that Peter, Paul, Andrew,
John etc. they are al particular heads of the people whom they govern, but
all members under one head, which is Christ, howsoever they hold Peter for
chief amongst them. I beseech the readers that they will take pains to read
upon this matter the epistles of Saint Gregory, and there they shall find the
condemnation of this Supremacy, more expressly, then yet I have said. To
conclude, the Emperors have called general Councils, and the patriarks and.
Metropolitanes, those that were National and prouincial. They that were
Patriarchs every one was president over the Sea of his patriarchshippe, and not
the Bishop of Rome, nor his deputies in general councils. The patriarks or
chief Bishops went not to seek their Palls at Rome, but were Canonically
elected over those places. The Bishop of Rome (as appears by those Epistles
them selves of Gregorye the great) when he was chosen, Greg. Anast. lib. 1.
epist. 25. and lib. 6. epist. 169.
exhibited unto them the confession of his faith, by a Synodall Epistle, as
they did to him. Each one of them had an Ecclesiastical judgment over his
own, and none appealed from them, no not the Bishops them selves beyond the
Sea, who had no Patriarch in the Sea of Rome. I demand then by what mark
they can show us that Supremacy in the ancient Primitive church, be it, but
by the positive law of man: And yet notwithstanding we see the course from
time to time, and from Council to Council, until the year of our LORD six
hundred and more, when Phocas the Emperor killed his master Maurice, and
invaded the Empire: and to get favor of the Romans, after so cursed and
detestable murder, gained Boniface the third, their Bishop, declaring him to
be head of the Church, and Bishop of Bishops, against that that Gregory his
predecessor had a little before so hotelye fought against. If the Church had
been so long time without a head, what did the members then? And if Jesus
Christ were the head then, why less now: Also whence comes it, that when
the Bishop of Rome was not acknowledged for such a one, it had such strength,
and always afterward grew weaker and decayed: Again, is it not notable,
that all the ancient Church was ignorant of so healthful a doctrine, hidden
in the holy Scripture, and that Boniface the third should be the first that
should find it out: That such so necessary privileges should be concealed
for the space of six hundred years, in the most happy ages, and to the most
quick sighted persons, which ever were: That so many Christian Emperors should
make no account of it, and one Phocas, an execrable murderer, should be ye
first to give authority unto it? But as the papacy must needs spring of the
ruins of Rome, and the second beast of the Carrion of the first, so also must
it needs he, that the supremacy of the Bishop of Rome, as that of the first
kings was, must be founded and builded upon murder.

Against these decrees of the general councills, they blush not to allege
unto us those goodly books of Clement, whereof we have spoken a little before:
that same ridiculous epistle of Anaclet, Distinct. 22* c. sacrosanct. 12. q. 1.
cap. rogamus.
That Cephas is as much to say as head of the church: that same authentical
revelation of Pope Marcellus, of Peter's seat to be removed from Antioch to
Rome, Cardinal Cusan lib. 2. cap. vlt.
and such other beggarly trumperie of that decree, which some even of their
own side do deride: Also certain other epistles of Pope Leo, who labors
thereby, as much as he can, to make us credit the latin Church. But we know that
none must be judge in his own cause, and if, as Gerson and Panormitan say, One
lay man may set himself (having the holy Scripture on his side) against a
whole general council which erreth from it: By a more strong reason may
the whole primitive Church oppose it self, and all the whole Scripture (having
all the general councils on her side, that were for the space of 600. years)
against ye tyra^nie of one man alone, which cannot allege any thing but his
own ambition, yea and against the decretall epistles of some Popes, and yet
for the most part, but shuffled in under the name of some of the ancient
fathers.

The ambition of the bishop of Rome.
I will not deny notwithstanding, that a good time the bishops of Rome had not
attempted to establishe a spiritual monarchy at Rome, according to the
example of the temporal, which made them to be envied. For the Church of God
began by Abel, as Saint Augustine says, and Babylon by Cain, and likewise it
is not to be doubted, but that very quicklye after the foundations of the
Christian Church were laid, Satan laid also the foundations of Antichrist. 1.
Cor. 1. 2 Thessalonians. 2.
In Paul his time the mystery of iniquity began to work, when one said that
he was of Apollo, another that he was of Paul, and another of Cephas. Victor
the bishop of Rome enterprised to excommunicate all Asia for the feast of
Easter, Eusebius. lib. 5. cap. 20. Ireneus epist. 24. Cyprianus lib. 4. Epi. 6.
but he was most lively reproved by Irenee. Steven also received the
schismatiques of Affricke, against the Sentence of the Church, that they
should not appeal beyond the Sea: but Cyprian calls him proud and ignorant,
and the council of Affricke holden about the self same time, sets it self
against him. Julius in the time of Constantine began to establishe his
Empire, but the council of Nice limited him his power, bringing him to the
bound and skantling of others. Yea, Council. Carthag. 6. cap. 5.4.101.105.
in the sixth council of Carthage, where Saint Augustine was present, three
bishops of Rome one after another were so impudent, as to falsify a decree of
the council of Nice, bringing forth in stead thereof, the articles of the
council of Sardes, yet corrupted and falsified, pretending that from all
parts, men might appeal to the bishop of Rome. But the fathers of the council
had learned well to say, that they would not believe those productions, and
therefore sent to the originalls, and they being seen, they pronounced the
quite contrary. Leo the first received Eutyches condemned by Flauianus the
bishop of Constantinople, and for a time mainteyned him against him, whereupon
his heresy first took footing and grew, which might then at once have been
quenched. But none approved this usurpation. To be short, in the time of
Chrysostom, this ambition was so great amongst them, that he complained, that
to obtain supremacy, the bishops of Rome had filled the Churches with blood,
and had defiled the Supper of the Lord with murders, until they had utterly
for it destroyed whole cities. And he that will see the civil wars, (for they
likewise name them) which were at Rome between Damasus and Vrsicius, in the
time of Saint Hierome, whether of them should be bishop, and afterward
between Laurence and Symmachus, Ruffinus lib. 12 cap. 10. hist Eccle. Amianus
Marc. lib. 27. Lib. Pontificalis.
he may read them in Ruffinus, Amian Marcellin, and their own Pontifical it
self. And howsoever it were, all the contentions that were made by the bishops
of Rome in the ancient Church, yea, till the time of the murdering of Phocas
for the supremacy, look how many they were, they were always arguments from
age to age, and as determined sentences against them, in so much that they
always lost their cause, whatsoever insta^ce they made, or whatsoever
diligence they used in pleading of it.

Rome has had the chief place, and how.
But they will obiecte unto me, that nevertheless the bishop of Rome has held
the chief place amongst the Patriarchs. I agree thereto, but yet I deuie that
it was to command others. And in deed, it is expressly said, that he shall
not be called universal bishop, Cap. prim. sedis and cap. Nullus did. 99.
but only the bishop of the first See. I say moreover, that this is not in
respect that he was the successor of S. Peter, and less by virtue of those
places alleged out of the holy Scripture. But because that in seats there
must be a first and a second place according to humame order, I say that this
was ordained, in consideration of that order, whereby the city of Rome was set
above others. If it had been by the Scriptures, it should have been a
wonderful thing, that for 600. years together, these mysteries should have
been hidden from the Church. If in respect of the founder, why not rather at
Antioche, and at Alexandria, after Gregory, Gregor. in Regist. 91. epist. ad
Alexandr. episco. Cusan. lib. 1. cap. 6. and 13.
or to all other bishoprics, after Cusan, who says yt all bishops are Peter's
successors, equal in ye essential dignity, although they differ in the
administration and government, as the bishops of Spain themselves have
disputed in the last council of Trent: Moreover that Jerusalem should be the
first and not the fourth, seeing the Salvation of the world did there govern:
Or why is Antioche, whereof Saint Peter was bishop, put after Alexandria, which
can allege nothing but the succession of Saint Mark his disciple: To be
short, what hurt has Saint John the well-beloved disciple of our Lord done unto
them, who so long time preached in Ephesus, which notwithstanding is not
nombred amongst the patriarchall cities: Or what new Apostle has founded
Constantinople, three hundred years after the death of our Lord, to attribute
unto it the second See: But there is none that has but a little judgment, that
does not well enough mark, that all the preeminences of these Sees rather
proceed from the rank and places, which their cities hold, then from the
establishment of Christian religion.

Rome was then the seat of the Empire, and the glory of all the world: good
learning there flourished: it was the chief of all the peoples of the earth:
and therefore when all the bishops were gathered together, they gave the bishop
of Rome the first place for civility and courtesies sake. Likewise we read
in the histories, that Alexandria and Antioch were after Rome the most famous
cities, and according to that degree which their governors held, they also
held their bishopprickes. And concerning Jerusalem, that was so greatly
accounted of, for the first original of true Religion, and therefore likewise
was not reckoned in the least place: for Pliny calls it the head of all the
East: but yet her place was ill kept, after she had lost her first glory.
Afterward Constantinople came to be builded, which was called the second Rome.
And then also we see the council of Constantinople, where there were six
hundredth bishops, Socrat. hist. tripart. lib. 9. cap. 13.22. did.
Co^stantinopolis. Authenique 231.
who gave unto it the second place, which had not been done, if they had had
regard to the degree of the founder, and not to the degree of the city, by
reason of whose might also, this dignity was confirmed unto it by the Emperor
Justinian. Aquila in Italy was called the second Rome. Also there was a
Patriarchship there established, yea Rauenna it self, was a long time holden
not to be subject to Rome, and it had her own Cardinals apart and by
themselves, and as Venice began to grow great, so it had the Patriarchship
of Grado for it. To be short, he that shall mark from country to country,
the erection of patriarchships and archbishopricks, he shall find no other
consideration then this, the same that Pope Lucinus says, alleged by Gratian,
That at the first they instituted Primates of the Church according to temporal
policy. Distinct. 80. In decreto, Did. 121. cap Decretis.
Also Pope Clement himself says: That where there were chief Priests of the
Painims, there they established Primats of Christians, See from whence
supremacy, and Popish superiority first sprang by the Papists own
confession. Lombard. lib. 4. did. 24. Conc. Chalcedon. cap. 1. and 12.
the which is repeated in the same words by Peter Lombard in his fourth book
of Sentences. The council of Chalcedon, (wherein notwithstanding the earnest
requests of Pope Leo the first, the second See was given to the City
Constantinople,) uses also the same words: The fathers upon good right with
one consent agreed, that the privilege of the first See should belong unto
old Rome, because of the Empire there, and we also moved with the same
consideration, agree that the second shall be at new Rome. And in the 12. Act of
the same council, the reasoning betwixt the bishop of Nice, and of
Basianopolis, is grounded upon the dignity of the cities. And to cut of all
such controversies, this Canon was there passed: That these Cities only
should be holden for Metropolitans, Concilium Taurin. cap. 8
to which Kings and Princes had done this honor by their statutes. And the
Council of Thurin there adds: That if the earthly superiority were
translated from one City to another, that then the right of the Archbishopric
should be translated likewise. To be short, when the seat of the Empire was
translated to new Rome, that is to say, to Constantinople, we see that the
Bishop of that place by and by took unto himself the primacie, whereof they
held even as much as they could: and when that murderer Phocas declared the
Bishop of Rome to be head of al churches, Platina in vita Bonifacii.
Platine says plainly, that it was in consideration that Rome was the ancient
seat of the Empire: whereon Constantinople was but the pillar, as others say,
propter principalitatem vrbis, for the principality of the City. Behold
then, that the pretended primacie of Rome, neither proceeded from the ordinance
of Christ, nor from the privilege of Peter, but from Romulus, and his
successors, who there erected an Empire, Non inquam a Petra, neque a Petro, sed
a Saxo Tarpeio: 93. and 95. distinct. Hosti ensis in summa de maioritate, and
obed entia, and glossa in can Nouo and 2. q 7. puto Cardinal. Cusanus lib. 2.
cap. 13.
I say neither from the rock, nor from Peter, but from the rock of Tarpeius,
whereupon Rome was builded, the which their own Canonists confess, seeing
truth gives them hell for their rewards, Quod omnis maioritas and minoritas,
etiam Papatus est de iure positiuo, that is to say, That all degrees both small
and great, yea the popedom it self, they are from the positive law, and of
man's ordinance. I know very well, that they have a decree of Pope Innocentius,
which says, that it is not necessary to change the ecclesiastical
pre-eminence, according to the Civil: but this forsooth was at such a time,
when the good man himself feared, least the Empire should withdraw all the
honor into the East, and he thought it expedient (which thing also his
successors did very well know and find) to build their greatness and glory of
the ruins of the Western Empire. And again, the decree of one man is not to
be preferred before so many Councils, seeing yt (as some of them have said) the
decretals have no authority, by the mere will of ye Pope, that is to say,
absolutely: but only so far forth, as they are agreeable to the Canons of
the Councils. Card. Cus. lib. 2. cap. 14.
If they will yet allege unto me, that the constitutions and policies of the
Church of Rome have bin received by many other Churches, I will answer them no
otherwise, then was answered by those professors of divinity in Paris, Arti.
Sorbonae Parisien. contra Papa^ Bonifaci. 8.
three hundred years passed, when there was controversies between our kings
and the Pope, and by Marsilius of Padua about ye same time, the Pope making
war upon the Emperors of Germany, Marsil Patauinus in lib defensor pacis 2.
part. cap. 18.
which gave boldness to the truth to speak freely: to wit, that in the
beginning men might be governed after it, because learning there flourished: no
otherwise then as the university of Orleans, or of Angers, oftentimes conform
themselves to that of Paris: as also ye Romans borrowed in deed their laws
from the twelve tables of the Greeks: And yet by virtue thereof, the Greeks
should not well ground to pretend themselves superiors to the Romans, and
likewise the Romans, if therefore they should pretend to be superiors over
other Bishops.

Now concerning ye name Pope, which is given unto him, they that have read,
know that it was common, not only to al Bishops, but also even to elders in
all the ancient Church. Epist. Cypr. Dionis. Alexander. Hier. August. Greg.
Sidonii. Apol. Acta Conciliorum.
He that will see this matter more plain, let him read the Epistles of Saint
Cyprian, of Saint Denis of Alexandria, lib. 2. Epist. 6.25. etc. of Saint
Augustine, of Saint Hierome, of Sidonius Apollinaris, of Saint Gregory
himself, and the acts of the Councils, where men may find them full. And in
deed the Greeks call their Priests at this day (Papous) and the Germans
(Pfaff) which they that understand the tongue, Suidas in dict. papas
do derive from this name Papa, which after Suidas signifies Father, in the
language of ye Sicilians. Now concerning the name Pontifex, Athanas. in prima
oratione contra Arrianos.
Irenee called Saint John the high Bishop, and Athanasius calls all the
Bishops by that name, and Ruffinus calls Athanasius the great Bishop:
Ruffinus lib. 1. cap. 26.
and he that will read the ancient Fathers, shall find nothing more often
then this. Now if they will allege their Cardinals, Gregor. Epist. 15. and
77 and 79. lib. 1. and Grego. in Registro. lib. 4.
they shall not find one word of them in the old Church, unless in this
signification: the Cardinal Priest, that is to say, a Bishop, or rather the
Curate of some parish of the Bishopric, as in very deed all are at this day,
either Curates or Deacons of some one or other parish of Rome. And in deed in
the Councils they were set last, as in the sixth Council of Carthage, and in
the Council of Gregory. Whatsoever it is, they can say of it, it is certain
that Innocent the fourth, about the year of our Lord, 1244. gave unto them
the privilege of the red hatte, and scarlet robe, and to ride on horseback:
and in the year 1470. Paul the second confirmed it, and Clemens the fifth is
gone so far in his Clementines, that he causes them to go before all the
princes of the earth. These inventions then, were not found in the flourishing
state of the Church, but after that it became subject to the ambition of one
man alone.

the grou^^ of ye Pope. Chro. Mattini. Platin. in vita Bonif. 3.
We have then found, that the Pope of Rome has been declared head of the
Church, a little after 600 years, not by the tradition of Christ, or of his
Apostles, but by ye treason of Phocas, not by any Council of the Church, but
by the conspiracy of a servant against his master, who to reconcile himself
with the people of Rome, ordained his Bishop with that title, which Gregory
his predecessor had left for Antichrist, and the Pope on the other side
proclaimed him self Emperor in stead of Mauritius, whom he had slain. This
goodly ordinance of Phocas was confirmed by a petty Council, Sigebertus in
Chronic.
which Boniface caused to be holden at Rome, when there were none present but
the Latins, who desired no better. And afterward by another holden in
Affrike, in the year 642. when the Arabians were turmoiled with many
invasions: whereupon they began to inscribe the letters of Pope Theodorus, To
the holy father of fathers, and sovereign prince of prelates, etc. and so we
see by histories, from degree to degree, how this monster has grown even to
full height, from which he must tumble down headlong. The Emperors of Greece,
who were then as banished out of Italy, to keep the Italians in obedience, they
left unto them the handling of their affairs, in such sort notwithstanding,
that they were constrained to confirm their election by the Emperor, and to
date their wrytinges according to the indiction and year of their Empire. But
even as the Emperors grew weak by the enterprises of the Persians in the
East, Sigon. lib. 2. de regno Itali. Guicciardinus in Concionibus.
so grew the Pope strong in the West, so as about the year 680. Pope Benedict
the second caused himself to be exempted from all the imperial jurisdiction,
by Constantine the fourth, called the Bearded. About that time began great
strifes in the Greek and Latin Church about Images, whereupon increased
superstition together with ignorance. The Greeks were of mind to throw the^
down: the Pope in despite of them would hold them up. This strife much
increased his might: for under the shadow hereof, he excommunicated Leo
Isauricus, called Chassimage, of breaking Images, and forbade all the people of
Italy, upon pain of excommunication, to pay him any impost, that is to say, he
chased the Emperor to Constantinople, and sets himself in full liberty of
all that quarter. And in deed then ceased the Exarchates, that is, Dukedomes
so called, that had endured six hundred years, that were as the lieutenants
of the Emperor in a part of Italy. The Emperors of Constantinople driven away,
the Lombards thereupo^ did invade the kingdom of Italy. The Pope more feared
them, then those whom he had driven away, because that they were his more nie
neighbors. At that time there governed in France the race of Martel, very
desirous to aspire. The Pope therefore puts himself into the protection of
the Frenchmen, against the Lombards, and Pepin the son of Martel, he passes
into Italy with the powers of France, who vanquisheth them. The issue was, yt
Pope Zachary in recompense, dispenses with the Frenchmen for their oath made
to their natural prince Chilperick, who left the government to ye Martels,
more subtle then himself, and crowned Pepin chief of the palaces of the king
of France, forbidding the princes and people of France, upon pain of
excommunication, to choose any other then of Pepins race. Contrariwise, Pepin
gives unto him the dukedom or lieutenantship of Rauenna and Pentapolis, which
contained 29. Cities, C. Adrianus d. 63. etc. Ego Ludoui. codem.
only reserving unto himself the sovereignty, and the power to choose the
Popes, ye which laws were afterward released by Lewys, the son of Charles
ye great, although yt some Emperors put them in practice afterward, as the
histories are full thereof. And so likewise behold him the head of the
spirituality, because he mainteyned ye murderer of his master and temporal
Lord, because he crowned a subject in the place of his natural prince: and this
beginning of the temporaltie grew up by the controversies of the houses of
Aniou and Arragon in Italy, and afterward of the Emperors of Germany, and
of the kings of France, till it came to that state wherein we now see it in
these last times.

This was after the time that the key of knowledge, which Christ promised to S.
Peter, was changed into ye key of power, and the ecclesiastical censure was
employed to excommunicate all princes, peoples and kingdoms which would not
obey them, until they had left them for a pray, and cut them of from
salvation, without acception of any persons. This was in that time, that these
gaye interpretations were bred: That all power was given to Christ by the
father, as well in heaven as in earth: Therefore the Pope absolutely commands
both one and other. Also God translateth kingdoms from one nation to another:
Ergo, ye Pope has power to establish, and to put down, as it seems good
unto him, whereupon Kings and Emperors of blind zeal began to kiss his
feet, Lib. 7. decretal. de sententia and reiudicata.
both present and by their letters, and to hold his stirrup. This was in that
time also that Pope Boniface the eighth caused this to pass as an article of
faith: Extrauagant. Vnam Catholicam Ecclesiam.
That the Pope is sovereign both of the spirituality and temporaltie, showing
himself in a Jubilee, with a key in one hand, and a sword in another: that
Pope Clement the fifth his successor, not content to command Kings and
Emperors, Clemens 5. in Clement. pastoralis. Idem in rescripto. This writing
is kept ac Vienna in Dauphin, and in Extrauagant. cadem.
took upon him by an express Bull to command Angels, that they should
execute his will. To be short, one has concluded and decided at Rota, that is
to say, in the Parliament of Popes at Rome, that God holds for well done, all
that is done of the Pope: that his will is the rule of all right and
righteousness: that he can absolutely do in this world all that God can do,
seeing he is all and above all things: That if he change his purpose,
Decisiones Rotae. Baldus
it is to be presumed that God changes his: that when he sends thousands of
his brethren to hell, Franciscus de Ripa. Philippus Decius Hostiensis. Carolus
de Ruiuo. Ioannes de Anania, and cap. distinct. 10. cap. Si Papa.
none may therein reprove him: that his power extends it self to heaven and
earth, yea and to hell: that none may appeal from him to God: that he may
ordeine against the epistles of Saint Paul, as greater then Saint Paul, and
against the old Testament, as greater then any authors thereof. And yet one man
has gone further, for one has disputed whether he may ordeine any thing
contrary to the Gospel: Whether he have not yet more power then S. Peter:
Whether he were simply a man, or as God. To be short, the devil has passed so
far in this mystery of iniquity, Erasmus in 1. epist. ad Tim. cap. 1.
that one disputed in the schools a little before Luther came, and somewhat
after, whether the Pope participated not with both natures, the divine and
humane with Jesus Christ. And what could the devil say more if he had come in
the flesh to have destroyed the Church: And yet notwithstanding the people do
worship this monster, and the princes of ye earth do clap their hands at him,
and destroy their kingdoms to serve his lust, and sacrifice yet every day
their poor subjects for a sacrifice of a sweet smelling savor at his feet.
Who would have believed this, except the Spirit of God had foretold it: and
who will believe it after us, when the self same spirit shall have destroyed
him? But which is more marvelous, when the power of the bishop of Rome was
intolerable, he never durst allege in the councills, and in the face of the
old Church, one only text of Scripture to ground his supremacy on. And now yt
it is so much beyond the bounds, that it spurneth ye earth under feet thereof,
that it threatens heaven, that it aduaunceth it self so far that it may be
above God himself, they are so impudent and so shameless, (but so she must be
that is an harlot) that they allege S. Peter's See, and the word of God, and
the keys which were promised to him, as though there were no more eyes in the
world to read, nor sense in men to judge. Let them not therefore ground their
tyranny upon this, ( Dabo tibi, I will give thee) which Jesus Christ spoke to
S. Peter: For between the kingdom of Christ and the tyranny of the Pope,
there is no likeness or agreement. But rather, if they will ground themselves
upon some text of Scripture, let them allege yt Tibi dabo, I will give thee,
which satan used to Jesus Christ. I will give thee (says he) all the
kingdoms which thou see, if thou vvilt worship me. That is for worshipping
the devil, they have that they have, and not for any other title they can
allege.

But I suppose, that now with the license of all the Readers, I may conclude
by these proofs contained in these two chapiters, that which follows: That
the essential head of the Catholic Church is Jesus Christ our Lord: That
under him all the Apostles were equal in dignity and power: That after them
the bishops are equal amongst themselves, and every one in his Ministry
occupies ye place of Christ: That none may be the Ministerial head of the
Church: That the Pope of Rome can pretend this title, neither by Gods law nor
man's: That ye first room that he had, was by reason of the dignity of ye
city, but that all that was more, was from the devil and by usurpation.
Whereupon it follows, that in regard of the ministerial head of the Church,
he could not pretend to be less subject to error, then other bishops and
patriarchs, neither the latin Church less then those of Greece and others of
ye East. And so we return, notwtstanding their exception, to our former
conclusion: That the articles grounded upon the authority of the Pope and the
church of Rome are overthrown, and al their traditions and inventions subject
to the examination of the holy Scripture, as are the doctrines of all other
Churches.

That the Pope in affirming himself to be head of the Church, and not being
so in deed, is the Antichrist in the Church: and that he cannot be received
with any other, then the papistical doctrine. CHAP. IX.
THE Pope not being head of the Church, as he says he is, and having no other
titles to prove this general Lieutenant ship which he so proudly
exercises, we say that he is the plague of the whole body, a tyrant in the
common weal, and Antichrist in the church. And for to prove this, I will not
enter into the particular explication of those predictions, which are in
Daniel, Daniel.
in ye epistle to the Thessalonians, and in the Apocalypse, 2 Thessalonians. 2. Apoca.
which in times past were darckened, but now are made clear. For also many
learned men, not only of our time, but 300. years ago, have made those books
plain amiddest the ignorance of ye world, and cruelty of the Pope. But I
say, that although he were not so lively painted out unto us, as he is in
those foresaid places, yet his doctrine ought to make us know, that he is the
very Antichrist, with whom ye Church was threatened, and that there could not be
in Christendom any thing more pernicious then yt doctrine which he has
brought in.

First, to take away al doubt, the Scripture speaks unto us of many
Antichrists. For every heretic which sets himself against the truth, he
is in very deed an Antichrist: but it speaks unto us of one amongst others,
who shall have his seat in the Church of God, and shall usurp Gods place: who
as Origin says, Origin Homil. 30. in Matt.
must be ye great Antichrist among other Antichrists. This is he of whom we
have now to speak.

Secondly when ye Scripture speaks of Antichrist, it says, that it shall be an
Apostacy or a falling back from the faith. Also, that that mystery of
iniquity began to work in Paul his time, 2 Thessalonians. 2.
and that it should no otherwise be destroyed, but by the coming of Jesus
Christ. Apoca. 13.15.16.17.
Again, that he must build his greatness, upon the ruin of the Roman Empire,
and give life to that lost beast, that is to say, as all the ancient fathers
have expounded, to this Empire, and namely S. Augustine in the xx. book of the
city of God: Aug. lib. 20. de ciuitate Dei, cap. 19. Chrysostom. in epist. ad
These. Ho. 2.
and Chrysostom upon that place, where S. Paul handles this matter. And we
know that the Roman Empire fell by little and little, and piece by piece. It
follows then that Antichrist is not one man alone, which must come at one
instant of time, but is an estate, seat and succession of men, an Empire lifted
up against Jesus Christ: as we see the Scripture, under the name of certain
beasts, to describe Empires. And this also is the interpretation of S.
Augustine upon that place.

Thirdly, Antichrist is called that false prophet, vomiting out blasphemies
against the most highest. His Empire therefore consists in false doctrine,
and not in arms: he is called a woman and an whore: he shall therefore wind in
himself, and come in by pleasant ways, sleightes and flatteries, deceyuing
men through his craft, and drawing them to his spiritual whordome, which is
idolatry. He is also called the son of perdition, as Judas. Again, he shall
not assail the Church by open force, but he shall betray her with a kiss, and
shall not enter by the breach, or by a strong scaling ladder, but by
counterfaiting the keys by painted Emblemes, and secretly like a thief. And
in very deed the Empires which consisted in forces and arms, they are figured
in the scriptures under ye name of Wolves, Lions, Bears, and such other
ravening beasts, whereas for this, ye have but women, whoredoms, cups,
drinckings, enchantments, that is to say, deceipts, crafts, and subtilties:
whereupon the schoolmen themselves have concluded, that this chief
Antichrist, which is here described, can neither be Mahomet, nor the Empire of
the Turks.

Fourthly, he is properly called Antichrist, and not Antithee, yt is to say,
contrary to Christ the Mediator, and not simply against God: therefore
particularly he shall be against Christ Jesus our Lord. And all the doctrine of
Christ consists in the office of the Mediatorship, and in the benefit of his
death and passion. This then shall be the special doctrine that he will
chiefly labor to abolish. It is oftentimes said, that he shall sit in the
Church of God, being there acknowledged as God. Now it is certain, that if he
should say that he were Christ, or should preach directly against Christ, the
Church would not suffer this in the midst of her, nor suffer him to reign.
Apoc. 13.11. Mat. 7.15. 2. Cor. 11.14.
It is likewise said, That he shall have two horns like to the lamb,
speaking notvvithstanding as the Dragon, that is to say, he shall counterfaite
the doctrine and holiness of Christ, although he speak nothing but impieties,
as Satan does. It follows therefore, to make these marks to agree together,
that it must be that Antichrist, of whom now the controversy is, that he must
speak in show as Christ, but in deed and in effect against Christ, and
honoring him in words, and yet as much as lies in him, robbing him of his
glory. And that he is the true Antichrist, of whom the question is, who under
the shadow of Christ, shall overthrow his doctrine, and put him self in
Christ his place, Saint Augustine handling this matter, does no otherwise
understand it. August in Epist. John. tract. 3. and 6.
Let us not regard (says he) the tongue, but the deed: Antichrist is a liar,
which makes profession of Christ, and yet denies him in effect. And a little
after, How say thou that I deny him in effect? Because Christ (says he)
is come in the flesh, to the end that he should die for us. Chrysostom says,
Chrysostom. in Mat. Homil. 49.
That he must be known by his doctrine, and neither by titles, miracles, nor
words of holiness. Saint Hilary says, Hilar. ad Auxenti.
That Antichrist shall be contrary to Christ, under opinion of an hypocritical
and feigned godliness. And in another place, O ye fools, who are moved and
ravished, and caught in love with words, and gorgeous seelinges of Churches:
Do ye doubt, that this shall one day be the seat of Antichriste? It behooves
us now therefore to consider, who it is that sits in the Church, who
speaks more of Christ, and least esteems him, who more honors him with
traiterous kysses, and blasphemeth more against his coming, who in the chair
of Christ, is more against Christ: for this same undoubtedly is the true
Antichrist.

Let us begin at the person of the Pope. Christ has declared that his kingdom
was not of this world, The doctrine of the Pope, and the doctrine of Antichrist.
that he fled, when they would have made him a king, that he rendered
obedience even unto the least magistrates, and commanded all those that were
his, to do after his example. Contrariwise the Pope says, that he is king of
the whole earth, disposes of all Empyres, treads Emperors under his feet,
burns with fire, and condemns to hell all those that will not acknowledge
him for such a one. And all this, because Christ has said, Al power is given
to me of the father, as well in heaven as in earth: I ask of any one, what
similitude and likeness there is between these two, and if this be not, in
alleging Jesus Christ, to mock Christ himself? Again, Christ being God,
and the son of the eternal God, vouchsafed to abase himself lower then
Angels, and under men themselves to work the salvation of the world: and a
man quite contrary lyfteth up himself above kings, and above the Angels, and
above the heavens of heavens, and has caused men to dispute, that he is not
simply a man, but a partaker of the divine nature with Christ, and that he has
the fountain and root of the spirit of Christ in him. To be short, whereas
Christ submitted himself under heaven, earth and hell, he will command Kings,
Angels and devils: and all this, under color of the key of the word, which
Christ has delivered to his ministers. I ask, God being made man for the
salvation of the world, how it can be, that this man, which makes himself
God, should be any other, then that son of perdition, come for the perdition
of the world?

But we must see, how he has as much as lay in him, made void the coming of
the Messiah, the cross of Christ, and the salvation we have by the same. We
feel in our selves, that man continually does nothing but offend God, and
that it is as possible for us, of our own nature, to keep our selves
therefrom, as to stay our pulse, or to hold in the wind of our breath. These
offenses also are so infinite, being and blasphemeth more against his coming,
who in the chair of Christ, is more against Christ: for this same undoubtedly is
the true Antichrist.

Let us begin at the person of the Pope. Christ has declared that his kingdom
was not of this world, The doctrine of the Pope, and the doctrine of Antichrist.
that he fled, when they would have made him a king, that he rendered
obedience even unto the least magistrates, and commanded all those that were
his, to do after his example. Contrariwise the Pope says, that he is king of
the whole earth, disposes of all Empyres, treads Emperors under his feet,
burns with fire, and condemns to hell all those that will not acknowledge
him for such a one. And all this, because Christ has said, Al power is given
to me of the father, as well in heaven as in earth: I ask of any one, what
similitude and likeness there is between these two, and if this be not, in
alleging Jesus Christ, to mock Christ himself? Again, Christ being God,
and the son of the eternal God, vouchsafed to abase himself lower then
Angels, and under men themselves to work the salvation of the world: and a
man quite contrary lyfteth up himself above kings, and above the Angels, and
above the heavens of heavens, and has caused men to dispute, that he is not
simply a man, but a partaker of the divine nature with Christ, and that he has
the fountain and root of the spirit of Christ in him. To be short, whereas
Christ submitted himself under heaven, earth and hell, he will command Kings,
Angels and devils: and all this, under color of the key of the word, which
Christ has delivered to his ministers. I ask, God being made man for the
salvation of the world, how it can be, that this man, which makes himself
God, should be any other, then that son of perdition, come for the perdition
of the world?

But we must see, how he has as much as lay in him, made void the coming of
the Messiah, the cross of Christ, and the salvation we have by the same. We
feel in our selves, that man continually does nothing but offend God, and
that it is as possible for us, of our own nature, to keep our selves
therefrom, as to stay our pulse, or to hold in the wind of our breath. These
offenses also are so infinite, being committed against him which is infinite,
that they deserve an infinite punishment, whereto all the men in the world
together are not able to satisfy. It must needs be therefore, that the son
of God in person must descend from heaven, to satisfy by his infinite merit,
for our infinite demerites: and not one man could ever hope for the mercy of
the Father, if his justice had not been executed upon his own son. This is
that which all the holy Scripture teaches us, that Christ was sent for the
salvation of the world: that he is the only and alone Savior thereof: that
he was slain from the beginning of the world, for the salvation of those that
believe in him, etc. And this is it wherein consists all the benefit of the
coming of Christ, and all the treasure of the Church. But see how this good
governor of the Church dispenses with this: First of all he has buried the
scripture in forgetfulness, forbidding the readyng thereof unto the people,
leaving them nothing but Rosaires, Legends of Saints, and such other baggage,
that is to say, as much as lies in him, he has put out the light, to the end
that his illusions might be the more of force amiddest the darkness. And we
have seen many burned, only and simply for having read it. Moreover, whereas
the law was given to convince a man of sin, and the Gospel to teach him the
remedy in Christ, the Popes doctors have taught, that a man, as he is of his
own nature, can love God above all things: that it is possible for him to
fulfill the law: and that at the first, man was saved by keeping the natural
law, afterward by fulfylling the law of Moses, and now Christians by keeping
the Gospel. If it be so, what shall become of that S. Paul says, That the law
engenders sin: that it is come upon us, Galat. 3.19 Romans 3.20. and 5.2. and
7.7.
to multiply transgressions? etc. Also what shall the Gospel have above ye law?
Christ above the shadows? And wherefore shall not his coming change ye law
into grace? Now to turn away the people from their Physician, there is no
shorter and readier mean, then to persuade them that they are whole, or if
they felt in any sort their disease, that they might cure them selves without
any Physician. This is that, from whence are sprung these goodly pharisaicall
propositions: Fr. Asotus in Catholic. sidei assertione.
that all the act of charity, absolutely deserves everlasting life: that a
man may work his own salvation in this world, and these gay distinctions, de
congruo, and de condigno, of congruence, and condignitie, which altogether
destroy the coming of ye Messiah. And they have gone so far, that the more
devout sort bought the merits of Friars, and Monks, which they called works
of supererogation, that is to say, that these Friars had enough to merit
Paradise: so as a man might not only of himself be saved, but he might buy
his salvation by the works of another.

And yet notwithstanding all this, sin is in such sort engraven in man, that
it is felt in those that are most blockish, and therefore the most part seek
yet the Physician, and can never content themselves with it. But behold an
other craft of Antichrist, to abolish the coming of the Messiah: whereas they
should only be directed to Christ the only Physician for sinners, he
directs them to men, and by little and little (so well he acquiteth himself)
they are altogether directed to himself. Jesus Christ says unto all, Call
upon me. He stretches out his arms to every one, he preuenteth us with his
mercy, he draws us to him self, as it were by strong hand. In stead of
showing us him, the Pope sends us to the virgin Marie and to Saints, and to
their merits, as though all they together, in all their life, could deserve
any thing but death, or hope for any thing after their death but hell fire,
without the death of Jesus Christ our Lord. To this end, so shameless they
were in this kingdom of darkness, that they corrupted the first promise
which God made to our Fathers concerning Christ to come, Genes. ^.
which should bruise the head of the Serpent, transferring it to the virgin
Marie. Also they attributed and applied to her al yt which is spoken of the
Father and the Son in David's Psalter: In te domina speraui. Miserere mei
Domina. Dixit dominus dominae meae, Sede matter mea a dextris meis etc. In thee
have I trusted O Lady. Have mercy upon me, O Lady. The Lord has said to my
Lady, Sit, my mother, at my right hand etc. In such sort, that these
blasphemies, which they called, Our Ladies hours, were the chief devotion of
those that were most devout. How seeing the virgin Marie was put in Christ
his place, I ask what remained for him? And if for bringing forth a child,
she had accomplished the salvation of those that call upon her, why then, what
need was there that he should deliver himself to death for us? From the self
same root sprung the fourteen Saints, that we must call upon in the time of
our necessity, the patrones of each profession, the Physicians for every
disease, that we must woorship by vows, Pilgrimages and Offerings, and their
Images with censinges, payntings, and all kinds of woorshppinges, so that the
Church of Rome had gods, not as the Jewish Church had, Iere. 2.18.
according to the number of their Cities, but almost according to the number
of their citizens. Whereupon the salvation of the world was parted amongst so
many persons, that the world knew nothing of the only salvation (I say) of
him, who by his death had purchased life for us, to wit, of Jesus Christ our
Lord. To help sins which are the diseases of the soul, we had the merits
of Saints both quick and dead, whereof a great number (as Saint Augustine
says) is in hell, or at least were in danger to be there. For remedy against
dangers of the body, as sickenesses, losses, fire, shipwrackes, stripes,
wounds, prysons, we had Saints to look to every of these, as had the
Paynims, one only thing remained to our Sautour, That in the conclusion of
prayer, he was by custom named without any thinking upon him, as it were in
the style of a notarie. What shall we say more of the abominable impiety,
that the popedom had brought in amongst Christians: He found out for us a
Saint Frauncis, Flosculi beati Fra^cisci. Conformitates Fra^cisci. Vinea S.
Francisci. Thom. lib. 4. distinct. 4. articul. 3.
as it were a new Christ, of whom men have taught these opinions, both by
preaching and imprinted books set forth by their privilege: That he
could save all men that shall live after him to the end of the world, through
his merits, from everlasting death: That he that shall take the habit or
apparel of Saint Frauncis, Barnardinus in Rosario Floscuit beati Fra^cisci.
has the same virtue as to be clothed with Christ through Baptism: That to
die, or to be buried in his habit, delivers from the pains of purgatory.
To be short, co^paring Jesus Christ with him, they make him in all things far
inferior. And to the end women should not have less privilege then men,
they have taught that the virgin Marie, by the merit of her virginity, might
save all women that should put their trust in her, and that Saint Claire came
at the same time that Saint Frauncis did, to save all those that should call
upon her, to the end of the world. And what would have been ye end of these
blasphemies, if men had not resisted them? Do we think there would have been
any mention of Christ in our days: I do not tell you any fables. The books
that men made four hundred or five hundred years ago, are full of such like
doctrine, which hitherto they dare not disalowe. These were the readings of the
schools, and of the most notable chaires, when Luther began to reueyle
Antichrist. And yet further, behold the absolution they gave to their
penitentiaries: The passion of Christ, and the merits of the blessed virgin
Marie, of Saint Peter, of Saint Paul, and of other he Saints, and she
Saints of paradise, be unto thee in remission of thy sins: whereby the
Franciscane Friars do inseparably join Saint Frauncis with Jesus Christ. See
then how the Popes, contrary to the word of God, and uniform doctrine of
all the ancient Fathers, have taught the people, the remission of their sins
in Jesus Christ alone, and him crucified, who notwithstanding is so sufficient
for our salvation, that Saint Paul said, he neither knew, nor would know any
other thing.

But as the Pope and his supporters had turned away the people from Christ, to
the virgin Marie, and from the virgin Marie, to the Apostles, and from the
Apostles, to old Saints, and from the old Saints to new, whom they have
canonized according to their fantasy, and after to their Temples, Chapels,
Sepulchers, Bones, Relikes and Images: Finally, they have gone so far
astraye, that by little and little, he drew all to himself, and by process of
time, wholly put him self in the place of Jesus Christ our Lord. The blood of
Jesus Christ, shed upon the tree of the Cross, is the satisfaction for the
sins of all those that believe in him. This is the only mark of all the
old and new Testament. But the Pope, the contemner of all religion, bare the
world in hand, that he was the treasourer of this great ransom paid for
our sins: And that to be partaker thereof, we must come unto him: And he will
distribute this benefit to whom he thinks good. And thereupon every man
began to bye salvation of him, which the only blood of Jesus Christ had
purchased for us, and no other thing could purchase it. If thou had committed
all the faults in the world, thou might have had recourse to the Popes
pardones and indulgences. All offenses, even to murders, incestes,
Sodomitries, were taxed, and set at a certain sum of money, and paying that,
the Pope would give you full remission thereof. This pardon was ratified and
delivered to him that would give most, and the book of taxes does confirm it,
which was imprinted by their own consent, before the light of the Gospel was
made clear again in these last ages. These indulgences they sold first to
certain persons, and after to families, and afterward to towns: And after,
they were sold to common wealths and whole kingdoms, without exception of any
persons, yea, for the term of four thousand years of true pardon. The
doctrine of Christ was: He that shall believe in me, shall have remission of
sins. That of the Popes: He that shall give me money, there shall be no
hell for him. If he had any enemy, he sent him to hell bound hand and foot,
yea, whole kingdoms and nations. If you desired paradise, he commanded the
Angels to carry you thither, and all your parents and friends, Bulla
Clementis quae exat Viennae.
as appears by the Bull of Clement the fifth, for the knights of the order of
S. John at Jerusalem. If any feared purgatory, having committed all the
mischiefs in the world, yea having lien with the virgin Marie, as the
preachers of the pardons in Germany say, as soon as one has cast silver into
the basen, their souls were by and by set at liberty therefro^. Tikelius
indulgentiarius in libello.
Yea they came so far, and the books of ye Popes doctors do seal it, that
one disputed in the schools, that the Pope had power utterly to abolish, and
to quench the fire of purgatory: yea more: that the Pope was more merciful
then Jesus Christ, seeing we read not in the scripture, yt he delivered any
person from the pains of purgatory, whereas the Pope through his mercy,
delivers every day an infinite number out of it. They that yet cleave unto
him, if they read this, they will wonder and hardly be brought to believe
this, because that after Antichrist was opened to the world, he has
endeavored to hyde his horns. Eras. in epist. ad Timot. cap. 1.
But the learned have read and may read, and those that are aged have seen,
and the books are yet extant and in use, that every one may see. Yea, but
some will say, In the midst of Popery men have always believed the true
God, and they have always taught that Jesus Christ is God, the eternal son
of God, and the doctrine of the Trinity was always amongst them entire and
sound etc. Ha, I pray you what avails it a sinner to know that there is one
God a ryghteous judge, but always to feel a hell: And what shall it avail him
that knows that Christ the son of God, came into the world to convince it
of sin, unless he know likewise, that through his death he has delivered
all those that believe in him from everlasting death, and that he has overcome
the Devil and abolished hell for him: The only end of the coming of Christ,
was the office of the mediatourship betwixt Gods righteousness and men's
sins. And he that takes to him self, or transferreth to any other, the
office of this mediation, he abolisheth the coming of Christ. Now I demand
who this is, but he that is crowned with the triple crown, worshipped of Kings
and Princes, that opens heaven, and shuts hell, that kyndleth, and
quenches purgatory as he thinks good: But let us go further. Jesus Christ
has left unto us two Sacraments, for the badges and marks of his. The Pope
will have his Sacraments and marks apart and by himself, and in greater
number. And to the end that his may be more esteemed then Christ's, he has
profaned them with all kind of prophanations. We hold baptism as an
entrance into the covenant of God. Thomas lib. 4. distinct. 4. Artic. ^.
Barnard. in Rosario.
He has applied it to Belles in mockery, and has enwrapped it with infinite
superstitions. But which is more, to advance himself above Christ, he has
taught by his Doctors, that the same grace which descends upon him that is
baptized, descends also upon him which takes a monks habit. That this
habit gives him full remission both from the trespass and punishment of all his
former sins, which is more then that of original sin: and that so often,
as there comes unto him, but an instinct or purpose always to continue in
this habit, it is to him as a new baptism. Concerning the supper, which is
the communion of the body and blood of Christ, he has taken the one half from
the people, contrary to ye express institution of Christ, and the continual
usage of the Church, for the space of a thousand years: He has taught that he
may change and abolishe the Sacraments of Christ, and institute new, and he
has turned the Supper of our Lord into such abominable idolatry, as amongst
the Painims and Heathen was never seen the like. After new mediators, a new
Christ, new Sacraments, what remains there further, but a new Gospel? Euang.
Cyril. Anno. 1192.
Now about the year one thousand, one hundred, nynetie and two, they made a
new Gospel, under the name of a Carmelite named Cyrillus, by the which they
taught, That God the father governed in the time of the law, and the Son in
the time of grace: but now by ye coming of the four orders of mendicants or
begging friars, the holy Ghost began to reign, and should reign til ye end of
ye world, and that they only which believed this new Gospel, should be
saved. And had not the LORD by his infinite mercy, stirred up the Waldenses
and certain other good people to resist this monster, no doubt there had not
bin any more mention of Christ in the world. I omit a thousand other false
doctrines, which men may read else where, only contenting my self, to have
showed that the Pope has turned Christians away from Christ, as much as he
could for his life, and abolished the fruit of his coming, which is the
proper and peculiar office of Antichrist. Now if so be it the Christian Church
be not otherwise joined with Christ, then by his office of mediation, as the
body is to the head by the neck, what could Antichrist do more, then to take
the Church by the throat, and strangle it? Concerning ye Jews and ye Turks,
whereof the one sort for having bin so long without Prophets, and the other for
the ridiculous and foolish doctrine of their Alcoran, might have been converted
to ye true Christ: they have seen such impiety in Popes, and in their courts:
such contempt of religion among them of their own coat, and such outrageous
Idolatry amongst Christians, that both the one and the other, among whom
nothing is more expressly forbidden, then Idolatry, have had thereby
Christian religion in great detestation, and one sort of the^ be stiff in
Iudaisme, and the other persuade the^ selves, yt all religion is nothing else
but an instrument of policy. I ask then for conclusion, for what worse we
should look from Antichrist, the^ to make Christ unprofitable to Christians,
and abominable to Jews and Painims? shall we wait til he preach Atheism,
and godlesnesse in Temples? yea, but they which see but the sun and moon,
and the order of all things, will spit in his face. What then? till he preach
the gods of the Romans? And what difference shall we make between the worship
of Castor and Pollux, and that of Saint Ratherin and of Saint Nicholas, seeing
that both the one and the other, makes us quite to forget our salvation? And
forasmuch as he has left preaching in the Temple, of which it must needs be
yt he took possession: it follows therefore yt the Pope, and none other is
Antichrist, who under ye name of Christ, has spoiled Christ of his place.

Now add unto his doctrine, August. (...) ciuitate (...). lib. 18. cap. 2.
Hierorym. ad Marcellam in praefat. lib. de sancto spir^tu. Card. Cusa^. lib. 2.
cap. vltimo.
which is the essential mark, the circumstances of persons, Simoniakes,
Magicians, Atheists, whoremasters and Sodomites: of the place where Antichrist
should be, to wit, in ye city with seven hills, described in the Apocalypse,
of the times of six hundredth sixty six, which falls out justly to the time
that the Pope made himself to be acknowledged for universal Bishop, exempt
from the subjection of any other, and there can remain no more doubt, yt this
should not be he.

That the Pope is Antichrist even by ye ancient fathers.
Now if any man would yet demand testimonies of the ancient fathers from
time to time, first we have this, that all the doctrine of the old Church, is
expressly contrary to the doctrine of the Popes, which we have before
mentioned, they not being able any manner of way, to stay or settle them
selves thereon. And concerning the marks, although they spoke of them afar
of, yet they draw so nigh thereto, that those which they deliver unto us, to
know him by, cannot be understood of any other then of him alone.

Saint Irenee, Ireneus lib. 3.
who is a most ancient doctor of the Church, the scholar of Polycarpe, and
Polycarpe of Saint John, who wrote the Apocalypse, disputing of Antichrist,
saw him no where else, but in the City of Rome, and in the Romish Church.
For namely (he says) that the latin Church should be his seat, and that he
proves after the opinion of his predecessors by the number of 666. mentioned
in the Apocalypse, Apoca. 13.
which was found in these words ((...)) and ((...)) that is to say, latin,
and the latin Church. I allege not this to play the Cabalist upon letters,
but to show that then they saw, that this monster must be borne at Rome, which
we see at this day through the special grace of GOD, to decay and totter.
Saint Chrysostom upon the Epistle to the Thessalonians: Toward the declyning
or decaying (says he) of the Roman Empire, Chrysostom. in epist. ad Thessalo.
hom. 2.
Antichrist shall come, and not without cause. For this Empire being so
renoumed, none will easily be subject unto it. But this being destroyed, he
shall invade the power of the Empire being void, and shall take it to him
self, in so much as he will take upon him the Empire both of God and men: For
as all kingdoms which were before the Roman Empire, were destroyed: even so
shall the kingdom of the Romans be destroyed by Antichrist, and he by Christ,
and after that he shall have no more power. Homil. 49. in Mat. cap. 24.
The same teaches, that he shall come under the visard of holiness, and of
miracles, of superstitions, and counterfeit godliness. Now I report me to all
that have read histories, if the Pope have not grown and come to it, by the
ruin of the Roman Empire, and if it were by any other way, then feigned
religion. Saint Hylary: Take heed (says he) of Antichrist. Hylarius ad
Auxentium.
It is a vilennie, that you should be so mad at the walls. You abuse your
selves in reuerencing goodly buyldyngs, for the Church of God: For that is the
place where Antichrist shall have his seat. It must not therefore be, that we
search for him, as some suppose, amongst the Barbarous, but in the most clear
and manifest place of the visible Church. Hieronymus in prefat. lib. De sancto
spiritu.
Saint Hierome the Minister writing unto Marcella: This Babylon (says he) and
this whore clothed with Purple, which is painted forth unto us in the
Apocalypse, can signify no other thing unto us, but Rome: and he repeateth the
same in the life of Saint Mark: and Cusan the Cardinal adds: Cusan Card.
lib. 2. de co^cordia Catholica. cap. vltimo. August. lib. 18. De Ciuitate dei.
ca. 2. and lib. 20. cap. 19.
That Bid and all the ancient interpreters have so expounded it. Saint
Augustine: Babylon is the first Rome, and Rome the second Babylon. Also,
expou^ding that place of Saint Paul in the second to the Thessalonians:
Antichrist shall come toward the ending of the Roman Empire, and he shall
not be a prince or one man alone, but a multitude of men are belonging unto
him, who together with him shall be called Antichrist, and he shall sit in the
Temple of God, as though he and his were the Church of God it self. Idem lib.
de Antichristo.
And in another place: He shall renew Idolatry, he shall scatter the doctrine
of the Gospel, and to this end he shall keep Magicians, Coniurers, and
Enchauntters, etc. Now every one knows the false miracles, wherewith he has
abused ye people, to lead them away from Christ. And he that will see how many
of the Popes came to their popedom by magic and sorcerie, that is to say,
how they were created by the devil, and no more successors of Peter, but of
Simon the Magician: Let them read that which their own story writers have
written thereof: as Cardinal Benno, In vitis Gregorij 7. Ioannis 19. and
Syluest. 2. etc.
Peter ye Praemonstratensis.
Monk, Volateran, Sabellicus and Platina, which I willingly omit, least I
make the readers quake for horror of such wickedness. Saint Gregory Bishop of
Rome, as he was more near unto it then others, so has he spoken thereof more
clearly then those that went before him. Let it not seem a light thing
(says he) unto thee, Gregor. lib. 16. Epist. 30. ad Mauritiu^ Imperatore^.
that Antichrist shall auouche himself to be God: For I say confidentlye and
boldly unto you, that whosoever shall call himself universal Bishop or
Minister, and will be so called, he is the very foreru^ner of Antichrist. Item
Epist. 78. lib. 4. and Epist. 83. etc.
In other places he says, That he is Lucifer, which aduaunceth himself above
Angels, and will set himself at the right hand of God: That this is to
bring to ruin the whole Church etc. Now he spoke this the more frankely,
because it was at that time that the Bishop of Constantinople attributed unto
himself that title. But behold that a little after his death, his universal
foretelling was accomplished in the person of Pope Boniface the third, his
successor, who, to accomplish that, that the Spirit of God had foretold us
by his Apostles, does so much prevail by his threatninges, that he obtayneth
that title of Phocas the Emperor, the murderer of Mauritius and his children,
and the Popes following, have builded thereupon always after. Against this
open Apostasy, then all the Churches of Greece, Dace, Illyricum etc. did
oppose themselves, even to the accusing of Pope Symmachus before Theodoricus
the king of the Goths, for that he vaunted himself not to be subject to the
reprehension of any. Spain and England also were a long time without
receiving the legates of Rome. One Claudius Bishop of Thurine, in the time of
Charles the great, wrote very learnedly against the Popes Supremacy, and
against his doctrine: yea, about the reygne of Hugh Capet, Concilium Rhemense
sub Capeto.
there was a Council held at Rheims, which denied unto him al obedience, and
pronounced him to be Antichrist. But finally, as it was bredde of the
superfluous and evil humors of the Church, so it was skillful to nourishe it
self of the factions, enmities and divisions of Christendom, that one in
despite of other, have suffered all to go to wrack.

Bernard in Cantic. Cantic. sermon. 33. and 77. In all his Epistles to Henry the
Bishop of Sons.
Now if we shall read that which Saint Bernard wrote of the state of the
Church in his time, about the year of our Lord 1140. as well in his Epistles,
as in his books of considerations to Pope Eugenius, they are nothing but
lamentations of the ruin of the Church, like to those of Jeremy, of the
Church under the captivity of Babylon, or thundringes against ye tyranny of
Antichrist, who showed him self in his time. He says, That the Popes Court
is a park of devils: That they usurp an unlawful and an intolerable
authority: That there was not any more show of Peter's succession: That the
Bishops of his time, were marchantes enriched with the riches of the whore:
That in stead of keeping the spouse of Christ, they made port sale of her, and
prostituted and laid her open to all the lechers of the world, to commit
fornication with her. And a little after, having said upon the 91. Psalm,
Item super Psalm. 91.
That Antichrist shall have his seat in the South part, he adds: What
differs then the estate of our Church, from that same pestilent estate which
walks in darkness? What differs it more from the seat of Antichrist?
Therefore yours (says he) is in very deed the state of Antichrist. He made
three express Satyrs against the Pope and court of Rome: and he that would
allege all that is written to that end, he must here put in his whole books.
Now after the manifest Apostasy and falling away of the popedom, the Church
of Rome has not brought forth so excellent a man as he was.

Francis Petrarcha in Epist. Epist. 5.14.17.18.19. etc.
Frauncis Petrarch the Archdeacon of Parma, and a Chanon of Padua, lived about
the year 1350. whom we may call, in all kind of good learning, The light of
his age. But I will not say how he decifreth out ye court of Rome in his
Sonets, under ye name of Babylon, calling it whore, the school of error, and
the Temple of heresy: for some will say, that much is permitted to poetry:
but I beseech the readers to read his latin Epistles, which are full of
gravity, zeal and doctrine. He says there in plain terms, That in the Pope
and his shauelings, there is neither faith, godliness nor truth: That the
Popes chair, is the chair of lying: That this is a falling away of a people,
which under the banner of Christ rebel against Christ, and fight for Satan:
That they esteem the Gospel but for fables, and the promises of the life to
come, for dreams. He compares the Pope to Judas, who betrayed Jesus Christ
with a kiss: and his clergy to the Jews, which said unto him, Aue Rex
Iudaeoru^, Al hail king of the Jews: his prelates to the Pharisees, who in
mockerye clothed him with purple, and afterward crucified him in the mount of
Caluery. And after he says: Deny it now if thou can, that thou art she
which the holy Evangelist John saw in the spirit, set down upon the great
waters. Thou art, and none other, that Babylon, the mother of the whoredoms of
the earth: Thou art drunken with the blood of the Martyrs of Jesus. Thou art
she which have made all the kings of the earth dru^ken with the Cup of thy
poison. If thou deny it, show us some other, to whom these things may better
agree: If thou can not, then wait for that to fall upon thine own head,
which John the Evangelist adds a little after: She is fallen, Babylon the
great, and is made an habitation of devils etc. But what do I say, Wayt for it?
Yea: thou have it already. For how much better is the son of perdition, then
the devil? Thou art in very deed a kingdom of devils, which reign in the
midst of thee in man's shape. And in another place, Let it not (my friend) ever
grieve thee, to return from these princes of darkness. And in deed, what
would thou see in the Court of Rome? Christ in exile? Antichrist reigning
in his stead? Beelzebub the judge? Woolues let loose? The Lambs in the
stocks? Ah good God, who shall deliver the world from this oppression? Who
shall gather together the sheep? Who shall vanquishe these wicked Pastors?
Shall there never be a limitation and end of this intolerable mischief? Now
when there was such that durst cry so loud, we may be sure, that there were
many more that lamented in their hearts. To be short, the most notable spirits
that the world brought forth, in the most ignorant ages, and in the greatest
thicknes of darkness, they perceived this, some more clearly, and others as it
were through a cloud, unless it were some such as ambition and glory of the
world had blinded: Insomuch that when abomination was come to his full top,
God raised up John Hus, Hierome of Prage, Wickliefe, Luther and others, which
have so lowdly published and proclaimed it, that all the world does understand
it. And what will we more: With leave of those good Fathers of the Council not
long ago holden at Trent, we may make this Syllogism.

Whosoever will be called the universal Bishop, he is the forerunner of
Antichrist, the father of the son of pride, and a very Lucifer, says Saint
Gregory ye Pope, and principal Doctor of the Church of Rome.

But Boniface the third his successor, took this title, they which followed
him, have continued it, and have increased it more and more. And the Council
of Trent excommunicateth all those, that will not acknowledge him for
universal Bishop.

Ergo the Pope is Antichrist, and al they are holden for excommunicate by the
Council of Trent, that do not acknowledge him for Antichrist.

Yea, but the clergy of Rome will say, If the Pope were the Antichrist, whereof
the Church was before threatened, we which are the Church, should have known
him. Contrariwise, I say unto you, that if you had known him for Antichrist,
he had not been Antichrist. This is that which the Pharisees said when Christ
came: If this were Christ, who should know him better then we: We have the
Church, we have the Scriptures: we are the interpreters thereof: We are the eyes
of the people: It cannot escape us, that we should not know it. And yet in
mean time the counsel of Jerusalem condemned and crucified the Messiah for a
deceiuer, and the great Rabbis and Masters, with an infinite number of the
people, a little while after, followed yt same miserable Barcosba to ruin and
destruction, and acknowledged him for the true Messiah. To ye end (says our
savior) that the word of Isai the Prophet might be fulfilled: Isai. 53.10.
Isai. 6.9. Ioh. 12.40.
Who has believed our word? and to whom has thine arm been manifested? They
have eyes but they see not. They have ears but they understand not. The Lord
has blinded their eyes, and hardened their heart etc. And now I say unto you,
that the self same is come upon you, upon you (I say) who boast of the name of
the Church, in the knowledge of Antichrist. For he is come with all the signs
and wonders, that the spirit of God has foreshewed unto us, in ye same place,
at the same time, by ye same way, and in the same apparel. There is nothing
that does not agree unto him, neither that can agree to any other, but to him.
In mean time the Church, that is to say, the Roman clergy, have received him
for their Spouse. The Council of Trent have declared him to be God in earth,
excommunicating al those yt will not cleave unto him: and the princes of the
earth have lent him their arms to persecute, and to murder those who would
make him known to the world. And wherefore? Because this word of God must be
fulfilled, which he has spoken by the mouth of his Apostles: 2. These. 2.
Apoca. 14. and. 18.
He shall sit in the Temple of God, boasting himself as if he were God. He
shall make dru^k all the kings of the earth. He shall abuse and deceive all the
world, because they have not loved ye truth. God shall give the^ up into a
strong illusion, to the end they may believe lies. And even like as the Cou^cil
of Jerusalem condemned Christ, so the Cou^cil of Trent have approved
Antichrist. The clergy crucified salvation it self: and the clergy has
adored their perdition. The great doctors of the law were therein blind,
because Christ showed them a spiritual kingdom, in stead of the temporal
that they waited for: And ye prelates of ye Romish Church have taken pleasure
to shut their eyes, because Antichrist has brought them a temporal
kingdom, wherein they intend to dwell. But notwithstanding death, the cross,
and the conspiracies of all the world, the spiritual kingdom of Christ was
victorious over all the kingdoms of the earth. And notwithstanding the
temporal kingdom of Antichrist, and all his adorations, and conspiracies of
al ye kings and princes of this world, which labor to uphold him, it must
needs be, that he be destroyed by the breath of Christ his mouth, and that he
fall, and utterly perish.

What became of our fathers
They demand hereupon, What then became of our fathers, after so long time
that this tyranny of Antichrist came into the Church? Of the great Rabbis and
masters who ask this question, I ask them what they have done therein, of
them, I say, who had their souls in keeping, and who had taken charge, and who
knew well how to heap up great riches, and to build them gaye houses? I ask
also again of them, what became of the poor people of all the East Churches,
who were far greater then the Latins, whom the Pope by his excommunications
sent to hell by whole millions, for the space of six or 700 years after that?
To be short, I may send the^ to that which our Savior says, that when the
Son of man shall come to destroy Antichrist by the Spirit of his mouth, it
shall be as the days of Noah, or of Lot in Sodom, that there shall be no more,
neither faith nor love in the world. But to the poor people who have been
deceived by Antichrist and his mayntayners, I answer after another sort.

First, that this false doctrine of Antichrist, came not in all at once, but
increased by little and little, till it grew to his full measure and heap, so
as it was not so deadly in the beginning, as toward the end thereof when it
came to his strength. But when it was most strong, and in the greatest ruff,
God always reserved many in all countries, which mourned under his tyranny,
yea and some also that cried out as loud as they could, by their wrytynges,
as we have already showed. And in deed xxv. years ago, one would have said
that there was not so much, as one to be had in France which knew Antichriste,
and his doctrine. And yet notwithstanding, at the first liberty which was
granted to the towns, they were found very full of such people.

Secondly, as our adversaries make a difference between the Church and the
people, snatching the name of the Church only to the prelates, which should be
common to all Christians: so we likewise do well put a difference, between the
people cleauyng to the Church of Rome, and the faction of Antichriste,
between them who live under the popedom, and the vpholders and maintayners of
the Pope: between the enchanters, and those that are enchanted: between the
Pharisees, whom Christ calls generation of vipers, and that poor sick
woman, whom he yet called the daughter of Abraham. We say that among that
poor people, which was so long time deceived under the darkness of
Antichriste, there was a part of the body of the visible Church: But that the
Pope and his mainteyners are the bane of it, which styfleth and choketh these
poor people, as much as lies in it. We say that this was the Church of
Christ, but that Antichriste held it by the throat, to the end that that
salvation and life which flows from Christ, might not be powered upon it:
That it was a flock of Christ, but governed partly by hyrelings, and partly by
woolues. In the people we consider ye members of ye universal church: but in
the scabbes and infections which do hide them, we mark the poison of the
papacy: and in their buddes, the whoredoms that the church of Rome has
committed with Antichriste. To be short, we say that the people were of the
Christian common weal: but the Pope with his faction, a proud seditious
Catiline, to destroy and to set it on fire: whom Cicero very well calls a
plague, and not a member of the common weal. And in deed, as of evil diet,
and superfluity there is engendered in ma^s body an impostume, (which yet
notwithstanding is not the body, nor any part of the body, but a disease, and
very oftentimes the death of the body) even so, says Salust, that of the
superfluity of the common weal, Catiline was bred: even so we say that of
the delights, superfluities, and idleness of the Church of Rome, Antichriste
is bredde in it, who yet is neither the Church nor any part of the Church, but
is the disease and pestilence it self of the Church, which had so infected and
festered the whole body, that there appeared no more health nor soundness
therein, and had bin altogether the death of the body, had not God of his
singular mercy opened the same unto us.

Thirdly, we say that this empoysoner with his accomplices, has cast into the
fountain of life, that is to say, into the doctrine of salvation in Jesus
Christ, all the poison he could devise, and that he has infected with his
venime, the most dainty meats which God had given for the nourishment of his
people. But that GOD has given grace to some to abstain from it, to some in
time to vomit it up again, to others to mingle it with the meat, and to
certain to overcome it by the soundnes of their complexion: in such sort that
many have daily escaped it, notwithstanding his accursed intention and purpose.
For example, we know that the most part of the people have been ignorant of
those mischievous doctrines, which the schoolmen have left by writing, that is
to say, of the principal blasphemies of the papacy. Also, that the more part
have never believed, that they could merit everlasting life by their own
works, whatsoever men preached unto them thereof. Again, albeit that through
custom and ignorance they went to Saints and Images, and frequented Masses and
pylgrimages: yet notwithstanding, in their conflictes of death, they always
principally claue to the Cross of Jesus Christ, and all the Franciscans
preaching in their ears, the habit and vanishing toys of S. Frauncis, could
not pull it away from them. In vita Bernard. lib. 1. cap. 12 and lib. 5. cap.
2. in epist. quam scripserat ante morte^ ad Arnold. Idem sermon. 61. in Ca^tica.
We have an example in S. Bernard himself, and we have seen many more in our
time. S. Bernard in certain places sauoureth of the contagion of his time, as
it was hard he should do otherwise. But see his refuge when he was tempted of
the Devil, in his last days. I confess (says he) that I am not worthy of
it. I know that I cannot by mine own works obtain the kingdom of heaven.
But my Lord has obtained it by a double right, by inheritance from the Father,
and by the merit of his passion. Now he is contented with the one, and
gives me the other. And when I attribute it to my self, by the gift which
he has made unto me thereof, I cannot be confounded. And in another place: My
merit is the mercy of the Lord. And I am not poor in merits, because he is
rich in his mercies. I have greatly sinned, but I will comfort my self in
the stripes of my Lord. Even so likewise we assure our selves in the mercy of
God, that a great number held ye foundation in Jesus Christ, 1. Cor. 3.
whereof the Apostle speaks, albeit Antichrist shook it, and as it were,
endeavored to ouerturne it in the^, all yt he might.

Finally, we say with S. Cyprian, That if my predecessors, Cypr. lib. 2. epist.
3.
either by ignorance or by simplicity, (holding notvvithstanding the
foundation) have not kept and holden that which our Lord has taught them by
his example and authority, (as it is most certain they did not) that the
mercy of our Lord might pardon the^. But as this good Doctor adds: That we
cannot hope for the like, being admonished at this day, and instructed by him.
But this matter shall be for the chapter following.

That every one is bound to separate himself from the Communion of Antichrist,
and that the Romanists are Schismatikes, and not they which separate themselves
from them. CHAP. X.
THe matters being as we have before proved, there shall be no great need now
that we render a reason for that we have withdrawn our selves from the
communion of ye Pope, Fugite idola 1. John. 5.
and from those false worshippes, which he has foysted into the Church. For
seeing that he is Antichrist, of whom ye Church is warned and threatened, and
his synagogue is yt same Babylon of idolatry, Apoc. 14.9. and 18.3.
out of which we have an express co^ma^deme^t to come, if we will not be
partakers of her sins and plagues, and drink of the cup of ye wrath of God,
which is prepared for her, we should be justly charged with a very vile and
abominable fault, if we should use our selves otherwise. And in deed, if it
were lawful for the true citizens of Rome, the city being under the power of
the Gauls, to retire themselves into the little town of Veies with Camillus,
and if all the auncientes have judged that then the common weal was at Veies,
albeit the walls were still about Rome: by a stronger reason we ought to
retire from the Temple which Antichrist has invaded, and profaned with so
many pollutions, not being able at the first dashe to drive him away: so that
having gathered together the true servant and champions of Jesus Christ from
under his claws, we shall by the grace of God be strong enough, to drive him
from thence, and there to place again the true service of God. And if he be to
be holden for a traitor, and to be accounted guyltie of hie treason, that
follows the army and ensign of a Vicegerent or general Lieutenant, which
is revolted from his Prince, much more should we be traitors against the
honor of our God, and to him who has vouchsafed to save us by his own blood,
if we should fight against him under Antichrist, who has invaded his place:
and should any manner of way take his part, yea seeing that it is a false
title, and they are false ensigns that he usurps of general lieutenantship,
he being nothing more in Christendom, then the least Bishops. But
notwithstanding, to satisfy all the doubts that may arise about this matter,
I am content to handle it more largely.

When it pleased God to give us grace to know the false Commission of the Pope,
by virtue whereof he made himself head of the Church, and that by examination
as well of his doctrine, as of those marks which he ought to have, we found
evidently, that this is the Antichrist, and none other: they, who were called
to preach the truth, have preached in the Church, they which had charge to
teach, have declared and published it by books, and many to whom God gave
zeal and courage, have protested it alowde and clearly, even amiddest the
flaming fire. Some have showed it to the people and commonweals. Some cried
it out in the ears of princes. Some have offered to verify the impiety of
his doctrine in a free general Council. In Concilio Constantiensi.
In the Council, in stead of disputing by the holy Scriptures, they have
refused the Scriptures: in stead of hearkening to their quick reasons,
according to faith, they have burned them quick against the faith. And to the
end, they should never have occasion to hope for a free Council, and should
not dare under the safe conduits of any to come thither, they have passed
therein an article, That faith and promise is not to be kept with heretics.
Afterward all this notwithstanding, we have always required a free Council,
where they have condemned us without ever calling for us. Some have answered us
for all: That these were matters done long ago, whereof we should not speak
any more. They have cut us quite of from the Church of Rome, and have proceeded
against us by fire and faggot, by the sword, by wars, and by massacres and
cruel murders. Finally, we see that they will give no place to our word, yt
they will not give us audience in a Council, that they excommunicate and chase
us from the Church of Rome. Therefore following the example of the Apostles,
when they were excommunicated from the Jewish synagogue for having preached
Christ: we have begun to gather our selves together to serve the Lord, first
secretly and in corners, and afterward more freely: and neither can we
communicate with those Idolatries brought in by Antichrist, nor at the first
dash drive him from his seat, for that the Princes of the earth with their
power uphold him: and therefore we are enforced to deliver our selves, and all
those that will hearken unto us, from his servitude and bondage. Now I ask,
what our adversaries can find fault with in this our doing, either in the
matter it self, or in the manner of our proceeding? If they look upon the
matter, we separa^t our selves not for light matters, but for manifest
idolatry, for making void the cross of Christ, for perdition, which reigns
in the place of salvation. To be short, we withdraw our selves from this prince
of confusion, who is revolted back against our Lord. And we report us even to
their own judgment, whether they think it not lawful to separate our selves
from the communion of Antichrist, sitting in ye chair of Jesus Christ. For if
every one wynke thereat, who shall discover him? and if every one cleave unto
him, who shall chase him away? and if all the world hold their peace, where is
the spirit of the mouth of the Lord which shall destroy him? Now if they shall
deny yt he is Antichrist, we will submit our selves to prove it, and then there
is no question of our separation, but of our doctrine. If they will reprove us
for the manner of our proceeding, therein condemning us, they condemn the
Apostles, who having ouerrunne all Israel, ran into a thousand dangers, to the
end they might make Christ to be received into his own house, and in the
midst of the temple: and finally, perceiving themselves to be stopped every
way by open force, by exco^munications, imprisonments, etc. they received him
secretly into their private houses, and did preach him in small assemblies,
till at last they brought all the world into his subjection. But
notwithstanding this, they cry out, that we have broken the Communion of the
Church: that we have set altar against altar: that we are Schismatikes, etc.
which were the outcries of the Pharisees against the Apostles, You violate the
Temple, the altar, the law, etc. And hereupon kings and nations have armed
themselves on all sides against us. This therefore is the thing that we must
presently make answer unto.

The Communion of the Church.
First, the Communion of the Church does not consist in a local union, neither
the separation, in removing of places: For there are a great many without, if
we look to the place, who yet are within according to charity, and many
again in place, that yet if we consider faith, are without: but the true
Christian Communion consists in the union of faith, and in the union of
charity, which S. Augustine calls the nerenesse, or rather the
neyghbourhoode and dwelling together (as I may say) of hearts, and agreement in
doctrine: and the true separation, in the diversity or contrarietis of the
self same things. Now concerning the union of faith, it consists in that
heavenly doctrine, which is comprehended unto us in the old and new Testament,
tending only to this point, to make us feel our sin, and to show us a
remedy therefore, in one only Jesus Christ crucified. And this is that, for
which, according to the example of all the ancient servants of God, we suffer
and are killed, and for withdrawing our selves from under the yoke of
Antichrist, that shamefully treads it under his feet, we are persecuted,
excommunicated, and murdered. We are therefore united in the faith, with the
Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, Martyrs, ancient Doctors, and generally with
the whole Church that was before the law, under the law, and under Grace, yea
and under the tyranny of Antichrist. If they will deny it, we will submit
our selves to prove it: There is not therefore any more question to cavil at
our separation, which is nothing else but as an escape, to the end to resort
to true doctrine: and if they confess it, denying us to be united with them,
they confess then, that they are not united with the ancient fathers, and
therefore they ought not to think it strange, that we renounce the communion
of the Papacy.

Concerning the Communion of charity or love, which consists in suffering
and bearing the euilles one of another, and in not lightly condemning one
another: we hold all them for the true members of Christ, which worship one
God in spirit and in truth, and hope for their salvation in one Jesus Christ
alone, the son of God come in the flesh, and crucified for the sins of the
world, which is the foundation of salvation to all men. We desire all union
and agreement with them, in whatsoever countries and regions they are, and
whatsoever corruptions may be yet remaining amongst them, not only in manner,
but also in certain points of doctrine, bewayling the bodyly servitude which
they endure, and praying the Father of light, that it will please him to
enlighten them more and more by his holy spirit. Contrary wise every man
knows, that the Popes Consistory has excommunicated all the East Churches,
600 years agone, only for this, that they would not submit themselves to the
Bishop of Rome, which is an article that concerns only but his ambition,
and that the Pope has left them to be invaded of the Turk, in despite whereof
they had rather endure all extremity, then to acknowledge him to be head of
the Church. And concerning the union of charity amongst them which yet cleave
to the Pope, there is nothing more dear unto them, then their own lives, and
we have been put to the fire, water and sword, for opening the truth unto
them, and praying God every day, that he will enlighten them by his spirit. On
the other side, the Romish Consistory does pursue us by all means to death, and
that by the space of these three score years and more, and so many people
continually groaning for a free general Council, they have not had only so
much charity, as to grant us either general or national, to deliver us from
the error they pretend us to be in, answering for all (and that to so many
princes, who have judged it necessary) That these matters are already decided,
and ought not any more to come in question. this is every way a frivolous
answer, as we have showed before. But I demand, what Parliament is it, yea
even amongst the heathen, so barbarous, and so far from humanity, which for
the agreeing of two persons only, would refuse to handle again a process,
whereof there had been a determinate sentence given by the Parliament before?
This therefore is in ye Romish Co^sistory, where there is manifest doubt of
their doctrine, or else foul and shameful lack of charity, and that in such
a wayghtie case, as concerns the salvation of the more part of Christendom.
To be short, we agree and are knitte together in the doctrine of the Bible,
with all Christians, but we reject the pestilent gloses and traditions of the
Pope: we have been willing brotherly to communicate the truth to our brethren,
with the danger of our life, in the midst of their Churches: and contrariwise
the Pope, in stead of hearkening unto us, fearing to be discovered, has
excommunicated, chased and driven us out. It is therefore the Pope and his
greasy ones, which have broken the Communion of the universal Church, and not
we, who to keep us in, are ready to submit our selves to al reason, and to
abide all dangers. Altar against altar.


Secondly, that they allege altar against altar, if we shall consider the
nature of the Christian Church, it is not much from the purpose. In ancient
time under the law, Exodus 29.
there was but one Temple, and one altar, without which they were forbidden to
sacrifice: whereupon we see yet, that the Jews which were scattered throughout
the world, might not sacrifice. And therefore those which set up altars in Dan
and Bethel, albeit that they had not sacrificed but to the true God, and
according to the sacrifices ordained in the law, yet they were guilty of
death, because they had broken the express ordinance of God, who would have
obedience and not sacrifice: and because that in Jesus Christ to come, figured
by one city of Jerusalem, by one Temple, and by one altar, they ought to
withdraw themselves from the society of all other people. This is the cause,
that we read not that the Prophets established any order of the service of
God in any other place, although that the Temple of Jerusalem were defiled
with idolatry, but rather that they preached openly against those which
mayntained it, and yet without sacrificing any where else. But by the coming
of Jesus Christ, as we have often said, it is altogether otherwise. For all
the world is Jerusalem, the temple, and the altar of the Lord. We pray not
any longer toward the East: but on every side to which we turn us, we turn
to God, we look always to Jesus Christ. When therefore the Apostles preaching
Christ, could not be received into Jerusalem preaching Christ in the temple,
they preached him in houses, and when they were yet driven away, they shook of
the duste of their feet, in witness against them, and went and preached else
where. When also they were forewarned by the holy Ghost, of Gods vengeance to
come upon that City that had crucified Christ the anointed, they made no
difficulty, says Eusebius, Eusebius. in histor. Eccles. lib. 3. cap. 5.
to withdraw the assembly, that is to say, the true Jerusalem, and the true
children of Abraham from thence, and to gather them together into the little
town of Pella near Jordan. Pella a littis town nece Jordan.
If therefore the temples of Constantinople are turned into the temples and
Churches of Mahomet. Christians may serve God, and sacrifice to him the
sacrifices of praise and thanksgiving at Pera hard by Constantinople. Pera a
little town over against Constantinople, whither the Christians with drew
the^se lues, when the Turk took Constantinople
And if Antichrist be set down in the Church of Rome amiddest his temples,
we may serve Christ in the porche, and if we may not preach against him under
the roof of the Church, we will do it under the roof of heaven, which is
even as well the Temple of the Lord. And this is the cause, why (being
forbidden by kings and Princes upon pain of rebellion to preach in Temples,
against the Idolatry which is there committed, and again being likewise
expressly commanded by God to avoid Idols, and to publishe the truth) we
have gathered the true faithful thither, where we might serve God together,
according to his word, and we have withdrawn Jerusalem into the town of
Pella, by the example of the Apostles, and according to the liberty which
Jesus Christ has given to the Universal Church. But by separating our selves
from Rome, we have remained in the heavenly Jerusalem, founded upon the
doctrine of the Apostles, from which it has separated it self, and we have
not buylt an altar against the altar of the Lord (for Rome is not the peculiar
seat of the Lords altar) but rather an altar of Christ against the altar of
Antichrist, a temple of living stones founded upon the chief master stone of
the corner, against the temples of idols, builded upon the stone of offense,
which is Antichrist. There is therefore a notable difference between Hierualem
and Rome: and consequently it is one thing to separat from the faction of Rome,
that can hardly deserve the name of a member, and an other, from the Catholic
and Universal Church. Jerusalem was the Temple of the Lord, and at this day
the whole world is his Temple: in comparison of which, Rome is nothing. To
Jerusalem was promised the Son of God, to Rome the son of perdition. And
from this peculiar Temple of God, the Apostles withdrewe themselves, for that
it refused salvation, yea that they might not perish in her destruction, they
removed the Christians into another place. From the communication or
fellowshippe therefore of the Church of Rome, which worshippeth and vpholdeth
perdition, we hold our selves bound to withdraw our selves, if we will not
draw upon us the heavy vengeance of God, Apoc. 13.18.
which is prepared for all those that remain therein.

It is one thing for a man to withdraw him self from the Papacy, and another
from the Church.
Thirdlye, it is one thing to withdraw our selves from the papacy, and another
thing to go away from the poor Church that is there holden under captivity.
Even altogether like, as it is one thing, to fly from a City, and another, to
fly from the pestilence that is in the City. And it is one thing for a man to
withdraw him self from the common Wealth, and another, from the power of a
tyranne that usurps the common weal. They that fly the pestilence, are
ready to come to the City again when the plague is gone, and they that avoid
tyranny, are ready to join them selves again to the Citizens that were
under tyranny, as soon as it shall be banished. Yea which is more, they are
in the City, and in the Common weal, in heart and spirit, suffering together
with their fellow Burgesses and Citizens, bewayling their bondage, and
purchasing their deliverance, by all the means they can devise, where as the
tyrants that keep that City, and they yt are there, seem rather to be shut
up from all co^munaltie or fellowship, not only of the common weal, but also,
as Cicero says, from all mankind, even as Thrasibulus was, being gone aside
from Philes, during the time that thirty Tyrants did tear in pieces the
common weal of Athens: And as Camillus at Veies, during the time that the
Gauls wasted the city of Rome: And as Athanasius also, and a few of the best
sort with him at Rome, during the time that the Arria^s, being favored of
Constantius the Emperor, spoiled and infected his Church of Alexandria. And
eue^ so likewise we at this day, in right are of the poor Church of France,
of Italy, and other places, which Antichrist holds by ye throat, to cause
the^ to abandon their salvation. And as soon as Antichrist and his mayntainers
shall be gone, with all the infection which they have brought into the church: we
shall be altogether ready to draw near unto the^, to join with them as nigh as
ever we did, and to run to the Churches with them, and there to rejoice
together for their deliverance. Let ye wolf be gone out of their fold, and
behold us al ready to enter in. In mean time we will pray unto god to drive him
away, yt it will please him to deliver the^ from under his claw, and will show
the^ this mercy, and we will enforce our selves all yt we can, to deliver the^.
To be short, Tertul. in lib de praescrip. contra haereticos.
we are kuit with them in doctrine, if they have regard to the ancient doctrine
of ye Church of Rome: but we co^de^ne yt of the popes, where with he oppresses
their consciences. Also we are in true charity: for what greater charity ca^
there be in ye world, the^ to rid ye world of such a one: But we renounce yt
Tyranne, which strangleth their souls: and seeing that God by his singular
grace has delivered ours from him, we proclayme open war against him for
their sakes, with all our hearts.

The Pope a schismatike even by the cano^ law.
These things being well considered, it is very easy for us to distinguish who
are schismatikes, that is to say, the aucthors of yt separation which was made
in our time in ye west churches, either we or our enemies.

The canon law says, 24. q. 1. Nor. afferamus. and q. 3. and ibiglossa and
doctores.
that Schism must not be considered neither in the number nor place, but by
the cause, and that he is a schismatike, which is ye cause of schism, and not
he which begins ye separation, even altogether like as he which denies the
law is the cause of process, and not he which first began. Now we have
required the pope and his prelates to reform the Church according to the
Scriptures, and to the ancient form, desiring to remain united with our
brethren: and in stead of agreeing unto us, they have excommunicated us,
without ever hearing us. The prelates therefore of the Roman Church are the
Schismatikes, and not we who demand nothing else but Reformation to make us
at one.

Also the Canon says, that the essential and material cause of all Schism
is want of charity. August. aduersus Cresconium Grammat. and Donatist. passim.
Now, for our parts we have offered our lives to death, to recover our brethren
from error: and contrariwise the prelates of Rome, to draw us from that they
say we are, what earnest request soever we could make, they would yet never
grant unto us a free Council. But when they have called us to their
assemblies, it was to burn us, and not to teach us: and all their Councils
were but conspiracies to kill us, and not consultations to heal us. And
therefore the lack of charity is in them, and so consequently the cause of
Schism.

Also the Canon law teaches us, Doctores Bononienses in council. de schismate
Benedict. 13 and Greg. 12. Item apnel Theodor. a Nien lib 3 Cusanus de
concordia Cathol. lib 1.14. cap. 2.24. q. 1. Non afferamus. and q. 3. inter
Schisma. 7. q. 1. Nonatianus cum glossa and ca. sequen. 24. q. 1 in summa and
cap. dicimus in glossa 2. Anno 1407. 15. q. 6. nos sanctoruin and can. iura tos
iuncta declaration. Innocentii de doctrina veritatis. 19. distinct. Anastasius
and cap. nulli 79. did. cap. si quis pecuniam. 2. q. 7. Sacerdos and ibid.
glossa.
that is to say, the Pope him self: That the Pope, which suffers a
controversy to wax old in the church concerning salvation, he is one that
seeks after division and heresy. And that if he be required to help it by a
general Council, and do it not, of Apostolic which he should be, he makes
him self an Apostata and Schismatike, That as from such a one, the
Cardinals, Prelates, Priests, peoples and provinces ought to separate them
selves, for that, as much as lies in him, he suffers the people and children
that are borne to grow under two heads, and into two churches. That all those
that wink in that matter, specially having a charge, and a calling to
withstand it, they are partakers with his fault, and are schismatikes as well
as he, notwithstanding all their oaths, homages and obligations, which they
have made unto him. And in deed by the counsel of the divines of Paris,
following the foresaid counsel, king Charles the sixte declared him self, his
realm and all his subjects to be separated from the communion of pope John the
22. and afterward by the same counsel cut of him self from the obedience of
Benedict the thirtenth, Literae Academ. Parisien. apud Theodor. de Nien. tract.
6. cap. 14.15. and lib. 3. cap. 34. Item in libr. Nemus vnionis cap. 7.
Chronica Gaguini in Carolo. 6.
and from Gregory the 12. admonishing and requiring all princes to do the like:
For that (says he in his protestation) they will maintain divisions in the
Church by their tretcheries, and will not submit themselves to the ordinary
mean of a free council, and to the determination of the church. Now it was
eight score years ago, that this strife began in the Church, and after
threescore years or thereabouts, it was spread over all Europe. The princes and
people called still for a free council, and always, sometimes by one mean,
sometimes by another the Popes went scot free. During all which time they
sought all the ways they could for their lives, ordinary and extraordinary, to
make an end of us. They therefore and their mainteiners (though ye salvation of
Christendom was not in controversy, as now it is) are by their own canons
found schismatikes, and they who have winked at it, fautors of schism: and
they who have with drawn themselves from their obedience, (admit that their
Popes had been sometime heads of the Church, and no Antichrists) are grounded
in the truth, exempted from all suspicion of schism, and blameless of all
the mischiefs and disorders, which through schism have arisen in
Christendom. Now contrariwise, if as we hold the Pope be Antichrist, and the
papal doctrine contrary to salvation in Jesus Christ, and all the service that
they do in all the churches yt acknowledge him, which they call ye church of
Rome, polluted with idolatry, the^ there needs no longer disputation, whether
men do well to separate themselves from him, or no: but rather to conclude full
and wholly, That we are traitors to God, who has created us: to Christ, who
has saved and regenerated us: to the Church, who has borne us: to be short,
to our brethren and to our selves, if we protest not against his blasphemies,
if we withdraw not our selves from his obedience, if we renounce not his
communion: to be short, if we do not our uttermost to make him known to every
one, and to deliver the world from his tyranny.

Hereupon they object unto us, yt Moses, for the idolatry committed amongst the
people of Israel to ye golden Calfe, Exodus 33.
separated not himself. I grant it. But they must add that Moses chid Aaron,
chastised ye people, ground the golden calfe into powder, and cast it into the
water. There was no cause then that he should fly Idolatry, because he
could drive it out. Now we will not be more scrupulous then Moses. Let
them suffer us to beat their Idols to powder, and to cast Idolatry out of
their Church, and we will ask no better, to remain still with them. They will
yet further reproach us, that Christ haunted the temple notwithstanding the
merchandise that was there committed: there is a great difference between the
merchandise that was there, and the idolatry that at this day has place in
the Church of Rome. But again let them suffer us, as the Jews did our savior
Christ, to whippe out the merchants of the whore, that buy and sell men's souls
by their simonies, out of the church, and we are all ready to frequent it. To
conclude, they cast us in ye teeth, that Iereinie preached in Topheth, where
abominable idolatry was committed: Ierem. 19.
they ought also to add that which the text says expressly, that he preached
there against idolatry. Also that Amos the Prophet prophesied in Bethel in
Amasias his chapel: Amos. 5.
they should add the^, that this was to signify unto him the horrible
vengeance that God had prepared to fall upon his head. Also that the man of God
prophesied well in Bethel, 2. King. 13.
in Ieroboams time: but they should also add that this was to signify unto
him, that his Priests should one day be sacrificed upon the same altar. But we
will yet say more unto them. Let the^ but suffer us to preach in their Churches
amongst their Idols, we will make them to fall down at the only word of God,
without ever touching or laying hand upon them. Let them but suffer us to
place the ark of God, and his holy covenant in the midst of their Temples, 1.
Sam. 5.
and they shall within a short space find al their Dagons in pieces. We refuse
not then to go to preach there. For this is it, we desire with all our hearts
to make the truth known unto every one. But we can not come there and hold
our peace: for accursed is he, which hears his God blasphemed, without
protesting against it, and sees his brother deceived, and does not direct
him. But we, after the example of Jeremy, of Amos, and of the man of God, will
protest before kings, before peoples, yea in ye face of al their abomi
nations, and we have done it, and have sealed our protestatio^s with our own
blood. But we will not sacrifice after their example, upon ye altar yt king
Achas caused to be made after the pattern of ye altar of Damascus, although yt
Vrias ye hie priest wincke at it. Much less will we worship in Dan and Bethel:
For they never did it: we will not (I say) communicate in any wise with the
sacriledges and impieties brought in by Antichrist: for this were great
wickedness to do it, and treason against God to co^ceale it, and more then
sensles blockishnes to all, not to search it out, and inexcusable blindness, in
ye light which at this day shines every where, to communicate with these
works of darkness.

Why we receive the baptism of ye church of Rome.
Moreover, they object unto us: If you hold ye pope for Antich. and our service
for idolatry, how the^ do you receive our baptism: or if you hold yt for good,
how is it yt you communicate not with our Church: First God has had such pity
of his church, yt he has suffered antichr. to change nothing in ye bapt. of
Christ, in yt which is of the substance thereof, although he had bewrapped it with
many superstitions, altogether like as he suffered not circumcision, which was
ye mark of the covenant, to be quite abolished, neither amongst ye Samarita^s
nor in Judah, whatsoever idolatry was there committed. We say then yt ye church
of Rome, through baptism, brought forth children to god, but yt through her
idolatries she nourished the^ up to ye devil, altogether like as Ezech. says,
Ezech. 16.
yt Jerusalem and Samaria engendered children to God, as an adultrous woman does
to her husband, until she be divorced, but afterward she sacrificed the^ to
Moloch, yt is, to false gods.

Augustus passim de baptismate contra Donatistas.
Secondly, we say with S. Aug. yt it is not ye heretic yt baptizeth, as long as
baptism remains sound, but Christ by ye hand of ye heretic, wherein we
follow ye practice of ye primitive church, and ye determination of ye 1. cou^cil
of Nice: Council. Nicenum.
That they which were baptized by heretics, renou^cing their heresy, they
shall not be rebaptized, except those yt have been baptized by ye Samosatens,
who kept not ye esse^tial words of baptism, who^ (to speak properly) they do
not rebaptize, because with out these, they could never be baptized: but by the
grace of God, we have been baptized in ye name of God, and not in ye name of
Antichrist, or of his idols.

Thirdly, baptism in our infa^cie brought us into ye house of God, but it is
not enough to be received into his family, if we serve him not according to
his commandments. For then we deprive our selves of the benefit received by
baptism, the which (as S. Augustine says) is turned into our greater
condemnation. This therefore is unto us as the law of nature in a common weal,
which binds us to the duty of good citizens: and of simple and plain
enemies that we should be, we become traitors, and parricides, if we serve a
Tyrant which has invaded it, Parricides are they that kill their own parents
and kinsfolks.
and if we bear arms against the Laws thereof. For albeit we be borne under
tyranny, yet we are borne for the common weal, and enrouled in the Register
of Citizens, and not wtin the lists of the tyrants slaves, yea even though the
tyrant or his officers keep ye Register. Now to the Citizen, which is borne
under tyranny, who has served a tyrant, and who afterward acknowledging his
fault, wtdraweth himself to the defenders of the common liberty, there is no
need of new letters of his natural birth, although by his former deeds, he
made himself unworthy. So likewise we say, that to him which is bound under
the popedom, who has maintained Antichrist, and joined himself to his
faction, and to every other Heritique, which has fought against Christ, there
needs no second Baptism, when he returns to his duty. For albeit he had
renounced Christ, yet Christ has not renounced the right he has over him, and
his Baptism is so little defaced, that of a simple enemy which he should have
bin without Baptism, he is become a traitor, and guilty of hie treason against
his majesty. And therefore there needs nothing but an utter abolishment of
his fault, and not a renewing of his baptism.

Fourthly. Yea, but there is no baptism but in the Church, and when you
separate your selves from us, you then separate your selves from the church.
The answer. There is no Baptism but in the Church, and we deny not also, that
the Church of Rome is a Church. For in that we affirm that Antichrist rules
there, we consequently hold yt it is the Church, inasmuch as he can not sit
any where but in the Church. But it is one thing, to separate our selves from
the Church of Rome defiled by Antichrist, and another thing to depart from the
communion of the universal church, as we have already declared. Again we
depart not from the temple, but from the idolatry committed in the temple, nor
from the common weal, but from the tyranny which oppresses the common wealth,
nor from the city, but from ye pestilence which infecteth ye city, nor from the
communion and fellowship of the people (to who^ we wish al happiness and
salvation) but from the conspiracy of Antichrist and of his mainteiners: we
therefore renounce not their baptism, but we ratify it. By the same we are
bound to serve God, and to renounce the devil: and following the same, we seek
to serve God according to his word, and renounce all idols. By these letters
of natural birth, we are bound to maintain the laws of ye ancient christian
common wealth, which is the church: and following the^, we set up again before
us ye law of God ye only lawgiuer of the church, and would deliver ye church
from al new impositions and burdens, which Antichrist has laid upon their
consciences. By baptism we have made an oath unto christ, and the pope would
turn our service from Christ, to his idols and to him self: we therefore set
Christ against Antichrist, and the church against his co^spiracy. And this is
yt for which by the grace of God, we have bin baptized into the Church, how
tyrannical and disordered soever it has been.

But ye ministers thereof, who^ you prete^s to be of Antichr. they have baptized
you. In deed they have put water on my head, but Christ has baptized me. The
tyran or his officers, which he has established after his fashion, have made
me lift up my hand, and give him an oath: but they have made me to make it to
ye common wealth, and not to ye tyran, in the name of Christ, and not in the
name of Antichrist. The form of the oath has remained entire and sound,
albeit ye estate were changed. To follow therefore ye tenor of mine oath, I will
retire my self into the army of true citizens, and I will seek out ye true
church in ye place, whereunto it has wtdrawe^ it self, and I will renounce the
communion of Antichrist, who under color of mine oath, makes me to break mine
oath.

To conclude this point. 1. John. 5. Apoc. 14.
It is said unto us, Preach the truth. We have done it: but they have
excommunicated us. It is said consequently unto us, Fly from idols, and
depart out of Babylon. We have done it: but yet then, when the obstinacy of
men against the truth, has compelled us. Finally, after the example of the
Apostles, being shut out of Churches by the magistrate, we have gathered
together the faithful into houses, and have builded the true Jerusalem at Pella
a little town by Jorden, wherein the Christians were preserved when Jerusalem
was destroyed.
Pella. If men mark this deed in it self, they cannot find fault with it:
For we stand grounded upon the express word of GOD. Now if any man
further say, howsoever it ought to be done, that yet it belonged not unto our
Ministers to do it: There is no farther question but of their vocation and
calling, which shall be handled in the chapter next following.

That the Ministers of the reformed churches have a lawful calling to reform
the Church. CHAP XI.
FOrasmuch as our adversaries ca^ neither deny the corruption, which is entered
into the Church, nor the tyranny of Antichrist with other things depending
thereof, from the which we go about by the word of God, to set it free: to the
end to hold us from entering to the ground of this matter, and from ripping it
up again, they at length use this pretty shift, and ask us whatcalling our
ministers have to reform ye church, and to preach in it? 1. King 12.24.
This is even ye same yt Zidkiiah the false prophet said unto Micheas, What
way went ye spirit of ye Lord from me, to speak to thee? And ye Pharisees to
Jesus Christ, Thou art a Carpe^ters son, and who has sent thee? To who^ we
may answer in one word with Jesus Christ, The words which we preach, bear
witness of us. They likewise cast in our teeth their long succession, That they
are ye children of Abraham, S. Peter's heirs etc. To who^ Jesus Christ has
answered for us, Ye are Abraha^s seed, Io. 8. 2. These. 2.
but the devil is your father, from who^ ye are come. and s. Paul: Brethren, be
not deceived, for Antichrist shall sit and be worshipped in the temple of God.
But forasmuch as hertofore they have made whole books upon this point, it is
needful to handle this more largely.

When fire shall take hold of any City or town, or an enemy shall scale it
in the night, if the least Burgess shall give an alarm, yea admit it be but
a stranger, whiles the watchmen sleep, no man will demand by what title he
did it, and much less punish him for it: but rather men will run to the
water, and to the walls, they will see where it is, and every one accepts
him thankfully that warned them. When contrariwyse, we discover Antichrist
sitting in the Church, who^ we have submitted our selves to convince, before ye
face of a Council, and in his own presence: in stead of hearing us, of
examining our reasons, of going to the holy Scriptures, where he is lively
painted out, they fall to examine us of our condition, and by what authority
we advertise them, yea they put us to a worse death, then if we had betrayed
the common wealth. If the governors of some places should do the like, when
men give them aduertisements, what place should not soon fall into the hands
of the enemies? And what prince is there that would not hold them for traitors,
and judge that they had conspired with his enemies? There is no question here
of our condition and qualities, but of the qualities of Antichrist, and of his
doctrine. It stands with the duty of those that warn us, and it concerns
the salvation of all, and of our selves. If the advertisement and warning be
true, it is ye salvation of the Church, if it be false, it is ours. The
question is then, to examine the circumstaunces of ye warning, and not the
qualities and condition of those that warn us. In the conspiracy of Catiline,
the Senate lent their ear to a base woman, against the greatest. And when the
Gauls would by night have invaded ye Capitole of Rome, the watchmen spoke not
a word, and the dogs were dumb: there was nothing but the Geese that cried,
and yet every man ran thither, and made account thereof: and had not this
gagling bin, this notable City, which afterward conquered the whole world,
had been lost. When therefore we shall be ye most vile and contemptiple of ye
Church, we deserve to be heard, yea seeing we desire not to speak in ye ear,
as slaunderers, but in the face of ye Church, yea in the ear of himself yt
has accused us, not from our selves, but from God. Concerning ye reformation
of the Church, after the scattering which the Pope and his have made in it, we
know yt there must be a lawful calling, but we maintain our selves to be
therein better warranted and grounded then they, who have nothing but their
boasting and vaunting, although they have ye greatest titles and honors in ye
world to be on their side.

The calling of the first reformers of the Church in our time.
If therefore our adversaries ask us, what was the calling of our first
Ministers, which reformed the Church in these last times, we answer that it
was the same vocation and succession, whereof they themselves do brag: but
the same vocation which they abused, our men have endeavored to use will, and
to that vain succession wherewith they decked themselves, they have added the
succession of true doctrine, which they had corrupted: without which all
succession is nothing else, but a continuing of abuse and error. Wickleife, John
Hus, Luther, Zwinglius, Decolompadius, Bucer, and others of that school (from
whence the Ministers which have gathered Churches from under Antichrist, are
descended) were Priests (as they call them) and doctors in divinity. As Priests
and Pastors, they had charge to preach ye truth unto the people, and to
minister the Sacraments unto them, according to ye institution of our Lord. As
doctors, they were called to expound divinity in their readings, and in their
books, and they were bound by ye ordinary oath of al universities, to declare
ye truth unto the Church, to confute al doctrines repugnant against ye word of
God, and what then might to expel it. Now in their time, they found yt ye word
of God was hid unto ye people: that the honor which was due to God alone, was
turned to men, and to Images: that the blood of Christ was trodden under foot:
that the sacrament of the supper was partly turned into Idolatry, and partly
denied to the poor people. To be short, yt all the holy scripture was
profaned and poisoned with the Popes gloses, and popish interpretations. And
when they showed these things to ye Bishops and Metropolitans, according to
the order of their Church, they made no rekoning of the^, they were the first
yt persecuted the^, because they themselves were the infected part of the
Church. I ask therefore, if their vocation commanded them not to go farther,
to wit, to preach the truth unto the people, and purely to administer the
holy Sacraments? And if they had done otherwise, whether they had not bin
forsakers of their calling, contenmers of their oath made unto God, and abusers
of the people? Both two therefore, (say I) both our adversaries, and our first
ministers had one and the same ordinary and outward calling. But herein is the
difference, that that which ours have followed, the other have forsaken: that
which ours have done of duty by reason of their charge, the other have
co^cealed. Ours have led their sheep upon ye mountains of Israel into good
pastures: Ezech. 34.
the others have devoured them, or else left them for a pray to the beasts of
the field, or else driven them to the fennes and marshes where they have
starued. A magistrate shall be called to the government of a common wealth,
where he shall find the good laws corrupted by the negligence or malice of
those that went before, his Courts full of injustice, the offices subject to
factions, briberies and corruptions: and he would reform all this, and bring
it to the censure of the laws. He that will further now ask him, by what
right he does this, should he not make him self a laughing stock, because he
follows step by step his calling? He has not sworn to mainteyne abuses,
but rather to mainteyne the laws, and to provide every way that he can, for
the good and preservation of the Common wealth. Now contrariwise, if he wincke
at that which is evil, he should do directly contrary to his calling. Even so
likewise have our first Ministers done, first requiring reformation, and
afterward putting to their hands according to their duty. And if we could
ask of ye Apostles, who are their true successors: they would not tell us, Such
as have a triple crown, or such a cope, or such a miter, but those that preach
the word of God after our example. For so had they learned of the true master,
Matthew. 1.
That he which does the will of God his father, is his mother, his sister and
his brother. At the preaching of these first men, the pastors of the Churches
were awakened in England, in Bohemia, in Germany, in Scotland, in Denmark, in
Swedenland, and afterward many in France, in Spain, and in Italy it self,
and these were sent to bethink them of their duty. Consequently some whole
Realms were reformed: the bishops themselves, that there had preached lies,
preached the truth in the self same Church and pulpit. Of these for the most
part, if our adversaries will demand succession, it is on their side, for they
have succeeded from bishop to bishop, from the first which preached there the
Gospel. If they ask a vocation, why, it is even their own: for they were
called to be bishopps and pastors, and they have performed the office, which
they had forsaken. The difference therefore, as we have said, is in this only
point, that they feed the people with pescod shales, and the others in the
pasture of life: they defile their flocks with the filthinesses of Antichrist,
and these wash them in the blood of Jesus Christ. Behold then, concerning the
calling of our first Ministers, which has whatsoever may be good, in the
pretended calling of our adversaries: and this point further: That our men
lawfully exercise it, and the other do but withhold it in unrighteousness. And
although some of our men, as in so corrupt a state of the Church (as we have
seen it in our time) without waiting for their calling, or allowance of them
that under the title of pastors, oppressed the Lords flock, were called by
those Churches, to which they vowed their ministry: yet this ought no more to
be thought strange, then in a free common wealth, where the people without
waiting either for ye consent or voices of those that play ye tyrants, shall
have chosen according to the laws, good and lawful magistrates.

The calling of those which came afterward.
Concerning the vocation of Ministers which were sent by the former, and since
by us, we have herein observed the example of the Apostles, and the canons of
the primitive Church. If the question be of their persons, we have lawfully
examined both their doctrine and manners. And this is the rule of Saint Paul, 1.
Tim 3.2.
That a bishop must be apt to teach, and blameless: If of the persons which
make this examination, why, it was not one man alone, but many ministers,
bishops and elders duly called before to this Church, that is to say, Titus.
1.9
the Presbytery or eldershippe, as Saint Paul calls it, or as Saint Cyprian
calls it, 1 Timothy 5. and Tit. 1.
the ecclesiastical Senate. During this examination, whereupon depends the
election, the Church continues in prayer and fasting, as we read in the
ordeining of elders in the Acts. Being found meet, Acts. 14.23.
they are published to the people, to the end that if any man has ought to say
against their election, he might repair before ye assembly, as we read was
practiced in the old Church, Lampridius in Alexa^dro.
even by ye testimony of Paynims. Finally by the consent of all the people, they
lay their hands upon the^, they give the^ authority to preach, which is the
only ceremony that ye Apostles used, by imitation of the Church of the Jews,
Acts. 19.6.
after which they began to administer the word and sacraments in the Church.
This is that the ancient Canons say, That the minister of the Church must be
ordained by the election of the Clergy, In Council. Laodic. cap. 12. In Council.
Parisi. cap. 8.
and by the consent of the people: That a Bishop should not be chosen without
a number of bishops, etc. At the request of the Clergy, that is to say, of the
elders, and with the consent of the people. Again, Rabanus in gloss. sexto
cap. Actuum Can. Nullus. cap. in ordin. distinct. 61. cap. Sacror. distinct.
63. Leo Papa epist. 87. and 90.
that they which are come to a bishopric by money or favor, they should not
be holden for Bishops, neither have any right to ordeyne others. Now we
report our selves to the church of Rome it self, who are more canonically
elected, they or we, and whether these canons have not been altogether
contemned amongst them, for the space of more then these 800. years. If the
question be of bishops, either ordeyning or ordained, they come to their
Byshoprickes either through favor of the princes court, or else by the
subtilties of ye court of Rome, or by paying of money. And there be, who are
made bishops for ye service of their predecessors, before they were borne, at
yt time when it was doubtful, whether they should be male or female, man or
woman. The thing it self speaks, and every man sees it, and knows it,
before I can speak of it. If of ye examination which is made, by this a man
may judge what it is like to be, when he sees a great part of ye bishops of ye
church of Rome, that know not whether their Mass be in Greek or Latin: and
their lives are so known (I touch not those few that behave themselves better)
that their Cardinals, In the articles that were presented by the Cardinals the
reformers of Pope Paul. 3. Cypria^. lib. 1 Epist. 3. August. Epist. 110.
chosen in the time of Pope Paul the third for a reformation, confess in their
articles, that for their wicked lives and horrible outrages, the name of God
was blasphemed throughout all nations. If of ye consent of ye people, which S.
Cyprian so much requires, and which we see so well put in practice in ye person
of Eradius yt was S. Augustines successor, they present their bishops to the
people, not to have their consent to approve the^, but to cause the^ to worship
them, for fashion sake only, and not altogether in good earnest. Now if we come
to the simple priests, Eusebius. lib. 6. cap. 29. de elect Fabri. Theodoret. lib
1. cap. 9.
the ignorant bishops do yet make them of the most ignorant, and of the most
vicious, worse then themselves, so that the time whereof ye Prophet
complayneth, has endured a long time in ye Church, that whosoever would, might
consecrate his hand. We ministers therefore at this day, have the same
succession that their bishops had. For from the first that reformed the
Churches, no man could take it away, and unto this they have further added ye
continual succession of the true doctrine. But their vocation is far better,
and more canonical: for besides that they were ordained, by those that the
church of Rome had ordained, they are ordained according to the example of the
Apostles, and ancient canons, which Antichrist and his mainteyners have
utterly disanulled, whereas examining the election of the Romish bishops, you
shall have much a do to find one, that may rightly be called a bishop.

Against this which has been said, nothing can be alleged, unless it be,
that these first reformers of ye Church, John Hus, Luther, Zwinglius,
Decolompadius and others, from whom ours are descended, they were not bishops,
but only priests and doctors. To this we answer, A bishop and an elder are
all one.
That a Minister and a Bishop in the primitive Church were al one, and that if
there be any difference at this day in their titles and myters, yet that in
their essential dignity, they differ not a whitte. S. Paul says to Titus,
I left thee in Candie, to the end thou should ordeyne elders in every city.
And afterward, Titus. 1.
willing to show him how he should govern there, he adds: For it behooves
that a Bishop be faultlesse, etc. Also it is said in the Acts, Acts. 20.17.
and 28.
That he sent to seek the Elders or Seniors of Ephesus. But mark the weighty
exhortation he makes to them, Take heed, says he, to your selves, and to the
whole flock, over which the holy Ghost has made you Bishops or overseers.
To the Philippians.
In the Epistle to the Philippians he saluteth the Deacons and Bishops of
that city, that is to say, the ancients. S. Peter also exhorting the Bishops
or elders, 1. Pet. 5. Graece (...), as being bishops. Ephesians. 4.
Feed (says he) the flock which is committed unto you, having an eye over
them as Bishops or overseers, etc. And in deed where Saint Paul rekoneth up
the names of all the degrees in the Church, he makes no mention of bishops,
but only of pastors and doctors, and to the elders it is said, Feed, teach,
and do the duty of Bishops. It is then most apparent, that elders (whom you
call priests) and Bishops were all one. Irenaeus ex Eusebius. lib. 5. cap. 26. and
epist. 24.
And Ireneus also calls Anicetus, Pius, and Hyginus Bishops of Rome, no
otherwise then by the name elders. This is that S. Hierom says in a certain
Epistle, handling this matter: Among our ancients, Bishop and elder were both
one, but the one is the name of age, the other of office or dignity, as the
Apostle has plainly shevved us. Hieronym. in epist. ad Euandrum.
And in another place: Before one said, I hold of Cephas, and I of Apollo, etc.
all things were governed in the Church by the common advise of the Seniors or
elders. Afterward to avoid Schisms, advise was given, that one should be
chosen above others. In 1. cap. ad Titu^ fusissime.
But as on the one side the elders are subject unto him, so on the other side
they must know, in that that he is above the elders, it is by custom, and not
by the Lords ordinance. Ambro. in 4. ad Ephesisios.
S. Ambrose expou^ding the 4. of the Ephe. where ye degrees of the Church are
largely handled: The Bishops (says he) were called at the first, Elders,
whereupon one succeeded another, etc. And upon Timoth. A Bishop is none other
but a chief elder. Idem in 1. ad Timoth.
S. Gregory in his epistles calls the Bishops, Elders and Cardinals, Greg.
lib. 1. epist. 15.77.79. Et lib. 2. epist. 6.25. etc.
that is to say, the chief: and Justinian the Emperor, in his Deconomical
laws, calls them Reverend, because they differ nothing from Elders in their
essential dignity, but only in this, that they kept the first place in the
administration of Gods service, that is to say, in order and Ceremony.
Gratian in his decretals says plainly, Distinct. 93. and 95. olim.
That the superiority of the Bishop, and the distribution of his dioces is
from man's law, and not from the institution of the Apostles. Peter Lombarde
repeateth it in the same words. And M. John of Paris, Pet. Lomb. lib. 4.
senten. distinct. 24. Magist. Ioh. Parisi. cap. 3. lib. de potestate regia and
Papali.
a doctor of the Sorbonists, of the order of Iacobins, in his book of ye
kingly and papal power, which the whole faculty of divinity approved at yt
time, goes further: For concerning the essential dignity of the ministry,
which he calls ye power of the ecclesiastical government over ye people, he
maintayneth that the priests are equal to ye Popes themselves, and he proves
it, because in their orders they use ye same words yt they use in ye orders of
bishops and Apostles: Receive the holy Ghost, whatsoever ye bind on earth,
shall be bound in heaven, etc. To be short, Cardinal Cusan himself maintains,
that ye popedom, the state of Bishoprics, Cardinal. Cusan. lib. 2. cap. 13 de
concord. Catholie. Ostiensis in summa de maioritate and obedient. and glossa.
in cap. 9 and 2. q. 7. puto.
yt is to say, al their degrees both great and small, they are not ordained of
God, but of men. That all Priests according to the ordinance of our Lord are
equal: and that they were likewise ordained of men for ye better, to wit, to
avoid division. But when this better was turned into worse, and this which men
had ordained to bring m^e to God, served to turn the^ away from God, then, the
cause ceasing, these positive laws should also cease, and me^ should be
brought to ye first institution. And therefore mark (says he) yt in time of
necessity, when the Pope has excommunicated with an evil purpose, the least
priest may absolve him, whosoever he be, from his excommunication. Behold
therefore, that in that the B. is above an elder, it is but from man's law, and
for order, which is no longer order, when it is the cause of disorder.

Consequently we say, That ministers and elders have power to lay on their
hands. 1. Tim. ^.
that those elders have power to lay on their hands, and to ordain pastors.
That they had so in the Apostles time, it is most clear. Neglect not (says
Saint Paul) the gift that is in thee, which is given to prophecy with the
imposition of the hands of the Eldership, that is to say, of the assembly of
Seniors or elders. And again, Timothy ordained him self. and forasmuch as a
Bishop and elder were al one, if by the scripture the Bishops take this power
to themselves, as well might the Ministers and Elders: and if they deny it to the
ministers and elders, they deny it to themselves. In deed in ye old time this
argument was common in the Church: He might baptize, Magister setent. lib. 4.
distinct. 25.
he might minister the Lords body, ergo he might lay on his hands. Also, when
they ordained an elder, ye B. holding his hand over his head, al ye other
elders drew near and laid on their hands together, and held them upon ye head
of him who^ they so ordained, as it appears in many places of Gratians
decretals, Can presbyter. distinct. 23. apud Gratiana^.
which was to keep their right in giving of orders, and to show that although
the Bishop had the charge of this action, that notwithstanding it was equal
amongst the^, and that he could not do it of himself alone. And certain of
their own have disputed this same question 300. years since. Marsil. Pata li.
2. ca. 17.
And if the ambition of Bishops, and the negligence of the Ministers and Elders
have confounded all things, and abolished ye order of ye church, we must
labor as much as we can, to bring it in again. And if the Bishop, of a
companion, which he ought to be, is become a tyrant over the ministers and
elders, why, it belongs to those that are true ministers and elders, to
exercise the duty which is left unto them. And if the primacie of the Bishop,
brought in by men, have led men to perdition, (which order we do not altogether
disalowe, if it be rightly observed) why then, by the equality of ministers
and Elders instituted of God, they must be brought again to salvation. To be
short, the first Bishops of the Christian Church were but elders: and our first
ministers were elders: and the elders by the institution of the Apostles, had
authority to lay on their hands, according to which also ours were ordained:
ministers therefore ordained by them are well ordained, and their vocation can
not in any wise be cauilled at, or slaundered. Now if any think them
contemptible in comparison of the great prelates of the Church of Rome: Caiphas
in deed was reuecenced of the world, whereas Cephas had neither gold nor
silver. Paul being a persecuter, was in great credit, and Paul being an
Apostle, got his living with his own hands. Also, God is wont to confou^d
the great and mighty things of the world, through things which seem small.
And many of ours follow ye poverty of Christ, which might be honored, yea
and were so sometimes, amongst the chief vpholders of Antichrist. It is not
therefore to the purpose, to ask miracles of us for the approving of our
calling: For if we must show some, then must they also, for that is ordinary.
But if by virtue of their calling, they have taken upon them to preach new
doctrine, why then, let them suffer us by virtue of the same, to restore the
ancient. And if they say it is ours that is new, and not theirs, why then,
there is no more question of our calling, but of our doctrine, and therefore we
must pass through all these suburbs, and come directlye to the conference of
these two.

In mean time, these were the goodlye fetches, that hyndered the fruit of the
conference at Poissy, from whence all France waited for some singular good
thing, and yet this is that, upon which at this day the Jesuits do ground
their principal defense. When any say unto them, Show me purgatory, and
transubstantiation, and the invocation of Saints, Miracles.
or any thing which draws near to the Scriptures, they say unto us, Work
miracles. Even so likewise Satan said unto Jesus Christ: If thou be the son
of God, cast thy self down from the top of the pinnacle etc. being as ready
to have turned unto him, if he had done it, as if he had done nothing. But our
Savior, who could have done greater things, confuted him only by the
scriptures. So likewise the Pharisees ask him for signs, albeit he wrought
inow, and those wonderful. But if he cast out devils, this was (say they) by
the power of ye devil. If he did the^ in earth, they ask the^ from heaven: and
if ye heaven it self should speak, to give authority to his vocation, the^
they said, What thu^der is this? Likewise they say unto him upon the Cross,
John. 12.
If thou be ye son of God, help thy self etc. and when he stepped out of ye
Sepulcher, ouerth wart those gross-headed watchmen, they said yt he was stolen
away. To be short, even so in asking miracles of us now, they are wholly bent
to say, if we should do them, yt we were the Antichrists, which should deceive
the world by signs and miracles, and that therefore we ought not to be
believed. But as ye Pharisees, when Christ suffered upon the Cross, in stead
of asking him miracles, had done a great deal better, to meditate upon this
place of Isaie, He was wounded for our transgressions, Isai. 53.
he was smitten for our iniquities, and with his stripes were we healed: So
should it be much better for our masters, to search out of the holy
scriptures, the true marks of Antichrist, and deeply to think upon this
great miracle, which God has wrought in our time without miracles, abolishing
by ye only breath of his mouth, and by the offscouring of the world, that
horrible mo^ster, who so long time has caused himself to be worshipped in the
world.

When the Law was published by Moses, we read that then he wrought miracles.
When there was a matter of judgment also betwixt God and Baal, God wrought
miracles by Elias. But when Josias the king, and Helkias the Priest brought
forth the book of the Law, which had been buried either by the negligence or
malice of the teachers, and that they threw out the idols which men had
brought into the Temple of God: when Esdras the Scribe and Priest restored the
service of God, after the captivity of Babylon, we read not that they wrought
any miracles: the reason thereof is very clear. Moses had published a new
Law to the people. And Elias had to do with a people, that openly had
renounced the law. Contrariwise Josias, Helkias, and Esdras only kept the
law, and according to that reformed the Church, and had to do with a people
that believed, and would yield unto it: yea, with a people who were taught by
the law, to believe the law against all miracles. Deuteronomy. 13.
In like manner when Christ brought the Gospel, he wrought miracles: but we
find not when any pastor of the Church has required the reformation of some
abuses of the Councilles which entered thereinto, that he was requested to
work miracles. Of Saint Bernarde, who cried so loud against the corruption of
his time, and who sighed so sore after the reformation of the Church, they
asked none. Now the reformation we ask, is of many things, according to yt
corruption which so long ago is entered into al things. To be short, this
should be a great miracle unto us, that an Angel should bring us from heaven a
new Gospel: Galat. 1.
and yet notwithstanding, the Gospel forbids us upon pain of damnation to
believe it: we are not those then that must work miracles. For we preach
nothing but salvation in one only Jesus Christ, confirmed by the miracles of
Christ, and of his Apostles. But it belongs to Antichrist to do them, who
preaches salvation by man's works, by monks merits, and by his own
indulgences and pardons, who has brought us in a new Christ, and a new
Gospel, which the devil has confirmed and sealed to the world, by strange
signs and wonders, and lying miracles, whereof all oratories and Chapels not
long since boasted and vaunted: which when Christ was borne, vanished
altogether to nothing, as he made the oracles of the devil to do when he was
borne into the world. And I ask the^ now of their conscience, if we came with
miracles, whether our adversaries would believe our Doctrine, which now so
boldly they condemn to the fire? If they say, No: why then, they abuse the
people, when they ask us for them, as though without miracles our Doctrine
ought not to be received, and as though they were by and by ready, if we had
these, quietly to allow it. If they say they would, we ought not then to
marueil, if against Christ, they have received Antichrist, seeing the devil
has authorized him by his miracles, forasmuch as all Christians were
forewarned by the spirit of God, 2 Thessalonians. 2.
that he should work strange and monstrous things, whereupon
notwithstanding they ought not to stay: and contrariwise, that Christ must
destroy him by the spirit of his mouth, that is to say, by ye only
preaching of his word, to which his spirit gives effect and power.

Now if they will yet stiffely hold an opinion of miracles, one poor Friar,
with the only sound of the word of God, has in one moment shaken all the
foundations of this Babylonical Empire, which seemed to be so well fensed
against all the injuries of the time. And in what time? even the^ when ye Pope,
as a god, had al ye earth at his commandment, at yt time when he was adored
and worshipped of kings, and served of Emperors, when he took away and gave
Empires at his pleasure, when to inquire of his doings, was (as they say) to
touch the holy mountain, and to open mouth against heaven. Even he (at whose
voice otherwise our most mightiest Kings have tre^bled in their thrones) at the
voice of a man, in respect of men, contemptible, has trembled in his throne,
and can not until this day be quieted. With the aid of a few of his
companions, and of the same estate, he has withdrawn the greatest part of
Christendom from under his power: he has delivered from this devil that
possessed them, not only me^, or cities, but even whole kingdoms: he has by
the word of God opened the eyes of a thousand millions of persons, that were
blind, even from their birth. And although the only word of God preached by
his servant, has done these great marueiles, you yet deny that God works
miracles. Yea rather this is the miracle of miracles, that this great miracle
is wrought without miracles. We have seen in our time many Bethulias, many
Senacheribs, many Herodes, and many Dioclesians. We have seen Giants dashed
against the stones: we make no reconing of these things, because we have seen
the^, but those that come after us shall wonder at them. And who would have
said, I pray you, that after the 24. day of August in the year 1572. that ever
there should again any mention be made of us in France? We were as dead and
buried, they had rolled such a great stone upon us, to keep us down: on every
side they were in arms about our graves. God contrariwise from all these same
lets, restored us life to praise him: and to make all the earth ashamed in
their sly purposes, he would that even the adversaries of our religion them
selves should remove ye stone, and reaching out their hands unto us, should
draw us out of the grave again. Now, if as the Pharisees, they will yet ask
us for a sign from heaven, then during the time that these horrible murders
continued through out France, there began to appear in the firmament this
new star, whereof since the creation of ye world the like has not been
seen, but at the birth of our Lord Jesus Christ. All the world saw it three
years together. Al Astrologers wondered at it, and are yet amazed to think of
it. The wise me^ of ye world, which believe al things to be eternal, began
from thenceforth to worship one Creator. And what shall we think that it
signifies unto us, but that second birth of Jesus Christ in the earth, by the
preaching of his word? But you will say, We have seen yet nothing. And
contrariwise, your affairs in stead to be advanced, go backward. Well. The
star which was followed of the wise men, was thirty years before it showed
his effect: and when that effect was accomplished, it was by the flesh of one
man, of whom me^ made no account, and by the shame of a cross, that seemed to
have enclosed the whole Divinity in one Tomb. Notwithstanding, after that the
devil had cast out his fire against the Apostles and disciples of Christ, and
that he had raised against them infinite persecutions, it must needs be in the
end that he yield himself, and that al ye earth acknowledge their Lord. Let
the earth therefore do what it will, the word of God endures for ever. And it
must be that Antichrist perish, and be discomfited by ye breath of the mouth of
Christ, and that he be abolished by the brightness of his coming. All kings,
and all the earth can do nothing against this determination. But I beseech the
Almighty, that it will please him to inspire into the hearts of all Kings and
peoples, a true desire of knowing the truth, and to search for their
salvation: a true zeal to bring Christendom again to true unity under the
obedience of Christ: a true aff^^^^ on to reign and to live in him, as they
reign and live by him: to the end that Kings being well obeyed of their
people, and the people well commanded of their Kings, we may see in our days
one only Jesus Christ, acknowledged of all peoples and Kings, to be ye King
of Kings, and Lord of Lords and in his Church the only mediator, fauiour,
and Lawegiuer.

Amen.
Conclusions.
THe Church is considered, as it is to be seen, or not to be seen.

The Church not to be seen, is the company of those whom God has chosen to
everlasting life, in all times and places.

The Church that is to be seen, is the company of those, who are called
thereinto, and is considered according to certain times and places.

There is notwithstanding but one Church, but considered diuersely: In that
which is to be seen, as the corn with the chasse: in that which is not to be
seen, as the corn threshed and fanned.

This visible Church was first without the law, afterward under the law, tied
to one certain place and family. Now through grace it is spread throughout the
world, one place having no more privilege then an other, whereof it is called
Catholic, that is to say, universal.

The Catholic Church comprehends under it all assemblies of Christians, in all regions, who^ we call Churches, as we call parts of the sea, the sea:
distinguishing the^ notwithstanding by their names, as the Church of Greece, of
Affrike etc.

Of the parts of the Church, as the members of the same body, yea though it be
universal, some are pure and some impure, and of those that are impure, some
are more and some less impure.

The pure Churches are those, in which the word of God is purely preached, and
the sacraments duly administered, albeit that in respect of God there is nothing
pure. The one they call the sound and true Churches, the other (but unproperly)
Catholic Churches.

The impure are those, in which the word of God, and his sacraments are ill
administered, whatsoever other outward marckes they can pretend.

And because that all the doctrine of Christ is faith and charity, we call those
that are impure in the doctrine of faith, heretical Churches, and those that
have separated themselves from the unity, which they do through lack of
charity, Schismatical.

And some there are, that are both heretical and Schismatical, as the Church
of Rome, and they that at this day cleave unto it: for they maintain many
damnable heresies, and persecute and excommunicate those that desire
reformation. Notwithstanding forasmuch as the profession of Christ remains
there in some sort, we deny them not the name of a Church, as we call a man,
a man, how sick or brainelesse soever he be.

To discern the pure churches from the impure, God has delivered us his word
contained in the scriptures, the which is perfect and clear to salvation: for
it has for his aucthor, the most perfect father of light.

This is that therefore, by which men ought to determine the controversies of
this time, and to reform ye Church, as the commonwealth according to the
laws, abolishing that, which God has there forbidden us, holding that for
forbidden in his service, which he has not ordained, looking to yt which he
has commanded, and interpreting his will by it self concerning those things
that are in controversy.

The Churches which follow that will, cannot err, for that is the way of
salvation, and following that, God guides them also by his spirit which
enlightneth them, and is inseparably joined thereto.

Contrariwise, the Churches which depart from it, may, and do err, yea and
that in the matter of salvation, for that they go out of the way of salvation.
Neither can they beast of the spirit: for God bestows it not but upon his
sheep, neither does he hold any for his sheep, but those that hear his voice.

Therefore the Church following man's fantasy, and not the law of God, has
greatly erred in all her particular states and times, even until the crucifiyng
of the son of God, that is to say, her own salvation: As in our time we say
that the Church of Rome does adore and worship the son of perdition, that is
to say, Antichrist.

The Church is a body, and Christ the son of God is the head thereof, giving
efficacy to the Ministry of his Gospel, through his spirit, and by the
self same assisting all those that truly call upon him. And this is that
wherein consists the administration or government of the head of the Church.

And as touching ye ministerial head, no man may be it. For the Church, by the
coming of Christ, is spread throughout the whole world, and none can exercise
that ministry throughout the world: but rather every pastor represents
Christ in his charge.

And in deed our savior Christ before he ascended into heaven ordained none
such, neither did any of the Apostles exercise any such office, and the whole
primitive Church never knew of it.

Wherefore, following the word of God and the opinion of the same church, we
hold that the Papal See, which under this false title exercises tyranny over
all the world, is Antichrist, the which without other proofs and
circumstances, may be verified by his doctrine alone.

Notwithstanding that this Papal See, placed in one part of the Church, is not
the Church, neither a part of the Church, but as a pestilence to the body of
the Church, which has corrupted and infected all as much as it could, and had
utterly choked it, without the special mercy of God.

We do therefore depart from the papacy, and not from the Church, from
Idols, and not from the temple, from Tyranme, and not from the common wealth,
from the plague, and not from the City, being ready, entirely to knit and
join our selves again, when Antichrist, and the evil which he has brought
in, shall be taken away.

And in waiting for this we reform the Ministry of the word of God, and as
nigh as we can, his service, according to his institution, by the example of the
Apostles excommunicated out of Jerusalem, which yet notwithstanding is not to
buyld altar against altar, for by Christ his coming all the earth is made the
Lords altar.

Our ministers, who have begone this work, have the same calling that our
adversaries pretend: for they were elders and doctors ordained as they were,
and by them, and they have done nothing, but followed their calling, whereas
the others had utterly abandoned it.

And they which followed the^ afterward, had a much better calling then our
adversaries: for besides that they were ordained by those first, who had
authority to do it, they were ordained according to the practice of the
Apostles and ancient Canons, which are neglected in the Church of Rome.

Moreover, besides this ordinary vocation, the extraordinary wonders, which
God has wrought, in these last times by their Ministry, and in the favor
thereof, may sufficiently witness that they do the work of God, and not of
men.

FINIS.
Imprinted at London by Christopher Barker, Printer to the Queens Majesty.


