THE CLEANSING of the Leper: DISCOVRSED, AND OPENED, FIRST, in certain
Lectures within the Cathedral Church of Saint Paul, in London; upon occasion
of that great visitation of the Plague, in the year of our Lord, 1603.

And now thought meet to be published, for our present instruction and comfort;
as being fitted both to this time of pestilence, and of famine amongst us.

Behold; thou art now made whole: sin no more; least a worse thing come unto
thee. Ioh. 5. By HENRY MORLEY, Bachelour of Divinity.

Imprinted at London, by H. L. for Clement Knight: and are to be sold at the
sign of the holy Lamb, in Paul's Churchyard. 1609.

TO THE MOST Reverend Father in GOD, RICHARD, the Lord Archbishop of
Canterbury his Grace, Primate and Metropolitan of all England, one of his
Majesty's most Honorable privy Council, and Chancellor of the University of
Oxford.
RIght Honorable, and my gracious good Lord: the common Apology that is made
for the publishing of books ( viz. the entreaty and importunity of friends)
with a complaint, notwithstanding, of the excessive number thereof already; I
take to bemuch like that formal speech used by guests at great feasts: who will
seem to find fault with the excess of cheer and superfluity of dishes; and
yet taste and eat of every one that is before them. The best Apology (I
suppose) my self and others can make herein (for, so many Critics have we in
these days, that nothing can well pass without an Apology) is the necessity
or rather iniquity of this age: wherein, the manifold opposition to Truth,
and the most shameful dishonor to Piety (the one by Papists and
Schismatickes; the other by Atheists and Libertines) do seem to call, as Moses
sometimes did to the tribe of Leui, to put every man his sword by his side
(that has skill to handle it) and to consecrate his hands unto God, in the
zeal and defense of them. In performance of which duty, if there be any
thing, in this simple Work, worthy of regard; I humbly consecrate the same
(next unto God) to the honor of your Grace: to whom it does most justly
belong; both in regard of my bounden duty (as your servant) and of your
Graces sundry favors and benefittes toward me. To which, please it you to
add your honorable patronage of this small Treatise, against the calumnies of
such Adversaries as it has to encounter with; I shall think my self yet more
deeply engaged (in any possible service) to your good Lordshippe. Thus,
craving your Honorable acceptance of my poor endeavors; I humbly take my
leave: with hearty and earnest prayer to God, for your Graces health and
happiness (to the prosperous and good estate of this our Church) long to
continue.

Your Graces humble Chaplain and Servant, HENRY MORLEY.

The Matters contained in this Book.
1 THe combining of Christ's preaching and his working of miracles together;
with the reasons thereof. page 1 2 The particular miracle of the healing of the
Leper, and the several points observed in it. page 5. 3 A description of the
nature and quality of the Leprosy; and of the contagion, and difficulty of
the curing thereof. page 6 4 The Lepers faith in coming unto Christ, and in
making a petition to be healed of him; comme^ding faith without diffidence in
prayer. page 8 5 The Lepers humility and reverence unto Christ, in worshipping
him and falling down before him; commending humility and reverence in prayer.
page 11 6 The honor that the Leper gives unto Christ, stiling him with the
name of a Lord, acknowledging him to be Lord God Almighty, the sovereign Lord
of heaven and earth. page 17 7 The form of the Lepers petition (in saying Si
vis, potes, if thou will, thou can make me clean) cleared from imputation of
distrust and diffidence of Christ's goodness toward him. page 24 8 The matter of
the Lepers petition, in praying for the health of his body, showing the
lawfulness of praying for temporal things, and how far and in what sort we
ought to pray for them. page 26 9 The ground of the Lepers petition: which is,
the acknowledgement of Christ's will and the confident assurance of his power,
in saying, Si vis, potes, if thou will thou can. page 32 10 Two propositions
diduced from thence: the one, that the will of God is the prime and principal
cause of Gods works; the other, that the will of God is omnipotent able to do
whatsoever it will. Ibid. 5 11 The former point proved in diverse cases, both of
election, reprobation, etc. of all which the will of God is showed to be the
first, immediate and principal cause. page 33 12 That the will of God is
always just, though many times secret and hid from us; and that there is
always a just reason though not a superior cause of it. page 36 13 Against
the heresy of the Pelagians and some of the Papists, affirming election and
reprobation to be of a preuision and foreknowledge in God, the one of faith and
good works, the other of infidelity and the abuse of his grace. page 38 14
Notwithstanding, the will of God is not the sole cause of most of his works,
and particularly of man's salvation: but the will of man works with the will
of God in the accomplishment thereof. page 43 15 Neither is the mere will of
God the only cause or any cause of the damnation of the wicked, without the
malice and wickedness proceeding from man's own will. page 47 16 The difference
of reprobation and damnation, or of negative and positive reprobation: the one
depending upon the will of God only; the other having respect unto the
wickedness of man. page 48 17 The conclusion of the first point, together with
the right use to be made of it. page 49 18 The second point, concerning the
omnipotency of Gods will; that nothing is able to resist or to hinder the
fulfilling of it. page 51 19 Of diverse manners whereby God wills many things,
although there be but one will in h m properly and indeed: viz. his absolute
will, or the will of his good pleasure, which is always fulfilled. page 53 20
Against the doctrine of universal grace, as it is held by some; as being not
able to confist nor to stand with the absolute will of God and the powerful
and effectual working thereof. page 54 21 The order of Christ's healing the
Leper, by his hand, and by his tongue, with diverse reasons of both. page 56 22
The first reason, why Christ uses his hand in healing the Leper; being able to
have healed him without touching him: viz. to show that he was not subject to
the law as others, but was Lord of it. pa. 57 23 The second reason, to show
that he did not fear to take the infection, nor refuse to do a work of
piety, upon any niceness and squeamishness: wherein is showed how far
charity is to be extended in times of infection. page 61 24 The third reason,
to show that he esteemed more of charity then of the ceremonies of the law,
and that all things are to yield unto piety and charity. Wherein is showed
how far charity is to be extended in a time of famine. page 69 25 The reasons
why Christ uses his tongue in healing the Leper, being able to have healed him
without speaking. page 79 26 The first reason, which was to manifest the
miracle to have been done by him and no other: wherein is showed the
necessary use of a more public life, with a comparison between it, and that
which is private, occupied for the most part in speculation. page 79 80 27 The
second reason, which was to heal him after a decent manner: not by dumb shows
or apish gestures; but by an express significant voice, joined with an outward
sign or action: Against the practice of coniurers, iugglers, and all
impostors. page 84 28 The third reason, which was to show the virtue and power
of his speech, having as much virtue and efficacy in his words as in his
works. Wherein is showed the mighty power and efficacy of Gods word. page 90
29 The particular words which Christ uses in healing, viz. volo mundare;
declaring his mercy and goodness to the Leper with his willingness and readiness
to heal him in saying volo, I will: and his actual operation and performance
of it in saying, mu^dare, be thou clean. page 98 30 The former showed in being
willing to help us not only when we pray, but also before we pray: with the
reason why God does not sometimes grant our prayers, nor extend his mercy
generally to al. page 99 31 The latter showed in the performance of his
promises, and in doing actually and really whatsoever he will have done.
Wherein is manifested the stabilitie and certainty of Gods will and decree
concerning election and reprobation, and all other things; being most immutable
and inviolable. page 104. 32 Diverse mysteries signified in Christ's touching the
Leper, and in saying, volo, mundare, I will be thou clean. page, 112 33 The
cure ensuing hereupon, wrought by so small means, viz. by the word of his
mouth and by the touch of his hand only; showing the wonderful power of
Christ, able to do so great things by so weak means. page 116 34 That it is
not in the strength and virtue of the means, but in the might and power of
Gods will, whereby he works. page 119. 120. 35 Why God uses any means,
being able to work without them; and using means why he uses commonly weak
and contemptible means. page 121 36 Two reasons why God uses some means, being
as well able to have wrought without them: one to keep a decent order in
things; the other to honor the creatures, making them coworkers with himself.
page 122. 123 37 Against diverse loyterers, who laying all upon God, they
themselves become altogether idle, in doing and working nothing at al with him.
These of three sorts. page 126 28 The first, of such as depend so much upon
Gods predestination, that they neglect altogether the second causes and
subordinate means of their salvation. page 127 39 The second, of such as depend
so much upon Gods providence in providing for them, that they neglect and
refuse all labor and other means of providing for themselves. page 132 40 The
third, of such as depend so much upon Gods protection and care over them, that
in times of danger they neglect all means of their preservation. page 136 41
Two reasons also why God uses so small and weak means, being able to have
used both greater and mightier means. page 140 42 The first, that we should
not ascribe that to the second cause and the means, which is wholly due unto
God. page 140. 141 43 The second, that we should not trust in the greatness of
the means, nor despair in the weakness thereof, but to depend upon Gods power,
who is able to work by small as well as by great means. page 142 44 That the
Leper is not only healed by small means, but also after a wonderful and
strange manner, viz. both presently and suddenly; whereof no other reason can
be given but only Gods power. page 145 45 The benefit and comfort that comes
unto us by the present and ready help that God does send us in our greatest
need. page 149 46 Christ's charge unto the Leper cleared from the imputation of
in civility and ingratitude, and his wisdom and loving affection commended
for our instruction and imitation. page 152 47 The moral respects which Christ
had, in willing the Leper to tell no man of his cleansing. page 160 48 The
first, in regard of modesty, not caring to have his good deeds to be
proclaimed, and to teach us not to publish our good deeds in boasting of the^.
Also how far we may manifest them unto the world. page 161 49 The second, in
regard of humility, flying vain glory, and to teach us not to seek the vain
applause and commendation of men. To which there are four motives, with a
limitation how far and with what respects we may receive the praise of men.
page 165 50 The third, in regard of piety, willing to give all the glory unto
God, and to teach us not to ascribe any thing unto our selves, but to give all
the praise and honor unto God, for all the good that either we have or do.
page 176 51 Christ's charge unto the Leper, to show himself unto the Priest,
which was to discern and judge of his healing, and to pronounce him clean.
Wherein is a three fold regard: first, of the Leper: secondly, of himself:
thirdly, of the Priest. page 180 52 The reason concerning the Leper, to perform
obedience unto the law. With the straight bond and obligatorie power not only
in the moral law of God, but also in the politic laws of men. page 181 53
Against the Anabaptists and Papists, who resist and oppose themselves against
civil government under a pretense of Christian liberty, or some special
immunitie. page 183 54 Against Schismatickes and disordered persons, who spurn
and kick against the ecclesiastical regiment, and the ceremonies of the
Church, under a color of the purity and sincerity of Gods word. Wherein is
showed how far, nature, reason, custom, humane constitutions, etc. without
express scripture, are to sway in matters of ecclesiastical government. pa.
187 55 The reason concerning Christ himself Which was, to avoid offense that
would have been taken at him; and how to carry our selves toward others in
the case of scandals. page 194 56 The nature and kinds of scandals, whereof
some active, and some passive, etc. page 195 57 That a special care is to be
had of the active scandal in giving no just offense: which proceeds of two
especial causes, either of corrupt doctrine or corrupt life. page 196 58 The
passive scandal considered according to the conditions of two sorts of
persons: the one mali^ious taking offense at good things; the other weak ^aking
offense at indifferent things. page 202 59 That of the scandal of malicious
men we ^eed not to be very sollicitous; exemplified in two ^articular cases.
page 203 60 That of the scandal of weak ones we ought ^o have some care, in
condescending something unto ^^eir weakness; wherein is showed how far, and how
^ong. page 206 61 The reason concerning the Priest, to give him his due, and
the honor that belonged unto him: whose office was to judge of the Leprosy,
and to pronounce sentence of the cleansing thereof. page 212 62 The great
honor that God has vouchsafed to the Priests of the Law from time to time,
specified in four particulars. page 213 63 The honor that God has vouchsafed
to the ministers of the Gospel, showed in the honor of their office and of
their person. page 216. 64 The contempt of Gods ministers in these days, and
the haynousnes of the sin, with the causes of this contempt. page 221. 224 65
Reverence and obedience to be yielded unto the^, notwithstanding their
unworthiness many times; due in regard of the dignity of their office, though
not in regard of the merit of their person. page 230 66 The third charge, to
offer his gift, with the reason thereof: which was to testify his thankfulness
unto God. page 232 67 That for the same cause God commanded the first fruits,
sacrifices, tenthes, oblations etc. to be offered unto him: which he has given
from himself unto the Priests for their service and maintenance. page 233 68
That the law of tithes and oblations is not (...) mere ceremonial and
judicial law, but also moral^ in the substance, and proportion, and equity
thereof page 23^ 69 That although the law of tithes do not bind Christians,
as they were due to the Leuitical priests, yet the Church has liberty to
retain the same, and to ordain it again, as it does. page 237 70 Four
propositions arising from the right which God has transferred from himself,
and has made over unto his ministers for their service. page 241 71 The first,
that the maintenance of ministers, is not a mere humane constitution, but a
divine ordinance, due unto them iure diuino, by a divine right or by the law of
God. page 241. 242. 72 Also that it is not a voluntary and beggarly alms
given in charity, but an honorable tribute due in justice: and that God did
not see it fit that ministers should live upon mere benevolence, and the
voluntary contributions of the people with the reasons thereof. page 242. 243
73 The second, that the maintenance of ministers ought to be a liberal, and a
bountiful maintenance; proved by the law of nature, of nations, of Christ, and
of Christian Princes. page 246 74 The third, that tenthes, and oblations, and
other revenues of the Church, do properly belong to Ecclesiastical and not
to any temporal persons. page 254 75 That to alienate the goods of the Church,
either by diuerting them without just cause to civil uses, or by converting
them fraudulently and unjustly to our own uses, cannot be without injury unto
God and to the Church. page 256 76 Of the great danger hereof, and the
grievous punishments that have followed after it, with an exhortation and a
Caueatto beware of it. p. 258. 267 77 The fourth, that tithes and oblations
with other duties belonging to the Church, are to be tendered willingly and
cheerfully, without grudging and murmuring, and without contesting and
cauilling about them; against the wicked practice in these days. page 271 78
The ground and reason of the charge; which is the law and commandment of
Moses, and why Christ would have the Leper to perform obedidience unto it,
being shortly after to be abolished: which was, to honor Moses and his law.
page 279 79 Of the honor dew to the laws and ceremonies of our Church, in
regard of the first authors and obseruers of them; the which are cleared of the
imputation of popery and superstition. page 284 80 Another special end of the
Lepers oblation: which besides the testification of his thankfulness was to be
a testimony against the priests. page 290 81 How God keeps records and
witnesses, to leave us without excuse; and therefore to seek for the
testimony of Gods spirit, and the testimony of a good conscience to secure us
against all witnesses that come against us. 291 82 The allegory of the whole
text applied to the cleansing of sin, which is the leprosy of the soul,
wrought by Christ Jesus, the Physitio^ that cleanses, and the high Priest that
does pronounce us to be clean; with the testifying of our thankfulness for
it. page 295
THE CLEANsing of the Leper.
Matthew. 8. Verse 2.3.4. And lo there came a Leper and worshipped him saying,
Lord if thou will, thou can make me clean.

And Jesus stretching forth his hand touched him saying, I will be thou clean,
and immediately his leprosy was cleansed.

Then Jesus said unto him, See thou tell no man, but go and show thy self
unto the Priest, and offer the gift that Moses commanded for a witness to
them.


IT is observed by the fathers that the creation of the World was not performed
with such labor and difficulty as the redemption of it.

In the creation God used his word only; for, dixit and facta sunt, he spoke
the word and they were made: Psalm. 33.9
Psalm. 33.9. But in the redemption of it, Christ used both words and deeds
too: Bern. incant. ser. 20
for multa dixit, multa fecit, and multa pertulit (says S. Bernard; he spoke
many things, he did many things, and he suffered many things. Which was the
cause that in performing the office of his mediation, he did not only preach
the word, but also wrought many works and wonders with it, joining unto his
sayings, his doings, to his words, his deeds, and to his doctrine, his works,
and miracles which he wrought. And this not without most wise and just
consideration. Partly (...) win credit and authority unto his preaching,
and to confirm his doctrine by signs and wonders that followed after: Mark
16.20
that as his doctrine was supernatural far above the apprehension of reason;
so the confirmation thereof might be supernatural far above the order and
course of nature. Cant. 2.12
It is the song of the Church in the book of the Canticles, The flowers
appear in the earth, and the voice of the Turtle is heard in our land: that is
says Bernard the truth is found by hearing and by seeing; the voice being
heard and the flowers being seen. Romans 10.17 Et visu veritas co^perta and
auditu. Etsi fides ex auditu, ex vis^ confirmatio est. Audita visa confirmant.
Bern. in Cant. ser. 59. Mat. 3.16
For though faith comes by hearing (as the Apostle says) yet notwithstanding
the confirmation of it is by seeing, according to that which Christ says, Go
show John what things ye have heard and seen; the things which we hear
being confirmed by those things which we see. Therefore is Christ not only
testified by a voice, but also demonstrated by a Dove, and is preached not
only by an audible, but by a visible word; to show that both a voice and a
sign do concur in the assurance of faith. Whereupon, he concludes concerning
the effectual power of Christ's preaching and his working of miracles together,
Intonat tuba salutaris, Bern. ibid.
^oruscant miracula and mundus credit: the ^rumpet of Gods word thundered, his
mi^acles and wonders lightened, and the whole world was thereby converted, and
belee^ed. Partly it was to convince his aduer^a^ies, and to stop the mouths of
those ^alitious Jews who were ready to de^raue, and to cavil with him.

For though his doctrine was most heavenly, having the words of eternal life
with him, Ioh. 6.68
Ioh. 6.68. Though his speech was most gracious having his lips full of grace.
Psalm. 45.2
Psalm. 45.2. Though his words were most powerful, speaking as one having
authority, Mat. 7.29
Mat. 7.29. In a word, though he excelled all that did ever speak (never any
man spoke like this man; said the officers that were sent to take him. Ioh. 7.46
Ioh. 7.46) Yet notwithstanding the Priests and the Pharisees, with the rest of
the people being maliciously bent against him, how were they ready to
backe-bite, to calumniate and to quarrel with him. Here are many goodly words,
were they ready to say, but we can see no deeds of his, it is an easy matter
to say well, but we would feign see what great matter he is able to do;
therefore our Savior Christ to show that he was not only verbal but real,
and that he was not only mighty in word, Act. 7.12
but mighty in deed, with his sayings he joins his doings, with his words
he joins his deeds, and with the preaching of the word, the working of
miracles too: so as if he preaches in the mountain he does miracles in the
vallie, if he says in the mountain, Beati mundo cord, Mat. 5.2
Blessed are the clean and pure in heart, he says really in the vallie Volo,
mundare, I will, be thou clean, as he does to the Leper here.

In the discourse and handling whereof we observe. 1. The Leper coming to
Christ and putting up a petition unto him to heal him of his seprosie (and lo
there came a Leper and worshipped him saying, Lord if thou will thou can make
me clean.) 2. Our Savior Christ granting his petition and healing his leprosy
(Jesus stretching forth his hand touched him saying, I will be thou clean).
3. The cure it self ensuing and following presently upon it (and immediately
his leprosy was cleansed.) 4. The charge or command that Christ gives him
after the cure 1. To tell it to no man (see thou tell no man.) 2. To show
himself unto the Priest (but go and show thy self unto the Priest) 3. To
offer his gift according to to the law of Moses and offer thy gift as MOSES
commanded for a witness to them

Concerning the Leper that makes suite unto Christ, Luke 5.12
S. Luke reporting this history, says that he was no ordinary Leper, but a man
full of leprosy; of the nature quality, signs, symptoms, and effects of which
disease I hold it needelesse to discourse out of the art and rules of physic,
being so copiously described in the holy Scriptures, as you may read in the
thirteen and foureteen Chapters of Leuiticus, Le. 13. and 14
and in diverse other places; only I note two things that are especially
observed of it, the one that it was contagious and infectious: the other that
it was desperate and almost incurable. So contagious it was, Leuit. 13.46
that God provided in the law of Moses, that such persons as were infected
herewith, should live apart from the society and company of others, and
should wear a covering upon their lips; and as any passed by to give
warning unto them by crying; I am unclean, I am unclean: and all to this end,
that others might not be infected by them, insomuch that even Vzziah the King
himself, being smittten with the leprosy for meddling presumptuously with the
Priests office, 2. Chro^. 26 21
lived as a Leper in a house apart by himself, all the days of his life. 2.
Chro. 26.21. And so hard and difficult was the cure, that when the king of
Syria sent Naaman the Leper to the king of Israel to be healed of him: 2.
King. 5.7
See (says the king of Israel) how he seeks a quarrel against me: am I God
to give life? signifying that it was not in the art and cunning of man, but
only in the power of God to heal this disease. So that the disease being so
contagious, and so incurable, the healing of it cannot but be admirable,
vvorthie of an Ecce, Behold, and deserving most diligent heed and attention
unto it. Yea not only the cure, but every circumstance in it, is remarkable,
and worthy of observation, both in the Leper and in CHRIST, and in the whole
course and proceeding of it.

To begin first with the Leper, who is the Petitioner, our Evangelist here
says that he came unto Christ, which was very strange, for in regard of the
law he ought not to have come, and in regard of his sickness he was not well
able to come, Non ad Christum ambulando currimus sed credendo, nec motu
corporis sed voluntate cordis accedimut. Aug. in Ioh. tract. 26.
and yet for all this, venit he comes unto Christ, but how? non tam passibus
corporis quam fide cordis, says S. Austen, not so much with the feet of his
body, as with the faith of his heart, for had his heart bin no better then his
legs, and his faith no better then his feet, he would never have trobled
himself to come unto Christ as he did.

But did the Leper this, think you, in regard of himself only? No verily; but
in regard of us also, to teach us whenever we put up our petitions and
pray unto Christ, Heb. 10.22
to come and draw near unto him with a true heart in assurance of faith. For
as we must first of all have the spirit of grace to stir us up to pray. Zach.
12.10
Zac^ 12.10. So next we must have the spirit of faith. 2. Cor. 4.13
2. Cor. 4.13. to assure us that God will grant and give us those things for
which we pray. Irrisio dei est si quid illum ores quod exoraturum te non
certoco^fidas. Pellic. in Mat.
Otherwise it is but a mocking of God, to pray for that, which we do not look
nor hope to obtain o^ God. Therefore S. James would have us whenever we
pray, to pray in faith, and not to waver, for he that wauereth is like a wave
of the sea, and is not like to receive any thing at the hands of GOD. Which
agrees with the advice that our Savior Christ gives unto us: Mar. 11.24
Mar. 11.24. Whatsoever ye desire when ye pray, believe that ye shall have it,
Bern. in Quad. sermon. 4
and it shall be done unto you. For as Bernard says, that prayer which is
full of distrust and diffidence, measuring Gods power and goodness, either by
the shallowness of our capacity, or by the greatness of our own
unworthiness, is not able to ascend and to fly up unto those hills from
whence our help comes. For as a cold or lukewarm prayer fails and
vanishes in the ascent, because it has not strength and vigor in it: and as
a rash prayer does ascend but yet is driven back again, being altogether
unworthy to come into Gods presence; so a timorous and a diffident prayer
does not ascend at all, nor come up into heaven as the prayers and alms of
Cornelius did Act. 10. being so restrained and held back with fear and
diffidence, that it can never come near the throne of grace to receive mercy,
Heb. 4.16
and to find grace at the hands of God. In which regard, we read that when
the man in the Gospel came unto Christ to make entreaty for his son that was
possessed with a devil, Mar. 9.22
telling him in what sort he was taken, and desiring him after a doubtful
manner to put to his hand, and to help him if he could, saying, Si quid
potes, adiuva nos, if thou can do any thing help us, and have compassion;
insteade of helping him he returns him an answer much like unto his demand:
Mar. 9.23
Si potes credere, omnia possibilia sunt, if thou can beleeeue all things are
possible; signifying, that the way to find help was not to doubt either of
his goodness, or of his power, but undoubtedly to believe that he is both
able and ready also for to help us.

Therefore, in that holy prayer which he has commended unto us, Mat. 6; He
does teach us in the beginning of it to call God our Father, that we should
have a certain confidence of obtaining that which we desire (for what will
not a Father give unto his Sons praying unto him, who has given a far
greater gift before they pray, in vouchsafing to make them his Sons?) and
in the end thereof he has taught us to say Amen, Amen in oratione dominica
significat indubitanter a domino conferri quod petitur. Aug. de Temp. ser. 182
to testify our faith that we do assuredly believe to obtain our desires
and to have our requests granted unto us; for Amen in the Lords prayer, as
Saint Austen says, signifies that GOD does undoubtedly bestow and confer
that which we desire of him.

But does this Leper only come unto Christ? no, but he worships him too. Venit
and adorauit eum, he came and worshipped him. Like unto those wise men, says
Origin that came out of the east. Mat. 2.11. who first fell down and worshipped
Christ, and afterward presented their gifts unto him. Concerning which
vvorshippe and reverence, the other Evangelists making relation do report it
somewhat otherwise. S. Mark. 1.40
Mark cap. 1. ver. 40. says that he besought him, kneeling down unto him.
Luke, 5.12
S. Luke cap. 5. ve. 12. says that he fell upon his face and besought him.
Saint Matthew says here that he came and worshipped him, all which together
do show his wonderful reverence and humility in presenting himself in such
submisse and lowely manner unto him. Whose religious and modest behavior is as
it were a lecture of the like reverence and humility unto us, to teach us when
we present our selves and our prayers unto God to adore and to worship him,
not only with an inward but also with an outward worship, in prostrating our
selves, and in kneeling and falling down before him. 1. Cor. 6.20
For, seeing God has created our souls and our bodies: therefore we are to
worship and to glorify him, not only inwardly with the one, but also outwardly
with the other. A duty usually practiced by holy and devout Christians in
former times, til some fanaticall spirits of late pretending God to be a spirit
and the service of God merely spiritual, and deeming themselves also to be
wholly in the spirit and not in the flesh, have hereby made a very Anatomy or
Sceleton of the service of God, void of all external rites and ceremonies, and
of all outward worship and reverence, notwithstanding they be a singular
means both to excite and stir up piety and devotion in us, as also to
testify our inward reverence and obedience unto God; so as religion and the
service of God, which was wont to be fair and beautiful, and in good liking,
may now complain as he does in the comedy, Plaut. in Aulular.
Pellis and ossa sum miser, that she is lean and withered, and nothing but
skin and bones, being utterly wasted and consumed.

I say, a duty commonly practiced in the Church in former ages, as may appear
by David's liturgy. Psalm. 95.3. Psalm. 95.3
In which he inuiteth the people to the service of God after this manner. O
come let us worship and fall down and kneel before the Lord our Maker: Which
our Church also upon good ground has received into her liturgy, prescribing
us not only to lift up our hearts unto God, but also to kneel and fall down
upon our knees before his foorstoole. Yea I ad further, a duty not only
practiced by the prophets, and the Apostles and other holy men, who being, but
poor and mean persons in the eyes of the World, may perhaps be thought to
have done it out of a kind of pusillanimity, and want of a generous spirit;
but also by Kings, and Princes, and great Monarchs of the World, Number. 16.22 2.
Sa^. 12.16 2. Chron. 6 13
viz. by Moses and Aaron, by David and Solomon, and by our blessed Savior
Christ himself, whose manner was to fall down and to kneel, and to stretch
forth, Luke 22 Prostratus in terra or at medicus and non inclinatur aegrotus?
and to lift up their hands when they prayed unto God; that men of lower rank,
and condition should not disdain, nor think much to do the like, having such
presidents, and being compassed with a cloud of such vvorthie Witnesses.
Heb. 12.1
It is worthy our observation, and very agreeable to this purpose, which is
recorded of the Emperor CONSTANTINE, of whom EVSEBIVS reports that it was
his common custom every day to shut up himself close into some secret place
of his Palace, Eusebius. in vita Constant. lib. 4. cap. 14 16
where he used to have both his Soliloquia, or private conferences with God,
and also to pray deuoutely upon his knees, with a submisse and an humble
voice unto God; which reverence and humility in prayer, he did so approve
both in himself, and in others, that in the coin which passed through all the
parts of his empire, he caused his image or picture to be graven and stamped
upon it after the fashion of an humble and devout suppliant looking up to
heaven and lifting up his hands to God. The which is so far from the vnreuerent
and immodest, or rather irreligious and profane behavior of diverse who presume
to cover their heads even in the celebration of the service of God, and to sit
both when they offer up their prayers, and receive the holy and blessed
Sacrament; that I cannot but greatly wonder, that those men that do thus carry
themselves, either under a pretense of Christian liberty, or else to avoid
popish superstition and idolatry, whose fashion was (as they say) to creep and
crouch when they prayed, and to adore the sacrament by kneeling unto it, when
they received it, do themselves incur hereby, though not popish idolatry
and superstition, yet notwithstanding that which is not much better then it,
heathenish impiety and profanenes: whose fashion was as Tertullian says
adorari sigillaria sua residendo, Tertul. de orat. cap. 13.
to worship their gods and their idols sitting, which had they been truly
wise says he, they would never have done, had it been but to show duty and
reverence unto their gods. For if we account it an uncivil and an unseemly
thing to sit in the presence of a man of honor whom we greatly reverence; how
much irreligio^ is it says the same father, to sit when we offer up our
prayers and thanksgiving unto God in the sight and presence of the glorious
Angels, Quanto magu Angelo adhue orationis asta^te factum istud
irreligiosissimu^ est? Tertull. ^^id.
which stand about us, ready to present our prayers and devotions unto God?
unless perhaps we have a meaning to vpbraid God with our service, as if prayer
were a very troublesome thing, that did greatly tire and weary us, and
therefore we are glad to sit and to ease our selves when we pray unto him.
Far be from Christians, such heathenish and irreligious behavior, knowing
that the more reverence and humility we use in praying unto God, the more we
do commend our prayers unto him.

Thus you see how the Leper prepares himself: now he puts up his petition
unto CHRIST, before which he puts a title of honor, stiling him with the
name of a Lord. Domine si vis, potes mundare me, Lord if thou will, thou can
make me clean. Which is not a word of complement, and of civil worship only,
as when OEADIAH said to ELIAS, Art thou my Lord ELIAH? 1. Kings. 18
but a word of sovereign and divine power, whereby he ascribes an absolute
power and authority, unto him, acknowledging him to be Lord God almighty,
Creator, and Ruler of the whole world. Which if any shall seem to make doubt
of, let him but consider the words following, and it will more then manifestly
appear. For, in making his power equal unto his will, as he does in saying,
If thou will thou can; herein he does acknowledge an omnipotent and a divine
power, which belongs unto God only. For, who is there in the World that is
able to do all that he will, but God only?

There are many men that would gladly do many things that they are not able to
do. As for example, some men have a will and a desire to do hurt; but they
have no power to do it, because there is no power but of God. Romans 13.2
Romans 13.2. And therefore when Pilate said unto Christ, have not I power to
crucify or to loose thee, he answered him, Thou could have no power against
me, Ioh. 19.10
unless it were given thee from above. Ioh. 19.10. On the other side, some men
have a will and a desire to do good, but they have no power to perform it,
because the spirit is willing but the flesh is weak. Mat. 26.41
Mat. 26.41. And therefore, Saint Paul says, To will, is present with me, but
I find no means to perform that which is good. Romans 7.18. Romans 7.1^
But as for Christ he is able to do all that he will; as the Leper here
confesses him: Si vis potes, If thou will thou can; and therefore in
acknowledging this, he does acknowledge him to be God, because this is a
property belonging to God only: as the Psalmist says, God is in heaven and
does whatsoever he will. Psalm. 115.3. Psalm. 115.3
If you desire to see the truth hereof, do but consider a little the works that
he did, and you shall manifestly perceive that to be true which he says of
himself. Ioh. 10. Ioh. 10.25
Opera quaefacio, ipsa testimonium perhibent de me, The works which I do,
they bear witness of me. For he that is able to do so great works as these,
viz. to give sight to the blind, to give hearing to the deaf, to give
strength to the lame, to heal the sick, to raise the dead, to cast out
devils, and many more like unto these, does plainly show that he has an
omnipotent and a divine power, equal unto his will, being able to do
whatsoever he will do. I do not deny but that Christ is able to do by his
absolute power, many things that he will not do: Matt. 4.3
as he is able to make stones to become bread, he is able of the stones to
raise up children unto Abraham, Mat. 3.9
he is able to make a Camel to go through the eye of a needle, Mat. 19
he is able to command twelve legions of Angels to assist him; Mat. 26
and many other things he is able to do which he will not do: but then by his
actual power, ^endei absoluta. ^endei actualis, seu ^endei ordinaria

which the Schoolmen call, his ordinary power, whatsoever he will do, he is
able to do, which is a power far above the power of any creatnre; and
therefore this fullness of power being in Christ, not by any delegate power,
communicated and received from an other, as the Apostles was wherewith they did
miracles, but by an absolute power subsisting in his own nature, and having
original, and beginning from himself, herein maugre the malice of all Jews,
Turks, Pagans, and Heretics, both the Leper and all of us that are
Christians, do acknowledge and profess, that he is not only a man, but GOD
and man in one person, begotten of the substance of his Father, from all
eternity, and equal unto him in all power and glory. Which, if any shall
presume to call into question in regard of his poor and base estate here in
this World, making himself of no reputation, and taking upon him the form of
a servant, and being found in the shape of a man (as the Apostell says)
Philippians, 2. Chapter 7. Phil. 2.7
Verse; Let him know for a surety that he did not so take upon him the
nature of man, that therewith he did lose the nature, of GOD; but as
NAZIANZENE, and AUSTEN do most truly affirm, permansit quod erat, Nazianzen.
orat. 3 de Theolog.
and assumpsit quod non erat, he did so assume that which he was not before,
namely man, that he remained that which he was before, namely God. The which
GREGORY NAZIANZENE, does most excellently demonstrate and set out in one of
his Orations, showing how the conditions and properties of both his natures
concurred together in him, through the course of his whole life. He is borne
of his mother and wrapped in swaddling cloutes (says he^e) as being a man;
Luke 2.7
but a star does manifest him, Matt. 2
and the Wisemen adore him, as being God. He is bap tised of John the Baptist
in the river Jordan as being a man: Mat. 3.16
but the holy Ghost descends upon him; and the Father gives a testimony of
him as being God. Mar. 1.12
He is tempted of the devil, and lives among the wild beasts, as he is man:
but he overcomes the devil, Mat. 4
and the Angels do serve and minister unto him, Ioh. 4
as he is God. He trauails and is weary, he is hungry and thirsty, as he is
man: but he refreshes the weary, and feeds the hungry, Ioh. 7
and gives drink to the thirsty, as he is God. He sleeps in the ship, Mat. 8
and his Disciples awake him, as he is man: but he rebukes the winds, and
stilleth the raging sea, as he is God. He is poor and needy, Mat. 9
and has not a house to put his head in, as he is man: but he is rich and
mighty, and has all the world at command as he is God. He is sorrowful and
heavy, Mat. 26
and he weeps and prays as he is man: but he hears our prayers, and
comfort us by his spirit, Ioh. 14.
as he is God. He is subject to infirmities, Esaias 53
and is smitten and wounded as he is man; but, he helps our infirmities and
heals our sickness as he is God. Mat. 26 Mat. 27.
He is mocked and whipped, he is reviled and buffeted, condemned and crucified,
as he is man; but he makes the valle of the I emple to rent, and the graves to
open, and the sun to hide his face thereat, as he is God. He dies and is
buried, Ioh, 19.
and lies in his grave as he is man: but he overcomes Death, and destroieth
the Devil, and raises himself unto life again, as he is God. Mat. 28
Being risen he appears unto his Disciples, Luke 24
and does eat and drink with them as he is man: but afterward he ascends
into heaven, Acts 1
and sits at the right hand of his Father as he is God. All which, with
much more besides, does evidently show that he is not an earthly Lord holding
his dominion and Lordship of some other greater then himself; but a heavenly
Lord, or a Lord in Capite (as the Laweyers speak, not depending upon any
other, but absolute in himself, being the very self same Lord, who is
called, Rex regum, Psalm. 50.1
and Dominus dominantium, the King of kings; and the Lord of lords: In which
sense the Leper also styles him here with the name and honor of a Lord,
saying; Domine si vis potes mundare me, Lord if thou will thou can make me
clean.

The way being thus made, the petition it self now follows: the form and
manner whereof is in this wise, Si vis potes mundare me, if thou will, thou
can make me clean. We read of diverse Suitors that have come unto Christ,
but not all after one and the self same fashion. Some make their petitions
plainly, and directly, as the Woman of Canaan: Mat. 15.22
Mathewe 15.22. Have mercy on me, O Lord, my Daughter is grievously vexed
with a Devil; and as the blind man, Luke 18. JESUS the son of David have
mercy on me. Luke 18.39
Some more closely and covertly, as the Sisters of Lazarus that said unto
Christ, Quem am as infirmatur, He whom thou love is sick. Ioh. 11.3
John 11.3. and the Mother of our Savior CHRRIST saying, unto him. John, 2.
Vinum non habent, Ioh. 2.3
they have no Wine. Which was a close and a modest kind of asking; to which
we may add the Leper, saying, unto Christ here: Si vis potes mundare me, if
thou will thou can make me clean, which is a covert and an indirect kind
of begging too. And therefore though our Evangelist here says nothing
expreslie of his asking, and the words make no great semblance of a petition,
yet Saint MARK, and Saint LVKE, Mark 1 Luke 5
both say that he came and besought him, saying, Si vis, potes mundare me, if
thou will thou can make me clean.

The form and manner of which Petition, if any shall suppose to savor
strongly of distrust, and diffidence of Christ's willingness and goodness
toward him, because he says, Si vis, De voluntate Domini non dubitauit
quasi pietatis incredulus, sed quasi colluvionis sua conscius non praesumpsit.
Amb. in Luo.
if thou will, which words carry some semblance of doubt and diffidence: Saint
AMBROSE shall answer for him, that he did not doubt of Christ's will and of
his goodness out of any distrust, or infidelity: but he would not presume
too much upon it in regard of his own unworthiness; Non de voluntate Christi
ad omne bonum parata dubitat, sed de iudicio voluntatis ^ius. Chrysostom. in Mat.
or as Chrysostom says, he did not doubt of Christ's will which is ready to do
good; but of his own judgment concerning his will, whether that was good: so
as he did not doubt whether Christ would do all that was good, for him; but
rather whether that was good that he would have Christ to do for him. And
therefore he prays after a modest manner, acknowledging both Christ's power,
and his goodness also; but yet submitting himself unto it, as knowing best
how to judge and to dispose of it, in saying, Si vis potes, if thou vvilt, thou
can.

The subject and matter of whose petition is, to be healed of his leprosy;
which some perhaps will censure to be very preposterous, in seeking and
desiring the health of his body, before the health of his soul: like unto
diverse men who falling sick, will first send for the Physician, and being past
recovery will then send for the Preacher; which course I confess not only to
be preposterous, but to be irreligious too But it is very credible that Christ
having healed the Leper before in his soul; Mosest diuinae virtutis prius
meder^ cordi quam corpori. Sanat prius quod potius. Ber. in par. sermon. 66 Mat.
9 Mat. 5
whose manner and custom was (as Bernard says) first to heal the soul
before he heales the body, healing that first which is best (as may appear
both by the man that was sick of the palsy. Mat. 9. and by the woman that was
diseased with an issue of blood. Mark, 5. and by the Leper also here in this
place, who worshipped and confessed Christ to be God before he healed the
leprosy of his body) that he comes now in the strength of his faith, and
desires to be healed in his body also; it being a thing not unlawful to pray
for the health of the one, as well as for the health of the other. For, though
we ought first and principally to pray for spiritual and heavenly things, as
our Savior Christ wills us first to seek the kingdom of heaven, Mat. 7
Thom. 2.2. quaest. 83. art. 4.
and the righteousness thereof: yet secondarily, we pray also for corporal
and temporal things, as certain helps and means to attain unto better
things. And therefore our Savior in that holy prayer which he has taught us,
after 3. petitions for spiritual graces, he adds one for temporal
blessings, to show that in a decent order, Debemus ista ae deo petere sed
secundo and tertio leco; vt primas parts orationis nostrae animae aemor and
defideriu^ vitae eternae obtiueat. Aug. de Temp. ser 60.
and in their dew place, we may pray for the one, as well as for the other.

Only this we are to be careful of, that we be not too forward nor too
greedy in praying for them, but to pray with sobriety and moderation, and
with submission to the will of God, as the Leper does here: Si vis potes, if
thou will thou can. As if he should say, Lord, I do not doubt but thou art
able to heal me; heal me I beseech thee if it be thy will, and if thou
see it to be good for me. Which is the true difference we are to make in
praying for spiritual and temporal blessings; for the one we may pray
absolutely if we will, for the other we are to pray conditionally and with
submission to the will of God as the Leper does; Lord if thou will thou can
make me clean. It is not to be doubted but that the Leper, had he prayed
for the health of his soul, as he does for the health of his body, desiring
remission of his sins, justification by faith, reconciliation with God, his
grace here in this life, and glory and blessedness in the life to come, all
which are spiritual blessings and cannot choose but be always good for us,
then he needed not to have prayed either covertly or co^ditionally, Si vis
potes, if thou will thou can, but he might have prayed both directly and
absolutely with the Prophet David Sana anima^ meam Domine, heal my soul, O
Lord, Psalm. 41.4. But because he prays for the health of his body which is a
temporal benefit, and such an one as God in his wisdom many times does see
not to be good for us, (for many men are better in sickness then they are in
health) therefore he prays conditionally and with submission to the will of
God. Domine si vis, potes mundare me, Lord, if thou will thou can make me
clean. To teach us also no doubt how to stand affected in praying for these
outward and temporal blessings, whether it be health, wealth, peace, plenty,
liberty, and deliverance from dangers and calamities, as the sword, the famine,
the pestilence, to which we are and have been a long time subject (the Lord
give us grace to turn unto him, that so he may turn away both these and all
other his judgments from us) viz to be affected and like minded a^ David was,
2. Sam. 15.25
when he was in danger and fled from his son Absolon that rebelled against
him, to say with him, If I shall find favor in the eyes of the Lord he will
bring me again: if not, here I am let him do to me as seems good in his
eyes; so likewise if we shall find favor in the eyes of the Lord, or if he
sees it to be a favor to give it unto us (for some things God does give us in
his great displeasure, Quaedam Deus negat propitius, quedam concedit iratus
Aug. Multis propitius Deus non tribuit quod volunt vt quod vtile est tribuat.
Aug. de unit. Eccle.
and some things he does deny us in his great love and mercy, denying to many
that which they desire, that he may give them that which is good for them.) I
say if God sees it to be a favor indeed to give these things unto us, he
will give us health, wealth, peace, plenty, liberty, prosperity, and will
preserve and deliver us both from the famine and the pestilence, which do lie
now at our gates as Hanniball sometimes did at the gates of Rome, threatening
calamity and destruction unto us; if not, let him do to us as seems good in
his eyes: here we are, ready to obey his will, either by doing or suffering of
it.

This ought to be the affection of every good Christian touching these outward
and temporal things, to pray with moderation and submission unto the will of
God, according to the direction that S. Bernard gives, Temporalia si
defuerint, Bern. de 4. modis orandi.
petenda quidem sunt, sed non sunt nimium requirenda: if we want te^porall
things necessary for this life, it is not unlawful to pray for them: but we
may not pray too carefully, nor too earnestly for them; not only by the
example of this Leper, but also by an example without all exception even of
Christ himself: who praying for outward deliverance, which was a temporal
benefit, prays both with condition and submission too, Mat. 26.39
Father if it be possible let this cup pass away from me; yet not my will but
thy will be done. Which was the cause that moved the Leper to pray so closely
and so submissiuely as he does, acknowledging Christ's power, but submitting
himself unto his will, in saving, Si vis potes mundare me, if thou will thou
can make me clean.

Which petition like unto those Cherubins which looked toward the Mercyseate,
Exodus 37.9.
Exodus 37.9. seems to have an eye unto two things in Christ; unto his will and
unto his power: to his will, in saying, Si vis, if thou vvilt: to his power in
saying potes mundare me, thou can make me clean: in the one insinuating and
acknowledging that both his cleansing and all things else, do proceed from his
will, as the first and chief cause of all, and therefore he says first, Si
vis, if thou will: In the other signifying plainly that his power is
omnipotent, able to do whatsoever he will, and therefore upon the grant of
his will he infers his power: Si vis, potes, if thou will, thou can.

For the first, Voluntas dei omnium quae sunt ipsa est causa. Aug.
viz. that the will of God is the first and principal efficient cause of all
those works which God does externally out of himself as the Schoole^en
speak, Voluntatis dei quae omnium causa, nulla causa. Hugo de S. Vict.
so as there is no superior nor ^recedent cause moving the same, it does
^uidently and manifestly appear by the ^ternitie and omnipotency of Gods will.
For seeing that nothing is before the will of GOD as being eternal, and
nothing greater then it as being omnipotent, Aug. lib. 1. contra Man. cap. 2.
and lib. 83. quaest. Quaest. 28
as Saint AUSTEN says; hence it follows necessarily that there can be no
cause ey^her of it or before it; but this is as it were the cause of all
causes, and the first moouer of every thing. Voluntas Dei est causa causarum
and extra vel vltra illam, ratio non qua renda, immo vltra nihil est
The truth whereof will more clearly appear unto our senses by a particular
view and consideration of the works of God; of all which you shall find no
cause to be above, or before the will of God, but contrariwise this to be both
the prime and principal cause of all. Quare hos eligat in gloriam and illos
reprobauit, no^ habet rationem nisi diuinam voluntatem. Thom. sum. par. 2. q.
23.
To begin with one of the greatest of Gods works which is his eternal
decree of predestination: what is the cause that God does elect and choose some,
in making them vessels of mercy to manifest his goodness and bounty in the^,
contrarily that he does reject and refuse others, Romans 9.22
in making them vessels of wrath to show his justice and his power in them,
Diuersitas seruandorum a damnandis, prouenit a principali intention primi
agentis. Thom. ibid.
but only the will and pleasure of God, as the first immediate cause of it:
whereof if there be any other causes, they are all in relation unto it, and
have a certain kind of dependency upon it, as upon the first and principal
cause of all. Let the case be if you please of Peter and Judas: I demand what
the cause was that God had mercy upon Peter in saving him, and not upon Judas
in damning him? will you say because Peter repented and Judas despayred? It is
true indeed this was a secondarie and a mediate cause: but I demand then
again, why did Peter repent, and Judas despair? but because it pleased God to
give repentance to the one, and would not give it unto the other; in regard
he had in his eternal decree elected the one, and rejected the other. For, if
God would have given repentance and faith to Judas as well as he did to Peter,
Judas had been saved as well as Peter; and therefore the will of God was the
first and maine cause of the salvation of the one and reprobatio^ of the other,
according to the conclusion which the Apostle makes, Romans 9.18. Romans 9.18
God will have mercy on whom he will have mercy and whom he will he
hardneth. Come to an other case of Gods gifts and of his blessings, as well
spiritual as temporal; which as we all know, he bestows diversely, giving to
diverse men diverse gifts, to some more, to some less, we shall find that the
chief and principal cause hereof is ascribed unto his will; 1. Cor. 12.7
To one is given (says the Apostle) the word of faith, to an other the word of
wisdom, to an other the gift of healing, to an other the operation of great
works, to an other prophecy, to an other the diversity of tongues, etc. All
which are given by one and the selfsame spirit, distributing to every one
severally even as he will. 1. Cor. 12.7. This is the cause why God does
reveal his mysteries to babes and children, and does hide them from the wise
and prudent, because it is the will and pleasure of God as CHRIST says, Mat
11.27
I give thee thanks O Father, maker of heaven and earth, because thou have hid
these things from the wise, and men of under standing, and have opened them
unto babes: it is so, O Father, because thy good will and pleasure was such.
Mat. 11.27. Insomuch that in the parable of the householder, Mat. 20
who hired Laborers into his Vineyard, when he came at Even to pay them their
wages, and found one murmuring, because he gave as much to them that came at
the last hour, as to them that came at the first, he gives no other reason
hereof, but his will: Volo huic nouissimo dare sicut tibi. I will give to this
last as much as to thee; making his will a sufficient and a just cause of his
deed. Of whose will there is that justice, that GOD is not said to will a
thing to be done, because it is good, but rather to make it good, because GOD
will have it to be done; like as we see in the creation, where it is first
said that GOD created all things, and then afterward it is said that he
saw that they were all good; to show that every thing is therefore good,
because it is created, not therefore created, because it is good. The which
does most notably clear Gods will from the least stayn or spot of injustice,
because that albeit his will be the first and chief cause of every thing,
doing every thing because he will do it: yet notwithstanding, it is not like
to the will of Tyrants, whose will is commonly without reason, or rather
against all right and reason, as the Poet says: but it is most just and holy
too, as the Prophet DAVID says, Psalm. Psalm. 145
145. The Lord is righteous in all his ways, and holy in all his works.
Whereupon that thrice learned ZANCHIVS makes a difference and a distinction
between the cause of Gods will and the reason of his will; Zanch. de natura
dei lib. 3 cap. 4.
that although there be no superior cause of Gods will, yet notwithstanding
there is a just reason, and a most right end and purpose in it, because that
cannot be without reason which is done with great wisdom. Psalm. 104
Psalm. 104: in regard whereof it is not simply called (...) the will of God,
but (...) the good will and pleasure of God. Ephesians. 1.11
Ephesians. 1.11. Insomuch that it may as truly be say de to be good in God, Deus and
bonus est in beneficio certorum, and iustus est in supplicio caeterorum. Et
bonus in omnib. quoniam bonum est cum debitum redditur: et iustus in omnib.
^aoniam iustum est, cum debitum sine cuiusqua^ fraud donatur. Aug. de Bono
perseu.
to reject and to cast away Judas for the declaration of his justice and power,
as to elect and save Peter for the manifestation of his love and mercy; both of
them concurring alike to the manifestation of his glory which is the chiefest
good and the last end of all things. Prou. 16.4.

The brightness and sun shine as it were of which truth, does after a
marvelous manner dispell and scatter that thick fogge, and impure mist of the
Pelagian heresy, fancying and dreaming of certain causes without God, as the
Schoolmen speak, that is not subsisting in God himself, but externally
moving the will of God to determine and dispose of sundry things. As for
example: in the case of election and reprobation, affirming that the will of
God is moved by the works which he did foresee in us, being either good or
evil, to elect some, and to reject others, and in the case of his gifts and
graces which he bestows, that he imparteth his grace unto some, and denies
it to some, in regard of the good use or abuse thereof, which he did foresee in
us. A doctrine not only repugnant to that truth which has bin confirmed,
which makes the will of God the first and chief cause not subject unto any
other, but also clean against the maine stream, end current both of the
Scriptures, Fathers, and all Orthodox writers, who do greatly condemn it, as
obscuring and extenuating the free grace of God in the matter of our salvation.
Ioh. 15.16
Our blessed Savior instructing and comforting his Disciples a little before
his passion with the sweet doctrine of their election, tells them, Ioh. 15.
Ye have not chosen me but I have chosen you, and ordained you, that ye bring
forth fruit, and that you fruit remain: therefore God has not chosen men
because he did foresee that he should be chosen of them, and that they would
bring forth fruit and continue in so doing, but he has chosen them to make
them bring forth fruit and to persevere and continue therein. Upon which words
S. Aug. in. Ioh. tr. 86.
Austen has this observation, of purpose as it seems against these kind of
men. Hic certe vacat vana illorum ratiocinatio qui praescientiam Dei defendunt
contra gratiam Dei, here is the vain reasoning of them confuted who defend the
foreknowledge of God against the grace of God, in saying that we were elected
before the foundation of the world because God did foresee and know before
that we would be good; which is quite contrary to that which Christ says
here, Ye have not chosen me, but I have chosen you. For, if God did therefore
choose us, because he did foresee and know we would be good, he did not choose
us to make us good, but rather we choose him, in purposing to be good. So also
the Apostle speaking of Gods election Ephesians. 1. he says, Ephesians. 1.4
that God has chosen us before the foundation of the world, that we should be
holy, having predestined us to be adopted through Christ Jesus unto himself,
according to the good pleasure of his will: he does not say that he has chosen
us, because he saw we would be holy, but that we might be holy; neither does
he say that he has predestined us for the good use of our free will, but
according to the good pleasure of his own will. Whereupon says Austen, Aug.
con. Inlianum Pelag. li. 5. cap. 3.
Nullum elegit dignum, sed eligendo effecit dignum, He has nor chosen any
being worthy, but he has made them vvorthie by choosing them. But most
pregnant is the testimony of the Apostle, Romans, 9.11. Romans 9.11
Where speaking of election and reprobation, or at least of the calling of the
Gentiles, and the rejecting of the Jews, he brings in the example of Jacob
and Esau, who being borne of the same Parents, and at one and the same time,
and without any disparitie at all in their works (for as yet the children were
unborn, and had done neither good nor evil) that the purpose of God might
remain according to election, not by works but by him that calls, it was
said I have loved Jacob, and hated Esau. Which because it might perhaps seem
unjust, he makes this objection unto himself; What shall we say then, is
there unrighteousness with God? To which he answers; God forbid; whereof he
gives no other reason then this; for he says to Moses; I will have mercy on
him to whom I will show mercy, and will have compassion on him to whom I will
show compassion. Whereas if GOD did choose one and reject an other for his
works foreseen, it had been ready for the Apostle to have said so, and so
quite to have cleared God of the least suspicio^ of injustice: which forasmuch
as he does not, but stands only upon Gods will and his mercy, it appears
plainly that election and reprobation and the graces and blessings of God, do
not depend upon works forseene, but first and principally upon the good will
and pleasure of God.

Last of all, our election which is of grace, as the Apostle says, Romans 11.5.
Romans 11.5
could not stand if works and merits go before it; for if it be of grace it is
no more of works, else were grace no more etc. Whereupon says the same Father,
Non est gratia, si praecesserunt merita, Non est gratia si praecesse runt
merita. Haec quippe non inueni^ merita sed facit. Aug. ibid.
there is no grace, if works and merits go before it: Haec quippe non inuenit
merita, sed facit, for grace does not find, but does make and fashion good
works in us.

And yet notwithstanding though the will of God be the prime and chief cause
of all things, before and beyond which there can be no other moving and
inclining the same, yet it is not the sole and only cause, as if there were no
other answer to be given of any thing, but only because God would have it to
be so; forasmuch as there are also many second causes concurring with the
first, by the mediation whereof, the will of God does effect and bring every
thing to pass. As for example, in the matter of our salvation, if a question
should be asked, why God does save some men, is there nothing to be answered,
but because God would have them to be saved? Yes verily the will and working
of man concurreth also with the will and working of God. For, though the will
and power of man is not able to do any thing, without both the will and the
especial grace of God, John 15.5
for as CHRIST says, Without me ye can do nothing, John 15. Yet
notwithstanding being prevented and assisted by the good will of God, and the
powerful and effectual grace thereof, then our will has power to work together
with the will of God, and the grace of God also works together, with our will;
according as S. Paul says, I labored more then they all, 1. Cor. 15.10
yet not I but the grace of God with me. 1. Cor. 15.10. Else how could David
pray unto God, Psalm. 30. August. de peccat. mer. and remis. lib. 2. Aug. de
gra. and lib. arbit.
to be his helper, says Saint Austen, unless he himself did endeavor and
work something with him? Yea: else, how could God command us and exhort us to
do his will, unless the will of man did work something in the performance of
it? For as therefore we pray unto God daily, because our will is not able to do
any thing without the grace of Gods will; so God does therefore command us
and exhort us, because our will being prepared and assisted by the grace of his
will, is able now to do something in the performance of it. So as it is a most
sure conclusion which Saint Austen has, that although God has created us
without our selves yet he will not save us without our selves, Qui creanit te
sine te, non seruabit te, sine to. Aug.
but he will have our will also to work together with his, in the salvation of
us; that as he does inlighten us, and sanctify us, and inspire us with his
heavenly grace: so we also should believe in him, and perform obedience unto
him, and do all such holy and religious duties as may be pleasing and
acceptable unto him. Therefore when Christ shall come to give the reward of
salvation at the last day, he will not only have regard unto his will and
pleasure in saying, Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom of
heaven prepared for you; because it is my will and pleasure to give it unto
you, but he will also look to the working of our will in saying: For I was
hungry and ye gave me meat, Matthew 25
I thirsted and ye gave me drink, I was naked and ye clothed me, etc. Showing
most plainly that not only the will of God, but also our own will working
with the grace of Gods will, is a second means whereby God would have every
one to attain unto salvation.

So also in the case of damnation, Decretum reprobationis non ponit
necessitatem damnationis nisi interueniente peccaeto. Et quide^ consequutiue
non causaliter est a reprobatione damnatio.
if any shall ask why a great many are damned, can there, or ought there
nothing else to be answered, but because God would have them to be damned?
Far be it from us to make God the Author of man's damnation, only to
satisfy his own will, because he would have it to be so. Yea rather the will
of man, and the malice and wickedness thereof, is the cause of it; insomuch
that God damneth none but in regard of sin as Austen says: August. ad
Sixtum Ep. 105. Bucer. in refor. eccl. de pecc. orig.
with whom also Bucer a most learned and judicious writer of our own agrees,
in saying that whosoever are damned, are damned for their own sin, because
God is just, and therefore does not condemn any to eternal death, but such
as perish through their own wickedness. Lombart. lib. 1. Seut. did. 41.
Aquin. sum. par. 1. quaest. 23. art. 5.
For though GOD does reprobate and pass over some in forsaking and leaving
them unto themselves; even of his mere will only without any respect either
of good or evil in them every man being to God as a piece of claie in the
hands of the Potter, Deus reprobauit quos vo luit, no^ propter futura merita
quae praeuideret etc. Lomb. lib. 1. did. 41 Bellarm. li. 2 de gra. and li.
arbit. cap. 10 Rhem. annot. in To. 9 sect. 5.
whereof it is free unto him to make either a vessel of mercy, or a vessel
of wrath (which Bellarmine calls negative reprobation, and does grant to
depend only upon the will of God without any respect had unto men, though the
Rhemists and some other Papists do join with the Pelagians herein, Ordinatio
ad poenam est a iustissima dei voluntate, no^ tamen excluso respectu peccati.
Vt enim actu da^na^tur homines ob peccatum: ita decreuit Deus eosdem damnare ob
idem peccatum. Nec tamen peccatum decreti damnationis causae est, etc.
affirming it to depend upon a foresight and foreknowledge of sin) yet
notwithstanding he does not adiudge any to eternal damnation, without
respect of sin in the person that is damned; which he calls positive
reprobation; because GOD being most just, does not punish nor torment a
Reprobate for his will and pleasure only, but for his sin; which he
foreseeing from all eternity, decreed to punish with eternal damnation for
the declaration and manifestation of his justice. And therefore when CHRIST also
shall pronounce his sentence against the wicked and reprobate at the last day,
in saying; Reprobatio quoad propositum deserendi creaturum absoluta est, quoad
propositum damnandi peccati, respectiua. Nemo enim nisi suae culpa perit, and
nemo absolute ordinatur ad gehennant.
Go ye cursed into everlasting fire, he will not make this the cause of it,
Because it is my will and pleasure to have it so, but because they have
grievously sinned in not doing those works of mercy which he required of them.
Wherefore, as we do justly condemn the Pelagian and Popish heresy, for
that it tends to the advancing and extolling of our own merits, and to the
obscuring and extenuating of the free grace of God: So on the other side, we
do as justly condemn the fond and vain conceit of some, who ascribe the
cause of salvation and damnation to the will of God only, without regard of
any thing in our own selves: because this opens a gap unto sin, and loses
the raynes as it were to all kind of wickedness, by laying an imputation of
men's damnation upon the will of God only. The right use we are to make of
this Doctrine, is, to adore and reverence the will of God as the prime and
chief cause of all things; above which there is none higher, and to submit our
selves in all duty and humility unto it, acknowledging it always to be just,
howsoever many times it is secret and hid from us. For, seeing that God himself
is most just, whatsoever he wills must needs be just; for as Austen says,
August. ad Siutum ep. 105. Non potest Deus facere iniusta, quia ipse est su^ma
iustitia Aug. lib. de Sp. and litera.
Iniustum esse non potest, quod placuit iusto; whatsoever seems good to him
that is most just in all things, that which he wills cannot possibly be
unjust, his will being the very rule of justice, and every thing therefore
just, because he wills the same. And forasmuch as God does not work things
by his own will only, but by the cooperatio^ of our will together with his:
therefore as Gods workmen, and Gods laborers we are to work together with him,
by conforming our will unto his, for the performance of it; that so the will of
God may be done in earth as it is in heaven, which is the thing we daily
desire, and the principal end and duty of every man.

Now for the other point, viz. that the will of God is powerful and effectual
to perform and accomplish whatsoever it will, so as nothing is able to resist
and to withstand it, that does necessarily follow upon the former proposition.
For seeing the will of God is the first and universal cause of all things; no
secondary causes whatsoever can have power to hinder or prevail against it;
Aug. in Enchir. ad Lau. cap. 100.
but the first does rule and swaie the second, and keeps them all in their
dew order. In regard whereof S. Austen does attribute a certain omnipotency
unto the will of God, Nonob aliud dicitur Deus ommipotens nisi quia quie quid
vult potest, nec voluntate cuiuspiam creaturae voluntatis omnipotentis
impeditur effectus. Aug. lib. 1. confess. cap. 4.
calling it the omnipotent will of God; because it is able to do all things,
and nothing is able to do any thing against it; the former whereof is confirmed
by the Prophet David, Psalm. 115. Whatsoever it pleased the Lord, that did he
in heaven and in earth, and in all places: The latter by the Apostle, Romans 9.
saying of Gods will, Who has ever resisted his will? The which is so powerful
and so effectual that the wicked who as much as in them lies, do resist the
will of God revealed and commanded unto us in his word (which the Schoolmen
call, Lombar. Sent. lib. 1. cap. 45
Voluntatem signi, his signified and revealed will, signifying his will and
pleasure unto us) yet notwithstanding, will they, nill they, they fulfill the
secret will of GOD decreede in himself from all eternity, which they call
Voluntatem bene-placiti, the will of his purpose, or his secret will. Whereof
we may see an example in Herod, Pilate, and the wicked Jews; who in
crucifying our Lord and Savior, did most manifestly resist the will of GOD
revealed in his word; (for, what more cruel and heinous murder could be
committed, then to crucify the LORD of life, 1. Cor. 2.8
and the LORD of glory) and yet herein they did perform and fulfill the
secret will of God: because they did that which the hand and counsel of God
had determined before to be done. Of which, S. Act. 4.28
Austen says; that even in that which they did against the will of God
revealed in his commandments, Hoc ipso quod contrae voluntatem Dei fecerunt de
ipsis facta est voluntas eius. Aug. in Ench. ad Laur. cap. 98
they did perform and accomplish the will of God, hid in his secret counsel.
Not that there are diverse and contrary wills in God, whose essence as it is
most simply without composition or division; so his will also which is nothing
else but his eternal decree concerning al things, De his qui faciunt quae non
vult, facit ipse quae vult. Aug. de Cor. and Gra^.
is one, immutable, and irresistable: but it is said to be manifold; partly
in regard of diverse things which God wills (there being one will toward
us, showing it self in his love and mercy, wherewith he electeth and saves
us; and an other will concerning us, Voluntas Dei alia de nobis, alia qua^
fieri vult anobis. Zanch. li. 3. de Natura Dei.
whereby he requires duty and obedience of us); partly in regard of the diverse
manners, wherewith he seems to will those things that he wills; as in willing
some things simply and absolutely without any condition, as the creation and
preservatio^ of the world which will is always performed and accomplished;
again in willing some things conditionally; as to have all men to be saved if
they believe, and to bestow his blessings upon them if they obey him; which
will is not always performed and fulfilled: and therefore it is said not to
be so properly the will of God as the other, there being indeed no
conditional will in God, but only in the revelation and manifestation of it,
which otherwise in it self is most absolute, and always most certainly
fulfilled and accomplished. Which doctrine concerning the infallible
performance of Gods will; I do not see how it can well stand with the doctrine
of universal grace, as by some it is maintained; as if God ordained and
offered saving grace unto all, and would absolutely have all men whatsoever to
be saved. For, if God would have them saved in his absolute and secret will
which is the will of his good pleasure and his proper will indeed (for we do
not deny but that he would have all men to be saved in his revealed and
conditional will in offering them the means of salvation in the Word and
Sacraments) I demand then, Sic velle and nolle in vole^tis and nolentis est
potestate, vt diuinam voluntatem non impediat nec superet potestatem. Aug. de
Corr. and Gra^. cap. 14. Tanquam dei voluntas superata sit hominum volu^tate,
and infirmissimis nolendo impedientib. non potuerit facere potentissimus quod
volebat. Aug. in Enchir. ad Laurent. cap. 97.
what is the reason that they are not saved? Will they say that the cause
hereof is not in the will of God but in the malitiousnesse and frowardness of
man's will, who will not believe nor receive the grace of God offered unto him?
what is this else but to make the will of God to depend upon the will of man,
and to subordinate the first cause unto the second, which by the law of nature
ought to order and to dispose the second cause? Yea as Saint Austen says, to
make the weak and peevish will of man, of more power then the omnipotent will
of God; as if the will of God were ouercom by the will of man. Of which we may
truly say, as Tertullian sometimes said wittily of the hethenish Romans, who
had a law that the Emperor might not deify nor consecrate any man to be a god,
unless he was first allowed and approved by the Senate; viz. that their gods
stood to the curresie and liking of men; Ita de humano arbitratu pensitatur
diuinitas. Nisi Deus homini placuerit, Deus no^ erit: homo tam Deo propitius
esse debebit. Tertul. in Apol. cap. 5.
so as, unless they had the favor and the good will of men, they might not be
admitted into the order of their gods. And is it not so here likewise? though
God would never so feign have his will to stand, yet it shall not unless man
be willing and say Amen unto it: if he will believe and receive grace, then
Gods will shall stand; but if he will not, or do not, then it must be void and
of no effect: whereas even in reason he whose will is of most strength, and of
most power, ought to have the sway and the pre-eminence; like as our Savior
Christ says unto his Father concerning his humane will, which he willingly
submitted unto his divine will; Math. 26.
Not my will but thy will be done.

Thus much of the Lepers petition: the next thing is Christ's answer unto it,
in the words that follow. JESUS stretching forth his hand touched him, saying,
I will be thou clean, which you shall find every way aunswerable and
agreeable to the Lepers petition. The Leper as you heard comes to our Savior
CHRIST and worships him: our Savior he stretches out his hand, and touches
him; the Leper he says: Si vis potes, if thou will thou can make me
clean; our Savior says, Volo, mundare, I will be thou clean. In doing and
performing of which cure, CHRIST uses his hand and his tongue as you see; his
hand, in stretching forth his hand, and touching him; his tongue, in saying,
Volo, mundare, I will, be thou clean.

For the first, if any man shall demand why our Savior CHRIST touches this
Leper contrary to the Law as it should seem, being able to have healed him
without the least touch of him; I answer, that it was not without especial
reason and consideration. First, to show that he was not under the law in
such sort as others were, but was Lord and Commander of the law it self.
Leuit. 14
The law forbad that any man should touch a Leper; if he did he was counted
unclean: and therefore when Naaman the Syrian came to Elisha the Prophet to be
healed of his leprosy, 2. Kings 5.
the Prophet suffers him, though he was a man of honor to stand without the
door, and sends him to the river Jordan to wash himself there; which he did
because he would observe the law: but our Savior Christ being not only under
the law Gal. 4.4. Gal 4.4 Mar. 2.28 Lex non ideo vetuit tangere lepram ne
leprosi sanarentur, sed vt ne tangentes lepram inquinarentur. Chrysostom. in.
Matt.
but also above the law Mar. 2.28. he stretches forth his hand and touches
this leper. And yet he did not break the law for all this: because the law did
not forbid to touch the leprosy, least lepers might be healed thereby, but
contrariwise least those that were not lepers might be infected thereby. And
therefore Christ touching this Leper to heal him not to be insected of him
(for as the Apostle says, Tit. 1.15
Omnia munda mundis, to the clean all things are clean, and that blessed hand
of his had a power to sanctify, not to be polluted) he ^oseth and dissolueth
the letter of the ^awe as Chrysostom says, Christus tangendo leprosu^ literam
legis soluit, propositu^ eius non soluit. Chrysostom. ibid.
but he does ^ot dissolve the intent and purpose of ^t; and so by consequence
does not ^reake the law; because the law does ^ot consist as Saint Austen
says in the ^eaues of the letter, and of the words hereof, but in the root
of reason, and and of the true intent and meaning of (...); so as the matter
and meaning ther^f is not subject unto the letter, Intelligentia dictorum ex
causis assumenda est dicendi, quia non sermoni res, sed rei debet esse sermo
subiectus. Hilar li. 14. de Trin.
as Hil^ary says, but the letter is subject to the ^atter and meaning of it;
in which regard the civil law says, that whosoe^er shall insist upon the
words of the ^awe contrary to the meaning of it, he ^oth sin and offend
against the law, ^eyther shall he under a color of words escape the
punishment of it. The ground whereof is this; because ^ll laws if they be
just are derived ^yther from the law of God or the law of nature, and are
ordained unto the public and common good of men^ and therefore if a man does
not offend either against the mind and meaning o^ the Lawe-giuer, or against
the main^ end and purpose of the law; certain^ it is that he does not violate
nor break^ the law. Which is a matter that does very much concern Judges and
Magistrates, and those that have the managing of the laws; not to attribut^
too much to the letter of the law, either by suffering contentions and
troublesome persons to vex and molest others, only with the favor of the
le^ter, Favor literae impietatis praetextus. Tertul.
which Tertullian calls a pretext and cloak of impiety, or by judging
according to the rigor of the letter, no^ according to the intent and equity
(...) the law. Whereby it falls out tha^ the law which is good, 1. Tim. 1.8
as S. Paul sait^ if a man use it lawefully, 1. Tim. 1. (...) is many times
made the ministratio^ of death and condemnation, 2. Cor. 3
by suc^ as do abuse and pervert the same. For as the Apostle says, in an
other case, the letter kills, but the spirit gives life: so we may truly
say here, that the rigor and extremity of the law, which is of the letter,
does hurt and wrong many times; but the equity which is of the spirit and
meaning of the law, that does right and justice to every man.

Secondly, CHRIST stretches out his hand and touches the Leper, being able
to have healed him without it, to the end that men should not think that he
did fear to take the infection, and himself to become a Leper; and to show
withal, that he would not omit nor leave so godly and charitable a deed
for any niceness or squeamishness, that he had of the loathsomenesse of the
disease. A matter that GREGORY NAZIANZENE does greatly complain of in his
time, Melior est conditio vitij quam morbi, etc. Nazianz. lib. de Amore
pauperum.
in saying that the condition of sin was better then the condition of
sickness; for men, says he, will converse and delight in the company of
drunkards, whoremongers, common swearers, and such like; but they do abhor
and shun the presenc^ and company of poor, and sick and diseased persons.
The which is no^ spoken to animate any to be without all fear of the
contagion and infection, and to run more boldly the^ wisely into the
company of those that are infected, because our Savior Christ here puts
forth his hand and touches this Leper; unless withal our hands were as pure
and holy, and as full o^ power and virtue to preserve our selves as his were;
but that in other diseases where there is not a special prouiso by the law as
there was for this, and wherein there is not a malignant and venomous quality
in the disease as there is in this, and where nature is of more strength and
ability to resist and defend it self then it is in this; that then we be not
over nice and dainty in abhorring and disdaining poor and sick persons, but
to stretch out our hands and to touch them, by visiting, helping and re^ieuing
of them; and that by the example of our Lord and Master here: who although he
was able to have healed him by his word only, yet notwithstanding he disdained
not to stretch out his hand, and to heal him by touching of him. Which
practice and example of Christ's, if any shall suppose to be above the reach and
imitation of a Christian (although every imitable work of Christ's, whereof
this is one, not as a miracle but as a deed of piety, is not only our
instruction but also our imi^ation) let him consider and set before his eyes
the Samaritane, who seeing the poor trauailer in a pitiful case, Luke 10.30
robbed of his money, spoiled of his raiment, wounded in his body, and left
desolate without al comfort, did not as the Priest and the Leuite did, who may
fitly be resembled to the man with the withered hand, Mark, 3. Mark. 3.1
looking on him and passing by him, as if they had not been able to stretch
out their hands unto him; but as soon as ever he sees him, he is moved with
compassion, and come^ unto him, and stretches out both his hands to help him,
in binding up his wounds, in pouring oil and win^ into them, in setting him
upon his ow^ beast, in bringing him to an Inn, and making provision for him,
being willing to pay all his costs and charges for him. The which I wish were
practiced a^ carefully and religiously by men of so^ and fashion, both in this
honorable C^tie and in other places where this contagious and grievous
sickness is, as piety and charity does claim and challenge it of them; I
mean by making such provision for their relief and comfort at such times, that
none of the^ might be suffered to perish either i^ the streets, or in the
fields, or in the^ houses for want of succor, whom^ Christ has bought and
purchased (...) dearly with his own blood; Act. 20.28
that a^^ though they be not present in person in such contagious times, or if
they were, and that it were not safe to stretch out their hands, and to help
them by a real and corporal touching of them, yet at the least to be present
in spirit and love, and to help them by a virtuall and powerful touching of
them, in providing so for them in this their affliction and misery, that
nothing which is needful be wanting unto them. Otherwise some to fly and
leave the City for fear of danger (which I do not condemn if they would
leave substitutes and pledges of their charity behind them) and others to
stay here and to shut up those persons whose houses are visited (which
notwithstanding I confess to be very necessary for the preventing and
avoiding of danger) teaching them in great Capital letters over their doors to
pray to the Lord to have mercy upon them, but they themselves in the mean
time, not showing the least jot of mercy unto them; what is this else but to
add more misery and affliction unto them, and to blind and delude the world,
making it to believe that they died of the plague, when as in very truth they
dyed of famine; who happily might very well have recovered of the plague, had
they not for want of things necessary been consumed with famine. Oh! how can
these men pray unto God when as they are either in the like or in any other
distress, and desire him to have mercy on them after his great goodness,
Psalm. 51.1
and according to the multitude of his mercies, when as they themselves are so
unmerciful, not showing mercy to their poor brethren according to the least
of Gods mercies. And because this is so necessary a duty, give me leave to
urge it a little more, and to exhort those whom it does concern, not to
perform it barely and niggardly, but to do it liberally and bountifully though
it be with some strayning, and stretching of themselves: which happily was some
cause that our merciful Savior does not only touch the Leper, but also
stretches forth his hand and touches him; to teach us in helping the poor
and the sick, at such times especially, to stretch our selves, and to be
liberal and bountiful in helping of them. It is an observation that S.
Chrysostom. hom 37. ad pop. Antioch.
Chrysostom has, that the Prophet David does not simply commend those that
give, but those that stretch out their hands when they give in giving
liberally, especially when as they are able: for so he says of a righteous
man, Psalm, 112. Dispersit, Psalm. 112
dedit pauperibus, He has skattered and given to the poor; he does not
only say he has given, but he has skattered and given; which implies a
liberal and a bountiful largess. For what great charity is it, says the
fame Father, for a man abounding with store and plenty, as the Sea does with
water, to give so much to those that are in distress out of his store, as a
little cup or dish would hold of the water that is taken out of the Sea.
Though it was sufficient for the poor Widdowe to cast two mites into the
treasury, Luke 21.1.
because it was all that she had, yet the rich men they cast great gifts into
the offeringes. And though it was enough for the children to cry Hosanna, Mat.
21.
and for poor men to cut down branches, and to strewe them before Christ; yet
the rich men were at more cost in casting their garments in the way. As
Alexander answered a beggar that asked him a penny, that it was not fit for a
King to give a penny: so it is not fit for those that have received bountifully
to give niggardly; for, To whom much is given, Luke 12.48
says Christ, of him much shall be required. Luke 12.48. So then, for the
conclusion of this second reason: let us in this and such like cases follow the
Apostles admonition: which is to put on bowels of mercy and compassion. Col.
3.12
Col. 3. that is, not only to be merciful, but to put on mercy, that as we
put on our clothes and garments and wear them upon us, so also to put on mercy
and compassion as a garment, and to wear it always about with us; and not to
put on mercy only, but to put on bowelles of mercy, so as our bowels do
even yearne within us, being moved with a tender and a most compassionate
affection toward them, which never produces and brings forth a less effect
in rich and great men, then a liberal and a bountiful subuention of them.

The third cause why Christ touched this Leper, was to show that he esteemed
more of charity (as Pelican observes) then he did of all the prescripts and
customs of the law, to whose command all things whatsoever are to yield and to
become subject. And therefore though he could have healed him without any
laying of his hand upon him; yet to perform a work of mercy, he regards
not the law nor the right and ceremony, only to give the primacie and
pre-eminence unto charity. And not without just regard and consideration; for
seeing that the whole law is comprehended in charity, Romans 13.9
as the Apostle says, in regard whereof it is called, the bond of perfection,
and the fulfilling of the law; Col. 3.
great reason there is that all other things whatsoever being inferior, should
yield and give place unto it as to their superior. Hence it is that our
Sau^our Christ, who otherwise most strictly and religiously observed the
Sabbath, in which it was commanded that men should not do any work, yet in
regard of charity, he healed and did many other good works upon the Sabbath,
with this defense of it against the malice and calumnies of the Pharisees, that
the Sabbath was made for man, Mark. 2.27
and not man for the Sabbath. Mark, 2.27. insomuch that preaching, and
praying, and such like duties, if any present necessity or duty of charity
required, were to yield and to give place unto it; Act. 20.7
as in the case of Eutichus, Act. 20.7. who falling into a dead sleep while
PAVL was long in preaching, and falling from a third loft, whence he was taken
up dead, PAVL leaves his preaching and comes unto him, and labors to
recover life in him. Yea those holy instruments and ornaments which are used in
the service of GOD, Auru^ habet Ecclesia non vt seruet, sed vt eroget and
subueniat in necessitatib: Tunc vasa ecclesiae etiam initiata confringere,
conflare, vendere licet. Amb. de officijs lib. 2 cap. 28.
and ought only to be employed to such use being holy and consecrated
thereunto, yet in a case of charity, and of some eminent necessity, as Saint
AMBROSE says, they may be diuerted and employed to godly and charitable uses:
the ground and warrant whereof is that rule which God has given unto himself,
Misericordiam volo, and non sacrificium, I will have mercy and not sacrifice.
Ose 6.6 Socr. hist. eccl. li. 7. cap. 21 Deus nosier neque lancibus neq poculis
eget: nam nec comedit nec bibit, quippe qui his rebus minime opus habet, etc.
Ose. Chap. 6. Ver. 6. We read in the Ecclesiastical history, that when as
the Roman Soldiers had taken diverse of the Persians Captives, to the number
of 7. thousand, whom rather then they would suffer to go free without ransom,
suffered them to starve and to perish for want of sustenance, Acacius the
Bishop of Amida calls his clergy together making this speech unto the^; Our
God whom we serve has no need either of dishes, or platters, or pots, or
cups; because he neither eats nor drinks, nor has any need of either.
Wherefore, forasmuch as our Church does possess many monuments of gold and
silver which have bin given out of the ready and godly devotion of well
affected Christians, it is meet and necessary that herewith we should ransom
and redeem poor captives out of bondage, and relieve and cherish them, being
almost affamished and killed with hunger. Whereupon presently he beat the
plate in pieces, sold the ornaments of the Church, and gave the price thereof
partly to the Roman soldiers for the ransom of the captives, and partly to the
captives to satisfy and to relieve their hunger withal. The like we read of
Ethelwoldus Bishop of Winchester, in the time of the West Saxons, about the
year of our Lord, 962. who in a great famine soulde the sacred vessels of the
Church to relieve the poor that were almost starued; saying, that there was no
reason that the senseless temples of God should abound in riches, and the
lively Temples of the holy Ghost lack it. Which wealth and riches if the
Church had now as it had then in those times, I could very well like that in
such cases it should be employed to holy and charitable uses whenever
extreme necessity required it: but because this wealth has long since been
gone from the Church, and is come into many lay men's hands who do possess the
wealth thereof, so as the Church, which in times past as you see did both redeem
captives and relieve a great many poor in a time of famine, with the wealth
which it had then, has now need to be redeemed it self from need and
beggerie, and to be relieved with some part of her own wealth, which some
temporal men have gotten into their hands; I could wish and desire these men
that do thus possess the patrimony of the Church, 1. King. 21
as Achab did Naboths vineyard, to consider and to remember, that a great part
of their wealth was in times past the goods and possessions of the Church; and
that dividing their ecclesiastical revenues from their temporal as a
shepherd divides his sheep from the goats, the one as proper unto
themselves, the other altogether improper and belonging unto the Church, though
they did not bestow any of their temporal, yet at the least they would
bestow the ecclesiastical revenues upon holy and charitable uses, in times of
sickness and of famine as these are: which they see the Church was very ready
and willing to do, when as they were masters of their own goods, and were
thought vvorthie to hold their wealth in their own hands. Or if this shall
seem a hard saying, which no man will hear; yet at least, that which both
they and other rich men bestow at other times in vain delights and pastimes,
in sumptuousness and superflu^tie, in pomp and magnificence, in stately
buildings and solemn feasts, or in any kind of ostentation; they would in
times of affliction and calamity, defaulke out of all these, not with any
reservation thereof unto themselves to gain or to save by it, but with a godly
and charitable affection to help and to relieve the poor with it. And yet
notwithstanding (to return again unto the matter from whence we are a little
digressed) as all Laws and Orders, Rites and Ceremonies, and all things
whatsoever, are to yield unto Charity: so to neglect or to violate any Laws or
Orders, Rites or Ceremonies, or to omit any duty that we are to perform,
without regard either of reverence to Rulers, and Governors, or of obedience
to laws and orders, or of a wise and just consideration of charity rightly
grounded as it ought to be, for the performing of some more necessary and more
excellent work, is a manifest breach and contempt of the law, and a
disobedience also unto the Lawegiuer. So that to heal or to do any work
upon the Sabbath without relation to some holy and present necessity, or
without respect of piety and charity, what is this else, but to violate and
to profane the Sabbath? To leave the preaching of the word and the
administration of the holy Sacraments, not upon any true ground of zeal and
piety, but rather upon contention and innovation to please our own fancies and
to satisfy men's humors; what is this else but an Apostasy and to revolt from
our holy orders? To alienate the goods of the Church and to convert them to
civil uses without respect of chariti^ in redeeming of captives, Si insua quis
deriuet emolumenta crimen est: si vero paeuperibus eroget, captinu^ redimat,
misericordia est. Ambr. ibid.
releeuing of the poor, and such like uses; what is this else but sacrilege,
and to rob both God and the Church? Lastly, to end the matter we began withal,
to touch a Leper, and to run desperately in a kind of bravery unto such as are
infected with the plague, without regard of holy and discreet charity, for the
necessary help and succor which they ought to have by somthat are appointed
for their keeping, and making of necessary provision for them; what is this
else but a desperate boldness, and a presumptuous tempting of God? And
therefore howsoever Christ touches this Leper, to show that all things ought
to yield to charity, yet to touch an unclean person with some godly and
charitable end and purpose, Tangere hominem immu^ dum nullae sancta causa, etc.
homo pius non faciet, nec Christus docuit. Pelli. in hunc locu^.
with the danger of those that we live and converse withal, or with contempt
and neglect of public order prescribed by those that are in authority, for the
general good and benefire of men; neither ought a godly man to do it, neither
did Christ ever teach us for to do it. Which makes me many times to pity and
to lament the desperate boldness of diverse among us, who in a vanity and a
foolish hardiness, and in the confidence of their faith as they imagine, will
contrary to all good order and good discretion run into howses that are
visited, as if the plague could not be infectious in such sort as the leprosy
was, nor infect any but only such as want faith, nor were to be feared nor
shunned any more then an ordinary ague is. The which I verelie persuade my
self not to be the least cause that the contagion rests and continues so
long amongst us, both because we do not fear and tremble at Gods judgments,
as we ought to do, making a light account of them, and because we do not
yield obedience unto our Rulers and Governors; who in great care and wisdom
do provide for the common good and safety of us, if we would submit our
selves unto them; and because we will not use that care and providence which
in a time of danger we ought to use for our preservation and deliverance. But
I leave this unto them, to whom the reformation hereof of belongs, and come
now to examine the causes, why our Savior Christ does not only use his hand,
but also his tongue in healing this Leper; being able to have healed him, both
without touching, and without speaking any one word unto him.

The first reason whereof, I suppose with Chrysostom to be this, that all the
people that was present might know that he was healed by him that said he
would heal him, or rather commanded him to be healed, in saying, Volo,
mundare, I will, be thou clean. For had CHRIST healed him secretly without
speaking, among so great a multitude as was about him, how could any have
discerned whether he was healed by him or by some other. And therefore to the
end that this might certainly be known, he does not only use his hand in
touching him, but his tongue also in speaking and saying; Volo, mundare, I will
be thou clean. So that our blessed Savior, who otherwise did not desire to be
popular nor seek in any vain glory to be famous in the world; Ioh. 7.3.
yet notwithstanding to make himself known to be the Messiah that was to com,
Mat. 11.4
and to the end that by his works the world might believe in him; he does
not only work great miracles but he would also have the miracles known to
be done by himself, and not by any other. Wherein is propounded unto us, a
matter worthy of our consideration, viz. how far forth we are to desire and
seek after a private and a close kind of life: which is to be determined and to
be measurd by a due regard of Gods honor, the advancement whereof we ought
carefully to seek after; and o^ the profit and benefit of our brethren to
whom we owe a duty of love, being debtors one unto another; that (...) by a
more practicke and public kind of life, we may better (...) God an^ profit
others, we are (...) to content our selves with a private and a contemplative
life, but rather to come a^ broad into the world, and to live a more
publickeand a conspicuous kind of life. For though a private and retiring kind
of life be more sweet and delightful unto our selves: Bern. in Cant. ser. 85.
(for as Bernard says: Aliter afficitur men's fructificans verbo, and fruens
verbo, the mind ^s otherwise affected in bringing forth fruit with the word,
and otherwise in enjoying and meditating of the word, even as a mother is more
joyful in the arms of her husband, then in the birth of her children) yet
notwithstanding, a public and an active life is more profitable and
beneficial unto others; there being more profit, as the same Father says, in
the breasts of the mother then ^hen in the embracing and kissing of ^he
husband; according to that in the Canticles, meliora sunt vbera tua vino ^hy
breasts are better then wine. Cant. ^.2. Saint Austen discoursing of 3. Aug. de
Ciuit. Dei. lib. 19. cap. 19
^inds of life, viz. the contemplative, ^he active, and that which is mixed of
both, says that although a man may with a sound faith live in any of al these,
and may come to heaven in any of them: yet notwithstanding he is to consider
what he is to hold in regard of verity, and what he is to bestow in regard
of charity; affirming that no man ought to be so given to contemplation, that
he neglect to edify and to do good unto others; neither ought any to be so
in continual action, that he forget and neglect to think upon God. In our
action and practice we are not to rest in our employments and our necessary
business, but to look up higher unto contemplation, for the good and benefit
of our selves. In our contemplation we are not to rest in our own delight and
comfort; but to bethink our selves of some business we are to do for the
profit and benefit of others. Ociumsanctum quaerit charitas: nego tium iustum
suscipit necessitas charitatis: Aug. ibid.
For (as the same Father says) the love of the truth requires a holy rest,
and the necessity of love takes a necessary and a just business upon it
self. The Spouse in the Canticles desiring to know where her beloved fed at
noone, saying Show me, O thou whom my soul loves, where thou feedest, where
thou lie at noone, received this answer again; If thou know not, O thou
fairest among women, get thee forth by the steps of the flock, and feed thy
kiddes by the tents of the Shepheardes: Bern. in Cant ser. 41.
telling the Church that she must not feed her self only, by study, and
contemplation, but she must feed the kiddes and the flocks also by labor
and practice. Whereof there was a mystical signification (as it may seem) in
Jacob, who desirous to enjoy Rachel, for whom he served seven years,
unwittingly and unwillingly lay with Leah instead of Rachel, not the fair one,
but the fruitful one: teaching us hereby that we should not dote too much
upon fair Rachel in contenting and delighting our selves with a pri^at and a
speculative life, but to ioyn our selves also with Leah in employing our selves
in an active and a practicke kind of life; for though Rachel (which as the
Fathers say, signifies the contemplative life) be bewtifull and fair: Ali^^d
est quod (...) latificat cor bominis, aliud quod adificat multos. Bern. in
Cant. ser. 9
yet Leah which signifies the active life, is more fruitful and profitable;
the one rejoicing the heart but of one, the other rejoicing and comforting the
hearts of many.

The 2. reason why Christ uses his tongue in healing this Leper, was to show he
would heal him after a decent and a seemly fashion, not doing his miracles
and his other works, by dumb shows and apish gestures, and by muttering and
mumbling, as inchaunters and sorcerers use to do; but by an express and
significant voice, joined with an outward sign or action, signifying his will
and pleasure for the doing of it. To which end it is observed, he seldom or
never does any miracle, but he uses his tongue and his speech when he does
it. So long as he refused to heal the Caananite to make trial of her faith.
Mat. 15.
Mat. 15. he would not answer one word unto her; but afterward purposing to
heal her, he opened his sacred mouth and speaks unto her: O woman! great is
thy faith, be it unto thee as thou have said. So did he to the woman of
Syrophonissa, that would have stolen an healing from him, Mat. Mat. 9
9. by coming closely behind him and touching the hemme of his garment: but
Christ knowing it, and not willing to have her healed by touching only, he
turns about, and speaks unto her, saying; Daughter be of good comfort, thy
faith has made thee whole. Mar. 7
So did he to the deaf man, Mark 7. in putting his fingers into his ears, and
saying, Ephata, be opened: Luke 18
to the blind man, Luke 18. in touching his eyes, and saying, Receive thy
sight; Luke 7
to the widows son, Luke 7. in touching the coffin, and saying, Young man,
Ioh. 11.
I say to thee arise; to Lazarus, Ioh. 11. in groaning, and saying unto him,
Lazarus, come forth; to the woman that was possessed with a devil, Mat. 8.
Mat. 8
I charge thee thou unclean spirit, that thou come out of him; and to the Leper
here, in touching him, and saying, Volo, mundare, I will be thou clean. Which
it is very credible that our Savior Christ did, to discover the vanity, and
to condemn the impiety of coniurers and forcerers, who will take upon them to
do great matters by outward and visible signs only, as characters,
figures, framing of circles, hanging of amulets about the neck, and such like
trumperie; things which in nature have no power nor virtue to produce such
effects: or if they do use words, they are either such as have no
signification with us, or else such as are superstitiously abused out of the
Scripture, and mumbled up after a strange and ridiculous manner; being for the
most part not understood of them that use them, nor any ways employed to that
end, to which God has ordained and appointed them; whereas our blessed Savior
in doing this great work upon the Leper, uses not only his hand in touching
him, as a most fit instrument to heal him withal (there being such virtue
and power therein, by reason of the fullness of the Godhead, Col. 2.
which did dwell bodily in him) but also his tongue and his speech too, uttered
after an express and a significant manner, declating his will and his pleasure
to have the thing done, and not void of virtue and power also for the
effecting and performing of it. With whom we may also join our Romish
Exorcists, who do fable and boaste of diverse strange woonders done among
them, viz. of diverse miracles that have been done at the Sepulchers of Saints
departed, of diverse images which have wept, and swet, and spoken, and moved
from place to place, and of a very strange one of late years; viz. of Garnets
picture (who was not long before executed for treason) represented and seen in
the length and breadth of a straw; a miracle certainly, much about the worth of
a straw; all which, of both sorts are lying wonders, both in regard of the
form being but mere illusions and very legerdemaines, and in regard of the
end of them being only to deceive, and to obscure the truth and the glory of
God. Remoueantur ista vel figmenta mendaciu^ hominum, vel portenta fallaciu^
spirituum. Aut enim no^ sunt vera quae dicu^tur, aut si haereticorum aliqua
mira facta sunt, mag is cauere debemus. Aug. de unit. Eccles. cap. 16. Contra
mirabiliarios istos cautum me fecit Dominus meus dicens; In novissimis
te^porib. etc. Aug. in Ioh. tr. 13.
Concerning which, Saint Austen does advise us not to gine any heed unto them,
but rather to refuse and to reject them: for either says he, these wonders and
miracles which they tell us of are not true, or if they be true we ought the
rather to beware of them, because Christ has forewarned us that in the latter
times there shall arise false Prophets, which shall do many signs and
wonders; insomuch that if it were possible, they should deceive the very Elect
with them. I do not deny but that there was great need and use of miracles in
former times, when as the Church was first to be planted, to the end that men
might repent and believe the Gospel; but now the doctrine of the Gospel
being confirmed and the whole world believing in it, there is no need of
miracles any longer: for as Nazianzen says, Signa infidelib us, Nazian. in
laudem Basilij.
non fidelibus dantur, signs and miracles are not given for those that do
believe; but for those that do not believe: neither would God have them still
to continue after that the Church is dispersed over the whole world, Miracula
in nostra tempora durare per missa no^ sunt ne animus semper visibilia
quaereret, and eorum consuetudine frigesceret genus humanum, quorum nouitate
flagrauit. Aug. de vera relig cap. 25.
least seeking too much after visible things, we should neglect those things
which are invisible, and grow cold in faith, by a daily custom of them,
whereas we were inflamed before with the newnes and strangeness of them. And
therefore all Exorcists and sorcerers, all impostors and iugglers, all
mirabiliarij, and workers of wonders may now put up their pipes and hang up
their harpes upon the willowes as they sit by the rivers of Babylon, and be
ashamed and blush at their own folly and impiety; who to the end that they
may with Simon Magus their master seem to be some great men able to do great
feats, delude the World with a deal of baggage and trumperie, and with a
company of ridiculous and apish toys, as if they did work wonders with them:
whereas it is a thing impossible for them by such causes to produce such
effects (there being so great disparitie and disproportion between them)
unless it be by a diabolical operation, that works together with them. By
whose power and help, I do verily believe such things to be wrought (if they
be really and truly done) rather then by any virtue or power in the causes
and means, or by any knowledge and skill in those impostours and coseners,
which pretend and would at the least seem to do them.

The third cause why our Savior uses his tongue in healing the Leper, was to
show the exceeding great power and virtue that is in his speech, and in his
words, insomuch that when he would have gone to the Centurions house to have
healed his servant, the Centurion desired only his word for the doing of it:
Dic verbu^ tantum, Mat. 8.9
say but the word only, and my servant shall be whole. Concerning the virtue
and power of whose word, if we shall enter into a view and consideration, we
shall find it not like the words of other men, which are commonly vain and
idle; but full of weight and power, having as much virtue and efficacy in them
as his works have. For as God speaks in his works, Aug. ad Deogratias ep. 49
as Saint Austen says; so likewise, he works in his speech, working as
mightily by his words, as by his deeds. When our Savior Christ taught and
preached unto the people, they were al amazed and wondered at the gracious
words that came from him. Luke 4. Luke 4.22
When he disputed with the Sadduces and the Pharisees, he put them all to
silence with his words, so as they durst not meddle any more with him. Mat. 22.
Mat. 22.46
When the officers wersent to lay hold on him they were so moved with his
words, that they had not the power to lay hands on him, saying, to those that
sent them: Nemo sicut hic locutus est; Ioh. 7.46
never any man spoke as this man does. Ioh. 7. Again, being sent the second
time, to apprehend him, he does but say, Ego sum, I am he, and they went
backward and fell to the ground presently. Ioh. 18.5
Ioh. 18. The power and efficacy of whose words is such, and so great, that it
produces most strange and wonderful effects in the hearts of men. But as the
Sun has a several operation in several subjects, hardening clay, and
softning wax; so the word of Christ has one operation in the hearts of the
wicked, and an other in the hearts of the godly. For the wicked it does greatly
trouble and astonish them, Dan. 5
as it did Belshazzar, Dan. 5. It humbles and brings them down, as it did
Achab. 1. King. 21
1. King. 21. It makes them to fear and tremble, as it did Felix. Act. 24
Act. 5
Act. 24. Yea, it strikes them dead, as it did Ananias, and Saphira. Acts 5.
For the godly it quickneth and gives life unto them. Ioh. 6
The words which I speak says Christ, are spirit and life. Ioh. 6. It gives
light and knowledge unto them: Thy Word, says DAVID, is a lantern unto my
feet, and a light unto my steps. Psalm. 119.
Psalm. 119. It mollifieth and softneth their hearts, he sends forth his word
says the Prophet, and melts them. Psalm. Psalm. 147
147. It sanctifies and makes them pure and holy, Now are you clean, says
Christ, by the word which I have spoken unto you. Ioh. 15. Ioa. 15.3
It feeds and nourishes the soul; Man shall not live by bread only, says
Christ, but by every word that proceeds out of the mouth of God, Mat. 4. It
resists, Mat. 4.4
and defends us against our enemies, Put on the whole armor of God, says
the Apostle, and among the rest, take the sword of the spirit, which is the
word of God, that ye may be able to resist, and to stand in the evil day,
Ephesians. 6. Ephesians. 6.16
Where if we happen to be wounded sometimes, he sends forth his word again,
and heals us; fulfilling that in us that the Centurion said: Dic verbum
tantum, and sanabitur, do but speak the word only and my servant shall be made
whole. Mat. 8 Lactantius speaking of the efficacy and power of Gods word,
Lactaut. de falsa sapien. cap. 26
makes as it were a challenge in the praise of it. Give me (says he) a man
that is full of wrath and revenge: with the word of God, I will make him as
meek and as gentle as a lamb; give me one that is covetous and griping: with
the word of God I will make him, liberal and bountiful, giving his money with
a full hand; give me one that is timorous and fearful of death, and of every
danger: with the word of God I will make him bold and hardy and to con^emne
Phalaris his bull and all kind of torments; give me one that is given to lust
and pleasure and to incontinencie: with the word of God, I will make him as
sober, chaste, and continent as a pure Virgin. Such is the power of the divine
wisdom, that it will presently drive away all folly, the mother of all
wickedness; vno lauacro omnis malitia abolebitur, with one lauer of Gods word,
al wickedness will be washed away. A thing which Philosophers could never do with
their wisdom: who although they have spent al their life in the study of it,
they could never make themselves nor others the better, if nature withstood
never so little; the most that it could do was, Sapientia little vt plurimum
efficiat non exscindit vitia sed obscondit. Lact. ibid.
that it did somewhat restrain their wickedness and cover it, but it did not
altogether correct and reform it. If you desire to have an instance hereof in
some example; do but examine thy self how thou art affected in thy soul, when
thou hear one of David's psalms, and how when thou hear one of the devils
songs; how when thou art in the Church hearing of a Sermon, and how in a
Theater, or Playhouse hearing of a play; and thou shall easily see what great
difference there is, though there be but one soul, in the diverse motions,
affections and dispositions of it: that it may manifestly and most evidently
appear hereby to men of the least understanding, in what price and estimation
we ought to have this word, and with how much reverence we are to entertain
it, whenas there is such power, virtue, and efficacy in it; being like unto
that Manna which God did feed his people withal in the wilderness, Mannae haec
fuit natura, saporem sui pro desiderio rescentium subministrans. Chrysostom. in
hom. Quod nemo laeditur nisi ^^ se. Psalm. 51
whose nature was, as Chrysostom says, to taste and relish according to the
appetite and desire of every one that did eat of it. If we be sorrowful, and
groan under the burden of our sins, it comforts us, saying: A sorrowful
spirit is a sacrifice to God. Psalm. 51. If we rejoice and be merry in our
prosperity, it increases our joy and says, Rejoice in the Lord, O ye
righteous, for it becomes upright men to be thankful. Psalm. 33.1
Psalm. 33. If we be in want and poverty it comfort us, saying; the Lord
rayseth the poor out of the dust, and lifts up the needy out of the
dunghill. Psalm. 113
Psalm. 113. If we be sick and weak it gives us a medicine and a salve to
heal us withal, The Lord forgiueth all thy sins, and heals all thine
infirmities. Ps. 103. Thus does the Manna of Gods word savor and relish in our
hearts whatsoever we our selves do desire; so as having this, we have no
cause to be ouer-carefull of any thing else; being like unto the garden of
Paradise. Genesis 2. where there was every tree pleasant to the sight, and good
fot meat, and a pleasant river divided into four heads to water the garden,
and all things which could be wished or desired for delight and comfort. And
therefore let us take heed how we do neglect and despise the word; forasmuch
as it is not only a leprosy of the soul as S. Ambrose says (if the physic of
the leprosy be the word, Si leprae medicinaverbu^, contemptus vtique verbi
lepra mentis est. Ambr. in 5. Luc. Dei non audire verbum fames animae Chrysostom.
hom. 2 in Mat.
then the leprosy of the soul is the contempt of it) but also the dearth and
famine of the soul, as Chrysostom says (not to hear the word of God, is to
famish and starve the soul) which God threatens as a most fearful judgment
worse then a famine of bread. Amos 8. though Atheists and wicked worldlings, do
not greatly regard nor care for it, in drawing it voluntarily and willingly
upon themselves.

Thus have you heard why our Savior Christ uses his hand and his tongue in
healing this Leper: now the words which he speaks are these: Volo, mundare,
I will be thou clean. Which as you see, are suitable and agreeable to the words
of the Leper; that as the Leper says unto Christ; Si vis potes mundare me, if
thou will thou can make me clean; so Christ says unto him, Volo, mundare,
I will be thou clean: Wherein there is a manifest declaration or demonstration
of Christ's mercy and of his goodness toward the Leper; first in his
willingness and readiness to heal him, answering Si vis, if thou will, with
Volo, I will; secondly, in his actual operation and performance of it,
answering potes mu^dare, thou can make me clean, with an imperative mundare,
I command be thou clean.

For the first; such is Christ's mercy and goodness toward us, in being
willing and ready to help us; that we can no sooner desire it of him, but he
is willing presently to vouchsafe and grant it unto us: Like as he does to the
Leper here, who no sooner said unto Christ, Si vis potes, if thou will thou
can; but Christ presently stretches out his hand, and says, Volo, mundare;
I will, be thou clean. Yea he is not only ready to help us when we desire it
of him as Mat. 7. Ask and you shall have, Mat. 7.7
seek and you shall find, knock and it shall be opened unto you; but many
times before we crave help of him, Esaias, 65.24
he is ready to send help unto us; as Esaias 65. Antequam clament exaudiam eos,
before that they cry I will hear them. For as there is the grace of God which
follows us all the days of our life. Ps. Psalm. 23.6
23: So there is the grace of God which preuenteth us, giving us many things,
which either we know not how to ask or dare not presume to ask of him. In the
fifth of John, Ioh. 5.6
our Savior CHRIST seeing a creeple, that was diseased and had layen at the
poole of Beshesda thirty eight years, waiting for the moving of the water;
but yet still evermore one or other stepped in before him; does not stay until
the poor man comes unto him, and desires him to heal him: but he comes, and
offers health unto him, saying, Visne sa^ari? Will thou be made whole? Math.
8.7
In the 8. of S. Matthew the Centurion comes unto Christ, and desires but his
word only for the healing of his servant; Dic verbum tantum and sanabitur, Do
but say the word and my servant shall be healed; and our Savior Christ
offers to go to his house and there to heal him: Ego veniam, and curabo
eum, I will come and heal him. Like as God dealt with Solomon, who desired
only wisdom of him, 1. King 3
and God gave him not one lie wisdom, but riches and honor also. In deed I
confess that God many times does not give us such things as we desire of him;
or if he does, he does not presently grant them unto us; yet not because he
is unwilling to give them unto us: but either because he sees them not to be
good for us, whose manner is to hear us, non ad voluntatem, sed ad sanitatem,
as S. Austen says, Augustine.
not for our pleasure, but for our profit; or else because he sees it to be
neither necessary nor expedient to give them so soon unto us; whose manner it
is sometimes to delaie us and to hold us off a while, Chrysostom. hoin 10. in Mat.
not with a purpose to differ his gifts on his part, as Chrysostom says;
but to make us more instant and earnest in praying unto him: who happily if we
were presently made partakers of those things we desire; either we would be
gone from God, and not pray any more unto him; or else set a very low price
upon those things that are so soon and so easily obtained of him.

But otherwise, when that is good for us, which we pray for; and when there is
a present necessity of receiving, without any especial regard which God has
unto those foresaid ends; then we may undoubtedly hope for one of these two at
the hands of God (says S. Bernard) that either he will give us that which we
do desire, Aut dabit quod petimus aut quod nouerit esse vtilius. Bern. in
quadr. ser. 5. 2. Cor. 12.8
or else he will give us that which is more profitable unto us; as he did to
Saint Paul in denying him that which he prayed for; but yet giving his grace
unto him, saying: Sufficit tibi gratia mea, My grace is sufficient for thee. 2.
Corin. 12.

But perhaps you will say, If God be so ready and willing to show mercy, why
then does he not show mercy unto all, but unto some only? To which I answer
with S. Austen, that as all the ways of God are mercy and truth, Psalm. Psaim.
25.9.
25. in regard whereof the Prophet David says: I will sing mercy and judgment
to thee O Lord. Psalm. 101.1.
Psalm. 101: So according to these two, (says the same Father) he has divided
all mankind into two societies, as it were into two Cities; the one to be
joined to the wicked Angels in punishment; Aug. de Ciu. Dei. lib. 12. cap. 27.
the other to be joined to the good Angels in reward and blessedness; in the
one to demonstrate what his grace and mercy is able to do; Aug. de Ciu. Dei.
lib. 21. cap. 12
in the other to manifest what his justice and severity is able to do. For, if
all should remain in the state of damnation; then the mercy and goodness of
Christ should not appear in any: on the other side, if all should be
translated from darkness unto light; then the justice and severity of gods
punishment should not appear in any. Again, if God should have saved none; Si
vtrique liberarentur, lateret quid peccato per iustitiam debeatur: si nemo,
quid gratia largiretur Aug. Sixto presb. ep. 105
it should not have been known, what was bestowed in mercy upon us; and if
he should have saved all, it should not have been known what was dew in
justice unto us. Therefore does God so make a demonstration of his mercy, that
withal he makes a reservation of his justice; being good in rewarding some,
and just in punishing others: Yea; good in all, even in those that are
punished; because it is good when that which is due, is given to every one: and
just also in all; even in those that are saved; because it is just whenas that
which is due is remitted without injury unto any.

This is for the declaration of Christ's goodness unto the Leper in his
willingness and readiness to heal him, in saying, Volo, I will: the next is
in his actual performance of it, in saying, mundare be thou clean. Where it
is worth the observation, that he does not say volo mundare in the infinitive,
I will heal thee; as if he did only promise to heal him; but he says, volo,
mundare, with a comma, in the imperative; I will, be thou clean; performing
that which he promised unto him. Wherein two things are very remarkable in
Christ; first that he performs that which he promises, adding to Volo, I
will, which is a word of promise: mundare, be thou clean, which is a word of
performance; secondly, that he is not only able to do; but also actually and
really, does whatsoever he is willing to have done; ioining, with volo,
mundare; his will, and his deed together.

For the former which is the performance of his promise, Christ is not like to
the man's son in the Gospel; Mat. 21.30
who when as his Father said unto him, Son go work to day in my vineyard,
answered, I will Sir, but yet he did not. Mat. 21. but he is as the only
begotten son of the Father, full of grace and truth: John. 1. Ioh. 1.14
Yea not only full of truth, but truth it self. Ioh. 14. of whom S. Ioh. 14.6
Austen says: Promissa tua sunt Deus, and quis falli timeat cum promittit
veritas, August. Confess. lib. 12. cap. 1
it is thou O God that do promise, and who needs to fear to be deceived,
when as the truth it self promises: whose promises are, yea and Amen, 2. Cor.
1.20
most sure and infallible. Therefore may we safely repose our selves in his
promises; Mat. 5
because heaven and earth shall pass before one iotte or tittle of his Word
shall fail: and withal we may learn of him to be true in our promises; Aug.
de. Tem ser. 127.
because as Saint Austen says; Non in promissione, sed in consu^matione virtus
est, Virtue does not consist in promise, but in performance. A good man is like
unto a tree, says David, that is planted by the water side, Psalm. 1.3
in which there is both fruit and leaves; that is, words, and deeds. Of the
fruit, that is, his deeds, it is said that it brings forth fruit in due
season; of the leaves, that is, his words, it is said that his leaf does not
fade nor wither; Aug. in Psa. 1
that is, says Austen, Verbum eius non erit irritum, his word and his promise
does never fail; of the truth whereof Saint Jerome says, Tantus in te sit
very amor, vt quicquid dixeris, iuratum putes. Hier. ad Celantiam.
There ought to be that love and desire in us, that whatsoever we say, we
should make account that we had sworn before to perform it.

For the other, viz. that he does really and actually accomplish whatsoever he
will have done: it appears plainly by the question that Balam asks. Numb.
23. Numquid ipse dicit, Nu^. 23.19
and non facit? has he said, and shall he not do it? and has he spoken and
shall he not accomplish it? It is a most sure and undoubted truth, that the
will of God is always fulfilled: for God himself has said it, Esaias. 46.10
Consilium meum stabit, and voluntas mea fiet, My counsel shall stand, and my
will shall be done. Esa. 46. there being none able to resist or to hinder it.
Therefore S. Paul speaking of the counsel and will of God, by which he has
predestined us, ioineth his actual operation and working with it; saying,
Ephesians. 1.11
that We are chosen in Christ according to the purpose of him which works
all things, after the counsel of his own will. Ephesians. 1. Which are so nearly
united and combined in God, that as David says, Psalm. 135.6.
What soever it pleased the LORD that did he, both in heaven, in earth, and in
all places. Quaedam decreuit Deus facere, quaeda^ permittere. Aug.
Wherein is to be seen the certainty and stabilitie of Gods decree
concerning election and reprobation; and of all other things that are wrought
by God as author: which is not contingent or changeable, Firmissime tene,
omnes quos vasa misericordiae fecit non pe^ir^ posse; nee quenquam eorum quos
no^ praedestinauit ad vita^, vllae ratione posse saluari. Aug. de fide ad
Petrum. cap. 35. Romans 11.29
depending upon the will of men; but immutable and inviolable, depending upon
the will and counsel of God, which is always fulfilled and accomplished:
insomuch that those whom God has predestined, cannot possibly perish, as
Austen says; and contrariwise those whom God has rejected cannot possibly
be saved. It is the saying of the Apostle, Romans 11.29. that the gifts and
calling of God are without repentance, and that with him there is no
variableness nor shadow of change. Iam 1.16
Iam. 1. Our Savior Christ makes it a matter impossible that any of Gods elect
should perish^ There shall arise (says he) many false Christ's and false
prophets, who shall do many signs and miracles, that they shall deceive the
very elect (if it were possible) Mat. 24. Mat. 24.24 Ioh. 10.28
of whom he says Ioh. 10, that he gives unto them eternal life, and that they
shall not perish, neither shall any take them out of his hands. The ground
whereof is the certainty and stabilitie of Gods foreknowledge and decree. 2.
Tim. 2. 2. Tim. 2.19
The foundation of the Lord remains sure and has this seal, The Lord
knows who are his. Indeed if election and reprobation, were in men, they
might easily be changed; because men are often times changed (for what is more
mutable, and more unconstant then man?) but because it is not in man but in
God, who is immutable as himself says, Mal. 3. Ego Jehovah, Mal. 3 6
et non mutor, I am the Lord, and I change not: Therefore his decree and
counsel both of election, and reprobation, and of all the other works of God,
are immutable and unchangeable; being fulfilled and acomplished according to
the decree and purpose of his will. Otherwise his fore-knowleege must be made
void, his power weakened, and his will changed: which to affirm of God were
most impious and blasphemous. For he that changes his counsel or his will
does it either because he sees that he might have taken better advise; or else
because he sees that he could not have brought his purpose to pass as he
would; both which do argue impotency and weakness; and therefore are far
from God, and greatly abhorring from the nature of him. Lastly, if the decree
concerning predestination may be changed, the certainty of our salvation is
taken away, whereby the confidence of our faith and the full assurance of our
hope is utterly overthrown; which is the greatest stay and comfort that a
Christian has here in this life. Therefore most sure it is, that the decree of
election and reprobation is not changed nor altered, by the faith or infidelity
of men (as if some were predestined to salvation, but by reason of sin
afterward, they utterly fall away, and lose their former estate and become
damned) forasmuch as those whom God predestinateth to the end, he
predestinateth also to the infallible means and ways which do direct us, and
bring us unto the end; by giving especial grace and saving faith, and all
other necessary virtues to those whom he has chosen (which they do
infallibly use, and by the use thereof attain unto salvation) and
contrariwise, denying the like measure of grace unto those that he has
rejected; whereupon consequently though not causally insueth damnation. And yet
notwithstanding God herein does not injustice or injury unto either: because
if he damned al, being in the mass of corruption, Romans 5.18
he were not unjust in doing so: therefore, if he chooses some, and refuses
others; Aug. de bono perseu.
qui liberatur, habet vnde gratias agat: qui damnatur, non habet quod
reprehendat, says, Saint Austen; he which is chosen and saved has cause to
give thanks to God for it: and contrariwise, he that is rejected and damned
has no cause to complain or to find fault with God for it. Si in remittendo
debitum bonitas, August. ibid.
in exigendo aequitas, nusquam apud Deum inuenitur iniquitas, if in remitting
of debt there be mercy, in requiring it there be equity, then there is no
ways found with God any kind of iniquity; to the one he shows mercy, to
the other he does not any injury: of the one he may rightly say, as the
householder does, Mat. 20
Volo huic nouissimo dare sicut tibi, I will give unto the last as unto the
first; of the other he may justly say, toll quod tuum est, and vade, friend I
do thee no wrong, take that which is thine own and go thy way.

Thus do you see the means and the manner of Christ's healing the Leper, both
with his hand and with his tongue; with his hand in stretching it forth and
touching him: with his tongue in saying, Volo, Mundare, I will, be thou clean:
so that now there seems nothing to remain but to consider the effect that
followed and insued hereupon. But as Christ when he had wrought a great miracle
in feeding 5000. men with five loaves and two fishes, Ioh. 6.12
he commanded the Disciples to gather up the broken meat; that nothing might
be lost; so also in this miracle, there are as it were certain fragments of
heavenly mysteries, which in no case we ought to suffer to be cast away or to
be lost. Sicut humana consuetudo verbis, ita diuina potentia etia^ factis
loquitur, etc. Aug ad Deogratias epist. 49.
For as it is the fashion and custom of men to speak by words; so it is the
manner of God to speak by his works also. And as strange and new words being in
a moderate and decent manner sprinkled upon our speech do give a kind of grace
unto it; so, great and strange works done by God, having an apt and a fit
signification in them, do make the speech and eloquence of God to seem a great
deal more gracious. And therefore consider once again the means and manner
of Christ's healing the Leper, and you shall find diverse and sundry mysteries in
the doing of it. As first, he uses his hand and touches the Leper, to show
the inestimable power and virtue of his humane nature, Heb. 10.12
by the immolation and offering whereof he has obtained redemption and
salvation for us; he uses his tongue and speaks withal, to show that his
corporal presence is not so necessary, Ioh. 14.16
but that he is able to do al things by his word and by his spirit, that are
necessary for the salvation of us. Again, he uses his hand and touches the
Leper, for the Jews which then looked on him and beheld him, and by seeing
believed in him; Gentes non videndo sed audiendo crediderunt. August. de Temp.
ser. 74 Psalm. 18.43
he uses his tongue and speaks for the Gentiles, which did not see but
hear, and by hearing believed in him, according to that which God says,
Psalm. 18.43. A people whom I have not known (that is as Austen does
interpret, to whom I have not showed my presence) shall serve me: which was by
hearing only or him, as it follows in the Psalm, as soon as they hear,
they shall obaie^ me. Lastly, he stretches out his hand and touches the
Leper: to show the realitie and truth of his humanity, he speaks and says,
Volo, mundare, I will, be thou clean; to show the realitie, and truth of his
divinity, more particularly he says, Volo, I will, against Photinus the
heretic; he says, mundare, be thou clean, against Arrius the heretic; and
extendens tetigit, he stretches out his hand, and touches him, against
Manicheus the heretic. As if he should say, where is he that denies the
truth of my humane nature, as if my body were a fantastical, not a true and a
natural body? why, behold my hand, and mark how I stretch it out, and do
touch this Leper with it; there is for Manicheus the heretic: Where is he
that denies the truth of my heavenly will, as if my will were not one and the
same with the will of GOD the Father? why mark and consider well what I say;
Volo, I will; not only as I am man but also as I am God, that this Leper be
healed presenly; there is for Photi^us the heretic: Where is he that denies
the truth of my divine power, as if my power were not equal to the power of
God the Father; why mark farther what I say, mundare, be thou clean: that
is, I do not only will, but command by mine own proper power and authority
that the leprosy be packing, and this Leper be made clean; there is for
Arrius the heretic. Thus does our Savior Christ heal him after a most
perfect and an exact manner both by the operation of his humanity in touching,
and by the operation of his divinity, in saying; Volo, mundare, I will be thou
clean: and this is the order and manner of Christ's healing of him.

The next thing we are to speak of is the effect and cure that insued
hereupon; for the Evangelist says, that after this, immediately his leprosy
departed from him. If we consider the disease of the Leper; it was very sore
upon him: for, Saint Luke says, that he was a man full of Leprosy; Luke 5.12
if the means of curing, it seems to be very weak; for he does but touch him,
and speak only unto him: and yet though the disease be great and the means
small, the cure is most perfect and admirable too; for after this, immediately
his leprosy was cleansed. The Philosopher holds it for a maxim and a rule,
that Propter nostrum dicere and velle, nihil in remutatur; that our will and
our word is not able to do any great matter. As for example, if a man be
naked and ready to starve for want of meat, and one should say very
charitably unto him: my good friend, I would wish thee to put on some warm
clothes and provide thee some good meat, and yet not supply his want with
either of them what think you of this? Is his body the warmer or his belly the
fuller, for these fair words? I suppose not; unless a man were as able to
live upon the breath of a man's mouth, as the Chameleon is to live upon the
breath of the air. Or to come yet a little nearer to the purpose, if a
Physician should come unto me being sick, and take me by the hand, and feel my
pulse, and say very cheerfully unto me, Sir be of good comfort, there is no
danger at all; I will heal you, I warrant you, ministering no physic at all
unto me; surely these are very good words, but what? am I healed any whit the
sooner for all this? I suppose not. And yet notwithstanding, mark I pray you:
Christ here does but touch the Leper, and speak two words only, Volo, I
will, and mundare, be thou clean, and the leprosy presently departs from
him. Wherein observe if it shall please you, the wonderful surpassing power of
Christ, who is able to do so great works, by so weak and slender means, even
by the touch of his hand, and by the word of his mouth only, for he does but
touch him with his hand, and say, Volo, mundere, I will, be thou clean, and
the leprosy departs away from him. But what is not he able to do, either by
small means, or without means, Voluntas eius Potestas eius Amb. in 5. Luc.
Psalm. 18.
whose will is his power, as Ambrose says, and to whom, to say, and to do, are
both alike? who if he does but touch the mountains they are ready to smoke, if
he does but speak and rebuke the sea, Mat. 8
both wind and sea are ready to obaie him. Look into the first creation of
the world, and you shall find with what great facility. God created all
things, even by his will and by his word only. God did but say, Genesis ^
Let there be light, and there was a light presently; God did but say, let
there be a firmament, and there was a firmament presently: and so for all the
rest of Gods works, dixit and facta sunt, he spoke the word, and they were
all made; Insomuch, that the Centurio^ when he desired Christ to heal his
servant that was sick of the palsy, he does not desire him to take the pains
to come unto his house, nor to use any great means for the doing of it; but,
Dic verbu^ tantum, Mat. 8.
speak the word only, and my servant shall be whole. So then, it is not in
any strength and virtue of the means, but in the might and power of Gods
will, whereby he works even his greatest works of all, who sometimes works
without means as he did in the creation of the world, where he neither used
workmen, nor tools, nor engines, nor instruments, Cic. lib. 2. de Not. deorum
as the Epicure in Tullie fondly imagined, that God of necessity must do, Docet
sine lingua, praebet sine manibus, currit and succurrit sine pedibus. Ber. in
Cant. ser. 6
if the world were created. For as Bernard does most elegantly express the
manner of Gods working in an other case, God does teach us and admonish us
without a tongue; he does uphold us and give liberally unto us, without hands;
he does come unto us and help us without any feet. Yea, sometimes also he
works against means: Ioh. 9.
as in restoring sight to the blind man, by anointing his eyes with claie,
which was a means rather to deprive a man of his sight, then to give sight unto
him: and when he does use any means at all, commonly they are very weak and
slender even in the greatest works that he does; as in doing many strange
miracles by Moses his rod. Exodus 4.
Exodus 4. In overthrowing the walls of Jericho with trumpets of Rams horns.
Ios. 6. Ios. 6
In discomfiting the Midianites with lamps and pitchers. Judges 7. Judges 7
in skattering the host of the Amorites with a terror Panicus, or a supposed
noise of Chariots and Horsemen. 2. Kings. 7. 2. Kings 7
and that which is one of the greatest miracles of all, in converting and
saving the whole world, by a few simple and unlearned fishermen, who being
sent by Christ to the sea of this world, as Nazianzene says, Nazianz. in
sanct. Pentecost.
having neither skill in grammar, nor knowledge in rhetoric, nor understanding
in logic, and other liberal arts and sciences, with the nets of the Gospel
and of the faith which they preached, caught after a most admirable manner a
multitude of fishes of all sorts of people.

If any shall ask now why God uses means, being as well able to work
without them as with them, or using means, and not rather goodly and glorious
means; I answer with Aquinas the father of the Schoolmen that he does both
these not without a most wise reason and consideration. Aquin part. 1. quaest.
23. art. 8.
First he uses some means, viz. the ministry of his creatures with the
several powers and operations thereof, to keep a decent and a comely order in
things, making as it were a scries or a concatenation of causes linked and
fowlded one with in an other as in a golden chain, where every link hangs
upon an other, wherein all the subordinate and secondarie causes depend upon
the first and primary cause; and that sends his influence into the secondary
causes, giving them power and ability to work and to effect several things
withal. As for example; God promising to show his mercy and to bestow his
blessing upon Israel his people, he does it by no less then three or four
secondary and subordinate causes, hanging one upon an other, and all of them
depending upon the first and primarie cause of all, which is himself, saying,
I will hear the heavens, Ose 2.15
and they shall hear the earth, and the earth shall hear the corn, the wine
and the oil, and they shall hear Israel; that is, he himself gives virtue
and power to the heavens; the heavens send their influe^ce unto the earth, the
earth gives norishme^t to the corn, wine, and oil; and the corn, wine, and
oil, give their strength and virtue unto us; and all this God does, being able
to have done it otherwise, to maintain a decent and a comely order in the world.

Secondly, he does it as the same Doctor says, to honor his creatures in
vouchsafing to make them coworkers with himself; that as he is the first and
principal Agent in every thing; so the creatures work together with him as
means and instruments to perform the will of the first agent: not that God
has any need of them for the effecting of his works; but to vouchsafe an
honor unto them, it being altogether a matter of dignation and not of
necessity. Thus we read that although God had promised Jacob to preserve him,
Genesis 28.15
and to defend him saying; Lo, I am with thee, and will keep thee whithersoeuer
thou go, Genesis 28. Yet when it was told him, that his brother Esau came
toward him, to meet him with 400. men, Genesis 32
he does not lay all upon God; but he himself also falls to work, and
provides as well as he can for the time, to defend both him and his from
violence, by dividing the people that was with him into two companies, and
commanding some to go before and others to follow after, that if the first
company were assaulted, the second might rescue and aid them, Josephus Anti.
lib. 1 cap. 19.
as Josephus discourses upon the story; by which example he would give us to
understand says Austen, August. in quaest. super Genesis quaest. 102.
writing upon the same scripture, that although we ought to look for help of
God as the first and principal worker that works all in all, yet
notwithstanding as coworkers to labor and work together with God, in doing
such things as men ought to do for their own preservation and safety; least
otherwise we incur that just reproof of those idle loyterers, quid statis
hic tota die otiosi, Mat. 20.
Why stand ye hear all the day idle? The like we read of Paul's dangerous
voyage, and of the company that sailed with him unto Rome; to whom though God
had promised safety by a special revelation saying, Fear not Paul, for thou
must appear before Caesar, and God has given unto thee all that sail with
thee; Act. 27.31.
yet notwithstanding when he saw the ship in danger, and the mariners who
were to govern the ship ready to depart out of it, he does not hold his peace,
but begins to bestir himself, and tell them plainly that unless those men
abide in the ship they cannot be safe: so that although he knew that none of
them should perish, yet he knew withal that the way to escape the danger, was
not to lay all upon God, but to labor with God and to govern the ship; which
otherwise was like to perish with all the company that was in it.

The consideration whereof does justly reprove and condemn the extreme folly
and presumption of diverse, who like unto the Scribes, and Pharisees, that would
lay heavy burdens upon other men's shoulders, Mat. 23.4
and not touch the^ with one of their own fingers, will lay all upon God to
work his own will, while they themselves do loyter, and are altogether idle;
dealing herein as the devil dealt with Christ, who having set him upon the
pinnacle of the Temple goes about to persuade him to cast himself down
headlong, Math. 4
because God had given his Angels charge over him: leaving out most subtly
and cunningly, that which Christ was to do on his own part; Numquid in
praecipitijs? qualis est haec via? Non est haec via sed ruina: et si via, tua
est no^ illius. Bern. in psa. Qui hab. sor. 14
which was, not to cast himself down, but to come down the right way, as it
follows in the text; and they shall keep thee in all thy ways; not in the
devils down falls, says Bernard, but in his own ways: Now what manner of
way call you this, for a man to cast himself down from the top of a pinnacle?
this is no way but a a downfall; or if it be a way it is the devils way not
Christ's way: and therefore he refuses it, giving no ear at all to his
persuasion. Which notwithstanding is a great fault, wherein diverse do offend
both in diverse manners and in diverse cases: which I purpose to specify in three
especially.

The first is a spiritual case in the matter of our salvation: wherein there
are many that do rely so much upon the first and chief cause thereof which
is Gods eternal and immutable decree of predestination, that they do
altogether neglect the secondary causes and the subordinate means thereof;
which is an effectual vocation by the preaching of the word, and the inward
working of the spirit, and an effectual justification by a true and a lively
faith, with the fruits of a holy and godly conversation; using a most devilish
speech, invented at the first by no other then the devil himself in saying,
if God has predestined me to salvation, let me live as I will, I am sure to
he saved, because his predestination is immutable; on the other side, if God
has ordained me to reprobation or damnation, howsoever I live I am sure to be
damned, because his decree cannot be altered. Dolosi vel im periti medici est,
vtile medicamentum sic alligare vt aut non prosit, aut obsit. Aug. de bono
persevere. cap. 21
To whom I might answer as S. Austen sometimes did in the like case, to certain
men that did abuse the doctrine of predestination as these do, that it is the
property either of a deceitful or of an unskillful physitio^ so to apply an
wholesome medicine, that either it shall do hurt or at the least no good;
whenas these men that do thus reason, ought to consider this with themselves,
that whom God has predestined to salvation, he has also predestined to
the secondarie causes and means that do bring us unto it; which is our
effectual vocation and justification; as the Apostle shows in that golden
chain both of the first and second causes of salvation. Romans 8. Romans 8.30.
Whom God has predestined he has called, whom he has called he justified;
whom he justified he has glorified. So that in the matter of predestination we
are not to reason a priori from the first and highest cause thereof, in saying,
If I am predestined I am sure to be saved, if not I am sure to be damned;
but we are to reason a posteriori, from the lowest of the subordinate and
second causes, to the first and highest cause of all, in reasoning thus; My
faith and good works do show that I am justified; being justified it shows
that I am called; being called, it shows that I am elected; being elected it
is most sure and certain that I shall be saved. Otherwise, to set all upon
Gods predestination not looking to the second means which God has ordained to
com unto it, what is this else, but as if a man that trauelles should think to
come to the end of his journey without stirring one foot, or using the way
that brings him to it? or as if a man should think to get up to the top of a
house without a pair of stayres, or a ladder to ascend withal? whereas in
Jacobs sision there was a ladder that reached up unto heaven, Genesis 28.12
and the Angels of God ascended and descended by it; but as for these men they
think to fly up to heaven with the wings of predestination, without the stairs
or ladder of a faithful and holy conversation. I have read of one Ludouicus an
Italian, who never considering the order and the causes of our salvation, grew
to that desperate conclusion which many Atheists and profane wretches in these
days seem to have learned of him in having this speech commonly in his mouth,
If I be predestined I am sure to be saved, if not do what I can, I am sure
to be damned; In which his wicked assertion he continued a long time, till at
the length he grew dangerously sick; whereupon he sent for a learned and a
cunning Physicion to request and to use his help. The Physicion being made
acquainted with his former lewd assertion in his health time, how he would
usually say, If I am saved I am saved; he likewise directed his speech to the
same purpose, and said unto him, Sir it shall be needless to minister any
physic unto you or to use means for your recovery, neither do I purpose to
take any such course; for if the time of your death be not com you have no
cause to fear, you shall live and do well enough without physic; and if the
time of your death be now come, all the Physic in the world will not help you,
because it is impossible to avoid it. Ludouicus musing in his bed of the
strange speech which the Physicion used, having considered a while advisedly of
it, began to see his own folly and to find by reason, that as means was to be
used for the health of the body; so God had also ordained means for the
health of the soul: whereupon he reuersed his former opinion; took physic and
so was cured both in his body, and soul at one time: which I wish were
seriosly considered of diverse irreligious and profane beasts, who neglecting
all the means of their salvation, by living a most wicked and a licentious
kind of life, and venturing all their estate upon Gods predestination, without
regard or respect of a holy conversation, do run headlong to eternal
destruction and damnation; whereas contrariwise, they and only they, which use
the means of salvation, shall obtain the end of predestination, which is,
eternal glorification.

The second case that I will propound, is a temporal case in the preserving
and maintaining of this temporal life: wherein there are many that do depend
so much upon Gods providence, in sustayning and keeping them, that they do
altogether neglect the means and the second causes of it. Some in relying and
resting so much upon Gods providence which is the first and the principle
cause, that they will use no labor, nor take any pains in any honest
vocation to get their living withal; like unto certain idle Monks,
Augaretract. lib. 2. cap. 21
of whom S. Austen complayneth in his time: who lived so well upon the alms
and benevolence of well disposed people, that they would not labor nor take
the least pains for their living, saying, that they did herein fulfill the
precept of our Savior Christ, where he says: Look upon the fowls of the
air, Mat. 6
and the Lillies of the field, they neither labor nor spin, nor sow, nor
reap, nor carry into the barnes, and yet God feeds them: Whereas, they
should not regard so much, what these senseless and unreasonable creatures
do, as what sensible and reasonable creatures ought to do; who are borne unto
labor, Job. 7
as Job says, God providing in the first beginning of all, that man should not
be idle; Genesis 2
and therefore put him into the garden of Eden to dress and to keep it. God
does not feed us ordinarily, as he did the Israelites miraculously, by rayning
down Manna from heaven, Exodus 1^
by sending quails among us, Number. 16.
nor yet by Angels and Ravens which bring meat and drink unto us, 1. King. 17
as they did unto Elias; but by labor and industry, Philo Iud. de sacr. Cain
and Abel.
which Philo calls the beginning of all virtue and happiness, without which no
good nor honest thing is to be found among men. For even as the eye of the
body is not able to see without light; so the eye of the soul is not able to
see to do any action of virtue without the help of labor, as it were with the
help of light. Look upon Students, and Artists, who study the liberal arts
and sciences; look upon husband men, artificers, and handicraftsmen, and such
as get their living by any manner of means; you shall see that they do not
cease to labor with their hands and with their feet, and with all the
strength both of their bodies and of their minds. It is the saying of a heathen
man; that the gods do sell all things for labor. Verily our God is but one and
he does not sell but give, but yet he gives all things for labor, it being
the root as Philo says from whence all good things do spring and grow.
Philo ibid.
For though God himself does give all things on his part without labor and
difficulty; yet notwithstanding he will not have any mortal creature to obtain
any thing without labor and industry, to the end that thereby we might
acknowledge and commend the eminent greatness and excellency of God above the
creatures. The labor of man is like unto meat: for as the life is preserved
and maintained by meat; so both life and every good thing is maintained by
labor.

And therefore, as those that desire to preserve this natural life, do not
refuse to take nourishment; so they that desire to have meat to preserve the
life withal, or to have any good thing to preserve the soul withal, ought
not to refuse labor, it being both to life and to virtue, and to every thing
else, as meat and nourishment is unto the body.

There are others also that depend so much upon Gods providence in preserving
them, that in a time of danger and sickness, as this is, they will not use
those means, which not only God, but even nature and reason also does direct
them unto for their defense, and preservation, running headlong and desperately
into places that are infected; without any care and regard either of
themselves or of others: saying that in good earnest which the Physicion spoke
but by way of a taunt to Ludouicus the Italian, God has set down the term of
my life, and if my time be come, do what I can, I can live no longer then God
has appointed: and if it be not come, let me go whither I will, I shall live
as long as God has determined; not considering withal, that Gods providence
does not take away the means and second causes of our preservation, but rather
sets them in a decent order as certain helps and instruments to accomplish
the same. When God made the law of the leprosy (a disease in regard of the
contagion thereof, Leuit. 13
not unlike unto the pestilence) there was no question but that all should
live out that time that God had appointed unto them: and yet God to accomplish
this by a secondarie means, he provides withal that the Lepers should live
a part without the camp from the society and company of others, as a
necessary and subordinate means to effect the same. Esaias 38
So also when God promised Ezechias that he should recover his sickness and
live fifteen years more; no question there was, but he must needs live so
long, because God had decreede and promised it: yet notwithstanding he
prescribes him certain means that he must use for his recovery, viz. to take
a bunch of dried figs, and to apply it unto the byle, as a subordinate means
to accomplish his decree. For to lay all upon the shoulders of Gods providence,
and our selves not to stir so much as the least of our fingers, in working
together with his providence, what is this else but to tempt God, Si periculum
quantum canere possumus non cauemus, magis tentamus Deum quam speramus in Deo.
Aug. de Ciu. dei. lib. 16 cap. 19. Zanchius in cap. 2. ep. ad Philip.
as S. Austen says; if we be in any danger, and be not careful to decline
and avoid it as much as we can, we do rather tempt God then put our trust in
him. To this purpose it is worthy of observation, which that worthy and learned
Zanchius, a singular ornament of Gods Church, reports upon occasion of the
pestilence that was very rife among them, of a certain conference or
disputation between him and a Minister of Curia, whether it were lawful for a
Minister to absent himself from those that were sick of the plague and to
flee from those places that were dangerously infected; the Minister of Curia,
holding that it was not lawful, and Zanchius on the other side holding that it
was not unlawful, being done with such due regard as it ought to be, without
dishonor unto God, neglect of our duty, or fraud and injury unto the people
committed unto us. Of which point they had reasoning so long both by word of
mouth, and by Letters, till at the length the Minister of Curia by resorting
daily to those that were sick of the plague, was stricken himself and fell
sick of it. At which time seeing his error and oversight, and the danger into
which he had brought himself and his family, he bewailed and cried out to
his wife, and children and to his friends about him; Oh vtinam Zanchij
consilium secutus essem! Oh that I had been ruled by Zanchius, who gave me
counsel so to have care of those that were sick; that withal, I should have
a care of those that are sound, viz. of my self and of my family, and of the
Church of God, whose future good and profit I ought to have regarded, expecting
a better opportunity afterward. Which is a matter right wisely and
Christianlie ordered by those that are in authority for the safety and
preservation both of Mininisters and of al sorts of people; but that I know not
how, either we think our selves wiser and more charitable then they, or else
(as it should seem) not to stand bound in duty to perform obedience to the
laws and orders of our superiors.

Thus do you see why God uses some means in his works that he does: now we
will show why he uses so small and weak means in doing of them; which is
not without as just cause and reason as the other. First of all, that we
should not ascribe that unto the means and to the secondarie cause which is due
to the power and goodness of God that works all in all. For such is the
corruption of our nature and the gross conceit of our reason, that we look
more to the means, then to God the Author and finisher of all: although alas
what is all the means in the world, unless God works with them, and gives
power and ability thereunto. What is bread the ordinary means to preserve life
able to do, unless withal God gives the staff of bread, which is a secret
blessing and power to norish us withal? what is all the labor and study and
pains we take, able to do, unless God lay his hand to the work and help
us through with it? If we build, yet, Psalm. 127
unless the Lord build the house, they labor in vain that build it; if we
watch, yet, except the Lord keep the City, the watchman watches but in
vain; if we labor and take pains, rising early and lying down late, and
eating the bread of carefulnes, yet unless Gods blessing be with us as it was
with Jacob whither so ever he went, all our labor is lost and to no purpose:
without this we may sow much and reap little, we may eat and not be
satisfied, Agg. 1.16
we may wear clothes and not be warm, we may earne wages and put them
into a broken bag, and be never the better nor the richer for it. Habac. 1.16
Therefore we ought not to sacrifice unto our net, nor burn incense unto our
yarn, as the Prophet speaks, ascribing all to the means of our prosperity,
but to ascribe all to the Author of it, as David and his people did, when they
made an oblation to God for the building of the Temple, saying; Thine O Lord is
greatness and power: for all that is in heaven and in earth is thine, both
riches and honor come of thee, and thou raignnest over al: now therefore our
God, we thank thee and praise thy glorious name: Quod dedit gratis tulit
ingratis. Au. in Ioh. tr. 14
least otherwise giving that to the creature which is due to the Creator; God
take away that from us for our unthankfulness, which before he did bestow
upon us in his great goodness.

2. He uses small and weak means, to the end that we should not trust in any
means whatsoever, but to depend upon Gods power and goodness only. For as
Jonathan said to his armor bearer, 1. Saw. 14.6
It is not hard for the Lord to save with many or with few, so neither is it
hard for him to save by great means or by small means. In which persuasion and
confidence, David being but a child and not expert in feats of war, ventured
to encounter with great Goliath with a staff and a sling only, 1. Sam. 17
who came against him with sword, spear, and shield, only upon this
resolution; It is the Lords battle, says he, who saves not with sword and
with spear but by his own power. 1. Sa^. 17. But most worthy and memorable is
that which we read of K. Asa. 2. Chr. 2. Chron. 14 11
14 who being to fight with Zerah the K. of Ethiopia, who came against him with
an host of 1000000. and 300. chariots, prayed unto God after this manner: Lord
it is nothing for thee to help with many, or with no power: help O Lord our
God, for we rest in thee, and in thy name are we come against this multitude. O
Lord thou art God, let not man preuail against thee: who also according to that
faith which he had of Gods power, wherein he did repose himself, did overcome
and vanquish him, being in power much inferior unto him. If I should but call
to your remembrance those 2. great and wonderful deliverances worthy to be
written in a pillar of marble that they might never be forgotten, which God
has vouchsafed to this our land by most small and weak means if I may so
speak: the one in delivering us from the fury of the Spaniardes who came
against us with an invincible navy as they called it, and not possible to be
resisted as they supposed, making the sea and the winds to fight for us, when
as our preparation was not able to match theirs; the other in delivering us
from the danger of the powder treason, into which we were ready to have
fallen, had not God of his mercy most miraculously saved us; and that by most
unlikely means, only by an enigmaticall Letter, written most darkly, and
interpreted as strangely, and yet withal most effectually for the discovering
and finding of it, by our most wise Sovereign, who like an other Oedipus
dissolved the riddle; and brake the snare in pieces; I say if I should but call
to your rembrance these two, they might easily move you not only to
acknowledge, how God works by small means, and yet brings mighty things
to pass by them; but also move you to put your trust in God, and not in
means, 2. Chro. 16.12.
as Asa did afterward in seeking to Physicions, and not to the Lord 2. Chron.
16. assuring our selves that it is not so much the means, whether great or
small, as the omnipotent power of God that works and and brings every thing
to pass. And therefore let us be of David's mind and say with him Psalm. 20.
Some put their trust in Horses, and some in Chariots, Psalm. 20.7.
but we will remember the name of the Lord our God: save Lord, let the King
hear in the day that we call.

Thus do you see, how the weak and small means is not any ways a let or
hinderance unto the cure; but there is yet a greater matter then this. viz.
That he is not only healed hereby, but also healed suddenly and presently; for
immediately upon this, the leprosy departed from him. The Philosophers have a
saying that (...), no great matter can be done upon a sudden; but there
must be a good time and a good space for the producing and bringing forth of
it. It is reported of the Elephant that she is ten years in bringing forth
an other Elephant, and that the Lioness is her whole life time in bringing
forth of a Lion. If it be but a matter of building, you shall see that a
fair house is not set up on a sudden; but there must be a good time for the
erecting of it. Salomons house which he builded for himself was 13 years in
building. 1. King. 7.11
1. Kings 7. And the Temple of Jerusalem, though some perhaps will think that
Solomon should have bestowed more time in building Gods house, then in building
his own; yet it was no less then seaue^ years in building. ^. Kin. 6.38
1. Kings 6. and the Temple which was builded also after this, was no less
then forty six years in building. John 2.20.

But to come a little nearer unto the point; in a matter of Physic, we see
that an ordinary disease is not by and by cured, but there must be a sufficient
time for the doing of it. The woman of Sirophonisse that was diseased with an
issue of blood, Mar. 5.25
was twelve years in the Physicions hands, of whom she suffered many things,
and spent all her substance on them, and yet was never the better for them but
rather the worse.

And Naaman the Sirian, when he was healed of his leprosy, though it was
after an extraordinary manner, 2. Kin. 5
yet he was not heared presently; but the Prophet bids him to wash himself
seven times in the river Jordan, and then his flesh came again like the flesh
of a young child, which was by little and little; but here our Savior Christ
does but touch the Leper and commands him to be healed, and the leprosy
immediately departed from him. Do not ask how this could possibly be; that
ama^ful of leprosy should be healed by touching and speaking only unto him,
and that presently and immediately too, as soon as ever the word was passed
from him; Aug. epist. 3. ad Volusian.
for as Austen says, Si ratio quaeritur, no^ erit mirabile; si exemplum
poscitur, non erit singular, if you seek for a reason of it, it were no
miracle: and if you would have an example of it, it were not singular; in
talibus ratio facti potestas facientis, in all such cases the reason and cause
of the thing done is the power of him that does it. If you will needs have a
reason of it; Saint Ambrose will tell you, Nihil medium est inter Dei opus and
praeceptum; quia in praecepto est opus. Dixit and facta sunt. Amb. in 5. Luc.
that the leprosy immediately departed from him, because there is nothing
between Gods command and the thing that h^ commands; the work which he does
being within the command, according as the Prophet David says, H^ spoke the
word and it was done: which implies that if he command any thing it is
presently done. Mark then I beseech you not only the power of Christ in healing
this leper, but also his power and goodness in healing him so presently too;
not taking any long time to heal him, as many Physicians and Chirurgians do,
who heal after a very strange manner, not ex^acting but protracting the
disease; but contrariwise in healing him quicly and speedily even in a trice as
it were and in the turning of the hand. For as he is able to heal us by small
and weak means: so is he able to help us in a very short time, or without
any time at all, when it pleases him; according to that which the Psalmist
says, God is our hope and strength, Psalm. 46.1. Beneficij gratia promptitudine
and celeritate congeminatur. Nazian de amore pauperum.
a present help in time of trouble. Which is not only a singular comfort, but
also a double benefit, as Nazianzene says; forasmuch as a benefit that is
bestowed promptly and speedily, is made a double benefit with the quickness
and celerity of it. We read of the Israelits that when Pharaoh and the
Egyptians pursued them in such manner as they despaired of all help; Exodus 14.
having their enemies behind them ready to kill them, and the sea before them
ready to drown them, being compassed round about with the mountains and the
rocks, with the sea, and a great multitude of armed men as Josephus does
discourse of it; Joseph. Antiq. lib. 2. c. 6.
God who is able to turn the mountains into a Plain, and the sea into dry
land, presently divided the sea, and made it become dry land: wherein the
Israelites passing through were preserved and saved, but contrariwise, Pharaoh
and the Egyptians pursuing them were destroyed and drowned. When Zenacharib the
King of Assiria, 2. Kings. 19.35.
came against Judah and Jerusalem with a huge host, so as Ezechias and his
people despaired and were out of all hope; God who is our refuge and a present
help in time of troble, sends an Angel which destroyed an hundred fourscore
and five thousand of his men in one night: by which means he preserved and
delivered both the King, and his people. 2, Kings, 6.25.
When Benhadad the King of Aram besieged Samaria, in such manner that an asses
head was sold for Lxxx. pieces of silver, and the fourth part of a Kab of
doves dunge for five pieces of silver; God within one day after sent such
plenty among them by a spoil, which he gave them in the tents of the
Aramits, that a measure of fine flower was soulde for a shekle, and two
measures of barley for a shekle. What should I tell you of Jonas? Ion. 1.17.
who being cast into the sea and ready to be drowned, God sends present
help, by sending a whale of the sea to receive him and to preserve him: of
Susanna, Dan. 3.25.
who being condemned to death, God stirred up the spirit of Daniell and so
delivered her: of the 3 children that were cast into the fiery and hot burning
furnace, who being ready to be co^sum'd with the fire, God sent one like unto
the Son of God and preserved them. All which with many more examples that
might be produced, do evidently demonstrate to our great comfort, that God is
both able and willing to help us even upon the present and in our greatest
need of all. And therefore we should not be discouraged nor dismayed at any
time in our greatest dangers of al; but rather with David, ^. Sam. 30.
when as the people were ready to stone him, to comfort our selves in the Lord
our God, assuring our selves that God who is able to bring light out of
darkness, is able by some mean: or other to send present help and deliverance
unto us; yea and that he will also, if he see it to make for our good and his
own glory. And thus much also of the cure it self, wrought as you see by
small and weak means, and yet most effectually and wonderfully too; for the
leprosy immediately departed from him.

Now follows the charge which our Savior Christ gives unto him after his
cure: See thou tell no man etc. Which perhaps may seem unto some to be very
strange, and scarce standing with the rules of civility and humanity, to
receive a benefit and then to smoother it by concealing of it; whereas if a
poor man receive but an alms, the hand will move to the head, the knee will
bend to the ground, and the tongue will be ready to give thanks and to be
telling every body of it. All which I confess to be true: but yet do but
consider the manner of the charge, and the intent and meaning of Christ in it,
and you will not only clear him of all imputation, but also highly approve,
and commend his dealing in it. First for the manner of the charge, Christ does
not forbid him to publish this miracle by way of a precept as Caietan says,
Caietan. in 8. cap. Mat.
but by way of an humble affection that he would show in himself and commend
vntovs; or if it be a precept, yet it is not a simple or an absolute precept,
but a precept secundum quid, as the Schoolmen speak, with relation to some
particular respect: wherein he does not simply and absolutely command him to
tell no man, as if he would have had the miracle to be hid and kept secret,
(for then he would rather have done it closely and secretly, then in the
presence of a great multitude that followed him, and would rather have healed
him by his will then by his word in speaking unto him) but he commands him to
tell no man, viz. before such time as he had showed himself unto the Priest,
and then afterward he might publish it and tell it to whomsoever he would. And
this was, to avoid the malicious and wicked dealing of the Priests about the
discerning and judging of his cleansing: who had they understood that Christ
had healed him, though most exactly and most perfectly; yet they would never
have admitted nor approved of his cleansing, only for the very malice and
hatred which they bare unto Christ; and therefore he would have this to be
hid, and secret for a while, until such time as the Priest had judged and
approved of his cleansing; that if afterward they should cavil and quarrel
about it, they might be convicted and condemned of themselves, having before
judged and pronounced him to be clean. Wherein appears most clearly both the
singular wisdom, and the most loving care and affection of Christ toward this
Leper. His wildom in preventing and defeating the malicious practice of the
Priests, by taking away al occasion of calumniation from the^; his love and
tender affection, in being careful that the Leper whom he had healed, might
not be vexed nor molested, but be received again into the society and company
of others. So as if Christians are to follow Christ as soldiers follow their
Captain, we may learn both to be wise in preventing and avoiding of dangers,
and also to be charitable in helping and delivering such as are oppressed and
suffer injury.

For the former, our Savior Christ would have his disciples not only to have
the innocence of the dove; Mat. 10.16.
but also the wisdom of the Serpent. For as religion and civil conversation
do very well agree together (though some make all their religion to be in a
certain austerity and rusticity) so also piety and Christian policy may very
well agree together. For it is not the simplicity of the Ass, which is void of
all reason and understanding, that is commended unto Christians; but the
simplicity of the dove joined with the wisdom of the Serpent, that is worthy
of praise and commendation. And therefore we shall find that the servants of
God have from time to time used singular wisdom in all their actions. It is
said of Jacob that he was a plain man (for so it is in our English
translation) and yet what wisdom showed he toward his uncle Laban in keeping
his flocks, toward his wives living peaceably with them both, and toward his
brother Esaw in pacifying his wrath and displeasure conceived against him? Ge.
30. and 32
Genesis 30.32. What should I tell you of David changing his behavior, and
fayning himself mad, when he was in danger of King Achish 1. Sa. 1. Sam. 21.
21. Of Solomon making a show as if he would have had the living child to have
been divided between the women that did strive together, 1. Kings. 3.
thereby to find out the true mother. 1. Kings. 3. Of Paul, who seeing one part
of the Council to be of the Pharisees, and the other of the Sadduces, set them
together one against an other, Act. 23.6.
thereby to escape the danger that he was in. Act. 23. with diverse other
examples that I could bring; that if God commends the unjust steward for
dealing wisely, Luc. 16.
Luke 16. he will much more commend just and godly men for dealing wisely. The
which is not spoken to patronise or maintain the policy, or rather the fraud
and subtilitie of Jesuits and Machiauelists, whose profession is altogether to
ly and to flatter, to dissemble, and to equivocate, and to use all kind of
treachery and villainy, having all the subtility of the Serpent but nothing at
all of the innocence of the dove (for as Bernard says of such wily and crafty
foxes as these are, Bern. in Cant ser. 65.
vulpium posteriora foetent, the hinder parts of these foxes stink most
abominably when their secrets and devises come to be discovered afterward: who
although they beguile the world for a while; yet in the end God catches them
in their own craftiness, 1. Cor. 3.19
strikes them in the hinder parts and puts them to a perpetual shame as David
speaks) I say it is not spoken to defend Machiauellian subtilty, Psalm. 78.66.
but Christian policy, to teach us to be as wise to take the Foxes, Cant. 2.15.
and the little Foxes, as they are crafty and malicious to destroy our vines,
and to do hurt unto us.

For the latter which is piety and charity in redeeming others from wrong and
injury, it is the very life and being of religion as Saint James says; for
what is pure religion and undefiled before God, but to visit the fatherless,
and the widows, in their adversity? Iam. 1. Iam. 1.27. Act. 7.24
that as we read of Moses when he saw one of his brethren suffer wrong, he
defended him and avenged his quarrel that had the harm done unto him, and
smote the Egyptian; so should we do, when we see our brethren suffer vvrong
and oppression or to be in any distress whatsoever, to help and deliver them
either by our countenance and authority if we be in place to do it, or at
least by our good counsel, and good endeavor, or by any other means, whereby
we may testify this christian and charitable affection toward them. Genesis 4.
Not to say as Cain did, when God asked him where his brother Abel was, Job.
29.12.
Numquid ego sum custos fratris mei? am I my brothers keeper? but rather to do
as Job did, who professes that he delivered the poor and the fatherless, and
him that had none to help him, that he was the eyes to the blind, the feet
to the lame, and a father unto the poor, that he did break the chawes of the
unrighteous man, and did pluck the prey out of his teeth. Which duty all
Christians ought to perform, not only by his example, but also of Christ
here, who was careful that the poor Leper might not be molested, but
forthwith be pronounced clean and be received of them.

But besides this, our Savior Christ had also a moral regard in forbidding
this Leper to tell the miracle unto any man: which was partly in regard of
modesty, as not caring nor desiring to have his good deeds to be proclaimed;
partly in regard of humility, as flying all vainglory in seeking the praise
and commendation of the world; and partly in regard of piety, to give all the
praise and glory hereof unto God, whose glory only he sought after; not that
he feared (says Caietan) either immodesty, or vain glory, or impiety in
himself, but hereby to commend modesty, humility and piety unto us.

For the first, our Savior Christ would not have us to divulge and to publish
our good deeds in bragging and boasting of them, Mat. 6
and in making a trumpet as it were to be blown before us, as hypocrites use
to do; but rather to desire as much as we may to have our good deeds to be
hid, and to be kept secret, that so God who sees in secret may reward us
openly. In the law, God did forbid to sheare the first borne sheep. Deuteronomy. 15.
to signify as Bernard says, Deuteronomy. 15.19
that he would not have us to lay open nor to publish our good deeds. Mat.
13.44.
And in the gospel, the man that found the treasure to which the kingdom of
heaven is resembled, went presently and hid the treasure that he found. For
virtues and good works, says the same Father, do grow and increase in private
and secret places: but they do wither and decrese in public and open places.
Satis tutus penus meritoru^, obliuio meritorum. Chrysostom. hom 39 ad pop. Ant.
The safest place to lay up our virtues, is, in oblivion (says Chrysostom)
that being a most safe and sure storehouse to keep them in. Even as gold and
silver or any other thing of price and value being exposed and laid forth in
open public place do provoke and entise others to lie in wait and to steal
them from us; but being laid up at home in some secret place, they are then
safe and free from all danger: so is it with the riches and the treasures of
our good deeds; if we always carry them about with us, either in our memory
or in the tip of our tongues, to make sale as it were of them, we provoke God,
we arm our enemy, and entise him to steal them away from us; whereas if he
only knows of them, from whom nothing is hid, though it be never so secret,
they are safe from all peril and danger. Mat. 13
The seed that fell in good ground and did take deep root in the earth was
not only safe; but brought forth fruit also; but the seed that fell by the
high-waie side, the fowls of the air came and devoured it; whereof a manifest
proof is to be seen in the Pharisee, Lu. 18.11
who for sowing his seed by the high-waie side, in boasting and telling every
where of his good deeds; the fowls of the air, that is, the devil and his
angels, came and eat up his seed, that he had never any crop of it.
Wherefore, if we do any good deeds, let us not proclaim them, as it were,
in an open market, nor yet glory in them. Number. 23.4
If thou have builded altars unto God, do not boast of them as Balaam did.
Numb. 23. Iud. 15.16
If thou have slain 1000. Philistines, yet do not boast of it as Sampson did.
Judge. 15. If thou fast, and pay thy tithes truly (as few do) yet do not
brag nor boast of it as the Pharisees did. Luk, 18. Luke 18.11
If we think to meet God with an hundred of our good deeds, he will come
against us with a thousand of our evil deeds, and overcome us.

And yet notwithstanding, I do not deny but that there is also sometimes a
necessary use of manifesting our good deeds unto the world, for the good
example and profit of others. For if we were altogether to hide them, why then
does our Savior Christ bid us to let our light to shine before men, that they
may see our good works, and glorify our Father which is in heaven. Mat. 5.
Aug. in ep. Ioh. tr. 8
Whereupon says S. Austen; Si times spectatores, non habeb is imitatores, if
thou fear to have any man to see thee when thou do well, thou shall not
have any man to imitate thee when thou do well. And therefore do not fear
when thou art about any good work, least any man should see thee: but rather
fear to do it for this end only, that another may see thee, Si abscondis ab
oculis hominu^, abscondis ab imitatione hominu^. Aug. ibid.
and commend thee for it. For necessary it is for thee to be seen for the
imitation of others, but thou must not do it for this end only for the praise
and commendation of others; according as Christ says, Matthew. 6
Take heed that you give not your alms to be seen of men, or else shall you
have no reward of your Father which is in heaven. Math. 6.

But the next point, which is Christ's humility, in not seeking for the vain
applause and commendation of the world, will give us more occasion to speak of
this matter: which he did to commend the like affection unto us; not to do
any thing for vain glory, nor for a popular applause, and commendation of the
world; because it is not virtue, says Saint Austen, Non virtus sed causa
virtutis mercedem habet. August.
but the cause of virtue that is rewarded. Our Savior Christ would have us
when we give our alms or do any other good deed, Mat. 6.3
not to let the left hand know what the right hand does: August. de Temp.
ser. 59
that is according to Saint Austens interpretation, not to suffer the vain
glory of the world to corrupt that which the love of God does or at the least
ought to do: Aug. lib. 2. de sermon. dei in monte.
the left hand signifying a sinister affection of the praise of men, the right
hand signifying a right affection of the love of God. So that if the desire of
praise and of worldly glory does insinuate and wind it self into our good
deeds, the left hand is privy to that which the right hand does: but if we
do them with an honest mind and a good intention, then the right hand deals
wisely, in doing all it self, and not suffering the left hand to know what the
right hand does. For if any shall think that this can be performed literally,
what monstrous conceits would ensue hereof? Suppose that the right hand be
hurt or maimed, ought not therefore a man to give an alms with his left hand?
Or suppose a man out of his charity would redeem a Captive, how can he either
untie his purse, or open his chest, if the left hand does not join it self
unto the right hand? Therefore, the meaning of Christ is, that in doing our
good deeds we should do them with a right affection of fulfilling the will of
God, and not with a sinister respect of seeking the vanity and glory of the
world. We read of the Prophet Elisha, that when he wrought a miracle, 2.
King. 4 4
to do a work of charity in helping a poor Widow (whose husband being dead,
the Creditors came very roughly upon her for his debts) that he willed her to
borrowe empty vessels of all her neighbors, and to go home and shut the
door upon her self, and her sons, and to fill the vessels with that oil
which she drew out of her pitcher: signifying hereby (as Saint Austen says)
that every man when he gives an alms or does any good deeds, August. ibid.
he should do them the door being shut, that is, not to be praised of men;
but to find grace and favor with God. For, he that does good deeds for the
praise of men, he does them the door being open: but he that does them for the
love of the glory of God, though he does it openly, yet he does it the door
being shut, because therein he does not seek that which is seen, viz. the
praise of men, but that which is not seen, viz. the praise and glory of God.

To dissuade us from this fond desire and love of the praise of men, there can
be no better motive then to consider, 1. How vain. 2. How uncertain. 3. How
unprofitable. 4. How dangerous it is unto us. First, it is a most vain and
frivolous thing, because it is to no purpose to be solicitous, and careful of
an other man's judgment, whose praise does not altogether commend us, and whose
dispraise does not altogether condemn us. If we were to appear before the
judgment seat of men, to receive a reward according to our works, there were
some cause then to seek the testimony and praise of men: but because we are
not to be presented before the judgment seat of men, but before the judgment
seat of Christ; 2. Cor. 5.10
How great vanity and folly is it to rejoice and glory in their testimony?
where God himself is the judge, before whose eyes all things are naked, having
no need that any man should give witness unto him. The vanity whereof,
appears yet further in this, that when a man has gotten all the praise and
glory that he can possbly have of men, in being called Rabbi, and having a
great name here in the world, yet what remains after death of all this, but
only a name and a memory here upon earth, according to that which David says.
Psalm. 76.5. Psalm. 76.5
They have slept their sleep, and all the men whose hands were mighty have
found nothing. If this be the end of all our good deeds, and if we do make
this our happiness, Born. ep. 104
what has a man more then a beast has? for as Bernard says, when a man's
palfry is dead, even his very palfry shall be praised and commended too.
Therefore if we will needs have praise let us seek for the praise of God, and
not the praise of men; for as he that praises himself is not allowed, (as
the Apostle says) so neither he whom men do praise, 2. Cor. 10.18
but he whom the Lord prayseth. 2. Cor. 10.18.

Besides, it is not only a vain and a fond thing, but also a very uncertain
and unsure thing, to commit a man's praise and his glory to the custody of an
other man; whose lips are like unto a chest as Bernard says, without either
lock or key unto it, Bern. ep 42^
which we can neither shut nor open when we our selves will. Yea, it is not
only very unsafe, but also very ridiculous to lay up our treasure there
whither we cannot come to take it and to use it when we our selves will. For,
if thou layest up thy praise and commendation in my mouth, it is not henceforth
in thy power, but in my power, being in my free choice either to praise thee
or to dispraise thee. Therefore, the safest place to lay up our praise, is with
God, and in our own conscience; whatsoever we lay up there, we are sure to
find, and to use it when we will: it will keep it for us while we live, and
will restore it again unto us when we are dead; for whithersoeuer we go, that
goes with us, carrying with it our depositum, viz. that which it received to
keep for us.

Again, who sees not how unprofitable and gainelesse a thing it is to seek the
praise of men for our good works, when as hereby we loose our reward with
God, by receiving the praise of men as a reward of them; that as Abraham said
unto the rich man, Luke 16
Son remember that thou receiuedst thy good things in thy life time; so God
will tell these men, that they have received their reward already here in this
world in which regard S. Chrysostom says, Chrysostom. hom 24. ad pop. Antioch.
that those that do any good thing for ^aineglory to be praised of men, do as
^t were suffer shipwreck in the haven, ^osing their reward there, where they
should receive it; and therefore he would ^ot have us to seek and receive the
praise of men, for our good works, that ^e may have God our debtor; who is ^ot
only able to pay his own debts him self without our running unto men for them,
but also to pay us more liberally and more bountifully, by giving us a reward
of eternal bliss and glory in heaven; then all the men in the world are, by
giving us a reward of a vain and transitory praise and glory here upon
earth.

But the greatest matter of all is, that it is not only unprofitable, but also
very dangerous and hurtful unto us; this same vain glory being like unto
the arrowe that flies by day whereof DAVID speaks, Psalm. 91
Psalm 91. Which flies lightly and pierces lightly, as Bernard says, Bern.
in psalm. Qui habit. ser. 14
but does not wound lightly. It is said of the Basiliske that he kills
with his very sight only. Now surely if I be not deceived says the same
Father, this Basiliske is vain glory, according to that which Christ says,
Take heed that you give not your alms to be seen of men. Math 6.1. Mat. 6.1
as if he should say, Beware o^ the eyes of the Basiliske, whose nature and
property it is to kill with his sight those whom he sees first, and
contrariwise to be killed of those that do first see him: so also vain
glory kills those that it first sees, and do not see it, in marking how
vain, unprofitable and hurtful it is; but contrariwise it is killed of them
that do first set their eyes upon it, in considering the nature and quality
thereof; thereby to avoid the hurt and the danger of it.

So then for the conclusion of all, let ^rs follow the counsel which S.
Chrysostom. hom 5. in Genesis
Chrysostom gives, viz. to imitate those that run at tilt; who do not greatly
heed the acclamations and shoutings of the beholders, but look chiefly to the
Judge and to the price for which they do strive: so let us also in running the
race that is set before us, not regard the praise and commendatio^ of men, but
look only to that crown of righteousness which christ the just Judge will give to
all those that run lawfully and continue unto the end. Howbeit, we do not
co^demn it as a thing simply and altogether unlawful to receive the praise of
men; Bern. in paru. ser. ser. 47.
there being a time when we may to very good purpose receive the same; not for
vain glory, but for the profit and benefit of some, who by this means will
the more easily be persuaded, in all honest and good things to yield obedience
unto us. For, as a good conscience is necessary for every good Christian in
regard of himself; so a good name and a good testimony among men, is
necessary in regard of others to profit and to do good unto them, being
greatly induced with the good opinion and commendation of a man's person. The
godly are fitly resembled unto Vines; which, as Solomon says, Can. 2.14
have a good savor with them: Vineae dederunt odorem, the Vines have cast a
savor. Bern. in cant. sermon. 60
Cant. 2. Now what is this good favor says Bernard but a good testimony of
those that are without? with which they being moved, who as yet have not
believed, do glorify God themselves also by our good report; being the savor
of life unto life unto them: according to that which the Apostle says: 2. Cor.
2
We are the sweet savor of Christ unto all them that are saved. 2. Cor. 2.
So then, as the wiseman does not simply forbid men to eat honey, Prou. 25
but to eat too much of it. Prou. 25. So, God does not absolutely forbid us to
desire and receive the testimony and praise of men; but to rest and content our
selves therein, as in our last end, not seeking any other fruit of it: for then
we eat too much of the honey comb, walking more in the light of man's
countenance then we do in the light of Gods countenance. And therefore, let
us either not regard nor care for the praise and applause of men, as making
that the chief end and mark we aim at; or if we do receive the
commendation and honor of men; let it not be to admire our virtues, and to be
in love with our selves; but let it be to honor our profession, and to enlarge
Gods dominions, and to advance the benefit and profit of our brethren, in our
several places: which is the right end and use of all man's praise and
commendation.

For the third respect, which is piety, our Savior Christ does it, to the end
that we should not ascribe any thing unto our selves, but give all the praise
and glory unto God for all those good things that we have or do; because all
our ability of doing good is not of our selves but from God: as the Apostle
says, 2. Cor. 3.5
We are not able of our selves so much as to think a good thought; but all our
sufficiency is from him. Whereupon says S. Cyprian, Cypr. epist. ad Cornel.
In null^ gloriandum, quia nostrum nihil est, we ought not to boast nor to
glory of any thing; because nothing is our own. The Prophet Esaias cap: Esaias 10.15
10. asks this question, Shall the axe boast it self against him that he
aweth therewith, or shall the Saw exalt it self against him that moves it?
as if the rod should lift up it self against him that takes it up, or as if
the staff should exalt it self, as if it were no wood. If we see any good
thing either in our selves or in others worthy of praise, we are to praise God
both in our selves and in them, being done by our hands but by his power; for
neither is the praise of writing well, the praise of the pen; neither is the
praise of doing well the glory of the hand. Examine any good thing that we
have or do; and tell me for which of them can we have praise of our selves?
Can we for our holiness? no verily; it is the spirit of God that does
sanctify us. 1. These. 5.22
Can we for our good words? no neither; Mat. 10.20.
it is GOD that gives both a mouth and wisdom to speak withal; as for our
tongue it is but the pen of a ready writer. Psalm. 45.1.
Can we for our good deeds? much less: It is God that works both the will
and the deed according to his good pleasure. Phil. 2.13.
And therefore let us say with David, Psalm. 115.1.
Not unto us, not unto us O Lord, but unto thy name give the praise and the
glory for thy truths sake: The quire of heavenly soldiers when they celebrated
the birth of Christ, Luke 2.12.
they divided their Song into two parts, giving glory unto God and peace unto
men after this manner, Glory be to God on high, and peace on earth. For though
God does give his grace unto men, yet his glory he gives unto none, as God
himself testifies by the Prophet Esaias, Esaias. 43.
I will not give my glory unto any other. Quid ergo dabis Domine, quid dabis?
what the^ will thou give us O lord, Bern. in Ca^t. ser. 12. Ioh. 14.27.
says Saint Bernard. What will thou give us? Peace I give unto you says
Christ, my peace I leave with you. It is sufficient O Lord says the devout
Father; I do thankefully receive that which thou leauest, and do leave that
which thou reseruest: least otherwise by usurping that which is denied, I
deserve to lose that which is granted. Verily, he that is not contented with
peace, is not contented with God; for God is our peace. Ephe. Ephesians. 2.14.
2. and has reconciled us unto himself. Though Joseph had the government of
his Masters house, Genesis 39.4.
and all his goods committed unto him, yet he knew that his Mistress was
excepted; and therefore he would not consent to come near unto her. 1. Sam.
17.
When David overcame Goliath, all the people rejoiced and received peace: but
David only had the honor of the victory. So let us content our selves with
the grace of God, and let God have the glory unto himself. For what favor or
glory soever we receive, which we do not refer unto God, we steal it
from him, and do incur the like danger of punishment which Herod did; who,
Act. 12.21.
for taking the glory unto himself which the people gave unto him for an
eloquent Oration which he made upon a solemn feast day (as Eusebius
reports) kept in the honor of Caesar (at which time being arrayed in a silver
suite glistering with the beams of the Sun, Eusebius. Eccl. hist. li. 2. ca. 9
and speaking most admirably as they thought, he did so amaze all that were
present, that they gave a great showt saying, The voice of God and not of man;)
I say, because he too ke the glory unto himself and did not give it unto
God, immediately the Angel of God smote him; so as he was eaten up of worms
and gave up the Ghost.

This is the first thing in the charge, that he should tell no man: the next
thing is to show himself unto the Priest. It was a law among the Jews, that
if any man was healed of the Leprosy, Leuit. 13.
he should show himself unto the Priest; not to show and confess his sins
unto him, Rhemists in Annot. Luc. 17.
as the Rhemists and others would seem to build their auricular confession
upon this: which must needs prove a very weak building, being set upon so weak
a foundation; (for the schoolmen say that Symbolica theologia non est
argumentatiua. Symbolicall divinity by way of allusion and resemblance is not
fit to argue and to make conclusions withal) but to discern and judge of the
cure, and to pronounce and deeclare him to be clean: which was the only cause
for which our Savior, Christ wills him to go and show himself unto the
Priest. Wherein it is very credible that Christ had a threefolde regard; both
of the Leper, of him self, and of the Priest.

First for the Leper, he would have him to show himself unto the Priest to
the end he might perform obedience unto the law, which required that every
Leper that was healed should present himself before the Priest. For seeing the
law of Moses was not yet abrogated but did still stand in force; therefore he
would have him to perform obedience unto it. Whereby he would seem to
intimate that straight bond and obligatorie power that is in all laws; not
only in the moral law of God, but also in the judicial and politic laws
of men. For seeing the laws of men are deduced and drawn from the law of God,
or from the law of Nature, if they be just and honest: hence it follows that
we are in conscience to perform obedience unto them, even as unto the written
law of God. 1. Pet. 2.13.
In which regard Saint Peter would have us to submit our selves to all
manner ordinance of man for the Lords sake, 1. Peter, Ephesians. 6.5.
2. And Saint Paul would have servants obedient unto their Masters as unto
Christ; Ephesians. 6. yea all whatsoever to be subject to those that are in
authority, Romans 13.6.
not only for fear but also for conscience, Romans 13. Not that the laws of men
do bind the conscience as they are from men (for there is but one Law giver
that is able to save and to destroy, Iam. 4.12.
James, 4.) but partly as they have their original from the law of nature, to
which our consciences are tied and bound; partly, as they are in relation unto
GOD, who has power over our consciences, and has expressly commanded us to
be subject and obedient unto the higher powers Romans 13.

Which doctrine is directed to two sorts of men especially, who gyantlike do
resist and oppose themselves against all laws and government, as if they meant
to fight against God himself, from whom as the Apostle says is all power and
authority Romans 13. The one is of such as resist and rebel against the civil
Magistrate, and against the laws and government of the Commonwealth; the
other is of such as disobay and murmr against the Ecclesiastical governors,
and the laws and regiment of the Church. Of the former sort, in times past
were the Donatists, but in these days are the Anabaptists, and the Libertines
and all kind of ungodly men, who as Saint Jude says do despise government and
speak evil of those that are in authority: affirming it to be an enemy to
Christian liberty; as if Christian liberty and civil obedience could not
agree and stand together. A conceit, or rather a monster not newly conceived,
but as old as the age wherein Moses lived: as may appear by the rebellion not
only of Corah and his company, Number. 16.
but also of the rest of the people at sundry other times; in so much that
Moses who had oftentimes been vexed with their grudging and murmuring, with
their stubbornness and disobedience, Josephus Antiq. lib. 4. cap. 8.
being about to dye as Josephus does report, called the chief of the people
before him, and made an Oration unto them: wherein he admonished and exhorted
them to take heed how they did show themselves unruly and disobedient unto
their governors; for as much as he that knows how to obey, will also know
the better how to rule when he is advanced unto it; and not to think that
their liberty does consist in impugning of laws and resisting their
superiors and governors as hitherto they had done, but rather in obaying and
submitting themselves in all duty unto them as unto the ordinance of God
himself. Which speech in my mind may as truly and as justly be made to
Jesuits, Priests and popish traitors, in these days: who think themselves to
be exempted and freed from all obedience and allegiance unto their Sovereign;
Especially if the Pope also shall acquit and absolve them thereof. Which I
marvel Saint Paul should so grossly ouersee, when he charged every soul to
be subject unto the higher powers, Romans 13. That is, Romans 13.1.
as Saint Chrysostom does note upon those words, not only secular persons, but
also Priests and Monks: as appears by the generality thereof in saying, let
every soul be subject; yea says the same Father, Etiamsi Apostolus, si
Euangelistae, si Propheta, sieve quisquis tandem fueris. Neque enim pietatem
subuertit ista subiectio. Chrysostom. in 13. cap. ad Romans
though he be an Apostle, or a Prophet, or an Evangelist, or whatsoever else
he may be; yet he must he subject to the higher powers, because this
subjection and obedience is not an enemy but rather a friend unto piety. And
although it may sometimes fall out that Princes and Magistrates may prove
wicked and ungodly, tyrannising most unjustly and cruelly; yet if they be
lawful Rulers, we ought to yield obedience unto them, because they do not
rule without the especial providence and permission of GOD, who sets wicked
rulers and governors many times over a Nation, thereby to correct and punish
the wickedness of the people. Ier. 27.8.
To which purpose God commanded his people whom he had delivered into the
hands of Nabuchadonofor a wicked King, to serve and to put their necks under
his yoke, threatening to visit all them with the plague, sword, and famine
that would not serve him, Ierem. 27. How much more then ought we to perform
obedience to good and godly governors, ordaining laws for the general benefit
of the common wealth, if we would not in an ouerweening manner judge of them,
but in all duty and humility submit our selves unto them?

The second sort is of certain Schismatickes and irregular persons, who refuse
to yield obedience to Ecclesiastical governors, and to the laws, orders, and
regiment of the Church; under a pretense that the rites and ceremonies, and the
whole discipline and Gouernmente thereof is not prescribed nor commanded in
the word of GOD; and therefore they are not bound to perform obedience unto
them. Which exception howsoever it may seem to carry a very fair show of
great purity, and sincerity, yet in very deed it is the self same reason
which the Arrians used against the Catholic Fathers in the Aramine Council,
Theodor. eccl. hist. lib. 2. cap. 18.
who cried out with open mouths as Theodoret does report, that the word
Substance and Consubstantiall were not to be found in the Scriptures; and
therefore they ought to be expunged and quite put out of the form of the
Christian faith; affirming moreover that that which they avouched, viz. that
Christ was like unto the father though not of the substance of the father, was
in express terms to be found in the Scripture; but that he was of the
substance of the Father, and consubstantiall with him, as they say, is no where
to be showed there. Of which kind of men we may truly say as Tertullian
said of some, that they believe Scriptures to the end that they may believe
against the Scriptures. Credunt scripturis, vt eredant aduersus scripturas
Tertull. de preaescr. adu. liae.


But for a further answer; because they will allow of nothing without
Scripture, leaving nothing to the liberty, and to the wisdom and authority
of the Church (although it were an easy matter, to show the regiment of our
Church and the orders and ceremonies thereof not to want the authority of
Scipture also) I will answer them as Sisinius a Bishop sometimes answered one
that found fault with him, for wearing a white garment, Socr. hist. Eccl. lib.
6. cap. 20.
asking him where he did find it written in the Scripture that a Priest ought
to wear a white garment; I pray you (says the Bishop) show me you first,
where you find it written in the Scipture that a Bishop ought to wear a
black garment? Whereat when he began to stick fast; well (says the Bishop)
you are not able to show me where a Bishop ought to wear a black garment:
but I can show you where Solomon says, Eccl. 9.
Let thy garments be always white, Eccl. 9. where Christ girded himself with
linen, Ioh. 13.
Ioh. 13. and where the Angels appeared in white garments as white as snow;
Act. 1.
signifying hereby that whosoever shall condemn or dislike many things in the
Church because they are not expressly set down in the Scripture, shall have
as just cause to dislike many things which he would have, because they also
are not expressed in the scripture. Tertull. de corona militis Tertull. de
Virgin. vela^dis. Dei est scriptura, dei est natura, dei est disciplina etc.
Quae docet Natura minime cum verbo dei pugnantia docet Deus. Zanch. de oper
dei. lib. 3 cap 6. Quod neque contra fidem neque contra bonos mores iniungitur
indifferenter est habendum and pro eorum intra quos viuitur societate seruandu^
est. Aug. ad Ianuar. ep. 118.119
In many things, nature and reason the consent of nations and the custom of
people is a sufficient bond to bind us without the word written: according to
that which the ancient Father Tertullian says, Natura prima omnium disciplina
est, Nature is the first teacher and instructour of us; again in another
place, The Scripture is from God, nature is from God, and discipline and
government is from God: but whatsoever is contrary unto these, is not from God.
With whom that learned Zanchius also accords, saying that whatsoever nature
does teach, not disagreeing from the word of God, that GOD himself does teach
us. So that herein Saint Austens judgment is to be retained as a most sure
rule, that whatsoever is not against faith and good manners, is to be held as
a thing indifferent, and is not only not to be disliked; but to be observed
according to the custom and fashion of the Church, wherein we live. Where he
reports his own behavior and carriage of himself at Millaine, August. ad
Casulanum ep. 86.
when as his mother Monica was there with him, and was somewhat perplexed
whether she ought to fast after the manner of her own Country upon the
Saturday, or to dine after the manner of the Church of Millaine; how he
himself went to Saint Ambrose the Bishop of that City to be resolved of that
doubt: to whom he answered after long conference, what can I tell you more of
this matter then that which I my self use to do? when I am here at Millaine,
I do not use to fast upon the Saturday, but when I am at Rome I do; therefore
observe the custom of every Church you shall come unto, if neither you will
give offense, nor take offense. Which judgment of Saint Ambrose he did so
reverence and so highly esteem, that he received it as a divine oracle from
heaven; having many times found to his great grief, as he professes, that
diverse weak ones are troubled by the co^tentious obstinacy and scrupulous
timidity of certain brethren; who in such matters as cannot be brought to an
issue, either by the authority of Scripture, or by tradition of the whole
Church, or by some profitte or benefit coming from the use thereof, do make
much trouble and strife in the Church, either upon some conceit which they
have in themselves, or upon experience of the places where they have traveled,
or upon some practice, unto which themselves have been accustomed, in so much
that they think nothing well done but that which they themselves do; Terent.
in Adelphis.
as the Poet did observe it of unskillful men and void of a sound judgment.
Which speech of Augustine may seem to have been as it were an Evangelical
prophecy, fulfilled and accomplished in this time wherein we live, in which all
the contentions of our Church I mean concerning the discipline and government
thereof, are raised upon the like grounds; either because the rites and
ceremonies of our Church are not expressly found in the Scripture, or because
other reformed Churches do not use them, or because the Romish Church does most
grossly and superstitiously abuse them; not considering that the external
policy of the Church and the use of Ceremonies and things indifferent, do not
absolutely depend either upon the express word of God prescribing them, or upon
the state of other reformed Churches which do not use them, or of idolatrous
churches which do abuse them; but upon the power and liberty which every Church
has to ordain an external policy with orders and ceremonies belonging
thereunto, as shall seem most meet and commodious for it; and that according
to the judgment both of Tertullian among the ancient writers, and of Calvin,
and Zanchius with diverse others among the modern, Regula fidei vna est, sola
immobilis and irreformabilis Hac lege fideimanente, caete ra disciplinae and
conuersationis admittu^t nouitatem correctionis Tertull. de Virg. velan.
who do affirm in effect and substance with Tertullian, that there is but one
rule of faith, which is immutable and admits no reformation; which remaining
safe and sure, other matters of order and discipline admit both alteration and
reformation, as the wisdom and the discretion of the Church shall think fit.
Therefore seeing these things stand not so much in the express definition of
the Scriptures, or in the use or abuse of others, as in the determination of
the Church and the governors thereof, we ought not either to quarrel or
contend about them, or to refuse subscription and conformity unto them, or to
forsake our callings and the execution of our ministry for them; but rather
with all humility and willingness to submit our selves and to perform
obedience unto them.

For the reason that concerns CHRIST himself, he would have the Leper to
show himself unto the Priest, to avoid all occasion of offense, on the Priests
and the pharisees part: who reputed him as a disordered person, and one that
went about to pervert and violate their law; and therefore, though he needed
not to have done this, as being superior both to the Priest and to the law
also; yet notwithstanding for the cause aforesaid, he sendes him to the
Priest, saying; Vade and ostende te Sacerdoti. Go and show thy self unto the
Priest. Wherein is a singular precedent, and an example of a Christian carriage
of our selves in such sort, as none may justly be offended and grieved
thorough any offense or defaulte in us. For the right understanding and
performance whereof, we are to remember and call to mind an old but yet a
necessary and a true distinction of scandalles, with the different natures
and qualities of sundry distinct persons, whom these scandals do concern. The
first kind of scandal is called by the Schoolmen, scandalum actiuum an
active scandal, Scandalum malae rei exemplum aedificans ad delictum. Tert. de
Virg. velandis. Scandalum ost dictum vel factum minus rectum praebens alteri
occasionem ruinae. Thom. 2. 2. quaest. 43. art 1.
or an offense given; which is nothing else, (as Tertullian says) but an evil
example that makes others to offend and to sin by it; or as Aquinas the
great Schooleman does define it; it is a word not rightly spoken, or a thing
not rightly done, giving others occasion to fall thereby: or if it does not
prevail so far, yet at the least it does greatly offend and grieve the mind
of a godly and a zealous man. The other is scandalum passiuum, a passive
scandal, or an offense not given but taken: when as a thing being good, or at
the least not evil in it self; yet notwithstanding a person not well disposed
falls into sin by it, or at the least is offended and grieved. For the
former, we ought to have an especial care that we give no offense unto any,
according to the Apostles direction. 1. Cor. 10. 1. Cor. 32
Give no offense neither to the Jews, nor to the Grecians, nor to the Church
of God, because the active scandal is most properly said to be the cause of
sin, and therefore has a most fearful woe against the authors of it. Mat.
18. Woe unto the world because of offenses. Necessary it is that offenses
come: but woe be unto the man by whom the offense comes. Mat. 16
Of this kind was the offense that Peter gave unto Christ, when as he went
about to dissuade him from his blessed passion, the sovereign salve and
medicine to heal all our diseases withal; which made him to reprove and
rebuke him so sharply as he did; Get thee behind me Satan: thou art an
offense unto me. And such also is the offense of many men now, who do greatly
offend and hurt others by such scandales as they give unto them. The which do
commonly proceed from two especial causes: either from some heretical
doctrine and erroneous opinion, which they do disseminate and sow in the
hearts and minds of such as are ignorant and unstable, being not altogether
settled nor rooted in the truth; or else from an evil example of a wicked and
ungodly conversation, whereby they infect and poison the souls of others,
drawing the^ on by their evil example to the like excess of wickedness.

Of the first sort, are not only our Jesuits and popish recusants, and the rest
of that rabble, who lie lurking secretly in corners, like foxes in their holes,
or like Lions in their dens, teaching most impious and blasphemous doctrine
and dissuading subjects from their loyalty and allegiance unto their
Sovereign; but also diverse Schismatickes, the seeds-men of sedition and
dissension in our Church; 2. Tim. 3
who creep privily into houses, and hold private conuenticles, seducing and
mis-leading them with strange fancies, and idle conceits, and withdrawing them
from performance of that dewty and obedience which they ought to yield unto the
Church.

Of the other sort, are all sorts of persons whatsoever, that give any kind
of scandal by the sins and offenses which they commit, whether it be
whoredom or drunkenness, swearing and blaspheming, fraud and oppression, or
any other sin whatsoever, whereby they cause others to commit the like, or at
the least do greatly grieve and vex their righteous souls, as the wicked
Sodomites vexed the righteous soul of that just man Lot, 2. Pet. 2.7
by their unclean conversation; but especially rich and mighty men that are in
high place and authority, and are more eminent then others: who by their evil
example and wicked practices do cause a great many to sin as Jeroboam did,
1. King. 12
by setting up his golden calves; because that men of lower rank are ready to
imitate, without any dew examination, the dealings and practices of those that
are of higher degree, thinking that they may lawefully do whatsoever they see
them to do; like as we see in the heavens, where the heavenly bodies which
are contained within the first sphere, are moved according to the motion of
the first moouer. Our Savior Christ says, Mat. 6.22
that the light of the body is the eye; and if the eye be single the whole
body will be light, and if the eye be wicked the whole body will be dark: so
surely, if great men be good, others will learn to be good also: but if they
be evil, others will learn to be evil by them; for wheresoever there is
darkness upon the mountains, there is darkness upon the valleys also. 1.
King. 12
If Jeroboam makes golden calves, the people will quickly fall to idolatry and
worship them. Dan. 3.7
If Nabuchadnezzar sets up a golden image, all the people will forthwith at the
sound of the trumpet, and other instruments of music fall down and worship
it. Judge. 16.30
Sampson cannot pull down the house upon himself, but many thousands of the
people will be slain with it.

Therefore, for the conclusion of both, let all sorts of persons take heed, how
they give any offense either by erroneous doctrine and wicked persuasions, or
by an evil example of a lewd life; because as Saint Austen says, August. de
Temp. ser. 104.
So many as a man shall edify by a good example, for so many he shall receive
a reward of a blessed life; and contrariwise so many as he shall hurt by
example of an evil life, he shall give an account unto God, and receive a
just recompense and a punishment of a wretched and a damnable life; this being
a sin that is not permanent and residing in a man's person only, but
transient and passing from our selves unto others, like unto a leprosy that
infecteth others with the contagion of it; that as our savior Christ says of
the Scribes and Pharisees, Mat. 23
who devoured widows houses under a color of long prayer, that they should
receive the greater damnation: so the like also may be said of these men, that
do not only sin themselves, but also cause others to sin, that they shall
receive a double damnation; one for the sin which they committed in themselves;
the other for the sins which they caused others to commit. So as Arrius, and
Julian, and all such miscreants and monsters, shall not only be punished for
their own impieties and blasphemies; but also for the impiety and wickedness
wherewith they have caused others to blaspheme the holy name of God. Now for
the second kind of scandal, Scandalum Pharisaeoru^, pusillorum.
which is the passive scandal or the offense taken not given, that is to be
considered according to the condition and quality of two sorts of persons:
Bern. de praecep. and dispe^.
the one is of malicious and wicked men, which take offense at good things,
which both Saint Bernard and the Schoolmen call, scandalum Pharisaeorum, the
scandal of the Pharisees; the other is of men not malicious but yet weak, who
either of ignorance or infirmity do take offense, not at evil but indifferent
things: which he calls, scandalum pusilloru^; the scandal of weak ones.

For the first sort, we ought not to be ouercarefull or sollicitous (as
Bernard says) because it proceeds of malice, as may appear by Christ's
dealing with the Pharisees. Math. 15. Who whenas the Disciples told him how the
Pharisees were offended at his doctrine, Mat. 15.14
he seems to make no reckoning nor regard of it, aunswering them with,
Sinite illos; let them alone, they are blind leaders of the blind. Whereupon
the same Father has a worthy saying, which is often used by the Schoolmen,
Bern. ep. 34
Melius est vt scandalum oriatur, quam vt veritas relinquatur, it is better
that a scandal should be taken, then that the truth should be forsaken.
According to which rule and direction, the Preachers and Ministers of Gods
word, are not to be greatly careful of their offense, who are offended with
them for speaking the truth, either by improving of errors, or reproof of sin,
because there are some spiritual things (says Aquinas) which are of the
necessity of salvation, Thom. 2. secu^dae quaest. 43. art. 7
which cannot be omitted nor concealed without the danger of sin; and
therefore ought not to be omitted for any scandal that may be taken at them:
or if they be not of so high a nature, yet the scandal arises of malice in
them: who would hinder good things by raising and stirring up of scandals,
which is just the Pharisees scandal; and therefore ought not be regarded,
because they will not be healed, unless others be made sick by them, Non
magnopere eorum curandum est scandalum, qui non sanantur nisi vos infirmemini.
Bern. epist. 90.
as Bernard says very elegantly. Neither need they to be greatly moved with
their offense, who are offended with them for reproving the sins and abuses
of these times; because it is the Preachers duty not only to speak, but also
to cry out loud against them: and besides that also; he is not the cause of
the scandal that does reprove, but he himself rather who has done that which
is meet to be reproved. The Preachers duty is to seek to profit not to
please: Satius ipforu^ profectib. qua^ voluntatib. prouidetis. Bern. ibid.
which he shall the better do by speaking sometimes against the wills of men,
then by leaving them wholly and altogether to their own wills. An other case
though not in a matter merely spiritual as the other are, yet in a matter
annexed unto spiritual, as the Schoolmen speak, is concerning the patrimony
and revenue of the Church; whether a Minister or a Pastor finding some wolves
in his flock that are ready to spoil and devour the lands and demeanes, the
tenths and oblations, which are the patrimony and inheritance of the Church,
ought quietly to permit and suffer them so to do, least otherwise offense may
be taken against the Minister, and an imputation of covetousness and
concontention he laid upon him. Thom. 2 2. quaest. 43 art. 8
To which it is answered by Aquinas, that the temporal goods of the Church are
not to be suffered, either to be spoiled or to be embeselled for any scandal
that may be taken thereat; especially when as the scandal arises of malice
in some that intend only fraud and rapine, and do seek altogether the wrack
and ruin of the Church. The reason whereof is this; because the sufferance
hereof would prove hurtful, not only unto the Church by giving occasion and
animating wicked and sacrilegious persons to rob the Church; but also unto
wicked men themselves, by suffering them to detain unjustly the goods
thereof, without controlement, and to live and die in their sin without
remorse and making restitution and satisfaction unto the Church.

For the second sort which take offense unjustly at things indifferent and not
evil in themselves, Illorum scandalum de malitia, istorum de ignorantia
descendit. Illi scandaliza^tur, quod oderunt, isti quia veritatem nesciunt.
Ber. de praec. and disp.
either of ignorance or of weakness; we are to have some care and regard of
them in yielding and condiscending something to their weakness: because that
as the scandal of the other proceeds of malice in hating the truth; so the
scandal of these men proceeds of weakness, in being ignorant of the truth;
who being of a good and honest mind, but not of any great knowledge, as
Bernard says, have the zeal of God, but not according to knowledge: the
scandal of which men does provoke, Talium scandala curam non iram prouocare
solent. Bern. ibid.
not anger, but a care in those that are spiritually minded. Of this kind of
scandal was that which our Savior CHRIST did yield and condescend unto: who,
Mat. 17.24
whenas the officers came to demand tribute or poll money of him and his
Disciples; though they needed not to have paid it as being free: yet, that
weak ones might not be offended, he caused PETER to cast an Angle into the
sea, and with that which he should take, to pay the tribute money for both
of them. And of this it is that the Apostle Saint Paul speaks in diverse
places, wherein he shows how we are to yield unto the weakness of others.
Romans 15.1
We that are strong (says the Apostle) ought to bear the infirmities of the
weak and not to please our selves. Romans 15. Again let us not judge one
another: ^om. 14.13
but use your judgment rather in this, that no man put an occasion to fall or
a stumbling block before his brother. Romans 14. Furthermore, Take heed least
this power of yours be an occasion of falling to them that are weak. 1. Cor.
8.9
The reason whereof is, Laesio proximi nullatenus excusatur a culpa si solus
defuerit in causa Deus Bern. de prae. and disp.
as Bernard says, because the hurt of our brethren is no way excused from sin,
unless there be a respect of a higher cause; which is our service and
obedience unto God, to which all things must yield and give place. In such a
case it is most true that the Prophet says; 1. Sam. 2.25
If one man sin against another, that is, in defense of Gods cause, the Judge
shall judge it. 1. Sam. 2. But otherwise, 1. Cor. 8.12
the Apostle says, that when we sin against the brethren and wound their weak
conscience, we sin against Christ. And therefore he does greatly terrify
them that have knowledge and want charity, not knowing how to condescend unto
the weak; saying, that through their knowledge shall the weak brother perish
for whom Christ died. 1. Cor. 8. 1. Cor. 8.13
and for his own part he protests, that if meat offend his brother, he
will eat no flesh while the world stands, that he may not offend his
brother, 1. Cor. 8, 13.

The which notwithstanding is not so to be taken, as if we might never in any
case whatsoever do any thing, whereat a weak brother may happily take
offense; but that we ought for a time to condescend to their infirmity and
their ignorance, while they may be taught and instructed in the truth, as Saint
Paul did with the Gentiles: 1. Cor. 9.15
who although he might have lawfully reaped their temporal things for sowing
spiritual things; yet he would not use this power and liberty for offense
sake, until such time as he had taught and instructed them that this was due
by the law of God and the law of Nature, for their study and labor in the
ministry. So that if after the truth sufficiently taught and demonstrated
unto them, they shall still remain doubtful and take offense; then their
weakness is not any longer to be borne withal, nor to be nourished by our
dissembling and yielding unto it; but to be reproved and corrected; because
now it is, Zanch. de Redemp. lib. 1
as the learned and judicious Zanchius says, pertinacia potius quam
imbecillitas, rather a pertinacie and an obstinacy then an infirmity and a
weakness in them.

To make this a little more plain by an instance or an example; There are
certain weak brethren among us (I forbear to say that some are obstinate)
that take great offense at the policy and government of our Church, and at
the use of diverse rites and ceremonies thereof, viz. at the Cross in Baptism,
the wearing of the Surplisse, the Ring in marriage, kneeling at the Communion,
and at diverse things in the Letany and the book of Common prayer: I demand
now what is to be done in this case? Are we always to yield and to
condescend to their weakness, because they take offense at these things? No
verily, but only for a while, till they may be taught and informed concerning
the lawful use of these things; after which if they shall still persist in
their errors, not subscribing, or not conforming themselves to the orders and
the regiment of our Church, they are not to be indulged nor to be spared any
longer, but they are to be left to the censures and coercions of the Church;
like as we read of Sara, Aug. Bonifacio epist. 50.
in whom Saint Austen says, that the Church of God was prefigured, Gal. 4.
who corrected and punished her maid Hagar, Genesis 16.
for her pride and contempt toward ^hir. And yet Sara did not persecute Hagar,
as these men use to coplain of per^ecutio^, when as the church does ce^sure
^he^ for their wilfulnes and disobedience; for as Saint Austen says, Grauius
ancilla Saram persecuta est per iniquam superbiam, quam eam Sara per debitam
disciplinam, etc. Aug. de unit. Eccle.
the maid did more persecute the mistress by her pride in despising her, then
the mistress did her maid by her just discipline in correcting her. And they
did more persequute our Savior, who caused him to say, the zeal of thy house
has eaten me up, then he did them when he overthrew their Tables, and cast
them out of the Temple; even as a son does more persecute his father by his
disobedience, then a father does his son by his correction. And therefore we
ought so to have a care of charity toward those that are weak, that thereby
we neither nuzzle infirmity, nor impeach the Churches liberty and authority:
of the defense and maintenance whereof there is a certain kind of necessity
that lies upon us as Calvin says, Habemus and necessitatem vindicandae
libertatis, si ea infirmis in conscientijs periclitatur. Calv. Inst. lib. 3.
cap. 19. sect. 12.
if at any time it be in danger to be lost by the scrupulous consciences of
those that are weak.

Now for the reason that concerns the Priest, our Savior Christ would have
the Leper to show himself unto the Priest, to give the Priest his due, viz.
that honor and prerogative that did belong unto him; who in this case was
ordained as an honorable judge to discern of the leprosy, and to give his
sentence and his judgment of the cleansing and curing of it: Romans 13.7
and therefore willing to give all men their duty, tribute to whom tribute,
custom to whom custom, fear to whom fear, honor to whom bonour belongs,
Vade and ostende te sacerdoti, go (says he) and show thy self unto the
Priest. For which we are to know, that since God did first of all ordain the
Priesthood, he has evermore highly honored it in vouchsafing many privileges,
prerogatives, immunities and dignities unto it. As first in annexing and
joining the Priesthood to the royal and imperial dignity in Melchizedec,
Genesis 14.
who was both a King and a Priest; in Noah, who was a Monarch and a Preacher;
2. Pet. 2.
in Moses, who was a prince and a prophet; Ex. 3. Eccl. 1.
in David, who was a king and a prophet; in Solomon, who was a king and a
preacher: yea in Christ himself, who was sent to preach, Luc. 4.
and was anointed a king, a priest, and a prophet, and all this no doubt to
honor and to countenance the priesthood. Secondly, in bestowing the priesthood
not upon the worst as Jeroboam did, 2. Kin. 12.31
who made priests of the lowest of the people, but upon the first borne of
every family as a privilege and an honor that they had above their
brethren; whereby Melchizedec who is though of most to be Sem the eldest son
of Noah, became to be a priest of the most high God. Philo. lib. 2. de
Monarchia. Deus Leuitas virtutis pietatisque ergo honorauit. Philo de
legspeeialib. lib. 2.
Yea more then this, the dignity of the priesthood was after that bestowed (as
Philo says) as a proper and due reward of piety and virtue upon the tribe of
Leui, at what time the people of Israel falling to idolatry in worshipping the
golden calf, the tribe of Leui at the commandment of Moses girded themselves
with their swords, and slew three thowsa^d of the idolators: with which zeal
of theirs God was so well pleased, Exodus 32.29
that they received the priesthood as a reward of their piety and their good
service unto God. Thirdly in making the priest a chief and a principal man
even in the greatest affairs in the world; as in anointing and consecrating
of Kings who were to be anointed of the priest, Number. 27.22.
in asking counsel of God both for the ruler and the people, who were to go
out and to come in at his word, in ruling and governing the people together
with the civil Magistrate, Psalm. 77. Psalm. 77.20.
Thou leddest thy people like sheep by the hands of Moses and Aaron. Lastly, in
making a law, Deuteronomy. 17.12
that whosoever dealt presu^ptuously and would not harke^ to the priest should
be put to death; yea ye none should presume so much as to speak evil of him;
Cypria^ Corn. aduer. haeret.
and there fore S. Pa. (as Cyp. notes) having called Ananias the high Pr. a
painted wall and being reproved by one that said unto him, Act 23.3.
Reuilest thou Gods high Priest; he answered and excused the fact in saying, I
wot not that he was the high Priest: for it is written, Thou shall not speak
evil of the Ruler of the people.

If God has so highly honored the Priests of the law, how much more does he
honor the Priests of the gospel? whose office and ministry is far more
excellent then theirs, as the Apostle reasons, 2. Cor. 3. If the ministration
of death was glorious, 2. Cor. 3.7.
how shall not the ministratio^ of the spirit be more glorious: and if the
ministry of condemnation was glorious, how much more does the ministration of
righteousness exceed in glory? Which honor given by God unto the ministers
of the Gospel, will appear by adouble honor given unto them; the one the
honor of their office, the other the honor of their person. The former whereof
is to be seen in diverse excellent and honorable duties performed by their
ministry. As first, in making of Christians the most honorable calling in the
world; for Christans are not borne but made as Saint Ierom says; Fiunt no^
nascuntur Christiani. Hier. ad Laetam.
and that by the means and help of Gods ministers in that holy and blessed
Sacrament of Baptism which they only have power to administer; whereby they do
also incorporate and ingraft them into the body and society of the Church, and
do consecrate and dedicate them unto the profession and service of Christ.
Secondly, in preaching the Gospel of Christ Jesus and publishing the glad
tidings of salvation: which is an honor that God has not vouchsafed unto the
Angels, though far more excellent in nature then we are; giving the law by
them, but the Gospel by Christ and his Apostles and ministers; which things
(says Saint Pet.) the Angels desire stooping to behold, 1. Pet. 1.12. Thirdly,
1. Pet. 1.12.
in administering and delivering with our hands the Sacraments and visible
signs and pledges of the most precious body and blood of the son of God,
whereby we obtain not only redemption and forgiveness of our sins, but also
peace and reconciliation and inheritance in the kingdom of heaven; where-as
the priests of the law were occupied about sacrificing and killing of beasts
and in burning of incense upon the altar. Mat. 18, 18.
Lastly, in having the keys of the kingdom of heaven committed unto them, so
as whatsoever they bind in earth, is bound in heaven, and whatsoever they
loose in earth, is loosed in heaven: Ioh. 20.20
whose-soeuer sins they remit, they are remitted, and whose-soeuer sins they
retain they are retained: A power that God has not communicated to any of the
Angels; for to which of them has he said at any time, whatsoever ye shall
bind in earth is bound in heaven. Upon which words Theophilact does observe
that the honor of the priesthood is divine, because it belongs to God to
forgive sins. For the other, which is the honor that God has bestowed upon
their person as they are ministers; that is to be seen in those honorable
titles that he has given unto them, stiling them with the name of ministers, a
title not only belonging unto princes and governors who are called the
ministers of God, Romans 13, Romans 13.4.
but also unto Christ who is called the minister of circumcision, Romans 15.8.
Romans 15. in calling them men of God, fellow laborers with himself, Angels,
Ambassadors, Rulers, stewards, stars, lights, fathers, doctors, pastors, with
a great many more besides; al which do show in what great honor and reputation
they are with God. Which is also further seen in that order that God has
taken and the charge that he has given for the good intertainment and usage
of them; providing not only for their inde^nitie and safety, in that charge
that he has given of the^, Psa. 105. Psalm. 105.
touch not mine anointed and do my prophets no harm; but also for a worthy
respect and regard to be had of the^, both concerning love and hearty
affection, and concerning reverence and obedience to be yielded unto them. 1.
These. 5.12
Of love; in admonishing men to know the^ that labor among them, and are over
them, and to have them not in an even kind of love which is (...), such as is
found among friends; but to have the^ in a higher and a superlatiue kind of
love, which is (...), as the Apostle calls it, and that for their work sake,
1 Thessalonians. 5. Of obedience; in charging men to obey them that have the oversight
of them and to submit themselves, Heb. 13.17.
because they watch for their souls, as those that must give account; that
they may do it with joy and not with grief, Heb. 13. Further in reputing the
wrong done unto them to be done unto himself. Zach. 2.8.
He that touches you, says God, touches the apple of mine eye: and
contrariwise, the love and reverence which is showed unto them, to be given
unto himself; he that receives you, says Christ, receives me; and he that
receives me, Mat. 10.40.
receives him that sent me; like as a Prince esteems either the wrong or
the honor done to his Ambassador, to be done to his own person.

So that considering the great honor that God has voutsafed to the Priests
both of the law and of the Gospel, it is a wonder to see the maruailous
neglect and contempt of the priesthood and ministry here in the world. Is it
because God has not honored them? No verily, he has set a crown of honor
upon them, crowning them with honor and worship as David speaks. What is
the cause then? Psalm. 8.6.
Surely because Atheists, Epicures, and profane worldlings have dishonored
the^: that as Christ says of the Jews, I honor my Father, Ioh. 8.49.
but ye have dishonored me; so it may truly be said of them, that God has
honored his ministers, but they like miscreants and profane wretches have
dishonored them, turning their honor into shame by loving vanity and seeking
lies, Psalm. 4.2.
Psalm. 4.2. A sin not like the sin of the Amorites, of which it is said
that the wickedness of the Amorites is not yet full, Genesis Genesis 15.26.
15. but a sin full of impierie like a Cart pressed down that is full of
sheaues, Amos 2. Amos 2.13.
and such an one as does argue a want of all grace, and of all religion and
piety and fear of God; there being a just estimate to be taken of a man's
religion by his behavior and demeanor toward Gods ministers. For how is it
possible, that any man that is in the state of grace and salvation should
contemn or abuse the ministers of God? who are the immediate instruments which
God does use to call them unto both. And therefore we may truly and safely
conclude of such, as Ignatius does, that whosoever shall despise the ministers
of God, is an Atheist, Ignat. ad Trallianos.
a profane wretch, and a despiser of God and all godliness. The Prophet Osee,
when as he would set out the desperate wickedness of the people in his time,
Osee, Osee. 4.4
4. says that they were like unto them that contend with the Priest, as
Pagnine, and Vatablus read it. Which does intimate and insinuate that those
that begin once to contemn Gods ministers and to contend with them, they are
come to the height of all wickedness, according to the saying of Solomon, Prou.
18.3
Prove. 18 3. Impius cum in profundu^ venerit peccatorum contemnit: which we may
truly expound after this sort, that a wicked man when he is become once a
profou^d doctor in sin (for scelus no^ ta^tu^ geritur sed docetur, says Cypr.
Cyprian. ad Demetrianu^.
sin is not only done, but taughtalso); then he sits in Cathedra
pestilentiae, in the chair of the scornful, and despises both God, his
ministers and all religion. To which purpose Socrates reports in his
Ecclesiastical history, of one Seuerianus a Bishop, to whom whenas one
Serapion showed a manifest contempt in not giving that honor and reverence that
belonged unto him, Si Serapion moriatur Christianus, certe Christus nunquam
homo factus est. Socrat. hist. eccl. lib 6. cap. 10.
exclaimed against him after this manner, If Serapion die a Christian, then
Christ was never made man: signifying that as it is most certain that Christ
was made man; so it is as certain that he that shall contemn or despise Gods
ministers, will never dye a good Christian, unless he repent him of his sin.

The which neglect and contempt, besides the malice and wickedness of the
ungodly (which makes them to hate Gods ministers, as being enemies to all
virtue and godliness; according as Christ says to his Apostles, Because ye
are not of the world but I have chosen you out of the world, Ioh. 15.19.
therefore the world hates you, Ioh. 15.) I suppose to proceed also from an
evil eye, not looking rightly upon them with a single eye as they ought to
do; which makes them so highly to contemn and to despise them. Of which some
there are that look only upon the outward appearance of Ministers, being in
outward show not so goodly nor so glorious in the eyes of the world as others
are. 2. Cor. 10.4
Whereat the Apostle seems to aim. 2. Cor. 10. who having given out great
words of the power and virtue of the ministry of the word, that it was able
to cast down strong holds, and to bring into captivity every thought to the
obedience of Christ; He adds presently after this, Look ye on things (says
he) after the outward appearance? as if he should say, 2. Cor. 10.7
If you regard Ministers by their outward show there is no such matter in
them: like as it was with our Savior Christ; who although he was said to be
fayrer then the sons of men, Psalm. 45. Psalm. 45.2
yet in regard of his outward show, men did not see any thing in him worthy
to be desired. Esa. 53. Esa. 53.2
And therefore Herod and his soldiers when as they looked upon his outward
appearance only with their bodily eyes, Luke 23.11
they despised him (says the text) and mocked at him. So did those beardless
boys in mocking the Prophet, 2. Kin. 2.23
and calling him baldpate. 2. Kin 9.11
2. Kings 2. So did Iehu his companions in making the Prophet no better then a
mad-cap, saying; What did this mad fellow here? 2. Kings 9. So shall you see
it every where, where the eye only is the judge, and looks more to the
outward then to the inward man. But as we do not despise gold because it is
sound in clay; so ought we not to despise Gods Ministers, 2. Cor. 4.7
because they carry their heavenly treasure in earthen vessels; but rather to
follow the example of that worthy Constantine, Eusebius. de vita Constant. lib.
1. cap. 35
of whom Eusebius reports that he did love and honor the Ministers of God,
not considering the outward man which is seen with the eyes of the body, but
the inward man which is seen with the eyes of the mind: and therefore he would
many times (as the same Author says) set them at his own table with him, and
have them in his company whithersoeuer he went; for whose sake he verily
believed that God would bless and prosper him the better in all his business.

Others there are, that look only upon their outward and mean estate in the
world, and the crosses and troubles which they suffer many times; as the Jews
and others did upon Christ, who despised him in regard of his birth and his
poverty, and his mean condition and reputation in the world; sometimes
disgracing him with his country, that he was a Galilean; Mar. 6.3
sometimes with his Parents, that he was a carpenters son; sometimes with his
friends and acquaintance, Mat. 11.19
that he was a friend of Publicans and sinners; sometimes with his
obscurenesse, and the small account and estimation he was in, Ioh. 7.48
that none of the Rulers, but only the vulgar sort did believe in him. So did
they with the Prophets, and the Apostles, despising them for their want, and
those manifold persecutions which they endured. But as we do not esteem a
sword by the scabberd, nor a dagger by the sheath (for as the Proverb is,
there may be a golden or a painted sheath, and a wodden dagger) so we ought
not to esteem of Gods Ministers by their mean estate, and by their crosses and
troubles in the world: which God would have them sometimes to suffer, not to
the end that any should conte^ne them; but rather that seeing their faith,
their patience and their constancy, they might imitate and follow, yea admire
and honor them for it. It is a sign of a base and an abject mind, yea of a
soul altogether dejected and cleaving to the du^^ of the earth, to esteem
basely of Gods servants in any outward respects; as i^ the soul knew no
better things the^ the outward and transitory things of the world; or as if all
the felicity and happiness of man did consist in the^. We read of the
Galathians, that they were so fa^ from despising S. Gal. 4.13
Paul for his poverty and his troubles and persecutions, tha^ they received
him as an Angel of God yea as Christ Jesus; insomuch that if it had bin
possible, they would have plucked out their own eyes to have given them unto
him. Sozom. ecel. hist. li. 7. cap. 13.
The people of Mediolanus were so far from despising S. Ambrose their Bishop,
for the troubles and vexations which he suffered of the Arrians, that when as
Valentinian by the persuasion of his mother Iustina sent a band of soldiers
into the Temple to say hands upon him and to carry him into exile; the whole
people that was in the Church hearing him preach, resisted the soldiers and
would not suffer them to offer him the least violence: saying, that they would
all of the^ lose their lives there, before they would lose their Bishop. And
Constantine the great was so far from despising Paphnutius for his outward
condition, Socr. hist eccl. lib. 1. cap. 8
and for the persecution which he suffered of the heathen, that as Socrates
reports, he had him in great honor, and would many times send for him to
his court, and in the presence of his courtiers kiss the place of his right eye
which he had lost in the persecution.

Wherefore to conclude this point, as our Savior Christ says in another case,
Quos Deus coniunxit homo non separet, Those whom God has joined together, let
no man put asunder: so, those whom God has honored, let no man presume to
dishonor by contemning and despising them for any cause; Bern. de Adnen.
domini ser. 3.
but rather, as Saint Bernard does advise and exhort, to give all reverence and
obedience unto them, as unto Christ, whose deputies and vicegerents they are:
whereof the one, to weet our reverence, is inward, and of the heart: the
other, to weet our obedience is outward, and of the body; because it is not
sufficient outwardely to honor them, unless inwardly we have a reverent
opinion and estimation of them. And if the life and conversation happily of any
shall be so criminous and notorious, that it cannot admit any excuse or
defense: yet notwithstanding to reverence and to respect him for his sake, who
has given this power unto him; giving it not to the merit of his person, but
to the ordinance of God, and to the dignity of his office: Thom. 2. socunda
quast. 25.
who as he is a Minister ought to be loved and to be reverenced for that
which is of God in him; that is, for his divine ministry which he has
received of God. Like as we read of Alexander the great, who going to besiege
Jerusalem, Joseph. Anti: lib. 11. cap. 8
and seeing the high Priest in his pontifical attire to come toward him,
lighted from his horse and saluted the high Priest: whereat Parmenio, one of
his followers disdaigning, asked him why he did reverence to the Priest of the
Jews, when as the whole world almost did reverence and adoration unto Him; to
whom he answred, that he did not the reverence so much unto him, as unto God
whose Priest he was; who appeared unto me (says he) in this very form of
attire being in Macedonia, and promised that by his conduct and help I should
conquer and subdue all Asia. Which if heathen by the light of Nature could see
and perform; what a shame is it to Christians, who have a far greater light
which is the light of grace shining in them, if they shall not be able to
discern and to do as much. And therefore the conclusion of this, shall be the
advertisement which our Savior Christ gives unto the Lawyer, Luke. 10.37
Luke 10. Vade and fac tu similiter, go and do thou also the like. Thus much
for the second duty in the charge, viz. to show himself unto the Priest. The
third is to offer his gift, in the next words; And offer thy gift, as Moses
commanded, etc.

It was a law among the Jews, as we may read in the Leuitical law; that such
persons as were cleansed of the leprosy, should offer 2. Leuit. 14
pigeons, or 2. sparrowes for their cleansing, with a certain measure of fine
flower and a pint of oil, and the priest to perform certain rites and
ceremonies withal; after which the Leper being pronounced clean by the
sentence of the Priest, was to be received and to be reputed as a clean
person. The reason whereof was that the leper might give thanks unto God and
might testify his thankfulness, by his gift that he offered unto him. Which
was the cause that God commanded in the law, the first born and the first
fruits, and the tenth part of all their increase to be offered and given unto
him. For, seeing the earth is the Lords and all the fullness thereof: Psalm. 24
therefore God to put us in remembrance of his universal dominion, and to
acknowledge him to be the author and giver of all, he has ordained and
appointed us to offer a part unto him; that so we might acknowledge his
bounty, and testify our homage and thankfulness toward him. Not that God
has need hereof: for as he himself says, Psalm. 50.10
All the beasts of the forest are mine, and so are the cattle upon a thousand
hills. If I be hungry I will not tell thee: for the whole world is mine and
all that is therein. Deu^ qui dignatus est totu^ dare, decima^ a nobis dignatur
accipere, non sibi sed nobis profutura^. Aug. de Temp. ser. 219. Philo de pram.
sacerdotum.
Psalm. 50; but for the use of his service and worship, and for the maintenance
of the Priests and Levites, who were employed, and labored in his service; it
being a thing most just and meet (as Philo faies) that some testimony of
thankfulness should be showed out of our temporal goods, for the most large
and manifold benefits that God has bestowed upon us; whereof, forasmuch as the
author and giver of all has no need, Psalm. 16.
(for, as David says, Psalm. 16. My goods do not extend unto thee, or, thou
have no need of my goods) they ought to redound to the Ministers of the
Temple, and to those that are the Curators, and have the charge of holy things.
And therefore God accordingly after such time as he had separated the tribe of
Leui from the other tribes, and had made the Priests office, an office of
service, Number. 18.17
as it is called, Numb. 18: that which he reserved unto himself, and
commanded to be offered unto him, in recognition of his dominion, he bestowed
the use and profit thereof upon the Priests and Levites for their maintenance
and service in the tabernacle; so as the first fruits, tenths, oblations, and
the sacrifices that were offered became dew to the Priests and Levites, for
their use and benefit, having that interest and property in the tenth part of
their goods at the least, Nahum. 10
which they themselves had in the other nine parts. The which I suppose to be a
law not merely ceremonial or judicial, as some do think, belonging to the
Jews only; but also in some respects natural and moral belonging unto
Christians. For, howsoever certain accidents and circumstances thereof do not
belong unto us, viz. that not the second, or third, but the first fruits should
be offered, that the tenth should not be received before it was offered in the
Temple and hallowed, and that the oblations should be offered every year upon
a certain time prescribed and appointed for it; I say though these rites and
ceremonies do not belong unto us necessarily, as being not tied nor bound to
the ceremonial and judicial laws of that people; yet notwithstanding, the
substance and equity, and the proportion and end of that law does belong unto
us: which is, a testimony of our gratitude and thankfulness unto God, and a
bountiful maintenance of those that serve at the altar; as the Apostle shows
not only out of the law of Moses, but also by the law of Nature. 1. Cor. 9.7
1. Cor. 9. the quantity and proportion whereof, ought neither to be less
then the allowance of the Priests (forasmuch as the Ministers of the Gospel are
not inferior but rather superior unto them) nor yet less then the tenth part
of men's goods, because the law of Nature which is the moral law written in
our hearts, or else some divine instinct agreeable to this law, did teach
Abraham before the ceremonial and judicial law of Moses, Genesis 14
to pay the tenth part of Melchisedech the Priest of the high God; as a thing
fitting and beseeming both reason, right, and equity. In which regard it is
received for a sure and undoubted truth of the best Divines, that the tenth
part of a man's goods at the least is dew to the Ministers of God and to holy
and charitable uses; not so much by a positive law of men, as by the divine
and immutable law of God.

To which I think fit to add one thing more: viz. that although those laws
of first fruits, tenths, and oblations, being considered in the ceremonial and
judicial respects thereof, do not bind christians now, as they were commanded to
be offered to the Leuiticall Priests, which Priesthood is now abrogated and an
other come in the place of it (for so they were merely judicial and did concern
none but them); yet notwithstanding, the Church has liberty to ordain and
make laws for the maintenance of the ministry by such tithes and oblations,
etc. as were then paid to the Priests; they so being judicial laws unto
them, that they may also not unlawfully be judicial laws unto us; being now
in the judicial regard, of the nature of things indifferent; which the Church
has liberty and power to use and dispose as it shall think most fit and
meet for the good and benefit thereof. And thus may we see, how the use of
tithes and oblations has been observed a long time in former ages, and in the
ancient Churches, as a thing most just and equal between the Pastor, and the
People, and the same proportion that was first appointed by God himself. For
tithes, we read of diverse Councels which have made diverse laws for the payment
of them; some admonishing that tithes be truly paid without fraud: Council.
Mogunt. cap. 17. Admonemus etc.
as the Council of Mentz; We admonish that no man neglect to pay his tithes:
for it is to be feared that if any do withholde from God his dew, God will
for his sin withhold such things as are necessary for him; some inflicting
the pain of excommunication for the neglect and defaulte hereof: as the Council
of Colen; Council. Colon. cap. 18
They that neglect to pay their tithes, let them be excommunicated: again,
they that being thrice admonished do not pay their full tithe, let them be
denied the Communion. For oblations, the Church has a long time had an
ancient custom, that whosoever came to receive the Lords Supper, if he were
of ability, he should offer something to God for the use of Gods Ministers, and
of the poor, in token of their thankfulness to God. In which regard S.
Cyprian ser. de eleemosyna.
Cyprian does sharply reprove a rich woman for coming into Gods house without
a sacrifice as he calls it, that is without an oblation, not so much as
looking unto the Corban to cast her offering into it. The devout Father does
ask her how she can celebrate the praise of God, when as she comes empty
handed unto the altar, without a sacrifice. On the other side, Saint Austen
does highly commend his mother Monica, Aug. Confel. lib. 5. cap. 9.
that she was careful morning and evening to repair to Gods house; where
after the offering up of her prayers, she was wont to offer an oblation or a
gift at the altar also. Which practice seems to have been derived from the
practice of the Apostls in the Primitive Church, 1. Cor. 11.
where the custom was that rich men did offer liberally for themselves and the
poor, such things as were necessary both to the celebration of the Lords
supper, and to the celebratio^ of their feasts of love, which they used to
keep. The which commendable custom, as Zanchius faith, is now left; and after
the Word preached, and the holy Supper administered, there is nothing but a
beggarly casting of something into the poor man's box: and that of the most for
fashion sake, without regard either of a dew proportion in offering according
to the measure which God has given unto them, or of the end for which they do
it; which is, to testify their thankfulness to God for his benefits bestowed
upon them.

Now from hence, as from the River of Eden, which was divided into four heads,
Genesis 2. are derived four propositions very remarkable and worthy of due
consideration. The first is, that the maintenance of Gods ministers is not a
policy of men, but an ordinance of God; due unto them, by a divine right, that
is by the law and ordinance of God, who has given that part which he reserved
for himself, unto his ministers for their sustentatio^, and maintenance. Which
appears further not only by the law of Moses, which was that they should not
muzzle the mouth of the Ox, 1. Tim. 5.8.
that treads out the corn (which the Apostle applies to the maintenance of
Gods ministers, 1. Tim. 5) but also by the law of nature and of nations, and
the ordinance and approbation of Christ himself, as the same Apostle shows
most plentifully, saying, 1. Cor. 9.7.
Who goes on warfare at any time at his own cost? who planteth a vineyard and
eats not of the fruit thereof? and who feeds a flock and eats not of the
milk of the flock? Again, do ye not know that they which minister about the
holy things, eat of the things of the temple; and they which wait at the
Altar are partakers with the Altar? so also has the Lord ordained that they
which preach the Gospel should live of the Gospel. The which does plainly
show, that the maintenance of ministers is not a voluntary and a beggarly
alms given in charity unto them, but an hono rabble stipend allotted by God
and due in justice unto them; according to that which Christ says, dignus est
operarius mercede, the laborer is worthy of his reward. Philo do praem. sacerd.
and honoribus.
To which purpose, Philo has very well observed, that the people of the Jews
were commanded to bring their oblations into the Temple, that there the priests
might receive them as from the hands of God to whom they belonged, least
otherwise the people should vpbrayde the Priest, as if he were behoulding unto
them for a benevolence. For as the same author says, whosoever receives a
gift from God, who bestows liberally upon all, he does receive it with less
shamefastness then if he should receive it from men only.

Yea, verily, God in his wisdom did not see it fit and meet that his
ministers should live of the alms and the benevolence of the people; but
rather that they should have a sure and certain maintenance, which by law
and right they might claim and challenge as due unto them; and that for diverse
weighty, and important causes. First, to the end that their minds should not
be distracted nor troubled with worldly care for their necessary provision; to
which they should be very subject, if they lived upon the voluntary
contributions of the people, who happily at one time would give very
liberally, and at an other time upon the least displeasure utterly withdraw
their benevolence from them. Secondly, to maintain the dignity and reputation
of their ministry, that they might not be forced either to beg and tell
their want to every pezant, and low prisde fellow, and to receive a great part
of their benetiolence of scandalous and notorious wicked persons, which were
not fit for them to do; or else through piety and modesty to suffer extreme
want and penutie, which were less m^ete and seemly for the honor and credit
of the profession. Thirdly, that they might not be driven either to be (...),
2. Cor. 2.17.
that is to corrupt and to adulterate the word of God as Vintners do their
wine by mixing water with it (for so the word signifies, which shows the
practice to be an old mystery of iniquity) or else to be (...), ^ Cor. 4 2.
that is to handle the word of God deceitfully, thereby to please the fancies
and humors of men, and to make a gain and a benefit unto themselves: which
perhaps some not very well disposed would be glad to do, if they lived only upon
the gratuities and charitable devotions of the people. Fourthly, that they
might not lose their liberty and boldness in their ministry, being glad to
flatter and to gloss and to claw euetie one, by sowing pillowes under
the^elbows and dawbing with vnte^pered mortar; but contrariwise to reprove and
rebuke freely and boldly the sins of all sort^ of people, eue^ of the richest
and mightiest of all. Which they shall be better able to do having a certain
and sure maintenance, then having only a voluntary allowance; because such as
depend upon beneuole^ce will fear least by using the liberty and boldness of
their ministry in rebuking and reproouing sin, they should thereby lose both
the favor and the benevolence of those that are perhaps the best benefactors
unto them. Which I suppose to have been the chief cause that godly and
religious Princes in former times would not permit Bishops and the rest of the
clergy to receive allowance and maintenance of every one of the people;
Eusebius. de vita Constant.
but first of all did give them bountiful allowance out of their own
treasuries and excheckers, and afterward gave diverse Lands, demaynes, and
possessions unto the Church: which they did no doubt in great wisdom; seeing
it to be more convenient, both in regard of the ministers, for the performance
of their duties, and in regard of the people for their profit and benefitte.

The second propositionis, that the maintenance of ministers ought to be a
liberal and a bountiful maintenance; forasmuch as they had not only Cities
and Suburbs allorted unto them to dwell in; Number. 35.4.
but also the first fruits, and the redemption of the first borne, oblations,
vows, sacrifices and the tenth part of all the fruits and increase to
maintain and to keep them withal.

The truth of which doctrine is justified not only by the judicial law of
Moses; but also by the law of Nations in Pharaoh his Priests, Genesis 47. Genesis
47.22.
who had lands and livings belonging unto them to maintain them; which lands
they were not forced to sell when as all the rest of the peosould their lands
to buy them corn withal; neither would Joseph meddle with them, but they had
an ordidinarie allowance of Pharaoh to live upon. Which is also further
confirmed in the new Testament: where the Apostle speaking of ministers says,
That the elders that rule well are worthy of double honor, 1. Tim. 5.17
especially those that labor in the word of God, and in doctrine; that is of
an honest and a liberal stipend, as the Apostle expounds it in the next
words; for it is written, Thou shall not muzzle the mouth of the Ox that
treads out the corn; as if he should say, the lean and bare plight that
ministers are in, shows plainly that their mouths have been muzzled
contrary to the law; therefore see that you muzzle them no more, but let them
eat their fill of the corn that they tread out; for the labourer is worthy of
his meat. Wherein it is worthy the observation, that the Apostle calls the
ministers maintenance by the name of an honor; because as a base and a
beggarly allowance makes to the discredit of the ministry, as if the calling
were base and contemptible and not worthy of regard: so a liberal and a
bountiful allowance makes for the honor and countenance of the ministry;
to show that the calling is honorable and worthy of an honorable reward.
The like we read afterward when as the Church had Christian kings and
princes, who became nursing Fathers, and nursing mothers thereof, the Church
was maruaylously enriched by the libe rall and bountiful donations of godly
and zealous princes and others, who gave houses and Lands, Castles and Towns
for the provision and maintenance of the Clergy; which continued a long time
afterward in many ages following, and does yet still in all well ordered
Churches and Commo^weales. For as Philo verse well notes, Philo de praem. and
hon. sacerd.
the large and plentiful provision of living for Gods ministers is an evident
argument both of public piety, and of a diligent observation of laws:
contrariwise, want and penury, and scarsitie of maintenance does vpbraid us
with contempt both of religion and of laws; of which if there were that regard
that there ought to be, the ministers of God should not only have a necessary
but a plentiful maintenance.

So then the provision and the living of ministers by the law of God, by the
law of Nations, by the law of Christ, and by the law of Christian Princes,
is not a bare and beggarly allowance, like unto the Levites wages, Judge. Judge.
17.10.
17. which was 10 shekels of silver, a suite of apparel and his meat and
drink; the allowance which many knights and gentlemen use to make, who having
gotten an Impropriation in their hands, will hire some one or other for five
pounds or twenty nobles a year to serve the cure; and (if he were able) to
teach their children too: and may I not truly say, the allowance of some rich
Citizens also? who being possessed not only of wealth, but also of store and
plenty in great abundance; do out of this their rich treasure, make that
allowance unto their minister yearly for his maintenance, which for very
shame they will not offer to one of their servants for his hire, nor to a poor
schoolemafter for his wages to teach their children their Abce, and to learn
their letters of him. And yet (forsooth) some of these will look to rule and
sway, and to be great masters and commanders in a parish, though their duties
and allowance unto their ministers be just the same with them, that take the
charity and the alms of the parish. This, I say, is not that allowance that
is due unto Gods ministers by the law of God and of Christian Princes (whose
godly laws are wrested and perverted by the fraud and cunning of these kind
of men) but a bountiful and an honorable maintenance, having not only
sufficiency for necessary use; but also plenty for delight and comfort too.
In regard whereof, the law provided that the first fruits of all increase, as
of corn, wine, oil, and the pleasant fruits of trees should be offered unto
the Priests, Philo de praem. and hon. sacerd.
(as Philo does observe) to the end that they might not live hardly, having
only so much as is necessary to hold the body and soul together; but that
they might live cheerfully and comfortably, in having wherewith to solace and
to delight themselves withal: insomuch that this ancient author, casting up an
account of all kind of oblations which were offered unto the Priests, says,
that by the law of God they were not much inferior unto Princes, having a
continual tribute (as he calls it) paid unto them as Princes have.

Therefore let no man grudge nor repine at the liuinges of ministers, as if
every thing were too much that the minister has, when as themselves can be
content to possess ten times as much, and yet for all this, think that they
have not half enough; seeing that this their murmuring is not against Gods
ministers but against God himself, Exodus 16.
who has given the tenth part of their goods from himself unto them, for
their maintenance and for other holy and charitable uses; that so they might
not live hardly, but liberally; not to take an alms, but to be able to give
alms and to relieve others. Now, shall men envy and repine against them for
this? GOD forbid. What were this else but to impeach Gods wisdom and to
murmr at his goodness and bounty toward them? Mat. 20.
Those laborers that murmured against the householder for giving as much unto
the last as unto the first, what answer did they receive for it? Friend,
says he to one of them, I do thee no wrong, did I not agree with thee for a
penny? toll quod tuum est and vade, take that which is thine own and go thy
way, I will give as much to this last as unto thee: is it not lawful for me
to do with mine own what I will? is thine eye evil because I am good? So
verily God will say to these envious and malicious men; My friend, why do
thou grudge and repine against my servants, for my bounty and large allowance
that I have given unto them? Is it any wrong to thee to see me liberal and
beneficial unto others? what if I would, to show my love and bounty to my
Apostles and ministers, give unto them mine own part which is due unto my
self, what is this to thee? Is it not lawful for me to do with mine own
what I will? will thou be evil because I am good? Go to; toll quod tuum est
and vade, take that which is thine own and go thy way; I have dealt well and
bountifully with thee in giving nine parts unto thee, and in giving but one
part, viz. the tenth unto them: content thy self with it, and do not envy
nor murmr any more, least I take away the nine parts from thee, and give the
tenth unto thee.

The third proposition is, that the tenths and oblations with other profittes
and emoluments do belong to the ministers of God, not to any others; forasmuch
as God gave his part to the Priests and Levites for their maintenance; and
therefore ought not to be diuerted or converted to the use of lay men, who
have no right nor interest either in Gods tenth or in any other goods of the
Church. For seeing that in the matter of tithes and oblatio^s and of all other
ecclesiastical profits, there is a mutual giving and receiving, as the
Apostle speaks, Phil. 4. Phil. 4.15.
the minister giving spiritual things, and the people giving carnal and
temporal things for them; what reason or equity can there be, that those
that may not, nor do not perform the one, should be partakers of the other,
or that they should live upon the Altar, that do not serve at the Altar? The
dignities and revenues of the Church do belong to such as are entitled unto
the^, by a lawful power and authority received from God, to manage and
discharge the duties and offices thereof, according to that which Philo
reports of the law among the Jews, Philo Iud. lib. 2. de Monarch.
that it does not permit any to reap those fruits and profits which are
holy unto God; but only those that are of the order of the Priesthood, though
otherwise he be of the same Country, and nobly descended and adorned with rare
and excellent virtues: whereof he gives this reason, because it is not meet
that sacrifices and other ceremonies of the Altar should be committed to the
Priests, and the honors and profits to be communicated to lay persons; nor is
it seemly that the Priests should take care, and labor day and night, and the
reward to be bestowed upon those that are idle and take no pains for it.
Therefore to alienate or detain the goods and revenues of the Church, which
are originally due unto God, and by a deed of gift due unto his ministers,
cannot be without manifest wrong and injury to God and to the Church: which
makes God to complain as he does, Mal. 3.8.
Mal. 3. Will any man (says he) spoil his gods? yet have ye spoiled me; but
ye say, wherein have we spoiled thee? in tithes and offerings, etc. How in
tithes and offerings? partly, by converting them to temporal and private uses,
as many covetous Patrons do, in reserving their own tithes unto themselves, 1.
Sam. 8.15
and in giving nothing at al unto God; partly by embezeling and diminishing
some part thereof by fraud and cunning, as many both in the Country and the
City use to do, by concealements, Act. 5.2
and by diverse couenous tricks and devises which they have; and so not giving
all, but a part of that which is dew unto him. For which cause he tells them
that they are cursed with a curse, and, does straightly charge them, to bring
all manner of tithes into his storehouse, Mal. 3.10
that there may be meat in his house; that is, into the Temple, to maintain
the Priests and the poor with it; not into their own barnes, and their
houses, to maintain them and their bravery withal. 1. Sam. 21
The shewe-bread was not for every man to eat of, but for the Priests; neither
is the meat of Gods house, for the use of every man, but for the use of the
Priests. It is a sure maxim in divinity, that those things that are dedicated
and consecrated unto God, cannot be alienated nor converted to civil uses
afterward: but do from thenceforth become the proper possession of God, and
of those to whom God does make an assignation thereof; and therefore whosoever
shall profane holy things, either by offering violence unto them, or by
employing them to their own private uses, they do cast themselves headlong
into very eminent danger, and do bring a fearful destruction upon themselves;
for as Solomon says, Laqueus est homini deuorare sancta, it is destruction
unto a man to devour that which is sanctified. Prou. 20.25
Pro. 20. The very heathen observed, Virgil. lib. 2. Aeneid.
that after such time as the Grecia^s once offered violence to the Temple of
Pallas, Lactant. de origin err. cap. 4
that they lost all their hope and never thriued nor prospred after it:
Lactantius writing against the error and profaneness of the heathen,
reports of diverse who have bin grievously punished among the^, for offering
violence unto holy things; as namely, of Fuluius the Censor, who for taking
away certain marmoreas tegulas, tiles of marble out of the Temple of Juno
Lacinia, Lact. de orig. err. cap. 8.
was within a short time after distraught of his wits, and had two of his
sons slain: for grief whereof he himself dyed also: of Appius Claudius,
who for translating and alienating only those things that were consecrated to
Hercules, within a while after lost the use of both of his eyes. And although
Dionysius made but a rest of sacrilege, in taking a golden cloak that was
upon the image of Jupiter Olympius, and putting a woollen cloak upon it
insteade thereof, saying, that a golden cloak was too heavy in summer and too
cold in winter, but a linsie wolsy cloak was fit for both; also in cutting off
a golden beard that Aesculapius did wear; saying, that i^ was no reason that
the son should have a beard, when as Apollo his Father had none;
furthermore, in taking away certain golden cups which they held forth in their
hands, saying, that it were great folly and madness not to take them being so
kindly offered; although I say Dionysius did all this without present punishment
(for afterward he was driven out of his kingdom) laughing and scoffing to his
companions, who feared that he would have suffered shipwreck for his
sacrilege; do you not see (says he) how prosperous a voyage the gods do give
to those that commit sacrilege? yet notwithstanding Pirrhus for robbing the
treasury of Proserpina, suffered shipwreck not far from the shore; where
himself, his men, and his other goods were drowned, and nothing found again of
all, but only the money that he had taken out of the tresury. What should I
tell you of Zerxes, who sending 400. Justin. hist^ lib. 2.
of his soldiers to Delphos, to spoil the Temple of Apollo, they were every
one of them destroyed and burnt with thunder, and lightning. Of Marcus Crassus,
Joseph. Ant. li. 14. cap. 12
who for taking a great sum of money out of the Temple of Jerusalem, which
Pompey in a kind of piety would not touch nor meddle withal (which sum
amounted to ten thousand talents) within a while after making an invasion upon
the Parthians, he perished there with his whole army. Let these pass and let
us cast our eyes a while upon divine histories, and the histories of the
Church; there shall you see Baltazar for profaning and abusing the holy vessels
which Nabuchadnezzar had taken in the spoil of Jerusalem, Dan. 5.23
and had laid up in the Temple of his own god, fearing to convert them to his
own use as Josephus in his antiquities discourses upon that history, Joseph.
Ant. li. 10. cap. 12
and for drinking and carowsing in them among his Princes, his Courtiers and
his Concubines, with certain blasphemous words, which he uttered against the
everliving God; received presently a fearful doom and sentence by a
handwriting upon the wall, which did wonderfully affright and astonish him,
making his joints to loose and his knees to knock together: Mean, Mean, Tekel,
Vpharsin. The interpretation whereof is, that God had numbered his kingdom and
had finished it, and that God had divided it, and given it to the Medes and
Persians. There may we see also Antiochus Epiphanes, 1. Mac. 6.12
who perceiving the time of his death not to be far off, called his friends
unto him, and shows them both the grieuousnesse of his disease and the cause
of it, viz. that he suffered all his pain and misery, for taking the vessels of
gold and silver out of the Temple of Jerusalem, and for destroying the
inhabitants thereof without cause. 1. Mac. 6.12. There may we likewise see
Herod, Joseph. Ant. li. 16. cap. 11
surnamed the great, who having opened David's sepulcher to take money out of it
as Hircanus had done before, who took from thence 3000. talents of silver,
lost two of his soldiers, or of his guarde there, who were consumed by a flash
of fire that brake forth of a secret place; so as he was glad to depart thence
for very fear: after which time his house decayed and fell to ruin; which was
a just reward and punishment of his wickedness. Look unto the age that
succeeded and followed after, I mean the time of the Gospel, before the Church
was altogether established: behold Ananias and Saphira for withholding
secretly part of that, Act. 5.5
which they had voluntarily given to the use of the church, most severely
punished with sudden death. After this when the Church was established, and
endued with great riches and possessions by the bountiful donations of godly
Emperors, and other devout Christians, Julian the Apostata, and Felix his
companion, Theodoret. eccl. hist. lib. 3. cap. 11, 12
(as Theodoret reports) for taking away the holy vessels of the Temple
(where one of them pissed against the Communion table, and struck one that
would have hindered him from it; saying that God did not take any care of
Christians and that his providence did not reach unto them; the other, seeing
the magnificence of the holy vessels derided and scoffed most wickedly and
blasphemously after this manner: Ecce quam sumptuosis vasis filio Mariae
ministratur, Behold with what sumptuous vessels the son of Marie is served):
these two monsters I say, for taking away the holy vessels, and making but a
jest of sacrilege, received both of them two just punishments, worthy of
their blasphemous sacrilege; the one having his mouth which was an instrument
of blasphemy, made a siege or a passage to void his filthy excrements, which
are naturally in all men egested an other way; the other having all the blood
of his body gathered to his mouth as to a sink: which he never left spetting
and spauling out, till all was exhausted, and so died most miserably. I will
not ransacke our own Chronicles, nor report of the just judgments that have
lighted upon diverse of our own nation, for this horrible sin; whereof some
have been authors and contriuers; others actors and abbettors of the wrack
and spoil of the Church. Those that are men of experience are able to say more
out of their own knowledge then I am able to tell them; neither do I list to
complain and to expostulate of the strange courses that have been taken in
alienating the goods of the Church to temporal and profane uses, only for the
abuse of them; making thus wounds of their medicines, Qui scripturas male intel
ligunt de medicamentis vulnera sibi faciunt. Aug. de Temp. ser. 61
as Saint Austen speaks in an other case, and making the last error worse
then the first; they erring ignorantly in the Assumption, thinking popery and
superstition to be the true service of God; these erring maliciously in the
maine Proposition, thinking that that which was generally given to the service
and worship of God, may utterly be taken away for the superstition and abuse
thereof; whereas the superstition should have been taken away, and the goods
remained to the true service and worship of God, according to the intent and
meaning of the donors: whose general intent and end was the service of God,
though in the particular matter and form thereof they were foulely deceived. So
should the wills of the dead have been performed, the goods of the church
rightly employed, piety and religion better maintained, and the service and
glory of God better advanced. But it is a booteless thing to complain hereof,
being like unto an old festured sore that will hardly be cured; not because
there is no balm in Gilead, Ier. 8.22.
nor any Physician there to recover it, but because those that are sick of this
disease will not be healed; of whom we may say as the Prophet says of the
obstinate and stubborn Jews, Ier. 51.9.
we would have healed them; but they would not be healed. Only I will advise
and admonish all men (because (...) are (...) the sufferings of others are
instructions unto us, these arrows of Gods judgments which he has shot
beyond us being like Ionathans arrows to give warning unto us) to take heed
and to beware how they deal and meddle with sacred and holy things, 1. Sa^. 2
c. 20
either by alienating and giving of them, or by selling and buying of them, or
by any kind of purloining and diminishing of them, and to discern and put a
difference between spiritual and temporal things, between holy and profane
things, between the goods of the world and the goods of God. When we give let
us not give away that which is Gods, when we sell let us not sell that which is
Gods, when we buy let us not buy that which is Gods, when we hoord and lay up,
Nolo quis habeat contra Deum, ne non habeat Deu^. Bern. epist. 272
let us not lay up that which is Gods; least by possessing that which is Gods,
we deserve to be dispossessed of God himself. Josephus reports in the
wars of the Jews, Josephus de bello Iudaico lib. 7.
that a little before the Temple of Jerusalem was destroyed, there were
certain voices of Angels heard there, which said, Migremus hinc, let us be
gone; signifying, that neither God nor his blessed Angels do delight to dwell
where sacrilegious Church-robbers are; who may fitly be compared unto Judas,
Judas fur sacrilegus, non qualiscunque fur, fur loculoru^, sed Dominicorum,
loculorum sed sacroru^. Aug. in Ioh. tr. 50.
who was not a common thief, but a sacrilegious thief, robbing not every man's
bag, but Christ's bag; and having robbed his bag, made little conscience
afterward, to sell Christ himself too. The consideration whereof (as I
suppose) made S. Fratri vestro eiusque militib. sagittarijs ba list arijsque
domos Episcopales contra ius and fas audacter nimiu^ etc. Bern. ad Regem
Francorum epist. 221
Bernard that zealous and devout Saint, to write so boldly to the King of
France, and to expostulate with him for giving the Bishops houses to his
kinsfolks, and to his soldiers, and to archers and slingers and such like, and
for suffering the goods of the church to be wasted and consumed in wicked and
profane uses; telling him plainly that he was too bold with the Church, and
that it would not be long unpunished, if he continued in so doing. The which
was so far from that divine spirit of the most worthy and renowned Constantine,
that he gave a straight charge to Auilinus his governor (as Eusebius
reports) that if any did hold or retain any of those goods and possessions
that did formerly belong unto the Church, Eusebius hist. eccl. lib. 10. cap. 5.
he should cause them forthwith to be restored again to the same Churches;
that such things as the Churches possessed before, might now at the last return
again to the right owners of them. Yea, he made an edict, Eusebius. de vita
Constant. lib. 2, cap. 39 40.
that if his own Exchecker had for a time possessed ought unjustly that belo^ged
unto the Church, that it should restore the same again; and if any had either
bought and purchased any of these goods, or had them freely upon some special
favor bestostowed on the^, that they should restore them again; in liew
whereof, though they had labored by their begging and buying of these things,
to alienate his mind and his good will from them, he would out of his princely
benignity provide some other ways for them, as occasion should serve. The like
also did Theodosius, Valentinian, Martianus, and diverse other Christian and
godly Princes: who made laws wherein they provided that it should not be
lawefull unto any to invade and usurp those goods, which they and others had,
or hereafter should bestow upon the Church; nor to alienate and convert the^
to any profane uses; and if at any time a public necessity should seem to
challenge the use of them, to take them with a condition and a purpose of
restoring them again, as Iouianus did: who took a great part of the goods of
the church to relieve the people being pinched with famine, promising to
restore all that he took, and to add more unto it. Wherefore, to conclude
this point, if either the exampls of godly Princes, or the judgments of God
upon sacrilegious people will move and persuade us; beware of this horrible
sin of sacrilege, and take heed how you possess and hold the goods of the
Church; for so long as Achans wedge of gold and the execrable thing is among
us, Ios. 7.13.
it is to be feared that Gods judgments, and his severe punishments will not
be far from us.

The fourth Proposition is, that the tenths and oblations, with other duties
belonging unto God, are to be offered willingly and gladly; forasmuch as they
are offered in token of our gratitude and thankfulness to GOD: which implies
both alacrity, and cheerfulness if it be true thankfulness. And verily
great reason there is of it: for seeing God does liberally and bountifully
bestow all that we have, upon us; therefore we ought to testify our
thankfulness by offering something most willingly and chearefully to him again.
Whereof we shall find a dew and most devout practice of holy and godly men in
former times. We read, that when as God commanded Moses to build a
Tabernacle for his service, Exodus 36.5
the people were so willing and forward to offer even the best things that
they had toward the building of it, that the workmen came to Moses and told
him that the people brought too much, and more then enough for the use of the
work: in regard whereof, he was feign to make a Proclamatition among them,
that neither man nor woman should prepare any more work for the oblation of the
sanctuary. Exo. 36.5. So likewise when the Temple was to be builded, 1. Chron.
29 9.14
David and his people did offer so willingly and so bountifully toward the
building of it, that as the text says they rejoiced greatly when they did it,
and did thank God for their offering which they offered unto him; acknowledging
that that which they gave, they did first receive, and that of his own hand
they did give unto him. Of which their willingness, both in their voluntary
oblatio^s, as also those which the law imposed upon them, Philo a man of the
same nation reports that they brought their tribute, Philo de pram. and hon.
sacerd.
as he calls it, more willingly unto the Priests, then in other places they
did unto Princes. For when as they paid their duties unto them, they would
grudge and complain of great impositions and exactions, and would cavil and
quarrel with the publicans and towle gatherers, hating them as a common plague
that was sent among the^; but when as they paid theirtithes and oblations unto
the Priests, every man did it willingly and joyfully, as if he did not give
but receive; giving thanks unto GOD, in the offering of their oblations. Yea,
since that time, Christians in the beginning of the primitive Church, were so
forward and willing to honor God with their goods, Act. 4.34.
that as many as were possessors of lands and houses sold them and brought the
price thereof and laid it down at the Apostles feet; which was distributed to
every one according as he had need. And after that also, in the declining
state of the Church many devout people were so ready and forward to give unto
the Church, that they gave more then was thought fit in policy to be given;
whereupon the statute of Mortmaine was made, that they should not exceed
certain bounds which were limited unto the^. Which practice how different it
is from the practice of this age wherein we live, every one that is purblind
may see: wherein the complaint and grudging of most men is that they are at too
much cost and charge for the service of God, as if every thing were too much,
that is bestowed upon it; dealing thus worse with God then the Israelites did
with the golden calf: who plucked of their earings and their jewels to make an
Idol; these contrariwise thinking much to do the like for the service and
worship of the true God: Whereof none can tell so well as the ministers of
God, who are as it were his stewards and collectors to receive his rents. When
we come to demand them in our masters name, to whom they are due, a world it is
to see what grudging and complaining, what quarrelling and contesting, what
cauilling and disputing there is about them; some pretending privileges and
prescriptions, others pleading customs and compositions, a third sort studying
and inuenting mere tricks and devises thereby to defeat and to defraud God
of his right; that it would grieve any well disposed mind to see even a very
mean person so injuriously and so fraudulently dealt withal. If hereupon in
the defense of our masters right, and in zeal to the Church, and in an honest
care of our selves and ours, we crave the benefit of the law and the help of
the magistrate; Publicans and towle gatherers were not more odious nor counted
more covetous and more extortioners then we are: although indeed it is not
covetousness and oppression to maintain the right of the Church, but theft and
sacrilege to witholde it from it. Socr. hist. eccl. lib. 3. cap. 12.
It is reported of Julian, that when as the Christians came and complained unto
him of the intolerable wrongs and injuries offered unto them by the Pagans,
he made them this answer, that it was their duty when they are wronged to
suffer it patiently, because their master had willed and commanded them to do
so. And does not the world deal thus with Gods ministers also in these days?
Yes verily. If they be forced at any time to sue for the right of God and the
church, men are ready to say to them as Julian did to the Christians; that
they ought to be patient and to suffer wrong, and not to go to law, but to
live quietly and peaceably with all men. Which I confess they ought to do: but
ought not these men also to deal justly, and truly and honestly with them? O
impiety and ingratitude of men! Is this our thankfulness unto God for the
bounty and plenty that he bestows upon us, to pinch and to spare, and to
deal niggardly and deceitfully with him? Does God voutsafe to ask thy tenthes
and oblations, and do thou like a miserable and a covetous wretch deny the^
unto him? what would thou do, if he should have taken nine parts unto
himself, and have given the tenth only unto thee? Which also he does many
times if thou could see it, Quid auide^ supputas? nouem tibi parts subtractae
sune, quia decima^ dare noluisti. Haec enim est Domini iustissima consuetudo vt
si tu illi decima^ non dederis, tu ad decima^ reuoceris. Aug. de Te^p. ser. 219.
in making thy fields barren and to bring forth no corn, thy trees fruitless
and to bring forth no fruit, the labor and pains thou take to be
unprofitable, and to bring no gain unto thee. Do thou muse and wonder at it,
says Saint Austen? surely it is no wonder. God does take away nine parts from
thee, because thou would est not give the tenth unto him. For this is most just
dealing in God ye if thou will not give the tenth to him, he will take away nine
parts from thee, and give the tenth unto thee. Yea, verily (as the same father
says) because the tenth of thy goods, and of thy increase remains with thee,
there shall be spoil and havoc made of that which thou have: August. ibid.
Dabis impio militi quod non vis dare sacerdoti, thou shall give that
unwillingly unto the soldier that seeks to make a prey of thee, which thou
would not willingly give the Priest that prays for thee. Confider this, all
ye that forget God, especially you whom God has blessed with plenty and
abundance of all kind of riches; Mat. 2.
and withal remember those wise men that came out of the East to worship
Christ: they came lade^ with gold and myrrh and fankincense to offer unto him;
and shall not Christians be as forward and as willing to do the like? Quale est
si quod fecit Magus non faciat Christianus? Chrysol.
says Chrysologus: what shame were it for Christians not to do as much as
Magicians did, that they should bring gold and other gifts to Christ's cradle,
and that Christians should not bring the like unto Gods Altar?

O let us blush and be ashamed of such ingratitude: and let us not hold Gods
due any longer from him, in going about to defeat him and to deceive him of
his right: but contrariwise, Prou. 3.
let us honor him with our substance by bringing willingly and gladly all our
tithes and oblations unto him; Mal. 3.
and then try whether God will not deal liberally and bountifully with you,
whether he will not fill your barnes with abundance, and make your presses
burst with new wine, whether he will not open the windows of heaven, and pour
a blessing upon you without measure. And thus much shall suffice for the last
duty in the charge, which is to offer his gift: the ground and warrant whereof
is the law or commandment of Moses; And offer thy gift as Moses commanded.

In discoursing and handling whereof, the hand of my text points me to that
obedience which we owe both to laws and governors: forasmuch as the Leper is
willed to perform this duty in regard of Moses his commandment; which
implies a subjection and an obedience to powers and principalities.

But because this matter has been handled before in that reason which
concerns the Leper himself, in going and showing himself unto the Priest, I
will not insist upon it any further; but rather will clear a doubt which is
made concerning this obedience, enjoined by Christ unto the ceremonial law of
Moses. For seeing the rites and ceremonies of the Leuiticall law were to be
abolished at the coming of Christ, being but types and shadows which are to
give place unto the body as Tertullian says; and were to endure, and to
continue only, Heb. 9.10.
vsque ad tempus correctionis, to the time of reformation, as the Apostle
speaks, Heb. 9. it may justly be demanded why Christ would have the Leper
to observe that which he himself came to abolish. To which it is answered, that
christ does not always dissolve the law of Moses, nor always keep it; but
sometimes does the one, sometimes the other. He does dissolve it sometimes, as
he did in touching the Leper, to prepare and make a way, Chrysostom. in Mat.
as Chrysostom. says, to his Evangelical doctrine: and he observes it sometimes,
as he does here in bidding the Leper to offer his gift as Moses commanded;
thereby to bridle the mouths of some, and to heal the weakness of others, in
yielding and condescending some thing unto them. Secondly, though the
ceremonies of the law were to have an end by the coming of Christ: yet
notwithstanding not presently at his coming, but after his death and his
ascension; and then not suddenly, neither; but by degrees and by little and
little. If our Savior Christ, and his Apostles should either suddenly or
altogether have abolished them, August. Hieron. epist. 19.
men might have thought that both they and others that lived after, did detest
and abhor them as devilish and sacrilegious impiety: and therefore to take
away this slander and reproach from them, and also to give a due honor and
commendation unto them, they would have them to continue a while after them,
yea and observe the^ also sometimes in their own persons. To which end, Luc. 2.
we read how Christ himself was circumcised and presented with an oblation,
Ioh. 7.
and did duly observe the feasts and sacrifices according to the law of Moses,
and how Paul circumcised Timothe, Act. 16.
and did sheare his own head at Cenchrea; which they did, least otherwise they
should be thought to condemn the ceremonies of Moses law, as much as they did
the superstition and idolatry of the heathen: which in no wise they would have
to be disgraced or to be dishonored; but rather to be countenanced and
respected both in regard of God, the author, and Moses the ordainer of them.
Indeed it cannot be denied, that after the death and ascension of Christ,
August. Ep. 19.
vetera sacramenta amiserunt tanquam vitam officij sui, as Saint Austen says
the old sacraments and ceremonies of the the law, they lost as it were the
life of their office; but yet as the bodies of the dead are not to be cast
unto dogs and to the fowls of the air, nor to be tumbled presently into
their graves, but are after a time to be brought decently and honorably unto
their burialles, with certain obsequies, and funeral rites performed by their
friends and acquaintance while they lived; so the ceremonies of the law, though
they languished and began to die at the coming of Christ, yea and were dead
also after his death; yet Christ and his Apostles who were friends to Moses,
would not have them presently to be tumbled into the grave without all
reverence, or to be cast out to the slanderous reproaches of enemies, as to the
biting of dogs; but with all honor and reverence after that time to be
brought unto the Grave, and there to rest and abide for ever. So if any shall
now labor and go about to revive them, and to bring them in again by
observing of them, he shall not be pius deductor and baiulus corporis,
August. Ibid
as Austen says; a loving friend that comes to solemnise the funeral; but
impius sepulturae violator, a wicked enemy that comes to rake the Grave, and
to violate the burial. The use that is now of them, is to read them for the
understanding and accomplishing of the things which they signified; not to
observe them, by performing any duty or obedience which we owe unto them.

From whence we may take a just estimate, how to esteem of the rites and
ceremonies of our Church, and in what account and honor we ought to have
them: not to disgrace and to dishonor them as diverse do; but to desteeme
reverently of them; if not for any other cause, yet in regard of them that did
first institute and ordain them, as also of them that did afterward for a long
time observe and keep them, who were both learned, godly and zealous men, such
as shed their blood, and laid down their lives for the profession of the
truth. For so we see that Christ and his Apostles did, who honored the law of
Moses and the Ceremonies thereof (though they were to have an end shortly
after) in regard of Moses who was the Author and ordayner of them: Which
honor if any shall refuse to give to the rites and ceremonies of our Church,
as deeming them popish and superstitious, both in the institution and the use
of them; let these men that do thus wrong our Church by casting an aspersion
of popery and superstition upon it, know first of all thus much, that these
rites and ceremonies have been observed and used even in the purest times of
the Church, many hundred years before popery and superstition crept in: as
might be showed in diverse particular ceremonies, namely the cross in
Baptism, the use of the surplisse, music in Gods service, kneeling at the
communion, with diverse other besides, whereat so much offense is taken. The
which were used, if not in the times of the Apostles, which Eusebius and others
seem to affirm, yet notwithstanding immediately after, both in the time of
persecution when godly and zealous Christians shed their blood in defense of
the Gospel: as appears plainly in the writings of Tertullian, Cyprian and
others, who make express mention of some of them; and in the time of peace
also, when as the Church began to have Christian Emperors, who became nursing
fathers and nursing mothers of the Church, as is to be seen in the writings
of most of the ancient fathers. Secondly, let it be granted, that the
ceremonies of our Church were first invented and ordained by those that were
popish and superstitious, yea by pagans and heathen men, as some do affirm,
and were most wickedlie abused to superstition and idolatry; is it therefore
unlawful for Christians to use them, and to improoue them to a good end? only
because they were ordained and abused by them? What were this else but to take
away the use of all things whatsoever? because they have either been invented
and ordained by heathen men; or else abused by wicked and ungodly men. The
captive ^oman that was taken in war, Deuteronomy. 21.
though otherwise an Infidel, her hair being ^horne and her nails being
pared, night be married to an Israelitie. Deu. 21. so also things profaned and
abused, being afterward corrected and reformed, may be employed to a more holy
and sacred use. In the sixth of Joshua, when the City of Jericho was destroyed,
God gave a commandment, that all the gold, silver, vessels of brass and iron
should be consecrated and brought into the treasury of God; showing most
plainly that things invented by heathen and abused by idolaters, may be
converted to the service of God and the use and benefit of the Church. So then
let it be granted that Mercury invented music: may not David therefore play
upon a harp and praise God with an instrument of ten strings? Say that
Aesculapus invented Physic, may not therefore Esaias prescribe Ezechias a
medicine for his sore? Put the case that Minerua inverted navigations: may not
therefore Jonas and Paul sail in ships? To be short, let idolaters be
inuenters of all kind of vtensils and household stuff: yet you shall find
Christ himself sleeping upon a pillow, using a basin to wash his disciples
feet, and girding himself with a linen garment, Linteo circilstringitur,
propria Osyridis vest. Tertul. de Cor. militis
which Tertullian calls a garment proper and belonging to Osyris. The
Egyptians jewels and their raiment will serve to put upon the Israelits. Exodus
3.22. and the wood of the groves where was the worship of strange Gods, will
serve for sacrifices and burnt offerings to worship the true and everliving
God. When things abused to idolatry are converted to Gods honor, it fares
with them (says S. Aug. Publicolae. ep. 154.
Austen) as it does with men themselves; who are converted and changed, being
of wicked and profane men, made holy and devout Christians: which as we do
greatly praise and commend, so we cannot justly dispraise nor condemn the
other. Lastly, were the ceremonies and orders of our Church impious and
superstitious, is it likely that those holy and godly Martyrs would have used
and observed them, who laid down their lives rather then they would be defiled
with popish superstition and idolatry? unless perhaps we think our selves
to be of more wisdom and of better judgment then they were: which must
needs be a sign of great arrogancy, in being wise in our own conceit, and
in preferring our selves before others. Therefore, so far ought we to be
from dishonouring and disgracing these rites and Ceremonies, and forsaking our
ministry in a dislike, and detestation of them, that we ought most willingly
to subscribe and to conform our selves unto them; and to praise and bless
God, Col. 25
not only for the faith, but also for the order that is among us, as the
Queen of Sheba blessed God for the decent order and government which she
beheld in Salomons house. 1. Kin. 10.11


The last thing to be considered, is the end of his oblation: which besides the
testifying of his thankfulness to God; is a particular respect concerning the
priests, that it might be in testimoniu^ for a witness unto the^, that if they
should out of their malice unto Christ, cauil about his cleansing, they might be
convicted and condemned by the gift which they received, as from one that was
made clean: for else, why did they take his offering, unless he were soundly
and perfectly healed of his disease? God deals with wicked and malicious men,
as Judges do with malefactors, who use to proceed upon witness and evidence
that is against them; that if they shall afterward cavil and quarrel about
the fact, they may be (...) without all excuse, being convicted by the
testimony and evidence that is against them.

Hence it was, that Aarons rod was kept in the Tabernacle for a witness
against the Jews, of their rebellion. Number. 17.10
Numb. 17. That the tables of stone written with Gods own finger, Heb. 9.4
Psalm. 81.5.
and called the tables of the testimony, were kept in the Ark for a testimony
of their disobedience, Psalm. 81. and that the Gospel was preached throughout
the whole world, to be a witness of the infidelity of all that did not
believe it. The Angels of God that stand round about us, our hearts and
consciences that are within us, and all the creatures in the World that are
without us, will be ready to bear record and witness of us. Iam. 5.3
The rich man's gold and the rust of it will be a witness of his
covetousness: Hab. 2.11.
the stone out of the wall, and the beam out of the timber, Ecc. 10.20.
shall be a witness of his cruelty: the fowls of heaven, and the birds of
the air will be witnesses of his impiety and of his blasphemy.

Wherefore, seeing we are compassed with a cloud of so many witnesses, Heb.
12.1.
as the Apostle speaks in another case, let us cast off every thing that
presses down, and the sin that hangs so fast on; let us be careful to
keep not only our hearts, Prou. 4.23
but our tongues and our hands with all diligence, keeping (as it were) a
continual watch amidst our thoughts, our words and our deeds; least otherwise
those that be present to behold us, be witnesses against us to convince and
condemn us. Those that have a great many eyes upon them to observe and note
all their words and deeds, are very wary and circumspect, that no indecent,
nor unseemly thing pass and escape from them: so ought we to be every way
as careful, and as provident; having so many to bear witness and record of
us. It was Seneca his counsel to his friend Lucilius, that whenever he went
about to do any thing, he should imagine Cato or Scipio, or some other
worthy Roman to be in presence; which as he thought, would make him the more
careful and circumspecte in all things: so ought we, whenever we go about
any thing, to consider, that God his holy Angels and his creatures are
present to bear witness of us; and if any of these should fail, yet our
own conscience never fails to be present, going every where with us, and
carrying about that with it, Conscientia est inseparabilis gloria vel confusio
vniuscuiusque pro qualitate depositi. Bern. de inter. domo cap. 1.
which it has received to keep; being every where unto us, either an
inseparable glory to excuse and to save us, or an inseparable confusion to
accuse and condemn us. In regard whereof, we ought all of us to have grace, as
the Apostle says, so to serve God and to please him with fear and reverence,
that we need not to fear any witnesses, that shall at any time rise up
against us; but contrariwise, 2. Cor. 1.12
having the testimony and witness of our conscience, that in simplicity and
godly pureness, we have had our conversation in the World, and giving an
outward testimony and witness unto the World, of our faith and good works
by the fruits thereof, we may receive both the inward testimomonie of the
spirit to bear witness with our spirits that we are the sons Romans 8.16
of God, and the outward testimony of God the Father, and of his son Jesus
Christ, saying unto us, Mat. 25.23
Euge bone serve and fidelis, It is well done good and faithful servant, thou
have been faithful in a little, I will make thee ruler over much, enter into
thy Masters joy.

To which words I would here add a blessing and a thanksgiving, Scripturae
scrutandae sunt, nec earum superficie debemus esse contenti, quae ita
modificatae sunt vt altius se penetrari velint. Aug. Hesich. ep. 80
to conclude and shut up all as the manner is; but that Saint Austen tells me
that the Scriptures are to be searched and to be ransacked: and that we ought
not to content our selves with the superficies, and outside of them, but that
we are to penetrate into the very bowelles of them. Omnia opera curationum
Christi habe^t in se mysteria dispositionum Dei absconditarum. Chrysostom. in Mat.
And Saint Chrysostom more particularly says, that all the works of Christ's
healing and curing do contain in them certain mysteries of the hidden and
secret dispositions of God. Which I know not how to open and to make manifest,
unless the healing of this Leper does represent and shadow out the healing of
a sinner, and the curing of sin, which is as it were a leprosy of the soul.
Which if it does (as very well it may do) then ought we all of us to come
unto Christ with the Leper, and to fall down before him, and humbly desire him
to heal our souls, and to cleanse us from al our sins; he being the only
Physicion and the physic to heal us withal; whose blood does both purge our
consciences and cleanse us from all our sins. Heb. 9.14
Which desire of ours, he is both able in regard of his power, and willing in
regard of his goodness, Psalm. 147.18
to grant and perform; being ready both to send out his word to heal us with
it, and to stretch out his hand, and to sprinkle his most precious blood upon
us to cleanse us with it: Heb. 12.24
the virtue and efficacy whereof is such, that he does even immediately, and
as it were in a moment, cleanse us from all our sins, and heal us of all our
iniquities. Whereof when we are cured, let us not tell it unto every one, by
bragging and boasting of it, as if we were healed by our own power and
godliness: Act. 3.1^
but let us ascribe all the praise and glory unto God for it, presenting our
selves unto Christ Jesus our high Priest, as unto our heavenly Physicion, Heb.
9.12
who by his own blood entered into the holy place to sanctify us and to
obtain eternal redemption for us; Romans 12.1
offering up our souls and bodies a living sacrifice holy and acceptable unto
him; as it were two Pigeons, or a pair of Turtle-doues, for a gift and a
testimony of our thankfulness unto him: that so being judged and pronounced
clean and pure from all leprosy of sin, we may (maugre the malice of
Satan) be received into the society and company of the Saints in the holy
City, Apoc. 4.13
the heavenly JERUSALEM, there to sing Halleluiah, and to give praise and
honor and glory to him that sits upon the throne and to the LAMB for
evermore. Which he vouchsafe to grant unto us, of his infinite goodness and
mercy toward us, and for the inestimable price and merit of his own blood,
wherewith he has purchased us and washed us from all our sins, and obtained
eternal redemption and salvation for us. To whom with the Father and the holy
Spirit, three persons and one God, be ascribed all honor and glory, praise
and dominion, both now and for ever.

Amen.
FINIS.
Faults escaped in the Printing.
Page 122. line 1. Read why weak and base, and not etc. Page 229. line 4. for
Mediolanus, Read Mediolanum.

