A LETTER Written by a French Catholic gentleman, to the Masters at Sorbonne.

CONCERNING the late victories obtained by the King of Navarre, as well against
the Duke of Ioyeuse at Coutras upon Tuesday the twentieth of October. 1587. as
else where.

LONDON Printed by John Wolf for Edward Aggas, and are to be sold at his shope
at the West end of Paul's. 1588.

A LETTER WRITten by a French Catholic gentleman, to the masters of Sorbonne
at Paris: Concerning the late victories obtained by the king of Navarre as well
against the Duke of Ioyeuse at Coutras upon tuesday the twentieth of October.
1587. as else where.
MY masters, I shall not be, as I think, the first Reporter of the lamentable
news of the death of the Duke of Ioyeuse, and the overthrow of his whole
Army: and so consequently may rejoice that I shall not be the author of your
heaviness, albeit I will not nevertheless fail in the discharge of my
duty, neither be the last that shall give you advice upon so strange an
accident, to the end to testify unto you, that for my own part I bewail this
public calamity, howbeit, not so as to despair of whatsoever this heavy day
has left us, but rather to seek after the most firm and steadfast kind of
hope, that we may and ought to conceive, to the end to bring forth the peace
of this miserable realm. In as much therefore as your selves are the most
notable company among whom the principal point of the estate, namely
religion, is entreated upon, I do direct my self especially to you, to the
end you may judge of my zeal, and if any profit may be taken thereof, you may
impart the same to those that still harken after you for the understanding of
their salvation: also that it may be the foundation whereupon again to build
up our ruins to the common relief of the people, and the discharge of your
consciences. But before I come to these remedies, I will lay open unto you the
new wounds that we have received in the late battle of Coutras the twentieth
of this month by the King of Navarre, with the assistance of the Lords the
prince of Conde, the Earl of Soissons, the Lord of Turenne, Trimouille, and
other Lords and gentlemen their partakers. The said King being returned from
Monsoreau where he had happily soiorned for the space of fifteen days or more
after the overthrow of the troops of the late D. of Ioyeuse, and the Marquess
of Renel as they retired from their voyage of Poictou, also having through the
conduct of the L. of Turenne seized upon the rich carriages of the D. of
Mercoeur near to Saumeur, who was coming out of his government of Bretagne to
join with his brother in law, the said D. of Ioyeuse yet being at Tours, and
withal had received the said L. Earl of Soissons with all his troops: after
(I say) that the said king was thus upon his return and led had his army into
Sainctonge, he took two Cannons from Rochell, and in the end determined to
march into Gascogne as well for the reenforcing of his troops, as to join
with his foreign power upon the borders of those provinces that favored him.
Now because, as you know, that that was the only thing which the K. did most
fear, he gave charge to the said D. of Ioyeuse to stop this his course by
all means possible, yea if all other opportunities failed, not to spare the
extremity of the battle, which he undertook to perform, and to the same
end marched with those troops which he had before, together with the other
that his majesty had newly granted him, as well for the better strengthening,
as to banish from him all fear of those that the K. of Navarre did lead. The
ground of this enterprise consisted in the passage over the rivers of Droune
and L'Isle, and the most diligent to feaze thereon was to prescribe law to the
more slothful. In respect hereof the said D. of Ioyeuse after he had a while
at the heels followed and costed the K. of Navarre his army, in the end fet
forward toward Roche-Chalays, entending according to the good advise given
him by the L. Marshal of Matignon to seize upon Coutras, which was the place of
most importance, in respect of the situation so favorable to the passage over
Droun, but he lost his time by reason that as his light horsemen were arrived
and taking their lodgings, the K. of Nauarres being the stronger came upon
them, and became masters thereof on Monday night the nyntenth of October. Thus
besides the said kings diligence which is the most necessary part in
warrelike attempts, and the thing that has bred him great credit among his
partakers, his force was also prejudicial to ye said D. of Ioyeuse: who
nevertheless being desirous to yield al duties of obedience to his masters
commandments, and imagining that the K. of Navarre being enclosed between the
two rivers, might be easily overcome, (...) the next day to give him batfaile,
and to the same end appointed his whole army their meeting place between
Roche-Chalays and Coutras, whither he came early in the morning, at leisure
and without any impeachment of the said kings troops, and took his battle
ground within half a league of Coutras to his most advantage possible. The K.
of Navarre as I was informed, having the first advertisement thereof early
enough in the morning, stayed until he had also the second yea and the third
before he would once stir, albeit he made no less show to be desirous of
battle than our selves: And in deed he had given us occasion twice before,
which we found not to he for our advantage. Howbeit, so soon as the said K.
was by these diverse reports assures thereof, he took horse, and departing
from Coutras, went to meet the said D. of Ioyeuse, set his army in hattaile
array, and in the mean time commanded the L. of Clermont master of his
ordinance to pass it over unto his side of the river, which he cold not do
the day before. Then having brought it into the fore front, he so ordered it
that without anoying any of his own part, about eight of the clock it played
for eight or nine belees very conveniently upon the first squadron of our
horsemen, and so carried away a great number of our gentlemen, which made the
rest to resolve rather to go to ye charge, then so miserably to dye without
any fight. Thus about nine of the clock our light horsemen with four,
hundredth horse gave upon the K. of Nauarres, which after some blows, was in
the end shaken and our men made glass windows therein: the rest of the said
kings army consisted of four square battles, whereof that of the L. of
Turenne was smelt to by the L. of Lauerdine. The other three wherein were the
three princes of the blood, keeping their standing did behold the joining, and
by and by after the D. of Ioyeuse marched furiously to the charge for the
general conflict, whereto these three Princes each in the face of his squadron
came a soft pace, only upon the trot as close and with as good assurance as
ever I see me^ of war martch. When they came to handy blows, our men suddenly
turned their backs, whether it were that the spears stopped them at the
strait of the conflict, or that we were reencountered somewhat rudely. Finally,
the fight was sharp and so violent that it continued the less while, and as
wars are uncertain, the whole victory remained with the king of Navarre.
And it is a marvelous matter that by ten of the clock never a one of our men
stood to the sight, neither so much as appeared in the field, which lay covered
with a great number of the dead, and those very notable. Such as escaped the
extremity of the weapone, either fled with shame, or fell into their enemies
hands, some wounded and some not, whereas in so notable an overthrow there
were lost on the king of Nauars part very few, and not so much as any one of
name or commandment: but of our part all the Captains were either wounded or
slain or taken, bestoos the D. of Ioyense the General, whose only love might
suffice to make us earnestly to lament, as for such a mishap as has stricken a
shrewde blow at such of our affairs as were ordered and set up again by the
king under the conduct of his fortune. Howbeit it is also replemished to
infinite other our losses, whereby we have the less means left to help us to
rise again from so miserable a fall. I will name unto you the most notable of
those ye I can remember that are slain, to the end that considering of them,
you may the better contemplate this mishappe which shall peradventure be but
the way to many more whereunto we do run, if God withhold us not.

Amongst our dead there are besides the D. of Ioyeuse, the L. of Saint Savior
his brother, the L. of Bressay who carried the white Cornet. The L. of Ronsay
the younger Pienne Guidon to the said D. of Ioyeuse. The Earls of Suze,
Gouuelo, and Aubigeou, the L. of Fumell, the L. of Neufuy the elder of
Perigord, Croyset son to the L. of Rochfort, the L. of Gurat Cornet of
Maumont, The L. of S. Fort Guidon to the L. of S. Luc. The L. of Vaux
Lieutenant to the L. of Bellegarde. The L. of Montignyes Ensign, Tiercelin
master of the field, Chenet his chief Captain, Vallade one of his Captains,
Captain Baccullard, young Campels, who carried a cloth. The L. of Pluuault and
Brangerie, al Officers in our army. More there were whom I cannot well call to
mind: but my masters, those were brave Gentlemen, those were the kings good
servants: these were the good pillars of our country, whom we have lost in
this battle, whose death does also make our lives so wretched, that
undoubtedly they are happier than we that breath foorch this air that is
infectes with our miseries. I think that they whom this loss does most
concern, should also be most fouthed with the grief that they ought to conceive
thereof: and your selves do I accoumpt so affectionate to the benefit of your
country that for your parts you will power forth a whole river of tears which
will not be dried up a great while, considering that the loss which you
receive do stretch so far, and spreads farther than the most passionate
can well imagine. We do well know what assurance we had conceived, that all
should have succeeded otherwise to us then it has done, whereby we are to be
the more sorry because we were deceived. And albeit Gods will was apparent
therein, also that it were our parts rather to yield thereto than to murmr
against it, yet can I not but feel that such was the pleasure of God, to the
end sharply to punish us for reposing more trust in our fleshly arm then in
his inightie power, yea and which is more, because we have fought and never
asked counsel at the mouth of the Lord. Would you have any more notable
testimonies to confirm my saying, then the death of this brave nobility? The
same is but too sufficient to wrest from you this belief: and if you do but
behold the rest that remains captive with the king of Navarre, you shall as a
man would say see our sorrow more lively, as if their captivity should
vnchaine those mischiefs which come in post to our oppression. The most
notable of them will I also name unto you. There is the L. of Bellegarde,
Governor of Xantonge and Angoumois, who was wounded, taken and since deceased.
The L. of S. Luc, Governor of Brouages and of the Isles of Xantonge taken. The
Marquess of Piennes: The Earl of Monsoreau wounded and taken. The L. of
Sansac taken. The L. of Cypierre, The L. of Saultray of the house of Lude. The
L. of Montigny Captain of the kings gate. The L. of Ville Comblin Lieutenant
to the L. of Souuray. The L. of Castle Renaud Guidon to the L. of Sansac. The
L. of Maumo^t Captain of the light Horse. The L. of Patriere Guidon to the L.
of Lauerdin. The L. of Old Castle. The L. Chastelu. The L. of Lauuerdiere
Guidon to the L. of Suze. All these were Captains and men of authority, and so
acknowledged of all, among when I reckon not the Captains of the foolemen,
neither many other private Gentlemen that had no charge, and are either taken,
wounded or slain. As for those that yet live, it may be ye shall hereafter
have some comfort of them, as hoping they may return into the kings service:
but I do much fear their coming to the speech of ye king of Nauar, whose
particular servants they all, or the most of them, have long been, neither did
ever bear arms against him, but against their wills: such at the least are
their ordinary protestations, which in effect they have often confirmed. Yea
did they bear but one spark of good affection to the said king of Navarre, he
is skillful enough thereof to kindle a whole flame: so shall he win from us
these relikes of our ruins, where with to prevail against our selves, if not
directly against us, yet indirectly for him self, but not for us. For you know
what a voice is generally given out of his wonderful grace in winning men's
minds and quenching the malice of his enemies, in case he can but once come to
let them taste of his courtesy. Ye may believe that most of these our masters
being so much bound unto him, will hereafter continue their bonds, also that
there be but few amongst them to whom the courtesies of this Prince may not
prescribe whatsoever laws he lift. In the mean time he shall have his passage
free: For as for the L. Marshall of Matignon, how good a servant so ever he be
to the king, he is tied to Gascogne: and besides his forces are not sufficient
to stop the said king from executing whatsoever his purposes as easily as he
would wish, neither can he at this day desire or put in execution any thing
whatsoever with greater honor, having obtained such a brave victory against
us, which is perfect in all notable parts. The death and imprisonment of all
the chief Captains, except the L. of Lauerdin who seeing our conflict a far
off, went to save him self and few others, the winning of the field, the
taking of the artillery, the burning of our armies lodgings, the chase pursued
four leagues, and a thousand other particularities which I here omit.
Concerning the king of Navarre, I have heard credibly reported that he was one
of the sharpest in fight, and buckled earnestly, yea so far forth as by
force to carry away Chasteau-renauds Cornet, also to have received a taint in
the neck with a spear and other blows that bruised his hands and face. To be
brief, that he showed himself a Captain in ordering his battles and a
soldier in fight. As for the Prince of Conde that he fought valiantly and had
one horse killed under him, also that being horsed again he took the L. of S.
Luc prisoner who had before borne him down. That the Earl of Soisons in this
first reencounter showed so good proof of his courage that he greatly
contented his partakers and gave them good hope of himself, for he joined
earnestly, and with his own hands took the Marquess of Piennes prisoner, so
as these three Princes fighting with their enemies, fought so reciprocally
whose virtue should best appear, that they have no cause one to envy an other,
since they all showed all duty according as the occurrences ministered
occasion, Neither is it to be doubted, but these so assured Captains did
greatly assure their members, among whom the L. of Turenne also had his horse
slain in the battle and entered very far, as also did the L. of Trimouille
who was noted of great courage and assurance in the front of his light
horsemen. Finally that there was no troop in all their army but had a share in
the glory of our overthrow. Herein have we cause to be sorry, since the hurt
that we do to them do but provoke our men, and that either early or late they
will find means to requite us: howbeit at this time it is much more then a
requital, neither is there any comparison between all the harm that we have
done them, yea albeit you set together all that have happened since the
beginning of the troubles, and the same which we have received in this
battle. One only short day has recompe^ced all that they have lost in two
years and a half, which is the time since the league was revealed, and as
far as I see, we are yet far in their debts. We have seen all the mighty
armies which the king has sent out of all ye provinces of the realm to make
an end. But show me now what fruit has come of them? The taking of towns?
we have taken none but such as they made no great account to keep, and all
but loures which were never, as a man should say, of any name, but through
mishap. And how have we gotten them? with large time, excessive expenses, and a
world of labor and policy, which heretofore would not have been practiced at
the siege of Metz, S. Quintins, and other good Towns in our days. What have
we gained? we have taken nothing by assault, and all our sieges have ended by
profitable and honorable composition for the besieged. Neither have our sieges
any whit diminished their number, since the laws of war have freed them from
the fury of our weapons. And which is worse, Castillon the Duke of Mayns
proudest trophee, the taking whereof cost six weeks work and six hundred
thousand francks has the Lord of Turenne recovered in one hour, and without
any expense. The king of Navarre has in less then three weeks taken
Tallemo^t, S. Messan, Fontenay, Maillezay, Mauleon, and five or six good
Castles more. The said D. of Ioyeuse came to recover these losses, but he
spent most of his time in preparatiues, and in the end at the siege of S.
Maissa^ was driven to discharge 113. Cannon shot, against ye which it had not
cost the said* king two hundredth Harquebuze shot: and had it not been for the
overthrow that the said D. of Ioyeuse gave to the Mothe of his two regiments of
Collters and Clounes, together with the controversies among the besieged, we
had not had it so soon or so easily. As for Maillezay which the said Duke of
Ioyeuse also took, he did rather suprize then take it, besides that the small
number of soldiers therein feared his purposes. But Fontenay was of over hard
digestion, and the Catholic forces gave place to the Protestants, of whom we
made so small account. And whereas there died a good number of them, as could
not be otherwise chosen, so if we peruse the rowles of our army, we shall find,
ye the rule of substraction may seem sufficient to find out our accounts. The
sword, the bad weather, poverty, pestilence or other diseases have taken away
so many that we have but few left to habandon to the like mishappes: and the
woorst is, we never seek to spare, but rather do seem to practice this
detestable saying: Let our friends perish, so as our enemies may perish also.
Moreover, wherein are their affairs empaired? We have kept the field, but
how? For the most part in such seasons as the retraite into the Towns had
been more fit and safe against the injuries of wind and snow: in such a season
I say, as albeit they had been as well able to have kept the field as we, yet
had it been wisdom to to habandon it unto us, so to suffer us to consume our
selves, with a million of inconveniences which fought against us, although they
meddle not at all. Likewise when the time favored our voyages, besides that
the same was but over short, we have found such resista^ce in them, and they
have given us so small hold, that our selves have beaten our selves with our
own pains, and have reaped but the dishonor of doing nothing, and blame for
working too much mischief: and to be brief, all our fires are in the end
converted into smoke which has choked us. The raising up of our bucklers were
haughty, but when we came to the matter and to take hold, we brought forth
nothing but confusion and disorder, wherein the king of Nauarres part has
been rather vpheld then shaken, so as we seem to be but the winds which
break upon their constancy or magnanimity. Twenty years ago and more might
I have learned how hard a matter it was utterly to overthrow him: but I never
thought it impossible until these our last trials, wherein he has taught us
that he either is a greater one then we, or else that he has more supporters
then we have force: or both. I will not be ashamed to confess that at the
beginning of these troubles our great preparatiues for war against him did make
me steadfastly to believe that he could have no means to keep himself from us,
whereupon my self as well as many other did according to my duty bring in
whatsoever I was able together with my own person: and notwithstanding all our
delays and the lingering of our purposes, yet did I not nevertheless despair
of good success: but now am I forced to pluck my pin from the stake, and
earnestly to open mine eyes to perceive the causes of our misfortune, together
with the necessity of a farther cause of mischief, whereof this late one is
but the first, or at the least the most apparent beginning. Not my masters
that I will resemble those fowls which so soon as cold weather comes on
do habandon every climate, by any rash alteration of my will which so long
and resolutely I have always kept. For I protest, that of all the reasons that
may be imagined in this novelty I do admit only the same which sets
before me the preservation of that estate, for the which so far I am from all
fear of the loss of my first pretense, that I wish rather to lose my self:
and in the name of God do exhort you so well to try my advice, that you may
allow thereof, and ensuing the same, show so good an example to the rest of
France, that since your selves are the light that should lighten us, this estate
may also by your means recover her ancient brightness, and this oppressed
people perfect relief from all their afflictions.

To enter therefore into the matter, my self have always been through zeal
to religion thrust for ward, and whenever there fell out any speech of the
defense thereof, I came as hotely as might be desired. Now this religion I
always held in such sort as I received of my predecessors, and as I account it
true salvation of my soul, I preferred it before all other whatsoever worldly
considerations. Wherein I was confirmed not only by this domestical example,
but also by that doctrine which your selves have always delivered unto us,
referring all that possibly I might unto ye authority which long you have
obtained and kept among our nation. I will not be ashamed to say that in this
case I have willingly reposed my self upon you, as imagining that you would
not damme your selves in sport, as also that in so good company I could not do
amiss. In consideration whereof I never troubled my self much about the search
into the depth of these mysteries and difficulties wherein your school is as
it were plunged, leaving to you the arguing in words, and reserving to my self
the decisions in action, wherewith as need required, to yield authority to
your decrees, and for my part stoutly to oppose my self against all those that
would withstand you, howbeit under the authority of the soneraigne
magistrate, to whom I never doubted of my due obedience. Hereupon I always
supposed that our war was not lawful against al such as shot against you and
sought to subvert your doctrine, accounting them very heretics and Apostataes
from the Church, with whom we were to strive even for life, considering that
their opinions did for the most part kill us, by rauishing from us through
their frowardness, that which I supposed you had imparted unto us in sincere
and faithful consciences. For this which I have often heard you say, did I take
for an infalible principle: that is to say, That our Church can not err, also,
that to accuse you of error, was such an error as deserved to be pursued with
fire and sword. Thus was I never of any other mind, but that we had a most
firm and more than necessary foundation every way to persecute those whom men
term Protestants. So presumpteous a title could not I like of: and as in
these latter ages, Gods spirit threatens us with sundry seducers, so have I
always accounted these men to be, whereupon I have detested their companies:
so far have I been from sparing, whatsoever I could possibly do, to use
against them all rigors whereby to root them out. For this cause do I make
great account of the devotion which diverse of our kings have at sundry times
showed. But seeing that the more we strive, the more this people increase: the
large expertence of these affairs makes me the more stacke in these matters,
and their late victory which God has given them, causes me to imagine that
he does wholly favor their cause, also that whatsoever crosses he does by our
hands lay upon them, he does nevertheless reserve unto them a happy and a
comfortable end. Disorder (says a certain ancient) breeds good decrees,
and the reiteration of our transgressions when we find them do work us, to
our knowledge, wisdom: yea the apprentiship of our own losses is more strong
and forceable then that which proceeds of others harms.

I do therefore willingly suffer my self to be carried away with that whose
effects do teach me to proceed further, not that I will search out all the
contentious points between the one and the other: for as yet I have not taken
so much pains: but only in respect of the proceedings used against their
persons and goods. First you are all to debate in matter of religion: you
differ in sundry articles, and yet do agree in the ground, which is, one
only Jesus, Christ mediator between God and man, and sole head of the Chruch.
I pray you, is this a matter to be decided by your murders? is it such a
controversy as may be so determined? how can you grant life to his soul,
whose bodily life you have taken away? how can you save those to whom you
grant no time to believe? or how would you have them to believe without
preaching unto? These be the ordinary complaints wherewith they usually
appeal from our pursutes, which notwithstanding they seem just, yet do we
stop our ears against them as against the maremaids song. But why do you
deny them all frienndly conference for the decision of your controversies? I
know you will answer that it is a matter that has already been preferred,
and yet has not profited. But the Lawiers have taught me, that whatsoever has
been fraudulently done, is accounted as won: for in all our assemblies our
proceedings have been imperfect, for proof whereof I refer my self to the
acts of the Council of Trent, and lately to the parley at Poyssy. Concerning
the first, there was never action more impertinent, then that wherein they were
condemned, and yet neither were or could be heard, considering that their
adversaries were also their judges: as also your selves do know, that the
French Church did never in all and through all allow of it, witness the
appeals there against made: albeit I say nothing of the opposition of our
kings, whereby this counsel may not be admitted as irreuocable in France:
otherwise we shall reveal our partiality in ruling their condemnation after
our own fantasies, and not according to the nullitie of the judgment which
undoubtedly is general, until by the reformation of those articles which we
allow not, there can be no fault found therein. For otherwise by taking and
leaving what we list, we should play too open. Such also the like privilege
grows of the same reason, why will you not suffer the professors of the
pretended reformed religion to enjoy the like liberty of judgment as your
selves? As for the parley at Poyssy I remember that the chief controversy
which concerned the sacrament of the altar, was in a manner agreed: also that
looking into our own consciences, we shall find that our own partakers upon
a politic discretion interrupted it, lest the overthrow of that foundation
should have pulled down the whole building. Ever since that time, I imagined
that it was well done to stick to antiquity, but since calling to mind that
the ministers pleaded their cause out of the holy scriptures and the ancient
Doctors conformable thereto, I can not think but that, except in respect of
the time, in case they verify their allegations, they can not be but well
grounded, and contrariwise, that if we speak but of the opinion of our Popes
only, who besides for the most part have not been the honestest men in the
world, we shall lose our cause outright. But when I do more nearely consider
of your selves, I do run into some further mistrust: for can you that
profess the understanding and teaching of the scriptures, want judgment to
comprehend them, or fidelity to deliver them? Shall these reformed persons
have that privilege above you, to whom it has been purchased so long ago?
Are you learned like to those high priests mentioned in the holy scriptures,
among whom Gods law was perished? Will God conceal his mysteries from your
greatness, and reveal them to their baseness? Can you forge unto your selves
any Cabal in lieu of the doctrine of Gods spirit? Have the subtilties of the
serpent made you to rebel against your creator? I dare not imagine thus much
of you, albeit your adversaries do sufficiently cast it in your teeth. But I
could rather wish them to abstain from iniuring of you, and to be content
simply to expound their own sayings, as also that you did the like by them:
howbeit you have grown so far into words with them, that we have been at
handiblowes for your sakes, whereby these braules do seem to be the more
irreconciliable, wherein I said that hitherto we have taken a very wrong
course, in ministering a corsiue to the wound before we tried such suppliant
ointments as might peradventure have yielded some ease. The mischief was but
in breeding, but we through our hasty and headlong proceedings have suddenly
brought it to extremity: so that in lieu of appeasing these troubles of the
Church, we have also brought in the troubles of the Estate; as if our peace
depended only upon confusion: yea we have so shusled the Cards, that we can
not find again the principal. We all have been forced to grow so obstinate
in your obstinacies, that for the preserving of you, some have hazarded, and
others quite lost them selves: for the maintaining of your rents, we have spent
our own: for your amity, we have entered enmity with our own kinsmen: under
the pretense of the honor of God, men have shamefully entreated men: to be
brief, Religion has caused us in the insolences of our wars to tread all
religion under foot: also whereas it had been more meet and profitable
gently to have reduced those that were strayed, to the fold, we have been
their butchers. In lieu of showing the way to those that went amiss, we have
thrust them into the mire: in lieu of presenting Joseph unto Jacob, we have
showed only his garment tainted in blood, whiles him self mourned in the
pit: in lieu of receiving the angels with the conversion of these miserable
persons, we have made them sorrowful through their deaths, nevertheless, God
desires not the death of a sinner, but rather that he may be converted and
live. The holy Ghost speaks of the spiritual death, whereof we are the cause
when we prevent their repentance with their destructions. What profit have you
found in giving us counsel, even from the beginning to take arm against the
pretended reformed? Did you not mean that they should have been rooted out
and we preserved? have ye your desires? Are not you, I pray you, guilty of
the deaths of so many as upon simplicity have followed your counsels? with
what consciences do you stay us to kill others: are not you the executioners
to both parties? see you not that in lieu of diminishing their number you lessen
ours? that we lose as many friends on our own parts as enemies of theirs?
that we can not weaken them without weakening of our selves? what profit is
there in this equality? They render you blow for blow: assault for assault:
battle for battle: victory for victory: and in the end you are always
forced to accept of their conditions of peace: yet is there nothing that can
make us give over. We still play the kites with their bowels, which
nevertheless do daily grow up again: we ordinarily draw away their blood,
which never dries up: and which is worse, we still incur as much loss as we
procure them, and consuming our enemies, do wast our own blood, and yet can
not perceive that you be any whit moved at our miseries, as if our labors were
your rest, and our sorrows your contentation: you laugh when others weep, and
never cease thrusting forward the wheel of these calamities, whereby to assure
your felicity. But I can not find that we have any profit in all this, and I
wonder that our long expense which we have had these twenty or twenty and
five years can not instruct us in our lesson. This is the seventh civil war
that we have leagued against these reformed, and yet we are now to begin.
True it is that we have wun some victories, but all is but vanity: if we have
gotten the field, alas! we have seen it covered likewise with a great part of
our own men: and returning into our tents, we have heard the mournings at our
own families. At our departure thence, what have we done but made war to the
end to purchase peace? what is become of all our purposes to root out this
people whom we have found so resolute in their defense? we have returned
thence into our closets then with shame and misfortune: then have we sodden
them again, but they that have endeavored to digest them, have found them to
be but fish. And yet are we so far bewitched, as among all these diseases
to think that we be in health: still there are some firebrands ready to
kindle our dissentions, and they that should cast on water, do pour on oil,
brimstone, and pitch, least the fire should go out. When I examine all these
proceedings, I leave to the persecuted, and in my doubt of religion, I do the
more favor their cause because of the only token of persecution. Thus have I
learned to judge by a place that lately I read in S. Hierom heretofore, one of
the famous priests of the Romish Church. He (says he) that is pursued, does
imitate Christ, but he that pursues or persecuteth is Antichrist. Not that I
mean to justify all those heretics whom our kings have suppressed, as the
Goths who were Arrians, and of late the Anabaptists, for they were monsters,
of whom the first subverted the grounds of our salvation, namely the divinity
of Jesus: an intolerable case among Christians, and yet the war that has
been leauied against them, had other foundations than religion. The
Anabaptists besides their apparent errors in religion did also pervert the
right of magistrates, and both the one and the other were by one consent
condemned even in the most reformed Churches. As for the Albigeois following
such ancient records as I have found contrary to the writings of our
Historiographers, I fear they were oppressed rather upon stomach then
equity. But I will leave those passed examples and come only to the reason of
things present. I could well like to have our Church purged from heresies and
heretics: but I must withal mistike the polluting of it with our own blood:
neither can I think these so violent means to be either lawful or
sufficient. Jesus Christ took a whippe to drive the money chaungers out of the
temple, but we are far enough from doing the like. For those men did not
falsify the Law, or the Prophets: but very unfitly, they made the house of
God which was ordained only for prayer, their market place. They did abuse the
holy place, with profane trafike, and so consequently this punishment of Jesus
Christ was but politic. Considering that in the mean time he was ordinarily
conversant among ye priests, Scribes, and Pharisees, entering and disputing in
their Sinagogues, and yet never laying hand upon them, albeit they were the
very falsifiers of the doctrine of Moses and the Prophecies of his own coming.
Our savior Christ's kingdom is not of this world: the weapon wherewith he
fights with his enemies, are spiritual: neither is his salvation purchased
by man's arm: how much more necessary then were it to defend religion by the
true understanding of the scriptures, by reformation of our lives, by prayers
and holy devotion to the service of God, by teaching the ignorant, setting
reasons against opinions, and antiquity against novelty: and to be brief, by
hearkening to the voice of our shepeheard, in lieu of those who to the end to
bewitch us with their dreams do shroude them selves under that title? This is
the cause, why from henceforth I do protest to depart from these cruelties
which are but too ordinary among us, and to beg pardon of the God of mercy,
whom I beseech with the truth of his word to shine into the bottomless gulses
of my ignorance, to the end that leaning no longer to the outward show of men,
I may behold the righteousness of this cause, for the which these poor reformed
persons do so long and so constantly abide whatsoever the torments to them
afforde: notwithstanding all our torments, they shake not, and that is it that
shakes me, yea and I wonder that the loss of their goods, makes them not to
abandon their religion. Their benefit must be very great, since so many
calamities can not make them to give it over: and we may well say, that they
have a very bright and large knowledge, in that notwithstanding whatsoever
hope of domestical ease we propound, they can never mistake. I see them lurk
in every place, deprived of their rents, and beseeged with a thousand
necessities, and yet can never be banished their assemblies and patient bearing
of their opressions. Surely they are not so senseless as upon pleasure to
suffer so many inconveniences, so that of necessity they must be invited and
strengthened by some stronger matter then the frailty of this world. Willingly
could I join with Gamaliel, and say, That if this reformed religion be of God,
it is in vain for man to labor to destroy it, if it be not of him, it will
vanish of it self. Howbeit, I seek not to take the sword from the magistrate,
but gladly I would beat judgment into his head, whereby he might discern the
bonds of his duty: for it is not enough to do a man's duty, but he must do
it conveniently, according to the circumstances of time, place and persons
which are the ordinary rules of our actions. Extreme law is extreme injury,
say the lawers, and that upon good reason. Nothing can be more just then to
punish the rebels of a common wealth, as men guilty of treason: but it may so
happen that this justice may be pernicious, and as a man may say, unjust. If
the whole body of a town or province should rise against their Sovereign,
yet if they should fall again into his hands, he ought to prefer the
conservation of so many persons before their destruction, because of the great
benefit that would ensue thereof, namely the preservation of one portion of his
realm, as lately did the L. Constable at Bordeaux, and the Roman Senate many
times with the peoples mutinies: whereas contrary wise the violences of Silla
and Marius who put their fellow citizens even by thousands to the sword, were
detestable and almost unworthy to be spoken off. When the mischief is so
great as it can not be cured without evident danger, it is better to tolerate
it in the weak part, than to lose all: as it happens to those, of whom when
the palsy has taken hold of half the body, no wise physician will counsel
to divide it from the other half that is yet in health. Now if this
consideration may take place in all diseases simply, much more then in such as
are of long continuance, and lightly more incurable then the later: even so
then when one part of a state is by whatsoever means divided from the other,
we must be very wary of making them to meet, especially when such means
brings now utter confusion to the whole body, and that the infected parts
be noble and essential: for in a mischief, in a manner universal, tolleration
in it self is far more necessary then the trial of the utter rooting of it
out when it passes our strength, and that there is so great equality that the
combat ought still to be in doubt. And such are those which we term necessary
evils, which being preserved, do also preserve the subject whereto they are
adjoined, and ought as a man should say, to be more curiously entreated then
health it self. Howbeit this similitude may in one respect be maimed: for such
an inconvenience may grow in a state, that it will be most necessary to oppose
the whole for the whole, and not before trial of the gentle and most loving
means. And in a monarchy we must adventure eue^ the crown and scepter against
him that aduentureth wrongfully to take it away. And why? because that every
defensive war is most lawful, and especially when your whole state is called
into question. Yea, which is more, you are by nature bound thereto, and in case
you be retchlesse therein, you do inwardly betraie your country. The like is
it in all matters whereupon depends your authority, together with the
preservation of your rightes, which ought to be inviolable. It is therefore the
duty of every sovereign magistrate diligently to watch, and upon necessity
stoutly to employ himself. But so long as the state is not touched, there can
be no cause sufficient to set the Monarke against his subjects, so far must
he be from shrowding himself with the veil of religion to oppress his
realm, notwithstanding whatsoever the diversities thereof, especially if the
number of the contrary party be innumerable, also that tolleration may be a
manifest occasion of rest. Wherefore albeit these pretended reformed, were the
most damnable heretics in the world, yet considering the multitude of them,
the good Towns, and almost all the good provinces which they enjoy, with the
mighty and valiant Captains that support them, it were but in vain for us to
enterprise to assail them, from who^ we can bring nothing but the tokens of
their stomachs, notwithstanding whatsoever foreign succor we have had to
support us, and that they have hitherto resisted us with the faction only that
they have in France. So far shall we be from doing them any harm at all, if
they get their foreign help. Besides this, we cannot well cast them off from
amongst us without extreme inhumanitie: for, for the most part they be
conjoined unto us by consanguinitie, and all generally by like participation of
one self country. Far are we from conforming our selves to the Israelites,
who by a certain just permission of God suffered the Iebusites to dwell in
Jerusalem: albeit the proportion between us and the reformed, were without
comparison greater then between them: either to the great Emperor Theodosius,
who as witness Epiphanius and Tertullian, Doctors of the Church and men
worthy credit, during his Empire tolerated an hundred sects, but
especially the Arrians, whom three or four Emperors before him had favored,
who were founded both by prescription of time, and by eight Councels which had
confirmed their heresy after the same of Nice, and namely the Council of
Arimini, where sixty Bishops maintained Arrianisme, and only three persons
stuck to the truth: and yet Theodosius himself perseuered constantly in true
religion, wherein he caused his children to be instructed, and so did more
weaken Arrianisme then he could have done by any violence of decrees, which
he surceased. I will not bring in for example the Turk, who tollerateth all
kinds of religion, for that I mind to keep the Christians within
Christendom, but surely he does the more steadfastly establish his estate, for
that men being glad of liberty, care not for troubling his estate that
grants them peace. Behold Germany and Poleland: you shall see no nation so
diverse in religion as they, and yet can they join in a common peace, neither
do the division of opinions divide their estates. As for the Catholic king,
he at the first established his Inquisition so surely that these reformed have
had no great opportunity to settle themselves in Spain, but for the low
Countries he cannot yet compass it there, which redoundeth to the great
detriment and confusion of his affairs, how good a face soever he set upon
the matter.

But God has given him that bone to gnaw upon, least he should employ his
great wealth to the destruction of any his mighty neighbor, which with the
incredible treasure that this Flemish war has wasted, he might peradventure
have done: yet do I not think but every of you do abhor the infinite
mischiefs which his obstinacy has bred: for through the natural love that
is rooted in us, we judge more freely of others then of our selves: and in
deed we have taken pity of them: witness the French troops at sundry
times led thither, and even lately the same which the late Monsieur brought,
albeit the whole have had but had success, either for our honors or the
profit of those poor tirannized people. Howbeit, we have always in appearance
showed what grief we have conceived of their desolation: and therefore
notwithstanding whatsoever controversy of religion the Catholic French could
run to their succor, albeit we have converted our fury against the same
faction among us: so diverse have we been to help some, and to oppress other
some, even those to whom we were more bound to show favor and courtesy.
Nevertheless I will not say, that the Catholics tended chiefly to aid the
reformed in Flanders, simply in respect of their religion: but I pretend
thereby only to show that they have all great reason to maintain their fellow
countrymen, who shroud them selves under the same cloak of reformation, as to
succor strangers. Concerning these men, they propound to them selves charity
toward their neighbors, and hatred of the Spaniard with the desire of his
destruction: neither have we feared to make the Catholics protectors of the
Reformed against the Catholics, and yet do we make a conscience to use the
like courtesy to ours against our selves, which we might with much more ease,
profit and commodity, do: considering that thereof do depend the
preservation and eminency of the estate.

Thus much have I thought good now to say unto you concerning this matter,
beseeching you, my masters, to examine my reasons, and thereto to add such
as your discretions are able to perform, whereby we all may procure the
restoring of our affairs. In the name of God do I exhort you to enter into so
deep consideration of our miseries, and the difficulty or rather
impossibility of our purposes, that we may shortly after many storms taste
of some tranquillity, bearing faithful counsels to the king in this matter,
according as by the duty of your functions you are bound. The kingdom of
Christ is destinate to troubles: true: but woe unto those that are the causers
thereof. This sacred shepeheards sheep ought not to become wolves: or they to
whom Christ has commanded peace, to make wars: or Gods children to murder
their brethren.

But I speak only to you my masters, whom I acknowledge to be the principal
court which at this day do minister whatsoever motion you list to our
affairs: consider that it is your parts to become mediators in all these
funeral divisions: to reunite, if not in religion, yet at the least in peace
al these partakers, which are so fleshed one against an other. Hitherto have
you been content to cast your torches between our armies, and suddenly after
the manner of the ancient Priests of Rome, to retire into place of safety. Now
is it time for you to run and quench them: otherwise you shall daily lose your
great supporters, and in the end grow so weak, that they whom you think
weakest shall over rule you: your force depends only upon peace, whereas in
the wars, besides that these reformed do catch from the Clergy infinite
treasures, eue^ those that are left do vanish with the air, and seem only to
fatten up such as under color of favoring of you, do but seek to get their
livings. Many of our Popes have agreed our kings with the Emperors and English
men, when we had but foreign wars: greater reason then have you in these
civil and domestical dissentions, the most intolerable or odious in ye
world, to seek some way so to do. Whosoever shall say to his brother, Racha,
is by God himself accursed, what then shall you he, if not only in words,
but in deed also you build the dissipation of your neighbors? And what
clemency can you look for of God that are so cruel to men? so cruel I say
even to your selves? I will speak boldly unto you my masters. I fear if you
long continue this savage life, it will happen to you as it did to Esau, that
for want of being in Gods house, you will loose your birthright. For so long as
you pursue these reformed, you are as it were in the wilderness, where you
run thirsting after their blood, and the whiles have no care to serve your
heavenly father. So as unless I be deceived, at your return the gate of his
mercy will be shut against you: you shall be known, but not acknowledged to
be his children: and finally these cruelties will inherit cruelty, these
oppressions oppression, and these iniquities vengeance. Beware my masters, for
albeit you deceive men, God sees your hearts, and to him all secrets are open:
suffer not religion to be the belweather unto the subuerters of this state, and
as the shortest follies are the best, so content your selves that you have
brought things into that despair wherein we now see them, and so long as
there is any likelihood of recovery, delate not your ability any longer,
least it fleet away in the violence of our mishaps. As for the league whereto
you have lent the vizard of religion, consider that you cherish ye serpent that
kills you: you have swallowed henbane which makes you to die without
feeling. Remember you not that when it was first revealed, you were not named?
as indeed what religion could they think on that purposed only impiety?
Could they that shot only at your kings person your head and protector, and
his state to order it after their fantasies, call you to warrant their
religion? you yt should preach nothing but obedience to the magistrate?
Hereunto do the blind see as clearly as the day. These shameless persons
thought upon nothing less then religion: The death of the Lords anointed, the
spoil of his crown did they level at: witness their practices against the best
and most Catholic Towns in France, for they never meddled with the reformed or
attempted against any thing to them apperteining. And I marvel how being so
fierce against these partakers of common quiet, as ye were at the beginning you
can now be so drunk with their hypocrisy as ye are, albeit you serve the^
but for a vailet and to say truth, you have but the fools part in the tragedy
that they play upon the Theater of France. What protection needed you when no
man seemed to molest you? who gave them this office over your sovereign?
needed he to be constrained to your defense, which he ever so willingly took
upon him? could not you be defended but by war? had you not for certain years
tried the defense of peace? was it not possible to live in so fair a path
without murdering all the world? All France before the last troubles did we
see in so good peace that the controversies in religion did nothing impeach the
concord of one or other: trafick was grown common again, the ways were free
through all parts of the realm, what loss had you by it: wherein were you
troubled? who molested you, either in your goods or persons? Enjoyed you not
your church rents even among these reformed? did you not eat and drink
together without outrage? who ever complained of this contentation? As for
these reformed, which of them during this time refused the obedience that the
subject owes to his Prince? who have defrauded him of his royal prerogatives?
what taxes or ordinary Subsidies have they rejected? who amongst them followed
not the ordinary course of justice? who conspired against the state? your
selves my masters will confess there was no fault in them. If by observing
their religion they did amiss, it was by ye consent of the king and all the
sovereign Courts of this realm: by the consent, I say, so solemnly sworn:
the infringing whereof seems to mende their cause: not that I will lay the
blame upon the king: but only upon those whose violence have brought him to
this extremity, to falsefie his word for the breaking of their pernicious
drifts, and to turn to these rebels, so to turn the storm that they had
moved against him into the innocence of these peaceable persons. Thus do such
as are in danger of shipwreck, abandon their own goods to relieve their
vessel, albeit this forced will be a will, since the first motions rest in him
that executes it. But I will enter no farther into the considerations which
the king may have had to gainsay himself, and yet will I boldly say, that he
never did thing so preiuditiall to his state, whereof he has most evident
proofs, and I beseech God to be content with that is past, and to withdraw
his hand from of his people, and grant us some release from these oppressions.
As also your selves do in deed know, notwithstanding the pursuit of the
Pensioners of the leagued remaining about his person, what adoo there was to
make his majesty resolve himself thereto. This his clear judgment perceived
the pernicious consequence of assotiation, but he wanted supporters to uphold
himself, considering that the chief Officers of his counsel, who before had
bound their faith to these Princes, never desisted from bending of him that
way, neither have I always been of that mind, but did long persuade my self
that the steadfastness of our affairs consisted in this inconstancy, howbeit
I was forced to be as it were sheitle witted, and by diuorcement from vanity
to marry with reason. For since the king knew well enough that there was no
quarrel but at his estate, he should have made no difficulty to call about
him such as have most interest therein, as the Princes of the blood and their
power, at the least upon extremity, according to their own offers. That was
the way to have suppressed the insolent proceedings of these partakers, who
fish only in puddle water, and use our confusions to their own establishment.
For the people would easily have believed that in truth there was no quarrel
but at the state, if the king had underpropped himself with the pillars of the
state and not been beaten down with the wind of religion, albeit some of ye
princes of his blood do profess no other then himself: also that they which
profess any other, are so affectionate to his service and the service of his
crown, that they would not have been any whit more slack in effect then in
will. Had there not been more appearance that he should have joined with these,
the^ with the leaguers? that is, with his friends then with his enemies? with
ye French then with the Lorrains? with his own blood then with these bastardes?
with the true Officers of his Crown, then with those that have been so
undutiful to him? The Romans always appeased their domestical quarrels, to
agree against those that assailed them, whether the Gauls, the Thuscans, or
the Carthaginians. The like did the Spaniards, when the late king Frances the
first, during their revolt from the Emperor Charles the fifth gat from them the
realm of Navarre. The descent of the English at Newhauen, 1562. bred the
reunion of the Frenchmen, so to return them away: and when we have seen
these monsters of Lorrain waste our country, must we needs join with them to
help to destroy our selves? what is become of that ancient French virtue that
was wont to go to fight with the enemy at his own door, where now we call
him in, we nourish him, we flatter him, and the more harm he does us, the
more we bind our selves to him? This nation which heretofore has triumphed
over the Emperors, the Solimans, the Sarasins, the Goths, and the Normans,
has not now been able to withstand a handful of Guizards, and this scepter
exalted over a million of trophies, stoopeth to these rebels, yea they have
almost trod it under foot. All the honor of valiancy and courage which our
predecessors have in twelve hundredth years achieved and kept, have we
wretchedly lost in one hour, and these Lions that feared no bulls, are now
terrefied only with the crowing of a Cock? Our estate do I now compare to the
Rock mentioned by Pliny, which if ye thrust with your whole body never
shakes, but when you touch it only with one finger, or rather to that stone
which being whole fleeteth upon the water, but broken sinketh. The whole world,
as a man should say, was not able to make France to shake, and now these
Mushromes do quite overthrow it. We altogether have fleeted upon the floodes
of infinite foreign wars, yet our divisions do drown us. This miserable
realm seems to be grown to her last periode, and as that ancient
Astrologer by the noise weules that did gnaw the posts, judged of the
destruction of the house wherein he was, so many we boldly say, that since
these vermin still consumes us, our fall is at hand. What then? must the
French men become strangers one to an other? can we find any souls so
disloiall as to abandon the true stock of S. Jews, to embrace these wrongful
usurpers of their right? Those yt have been our true and lawful Lords these
three hundredth and sixty years, (for so long is it since the reign of S.
Jews head of that race, who also gathers his descent from Merouee) to those
whom we have not known these fifty years? shall we carry upon our Targets
and shoulders, those whose unworthiness and injustice should make to clean to
the earth? shall we pluck away these brave branches of the Flowerdeluce which
yet remain, to graft in their places these wildings, who as they have begun,
will yield forth nothing but thorns? Oh, who can wish this horrible change?
This only reason might move us to detest the ambition of these busy bodies:
they aspire to the Crown, but they cannot have it without murder, and the
death of a million of men: those that uphold it, are like to be the first that
must stoop: and they that imagine by their means to get preferment, shall
have peradventure no other recompense then the loss of their lives. To be
brief, for the fulfilling of their ambition, we must heap up our tombs with
carkases: the heaps of their oppressed partakers are ye stays whereby they
climb up to heaven. Ought we not to abhor these cruelties? to spit in the
faces of these shameless persons that bereave us of our liberty? To honor
those that may peaceably and without disorder ascend unto the type of that
authority which the laws of the realm and their desert have purchased for
them? Let us hardly touch the chief string of this game, and since these men
are not ashamed to do, let not us be ashamed to speak. The Guizardes would,
to the prejudice of ye house of Burbon, invade this realm, every man knows
it, neither is there any thing so common in the peoples mouths: wherefore,
because the king of Navarre, who is the nearest and the Prince of Conde, do
profess the reformed religion, and so consequently are are heretics. I am
sorry that I am no great Doctor, that I might find out this point of heresy
which so often is cast in their teeth: but in my mind the chief disputations of
these reformed, do tend only to make the simple word of God of more force then
men's traditions. That is it whereto they call us, and I believe they have great
reason, neither that we are so sufficiently shrouded under the cloak of the
Church, as to think that the beautiful title can in effect stop all errors:
neither is there any thing so easy to corrupt as the mysteries of religion,
whereof I report my self to Noa hes family, which was so holily instructed,
and yet whence grew all the Idolatry of ye Chaldeans, and consequently of all
the rest of the world, except those whom God reserved for his people? yea I
refer my self to the same people: was there ever thing so frail as those
wretches? whence then came the four hundredth false Prophets against one only
Micheas? the worshipping in the high places, and the abominable superstitions
wherein these libertines did ouerflow? neither was it ever otherwise, but that
the truth upon the beginning of the light thereof, has had the darkness of
lying opposite thereto: yea, if I durst be so bold, as to pass common speech,
it is the truth that of necessity brings forth lies, even as light brings
forth a shadow. For this cause, so soon as Jesus Christ revealed him self to
be the son of God, al men accounted him a blasphemer, and the whole course of
his life seemed to those blind people but a merry interlude: so soon as the
Apostles had preached the pure doctrine, the devil sowed his impurities: yea no
man drive them more out of the Church, then they that named them selves the
Church. Simon ye magitian opposed himself against S. Peter: Cerinthus against
S. John, and so consequently sundry heretics against the Church, as Ebion,
Basilides, Marcion, Montanus, Carparates Sabellicus and many other, who all for
the most part endeavored to overthrow the ground of our salvation, Jesus Christ:
neither has the Church wanted exercise only against her enemies, but also she
has, as I find, been often molested by her own household servants: Nouatian
the Priest, denied to receive, such as had revolted, to penance: and so with
the help of Nicostratus a Priest of Carthage, caused a great schism in the
Church. Samosatenus, being Bishop of Antioch, renewed the errors of the
Ebionites. Arrius a Priest of Alexandria, had the assistance of many Bishops
and Emperors, yea, and since of whole nations in his heresy. Now if in these
beginnings, the treasons of such as seemed to serve God were so great, there is
no doubt but this mischief has still slipped in and been maintained in the
Church. Yea if you can well think upon it, it may be you will not judge your
selves clean exempt from all corruptions: but I will say no more for fear of
incurring your censures. Howbeit I am sorry you never prove the decision of the
process which the reformed have entered against you, and have long hung upon
the file, also yt we must believe some rather then other some without any further
notice of the matter: for so should we be no longer troubled to know whether
these two princes be heretics or not. Howbeit admit they be (which hardly and
without prejudice to their replication I can believe) is it your parts to
shrink from their obedience? So did never any Christians in the Primitive
Church against the heathen Emperors, to whom in all public government they
submitted them selves, albeit there could be no greater difference in religion
than was between them. Did they revolt against Constantin the great, who in
the end favored Arrius? against Licinius? against Julian the Apostata: against
Valentinian and many others that exercised tyranny against their religion? But
the king of Navarre is far from dealing so with us: for he is not yet come to
that which we fear. Thus we cry without a cause before we be beaten: not that
foresight is not an effect of wisdom, but because it is in vain to prevent
that which we neither can nor ought to eschew. Howsoever God gives us our
kings we must suffer it: neither is there any law or lawful example in the
world, that teaches us to do otherwise. Herein the reformed may seem to
bear themselves but badly, in that they take arms against their sovereign,
in defense of their religion. But besides that they are justly grounded upon
the defensive under the magistrates authority: also that nothing is more
natural then to expulse violence, they do besides allege the peremptory
reasons which often enough they have given us to understand of, neither is
their any fault but in our negligence that we are not sufficiently enstructed
thereof. Moreover, the king of Nauarres and the P. of Condes manner of dealing
with our Catholics, might make you to hope of all good entreatie, whenever
things may come to that pass. Truly the king of Navarre has always
tolerated Catholic religion in his Realm, which is the lawer Navarre, that
is to say, a portion of all Navarre, the rest thereof lying beyond the Pirinean
mountains, the Spaniards unjustly detain from him. And this can myself
testify, as having seen it with my own eyes: for upon a certain curiosity
I travailed thither two years since, even to know whether that which I had
heard to the contrary, were true or no. True it is, that matters are otherwise
ordered in his soueraignetie of Bearne: which is, because at his coming
thereto, he so found them: yea and so well established for the space of
certain years during the life of his late mother the Queen of Navarre, that
it were very hard, yea impossible to make any alteration, which also is
dangerous unless any greater benefit be very apparent. Secondly, his house is
full of Catholic gentlemen which serve him, even in his most private and
notable offices, neither did he ever make any difficulty with great
courtesy to receive all those that offered them selves. This is no token that
he will otherwise deal whenever he shall obtain our estate, neither will I
use any more then one reason gathered of the likelihood, yea, unless I be
deceived, of the very truth. It is not likely that this Prince seeing
himself exalted unto the throne, would after so many troubles, seek other
then peace, so far would he be from taking occasion of war with his
subjects, whose affections he had rather captiuate, then estrange: whereupon he
will always like that his subjects should maintain their accustomed religion,
provided, that the insolency of these harebraines who seek but to trouble the
water, and then to blame the lambs, least they should fail of some pretense
to devour them, do permit him the like. He may always consider that the
Catholics part is well underpropped: that if his were invincible, so is the
other, and therefore that he shall have a better hand by maintaining of it,
then by drawing upon his estate the curse of the people, and upon his
conscience the destruction thereof: as also I will add the other of his house
being Catholics, having so good part therein, he will be the more careful for
their sakes. But what? we do, according to the proverb, strive for the
Bishops cope, and to no purpose do divide the inheritance of the living, who
peradventure may outline all those that dispute of things to come after his
death: yea it seems, we share out the web of his life at our pleasures: but
albeit it be not lawful to move this question, yet may we resolve it, to the
end to take away all doubts from those that breeds prejudice to peace and the
common wealth. And indeed, it is as much as to complain of ease. Well you see
that the king of Nauars troops do at this day consist as well of the one as
of the other sort, likewise that concord remains amongst them, whereas the
best of their profession that comes amongst us must be imprisoned and
ransomed from all his goods, yea and finally suffer that death which he has
not deserved. These be monsters, they must be choked up: and many times for
the satisfying of the rage of the enemies to the State, we are forced to
injury our own selves. I know that the most malicious among them do use to
gird at this the king of Nauarres facility, as if the same were the baits
wherewith he seeks to draw us into his nets: but no man can do so well as
to please all men: still there is some thing to be misliked, and men's fancies
must be tormented for their pleasures. How would it have been, if in the
beginnig abandoning his own religion for our pleasures, he had taken ours?
Then would they have said it had been to curry favor with us: that he so
counterfeited to the end to deceive us: that outwardly he had been a
Catholic, and inwardly reformed in his conscience: that he had not cast his
old skin: that yet he smelt of the faggot: that we must wait for his
perseverance, so to know whether he were to be trusted: In sum, the poor
Prince had been wide in his account. And in truth, that had been the only
way, to have unhorsed him outright: for the reformed would not have trusted
him, but would have played their parts alone: and the Catholics would not at
the first blow have committed them selves to him, no peradventure not at all.
Yea if the Captains of the league were before their ghostly father, they would
say they should have been very sorry if they thought that the Catholics
would take his part: and I am sure they would soon labor to be of the other
side as heretofore they have done, so to lay a foundation for their ambition.
But surely thereby the king of Navarre could have reaped neither honor nor
profit: and therefore I do not think it had been any good counsel for him
so to have done, least he might by that means have lost those of whom he is
already assured: neither can it be any let to any that affect only the
preservation of the state to join with him, as of late did the Earl of
Soissons. Also in as much as which way so ever he turn him, the present state
of his affairs will still furnish him of enemies, it will better beseem him to
cleave constantly to that wherein from his infancy he has been brought up,
then lightly to intrude him self into pernicious and uncertain novelties.
Moreover, the lesser is never to prescribe law to the superior, and except the
kings person (whom I speak not of) it is greater reason that all Frenchmen
endeavor to conform themselves to the K. of Navarre, then he to stoop to
their discretion, and bend to their violences: as also his dignity and courage
can not digest such reproaches as they procure him, or rigor as they use toward
him. This has he alwais showed, but now more then ever. You see how God has
lately blessed him, in delivering us into his hands, so as if his foreign
help should once join with him, his discretion, valor, and dexterity would
set our spurs close enough to our heels. It is therefore most necessary for
you to dispose your selves to prevent the mischief which God has prepared for
us in the reencounter of these armies, the hazard whereof can not but redound
greatly to the kings loss: for if he get the victory, it will be with
horrible slaughter of his subjects: and if he lose it, his state is gone,
neither shall we peradventure hereafter find such favor at the Conquerors
hands as we would desire. Take heed it fall not out with us, as it did with
the Tyrians, who refusing the honest composition that Alexander offered, were
afterward taken by assault and cruelly entreated: rather lead the way to these
reformed in this godly work of compassion by offering unto them such union and
concord as heretofore have been among you: or else follow their steps, who from
the beginning have cried for, and desired nothing but the way to be joined
again unto you, namely a Council lawfully called, wherein all points of
religion may be decided of the scriptures, and not by opinions: by reason, not
by rage: by the quietness of amity, not by the bitterness of malice: neither
allege that, as is aforesaid, that is done already: for the Council of
Nice, the first general after the Apostles time within yt space of three
hundredth years, was no prejudice to the calling of diverse other according to
the exigents of the affairs, as the same of Constantinople, egainst Macedonius
bishop of the same city, who denied the divinity of the holy Ghost: of
Ephesus against Pelagius and Nestorius bishop of Constantinople, who denied the
divinity of Jesus Christ: of Chalcedon against Eutiches also a priest of
Constantinople, who confounded the two natures of Jesus Christ: the second of
Constantinople against Anthemius bishop of the same place, who denied that the
virgin Mary had brought forth Jesus Christ Man and God: to be brief, many
other general Councels, often called. Besides all which, our kings have also
been careful to call some particularly for France. Under Pelagius the first,
there were two holden at Paris: seven or eight at Orleance: two at Tours under
Paul the first, and an other by the authority of Pepin against the Greeks,
concerning the trinity: under Adrian the first, and by the authority of
Charlemaigne seven at Magence, Reimes, Tours, Chalais, and Arles for the
reformation of the state of the Church: under Gregory ye fourth, by ye
authority of Lewis ye meek, one at Aix the Chapel, wherein the superfluity of
the Clargie was restrained, whereupon they grew to mutiny, and procured the
cursed revolt of Lewis his children. Others have there been holden for the
reformation of the Clargie under Leo the ninth at Rheims: but since as the
Popes authority increased, the Kings diminished, and so consequently,
disorders were more tolerated in the Church: and unless I be deceived, of the
corruption of manners, which every one confesses, and all histories do
testify, some part may have crept even into the doctrine, either throug
ambition or covetousness of the Doctors: howbeit I also said that Vrbane the
second came personally into France to hold the Council at Clermont in
Auuergne: Pascall to hold that of Troy: Innocent the fourth to hold that of
Lions: Gregory the tenth to hold another in the same town: as for Clement the
fifth, he held his seat at Auignion, and celebrated the universal Council at
Vienna in D'Aulphin. Afterward Sigismund the Emperor procured the holding of
the Council of Constance under John the 23. who was there deposed. That of
Basil under Eugenius the fourth who also, was there deposed. That of Florence
under Amedee or Felix the fifth. After all these there was one holden at
Orleance by the French Church against Pius the second, who would have abolished
the Pragmaticall sanction, as an heresy which was but the dependence of the
Council of Basil: an other at Tours against Pope July the second: an other at
Lions by king Lewis the twelfth, and the last at Trent before mentioned. You see
then my M. whether the first Councels were ever any law to the second, the
second to the third, and so forth as need has required. It is wc the Church as
with our bodies: if the body be sick, we must call the physician: if the
Church be diseased, we must have recourse to the Councels, and therein to
co^sult upon most convenient remedies:

But as it is not enough to have once heard the Physicians opinion, but that
according as the sickness increases, we must also have still recourse
thereto: even so must we upon every occasion gather again together these
sovereign Physicians of whom the Council must consist, hear them without
passion, command the diseased to silence, take reason in payment, and
persevere to the end in their firm resolutions. If the Church fall again,
we must again call for these helps to raise it up, and so continually without
intermission unto the end of the world, when the head of the Church shall hold
his last Council. Not that I would at every word so trouble the Bishops, or
for the least ache that may happen to our fingers end: but when the mischief is
universal, we must seek the like remedy. The Greek and Latin Church met
fourteen or fifteen times to conclude upon an agreement: and albeit there
rested some difficulty, as yet there is, they nevertheless never denounced
war each to other. There are nous but these reformed who have swallowed up
all injury, in being debarred this sovereign salve of reunion by a Council:
I say by one only Council, so far are we from granting them many upon
necessity. What can you term this refusal but stomach and injury. I would
never have thought they had had so much reason on their side. We have wished
to arm the king of Navarre, yea even by force to compel him, rather then to
strain our selves to co^discend to so just a demand. Touch me has he said to
you if I be ignorant, and ye have beaten him: he has harkened to you and ye
have stopped your mouths: he has asked you the way to heaven and ye have
stopped your ears. Your voice has been like to the voice of the Edomites, at
the taking of Jerusalem, and all men have heard you cry: on, sack, blood and
fire. Out of your schools as out of ye Troyan horse have suddenly stepped forth
these armies wherewith ye have threatened this prince, yea they have been
almost upon his army before he has been ready to beat them of. This is a
matter in fresh remembrance, and every man can bear me witness of the truth:
the more I consider it, the better ground do I And for their taking of arms,
yea there was never thing more just then their proceedings. He defends
himself, but being assailed. He pursues us, but after he had reculed: he
takes revenge, but being injured. He calls the stranger, but when his have
driven him away. Who then can mislike his resolution after so long patience?
We shoot at him, who can then blame him for looking to himself? We
undermine his honors and dignities, why then shall not he rampire them up
again? Oh, how dear will these brawles be to France? all the forces of the
world do seem on every side to fall upon us for our confusion and
dissipation. And albeit I can comprehend the domestical, yet do I more fear
the foreign, namely the Spanish, who by little and little grows licorous of
the delicaties of our country. Long have they envied us, neither will they
observe the league until their envy be contented. For these enemies of the
peace of France, where they can by nothing but by injustice and violence, will
make a good peniworth of so much as shall be at their discretions to cast it
into the throats of these Marans, in hope still to retain the superiority.
But that nation is subtle enough to use this mean to their own advantage,
and as within these few years while they have had a fair wind they have not
accustomed themselves to serve, so will it be hard for the French men to escape
their dominion unless they look the sooner to it. And this is it that king
Philip barketh at: this it is that he wants to accomplish his most large
conquests: this is the flower that he wants in his nosegaie: he has long
since cast an eye at it, and now is the time that he will stretch forth his
hand to take it. And indeed France is now but an Antes nest of Espaniolized
persons, that is to say, of Traitors and periures to France: their cofers do
swel with Spanish Duccats, and these wretches are not ashamed for ready money
to sell the liberty which our Fathers so painfully purchased, yea unless God
break off the purposes of these corrupt persons, we shall in the end find our
selves the Turks Ienissaries and this Pirates slaves. If it were as easy to
shake off the yoke as to take it, I could wish these goodly perturbers a while
to try the tyranny of these Busires, and so I hope we should soon see them
run back to their franchize: but it lies is upon to keep them from that, yea
from making even the least motion that may be: for these Foxes will easily set
fast wheresoever they can but reach their nails, and all the body where they
set their feet. And since part of us do already stoop under the burden, I
hope that God will so strengthen the king of Nauar, and all the princes of the
blood, ye these staruelings shall loose but their longing. Also if the princes
do but continue their brave exploits, I would wish these pernicious Counsailors
of yt state to put up their pipes and sound their retrait betimes, lest the
night of our common mishaps overtake them. And as for you my masters I do
once again beseech you to take pity of this miserable realm. Consider of
what importance it is to keep a stranger armed about you: give ear to the
woeful cries of so many widows, Orphans, and friendles, laid desolate by the
wars. Measure not others mishappes by your ease, neither under the pretense
that the blows touch you not, think that those of your neighbors should not
move you to compassion. If ever you loved this realm in her greatest eminency,
alas cherish those small beams that yet remain: Rear up the old walls of
this building with all your power: suffer not these Erostrates to wax noble in
our ashes. And behold the king of Navarre watches upon the conservation
thereof, beware ye sleep not in your miseries, when carefully you should look
for the means to make us all to take rest in ye sweetness of peace. Otherwise
my masters look for nothing but Gods judgments against your hardened hearts,
and for the fire of your seditions which you have kindled, the flame of
condemnation which never will be quenched, also ye like punishment as Chore,
Dathan and Abiram, for going about to divide the Lords Tabernacle. For my part
I will get me to my own home, as into a safe port, from whence I may behold
your shipwreck, and if in short space I can not see you disposed to your
safety, and that by your industry these wars do continue, I protest to yield
my self to these princes, to encurre like fortune as they, until they have
reaped the fruits of those labors which you lay upon them, which shall be a
peace crowned with contentation, by the help of God, whom I beseech, my
masters, to enspire you with his grace, and generally to take pity of his
Church.

The King of Nauars song after his victory.
SInce that my hands in victory,
thy puissance (Lord) did know:
My tongue shall not in silence rest,
till glory thine it show.
That forces theirs did not abate,
our courage ought at all:
Did show that thou did us protect,
whereby their strength was small.
Their numbers great like dust in sky,
which wind drives here and there:
Thine Angel did disperse abroad,
so that we naught did fear.
And those who did their honor build,
upon my fall, whose pride
All men adored, I soon beheld,
distressed far and wide.
Which wonder strange to conquer those,
before I seemed to fight:
Does show that all our conquests comes,
through thy great power and might.
For as the rage of furious waves,
against the Rock do break:
So did their forces through thy help,
against ours sustain the wreake.
Their courage great, puffed up with hope,
exceedingly did swell:
Their pride did mount unto the heavens,
from whence their ruin fell.
The eye which blood and murder sought,
and throat which open lay
To blasphemy, full gorged is,
with venom for their pay.
My heart (O Lord) full joyful is,
to see thy foes down cast:
Who laid the giunes wherein them selves,
were game and pray at last.
They me pursued without a cause,
but they overtaken were:
The knots of their devises cut,
and just rewards did bear.
So to repress the like outrage,
the Lords strong arm we need:
Who fails none which do him trust,
but paies the bad their meede.
The length of time which brought our weal,
through our desert made short:
And God our cries did not neglect,
though we did his in sport.
Wherefore (O Lord) cry still and pearce
mine ears, until thy voice
I hear, and learn thee to obey,
in whom I may rejoice.
Give strength that in like dangers we
amazed may not go:
And as thou have begun so end,
each work the end does show.
FINIS.

