A PLAIN AND EASY INTRODVCTION TO PRACTICAL MUSIC, Set down in form of a
dialogue: Divided into three parts, The first teaches to sing with all things
necessary for the knowledge of pricktsong.

The second treats of descante and to sing two parts in one upon a plainsong
or ground, with other things necessary for a descanter.

The third and last part entreats of composition of three, four, five or
more parts with many profitable ^^^es to that effect.

With new songs of 2. 3. 4. and.5 parts.

By Thomas Morley, Batcheler of music (...) one of the gent* of her Majesty's
Royal Chap(...)

Imprinted at London by Peter Short dwell(...) Breedstreet hill at the sign of
the Star. 15(...)



To the most excellent Musician Master William Bird one of the gentlemen of
her Majesty's chapel.
THere be two whose benifites to us can never be required: God, and our
parents, the one for that he gave us a reasonable soul, the other for that of
the^ we have our being. To these the prince and (as Cicero terms him) the
God of the Philosophers added our masters, as those by whose directions the
faculties of the reasonable soul be stirred up to enter into contemplation,
and searching of more then earthly things: whereby we obtain a second being,
more to be wished and much more durable the^ that which any man since the
worlds creation has received of his parents: causing us live in the minds of
the virtuous, as it were, deified to the posterity. The consideration of this
has moved me to publish these labors of mine under your name both to signify
unto the world, my thankful mind: and also to notify unto your self in some
sort the entire love and unfeigned affection which I bear unto you. And seeing
we live in those days wherein envy reigns; and that it is necessary for him
who shall put to light any such thing as this is, to choose such a patron, as
both with judgment may correct it, and with authority defend him from the rash
censures of such as think they gain great praise in condemning others: Accept
(I pray you) of this book, both that you may exercise your deep skill in
censuring of what shall be amiss, as also defend what is in it truly spoken,
as that which sometime proceeded from your self. So shall your approbation
cause me think the better of it, and your name set in the forefront thereof be
sufficient to abate the fury of many insulting momistes who think nothing true
but what they do themselves. And as those verses were not esteemed Homers
which Aristarchus had not approuod, so will I not avouch for mine that which by
your censure shall be condemned. And so I rest,

In all love and affection to you most addicted, THOMAS MORLEY.

Ant. Holborne in commendation of the Author.
TO whom can ye, sweet Muses, more with right
Impart your pains to praise his worthy skill,
Then unto him that takes sole delight,
In your sweet art, therewith the world to fill.
Then turn your tunes to Morleys worthy praise,
And sing of him that sung of you so long:
His name with laud and with dew honor raise,
That has made you the matter of his song.
Like Orpheus sitting on high Thracian hill,
That beasts and mountains to his ditties drew,
So does be draw with his sweet musicks skill
Men to attention of his Science true.
Wherein it seems that Orpheus he exceeds,
For he wyld beasts, this men with pleasure feeds.
Another by A. B.
What former times through self respecting good
Of deepe-hid Music closly kept unknown,
That in our tongue of all to b'understoode,
Fully and plainly has our Morley shown.
Whose worthy labors on so sweet a ground,
Great to himself to make thy good the better:
If that thy self do not thy self confound,
Will win him praise and make thee still his detter.
Buy, read, regard, mark with indifferent eye,
More good for Music elsewhere does not lie.
Another by I. W.
A Noise did rise like thunder in my hearing,
When in the East I saw dark clouds appearing:
Where furies sat in Sable mantles couched,
Haughty disdain with cruel envy matching,
Old Momus and young Zoylus all watching,
How to disgrace what Morley has avouched,
But lo the day star with his bright beams shining,
Sent forth his aid to musicks art refining,
Which gave such light for him whose eyes long houered,
To find a part where more lay undiscovered,
That all his works with air so sweet perfumed,
Shall live with fame when foes shall be consumed.
To the courteous Reader.
I Do not doubt, but many (who have known my disposition in times past) will
wonder that (amongst so many excellent Musicions as be in this our contrie at
this time, and far better furnished with learning then my self,) I have
taken upon me to set out that in our vulgar tongue, which of all other things
has been in writing least known to our contrimen, and most in practice. Yet
if they would consider the reasons moving me thereunto: they would not only
leave to marvel, but also think me worthy, if not of praise, yet of pardon
for my pains. First, the earnest entreaty of my friends daily requesting,
importuning, and as it were adiuring me by the love of my contrie, which next
unto the glory of God, ought to be most dear to every man. Which reason so
often told and repeted to me by them, chiefly caused me yield to their
honest request in taking in hand this work which now I publish to the view of
the world: Not so much seeking thereby any name or glory, (though no honest
mind do contemn that also, and I might more largely by other means and less
labor have obtained) as in some sort to further the studies of them, who
(being indewed with good natural wits, and well inclined to learn that
divine Art of Music) are destitute of sufficient masters. Lastly, the
solitary life which I lead (being compelled to keep at home) caused me be
glad to find any thing wherein to keep my self exercised for the benefit of
my contrie. But as concerning the book it self, if I had before I began it,
imagined half the pains and labor which it cost me, I would sooner have
been persuaded to any thing, then to have taken in hand such a tedious piece
of work, like unto a great Sea, which the further I entered into, the more I
saw before me vnpast: So that at length dispairing ever to make an end
(seeing that grow so bigg in mine hands, which I thought to have shut up in
two or three sheets of paper,) I laid it aside, in full determination to have
proceeded no further, but to have left it off as shamefully as it was foolishly
begone. But then being admonished by some of my friends, that it were pity
to lose the fruits of the employment of so many good hours, and how justly I
should be condemned of ignorant presumpsion, in taking that in hand which I
could not perform, if I did not go forward: I resolved to endure whatsoever
pain, labor, loss of time and expense, and what not? rather then to leave
that vnbrought to an end, in the which I was so far ingulfed. Taking
therefore those precepts which being a child I learned, and laying them
together in order, I began to compare them with some other of the same kind,
set down by some late writers: But then was I in a worse case then before. For
I found such diversity betwixt them, that I knew not which part said truest,
or whom I might best believe. Then was I forced to run to the works of
many, both strangers and English men (whose labors togithers with their names
had been buried with me in perpetual oblivion, if it had not been for this
occasion) for a solution and clearing of my doubt. But to my great grief, then
did I see the most part of mine own precepts false and easy to be confuted by
the works of Tauerner, Fairfax, Cooper, and infinite more, whose names it
would be too tedious to set down in this place. But what labor it was to
tomble, toss, and search so many books, and with what toil and weariness I
was enforced to compare the parts for trying out the valor of some notes,
(spending whole days, yea and many times weeks for the demonstration of one
example, which one would have thought might in a moment have been set down,) I
leave to thy discretion to consider: and none can fully understand, but he who
has had or shall have occasion to do the like. As for the method of the
book, although it be not such as may in every point satisfy the curiosity of
Dichotomistes: yet is it such as I thought most convenient for the capacity of
the learner. And I have had an especial care, that nothing should be set out
of his own place, but that it which should serve to the understanding of that
which follows should be set first. And as for the definition, division,
parts, and kinds of Music, I have omitted them as things only serving to
content the learned, and not for the instruction of the ignorant. Thus have
thou the reasons which moved me to take in hand and go forward with the book.
The pains of making whereof, though they have been peculier to me, and only
to me: yet will the profit redound to a great number. And this much I may
boldly affirm, that any of but mean capacity, so they can but truly sing
their tunings, which we commonly call the six notes, or vt, re, mi, fa, sol,
la, may without any other help saving this book, perfectly learn to sing, make
discant, and set parts well and formally together. But seeing in these latter
days and doting age of the world, there is nothing more subject to calumny
and backbiting then that which is most true and right: and that as there be
many who will enter into the reading of my book for their instruction: so I
doubt not but diverse also will read it, not so much for any pleasure or
profit they look for in it, as to find some thing whereat to repine, or take
occasion of backbyting. Such men I warn, that if in friendship they will
(either publikly or privately) make me acquainted with any thing in the book,
which either they like not or understand not: I will not only be content to
give them a reason (and if I cannot, to turn to their opinion,) but also
think my self highly beholding to them. But if any man, either upon malice,
or for ostentation of his own knowledge, or for ignorance (as who is more
bold then blind bayerd) do either in huggermugger or openly calumniate that
which either he understands not, or then maliciously wresteth to his own
sense, he (as Augustus said by one, who had spoken evil of him) shall find
that I have a tongue also: and that me remorsurum petit, He snarleth at one who
will bite again, because I have said nothing without reason, or at least
confirmed by the authorities of the best, both scholars and practicioners.
There have also been some, who (knowing their own insufficiency, and not
daring to disallow, nor being able to improve any thing in the book) have
nevertheless gone about to discredit both me and it another way, affirming
that I have by setting out thereof maliciously gone about to take away the
livings from a number of honest poor men, who live (and that honestly) upon
teaching not half of that which in this book may be found. But to answer
those malicious caterpillars, who live upon the pains of other men,) this
book will be so far from the hinderance of any, that by the contrary, it
will cause those whom they allege to be thereby damnified, to be more able to
give reason for that which they do: Whereas before they either did it at
hap-hazerd, or for all reasons alleged, that they were so taught. So that if
any at all owe me any thanks for the great pains which I have taken, they be
in my judgment, those who taught that which they knew not, and may here if
they will learn. But if the effect do not answer to my good meaning* and if
many do not reap that benefit which I hoped; yet there will be no reason why I
should be blamed, who have done what I could, and given an occasion to others
of better judgment and deeper skill then my self to do the like. And as for
those ignorant Asses, who take upon them to lead others, none being more blind
then themselves, and yet without any reason, before they have seen their
works, will condemn other men, I ouerpasse them, as being unworthy to be
nominated, or that any man should vouchsafe to answer them: for they be in
deed such as doing wickedly hate the light for fear they should be espied.
And so (gentle Reader) hoping by thy favorable courtesy, to avoid both the
malice of the envious and the temeritie of the ignorant, wishing thee the whole
profit of the book and all perfection in thy studies, I rest.

Thine in all couttesie THO. MORLEY.

The first part of the Introduction to Music, teaching to sing.
Polymathes. Philomathes. Master. Polymathes. Stay (brother Philomathes) what
haste? Whither go you so fast?


Philomathes. To seek out an old frind of mine.


Pol. But before you go, I pray you repeat some of the discourses which you
had yester night at master Sophobulus his banquet: For commonly he is not
without both wise and learned guestes.


Phi. It is true in deed. And yester night, there were a number of excellent
scholars, (both gentlemen and others:) but all the propose which then was
discoursed upon, was Music.


Pol. I trust you were contented to suffer others to speak of that matter.


Phi. I would that had been the worst: for I was compelled to discover mine own
ignorance, and confess that I knew nothing at all in it.


Pol. How so?


Phi. Among the rest of the guestes, by chance, master Aphron came thither
also, who falling to discourse of Music, was in an argument so quickly taken
up and hotly pursued by Eudoxus and Calergus, two kinsmen of Sophobulus, as in
his own art he was overthrown. But he still sticking in his opinion, the two
gentlemen requested me to examine his reasons, and confute them. But I
refusing and pretending ignorance, the whole company condemned me of
discurtesie, being fully persuaded, that I had been as skillful in that art,
as they took me to be learned in others. But supper being ended, and Music
books, according to the custom being brought to the table: the mistress of
the house presented me with a part, earnestly requesting me to sing. But when
after many excuses, I protested unfeignedly that I could not: every one began
to wonder. Yea, some whispered to others, demanding how I was brought up: so
that upon shame of mine ignorance I go now to seek out mine old frinde
master Gnorimus, to make my self his scholar.


Pol. I am glad you are at length come to be of that mind, though I wished it
sooner: Therefore go, and I pray God send you such good success as you would
wish to your self. As for me, I go to hear some Mathematical Lectures, so
that I think, about one time we may both meet at our lodging.


Phi. Farewell, for I sit upon thorns till I be gone: therefore I will make
haste. But if I be not deceived, I see him whom I seek sitting at yonder
door, out of doubt it is he. And it should seem he studieth upon some point
of Music; But I will drive him out of his dumpe. Good morrow Sir.


Master. And you also, good master Philomathes, I am glad to see you, seeing it
is so long ago since I saw you, that I thought you had either been dead, or
then had vowed perpetually to keep your chamber and book, to which you were
so much addicted.


Phi. In deed I have been well affected to my book. But how have you done
since I saw you?


Ma. My health, since you saw me, has been so badd, as if it had been the
pleasure of him who may all things, to have taken me out of the world, I
should have been very well contented: and have wished it more than once. But
what business has driven you to this end of the town?


Phi. My errand is to you, to make my self your scholar. And seeing I have
found you at such convenient leisure, I am determined not to depart till I have
one lesson in Music.


Ma. You tell me a wonder: for I have heard you so much speak against that
art, as to term it a corrupter of good manners, and an allurement to vices,
for which many of your companions termed you a Stoic.


Phi. It is true: But I am so far changed, as of a Stoic I would willingly
make a Pythagorian. And for that I am impacient of delay, I pray you begin
even now.


Ma. With a good will. But have you learned nothing at all in Music before?


Phi. Nothing. Therefore I pray begin at theverie beginning, and teach me as
though I were a child.


Ma. I will do so, and therefore behold, here is the Scale of Music, which
we term the Gam.


Double or Treble keys. ee la la 1 note. dd la sol sol la 2 notes. cc sol fa
fa sol 2 notes. bb fa mi mi fa 2 notes, 2 cliffes. aa la mi re re mi la 3
notes. g sol re vt Septima vt prima. vt re sol * 3 notes. f fa vt Sexta vt
tertia vt fa 2 notes. e la mi mi la 2 notes. Mean keys. d la sol re re sol la
3 notes. c sol fa vt Quinta vt secunda. vt fa sol * 3 notes. b fa mi mi fa 2
notes, 2 cliffes. a la mi re re mi la 3 notes. G sol re vt Quarta vt prima. vt
re sol 3 notes. Grave or Base keys. F fa vt sertia deductio. vt fa * 2 notes.
E la mi mi la 2 notes. D sol re re sol 2 notes. C fa vt Secunda deductio. vt fa
2 notes. G mi mi 1 note. A re re 1 note. r vt Prima sex vocum deductio. vt 1
note.

Phi. In deed I see letters and syllables written here, but I do not
understand them nor their order.


Ma. For the understanding of this Table, You must begin at the lowest word
Gamvt, and so go upwards to the end still ascending.


Phi. That I do understand. What is next?


Ma. Then must you get it perfectly without book, to say it forwards and
backwards. Secondly, You must learn to know, wherein every Key stands, that
is, whether in rule or in space. And thirdly, How many cliefes and how many
notes every Key contains.


Phi. What do you call a Cliefe, and what a Note?


Ma. A Cliefe is a charecter set on a rule at the beginning of a verse, What a
cliefe is.
showing the height and lownes of every note standing on the same verse, or in
space (although use has taken it for a general rule never to set any cleife
in the space except the cleife) and every space or rule not having a cleife set
in it, has one understood, being only omitted for not pestering the verse,
and saving of labor to the writer: but here it is taken for a letter beginning
the name of every keye: and are they which you see here set at the beginning of
every word.


Phi. I take your meaning, so that every keye has but one cleife, except, b fa
mi.


Ma. You have quickly and well conceived my meaning. The residue which you see
written in Syllables are the names of the Notes.


Phi. In this likewise I think I understand your meaning. But I see no reason,
why you should say the two bb be two several cliefes, seeing they are but one
twice named.


Ma. The Herralds shall answer that for me: for if you should ask them, why
two men of one name should not both give one Arms? they will straight answer
you, that they be of several houses, and therefore must give diverse coats. So
these two bb, though they be both comprehended under one name, yet they are in
nature and charecter diverse.


Phi. This I do not understand.


Ma. Nor cannot, till you know all the cliefes, and the rising and falling of
the voice for the true tuning of the notes.


Phi. I pray you then go forwards with the cliefes: the diffinition of them I
have heard before.


Ma. There be in all seven cliefes (as I told you before) as A. B. C. D. E. F.
G. How many cliefes there be.
but in use in singing there be but four: that is to say, the F fa vt, which
is commonly in the Basse or lowest part, The forms of the usual cliefes.
being formed or made thus *. The C sol fa vt cliefe which is common to every
part, and is made thus *. The G sol re vt cliefe, which is commonly used in the
Treble or highest part, and is made thus *. And the cliefe which is common to
every part, is made thus or thus the one signifying the half note and flatt
singing: the other signifying the whole note or sharp singing.


Phi. Now that you have told me the cliefes, it follows to speak of the
tuning of the Notes.


Ma. It is so, and therefore be attentive and I will be brief. There be in
Music but vj. The six notes in continual deduction.
Notes, which are called, vt, re, mi, fa, sol, la, and are commonly set down
thus: ^


Phi. In this I understand nothing, but that I see the F fa vt cliefe standing
on the fourth rule from beneath.


Ma. And do you not understand wherein the first note stands?


Phi. Verily, How to know wherein every note stands.
no.


Ma. You must then reckon down from the Cliefe, as though the verse were the
Scale of Music, assigning to every space and rule a several Keye.


Phi. This is easy. And by this means I find that the first note stands in
Gamvt, and the last in E la mi.


Ma. You say true. Now sing them.


Phi. How shall I term the first note?


Ma. If you remember that which before you told me you understood: you would
resolve your self of that doubt. But I pray you in Gam vt, how many cliefs,
and how many notes?


Phi. One cliefe and one note. O I cry you mercy, I was like a pot with a
wide mouth, that receives quickly, and lets out as quickly.


Ma. Sing then after me till you can tune: for I will lead you in the tuning,
and you shall name the notes your self.


Phi. I can name them right till I come to C fa vt. Now whether I term this
fa, or vt?


Ma. Take this for a general rule, A note for singing of Vt.
that in one deduction of the six notes, you can have one name but once used,
although in deed (if you could keep right tune) it were no matter how you
named any note. But this we use commonly in singing, that except it be in the
lowest note of the part we never use vt.


Phi. How then? Do you never sing vt but in Gam vt?


Ma. Not so: But if either Gam vt, or C fa vt, or F fa vt, or G sol re vt, be
the lowest note of the part, then we may sing vt there.


Phi. Now I conceive it.


Ma. Then sing your six notes forward and backward.


Phi. ^ Is this right? Vt re mi fa sol la la sol fa mi re vt


Ma. Very well.


Phi. Now I pray you show me all the several Keys wherein you may begin your
six notes.


Ma. Lo here they be set down at length. ^


Phi. Be these all the ways you may have these notes in the whole Gam?


Ma. These and their eights: as what is done in Gam vt may also be done in G
sol re vt, and likewise in g sol re vt in alt. And what in C fa vt, may be also
in C sol fa vt, and in C sol fa. And what in F fa vt in Base, may also be done
in f fa vt in alt. But these be the three principal keys containing the three
natures or properties of singing.


Phi. Which be the three properties of singing?


Ma. b quarre. The three properties of singing
Properchant. and b molle.


Phi. What is b quarre?


Ma. It is property of singing, wherein mi is always song in b fa mi, and is
always when you sing vt in Gam vt.


Phi. What is Properchant?


Ma. It is property of singing, wherein you may sing either fa or mi in b fa mi
according as it shall be marked or thus and is when the vt is in C fa vt.


Phi. What if there be no mark.


Ma. There it is supposed to be sharp.


Phi. What is b molle?


Ma. It is a property of singing, wherein fa must always be song in b fa mi,
and is when the vt is in F fa vt.


Phi. Now I think I understand all the cliefes, and that you can hardly show
me any note, but that I can tell wherein it stands.


Ma. Then wherein does the eighth note stand in this example. ^


Phi. In G sol re vt.


Ma. How knew you?


Phi. By my proof.


Ma. How do you prove it?


Phi. From the cliefe which is F fa vt: How to prove where a note stands.
for the next keye above F fa vt is G sol re vt.


Ma. Now sing this example. ^


Phi. ^ But now I am out of my byas, for I know not what is above la. vt re mi
fa sol la


Ma. Wherein stands the note whereof you doubt?


Phi. in F fa vt.


Ma. And I pray you, F fa vt, how many cliefes and how many notes?


Phi. One cliefe and two notes.


Ma. Which be the two notes?


Phi. fa and vt.


Ma. Now if you remember what I told you before concerning the singing of vt,
What to be sung above la.
you may not sing it in this place: so that of force you must sing fa.


Phi. You say true. And I see that by this I should have a very good wit, for
I have but a bad memory: But now I will sing forward.


Ma. Do so then,


Phi. ^ But once again, I know not how to go any further. vt re mi fa sol la
fa sol la


Ma. Why?


Phi. Because I know not what to sing above this la.


Ma. Wherein stands the note?


Phi. in b fa mi.


Ma. And what has it before it?


Phi. None.


Ma. How then must you sing it when there is no sign?


Phi. I cry you mercy, it must be sharp: but I had forgotten the rule you
gave me, and therefore I pray you set me another example, to see if I have
forgotten any more?


Ma. Here is one: sing it. ^


Phi. ^ Vt re mi fa sol la fa sol la mi fa.


Ma. This is well song: ^ Now sing this other.


Phi. ^ vt re mi fa sol la mi fa sol la


Ma. This is right: but could you sing it no other wise?


Phi. No otherwise in tune, though I might alter the names of the notes.


Ma. Of which, and how?


Phi. Of the three first, The three first notes may be altered in name though
not in tune.
thus ^ and so forth of their eyghtes. etc. fa sol la


Ma. You do well. Now for the last trial of your singing in continual
deduction sing this perfectly, and I will say you understand plainsong well
enough. ^


Phi. I know not how to begin.


Ma. Why?


Phi. Because, beneath Gam vt there is nothing: and the first note stands
beneath Gam vt.


Ma. Where as you say, Music is included in no certain bounds.
there is nothing beneath Gam vt, you deceive your self: For Music is
included in no certain bounds, (though the Musicions do include their songs
within a certain compass.) And as you Philosophers say, that no number can be
given so great, but that you may give a greater. And no point so small, but
that you may give a smaller. So there can be no note given so high, but you may
give a higher* and none so low, but that you may give a lower. And therefore
call to mind that which I told you concerning the keys and their eightes:
for if Mathematically you consider it, it is true as well without the compass
of the Scale, as within: and so may be continued infinitely.


Phi. Why then was your Scale devised of xx. notes and no more?


Ma. Because that compass was the reach of most voices: What is to be sung
under Gam vt.
so that under Gam vt the voice seemed as a kind of humming, and above E la a
kind of constrained skricking. But we go from the purpose, and therefore
proceed to the singing of your ensample.


Phi. Then I perceive the first note stands in F fa vt under Gam vt, and
being the lowest note of the verse I may there sing vt.


Ma. Right, or fa if you will, as you did in the eight above in the other verse
before. But go forward.


Phi. Then though there be no re in Gam vt, nor mi in A re, nor fa in mi etc.
yet because they be in their eyghtes I may sing them there also. But I pray you
why do you set a in E la mi? seeing there is neither in it nor in E la mi in
alte, nor in E la any fa, and the cliefe is only set to those keys wherein
there is fa.


Ma. Because there is no note of it self either flatt or sharp, Every note
both sharp and flat.
but compared with another, is sometime flatt and sometime sharp: so that
there is no note in the whole Scale which is not both sharp and flatt: And
seeing you might sing la in D sol re, you might also (altering the tune alitle)
sing fa in E la mi. There be many other flattes in Music, as the in A la mi
re, whereof I will not speak at this time, because I will not cloy your
memory with unprofitable precepts: and it will be time enough for you to
learn them when you come to practice prick song.


Phi. This I will then think sufficient till that time, and therefore go
forward to some other matter.


Ma. Then seeing you understand continual deduction, I will show you it
disiunct or abrupt.


Phi. In good time.


Ma. Here, The notes in disiunct deduction,
sing this verse. ^


Phi. Here I know where all the notes stand: but I know not how to tune them
by reason of their skipping.


Ma. When you sing ^ Imagine a note betwixt them thus: ^ and so leaving out the
middle note, How to keep right tune in disiunct deduction
keeping the tune of the last note in your mind, you shall have the true tune,
thus: sing first vt re mi, then sing vt mi, and so the residue, thus: ^ And so
downward again, thus: ^


Phi. Here is no difficulty but in the tuning: so that now I think I can
keep tune, and sing any thing you can set down.


Ma. Then sing this verse. ^


Phi. ^ sol sol la sol la fa sol fa mi sol la sol.


Ma. This is well song. Now here be diverse other examples of plainsong, which
you may sing by your self.


^ sol fa fa sol fa fa la sol sol fa la la sol fa mi la la sol. ^ fa sol la fa
sol la sol fa fa sol la fa sol la fa sol sol fa. ^ fa sol sol la sol fa sol fa
fa la fa sol fa fa mi fa. ^ sol la la sol fa la fa sol la sol sol fa sol la la
sol. ^ sol fa mi fa sol sol sol fa la sol la fa mi la sol. ^ sol sol la sol fa
mi fa sol la fa sol fa sol la fa mi la sol. ^ sol sol sol mi la fa mi la sol
sol fa la sol fa mi sol la sol. ^ sol fa sol la sol fa fa la sol fa mi la sol
sol fa la sol. ^ sol sol sol fa la la sol fa la sol sol fa la la sol ^ sol fa
fa la sol fa fa la sol fa fa la sol sol fa sol

Ma. Thus for the naming and turning of the notes, it follows to speak of
the diversity of timing of them (for hitherto they have all been of one
length or time, every note making up a whole stroke.


Phi. What is stroke?


Ma. It is a successiue motion of the hand, Definition of strokes.
directing the quantity of every note and rest in the song, with equal
measure, according to the variety of signs and proportions: this they make
three fold, Division of strokes.
more, less, and proportionate. The More stroke they call, when the stroke
comprehends the time of a Brief: The less, when a time of a Semibriefe, and
proportionat where it comprehends three Semibriefes, Definition of time.
as in a triple or three Minoms, as in the more prolation, but this you cannot
yet understand.


Phi. What is the timing of a note?


Ma. It is a certain space or length, wherein a note may be holden in singing.


Phi. How is that known?


Ma. By the form of the note and the Mood.


Phi. How many forms of notes be there?


Ma. Eight, which be these.

A large. Usual forms of notes.
A long. A brief. A semibreife. A minim. A crotchet. A quauer. A simiquauer. ^


Phi. What strokes be these set after every note? Restes.



Ma. These be called rests or pauses. And what length the notes, Large, Long,
Brief Semibriefe or any other signified in sound the same. The rests are (as
you call them) stroks, do them in silence. But before we go any further,
we must speak of the Ligatures.


Phi. What is a Ligature? What ligatures be.



Ma. It is a combination or knitting to gether of two or more notes, altering
by their situation and order the value of the same.


Phi. And because we will in learning keep order, I pray speak of them
according to their order beginning at the first.


Ma. I am contented, First notes in Ligature without tails.
be then attentive and I will both be brief and plain, if your first note
lack a tail, the second descending, it is a Long, as in this ensample. ^ 42 4
4 2 44


Phi. But what if it have a tail?


Ma. I pray you give me leave first to dispatch those which lack tails: and
then I will speak of them which have tails.


Phi. Go to then, but what if the next note be ascending?


Ma. Then is it a brief, thus. ^ 22 222 2 2


Phi. But interrupting your course of speech of Ligatures: how many notes
does that charecter contain which you have set down last?


Ma. Two.


Phi. Where do they stand? for I thought it should have been set thus, ^
because it stretches from A la mi re, to E la mi.


Ma. The notes stand at the beginning and the end, as in this example
aforesaid: the first stands in A la mi re, the last in E la mi.


Phi. Proceed then to the declaration of the tayled notes.


Ma. If the first note have a tail on the left side hanging downward: (the
second ascending or descending) it is a brief: First notes with tails coming
down.
Example. ^ 2 42 2 2222 224 2 2


Phil. But how if the tail go upward?


Ma. Then is it and the next imediatly, following, (which I pray you keep well
in mind,) First notes with tails ascending.
a semibriefe: Example. ^ 114 111 11 11


Phi. How if the tail go both upward and downewarde?


Ma. There is no note so formed as to have a tail of one side to go both
upward and downewarde.


Phi. But how if it have a tail on the right fide?


Ma. Then out of doubt it is as though it were not in Ligature and is a Long,
Every Note having a tail on the right side, is as though it were not in
Ligaturs
thus. ^ 424 2 4 4444 And this is true, as well in the last notes as in the
first.


Phi. Now I think you have told me all that may be spoken of the first notes:
I pray you proceed to the middle notes, and their nature.


Ma. Their nature is easily known, A general rule for middle notes in Ligatures
for every note standing between two others is a Brief, as thus. ^ 42 222224
222 222 2 4 222224 But if it follow immediately after an other, which had a
tail going up, then is it a Semibriefe as I told you before, Exception,
and you may see here in this Example. ^ 112 11224 112 2


Phi. So, now go to the final or last notes.


Ma. Every final note of a Ligature descending: Final notes in Legatures
being a square note is a long: Example. ^ 2224 224 4224 1122


Phi. But how if it be a hanging or long note?


Ma. Then is it always brief except it follow a note, which has the tail
upward as here. ^ 42 2 2 211 But if the note be ascending, be it either square
or long it is always a brief if it lack a tail, as thus. ^ 222 22 22 2222
112


There be also Ligatures with pricks, Pricked notes in Ligature.
^ whereof, the first is three Minomes, and the last likewise three Minomes
thus, And also others, whereof the first is three Semibriefes, and the last
two, thus: ^

There be likewise other Ligatures which I have seen, but never used by any
approved author, whereof I will cease to speak further, setting them only down
with figures signifying their value of Semibriefs, whereof if you find one
directly to be set over another, the lowest is always first song: Example. ^
1124 2 4 44 24

Phi. Now have you fully declared the Ligatures. all which I persuade my self
I understand well enough: but because you speak of a pricked Ligature, I do
not understand that yet perfectly: therefore I pray you say what Pricks or
points signify in singing.


Ma. For the better instruction here is an example of the notes with a prick
following every one of them. Pricks and their signification.
^ And as your rests signified the whole length of the notes in silence, so
does the prick the half of the note going before to be holden out in voice
not doubled, A prick of augmentation.
as (mark me) v vt, re e, mi i, fa a, so-ol, la-a, and this prick is called a
prick of augmentation.


Phi. What be there any other pricks.


Ma. Yes there be other pricks whereof we will speak in their own place.


Phi. Having learned the forms and value of the notes, restes and pricks by
them selves, it follows to speak of the Moodes, and therefore I pray you to
proceed to the declaration of them.


Ma. Those who within these three hundredth years have written the Art of
Music, have set down the Moodes otherwise then they either have been or are
taught now in England.


Phi. What have been the occasion of that?


Ma. Although it be hard to assign the cause, yet may we conjecture that
although the great music masters who excelled in fore time, no doubt wear
wonderfully seen in the knowledge thereof, as well in specilation as practice,
yet since their death the knowledge of the art is decayed and a more slight or
superficial knowledge come in steed thereof, so that it is come now adays to
that, that if they know the common Mood and some Triples, they seek no
further.


Phi. Seeing that it is always commendable to know all, I pray you first to
declare them as they were set down by others, and then as they are used now a
days.


Ma. I will, and therefore be attentive.


Phi. I shall be so attentive, that except I find some great doubt, I will
not dismember your discourse till the end. The definition of a degree.



Ma. Those which we now call Moodes, they tearmid degree of Music: the
definition they gave thus: a degree is a certain mean whereby the value of
the principal notes is perceived by some sign set before them, Three degrees
degrees of music they made three, Mood: Moodes.
Time and Prolation.


Phi. What did they term a Mood?


Ma. The dew measuring of Longes and Larges, and was either greater or lesser.


Phi. What did they term the great mood? Great Mood*



Ma. The dew measuring of Larges by Longes, and was either perfect or imperfect.


Phi. What did they term the Great mood perfect?


Ma. That which gave to the Large three Longes, for in both Mood, time, and
prolation, that they term perfect which goes by three: as the great Mood is
perfect when three longes go to the large. The less Mood is perfect when
three briefes go to the long: and time is perfect when three semibriefes go to
the brief. And his sign is thus. Franchinus Glareanus Lossius.
{timeperf-prolatimperf}3 ^


Phi. Which Mood did they term, the great one imperfect?


Ma. That which gave to the Large but two Longes. Franchinus op. mul. it. trac.
3. cap. 2. Lossius. lib. 2. cap 4. Peter Aron Tulcanello.
His sign is thus, *3 ^


Phi. What did they call the lesser Mood?


Ma. That mood which measured the Longes by Breeues, and is either perfect or
imperfect. The less Mood perfect was when the Long contained three Breeues,
and his sign is thus {timeperf-prolatimperf}2 ^ The less Mood imperfect is,
when the Long contains but two Breeues. And his sign is thus: *2 ^


Phi. What called they time?


Ma. The dimension of the Brief by Semibreeues: and is likewise perfect or
imperfect. Perfect time is, when the Brief contains three semibreeues. His
signs are these, {timeperf-prolatimperf}3 *3 {timeperf-prolatimperf} ^ The
time imperfect is, when the Brief contains but two semibrees, whose signs
are these: {timeperf-prolatimperf}2 *2 * ^


Phi. What is Prolation?


Ma. It is the measuring of Semibriefs by Minoms, and is either more or less.
The more prolation is, when the Semibrief contains three Minoms, his signs
be these: {timeperf-prolatperf} * ^


The less prolation is when the Semibriefe contains but two Minomes: The
sign whereof is the absence of the prick thus. {timeperf-prolatimperf} * ^

So that you may gather that the number does signify the mode, the circle the
time, and the presence or absence of the point the prolation. I have thought
good for your further knowledge to set down before you the examples of all the
Moodes, joined to their times and prolations: to begin with the great Mood
perfect. Here is his ensample following without any prolation, because in this
Mood it is always Great Mood and time perfect.
imperfect. ^

The great Mood imperfect, Great Mood imperfect and time perfect
with time perfect, is set down thus. ^

The lesser Mood perfect and imperfect, may be gathered out of the former two.
It follows, to set down the Prolation in the times perfect and imperfect:
Prolation perfect in the time perfect is thus: Great Mood imperfect, Small
Mood imperfect, time and prolation both perfect, Where there is respect had to
the prolation, the Mood is left out. But yet to make a difference: when the
Mood is shown it is set by the Larg: when the prolation is shown, it is
always within.
^

Prolation perfect in the time imperfect is set thus: Great Mood imparfect,
Small Mood imperfect, time imperfect and prolation perfect.
^

Prolation imperfect in the perfect time, is set down thus: Both Moodes
imperfect, time perfect and prolation imperfect.
^

The imperfect prolation in the imperfect time, thus. Both Moodes, time and
prolation imperfect.
^

And because you may the better remember the value of every note, according to
every sign set before it, here is a Table of them.

A Table containing the value of enery Note, according to the value of the
Moodes or signs.
* * * * * * 1 * 1 * 2 2 2 2 2 2 3 3 1 * 1 * 1 * 1 * 1 * 1 * 3 * 3 * 3 3 2 2 3
2 3 2 3 * 3 * 2 * 2 * 3 * 2 * 9 * 6 * 3 2 3 2 2 2 2 2 9 * 6 * 6 * 4 * 6 * 4 *
18 * 12 * 3 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 27 * 12 * 12 * 8 * 12 * 8 * 36 * 24 *
{timeperf-prolatimperf}3 *3 {timeperf-prolatimperf}2 *2 {timeperf-prolatimperf}
* {timeperf-prolatperf} *

Phi. I pray you explain this Table, and declare the use thereof.


Ma. In the Table there is no difficulty, The use of the precedent Table.
if you consider it attentively. Yet, to take a way all scruple, I will show
the use of it. In the lower part stand the signs, and just over them the
notes, that if you doubt of the value of any note in any sign, seek out the
Sign in the lowest part of the Table; and just over it you shall find the
note: then at the left hand, you shall see a number set even with it, showing
the value or how many Semibreeues it contains. Over it you shall find how
many of the next lesser notes belong to it in that sign. As for example in the
great Mood perfect you doubt how many Breeues the Long containethan the
lowest part of the table on the left hand, you find this sign
{timeperf-prolatimperf}3 which is the Mood you sought: just over that sign
you find a Large, over that, the number 3, and over that a Long. Now having
found your Long you find hard by it on the left hand the number of 9.
signifying that it is nine Semibreeues in that Mood: Over it you find the
figure of three, signifying that there belong three Breeues to the Long in
that Mood: and so forth with the rest.


Phi. This is easy and very profitable, therefore seeing you have set down
the ancient Moodes (which hereafter may come in request, as the shotten-bellied
doublet, and the great breeches,) I pray you come to the declaration of those
which we use now.


Ma. I will, but first you shall have an example of the use of your Moodes in
singing, where also you have an example of augmentation, (of which we shall
speak another time) in the Treble and Mean parts. The Tenor part expresses
the lesser mood perfect, This is imperfection, whereof hereafter.
that is, three Breeues to the Long, the black Longs contain but two
Breeues. But when a white Brief or a Brief rest does immediately follow a
Long, then the Long is but two Breeues, as in your Tenor appears. Your Base
expresses time perfect, where every Brief contains three Semibreeues,
except the black, which contains but two.


Discantus. Augmentation. ^ ^ ^


Altus. ^ ^


Tenor. {timeperf-prolatimperf}2 ^


Bassus. Timeperfect. ^ ^


Phi. So much of this song I understand as the knowledge of the degrees has
showen me: the rest I understand not.


Ma. The rest of the observations belonging to this, you shall learn, when we
have spoken of the Moodes.


Phi. You have declared the Moodes used in old times so plainly, that I long to
hear the other sort of Moodes, and therefore I pray you now explain them.


Ma. Although they differ in order of teaching and name, yet are they both one
thing in effect, Exposition of the four usual Moodes.
and therefore I will be the more brief in the explaining of them. There be
four Moodes now in common use: Perfect of the more prolation. Perfect of the
less prolation. Imperfect of the more prolation. And Imperfect of the less
prolation. The mood perfect of the more is, when all go by three: as three
Longes to the Large: three Breeues to the Long: three Semibreeues to the
Brief: three Minomes to the Semibreefe. His sign is a whole cirkle with a
prick or point in the center or middle thus: Perfyte of the More.
{timeperf-prolatperf} ^


Phi. What is to be observed in this Mood?


Ma. The observation of every one, because it does depend of the knowledge of
them all, we will leave till you have heard them all.


Phi. Then I pray you go on with the rest.


Ma. The Mood perfect of the less prolation is, when all go by two, except
the Semibreefe: as two Longes to the Large. two Breeues to the Long: three
Semibreeues to the Brief: two Minoms to the Semibreefe. And his sign is a
whole cirkle without any point or prick in the middle, Perfyte of the Less.
thus. ^


Phi. Very well. Proceed.


Ma. The Mood Imperfect of the more prolation is, when all go by two, except
the Minome which goes by three: as two Longes to the Large, two Breeues to the
Long, two Semibreeues to the Brief, and three Minomes to the Semibriefe: so
that though in this Mood the Brief be but two Semibriefes, yet you must
understand that he is six Minomes, and every Semibriefe three Minomes. His
sign is a half cirkle set at the beginning of the song, with a prick in the
middle, Imperfyte of the More.
thus. ^

The Mood Imperfect of the less prolation is, when all go by two: as two
Longes to the Large, two Breeues to the Long, two Semibriefes to the Brief,
and two Minomes to the Semibriefe, two Crotchets to the Minome, etc. His sign
is a half cirkle without a prick or point set by him, Imperfyte of the Less.
as thus. ^

This Mood is in such use, as when so ever there is no Mood set at the
beginning of the song, it is always imagined to be this: and in respect of it,
all the rest are esteemed as strangers.


Phi. This is well. Now I pray you show me what is to be observed in every
one of the Moodes?


Ma. The particular observations, because they are best conceived by examples,
I will set you down one of enery several Mood. And to begin with the perfect
of the Moore. Take this example of a Duo.


Cantus. {timeperf-prolatperf} ^ ^ ^


Bassus. {timeperf-prolatperf} ^ ^


Phi. Now I pray you begin and show me how I may keep right time in this
example.


Ma. In this Cantus there is no difficulty if you sing your Semibreefes three
Minyms a piece (the black excepted, The value of some Notes in this Mood.
which is always but two) your Breeues nine, and your black Breeues six. and
whereas there is a brief rest in the beginning of the Base, that you must
reckon nine Minymes. There is also in the Base a Long which must be sung nine
Semibreefes which is xxvii. Minymes.


Phi. A time for an Atlas or Typhaeus to hold his breath, and not for me or
any other man now adays.


Ma. True, but I did set it down of purpose, to make you understand the nature
of the Mood.


Phi. You did well But I pray you, A director, and the use thereof.
what is that which you have set at the end of ^ the verse, thus:


Ma. It is called an Index or director: for look in what place it stands, in
that place does the first note of the next verse stand.


Phi. But is there no other thing to be observed in this Mood?


Ma. Yes, for though in this Mood, and likewise in the other of this
prolation, every Semibreefe be three Minymes: yet if an odd Minyme come
immediately either after or before (but most commonly after) a semibreefe, then
is the semibreefe sung but for two minymes, and that other Minyme makes up the
number for the stroke. But to the intent that the singer may the more easily
perceive when the Minyme is to be taken in with the Semibreefe, and when it is
to be left out: the masters ^ have devised a certain prick (called a prick
of division) which being set betwixt a Semibreefe and a minyme thus: A prick of
division, with the nature and use thereof.
shows, that the Semibreefe is perfect, and that the minyme next following
does belong to another stroke.


Likewise, if the prick of division come betwixt two minymes, thus: ^ it
signifies, that the Semibreefe going before is imperfect, and that the minyme
following it must be joined with it to make up the stroke.

Phi. Now I think you have sufficiently declared the nature of this Mood: I
pray you therefore go forward to the next, or perfect Mood of the less
prolation.


Ma. Here is an ensample, pervse it.


Cantus. ^ Duo. ^


Bassus. ^ Duo. ^ ^


Phi. In this last also I pray you begin with your stroke and time.


Ma. In this Mood every semibreefe is two minymes or one full stroke. Every
brief three semibreefes, The value of the notes in this Moodd.
except it be black, in which case it is but two. Every long is six
semibreefes, except it be black, and then it is but four, or have a
semibreefe following it noted with a prick of division thus: ^ and then it is
five, and the other semibreefe makes up the full time of six. The value of a
Long having a semibreef with a prick of division after it.
And though this has been received by the composers, yet have they but small
reason to allow of it: for of Iusquin they had it in the Tenor part of the
Gloria of his Mass Aue Maris stella: but Iusquin in that place used it for an
extremity, because after the long came two semibreefes and then a brief: so
that if the first semibreefe had not been taken in for one belonging to the
long, the second must have been song in the time of two semibreefes and noted
with a prick of alteration, as in these his notes you may see. ^ And though
(as I said) he used it upon an extremity, yet find, I it so used of many
others without any necessity. And amongst the rest master Tauerner in his
Kyries and Alleluyas, and therefore I have set it down in this place because
you should not be ignorant how to sing such an example if you should find any
hereafter in other songs.


It follows to speak of the third Mood which is the Imperfect of the more
prolation, of which, let this be an example.

Cantus ^ Duo. ^


Bassus. ^ Duo. ^ ^

And as we did in the others, to begin with your stroke and time. Strike and
sing every one of these breefes six minymes, and every one of the semibreeues
(except the last) three.


Phi. And why not the last also?


Ma. If you remember that which I told you in the observations of the perfect
mood of this prolation, you would not ask me that question: For what I told
you there concerning a minyme following a semibreefe in the more prolation, is
as well to be understood of a minyme rest as of a minyme it self.


Phi. I cry you mercy, for in deed, if I had remembered the rule of the mi
nyme I had not doubted of the rest. But I pray you proceed.


Ma. You see the minyme in d la sol marked with a prick, and if you consider
the tyming of the song, you shall find that the minym going before that
begins the stroke, so that those two minymes must make up a full stroke. You
must then know, that if you find a prick so following a Minyme in this Mood,
A prick of alteration.
it doubleth the value theeof and makes it two Minymes, and then is the prick
called a prick of alteration. The black semibriefe is always two minymes in
this Mood, and the black brief twice so much, which is four minymes, and
this is all to be obserned in this Mood.


Phi. All that I think I understand* therefore I pray you come to the
declaration of the fourth and last.


Ma. The last, which is termed the Imperfect of the less prolation is, when
all go by two, as two longes to the large, two breefes to the long, two
semibreefes to the breef, two minymes to the semibreefe, two crochets to the
minyme, two quauers to the crochet, and two semiquauers to the quauer, and so
forth, Example.


Cantus. ^ Duo. ^ ^ ^


Bassus. ^ Duo. ^ ^


The sign of this Mood set with a stroke parting it thus * causes the song
before, which it is set, to be so song as a brief or the value of a brief in
other notes, make but one full stroke, and is proper to motetes specially when
the song is pricked in great notes.

Cantus. ^ 2 2 ^ 24 4 ^ 2 24


Bassus. ^ ^ ^ ^

Although that rule be not so generally kept: but that the composers set the
same sign before songs of the semibriefe time: But this I may give you for an
infalable rule, that if a song of many parts have this Mood of the imperfect
of the less prolation, set in one part with a stroke through it, and in
another part without the stroke, than is that part which has the sign with
the stroke so diminished, as one brief stands for a semibriefe of the other
part which has the figne without the strok, whereof you shall see an evident
example after that we have spoken of the proportions. zaccone. Berrhusius cum
alijs.
But if the sign be crossed thus * then is the song so noted, so diminished in
his notes, as four semibriefes are song but for one, which you shall more
clearly perceive hereafter, when we come to speak of diminution. The other
sort of setting the Mood thus * belongs to Madrigals, Canzonets, and such
like.

This much for the Moodes by them selves: but before I proceed to the
declaration of the altering of them, I must give you an observation to be kept
in perfect Moodes.


Phi. What is that?


Ma. It is commonly called imperfection.


Phi. What is imperfection? Imperfection.



Ma. It is the taking away of the third part of a perfect notes value, and is
done three manner of ways, By note, rest, or cullor. Imperfection by note, is
when before or after any note there comes a note of the next less value, as
thus. ^ 9 18

By rest, when after any note there comes a rest of the next less value, as
thus: ^ 4 2

Imperfection by coullor, is when notes perfect are pricked black, which takes
away the third part of their value, thus: ^ The example whereof you had in
your Tenor part of the song set next after the former Moodes. But the examples
of perfection and imperfection, are so common, specially in the Moodes of
perfect time and more prolation, that it would be superfluous to set them
down. There is also another observation a kin to this, to be observed likewise
in Moods perfect, and is termed alteration.


Phi. What is alteration?


Ma. It is the doubling of the value of any note for the obsaruation of the
odd number, Alteration.
and that is it which I told you of in the example of the Mood perfect of the
Moore prolation, so that the note which is to be altered is commonly marked
with a prick of alteration.


Phi. Now I pray you proceed to the alteration of the Moodes.


Ma. Of the altering of the Moods proceeds augmentation, ordiminution,
augmentation proceeds of setting the sign of the more prolation in one part
of the song only, Augmentation
and not in others, and is an increasing of the value of the notes above their
common and essential valor, which comes to them by signs let before them,
or Moodes set over them, or numbers set by them. Augmentation by numbers is
when proportions of the less in aequalitie are set down, meaning that every
note and rest following are so often to bemultiplyed in them selves, as the
lower number contains the higher thus. 12 13 14 etc. that is, the minym to be
a semibrief, the semibriefe a brief etc. but by reason that this is better
conceived by deed than word, here is an example of augmentation in the Tenor
part.


Cantus. ^ ^


Tenor. ^ ^


Bassus. ^ ^


Phi. I con you thank for this ensample, for in deed without it I had hardly
conceived your words, but now proceed to diminution. Diminution.



Ma. Diminution is a certain lessening or decreasing of the essential value of
the notes and rests, by certain signs or rules, by signs, when you find a
stroke cutting a whole circle or semicircle thus, {timeperf-prolatimperf-str} *
{timeperf-prolatperf-str} * But when (as I told you before) a circle or half
circle is crossed thus {timeperf-prolatimperf-x} * it signifies diminution of
diminutio^, so that whereas a note of the sign once parted was the half of his
own value: here it is but the quarter. By a number added to a cirkle or
semicircle thus. {timeperf-prolatimperf}2 *2 {timeperf-prolatperf}2 *2. also by
proportionate numbers as thus. 21 dupla. 31 tripla 41 quadrupla etc. By a
semicircle inuerted thus * * and this is the most usual sign of diminution,
diminishing still the one half of the note: but if it be dashed thus, * * it
is double diminished.


Phi. As you did in the augmentation, I pray you give me an example of
diminution.


Ma. Lo, here is one.


Cantus. ^ ^ ^ ^


Tenor. ^ ^


Bassus. ^ ^ ^ ^


Where you see two Moodes set to one part, the one thus * the other retorted
thus * signifyng that the first must serve you in your first singing till you
come to this sign * where you must begin again and sing by the retort in
half time (that is, as round again as you did before) till you come again
to the same sign, and then you must close with the note after the sign.

Phi. What do you term a retorted Mood? A Retort.



Ma. It is a Mood of imperfect time set backward, signifyng that the Notes
before which it is set must be sung as fast again as they were before, as in
your former example, at the second singing, that which was a semibreef at the
first you did sing in the time of a minyme, and the minyme in the time of a
crochet.


Phi. Why did you say a Mood of imperfect time?


Ma. Because a Mood of perfyt time cannot be retorted.


Phi. Of the less prolation I have had an example before, therefore I pray
you let me have an ensample of the imperfect of the More retored.


Ma. Although by your former example, you may well enough comprehend and
perceive the nature of a retort, yet will I to satisfy your request, give you
an example of that Mood, with many others after we have spoken of the
proportions.


Phi. What is Proportion? Proportion.



Ma. It is the comparing of numbers placed perpendicularly one over another.


Phi. This I knew before, but what is that to Music?


Ma. In deed we do not in Music consider the numbers by themselves, but
set them for a sign to signify the altering of our notes in the time.


Phi. Proceed then to the declaration of proportion.


Ma. Proportion is either of equality or inequality. Proportion of
aequalitie, is the comparing of two aequall quantities together, Proportion of
the more inaequalitie does in Music always signify diminution.
in which, because there is no difference, we will speak no more at this time.
Proportion of inaequalitie is, when two things of unequal quantity are
compared together, and is either of the more or less inaequalitie. Proportion
of the more inaequalitie is, when a greater number is set over and compared to
a lesser, and in Music does always signify diminution. Proportion of the
less inaequalitie is, where a lesser number is set over, and compared to a
greater, as 23, and in Music does always signifye augmentation.


Phi. How many kinds of Proportions do you commonly use in Music? for I am
persuaded it is a matter impossible to sing them all, especially those which be
termed superpercients.


Ma. You say true, although there be no proportion so hard but might be made
in Music, but the hardness of singing them, has caused them to be left out,
and therefore there be but five in most common use with us: Dupla, Tripla,
Quaedrupla Sesquialtera, and Sesquitertia.


Phi. What is Dupla proportion in Music?


Ma. It is that which takes half the value of every note and rest from it,
Dupla.
so that two notes of one kind do but answer to the value of one: and it is
known when the upper number contains the lower twice thus. 21 42 63 84 126
etc. But by the way you must note that time out of mind we have termed that
dupla where we set two Minymes to the Semibriefe, which if it were true, there
should be few songs but you should have dupla quadrupla and octupla in it, and
then by consequent must cease to be dupla. But if they think that not
inconvenient, A confutation of Dupla in the minyme.
I pray them how will they answer that which from time to time has been set
down for a general rule amongst all musitions, that proportions of the greater
inequality, do always signify dimunution, and if their minyms be diminished,
I pray you how shall two of them make up the time of a full stroke, for in all
proportions the upper number signifies the semibriefe, and the lower number
the stroke, so that as the upper number is to the lower, so is the semibriefe
to the stroke. Thus if a man would go seek to refute their Inueterat
opinions, it were much labor spent in vain: but this one thing I will add,
that they have not their opinion confirmed by the Testimony of any, either
musition or writer, where as on the other side, all who have been of any name
in Music, have used the other dupla, and set it down in their works, as you
may see in the example following, confirmed by the authorities of Peter Aron,
Franchinus, Iordanus, and now of late days, learned Glareanus, Losius,
Listenius, Berhusius and a great number more, all whom it were to tedius to
nominate: true it is that I was taught the contrary my self, and have seen
many old written books to the same end. But yet have I not seen any published
under any man's name: but if their opinion had been true, I maruayle that non
amongst so many good musitions have either gone about to prove the goodness of
their own way, or refute the opinions of others from time to time by general
consent and approbation, taking new strength: therefore let no man cauil at my
doing in that I have changed my opinion and set down the proportions
otherwise then I was taught them, For I assure them that if any man will give
me stronger reason to the coutrary, than those which I have brought for my
defense, I will not only change this opinion, but acknowledge my self debt
bound to him, as he that has brought me out of an error to the way of truth.


Phi. I doubt not but your master who taught you would think it as lawful
for you to go from his opinion, as it was for Aristotle to disalow the opinion
of Plato with this reason, that Socrates was his friend, Plato was his friend
but verity was his greater friend.


Ma. Yet will I (to content others) set down the proportions at the end of
this treatise as they are commonly pricked now, to let you see that in the
matter there is no difference betwixt us, except only in form of pricking,
which they do in great notes and we in small: and to the end, that if any man
like his own way better than this, he may use his own discretion: But we go
too far, and therefore peruse your example.


Cantus ^ ^ ^ ^


Tenor. ^ ^ Diminution in time Dupla proportion. ^ ^


Bassus. ^ ^ ^ ^


Phi. What is tripla proportion in music?


Ma. It is that which diminishes the value of the notes to one third part: for
three briefes are set for one, Tripla.
and three semibriefes for one, and is known when two numbers are set before
the song, whereof the one contains the other thrice thus 31 62 93 For example
of this proportion take this following.


Cantus ^ ^


Tenor. ^ ^ ^


Bassus, ^ ^ Here is likewise another ensample wherein Tripla is in all the
parts together, which if you prick al in black notes, will make that
proportion which the musitions falsely termed Hemiolia, A confutation of
hemiolia.
when in deed it is nothing else but a round Tripla. For Hemiola does signify
that which the Latins term Sesquipla or sesquialtra: but the good Munks
finding it to go somewhat rounder then common tripla, gave it that name of
Hemiolia for lack of another. But for their labor they were roundly taken up
by Glareanus, Lossius and others.


Cantus. ^ ^


Altus. ^ ^


Tenor. ^ ^


Bassus. ^ ^


Phi. Proceed now to Quadrupla.


Ma. Quadrupla is a proportion deminishing the value of the notes to the
quarter of that which they were before, and it is perceived in singing, when a
number is set before the song, comprehending another four times, as 41 82 124
etc.


Phi. I pray you give me an ensample of that.


Ma. Here is one.


Cantus. ^ ^ ^


Tenor. ^ ^ ^


Bassus. ^ ^ ^

Quintupla and Sextupla I have not seen used by any stranger in their songs
(so far as I remember) but here we use them, but not as they use their other
proportions, for we call that sextupla, where we make six black minyms to
the semibriefe, and quintupla when we have but five etc. But that is more by
custom then reason.


Phi. I pray you give me an example of that.


Ma. You shall hereafter: but we will cease to speak any more of proportions
of multiplicitie, because a man may consider them infinitely.


Phi. Come then to Sequialtera, Sesquialtera.
what is it?


Ma. It is when three notes are sung to two of the same kind, and is known by
a number containing another once, and his half 32 64 96 the example of this
you shall have amongst the others. Sesquitercia is when four notes are sung to
three of the same kind, and is known by a number set before him, containing
another once, and his third part thus. 43 86 129 And these shall suffice at
this time: For knowing these, the rest are easelie learned. But if a man would
ingulfe himself to learn to sing, and set down all them which Franchinis
Gaufurius has set down in his book De proportionibus musicis, he should
find it a matter not only hard, but almost impossible. But if you think you
would be curious in proportions, and exercise your self in them at your
leisure. Here is a Table where you may learn them at full.


A table containing all the usual proportions.
- - - - - - - - - - * * 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 dupla - - - - - - - - - * * 2 4 6
8 10 12 14 16 18 20 tripla sesqui altra - - - - - - - - * *^ 3 6 9 12 15 18 21
24 27 30 quadrupla dupla sesqui tercia - - - - - - - * * 4 8 12 16 20 24 28 32
36 40 quintupla dupla sesqui altra - - - - - - - - * * 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40
45 50 sextupla tripla dupla - - - - - - - {timeperf-prolatimperf} * 6 12 18 24
30 36 42 48 54 60 septupla Tripla sesqui altra Dupla sesqui tertia Super
tripertiens quartas - - - - - - * * ** 7 14 21 28 35 42 49 56 63 70 octupla
quadrupla Dupla superbi partie^ tertias dupla Super tripertiens quintas - - - -
- * * 8 16 24 32 40 48 56 64 72 80 nonupla quadrupla sesqui altra tripla Dupla
sesqui quatra Super quadripartie^s quintas Sesquialtera Superbi partie^s
septimas Sesquioctaua - - {timeperf-prolatperf} * 9 18 27 36 45 54 63 72 81 90
te^upla quintupla Tripla sesqui tertia Dupla sesqui altera dupla Superbi
partiens tertias Super tripartiens septimas Sesqui quarta Sesqui nona - * * 10
20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100 * * * * * *^ * * * * {timeperf-prolatimperf} * * *
** * * {timeperf-prolatperf} * * * 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18
20 3 6 9 12 15 18 21 24 27 30 4 8 12 16 20 24 28 32 36 40 5 10 15 20 25 30 35
40 45 50 6 12 18 24 30 36 42 48 54 60 7 14 21 28 35 42 49 56 63 70 8 16 24 32
40 48 56 64 72 80 9 18 27 36 45 54 63 72 81 90 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100

As for the use of this Table, when you would know what proportion any one
number has to another, find out the two numbers in the Table, then look
upward to the triangle enclosing those numbers, and in the angle of concourse,
that is, where your two lines meet together, there is the proportion of your
two numbers written: as for example, let your two numbers be 18* and 24* Look
upward, and in the top of the tryangle covering the two lines which enclose
those numbers, you find written sesquitertia, so likewise 24. and 42. you find
in the Angle of concurse written super tripartiens quartas, and so of others.

Phi. Here is a Table in deed containing more than ever. I mean to beat my
brayns about. As for music, the principal thing we seek in it, is to delight
the ear, which cannot so perfectly be done in these hard proportions, as
otherwise, therefore proceed to the rest of your music, specially to the
example of those Proportions which you promised before.


Ma. I will, but before I give it you, I will show you two others, the one out
of the works of Iulio Renaldi: the other out of Alexandro Striggio, which
because they be short and will help you for the understanding of the other, I
thought good to set before it.


Phi. I pray you show me the true singing of this first, because every part
has a several Mood and prolation.


Ma. The Treble contains Augmentation of the Moore prolation in the subdupla
proportion, Explanation of the example next ensuing.
so that every semibreefe lacking an odd minyme following, it is three: But if
it have a minyme following it, the semibriefe it self is two semibriefs and
the minyme one. The Altus and Quintus be of the less prolation, so that
betwixt them there is no difference, Giulio Renaldi in the eight song of his
Madrigali and Neapolitans to five voices beginning diverse lingue.
saving that in the Quintus the time is perfect, and by that mean every
brief three semibriefs. Your Tenor is the common Mood of the imperfect of the
less prolation, diminished in dupla proportion, so that in it there is no
difficulty. Lastly your Base conteyneth diminution of diminution or diminution
in quadrupla proportion, of that (as I showed you before) every long is but a
semibreefe, and every semibriefe is but a crochet. And to the end that you may
the more easelie understand the contryuing of the parts, and their proportion
one to another, I have set it down in partition. ^


Phi. This has been a mighty musical fury, which has caused him to show
such diversity in so small bounds.


Ma. True, but he was moved so to do by the words of his text, which reason
also mouid Alexandro Striggio to make this other, wherein you have one point
handled first in the ordinary Mood through all the parts, then in Tripla
through all the parts, and lastly in proportions, no part like unto another,
for the Treble contains diminution in the quadrupla proportion. The second
Treble or sextus has Tripla pricked all in black notes: your Altus or Mean
contains diminution in Dupla proportion. The Tenor goes through with his
Tripla (which was begone before) to the end. The Quintus is sesquialtra to
the brief which has this sign * 32 set before it: But if the sign were
away, then would three minyms make a whole stroke, where as now three
semibriefs make but one stroke The Base is the ordinary Mood, wherein is no
difficulty as you may see.

^ Alexandro Striggio in the end of the 30. song of the Second book of his
Madrigals to six voices, beginning Al l' Acquae sagra.
Cangiar fani mill di su sat for me Can- ^ ^ gier ^


Phi. Now I think you may proceed to the examples of your other proportions.


Ma. You say well, and therefore take this song, peruse it, and sing it
perfectly: and I doubt not but you may sing any reasonable hard pricke-song
that may come to your sight.


Cantus. A3. voc. ^ Christ's cross be my speed, in all virtue to proceed, A.
b. c. d. e. f. g. h. ^ i. k. l. m. n. o. p. q. r. s and t. double w. v. x. with
y. ezod. and perse. conper se. ^ title title. est A men, When you have done
begin again begin again.


Tenor. A3. voc. ^ Christ's cross. ^ ^ ^ Verte folium.


Bassus. A3. voc. ^ Christ's cross. ^ ^ ^ Verte folium.


Cantus. A3. voc. ^ Christ's cross be my speed, in all virtue to proceed, A.
b. c. d. e. f. g. h. ^ i. k. l. m. n. o. p. q. r. s. and t. double w. v. x.
with y. ezod. and per se conper se. ^ title title. est Amen, When you have done
begin again begin again. ^ Christ's cross be my speed, in all virtue to
proceed, A. b. c. d. e. f. g. h.


Tenor. ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^


Bassus. ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^


Cantus. ^ i, k, l, m, n, o, p, q, r, s. and t, double ^ w, v, x, with y, ezodd
and per se, con per se, title ^ title, est Amen. Verte folium.


Tenor. ^ ^ ^ ^ 31 ^ 3 to one of the notes precedent. ^


Bassus. ^ 31 ^ ^ ^ 31


Cantus. ^ When you have done, begin again, begin again. Christ's cross ^ be
my speed, in all virtue to proceed, A. b. c. d. e. ^ f. g. h. i. k. l. m.


Tenor. ^ 91 ^ ^ ^ 31 whole* ^ ^ 31 ^ ^ Decupla.


Bassus. ^ 3 to one of the notes precedent. 92 ^ ^ ^ 31. whole: ^ 51 ^ ^ ^


Cantus. A3. voc. ^ n. o. p. q. r. s and t. double w. v. x. with y. ezod. and
per se. conper se. ^ title title. est A men, When you have done begin again
begin again.


Tenor. ^ ^ ^ 31 ^ ^


Bassus. ^ Septupla. ^ ^ 31 ^ ^

And this is our usual manner of pricking and setting down of the Proportions
generally received amongst our Musitions. But if Glareanus, Ornithoparchus,
Peter Aron, Zarlino, or any of the great Musitions of Italy or Germany had
had this example, he would have set it down thus, as follows.


Cantus. A3. voc. ^ Christ's cross be my speed, in all virtue to proceed, A.
b. c. d. e. f. g. h. ^ i. k. l. m. n. o. p. q. r. s and t. double w. v. x. with
y. ^ ezod. and per se. con per se. title title. est A men, When you have done
begin ^ again begin again. Christ's cross be my speed, in all virtue Verte
fol.


Tenor. ^ ^ ^ ^ ^


Bassus. ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ Verte folium.


Cantus. ^ to proceed. A, b, c, d, e, f, g, h, i, k, l, m, n, o, p, q, r, s
and ^ t, double w, v x, with y, ezod and per se, con per se, title title, ^ est
Amen. When you have done begin again begin again. Christ's cross be my ^
speed, in all virtue to proceed, A, b, c, d, e, f, g,


Tenor. ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^


Bassus. ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ Christ's


Cantus. ^ h, i, k, l, m, n, o, p, q, r, s and t, double w v, x, with y, ezod,
and per se, con per ^ se, title title est Amen. When you have done begin
again, begin again. ^ Christ's cross be my speed in all virtue to proceed,


Tenor. ^ ^ ^ true tripla whole. ^ true tripla broken in the more prolation. ^
^ ^ true tripla. ^ true tripla in the ^ more prolation.


Bassus. ^ true tripla. ^ ^ ^ true tripla whole. true tripla broken in the more
prolation ^ ^ true dupla ^ true tripla in ^ more prolation. Verte fol.


Cantus. ^ A, b, c, d, e, f, g, h, i, k, l, m, n, o, p, q r, s and t, double w
v, x, with ^ y, ezod, and per se, con per se, title title est Amen. When you
have done begin again, ^ begin again.


Tenor. ^ the more prolation. true quiutupla. ^ quiutupla broken. ^ ^ the less
prolation. ^ ^ true dupla in the more prolation. ^ ^


Bassus. ^ true quintupla. ^ ^ ^ true septupla. ^ ^ ^


And to the end that you may see how every thing hangs upon another, and
how the proportions follow others, I will show you particularly every one.
The first change which comes after the proportion of equality, is commonly
called sextupla, or six to one, signified by the more prolation, retorted thus
But if we consider rightly that which we call sextupla, ^ is but true tripla,
pricked in black notes. But because I made it to express sextupla, I have set
it down in semibriefes, allowing six for a stroke, and taking away the
retortiue mood, The next proportion is true Dupla: signified by the time
imperfect of the less prolation, retorted thus. which manner of marking Dupla
cannot be disallowed: but if the proportion ^ next before had been signified
by any mood, then might not this Dupla have been signified by the retort, but
by proportionate numbers. Thirdly comes the less prolation in the mean
part, and that ordinary Tripla of the black minimes to a stroke in the base:
and because those three black minimes, be sung in the time of two white
minimes, they were marked thus *32. signifieng three minimes to two minimes.
But if the sign of the prolation had been left out, and all been pricked in
white notes, then had it been true thus ^ And in this manner most commonly do
the Italians signify their three minimes to a stroke or tripla of three
minimes, which is indeed true Sesquialtra. But because we would here express
true tripla, I have set it down thus, ^ Therefore to destroy the proportion
follow these proportionate numbers at the sign of degree thus *13 which makes
the common time vnpetfect of the less prolation.

Then follows true tripla, which they call tripla to the Semibriefe. But
because it is afterward broken, I thought it better to prick it white then
black: but the matter is come so far nowadaies, that some will have all
semibrieues in proportion pricked black else (say they) the proportion will not
be known. But that is false, as being grounded neither upon reason nor
authority. The tripla broken in the more prolation, makes nine minimes for
one stroke, which is our common Nonapla, but in one place of the broken tripla,
where a semibriefe and a minime come successively that they marked with these
numbers 92, which is the sigue of Quadrupla sesquialtra, if the numbers were
perpendicularly placed: but if that were true, why should not the rest also
which were before be so noted, seeing nine of them were sung to two minymes of
the Treble. Then follows true Dupla: but for the reason before said, I
signified it with numbers and not by the retort but in the Basse, because the
sign of the less prolation went immediately before, I could not with reason
alter it, and therefore I suffered the retort to stand still, because I thought
it as good as the proportionat numbers in that place. Then again follows
true Tripla in the more prolation, afterward the contrary numbers 13 of Sub
Tripla destroying the proportion the more prolation remains, ^ to which the
Basse sings Quintupla being pricked thus such was our manner of pricking
without any reason or almost common sense, to make five crotchets be Quintupla
to a Semibriefe, seeing four of them are but the propper value of one
Semibreefe. But if they wonld make five crotchets to one femibreefe, then must
they set down Sequiquarta proportion thus 14, wherein five semibriefes or
their value make up the time of four semibriefes or strokes. But I am almost
out of my purpose, and to return to our matter, I have altered those crotchets
into semibriefes expressing true Quintupla. Then comes Quintupla broken,
which is our common Decupla, But if the other were Quintupla, then is this
likewise Quintupla, because there goes but the value of five semibriefes for a
stroke, and I think none of us but would tsiinke a man out of his wits, who
would confess, that two testers make a shilling, and deny that six pieces of
two pence a piece, or twelve single pence do likewise make a shilling. Yet we
will confess that five semibriefes to one is Quintupla. But we will not
confess that ten minimes, being the value of five semibriefes, compared to one
semibriefe, is likewise Quintupla: and so in Quadrupla, sextupla, septupla, and
others. Then comes the common measure, or the less prolation (the sign of
Subquintupla thus 15. destroying the proportion) for which the base sings
septupla, but as it is set down in the first way, it is as it were not
septupla, but Supartripartiens, Quartas, or 74. Therefore I set them all down
in semibriefes, allowing seven of them to a stroke: which ended comes
equality after which follows true Dupla in the more prolation, which we
sometime call Sextupla, and sometime Tripla. After which and last of all
comes equality.

And let this suffice for your instruction in singing, for I am persuaded
that except practice you lack nothing, to make you a perfect and sure singer.

Phi. I pray you then give me some songs wherein to exercise my self at
convenient leisure.


Ma. Here be some following of two parts, which I have made of purpose, that
when you have any friend to sing with you, you may practice together, which will
sooner make you perfect then if you should study never so much by your self.


Phi. Sir I thank you, and mean so diligently to practice till our next
meeting, that then I think I shall be able to render you a full account of all
which you have told me: till which time I wish you such contentment of mind,
and ease of body as you desire to your self, or mothers use to wish to their
children.


Ma. I thank you: and assure your self it will not be the smallest part of my
contentment, to see my scholars go towardlie forward in their studies, which I
doubt not but you will do, if you take but reasonable pains in practice.


Cantus. ^ Duo. ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^


Tenor. ^ The First.
Duo. ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ I2


Cantus. ^ Duo. ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^


Tenor. ^ Duo. ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^


Cantus. ^ The Third.
Duo. ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^


Tenor. ^ Duo. ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^


Cantus. ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^


Tenor. ^ The fourth.
Duo ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^


Cantus. ^ The fifth.
Duo ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ 32 ^ ^ ^


Tenor. ^ The fifth.
Duo. ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ 32 ^ ^ ^


Cantus. ^ The sixth.
^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^


Tenor. ^ The sixth.
^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^


Aria. A 3. voices. Cantus. ^ When you see this sign * of repetition, you must
begin again, making the note next before the sign (be it minyme, crochet or
whatsoever) a semibriefe in the first singing. At the second time you must sing
it as it stands, going forward without any respect to the close. When you
come to the end and find the sign of repetition before the final close, you
must sing the note before the sign as it stands and then begin again at the
place where the stroke parts all the lines, and so sing to the final close.
But if you find any song of this kind without the stroke so parting all the
lines, you must begin at the first sign of repetition, and so sing to the end,
for in this manner (for saving of labor in pricking them at length) do they
prick all their airs and villanellaes.
^ * ^ ^ ^ * ^


Tenor. ^ ^ * ^ ^ ^ * ^


Bassus. ^ * ^ ^ ^ ^ * ^


The second part of the introduction to Music: treating of Descant.
Master. WHom do I see a far off: is it not my scholar Philomates? out of
doubt it is he, and therefore I will salute him. Good morrow scholar.


Phi. God give you good morrow, and a hundredth: but I maruayle not a little to
see you so early, not only stirring, but out of doors also.


Ma. It is no maruayle to see a Snayle after a Rain to creep out of his shell,
and wander all about, seeking the moisture.


Phi. I pray you talk not so darkely, but let me understand your comparyson
plainly.


Ma. Then in plain terms, being ouerwearied with study, and taking the
opportunity of the fair morning: I am come to this place to snatch a mouthful
of this wholesome air: which gently breathing upon these sweet smelling flowers,
and making a whispering noise amongst these tender leaves, delights with
refreshing, and refreshes with delight my ouer-wearied senses. But tell me I
pray you the cause of your hither coming; have you not forgotten some part of
that which I showed you at our last being together?


Phi. No verily, but by the contrary, I am become such a singer as you would
wonder to hear me.


Ma. How came that to pass?


Phi. Be silent and I will show you. I have a Brother a great scholar, and a
reasonable musition for singing: he, at my first coming to you conceived an
opinion (I know not upon what reason grounded,) that I should never come to any
mean knowledge in music; and therefore, when he heard me practice alone, he
would continually mock me; indeed not without reason, for many times I would
sing half a note too high, other while as much too low; so that he could not
conteyne himself from laughing: yet now and then he would set me right, more
to let me see that he could do it, then that he meant any way to instruct me:
which caused me so diligently to apply my pricksong book; that in a manner, I
did no other thing but sing practicing, to skip from one key to another, from
flat to sharp, from sharp to flat, from any one place in the Scale to another,
so that there was no song so hard, but I would venture upon it, no Mood nor
Proportion so strange, but I would go through and sing perfectly before I left
it: and in the end I came to such perfection, that I might have been my
brothers master: for although he had a little more practice to sing at first
sight then I had: yet for the Moods Ligatures, and other such things I might
set him to school.


Ma. What then was the cause of your coming hither at this time?


Phi. Desire to learn, as before.


Ma. What would you now learn?


Phi. Being this last day upon occasion of some business at one of my
friends houses, we had some songs sung: Afterward falling to discourse of
music and musitions, one of the company naming a friend of his own, termed
him the best Descanter that was to be found. Now sir, I am at this time come
to know what Descant is, and to learn the same.


Ma. I thought you had only sought to know Pricktsong, whereby to recreate
your self being weary of other studies.


Pbi. In deed when I came to you first, I was of that mind: but the common
Proverb is in me verified, that much would have more: And seeing I have so
far set foot in music, I do not mean to go back till I have gone quite
through al, therefore I pray you now, (seeing the time and place fitteth so
well) to discourse to me what Descant is, what parts, and how many it has, and
the rest.


Ma. The heat increases, and that which you demand requires longer discourse
then you look for. Exposition of the name of Descant.
Let us therefore go and sit in yonder shadie Arbor to avoid the
vehementnesse of the Sun. The name of Descant is usurped of the musitions in
diverse significations: some time they take it for the whole harmony of many
voices: others sometime for one of the voices or parts: and that is, when the
whole song is not passing three voices. Last of all, they take it for singing a
part extempore upon a playnesong, in which sense we commonly use it: so that
when a man talks of a Descanter, it must be understood of one that can
extempore sing a part upon a plain song.


Phi. What is the mean to sing upon a plain song.


Ma. To know the distances both of Concords and Discords.


Phi. What is a Concord? What a Concord is.



Ma. It is a mixed sound compact of diverse voices, entering with delight in the
ear, and is either perfect or imperfect.


Phi. What is a perfect consanant? What a perfect Consonant is



Ma. It is that which may stand by it self, and of it self makes a perfect
harmony, without the mixture of any other.


Phi. Which distances make a Concord or consonant Harmony.


Ma. A third, How many concords there be.
a Fifth, a Sixth, and an eight.


Phi. Which be perfect, and which imperfect.


Ma. Perfect, an Unison, a Fifth, and their eights.


Phi. What do you mean by their eights.


Ma. Those notes which are distant from them eight notes, as from an unison, an
eight, from a fifth, a twelfe.


Phi. I pray you make me understand that, for in common sense it appears
against reason: for put Eight to One, and all will be Nine, put Eight to Five,
and all will be Thirteen.


Ma. I see you do notconceiue my meaning in reckoning your distances, for you
understood me exclusiuely, and I meant inclusiuely: as for example. From Gam ut
to b my is a third: for both the extremes are taken, so from Gam vt to G solre
ut is an eight, and from Gam ut to D lasolre is a twelfe, although it seem in
common sense but an a Leuenth.


Phi. Go forward with your discourse, for I understand you now.


Ma. Then I faie, a unison, a fifth, an eight, a twelfth, a fifteenth, a
nineteenth, and so forth in infinitum, be perfect cords.


Phi. What is an imperfect concord?


Ma. It is that which makes not a full sound, What an imperfect concord is.
and needs the following of a perfect concord to make it stand in the
harmony.


Phi. Which distances do make imperfect consonants?


Ma. A third, a sixth, and their eightes: a tenth, a thirteenth, etc.


Phi. What is a discord? How many imperfect cords there be.



Ma. It is a mixed sound compact of diverse sounds naturally, offending the
ear, and therefore commonly excluded from music. What a discord is.



Phi. Which distances make discord or dissonant sounds?


Ma. All such as do not make concords: as a second, a fourth, a seventh, and
their eightes: a ninth, aleuenth, a fourteenth, etc. And to the end that what I
have showed you concerning concords perfect and imperfect, and discords also
may the more strong lie stick to your memory, here is a table of them all,
which will not a little help you.


Concords. Discords. perfect. imperfect. perfect. imperfect. an unison. a
third. a fifth. a sixth. a second. a fourth. a seventh.

Or thus more briefly.
From 7 arises 14 And from 14 arises 21 From 6 arises 13 And from 13 arises
20 From 5 arises 12 And from 12 arises 19 From 4 arises 11 And from 11
arises 18 From 3 arises 10 And from 10 arises 17 From 2 arises 9 And from 9
arises 16 From 1 arises 8 And from 8 arises 15

Phi. I pray you show me the use of those cords.


Ma. The first way wherein we show the use of the cords, is called
Counterpoint: that is, when to a note of the plainsong, there goes but one
note of descant. Therefore when you would sing upon a plainsong, look where the
first note of it stands, and then sing another for it which may be distant
from it, three, five, or eight notes, and so forth with others, but with a
sixth we sildome begin or end.


Phi. Be there no other rules to be observed in singing on a plainsong then
this?


Ma. Yes.


Phi. Which be they?


Ma. If you be in the unison, fifth, or eight, from your base or plainsong, if
the base rise or fall, you must not rise and fall just as many notes as your
base did.


Phi. I pray you explain that by an example.


Ma. Here is one, wherein the unisons, fifthes, and eights, be severally set
down. ^ Unisons Fiftes Eights. Consequence of perfect concordes of one kind
condemned
^ ^


Phi. This is easy to be decerned as it is set down now: but it will not be
so easy to be perceived when they be mingled with other notes. Therefore I pray
you show me how they may be perceived amongste other cords. ^


Ma. There is no way to discern them, but by diligent marking wherein every
note stands, which you cannot do but by continual practice, and so by
marking where the notes stand, and how far every one is from the next
before, you shall easily know, both what cords they be, and also what cord
comes next.


Phi. I pray you explane this likewise by an example.


^ Ma. Here is one, wherein there be equal number of true and false notes, ^
therefore (if you can) show me now what concord every note is, and which be the
true notes, and which false.


Phi. The first note of the base, stands in C solfavt, and the first of the
treble in G sol re vt: so that they two make a Fifth, and therefore the first
note ^ is true. The second note of the base stands in A la mire, and the
second of the treble in E la mi, which two make also a fifth, and were true if
the base did not fall two notes, and the treble likewise two notes from the
place where they were before. The third note is true, and the last false.


Ma. You have conceived very well, and this is the meaning of the rule which
says, that you must not rise nor fall with two perfect cords together.
Consequence of perfect concords of diverse kinds allowed.



Phi. What may I not fall from the fifth to the eight thus? ^


Ma. Yes, but you must take the meaning thereof to be of perfect concordes of
one kind.


Phi. Now I pray you set me a plain song, and I will try how I can sing upon
it. ^


Ma. Set down any you list your self.


Phi. Then here is one, how like you this? ^ ^


Ma. This is well being your first proof, But it is not good to fall so from
the eight to the unison as you have done in your first two notes: Falling from
the eight to the unison condemned.
for admit, I should for my pleasure descend in the plainsong from G sol re ut,
to C fa ut, then would your descant be two eights: and whereas in your seventh
and eighth notes you fall from a sixth to an unison, it is indeed true, but not
allowed in two parts either ascending or descending, but worse ascending then
discending: Falling from a sixth to a unison condemned in two parts.
for descending it comes to an eight, which is much better, and has far
more fullness of sound then the unison has. Indeed, in many parts upon an
extremity, or for the point (or fuge) sake thus, or in Canon it were
tolerable, but most chiefly in Canon, the ^ reason whereof you shall know
hereafter, when you have learned what a Canon is. In the mean time let us go
forwards with the rest of your lesson. In your last two notes, the coming
from a sixth to a third is altogether not to be suffered in this place, ^ but if
it were in the middle of a song, Falling from sixth to a third both parts
dcending disalowed.
and then your B fa b mi being flat, it were not only sufferable but
commendable: but to come from F fa vt (which of his nature is always flat) to
B fab mi sharp, it is against nature. But if you would in this place make a
flat close to your last note, and so think to avoid the fault that could no
more be suffered then the other: for no close may be flat, but if you had made
your way thus, it had been much better. ^ ^

For the fewer parts your song is of, the more exquisite should descant be,
and of most choice cords, especially sixtes and tenthes: perfect cords are
not so much to be used in two parts, except passing (that is when one part
descends and another ascends) or at a close or beginning.


Phi. Indeed me thinks this fills mine ears better then mine own did, but
I pray you how do you make your last note saving two to stand in the harmony,
seeing it is a discord.


Ma. Discords mingled with concordes not only are tolerable, Discords well
taken allowed in music.
but make the descant more pleasing if they be well taken. Moreover, there is
no coming to a close, specially with a Cadence without a discord, and that
most commonly a seventh bound in with a sixth when your plainsong descends,
as it does in that example I showed you before.


Phi. What do you term a Cadence?


Ma. A Cadence we call that, when coming to a close, two notes are bound
together, What a Cadence is.
and the following note descends thus: or in any other keye after the same
manner. ^


Phi. I pray you then show me some ways of taking a Discord well, and also
some, where they are not well taken: that comparing the good with the badd, I
may the more easily conceive the nature of both.


Ma. Here be all the ways which this playnsong will allow, wherein a discord
may be taken with a Cadence in Counterpoynt. Examples of well taking a discord
with a Cadence.
^ ^

And whereas in the first of these examples you begin to bind upon the sixth,
the like you might have done upon the eight: or in the fifth, if your playnesong
had risen thus. ^


Phi. The second of these examples closes in the fifth, and I pray you do you
esteem that good? ^


Ma. It is tolerable though not so good in the ear, as that before which
closes in the eight, or that which next follows it. ^

But if the last note of the plain song ascended to d la sol re* thus: it had
been good and the best way of closing. ^


Phi. Now I pray you give me some examples where the discord is not well taken.
^


Ma. Here is one peruse it.


Phi. I pray you show me a reason why the Discord is evil taken here? ^


Ma. Because after the Discord we do not set a perfect concord for the perfect
concordes do not so well bear out the discords as the imperfect do, and the
reason is this. When a discord is taken, it is to cause the note following be
the more pleasing to the ear. Now the perfect Concords of them selves being
sufficiently pleasing, need no help to make them more agreeable, because they
can be no more then of themselves they were before.


Phi. Let us now come again to our example from which we have much disgressed.


Ma. We will, and therefore as I have told you of the good and bad taking of a
discord upon these notes: it follows to speak of a formal closing without a
discord or Cadence: and here be some ways formally, to end in that manner.^


Phi. The first and last ways I like very well, but the second way closing in
the fifth offends mine ears. ^


Ma. though it be unpleasant, Examples of formal closing without a Cadence.
yet is it true, and if it be true closing in the eight, why should it not be
true in the ^ fifth also. But if you like it not, there be (as the Proverb
says) more ways to the Wood then one.


Phi. You say true, but I have had so many observations, that I pray God I may
keep them al in mind.


Ma. The best means to keep them in mind is continually to be practicing,
and therefore let me see what you can do, on the same plain song again. ^


Phi. Here is away how like you it?


Ma. Peruse it, and see it how you like it your self. ^ The scholars second
lesson of Counter point.



Phi. I like it so well, as I think you shall not find many faults in it. ^


Ma. You live in a good opinion of your self, but let us examine your example.
This is in deed better then your first: Faults in this lesson What hitting the
eight on the face is.
But mark wherein I condemn it. In the first and second notes you rise as
though it were a close, causing a great informalitie of closing, when you
should but begin. Your third note is good: your fourh note is tolerable, but
in that you go from it to the twefth, it makes it unpleasing, and that we
commonly call hitting the eight on the face, when we come to an eight, and skip
up from it again to another perfect concord: But if it had been meeting one
another, the playnesong ascending, and the Descecant desending: it had bin very
good thus: ^ But I pray you where was your memory when you set down this sixth
note. Consequence of imperfect. Fifts no more to be used then of perfect.



Phi. I set it so of purpose, not of negligence.


Ma. And I pray you what reason moved you thereunto? ^


Phi. Where in do you condemn it?


Ma. For two twelfes or fifts, which was one of the principal caueats I gave
you to be avoided.


Phi. But they be not two fifts.


Ma. No, what reason have you to the contrary?


Phi. Because in singing I was taught that the sharp cliff takes away half of
his sound so that it cannot be properly called a fifth.


Ma. That is a new opinion. But I trust you will not say it is a fourth.


Phi. No.


Ma. Why?


Phi. Because it has half a note more then any fourth has.


Ma. and I hope you will not term it a sixth.


Phi. No.


Ma. Then if it be no fourth, because it is more then a fourth, nor a sixth
because it is less then a sixth, what name will you gine it?


Phi. I cannot tell.


Ma. A woman's reason to maintain an oppinion, Alfonso in his song Si ch'io mi
cred ho may being the twentieth song of his second book of Madrigals of five
voices at the very close between Canto and Alto
and then if she be asked why she does so, will answer, because I do so. In
deed I have seen the like committed by master Alfonso agreat musition, famous
and admired for his works amongst the best: but his fault was only in
pricking, for breaking a note in division, not looking to the rest of the
parts, made three fifts in the same order as you did. But yours came of
ignorance, his of Iolitie, and I my self have committed the like fault in my
first works of three parts, (yet if any one should reason with me) I wear not
able to defend it: but (no shame to confess;) my fault came by negligence* But
if I had seen it before it came to the press, it should not have passed so,
for I do utterly condemn it as being expressly against the principles of our
art: In the third part
but of this another time at more length.

And as for the rest of your lesson, though the cords be true, yet I much
mislike the form, for falling down so in tenths so long to gether is odius,
seeing you have so much shift otherwise. Likewise in your penult and antepenult
notes, you stand still with your descant, Standing with the plainesong
condemned. What formalitie is.
the plainsong standing still, which is a fault not to be suffered in so few
as two parts, especially in eightes. But in descanting you must not only
seek true cords, but formalitie also: that is, to make your descant carry
some form of relation to the plain song, as thus for example.


Phi. You sing two plainesong notes for one in ^ the descant, which I thought
you might not have done, except at a close.


Ma. That is the best kind of descant, Binding descant.
so it ^ be not too much used in one song, and it is commonly called binding
descant, but to instruct you somewhat more in formalitie, the chiefest point in
it is singing with a point or Fuge.


Phi. What is a Fuge? A Fuge.



Ma. We call that a Fuge, when one part begins ^ and the other sings the
same, for some number of notes (which the first did sing) as thus for example:


Phi. If I might play the zoilus with you in this ^ example, I might find much
matter to cavil at.


Ma. I pray you let me hear what you can say against any part of it, for I
would be glad that you could not only spy an oversight, but that you could
make one much better.


Phi. First of all, you let the plainsong sing twoe whole notes, for which you
sing nothing: secondly you begin on a sixth.


Ma. You have the eyes of a Lynx, in spying faults in my lesson, and I pray
God you may be so circumspect in your own: but one answer solueth both these
objections which you lay against me. And first for the rest, there can be no
point or Fuge taken without a rest, No fuge can be brought in without a rest.
Beginning upon a sixth in a fuge tolerable.
and in this place, it is impossible in counterpoint sooner to come in with the
point in the eight: and as for the beginning upon a sixth, the point likewise
compelled me to do so, although I could have made the descant begin it
otherwise, as thus ^ for avoiding of the sixth, altering the leading part, but
then would not your point have gone through to the end, answering to every
note of the plainesong, for that the ^ ninth note of force must be a fourth as
you see. But if you would sing the descant part fifteen notes lower, then will
it go well in the eight below the plainesong, and that note ^ which above was a
fourth, will fall to be a fifth under the plainsong thus: the point likewise
does excuse all the rest of the faults which might be objected against ^ me,
except it be for false descant, that is, two perfect cords of a kind together,
or such like.


Phi. You have given me a competent reason, and therefore I pray you show me, in
what and how many distances you may begin your point.


Ma. In the unison, Dista^ces where upon a huge may be begun.
fourth, fifth, sixth and eight, but this you must mark by the way, that when
we speak of a Fuge or Canon, How those distances are reckoned.
in the unison, fifth, or eight: it is to be understood, from the first note of
the leading part, as my lesson may be called two parts in one in the eighth,
although I did begin upon a sixth.


Phi. Well then, seeing by your words I conceive the formalitie of following a
point with a plainsong, I will try upon the same plainsong what I can do, for
the maintenance of this Fuge* But now that I have seen it, I think it
impossible to find any other way then that which you already have set down
on these notes.


Ma. Yes there is another way if you can find it out.


Phi. I shall never leave breaking my brains til I find it. And lo, here is
a way which although it do not drive the point quite through as yours did, yet
I think it formal.


Ma. You have rightly conceived the way ^ which I meant. But why did you
prick it of so much compass?


Phi. For avoiding the unison in the beginning. ^


Ma. It is well, and very hard and almost impossible to do more for the
bringing in of this point above the plainsong then you have don. Wherefore I
commend you, in that you have studied so earnestly for it, but can you do it
no otherwise?


Phi. No in truth, for while I studied to do that I did, I thought I should
have gone mad, with casting and devising, so that I think it impossible to
set any otherwaie.


Ma. Take the descant of your own way, which was in the eleventh, or fourth
above and sing it as you did begin (but in the fifth below under the
plainesong) and it will in a ^ manner go through to the end, whereas yours did
keep report but for five notes,


Phi. This rises five notes and the plainsong rises but four.


Ma. So did you in your example before, although ^ you could perceive it in
mine, and not in your own: but although it rise five notes, yet is it the
point. Rising from the fifth to the eight disalowed in music.
For if it were in Canon, we might not rise one note higher, nor descend one
note lower then the plainsong did: but in Fuges we are not so straightly
bound. But there is a worse fault in it which you have not espied, which is,
the rising from the fifth to the eight in the seventh and eight notes, but the
point excuses it, although it be not allowed for any of the best in two
parts, but in mo parts it might be suffered.


Phi. I would not have thought there had bin such variety to be used upon so
few notes.


Ma. There be many things which happen contrary to men's expectation, therefore
yet once again, try what you can do upon this plainsong, though not with a
point, yet with some formalitie or meaning in your way.


Phi. You use me as those who ride the great horses: for having first ridden
them in a small compass of ground, they bring them out and ride them abroad at
pleasure. But lo here is an example upon the same ^ ^ notes.


Ma: This is well enough, although if I peruse mine own first lesson of Fuge, I
shall find you a robber. For behold here be all your own notes in black
pricking, the rest which be white, be mine: for though you close in ye eight
below, yet is the descant all one. ^ ^


Phi. In truth I did not willingly rob you, although by chance I fell into your
cords.


Ma. I like it all the better. But I would counsel you, that you accustom not
your self to put in pieces of other men's doings amongst your own, for by
that means the diversity of veins will appear, and you be laughed to scorn
of the skilful for your pains


Phi. You say true, and I will take heed of it hereafter. But I think my self
now reasonably instructed in counterpoint. I pray you therefore go forward to
some other matter


Ma. There remains some things in counterpoint which you must know before you
go any further. Short and long
The first is called short and long, when we make one note alone, and then two
of the same kind bound together, and then another alone, as you see in this
lesson. long and short.


Phi. Nay by your leave, I will ^ make one of every sort, and therefore I pray
you proceed no further, til I have made one of these.


Ma. If you think it worth the making do so, for ^ if you can otherwise do
any thing upon a plaine-song, this will not be hard for you, but to do it
twice or thrice upon one plainesong in several ways, will be somewhat
harder, because that in these ways there is little shift.


Phi. Somewhat (said you?) I had rather have made twenty lessons of
counterpoint, then have made this one miserable way, which notwithstanding is
not to my contentment, but I pray you peruse it. ^


Ma. This is well done.


Phi. The rising to the twelfth of fifth I do mislike, in the seventh note, but
except I should have taken your descant, I had none other shift. ^


Ma. Let it go. Long and short, is when we make two notes tied together, and
then another of the same kind alone, Long and short
contrary to the other example before, thus. ^


Phi. Seeing I made one of the other sort, I will try if I can make one of this
also. ^


Ma. You will find as little shift in this as in the other. ^


Phi. Here is a way, but I was feign either to begin upon the sixth, or else to
have taken your ^ beginning, for here I may not rest.


Ma. Necessity has no law, and therefore a small fault in this place: but let
this suffice for counterpoint. ^


Phi. What follows next to be spoken of?


Ma. The making of twoe or more notes for one of the plainsong, Descant
commonly called Dupla.
which as (as I told you before) is falsely termed dupla, and is, when a
semibriefe or note of the plainsong, we make two minimes.


Phi. May you not now and then intermingle some crotchets.


Ma. Yes as many as you list, so you do not make al crotchets.


Phi. Then I think it is no more dupla.


Ma. You say true, although it should seem that this kind of dupla is derived
from the true dupla, and the common quadrupla out of this. But to talk of
these proportions is in this place out of purpose: therefore we will leave them
and return to the matter we have in hand.


Phi. I pray you then set me down the general rules of this kind of descant,
that so soon as may be I may put them in practice.


Ma. The rules of your cords, beginning, formalitie, and such like are the
same which you had in counterpoint, yet by the way, one caveat more I must
give you to be observed here, that is, that you take not a discord for the
first part of your note, except it be in binding manner, but for the last part
you may.


Phi. I pray you make me understand that by an example.


Ma. Here briefly you may see, that upon these notes you may sing thus. A
discord not to be taken for the first part of a note, except in binding wise
^ or thus. not thus nor thus. ^

But in binding descant, you may take a discord for the first part of the
note, thus. ^ or thus. ^


Phi. I will remember this, therefore I pray you set me a lesson in this
kind of descant, whereby I may strive to imitate you with another of the same
kind.


Ma. Here is one, mark it: and then make one of your own like it. ^


Phi. I perceive by this, that it is an easy matter for one that is well seen
in counterpoint to atain ^ in short time to ye knowledge of this kind.


Ma. It is so. But there be many things which at the first sight seem easy,
which in practice are found harder then one would think. But thus much I will
show you, that he who has this kind of descanting perfectly, may with small
trouble, quickly become a good musition.


Phi. You would then conclude, that the more pains are to be taken in it. But
here is my way, how do you like it?


Ma. Well for the first trial of ^ your understanding in this kind of descant.
But let us examine particularly every note, that you seeing the faults, may
avoid them ^ hereafter.


Phi. I pray you do so, and leave nothing untouched which aniewaie may be
objected.


Ma. The first, second, and thirde-notes of your lesson are tolerable, but
your fourth note is not to be suffered, because that and the next note
following are two eights.


Phi. The second part of the note is a Discord, and therefore it cannot be two
eights seeing they are not both together.


Ma. Though they be not both together, A discord coming between two perfect
cords of one kind, takes not away the faulty consequence.
yet is there no concord between them: and this you must mark, that a Discord
coming between two eights, does not let them to be two eightes still.
Likewise, if you set a discord between two fifts, it lets them not to be
two fifts still. Therefore if you will avoid the consequence of perfect cords
of one kind, you must put betwixt them other concords, and not discords.


Phi. This is more then I would have believed, if another had told it me, but I
pray you go on with the rest of the faults.


Ma. Your seventh and eighth notes have a fault, cosine german to that which
the others had, though it be not the same.


Phi. I am sure you cannot say that they be two eightes, for there is a tenth
after the first of them.


Ma. Yet it is very naught, Ascending or descending to the eight condemned.
to ascend or descend in that manner to the eight, for those four crotchets be
but the breaking off a semibriefe in G sol re ut, which if it were sung whole,
would make two eights together ascending, or if he who sings the plainsong
would break it thus, Zarlim inst. mus. part terza cap. 48.
^ (which is a thing in common use amongst the singers, it would make five
eightes together: and as it is, it ought not to be used, especially, in two
parts: for it is a gross fault. Your ninth and tenth notes, are two eightes
with the plainsong, for a minime rest set betwixt two eights, keeps them not
from being two eights, because as I said before, there comes no other
concord betwixt them: A minime rest put betwixt two perfect cords of one kind,
hinders not their faulty consequence
but if it were a semibriefe rest, then were it tolerable in more parts,
though not in two, for it is an vnartificiall kind of descanting in the middle
of a lesson, to let the plainsong sing alone, except it were for the bringing
in or maintaining of a point praecedent.


Phi. I pray you give me some examples of the bad manner of coming to
eightes, fifts, or unisons, that by them I may in time learn to find out
more: for without examples, I shall many times fall into one and the self
same error.


Ma. That is true: and therefore here be the grosest faults. Others by my
instruction and your own observations, you may learn at your leisure. And
because they may hereafter serve you when you come to practice base descant, I
have set them down first above the plainsong, and then under it.

^ Examples for alowances forbidden in music.
In the eight ^ ^ In the unison In the fifth ^ ^ ascending and descending to the
eight. ^


Phi. These I will diligently keep in mind, but I pray you how might I have
avoided those faults which I have committed in my lesson?


Ma. Many ways, and principally by altering the note going before that,
wherein the fault is committed.


Phi. Then I pray you set down my lesson corrected after your manner.


Ma. Here it is with your faults amended, and that of yours which was good
retained.


Phi. This is well: but I will ^ make another, that all my faults may come out
at the first, and so I may have the more time to mend them. ^


Ma. Do so: for the rules and practice joined together, will make you both
certain and quick in your sight.


Phi. Here is one, and as you did in the other, I pray you show me the faults
at length.


Ma. The beginning ^ of your desca^t is good, the second note is tolerable,
but might have ^ been made better.


Phi. May I not touch a discord, passing in yt, order?


Ma. You may, and it is impossible to ascend or descend in continual
deduction, An observation for passing notes.
without a discord, but the less offense you give in the discord the better it
is, and the shorter while you stay upon the discord, the less offense you
give. Therefore, if you had set a prick after the Minime, and made your two
Crotchets, two Quauers, it had been better, as thus: ^ Your next note had the
same fault, for that you stayed a whole Minime in the fourth, which you see I
have mended: making the last minim of your third note a crotchet, and setting a
prick after the first. Your fifth, sixth, and seventh notes be wild and
vnformall, for that vnformall skipping is condemned in this kind of singing,
Wild skipping condemned in descant.
but if you had made it thus it had been good and formal.


Phi. Wherein did you ^ mislike my Close, for I see you have altered it also.


Ma. Because you have stayed ^ in the note before it a whole semibriefe
together. Staying before the close condemned.
For if your descant should be stirring in any place, it should be in the note
before the close. As for this way, if a Musition should see it, he would say
it hangs too much in the close. Also you have risen to the eight, which is
all one, as if you had closed below, in the note from whence you fled.


Phi. I pray you before you go any further, to set me some ways of discordes
passing, ascending and discending, and how they may be allowable, and how
disalowable.


Ma. Although you might by the example which I showed you before, conceive the
nature of a passing note: yet to satisfy your desire, I will set down such as
might occur upon this plainsong, but in form of a Fuge, that you may perceive
how it is allowable or disallowable in Fuge: And because we will have the best
last, I will show you twoe ways, which though others have used them, yet are
no way tolerable: for it is impossible to take a discord worse, then in them
you may here see set down, which I have of ^ Bad taking of discords in this
kind of descant
^ purpose sought out for you, that you may shun them and such like hereafter.
Yet some, more upon their own opinion than any reason, have not spared to
praise them for excellent. But if they or any man else, can devise to make them
falser, then will I yield to them, and be content to be esteemed ignorant in my
profession. But I pray you peruse them.


Phi. It may be there is art in this which I cannot perceive, but I think it
goes but vnpleasinglie to the ear, specially in the two notes next before
the close.


Ma. I find no more art in it, then you perceived pleasure to the ear. And I
doubt not, if you your self should examine it, you would find matter enough
without a Tutor, to condemn it: as for the first, there are four notes that
might be easily amended with a prick, altering some of their length, by the
observation which I gave you before. But as for the place which you have
already censured, if all the masters and scholars in the world, should lay
their heads together, it were impossible to make it worse. But if it had been
thus ^ The former example bettered.
^ it had been tolerable, and you may see with what little alteration it is
made better, from the beginning to the end: not taking away any of the former
notes, except that vnformall close, which no man's ears could have endured: yet
as I told you before, the best manner of closing is in Cadence.


Phi. In Cadence there is little shift or variety, and therefore it should
seem not so often to be used, for avoiding of tediousness*


Ma. I find no better word to say after a good prayer, then Amen, nor no
better close to set after a good piece of descant, then a Cadence: yet if you
think you will not say as most voices do, you may use your discretion, and
say So be it, for variety. Here is also another way, which for badnesse will
give place to none other.


^ Other examples of discord evil taken.
^


Phi. What? Will not the Fuge excuse this, seeing it sings in a manner every
note of the plainesong?


Ma. No.


Phi. For what cause?


Ma. Because it both takes such bad allowances as are not permitted, and
likewise the point might have been better brought in thus.

But it were better ^ to leave the point and follow none at all, Examples of
discord well taken.
then for the points ^ sake, Wherein all the alowances be contained.
to make such harsh vnple sant music: for music was devised to content and
not offend the ear. ^

^ And as for the other two, as there is no means of euiltaking of discords,
which you have not in them (and therefore because I think I have some
authority over you, I will have you altogether to ^ abstain from the use of
them) so in these other twoe, there is no way of well taking a discord,
lacking, both for Fuge, and for binding descant, in that it is impossible to
take them truly on this plainesong, otherwise then I have set them down for
you, for in them be all the allowances: and besides, the first of them sings
every note of the plainsong.


Phi. I thank you heartily for them, and I mean by the grace of God, to keep
them so in memory, that whenever I have any use of them I, may have them
ready.


Ma. Try then to make another way formal without a Fuge?


Phi. Here is one, although I be doubtful how to think of it my self, and
therefore I long to hear your opinion. ^ ^


Ma. My opinion is that the half of it is tolerable, the other half I
mislike.


Phi. I suspected so much before, that the latter half would please you,
though the first half did not.


Ma. You are deceived, for the first half likes me better then the latter.


Phi. How can that be, Falling down with the plain song disalowed
seeing the latter keeps point in some sort with the plainsong.


Ma. But you fall as the plainsong does, still telling one tale with out
variety. But if you would maintain a point, you must go to work thus: ^ ^
But withal you must take this caveat, that you take no note above one Minime
rest, or three upon the greatest extremity of your point in two parts (for
that in long resting, the harmony seems bare) and the odd rest gives an
unspeakable grace to the point (as for an even number of restes, An od rest the
most artificial kind of bringing in a point.
few or none use them in this kind of descanting) but it is supposed, that
when a man keeps long silence, and then begins to speak, he will speak
to the purpose so in resting, you let the other go before, that you may the
better follow him at your ease and pleasure.


Phi. Here is a way which I have beaten out, wherein I have done what I could
to maintain the point.


Ma. You have maintained ^ your point indeed, but after such a manner, as no
body will commend: ^ for the latter half of your lesson is the same that your
first was, without any alteration, saving that to make it fill up the whole
time of the plainesong (which has two notes more then were before) you have
set it down in longer notes. One thing twice sung in one lesson condemned.
But by casting away those two notes from the plainsong, you may sing your
first half twice after one manner, as in this example you may see.

And therefore though this ^ way be true, yet would I have you to abstain
from the use of it, because in so small bounds and short space it is ^ odious
to repeat one thing twice.


Phi. Well then, I will remember not to take the same descant twice in one
lesson, but when I made it, I did not look into it so narrowly: yet I think
by these ways I do well enough understand the nature of this kind of descant,
therefore proceed to that which you think most meet to be learned next.


Ma. Before you proceed to any other thing, I would have you make some more
lessons in this kind, that you may thereby be the more ready in the practice
of your precepts: for that this way of maintaining a point or Fuge, comes as
much by use as by rule.


Phi. I may at all times make ways enough, seeing I have the order how to do
them, and know the most faults which are to be shunned: therefore if you
please, I pray proceed to some other matter, which you think most requisite.


Ma. Now seeing (as you say) you understand this kind of descant, What a
reuert is.
and know how to follow or maintain a point, it follows to learn how to
reuert it.


Phi. What do you call the reuerting of a point?


Ma. The reuerting of a point (which also we term a reuert) is, when a point
is made rising or falling, and then turned to go the contrary way, as many
notes as it did ye first.


Phi. That would be better understood by an example then by words, and
therefore I pray you give me one.


Ma. Here is one, mark it well, and study to imitate it: ^ ^


Phi. This way argues maistrie, and in my opinion he who can do it at the
first sight, needs not to stand telling his cords.


Ma. That is true indeed, but do you see how the point is reuerted?


Phi. Yes very well, for from your first note till the middle of your fifth,
your point is contained; and then in the middle of your fifth note you reuert
it, causing it ascend as many notes as it descended before, and so descend
where it ascended before.


Ma. You have well perceived the true making of this way, but I pray make one
of your own, that your practice may stretch as far as your speculation.


Phi. Lo here is one, How do you like it? ^ ^


Ma. I think it is fatal to you, to have these wild points of vnformal
skippings (which I pray you learn to leave) otherways your first five notes
be tolerable, in your fifth note you begin your reuert well: Falling from the
sixth to the eight condemned.
but in your seventh and eight notes, you fall from the thirteenth or sixth, to
the eight or unison, which was one of the faults I condemned, in your first
lesson of Counterpoint: the rest of your descant is passable. But I must
admonish you, that in making reuerts, you choose such points as may be easily
driven thorough to the end, without wresting, changing of notes, or points in
harsh cords, which can not be done perfectly well, without great foresight of
the notes which are to come after. Therefore I would wish you, before you set
down any point, diligently to consider your plainsong, to see what points
will aptliest agree with the nature of it, for that upon one ground or
plainesong, innumerable ways may be made, but many better then other.


Phi. Then for a trial that I have rightly conceived your meaning, I will make
another way reuerted, that then we may go forward with other matters.


Ma. Do so, but take heed of forgetting your rules.


Phi. I am in a better opinion of the goodness of mine own memory, then to
do so. but I pray you peruse this way, if there be in it any sensible
gross fault, show it me. ^ ^


Ma. All this is sufferable, except your seventh and eight notes, wherein you
falfrom B fa b mi to F fa vt, and so vnformallie to B fa b mi back again,
thus: ^ which though it be better then that which I condemned in the Close of
your first lesson of Counterpoint yet is it of the same nature and ^ naught,
but you may in continual deduction, ascend from mi to fa thus. I know you will
make the point your excuse, Falling from B fa b mi sharp to F fa vt condemned.
but (as I told you before) I would rather have begun again and taken a new
point, then I would have committed so gross a fault: as for the rest of your
lesson it is tolerable. Now I hope by the precepts which I have already
given you, in your examples going before, you may conceive the nature of treble
descant, it follows to show you how to make base descant.


Phi. What is Base descant?


Ma. It is that kind of descanting, Base descant.
where your sight of taking and using your cords must be under the plainsong.


Phi. What rules are to be observed in base descant?


Ma. The same which were in treble descant, but you must take heed that your
cords deceive you not, for that which above your plainsong was a third, will
be under your plainsong a sixth: and that which above your plainsong was a
fourth, will be under your plainsong a fifth: and which above was a fifth, will
under the plainsong be a fourth: and lastly, A caveat for the sight of cords
under the plainsong.
that which above your plainsong was a sixth, will under it be a third. And so
likewise in your discords, that which above your plainsong was a second, will
be under it a seventh: and that which above the plainsong was a seventh, will be
under the plainsong a second.


Phi. But in descanting I was taught to reckon my cords from the plainsong or
ground.


Ma. That is true: but in base descant the base is the ground, although we are
bound to see it upon the plainsong: for your plainsong is as it were your
theme, and your descant (either base or treble) as it were your declamation,
and either you may reckon your cords from your base vpwardes, or from the
plainesong downewarde, which you list. For as it is twenty miles by account
from London to ware, so is it twenty from Ware to London.


Phi. I pray you set me an example of base descant.


Ma. Here is one. ^ ^


Phi. I think it shall be no hard matter for me to imitate this.


Ma. Set down your way, and then I will tell you how well you have don it:


Phi. Here it is, and I think it shall need but little correction.


Ma. Conceit of their ^ own sufficiency has overthrown many, who otherwise
would have proved excellent. There ^ fore in any case, never think so well
of your self but let other men praise you, if you be praise worthy: then may
you justly take it to your self, so it be done with moderation and without
arrogancy.


Phi. I will: but wherein do you condemn my way?


Ma. In those things wherein I did not think you should have erred. A discord
taken for the first part of a note not in binding wise condemned
For in the beginning of your fourth note, you take a discord for the first
part, and not in binding wise: your other faults are not so gross, and yet
must they be told.


Phi. In what notes be they?


Ma. In the four notes going before the close, for there your descant would
have been more stirring, and by reason it hangs so much, I do not, nor cannot
greatly commend it, although it be true in the cords.


Phi. What? Is not that binding descant good?


Ma. That kind of binding with concords is not so good as those bindinges which
are mixed with discordes: Binding with concords not so good as that with
discords.
but here is your own way with a little alteration much better. ^ ^


Phi. This is the course of the world, that where we think our selves surest,
there are we furthest off from our purpose. And I thought verily, that if
there could have been any fault found in my way, it should have bin so small,
that it should not have bin worth the speaking of. But when we have a little,
we straight imagine that we have all, when God knows the least part of that
which we know not, is more then al we know. Therefore I pray you yet set me
another example, that considering it with your other, I may more cleerelie
perceive the artificial composition of them both.


Ma. Here be two, choose which of them you think best and imitate it. ^ ^


Phi. It is not for me to ^ judge or censure your works, for I was far dashed
in my last way (which I thought so exceeding ^ good) that I dare never
credit mine own judgment hereafter. But yet I pray you why have you left
out the sharp cliffe before your sixth note in the plain song of your second
way.


Ma. Although the descant be true (if the sharp cliffe were there) yea and
passable with many, The ear the most just judge of al music.
yet let your ear be judge, how far different the air of the descant (the
plainsong being flat) is from it self, when the plainsong is sharp. And
therefore, because I thought it better flat then sharp, I have set it flat.
But if any man like the other way better, let him use his discretion.


Phi. It is not for me to disallow your opinion: but what rests for me to do
next?


Ma. By working we become workmen: therefore once again set down a way of
this kind of descant.


Phi. That was my intended purpose before, and therefore here is one, and I
pray you censure it without any flattery. ^ ^


Ma. This is very well, and now I see you begin to conceive the nature of base
descant: wherefore here is yet another way, of which kind I would have you
make one. ^ ^


Phi. This is a point reuerted, and (to be plain) I despair for ever doing
the like.


Ma. Yet try, and I doubt not but with labor you may overcome greater
difficulties


Phi. Here is a way, I pray you how like you it? ^ ^


Ma. I perceive by this way, that if you will be careful and practice,
censuring your own dooinges with judgment, you need few more instructions
for these ways: therefore my counsel is, that when you have made any thing,
you peruse it, and correct it the second and third time before you leave it.
But now seeing you know the rules of singing one part above or under the
plainsong: it follows, to show you how to make more parts. But before we
come to that, I must show you those things which of old were taught, before
they can sing two parts: and it shall be enough to set you a way of every
one of them, that you may see the manner of making of them, for the alowances
and descanting be the same which were before: so that he who can do that which
you have already done, may easily do them all. The first is called crotchet,
minime, and crotchet, crotchet, Crotchet, minime and crotchet.
minime and crotchet, because the notes was disposed so, as you may see in this
example, ^ ^ This way in every note comes even in time of stroke. ^

The second is called Minime and Crotchet, because there come a ^ minime and a
crotchet successively through to the end, this after two notes comes even in
the stroke, and in the third likewise, and so in course again to the end,
Minime, crotchet and minim.
as here you may see. ^ ^ The third is a driving way in two crotchets and a
minime, Two crotchets and a minimes
but odded by a rest, so that it never comes even till the close, thus. ^ ^ ^
^ The fourth way drives a crotchet rest throughout a whole lesson all of
minims, so that it never comes even till the end, Driving of a crotchet rest
to the end
thus. ^ ^ And in these ways you may make infinite variety, altering some
note, or driving it thorough others, or by some rest driven, or making your
plainesong figuration.


Phi. What is Figuration? Figuration.



Ma. When you sing one note of the plainsong long, and another short, and yet
both pricked in one form. Or making your plainesong as your descant notes, and
so making upon it, or then driving some note or rest through your plainsong,
making it two long, three long, etc. Or three minimes, five minimes, or so
forth, two minimes and a crotchet, three minimes and a crotchet, five minimes
and a crotchet, etc. with infinite more, as men's inventions shall best like:
for, as so many men so many minds, so their inventions will be diverse, and
diversely inclined. The fifth way is called Tripla, when for one note of the
plainsong, Triplain the minime.
they make three black minimes thus. ^ 31 ^ ^ though (as I told you before)
this be not the true tripla, yet have I set it down unto you in this place,
that you might know not only that which is right, but also that which others
esteemed right. And therefore likewise have I set down the proportions ^
following, not according as it ought to be in reason, but to content
wranglers, who I know will at every little oversight, take occasion to
backbire, and detract from that which they cannot disprove. I know they will
excuse themselves with that new invention of Tripla to the semibriefe, and
tripla to the minime, and that that kind of tripla which is tripla to the
minime, must be pricked in minimes, and the other in semibriefes. But in that
invention they ouershoote themselves, seeing it is grounded upon custom, and
not upon reason. They will reply and say, the Italians have used it: that I
grant, but not in that order as we do: For when they mark tripla of three
minimes for a stroke, they do most usually set these numbers before it 52:
which is the true marking of Sesqui altera, and these three minimes are true
sesqui altra it self. But you shall never find in any of their works a
minime set down for the time of a black semibriefe and a Crotchet, or three
black minimes, which all our Composers both for voices and instruments do
most commonly use. It is true that Zaccone in the second book and 38. chapter
of practice of music, does allow a minime for a stroke in the more prolation,
and proves it out of Palestina, but that is not when the song is marked with
proportionate numbers: but when all the parts have the less prolation, and
one only part has the more, In the first part
in which case the part so marked, contains Augmentation as I said before:
and so is every minime of the more prolation worth a semibriefe of the less.
But let every one use his discretion, it is enough for me to let you see that
I have said nothing without reason, and that it has been no small toll for
me to seek out the authorities of so many famous and excellent men, for the
confirmation of that, which some will think scarce worth the making mention
of. Quadrupla and Quintupla, they denominated after the number of black
minimes set for a note of the plainsong, as in these examples you may see.
Quadrupla.
^ ^ ^ ^ ^ Quintupla.
51 ^ ^ ^ And so forth sextupla, septupla, and infinite more which it will be
superfluous to set down in this place. But if you think you would consider
of them also, you may find them in my Christ's Cross set down before, sesqui
altra and sesquitertia, they denominated after the number of black semibriefes
set for one note of the plainsong, as in these two following.

^ Sesquialtra
32 92 ^ ^ Here they set down certain observations, which they termed
Inductions, as here you see in the first two bars Sesqui altra perfect:
Inductions and what they be.
that they called the induction to nine, to two, which is Quadrupla
Sesquialtra. In the third ^ bar you have broken sesquialtra, and the rest to
the end is Quadrupla sesquialtra, or as they termed it, nine to two, and every
proportion whole, is called the Inductio^ to that which it makes being broken.
As tripla being broken in the more prolation, will make Nonupla, and so is
tripla the Induction to nonupla: Or in the less prolation will make sextupla,
and so is the induction to sextupla: but let this suffice. It follows to show
you Sesquitertia, whereof here is an example.

^ 43 Therebe many other proportions (whereof you have examples in my Christ's
cross before) which here be not set down, and many you may see elsewhere.
Sesquitertia.
Also you ^ your self may devise infinite more, which may be both artificial
and delightful, and therefore I will leave to speak any more of them at this
time, for there be many other things which men have devised upon these ways,
which if one would particularly deduce, he might write all his life time and
never make an end, as John Spataro of Bologna did, who wrote a whole great
book, containing nothing else but the manner of singing Sesquialtra
proportion. Two parts upon a plainsong.
But to return to our interrupted purpose, of making more parts then one upon
a plainsong. Take any of the ways of base descant which you made, and make
another part, which may serve for a treble to it above the plainesong, being
true to both.


Phi. Yours be better and more formal then mine, and therefore I will take one
of yours


Ma. If you list do so.


Phi. Here is a way which I think is true. ^ ^ ^


Ma. This is much, and so much as one shall hardly find any other way to be
sung in this manner upon this ground: for I can see but one other way besides
that, which is this, ^ but I did not mean that you should have made your
treble in counterpoint, but in descant manner, as your base descant was, thus. ^


Phi. I did not conceive your meaning, till now, that you have explained it by
an example: and therefore I will see what I can do to counterfeit it, although
in my opinion it be hard to make.


Ma. It is no hard matter, for you are not tied when your base sings a
semibriefe or any other note to sing one of the same length, but you may
break your notes at your pleasure and sing what you list, so it be in true
cords to the other two parts: but especially fiftes and thirds intermingled
with sixes, which of all other be the sweetest and most fit for three parts.
For in four or five parts you must have more scope, because there be more
parts to be supplied. And therefore the eight must of force be the oftener
used.


Phi. Well then here is a way, correct it, and show me the faults I pray you.
^


Ma. This is well. But why did you stand so long before the close?


Phi. Because I saw none other way to come to it. Hanging in the close
condemned.



Ma. Yes there is shift enough: but why did you stand still with your last
note also? seeing there was no necessity in that. Many perfect cords together
condemned.
For it had been much better to have come down and closed in the third, for
that it is tedious to close with so many perfect cords together, and not so
good in the air. But here is another example (which I pray you mark ^ and
confer with my last going before) whereby you may learn to have some meaning
in your parts to make them answer in Fuge. For if you examine well mine other
going before, you shall see how the beginning of the treble leads the base,
and how in the third note the base leads the treble in the fourth note, and
how the beginning of the ninth note of the base, leads the treble in the same
note and next following.


Phi. I perceive all that, and now will I examine this which you have set
down. In your treble you follow the Fuge of the plainsong. But I pray you
what reason moved you to take a discord for the first part of your fourth note
(which is the second of the treble) and then to take a sharp for the latter
half, your note being flat.


Ma. As for the discord it is taken in binding manner, In what manner a sharp,
for a flat is alowable in the fifth.
and as for the sharp in the base for the flat in the treble, the base being a
Cadence, the nature thereof requires a sharp, and yet let your ears (or whose
soever else) be judge, sing it and you will like the sharp much better then the
flat in my opinion. Yet this you must mark by the way, that though this be
good in half a note as here you see, yet is it intolerable in whole
semibriefes.


Phi. This observation is necessary to be known, but as for the rest of your
lesson, I see how one part leads after another: therefore I will set down a
way which I pray you censure.


Ma. I do not use when I find any faults in your lessons to leave them
untold, and therefore that protestation is needless.


Phi. Then here it is, peruse it. ^


Ma. In this lesson in the very beginning, I greatly mislike that rising from
the fourth to the fifth, Going up from the fourth to the fifth both parts
asce^ding condemned.
between the plainsong and the treble: although they be both true to the
base, yet you must have a regard that the parts be formal betwixt themselves
as well as to the base. Next, your standing in one place two whole semibriefes
together, that is, in the latter end of the third note, all the fourth, and
half of the fifth. Thirdly, your causing the treble strike a sharp eight to
the base, which is a fault much offending the ear, Long standing in a place
condemned.
though not so much in sight. Therefore hereafter take heed of ever touching a
sharp eight, except it be naturally in E la mi, or B fa b mi (for these
sharpes in F fa vt, Csolfa vt, and such like be wrested out of their
properties, although they be true and may be suffered, A sharp eight
disallowed.
yet would I vvishe you to shun them as much as you may, for that it is not
altogether so pleasing in the ear, as that which comes in his own nature)
or at a close betwixt two middle parts, Going from F fa ut sharp to B fa b mi
sharp disallowed.
and sildome so. Fourthlie, your going from F fa vt to B fa b mi, in the eight
note, in which fault, you have been now thrice taken. Lastly, your old fault,
standing so long before the close: all these be gross falts: but here is your
own way altered in those places which I told you did mislike me, and which
you your self might have made much better, if you had been attentive to your
matter in hand. But such is the nature of you scholars, that so you do much,
you care not how it be done, though it be better to make one point well, then
twenty naughty ones, needing correction almost in every place. ^


Phi. You blamed my beginning, yet have you altered it nothing, saving that you
have set it eight notes higher then it was before. ^


Ma. I have indeed reserved your beginning, to let you see, that by altering
but half a note in the plainesong, it might have been made true as I have
set it down. ^ ^


Phi. What? may you alter the plainsong so at your pleasure?


Ma. You may break the plain song at your pleasure (as you shall know
hereafter) but in this place I altered that note, Better to break the
plainesong then dissolve a point.
because I would not dissolve your point which was good with the base.


Phi. But upon what considerations, and in what order may you break the
plainsong?


Ma. It would be out of purpose to dispute that matter in this place, but you
shall know it afterward at full, when I shall set you down a rule of breaking
any plainesong whatsoever.


Phi. I will then cease at this time to be more inquisitiue thereof: but I will
see if I can make another way which may content you, seeing my last proved so
bad: but now yt I see it I think it impossible to find another way upon this
base answering in the Fuge.


Ma. No? Here is one, wherein you have the point reuerted: but in the end of
the ^ twelfth note I have set down a kind of closing (because of your self
you could not have discerned it) from which I would have you altogether
abstain, Meeting of the flat and sharp eight condemned.
for it is an unpleasant harsh music: and though it has much pleased diverse
of our descanters in times past, and been received as current amongst others
of later time: yet has it ever been condemned of the most skillful here in
England, and scoffed at amongst strangers. For as they say, there can be
nothing falser (and their opinion seems to me to be grounded upon good
reason) how ever it contenteth others. It follows now to speak of two
parts in one.


Phi. What do you term two parts in one?


Ma. It is when two parts are so made, Definition of two parts in one.
as one sings every note and rest in the same length and order which the
leading part did sing before. But because I promised you to set down a way
of breaking the plainsong, before I come to speak of tvvoe parts in one, I
will give you an example out of the works of M. Persley (wherewith we will
content our selves at this present, because it had been a thing very
tedious, to have set down so many examples of this matter, as are every
where to be found in the works of M. Redford, M. Tallis, Preston, Hodgis,
Thorn, Selbie, and diverse others: where you shall find such variety of
breaking of plainsongs, as one not very well skilled in music, should scant
descerne any plainsong at al) whereby you may learn to break any plainsong
whatsoever.


Phi. What general rules have you for that?


Ma. One rule, which is ever to keep the substance of the note of the
plainsong.


Phi. What do you call keeping the substance of a note?


Ma. When in breaking it, you sing either your first or last note in the same
key wherein it stands, or in his eight.


Phi. I pray you explain ^ that by an example.


Ma. Here be three plainesong notes which you may break thus:^ thus ^ or thus
^ and infinite more ways which you may devise to fit your Canon, for these I
have only set down to show you what the keeping the substance of your note is.


Phi. I understand your meaning, and therefore I pray you set down that
example which you promised.


Ma. Here it is set down in partition, because you should the more easily
perceive the conueiance of the parts.

^ The plainsung of the Hymn Saluator mundi, broken in division, and brought
in a Canon of three parts in one, by Osbert Parsley.
^ ^ ^ ^ Saluator mundi domine. ^

I have likewise set down the plainesong, that you may perceive the breaking
of every note, Great maisteries upon a plainsong not the sweetest music.
and not that you should sing it for a part with the rest: for the rest are
made out of it and not upon it. And as concerning the descanting, although I
cannot commend it for the best in the music, yet is it praise worthy, and
though in some places it be harsh to the ear, yet is it more tolerable in
this way, then in two parts in one upon a plainsong, because that upon a
plainsong there is more shift then in this kind.


Phi. I perceive that this example will serve me to more purpose hereafter, if
I shall come to try maisteries, then at this time to learn descant. Therefore
I will pass it, and pray you to go forward with your begun purpose of twoe
parts in one, the definition whereof I have had before.


Ma. Then it follows to declare the kinds thereof, which we distinguish no
other ways, then by the distance of the first note of the following part, from
the first of the leading which if it be a fourth, the song or Canon is called
two parts in one in ye fourth if a Fifth, in the fifth, and so forth in other
distances. But if the Canon be in the eight, of these, as in the tenth,
twelfth, or so, then commonly is the plainesong in the middle betwixt the
leading and following part* yet is not that rule so general, but that you may
set the plainsong either above or below at your pleasure. And because he who
can perfectly make two parts upon a plainsong, may the more easier bind
himself to a rule when he list, I will only set you down an example of the
most usual ways that you may by your self put them in practice.


Phi. What? be there no rules to be observed in the making of two parts in one
upon a plainsong?


Ma. No verelie, in that the form of making the Canons is so many and diverse
ways altered, that no general rule may be gathered: yet in the making of two
parts in one in the fourth, A note for two parts in one in the fourth.
if you would have your following part in the way of counterpoint to follow
within one note after the other, you must not ascend two, nor descend three.
But if you descend two, and ascend three, it will be well: as in this example
(which because you should the better conceive, I have set down both plain and
divided) you may see.


Thus plain. ^ Two parts in one in the fourth This way, some term a Fuge in
epidiatessaron, that is in the fourth above. But if the leading part were
highest, then would they call it in hypodiatessaron, which is the fourth
beneath: And so likewise in the other distances, diapente which is the fifth:
and diapason which is the eighth.
^ Thus divided. ^ Two parts in one in the fourth. ^

And by the contrary in two parts in one in the fifth, you may go as many
down together as you will, but not up and generally or most commonly that
which was true in two parts in one in the fourth, the contrary will be true
in two parts in one in the fifth, an example whereof you have in this Canon
following: wherein also I have broken the plainsong of purpose, and caused it
to answer in Fuge as a third part to the others: so that you may at your
pleasure, sing it broken or whole, for both the ways.

Thus plain. ^ Fuga in epidiapente.
two parts in one in the fifth. ^ Thus divided. ^ two parts in one in the fifth*
^

Phi. I pray you (if I may be so bold as to interrupt your purpose) that you
will let me try what I could do to make two parts in one in the fifth in
counterpoint.


Ma. I am contented, for by making of that, you shall prepare the way for your
self to the better making of the rest.


Phi. Here is then a way, I pray peruse it, but I fear me you will condemn
it because I have caused the treble part to lead, which in your example is
contrary. ^


Ma. It is not material which part lead, Fuga in hypodiapente.
except you were enjoined to the contrary, and seeing you have done this so
well plain, let me see how you can divide it.


Phi. Thus, and I pray you peruse it, that I may here your opinion of it.


Two parts in one in the fifth. ^

Ma. This is well broken, and now I will give you some other examples in the
fifth, wherein you have your plainsong changed from part to part, first in
the treble, next in the tenor, lastly in the base.


Phi. I pray you yet give me leave to interrupt your purpose, that seeing I
have made a way in the fifth, I may make one in the fourth also, and then I
will interrupt your speech no more.


Ma. Do so if your mind serve you.


Phi. Here it is in descant wise without counterpoint, for I thought it too
much trouble, first to make it plain and then break it.


Two parts in one in the fourth. ^

Ma. This way is so well, as I perceive no sensible fault in it.


Phi. I am the better contented, and therefore (if you please) you may proceed
to those ways which you vvoulde have set down before.


Ma. Here they be. As for the other ways, because they be done by plain sight
without rule, I will set them down without speaking any more of them: only
this by the way you must note: that if your Canon be in the fourth, and the
lower part lead, if you sing the leading part an eight higher, your Canon will
be in Hypodiapente, which is the fifth below, and by the contrary, if your
Canon be in the fifth, the lower part leading, if you sing the leading part an
eight higher, your Canon will be in hypodiatessaron, or in the fourth below.


Two parts in one in the fifth, the plainsong in the treble: ^

Another example in the fifth the plainsong in the midst. ^ Another example of
two parts in one in the fifth, the plainsong in the base. ^ Two parts in one in
the sixth. ^

This way in the sixth (if you sing ye lower part eight notes higher, and the
higher part eight notes lower) will be in the third or tenth, and by the
contrary if the Canon be in the tenth if you sing the lower part eight notes
higher, and the higher part eight notes lower, then will your Canon be in the
sixth, either above or below, according as the leading part shall be.

Two parts in one in the seventh. ^

If your Canon be in the seventh the lower part being sung an eight higher,
and the higher part an eight lower, it will be in the ninth, and by the
contrary if the Canon be in the ninth, the lovver part sung eight notes
higher, and the higher part eight notes lower, will make it in the seventh.

Two parts in one in the eight. ^

The plainsong in the third bar I have broken to shun a little harshnesse in
the descant, if any man like it better whole, he may sing it as it was in the
Canon before, for though it be somewhat harsh, yet is it sufferable.

Two parts in one in the ninth. ^ Two parts in one in the tenth. ^

Here is also another way in the tenth, which the masters call per arsin and
thesin, that is by rising and falling* for when the higher part ascends, the
lower part descends, and when the lovver part ascends, the higher part
descends, and though I have here set it down in the tenth, yet may it be
made in any other distance you please.

^ Duae parts in vna per arsin and thesin in the tenth. ^ And because we are
come to speak of two parts in one upon a plainsong, per arsin and thesin, I
thought good to set down a way made by M. Bird, which for difficulty in the
composition is not inferior to any which I have seen: for it is both made per
arsin and thesin, and likewise the point or Fuge is reuerted, note for note:
which thing, how hard it is to perform upon a plainsong, none can perfectly
know, but he who has or shall go about to do the like. And to speak
vprightlie, I take the plainsong to be made with the descant, for the more
easy effecting of his purpose. But in my opinion, who soever shall go about to
make such another, upon any common known plainesong or hymn, shall find more
difficulty then he looked for. And although he should assaie twenty several
hymns or plainsonges for finding of one to his purpose, I doubt if he should
any way go beyond the excellency of the composition of this, and therefore I
have set it down in partition.

^ Duae parts in vnaper arsin and thesin bis re-petite. ^ Adplacitum ^

^

And thus much for Canons of two parts in one, which though I have set down
at length in two several parts, yet are they most commonly pricked both in
one, and here in England for the most part without any sign at al, where and
when to begin the following part: which use many times caused diverse good
Musicians sit a whole day, to find out the follovving part of a Canon: A
compendious way of pricking of canons.
which being found (it might be) was scant worth the hearing. But the French
men and Italians, have used a way that though there were four or five parts
in one, yet might it be perceived and sung at the first, and the manner thereof
is this. Of how many parts the Canon is, so many Cliefes do they set at the
beginning of the verse, still causing that which stands nearest unto the
music, serve for the leading part, the next toward the left hand, for the
next following part, and so consequently to the last. But if betvveene any
two Cliefes you find rests, those belong to that part, which the cliefe
standing next unto them on the left side signifies.

Example. ^.?..?. ^

Here be two parts in one in the Diapason cum diatessaron, or as we term it,
in the eleventh above, where you see first a C sol fa ut Cliefe standing on the
lowest rule, and after it three minime rests. Then stands the F fa ut cliffe
on the fourth rule from below, and because that stands nearest to the notes,
the base (which that cliffe represents) must begin, resting a minime rest
after the plainsong, and the treble three minim restes. And least you should
miss in reckoning your pauses or rests, the note whereupon the following part
must begin, is marked with this sign?. It is true that one of those two, the
sign or the rests is superfluous, but the order of setting more cliffes then
one to one verse, being but of late devised, was not used when the sign was
most common, but in stead of them, over or under the song was written, in what
distance the following part was from the leading, and most commonly in this
manner. Canon in * or * Superiore, or inferiore. But to shun the labor of
vvriting those words, the cliffes and rests have been devised, showing the same
thing. And to the intent you may the better conceive it, here is another
example wherein the treble begins, and the mean follows within a
semibriefe after in the Hypodiapente or fifth below.

^ 31 ^

And this I thought good to show you, not for any curiosity which is in it,
but for the easiness and commodity which it has, because it is better then
to prick so as to make one sit five or six hours beating his brains, to
find out the following part. But such has been our manner in many other
things heretofore, to do things blindlie, and to trouble the wits of
practisioners: whereas by the contrary, strangers have put all their care how
to make things plain and easily understood, but of this enough There is also
a manner of composition used amongst the Italians. Double desca^t
which they call Contrapunto doppio, or double descant, and though it be no
Canon, yet is it very near the nature of a Canon: and therefore I thought it
meetest to be handled in this place, and it is no other thing, but a certain
kind of composition, which being sung after diverse sorts, Division of double
desca^t.
by changing the parts, makes diverse manners of harmony: and is found to be
of two sorts. The first is, when the principal (that is the thing as it is
first made) and the reply (that is it which the principal having the parts
changed does make) are sung, changing the parts in such manner, as the highest
part may be made the lowest, and the lowest part the highest, without any
change of motion: that is, if they went upward at the first, they go also
upward when they are changed: and if they went downward at the first, they go
likewise downward being changed. And this is likewise of two sorts: for if
they have the same motions being changed, they either keep the same names of
the notes which were before, or alter them: if they keep the same names, the
reply sings the high part of the principal a fifth lower, and the lower part
an eight higher: and if it alter the names of the notes, the higher part of the
principal is sung in the reply a tenth lower, and the lovver part an eight
higher.

The second kind of double descant, is when the parts changed, the higher in
the lower, go by contrary motions: that is, if they both ascend before,
being changed they descend: Rules to be observed in compositions of the first
sort of the first kind of double descant.
or if they descend before, they ascend being changed. Therefore, when we
compose in the first manner, which keeps the same motions and the same names,
we may not put in the principal a sixth, because in the reply it will make a
discord: nor may we put the parts of the song so far asunder, as to pass a
twelfe. Nor may we ever cause the higher part come under the lower, nor the
lovver above the higher, because both those notes which pass the twelfth, and
also those which make the lovver part come above the higher in the reply, will
make discords. We may not also put in the principal a Cadence, wherein the
seventh is taken, because that in the reply it will not do well. We may very
well use the Cadence wherein the second or fourth is taken, because in the
reply they will cause very good effects. We must not also put in the
principal a flat tenth, after which follows an eight, or a tvvelfe (a flat
tenth is when the highest note of the tenth is flat, as from D sol re, to F fa
ut in alte flat, or from Gam ut, to B fa b mi flat) nor a flat third before
an unison, or a fifth when the parts go by contrary motions: because if they be
so put in the principal, there will follow Tritonus or false fourth in the
reply. Note also, that every tvvelfe in the principal, will be in the reply
an unison. And every fifth an eight, and al these rules must be exactlie kept in
the principal, else will not the reply be without faults. Note also, that if
you will close with a Cadence, you must of necessity end either your principal
or reply, in the fifth or twelf, which also happens in the Cadences, in what
place soever of the song they be, and betvveene the parts will be heard the
relation of a Tritouns or false fourth, but that will be a small matter, if
the rest of the composition be duly ordered, as you may perceive in this
example.

^ The higher part of the principal. ^ ^ ^ The lower part of the principal. ^
^ Now change the higher part, making it lower by a fifth, and the lower part
higher by an eight, and so shall you have the reply thus: ^ The higher part of
the reply. ^ ^ ^ The lower part of the reply. ^ ^

And this is called double descant in the twelfe: but if we would compose in
the second kind (that is in it, Caueats for compositions in the second sort of
the first kind of double descant.
which in the reply keeps the same motions but not ye same names which were
in the principal) we must not put in any case two cords of one kind
together in the principal: as two thirdes, or two sixes, and such like,
although the one be great or sharp, and the other small or flat: nor may we
put Cadences without a discord. The sixth likewise in this kind may be used if
(as I said before) you put not twoe of them together also if you list, the
parts may one go thorough another that is, the lower may go above the
higher, and the higher under the lower, but with this caveat, that when they be
so mingled, you make them no further distant then a third, because that when
they remain in their own bounds, they may be distant a twelfth one from
another. Indeed we might go further asunder, but though we did make them so
far distant, yet might we not in any case put a thirteenth, for it will be
false in the reply: therefore it is best not to pass the twelfth, and to
keep the rules which I have given, and likewise to cause the music (so far
as possibly we may) proceed by degrees, and shun that motion of leaping
(because that leaping of the fourth and the fifth, may in some places of the
reply, engender a discommoditie) which observations being exactlie kept, will
cause our descant go well and formablie, in this manner.

^ The higher part of the principal, of the second sort of the first kind of
double descant. ^ ^ ^ The lower part of the principal of the second sort of
the first kind of double descant. ^ ^

And changing the parts, that is, setting the treble lower by a tenth, and the
lower part higher by an eight, we shall have the reply thus.

^ The higher part of the reply. ^ ^ ^ the lower part of the reply. ^ ^

And this is called double descant in the tenth.

You may also make the treble part of the principal an eight lovver, and the
base a tenth higher, which will do very well, because the nature of the tune
will so be better observed, as here you may perceive.

^ the high part of the second reply. ^ ^ ^ the low part of the second reply.
^ ^

Also these compositions might be sung of three voices if you sing a part a
tenth above the low part of the principal, and in the reply a seventh under
the high part. It is true that the descant will not be so pure as it ought to
be, and though it will be true from false descant, yet will there be unisons
and other allowances which in other music would scarce be sufferable. But
because it is somewhat hard to compose in this kind, and to have it come well in
the replye, I will set you down the principal rules how to do it leaving the
less necessary observations to your own study. Rules for singing a third
part to other two in double discant.
You must not then in any case put a third or a tenth after an eighth when the
parts of the song descend together: and when the parts ascend you must not put
a sixth after a fifth, nor a tenth after a twelfth, especially when the high
part does not proceed by degrees, which motion is a little more tolerable then
that which is made by leaping. Likewise you must not go from an eight to a
flat tenth, except when the high part moves by a whole note, and the lower
part by a half note (nor yet from a third or fifth to a flat tenth by contrary
motions. Also you shall not make the treble part go from fifth to a sharp third
the basse standing still, nor the basse to go from a fifth to a flat third, or
from a twelfth to a flat tenth the treble standing still, because the reply will
thereby go against the rule. In this kind of discant every tenth of the
principal will be in the reply an eight, and every third of the principal in
the reply will be a fifteenth: but the composer must make both the principal
and the reply together and so he shall commit the fewest errors, by which means
your discant will go in this order.

^ The high part of the principal. ^ ^ ^ The third part added to the other two
^ ^ ^ The lower part of the principal. ^ ^

^ By negligence of not thinking upon a third part in the composition of the
principal, the fault of too much distance in the reply was committed which
other wise might easily have been avoided, and the example brought in less
compass.
the higher part of the reply. ^ ^ ^ The lower part of the reply. ^ ^ ^ The
reply of the third part which was added to the principal. ^ ^

In the second kind of double descant where the reply has contrary motions
to those which were in the principal keeping in the parts the same distances,
Notes to be observed in the second kind of double desca^t.
if you put any Cadences in the principal, they must be without any discord,
and then may you put them in what manner you list. But if they have any
dissonance, and in the reply, they will produce hard effects. In this you may
use the sixth in the principal, but in any case set not a tenth immediately
before an eight, nor a third before an unison, when the parts descend
together, because it will be naught, but observing the rules, your descant will
go well in this manner.

^ The high part of the principal in the second kind of double descant. ^ ^ ^
^ The low part of the principal. ^

If you make the high part lower by a ninth, and the low part higher by a
seventh, you shall have the reply thus. ^ The high part of the replye. ^ ^ The
low part of the reply. ^ ^

And if you compose in this manner, the parts of the principal may be set in
what distance you will, yea though it were a fifteenth, because in the reply
it will do well, but yet ought we not to do so, Likewise, if you examine well the
rules given before, and have a care to leave out somethings which in some of
the former ways may be taken, you may make a composition in such sort as it
may be song all the three before said ways with great variety of harmony, as
in this principal and replies following you may perceive.

^ The high part of the principal. ^ ^ ^ The low part of the principal. ^ ^
The high part of the first replye. ^ ^ The low part of the first replye. ^ ^ ^
The high part of the second replye. ^ ^ The low part of the second replye. ^ ^
^ The high part of the third replye, being per'arsin and thesin to the low part
of the ^ principal. ^ The low part of the third replye, being per ar sin and
the sin to the high part of the ^ principal. ^

And that you may the more cleerelie perceive the great variety of this kind,
if you join to the low part of the principal, or of the third reply a high
part distant from it a tenth, or third: Or if you make the low part higher by
an eight, and put to a part lower then the high part by a tenth (because it
will come better) every one of those ways may by themselves be sung of three
voices, as you saw before in the example of the second way of the first kind
of double descant. There be also (besides these which I have showen you) many
other ways of double descant, which it were too long and tedious to set down
in this place, and you your self may hereafter by your own study find out.
Therefore I will only let you see one way Par arsin and thesin, and so an
end of double descant. If therefore you make a Canon per arsin and thesin,
without any discord in binding manner in it, you shall have a composition in
such sort, as it may have a reply, wherein that which in the principal was
the following part, may be the leading, as here you see in this example.

^ The principal. ^ ^

^ The replye. ^ ^

Thus you see that these ways of double descant carry some difficulty, and
that the hardest of them all is the Canon. But if the Canon were made in that
manner upon a plainsong (I mean a plainesong not made of purpose for the
descant, but a common plainsong or hymn, such as heretofore have been used in
churches) it would be much harder to do. But because these ways seem rather
for curiosity then for your present instruction, I would counsel you to
leave to practice them, till you be perfect in your descant, and in those
plain ways of Canon which I have set down, which will (as it were) lead
you by the hand to a further knowledge: and when you can at the first sight
sing two parts in one in those kinds upon a plainesong, then may you
practice other hard ways, and specially those per arsin and thesin, which of
all other Canons carry both most difficulty, and most majesty: so that I
think, that who so can upon any plainsong whatsoever, make such another
way as that of M. Bird, which I shevved you before, may with great reason be
termed a great master in music. But whosoever can sing such a one at the
first sight, upon a ground, may boldie undertake to make any Canon which in
music may be made. And for your further encouragement this much I may boldly
affirm, that whosoever will exercise himself diligently in that kind, may
in short time become an excellent Musician, because that he who in it is
perfect, may almost at the first sight see what may be done upon any plainsong.

And these few ways which you have already seen, shall be sufficient at
this time for your perfect instruction in two parts in one upon a plainsong.
For if a man should think to set down every way, and do nothing all
his life time but daily invent variety, he should lose his labor, for any
other might come after him, and invent as many others as he has done. But if
you think to employ any time in making of those, I would counsel you
diligently to peruse those ways which my loving Master (never without
reverence to be named of the musicians) M. Bird, and M. Alphonso in a virtuous
contention in love betwixt themselves made upon the plainsong of Miserere, but
a contention, as I said, in love: which caused them strive every one to
surmount another, without malice, envy, or backbiting: but by great labor,
study and pains, each making other censure of that which they had done. Which
contention of theirs (specially without envy) caused them both become
excellent in that kind, and win such a name, and gain such credit, as vvil
never perish so long as Music indureth. Therefore, there is no way readier
to cause you become perfect, then to contend with some one or other, not in
malice (for so is your contention upon passion, not for love of virtue) but in
love, shevving your adversary your work, and not skorning to be corrected of
him, and to amend your fault if he speak with reason: but of this enough. To
return to M. Bird, and M. Alphonso, though either of them made to the number
of forty ways, and could have made infinite more at their pleasure, yet has
one manne, my friend and fellow M. George Waterhouse, upon the same plainsong
of Miserere, for variety surpassed all who ever labored in that kind of
study. For he has already made a thousand ways (yea and though I should
talk of half as many more, I should not be farrewide of the truth) every
one different and several from another. But because I do hope very shortly
that the same shall be published for the benefit of the world, and his own
perpetual glory, I will cease to speak any more of them, but only to
admonish you, that who so will be excellent, must both spend much time in
practice, and look over the doings of other men. And as for those who stand
so much in opinion of their own sufficiency, as in respect of themselves they
contemn al other men, I will leave them to their foolish opinions: being
assured that every man but of mean discretion, will laugh them to scorn as
fools: imagining that all the guiftes of God should die in themselves, if they
should be taken out of the world. And as for four parts in two, six in
three, and such like, you may hereafter make them upon a plainsong, when you
shall have learned to make them without it.

Phi. I will then take my leave of you for this time, till my next leisure, at
which time I mean to learn of you that part of music which rests. And
now, because I think my self nothing inferior in knowledge to my brother, I
mean to bring him with me to learn that which he has not yet heard.


Ma. At your pleasure. But I cannot cease to pray you diligently to practice,
for that only is sufficient to make a perfect Musician.


The third part of the introduction to Music, treating of composing or
setting of Songs.
Philomathes the Scholar. Polymathes. Philomathes. WHat new and unaccustomed
passion, what strange humor or mind-changing opinion took you this morning
(Brother Polymathes) causing you without making me acquainted so early be
gone out of your chamber? was it some fit of a fever? or (which I rather
believe) was it the sight of some of those fair faces (which you spied in your
yester nights walk) which have banished all other thoughts out of your mind,
causing you think the night long and wish the daylight that thereby you might
find some occasion of seeing your mistress? or any thing else, I pray you hide
it not from me, for as hitherto I have been the secretary (as you say) of your
very thoughts: so if you conceal this I must think that either your
affection toward me does decrease, or else you begin to suspect my secrecy.


Pol. You are too gelous, for I protest I never hid any thing from you
concerning either you or my self, and where as you talk of passions and
mind-changing humors, those seldom trouble men of my constitution, and as for
a fever I know not what it is, and as for love which you would seem to thrust
upon me, I esteem it is a foolish passion entering in empty brains, and
nourished with idle thoughts, so as of all other things I most contemn it, so
do I esteem them the greatest fools who be therewith most troubled.


Phi. Soft (brother) you go far, the purest complexions are soonest infected,
and the best wits soonest caught in love, and to leave out infinite examples of
others, I could set before you those whom you esteemed cheifest in wisdom,
Socrates, Plato, Aristotle, and the very dog himself all snared in love, but
this is out of our purpose, show me the occasion of this your timely departure?


Pol. I was informed yesternight that Master Polybius did for his recreation
every morning priuatelely in his own house read a lecture of Ptolomey his
great construction, and remembering that this morning (thinking the day farther
spent then in deed it was) I hied me out thinking that if I had stayed for you,
I should have come short: But to my no small grief I have learned at his house
that he is gone to the university to commence doctor in medicine.


Phi. I am sorry for that: but we will repair that damage an other way.


Pol. As how?


Phi. Employing those hours which we would have bestowed in hearing of him in
learning of music.


Pol. A good motion: for you have so well profited in so short space in that
art, that the world may see that both you have a good master and a quick
conceit.


Phi. If my wit were so quick as my master is skillful, I should quickly
become excellent, but the day runs away, shall we go?


Pol. With a good will: what a goodly morning is this, how sweet is this sun
shine? clearing the air and banishing the vapors which threatened rain.


Phi. You say true, but I fear me I have slept so long that my master will
either begone about some business, or then will be so troubled with other
scholars, that we shall hardly have time to learn any thing of him. But in
good time, I see him coming from home with a bundle of papers in his bosom, I
will salute him. Good morrow master.


Ma. Scholar Philomathes? God give you good morrow, I maruailed that since our
last meeting (which was so long ago) I never heard any thing of you.


Phi. The precepts which at that time you gave me, were so many and diverse
that they required long time to put them in practice, and that has been the
cause of my so long absence from you, but now I am come to learn that which
rests, and have brought my brother to be my schoolefellow.


Ma. He is heartily welcome, and now will I break off my intended walk, and
return to the house with you. But has your brother proceeded so far as you
have done?


Phi. I pray you ask himself, for I know not what he has, but before I knew
what discant was, I have heard him sing upon a plainesong.


Pol. I could have both song upon a plainsong, and began to set three or
four parts, but to no purpose, because I was taken from it by other studies,
so that I have forgotten those rules which I had given me for setting, though I
have not altogether forgotten my discant.


Ma. Who taught you?


Pol. One master Boulde.


Ma. I have heard much talk of that man, and because I would know the tree by
the fruit, I pray you let me hear you sing a lesson of discant.


Pol. I will if it please you to give me a plainsong?


Ma. Here is one sing upon it. ^


Pol. ^


Phi. Brother if your discanting be no better then that, you will gain but
small credit by it.


Pol. I was so taught, and this kind of discanting was by my master allowed,
and esteemed as the best of all descant.


Phi. Who ever gave him his name has either foreknown his destiny, or then
has well and perfectly read Plato his Cratylus.


Plo. Why so?


Phi. Because there be such bold taking of alowances as I durst not have
taken if I had feared my masters displeasure.


Ma. Why wherein do you disallow them?


Phi. First of all in the second note is taken a discord for the first part of
the note, and not in the best manner nor in binding: the like fault is in the
fifth note, and as for the two notes before the close, the end of the first is
a discord to the ground, and the beginning of the nextlikewise a discord, but I
remember when I was practicing with you, you did set me a close thus, which you
did so far ^ condemn as that (as you said) there could not readily be a
worse made, Two discords together condemned.
and though my brothers be not the very same, yet is it Cousin german to it,
for this descends where his ascends, ^ and his descends where this
ascends, that in affect they be both one.


Pol. Do you then find fault with the first part of the second note.


Phi. Yea, and justly.


Pol. It is the fuge of the plainsong, and the point will excuse the
harshnesse, and so likewise in the fifth note, for so my master taught me.


Phi. But I was taught otherwise, Harsh cords not to be taken for the points
sake.
and rather then I would have committed so gross ouersighis I would have left
out the point, although here both the point might have been drought in
otherwise, and those offenses left out.


Ma. I pray you (good master Polymathes) sing an other lesson.


Pol. ^ 61 ^ ^ Proportions are not ridiculously to be taken.
61 ^ ^ ^


Phi. I promise you (brother) you are much beholding to Sellingers round for
that beginning of yours, and your ending you have taken Sesqui paltry very
right.


Ma. You must not be so ready to condemn him for that, seeing it was the fault
of the time, not of his sufficiency, which causes him to sing after that
manner, for I my self being a child have heard him highly commended, who
could upon a plainesong sing hard proportions, harsh allowances, and country
daunces, and he who could bring in maniest of them was counted the iollyest
fellow, but I would feign see you (who have those Argus eyes in spying faults
in others) make away of your own, for perchance there might likewise be a hole
(as they say) found in your own cote.


Phi. I would be ashamed of that, specially having had so many good precepts
and practicing them so long.


Pol. I pray you then set down one that we may see it.


Phi. Here it is, and I fear not your censure. ^ The fuge of the first lesson
brought in without bad allowances.
^ ^ ^


Pol. You need not, but I pray you master help me for I can spy no fault
in it.


Ma. Nor I, and by this lesson (scholar Phylomathes) I perceive that you have
not been idle at home.


Pol. Indeed now that I have perused it, I cannot but commend it for the
point of the plainesong is every way maintained, and without any taking of
harsh cords.


Ma. That is the best manner of descanting, but shall I hear you sing a lesson
of base descant.


Pol. As many as you list, so you will have them after my fashion.


Ma. It was for that I requested it, therefore sing one.


Pol. ^ ^


Ma. The first part of your lesson is tolerable and good, but the ending is not
so good, for the end of your ninth note is a discord, and upon another discord
you have begun the tenth breaking Priscians, head to the very brain, but I know
you will go about to excuse the beginning of your tenth note in that it is in
binding wise, but though it be bound it is in fetters of rusty iron, Binding
no excuse for two discords together.
not in the chains of goulde, for no ear hearing it, but will at the first
hearing loath it: and though it be the point, yet might the point have been as
nearly follewed in this place, not causing such offense to ye ear. And to let
you see with what little alteration, you might have avoided so great an
inconuenie^ce, here be al your own notes of the fifth bar in the very same
substance as you had them, though altered somewhat in time and form, therefore
if ^ you mean to follow music any further, I would wish you to leave those
harsh allowances, but I pray you how did you become so ready in this kind of
singing.


Pol. It would require a long discourse to show you all.


Ma. I pray you trusse up that long discourse in so few words as you may, and
let us hear it.


Phi. Be then attentive, when I learned descant of my master Bold, he seeing
me so toward and willing to learn, ever had me in his company, and because he
continually carried a plainsong book in his pocket, he caused me do the
like, and so walking in the fields, he would sing the plainsong, and cause me
sing the descant, and when I song not to his contentment, he would show me
wherein I had erred, there was also another descanter, a companion of my
masters, who never came in my masters company (though they wear much
conuersa^t together) but they fell to contention, striving who should bring in
the point soonest, and make hardest proportions, so that they thought they had
won great glory if they had brought in a point sooner, or sung harder
proportions the one then the other: but it was a world to hear them wrangle,
every one defending his own for the best. What? (says the one) you keep not
time in your proportions, you sing them false (says the other) what proportion
is this? (says he) Sesquipaltery says the other, nay (would the other say)
you sing you know not what, it should seem you came lately from a barbers
shop, where you had That name in derision they have given this quadrant pauan,
because it walks amongst the barbars and fiddlers more common then any other
Gregory Walker, or a Curranta plaide in the new proportions by them lately
found out, called Sesquiblinda, and Sesqui harken after, so that if one
unacquainted with music had stood in a corner and heard them, he would have
sworn they had been out of their wits, so earnestly did they wrangle for a
trifle, and in truth I my self have thought sometime that they would have gone
to round buffets with the matter, for the descant books were made Angels, but
yet fistes were no visiters of ears, and therefore all parted friends: but to
say the very truth, this Poliphemus had a very good sight, (specially for
treble descant) but very bad utterance, for that his voice his voice was the
worst that ever I heard, and though of others he were esteemed very good in
that kind, yet did none think better of him then he did of himself, for if
one had named and asked his opinion of the best composers living at this time,
he would say in a vain glory of his own sufficiency, tush, tush (for these
were his usual words) he is a proper man, but he is no descanter, he is no
descanter there is no stuff in him, I will not give two pinnes for him except
he has descant.


Phi. What Is can a composer be without descant?


Ma. No: but it should seem by his speech yt except a name be so drowned in
descant yt he can do nothing else in musik but wrest and wring in hard points
upon a plainsong, they would not esteem him a descanter, but though that be
the Cyclops his opinion he must give us leave to follow it if we list, for we
must not think but he that can formally and artificially put there four,
five, six or more parts together, may at his ease sing one part upon a ground
without great study, for that singing extempore upon a plainsong is in deed a
piece of cunning, and very necessary to be perfectly practiced of him who
means to be a composer for bringing of a quick sight, yet is it a great
absurdity so to seek for a sight, as to make it the end of our study
applying it to no other use, for as a knife or other instrument not being
applied to the end for which it was devised (as to cut) is unprofitable and of
no use, even so is descant, which being used as a help to bring ready sight
in setting of parts is profitable, but not being applied to that end is of it
self like a puff of wind, which being past comes not again, which has
been the reason that the excellent musitions have discontinued it, although it
be impossible for them to compose without it, but they rather employ their time
in making of songs, which remain for the posterity then to sing descant which
is no longer known then the singers mouth is open expressing it, and for the
most part cannot be twice repeated in one manner.


Phi. That is true, but I pray you brother proceed with the cause of your
singing of descant in that order.


Pol. This Polyphemus carrying such name for descant, I thought it best to
imitate him, so that every lesson which I made was a counterfeit of some of his,
A course not to to be disliked if it had been done with judgment.
for at all times and at every occasion I would foist in some of his points
which I had so perfectly in my head as my pater noster, and because my master
himself did not dislike that course I continued still therein, but what said
I? dislike it he did so much like it as ever where he knew or found any such
example he would wright it out for me to imitate it.


Ma. I pray you set down two or three of those examples.


Pol. Here be some which he gave me as authorites wherewith to defend mine own.

^ Iste confessor. ^ Hyme.
^ ^ ^ ^


^ ^ ^ ^

Ma. Such lips, such lettus, such authority, ^ such imitation, but is this
master Boulds own descant?


Pol. The first is his own, the second he wrote ^ out of a verse of two parts
of an Agnus dei, of one Henry Rysbie, and recommended it to me for a singular
good one, the third is of one Piggot, but the two last I have forgotten whose
they be, but I have heard them highly commended by many who bore the name of
great discanters.


Ma. The authors were skilful men for the time wherein they lived, but as for
the examples he might have kept them al to himself, for they be all of one
mould, and the best stark naught, In music both the ear is to be pleased and
art showed.
therefore leave imitating of them and such like, and in your music seek to
please the ear as much as show cunning, although it be greater cunning both to
please the ear and express the point, then to maintain the point alone with
offense to the ear.


Pol. That is true in deed, but seeing that such men's works are thus
censured, I cannot hope any good of mine own, and therefore before you
proceed to any other purpose, I must crave your judgment of a lesson of
descant which I made long ago, and in my conceit at that time I thought it
excellent, but now I fear it will be found scant passable.


Phi. I pray you let us here it, and then you shall quickly hear mine opinion
of it.


Pol. It was not your opinion which I craved, but our masters judgment.


Ma. Then show it me?


Pol. Here it is, and I pray you declare all the faults which you find in it. ^
Faults in this lesson.
^


Ma. First that discord taken for the first part of the second note is not good
ascending in that manner, secondly the discord taken for the last part of the
fifth note, and another discord for the beginning of the next is very harsh and
naught, thirdly the discord taken for the beginning of the tenth note is
naught, it and all the other notes following are the same thing which wear in
the beginning without any difference, saving that they are four notes higher,
lastly your close you have taken thrice before in the same lesson a gross
fault in sixteen notes, to sing one thing four times over.


Phi. I would not have used such ceremonies to anotomise every thing
particularly, but at a word I would have flung it away, and said it was
stark naught.


Pol. Soft swift, you who are so ready to find faults, I pray you let us see
how you can mend them, maintaining the point in every note of the plainsong
as I have done?


Phi. Many ways without the fuge and with the fuge, easily thus. ^ The former
lessons bettered.
^


Pol. But you have removed the plainesong into the treble, and caused it rest
two whole semibreues.


Phi. You cannot blame me for that, seeing I have neither added to it, nor
paired from it, and I trust when I sing upon a plainsong I may choose whether I
will sing treble or base discant.


Pol. You say true.


Ma. But why have you made it in a manner all counterpoint, seeing there was
enough of other shift.


Phi. Because I saw none other way to express every note of the plainesong.


Ma. But there is an other way to express every note of the plainsong,
breaking it but very little, and therefore find it out.


Pol. If I can find it out before you, I will think my self the better
descanter.


Phi. Do so.


Pol. Faith I will leave further seeking for it, for I cannot find it.


Phi. Nor I.


Pol. I am glad of that, for it would have grieved me if you should have found
it out and not I.


Phi. You be like unto those who reioise at the adversity of others, though it
do not any thing profit themselves.


Pol. Not so, but I am glad that you can see no further into a millstone then my
self, and therefore I will pluck up my spirits (which before was so much
dulled, not by mine own fault, but by the fault of them who taught me) and
Audere aliquid breuibus gyaris and carcere dignum, because I mean to be
aliquid.


Phi. So you shall, though you be a dunce perpetually.


Pol. That I deny as impossible in that sense as it was spoken.


Ma. These reasoninges are not for this place, and therefore again to your
lesson of Descant.


Pol. We have both given it over as not to be found out by us, and thereupon
grew our jar.


Ma. Then here it is, though either of you might have found out a greater
matter, and because you caueled at his removing the plainesong to the treble,
here I have set it (as it ^ ^ was before) lowest, you may also upon this
plainesong make a way wherein the descant may sing every note of the ground
twice, which though it show some sight and maistry, yet will not be so sweet in
the ear as others.


Phi. I pray you sir satisfy my curiosity in that point and show it us.


Ma. Here it is, and though it go harsh in the ear, yet be there not such
allowances ^ ^ ^ ^ in taking of descordes used in it as might any way
offend, but the unpleasantness of it comes of the wresting in of the
point, for seeking to repeat the plainsong, again the music is altered in
the air, seeming as it were another song which does disgrace it so far as
nothing more, and though a man (conceiting himself in his own skill, and
glorying in that he can deceive the hearer) should at the first sight sing such
a one as this is, yet another standing by, and perchance a better musicion then
he, not knowing his determination and hearing that unpleasantness of the
music might justly condemn it as offensive to the ear, then would the
descanter allege for his defense that it were every note of the plainsong
twice song over, and this or some such like would they think a sufficient
reason to move them to admit any harshnes, or inconvenient in music, what
soever which has been the cause that our music in times past has never
given such contentment to the auditor as that of latter time, because the
composers of that age making no accoumpt of the air nor of keeping their key,
followed only that vain of wresting in much matter in small bounds so that
seeking to show cunning in following of points they mist the mark, where at
every skilful musition does cheefely shoot, which is to show cunning with
delightfulness and pleasure, you may also make a lesson of deseant which may
be song to two plainsongs, although the plainesonges does not agree one with
another, which although it seem very hard to them at the first, yet having
the rule of making it declared unto you, it will seems as easy in the making
as to sing a common way of descant, although to sing it at the first sight will
be somewhat harder because the eye must be troubled with two plainsongs at once.


Pol. That is strange so to sing a part as to cause two other dissonant parts
agree.


Ma. You mistake my meaning, for both the plainesonges must not be sung at
once, but I mean if there be two plainesonges given, to make a lesson which
will agree with either of them, by themselves but not with both at once.


Pol. I pray you give us an example of that.


Ma. Here is the plainesong vvhereupon we song, with another under it taken at
all adventures, ^ now if you sing the descanting part it will be true to any one
of them.


Pol. This is pretty, therefore I pray you give us the rules which are to be
observed in the making of it.


Ma. Having any two plainesongs given you, you must consider what cord the one
of them is to the other, so that if they be in an unison, then may your descant
be a 3. 5. 6. 8. 10. 12. or 15. to the lowest of them, but if the plainesonges
be distant by a second or ninth, then must your descant be a 6. or a 13. to
the lowest of them, moreover, if your plainesongs stand still in secondes or
ninthes, then of force must your descant stand still in sixts, because there is
no other shifts of concord to be had, if your plainesongs be distant by a
third, then may your descant be a 5. 8. 10. 12 or 15. to the lowest, and if
your plainsonges be distant by a fourth, then may your descant be a sixth 8.
13, or 15. to the lowest of them, likewise if your plainesongs be a fifth one
to another, your descant may be a 3. or 5. to the lowest of them, but if your
plainesongs be in the sixth, then may your discant be an 8: 10 15. or 17. to
the lowest of them: lastly, if your plainsongs be distant a seventh, then may
your descant be only a twelfth, also you must note that if the plainsongs come
from a fifth to a second, the lower part ascending two notes, and the higher
falling one (as you may see in the last note of the sixth bar, and first of the
seventh of the example) then of force must your descant fall from the tenth to
the sixth with the lower plainesong, and from the sixth to the fith with the
higher, and though that falling from the sixth to the fiftth, both parts
descending be not tolerable in other music, yet in this we must make a virtue
of necessity, and take such allowances as the rule will afford.


Phi. This is well, but our coming hither at this time was not for descant,
and as for you (brother) it will be an easy matter for you to leave the use
of such harsh cords in your descant, so you will but have a little more care
not to take that which first comes in your head.


Pol. I will avoid them so much as I can hereafter, but I pray you master
before we proceed to any other matter, shall I here you sing a lesson of base
descant?


Ma. If it please you sing the plainsong. ^ ^ ^ ^


Phi. Here is an instruction for us (brother) to cause our base descant be
stirring.


Pol. I would I could so easily imitate it as mark it.


Phi. But now (master) you have sufficiently examined my brother Polymathes,
and you see he has sight enough, so that it will be needless to insist any
longer in teaching him descant, therefore I pray you proceed to the
declaration of the rules of setting.


Ma. They be few and easy to them that have descant, for the same alowances
are to be taken, and the same faults which are to be shunned in descant must
be avoided in setting also. And because the setting of two parts is not very
far distant from singing of descant, we will leave to speak of it and go to
three parts, and although these precepts of setting of three parts will be in a
manner superfluous to you, (Philomathes) because to make two parts upon a
plainesong is more hard then to make three parts into voluntary, yet because
your brother either has not practiced that kind of descant, or perchance has
not been taught how to practice it, I will set down those rules which may
serve him both for descant and voluntary, and therefore to be brief peruse
this Table wherein you may see all the ways whereby concords may be set
together in three parts, and though I do in it talk of fifteenth and
seuententhes, yet are these cords seldom to be taken in three parts except of
purpose you make your song of much compass and so you may take what distances
you will, but the best manner of composing three voices or how many soever is to
cause the parts go close.


A Table containing the cords which are to be used in the compositon of
songs for three voices.
If your base be an unison or 8. to the tenor, then may your Alto be a 3. 5.
6. 8. 10. 12. or 15. to the base. example. ^ If your base be a third under
your tenor, the Altus may be a 5. 6. 12. or 13. above the base. example. ^ And
if your Base be a fifth to the tenor, your Altus may be a 3. 8. 10. 12. or
15. to the base. example. ^ But if your base be a sixth to the tenor, then
must your Altus be a 3. 8. 10. or 15. to the base. example ^

Pol. I pray you give me an example which I may imitate. ^


Ma. Let this suffice for one at this time, and when you come to practice, let
the third, fifth, and sixth (sometimes also an eight) be your usual cords
because they be the sweetest, and bring most variety, the eight is in three
parts seldom to be used, except in passing manner or at a close, and because of
all other closes the Cadence is the most usual (for without a Cadence in some
one of the parts, either with a discord or without it, it is impossible
formallie to close) if you carry your Cadence in the tenor part you may close
all these ways following and many others, and as for those ways which here
you see marked with a star thus * they be passing closes, which we commonly
call false closes, being devised to shun a final end and go on with some other
purpose, and these passing closes be of two kinds in the base part, that is,
either ascending or descending, if the passing close descend in the base it
comes to the sixth, if it ascend it comes to the tenth or third, as in some
of these examples you may see. ^ ^ ^

If you carry your Cadence in the base part, you may close with any of these
ways following the mark still showing that which it did before, and as
concerning the rule which I told you last before of passing closes if your
base be a Cadence (as your tenor was before not going under the base) then will
the rule be contrary, for whereas before your base in your false closing did
descend to a sixth, now must your Altus or Tenor (because sometime the Tenor is
above the Altus) ascend to the sixth or thirteenth and descend to the tenth or
third, as here following you may perceive. ^

But if your Cadence be in the Alto, then may you choose any of these ways
following for your end, the sign still showing the false close, which may not
be used at a final or full close, and though it hat been our use in times
past to end upon the sixth with the base in our songs, and specially in our
Canons, yet is it not to be used but upon an extremity of Canon, but by the
contraty to be shunned as much as may be, and because it is almost every where
out of use, I will cease to speak any more against at this time, but turn you
to the perusing of these examples following. ^

Thus much for the composition of the three parts, it follows to show you
how to make four, therefore here be two parts, make in two other middle
parts to them, and make them four.


Phi. Nay, seeing you have given us a table of three, I pray you give us one of
four also.


Ma. Then (that I may discharge my self of giving you any more tables) here is
one which will serve you for the composition not only of four parts, but of how
many else it shall please you, for when you compose more then four parts, you
do not put to any other part, but double some of those four, that is, you
either make two trebles or two means, or two tenors, or two bases: and I have
kept in the table this order. First to set down the cord which the treble
makes with the tenor, next how far the base may be distant from the tenor, so
that these three parts being so ordained, I set down what cords the Alto must
be to them to make up the harmony perfect, you must also note that sometimes you
find set down for the Alto more then one cord, in which case the cords may
serve not only for the Alto but also for such other parts as may be added to
the four, nor shall you find ye Alto set in an unison or eight with any of the
other parts, except in four places, because that when the other parts have
amongst themselves the fifth and third, or their eights of necessity such
parts as shall be added to them (let them be never so many) must be in the eight
or union, with some of the three before named, therefore take it and peruse it
diligentile.


A Table containing the usual cords for the composition of four or more
parts.
OF THE UNISON.
If the treble be an unison with the tenor
and the base a third under the tenor
your Alto or mean shall be a fifth or sixth above the base.
but if the base be a fifth under the tenor
the Alto shall be a third or tenth above the base.
Likewise if the base be a sixth under the tenor,
then the Alto may be a 3 or tenth above the base
And if the base be an eight under the tenor,
the other part may be a 3. 5. 610. or 12. above the base.
But if the base be a tenth under the tenor,
the mean shall be a fifth or twelfth above the base.
But if the base be a twelfth under the tenor,
the Alto may be made a 3. or 10. above the base.
Also the base being a fifteenth under the tenor,
the other parts may be a 3. 5. 6. 10. 12. and 13. above the base.
OF THE THIRD.
If the treble be a third with the tenor
and the base a third under it
the Alto may be an unison or 8. with the parts.
If the base be a sixth under the tenor,
the Altus may be a third or tenth above the base.
But if the base be an eight under the tenor,
then the Altus shall be a fifth or sixth above the base.
And the base being a tenth under the tenor,
then the parts may be in the unison or eight to the tenor or base.
OF THE FOVRTH.
When the treble shall be a fourth to the tenor
and the basse a fifth under the tenor
then the mean shall be a 3, or 10, above the base
But if the base be a 12. under the tenor
the Altus shall be a 10. above the base
OF THE FIFTH.
But if the treble shall be a fifth above the tenor
and the base an eight under it
the Alto may be a 3 or tenth above the base
And if the base be a sixth under the tenor,
the Altus shall be an unison or 8 with the parts
OF THE SIXTH.
If the treble be a sixth with the tenor
and the base a fifth under the tenor,
the Altus may be an unison or eight with the parts
But if the base be a third under the tenor,
the Altus shall be a fifth above be base.
Likewise if the base be a tenth under the tenor,
the mean likewise shall be a fifth or 12. above the base.
OF THE EIGHT.
If the treble be an 8. with the tenor.
and the base a 3. under the tenor
the other parts shall be a 3. 5. 6. 10. 12. 13. above the base
So also when the base shall be a 5. under the tenor
the other parts may be a 3. above the base
And if the base be an eight under the tenor
the other parts shall be a 3* 5* 10. 12. above the base.
Lastly if the base be a 12. under the tenor
the parts shall make a 10. or 17. above the base*
Here be also certain examples whereby you may perceive, your base landing in
any key, how the rest of the parts (being but four) may stand unto it: both
going close and in wider distances.

^ ^ ^

Lastly, here be examples of formal closes in four, five and six parts,
wherein you must note that such of them as be marked with this mark *serve for
middle closes, such as are commonly taken at the end of the first part of a
song, the other be final closes whereof such as be sudden closes belong
properly to light music, as Madrigals Canzonets, Pauins and Galliards,
wherein a semibriefe will be enough to Cadence upon, but if you list you may
draw out your Cadence or close to what length you will. As for the Motets and
other grave music you must in them come with more deliberation in bindings and
long notes to the close. ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^

Closes of five voices. ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^

Closes of six voices. ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^

And though you have here some of every sort of closes, yet will not I say that
here is the tenth part of those which either you yourselfe may devise
hereafter, or may find in the works of other men, when you shall come to
peruse them, for if a man would go about to set down every close, he might
compose infinite volumes without hitting the mark which he shotat, but let these
suffiice for your present instruction, for that by these you may find out an
infinite of other which may be particular to your self.

Phi. Now seeing you have abundantly satisfied my desire in showing us such
profitable tables and closes, I pray you go forward with that discourse of
yours which I interrupted.


Ma. Then (to go to the matter roundly without ^ circumstances) here be two
parts make in two middle parts to them and make them four, General rules for
setting.
and of all other cords leave not out the fifth, the eight and the tenth, and
look which of those two (that is the ^ eight or the tenth) comes next to
the treble that set uppermost: A caveat for the sixth. How the fifth and sixth
may be both used together.
^ but when you put in a sixth then of force must the fifth be left out, except
at a Cadence or close where a discord is taken thus, which is the best manner
of closing, and the only way of taking the fifth and sixth together.


Phi. I think I understand that for proof whereof here be woe other parts to
those which you have set down. ^


Ma. In deed you have taken great pains about them, for in the second and
third notes you have taken two eightes betwixt the tenor and base part, Faults
contron led in this lesson,
which fault is committed by leaving out the tenth in your second note in the
tenor, for the eight you had before betwixt the base and treble, in your third
note you have a flat Cadence in your counter tenor, which is a thing against
nature, for every Cadence is sharp: but some may reply that all these three
following. ^ (the first whereof has only one Cadence, in the treble, the
second has two Cadences together, the one in the treble, the other in the
counter, in the third, the mean counter and tenor Cadence all at once) be
flat Cadences: which thing though it might require long disputation for
solutio^ of many arguments which to diverse purposes might be brought, yet will
I leave to speak any more of it at this time, but only yt they be al three
passing closes, and not of ye nature of yours, which is a kind of full or final
close although it be co^monlie used both in passing manner in diverse places of
your composition, and finally at the close, but if your base ascend half a
note thus, ^ any of the other parts making Syn copation (which we abusiuely call
a Cadence) then of force must your Syncopation be in that order as the first of
the aforeshewed examples is, the other two not having that necessity be not in
such common use, though being aptly taken they might in some places be both
used and allowed, but of this too much, therefore to return to the other
faults of your lesson, in your fifth and sixth notes, your base and counter
make two eights, and the base and tenor two fifts, likewise in the ninth note
you have in your tenor part a sharp eight, which fault I gave you in your
descant to be avoided: but if you had made the tenor part an eight to the
treble it had been far better: Last of all your eleventh and twelfth notes
be two fifthes in the tenor and base.


Pol. Brother me thinks your setting is no better then my descanting.


Phi. It were well if it were so good, for then could I in a moment make it
better, but I pray you (master) show me how these faults may be avoided
hereafter, for that I have observed your rule every where saving in the second
and twelfth notes in the tenor part.


^ Objection.


Ma. In this example you may see al your ouersights mended.


Pol. But when your base and treble do ascend in tenths, as in the fifth and
sixth note of this example, if you must not leave out the fifth and the eight,
I see no other but it will fall out to be two eights betwixt the base and
counter, and likewise two fiftes betwixt the base and tenor.


Ma. Then for avoiding of that fault, take this for a general rule, that when
the base and treble ascend so in tenthes, Solution with rules for true
ascending or descending.
then must the tenor be the eight to the treble in the second note as for
example: ^ but by the conrrary, if the base and treble descend in the tenthes
then must the tenor be the eight to the treble in the first of them: example. ^


Phi. These be necessary good rules and easy to be understood, The middle
parts may go one through another.
but may you carry your tenor part higher then your counter as you have don in
your example of tenths ascending.


Ma. You may.


Phi. But what needed it, seeing you might have caused the counter sing those
notes which the tenor did, and contrary the tenor those which the counter did.


Ma. No, for if I had placed the fourth note of the tenor in the counter, and
the fourth note of the counter in the tenor, For what reason one part may sing
that which the other may not.
then had the third and fourth notes been two fiftes betwixt the counter and
the treble, and the fourth and fifth notes been two eightes between the tenor
and treble.


Phi. You say true, and I was a fool who could not conceive the reason thereof
before you told it me, but why did you not set the fourth note of the tenor in
C sol fa vt, seeing it is a fifth and good in the ear. ^


Ma. Because (although it were sufferable) it were not good to skip up to the
fifth in that manner, Coming from the eighth to the fifth both parts ascending
naught.
but if it were taken descending, then were it very good thus.


Phi. This example I like very well for these reasons, for (brother) if you
mark the artifice of the composition you shall see that as the treble
ascends five notes, so the tenor descends five notes likewise, the binding
of the third and fourth notes in the tenor, the base ascending from a sixth to
a fifth, causes that sharp fifth to show very well in the ear, and it must
needs be better then if it had been taken ascending in the first way as I
desired to have had it, last of all the counter in the last four notes does
answer the base in fuge from the second note to the fifth, but now I will try
to make four parts al of mine own invention.


Pol. Take heed of breaking Priscians head, for if you do I assure you (if I
perceive it) I will laugh as heartily at it as you did at my Sellengers round. ^


Phi. I fear you not, but master how like you this?


Ma. Well for your first trial, but why did you not put the sixth, seventh and
eight notes of the tenor eight notes higher, and set them in the counterpart,
seeing they would have gone nearer to the treble then that counter which you
have set down.


Phi. Because I should have gone out of the compass of my lines.


Ma. I like you well for that reason, but if you had liked the other way so
well you might have altered your cliffes thus: ^ whereby you should both have
had scope enough to bring up your parts, and caused them come closer together,
which would so much the more have graced your example: for the closer the
parts go the better is the hermony, and when they stand far asunder the
harmony vanishes, therefore hereafter study so much as you can to make your
parts go close together, The parts must be close, so that no other may be put
in betwixt them.
for so shall you both show most art, and make your compositions fittest for
the singing of all companies.


Phi. I will, but why do you smile?


Ma. Let your brother Polymathes look to that.


Pol. If you have perused his lesson sufficiently, I pray you show it me.


Ma. Here it is, and look what you can spy in it.


Phi. I do not think there be a fault so sensible in it as that he may spy it.


Pol. But either my sight is daseled or there brother I have you by the back,
and therefore I pray you be not offended if I serve you with the same measure
you served me.


Phi. What is the matter?


Pol. Do you see the fifth note of the tenor part?


Phi. I do.


Pol. What cord is it to the base.


Phi. An eight, but how then.


Pol. Ergo, I conclude that the next is an eight likewise with the base, both
descending, and so that you have broken Piscians head, wherefore I may Lege
talionis laugh at incongruity as well as you might at vnformality, but now I
cry quittance with you.


Phi. In deed I confess you have overtaken me, but master, do you find no
other thing discommendable in my lesson?


Ma. Yes, for you have in the closing gone out of your key, which is one of the
grosest faults which may be committed.


Phi. What do you call going out of the key?


Ma. The leaving of that key wherein you did begin, and ending in an other.


Phi. What fault is in that?


Ma. A great fault, Going out of this key a great fault.
for every key has a peculiar air proper unto it self, so that if you go
into another then that wherein you begun, you change the air of the song,
which is as much as to wrest a thing out of his nature, making the ass leap
upon his master and the Spaniell bear the load. The perfect knowledge of
these aires (which the antiquity termed Modi) was in such estimation amongst
the learned, as therein they placed the perfection of music, as you may
perceive at large in the fourth book of Seuerinus Boethius his music, and
Glareanus has written a learned book which he took in hand only for the
explanation of those moodes; and though the air of every key be different one
from the other, yet some love (by a wonder of nature) to be joined to others so
that if you begin your song in Gamut, you may conclude it either in C fa ut or
D sol re, and from thence come again to Gam ut: likewise if you begin your
song in D sol re, you may end in air and come again to D sol re, etc.


Phi. Have you no general rule to be given for an instruction for keeping of
the key?


Ma. No, for it must proceed only of the judgment of the composer, yet the
church men for keeping their keys have devised certain notes commonly called
the eight tunes, so that according to the tune which is to be observed, at that
time if it begin in such a key, it may end in such and such others, as you
shall immediately know. And these be (although not the true substance yet) some
shadow of the ancient modi whereof Botius and Glareanus have written so much.


Phi. I pray you set down those eight tunes, for the ancient modi, I mean by
the grace of God to study hereafter.


Ma. Here they be in four parts, the tenor still keeping the plainesong.


The first tune. ^

The second tune. ^ The eight tunes.


The third tune. ^

The fourth tune. ^

The fifth tune. ^

The sixth tune. ^

The seventh tune: ^

The eighth tune. ^

Phi. I will insist no further to crave the use of them at this time, but
because the day is far spent, I will pray you to go forward with some other
matter.


Ma. Then leave counterpoint, and make four parts of mingled notes.


Phi. I will.


Pol. I think you will now beware of letting me take you tardie in false cords.


Phi. You shall not by my good will.


Ma. Peruse your lesson after that you have made it, and so you shall not so
often commit such faults as proceed of oversight.


Pol. That is true indeed.


Phi. I pray you (master) peruse this lesson, for I find no sensible fault in
it.


Pol. I pray you show it me before you show it to our master, that it may pass
censures by degrees.


Phi. I will, so you will play the Aristarchus cunningly.


Pol. Yea, a Diogenes if you will.


Phi. On that condition you shall have it.


Ma. And what have you spied in it?


Pol. As much as he did, which is just nothing.


Ma. Then let me have it.


Pol. Here it is, and it may be that you may spy some informalitie in it, but
I will answer for the true composition.^


Ma. This lesson is tolerable, but yet there be some things in it which I
very much dislike, and first yt skipping from the tenth, to the eight in the
last note of the first bar, Skipping from the tenth to the eight both parts
asce^ding.
and first not of the second in the counter and base part, not being enjoined
thereunto by any necessity, either of fuge or Canon, but in plain
counterpoint where enough of other shift was to be had, I know you might defend
your felfe with the Authorites of almost all the composers, who at all times
and almost in every song of their Madrigals and Canzonets have some such
quiditie, and though it cannot be disproued as false descant, yet would not I
use it no more then many other things which are to be found in their works as
skipping from the sixth to the eight, from the sixth to the unison from a tenth
to an eight ascending or descending and infinite more faults which you shall
find by excellent men committed, Faults to be avoided in imitation.
specially in taking of unisons which are seldom to be used but in passing
wise asce^ding or descending, or then for the first or latter part of a note, A
note for taking of unison.
and so away, not standing long upon it, where as they by the contrary will
skip up to it from a sixth, third or fifth, which (as I told you before) we call
hitting an unison or other cord on ye face, but they before they will break the
are of their wa^ton amorus humor will chose to run into any inconvenient in
music whatsoever, and yet they have gotten the name of music masters though
the world by their Madrigals and quick inventions, for you must understand
that few of them compose Mottets, whereas by the contrary they make infinite
volumes of Mardigals, Canzonets, and other such ayreable music, yea though he
were a priest he would rather choose to excel in that wanton and pleasing
music then in that which properly belongs to his profession, so much be
they by nature inclined to love, and therein are they to be commended for one
musicion amongst them will honor and reverence another, whereas by the
contrary, we (if two of us be of one profession) will never cease to backbite
one another so much as we can.


Pol. You play upon the Homonymie of the word Love, for in that they be
inclined to lust, therein I see no reason why they should be commended, but
whereas one musicion amongst them will reverence and love one another, that is
in deed praiseworthie, and whereas you justly complain of the hate and
backbiting amongst the musicions of our country, that I know to be most
true, and specially in these young fellows, who having no more skill then to
sing a part of a song perfectly, and scarcely that will take upon them to
censure excellent men, and to backbite them too, but I would not wish to live
so long as to see a set of books of one of those young yonkers compositions,
who are so ready to condemn others.


Ma. I perceive you are choleric, but let us return to your brothers lesson,
though imitation be an excellent thing, yet would I wish no man so to imitate
as to take whatsoever his author says, be it good or bad, and as for these
scapes though in singing they be quickly ouerpast (as being committed in
Madrigals, Canzonets, and such like light music and in small notes) yet they
give occasion to the ignorant of committing the same in longer notes, as in
Mottets where the fault would be more offensive and sooner spied. And even as
one with a quick hand playing upon an instrument, showing in voluntary the
agilitie of his fingers, will by the have of his conueiance cloak many
faults, which if they were stood upon would mightily offend the ear, so
those musicians because the faults are quickly ouerpast, as being in short
notes, think them no faults but yet we must learn to distinguish betwixt an
instrument playing division, and a voice expressing a dittie, and as for the
going from the tenth to the eight in this place ascending, if the base had
descended to Gam ut, where it ascended to G sol re ut, then had it been
better, but those fyrie spirits from whence you had it, would rather choose to
make a whole new song, then to correct one which is already made, although
never so little alteration would have avoided that inconvenient, else would
they not suffer so many fiftes and eightes pass in their works, yea Croce
himself has let five fiftes together slip in one of his Tste 17. song of his
second book of Madrials of 5. voices, in the 11. and 12. semibreeues. See also
the 5. 8* 9. and 15. of the same set.
songs, and in many of them you shall find two (which with him is no fault as
it should seem by his use of them) although the eastwind have not yet blown
that custom on this side of the Alps. But though Croce and diverse others
have made no scruple of taking those fiftes, yet will we leave to imitate him
in that, nor yet will I take upon me to say so much as Zarlino does, though I
think as much, who in the 29. chapter of the third part of his Institutions of
music, discoursing of taking of those cords together writes thus. Et non si
dee hauer riguardo che alcuni habbiano voluto fare il contrario, piu presto per
presuntione, che per ragione alcuna, che loro habbiano hauuto, come vedia mo
nelle loro compositioni; conciosia che non si deue imitare coloro, che fanno
sfacciatamente contra li buoni costumi, and buoni praecetti d'um' art and di
vna scienza, senza renderne ragione aleuna: ma dobbiamo imitar quelli, che sono
stati obseruatori dei buoni praecetti, and accostar si aloro and abbracciarli
come buoni maestri: lasciando sempre il tristo, and pigliando il buono: and
questo dico per che si comme il videre vnapittura, che sia dipinta convarij
colori, magiormen te dilettal'occhio, di quello che non farebbe se fusse
depinta con un solo color: cosi l'udito maggiormente si diletta and
pigliapiacere delle consonanze and delle modulationi variate, post dal
diligentissimo compositore nelle sue compositioni, che delli semplici and non
variate: Which is in English. Nor ought we to have any regard though others
have done the contrary, rather upon a presumption then any reason which they
have had to do so, as we may see in their compositions: although we ought not
to imitate them, who do without any shame go against the good rules and
precepts of an Art and a science, with out giving any reason for their doings:
but we ought to imitate those who have been obseruers of those precepts, join
us to them and embrace them as good masters, ever leaving the bad and taking
the good: and this I say because that even as a picture painted with diverse
colors does more delight the eye to behold it then if it were done but with
one color alone, so the ear is more delighted and takes more pleasure of
the consonants by the diligent musicion placed in his compositions with
variety then of the simple concords put together without any variety at all.
This much Zarlino, yet do not I speak this, nor seek this opinion of his, for
derogation from Croce or any of those excellent men, but wish as they take
great pains to compose, so they will not think much to take a little to
correct, and though some of them do boldly take those fiftes and eightes, yet
shall you hardly find either in master Alfonso (except in that place which I
cited to you before) Orlando, striggio. Clemens non papa, or any before them,
nor shall you redily find it in the works of any of those famous english men
who have been nothing inferior in art to any of the before named, as Farefax,
Tauerner, Shepherde, Mundy, White, Persons, M. Bird, and diverse others, who
never thought it greater sacrilidge to spurn against the Image of a Saint then
to take two perfect cords of one kind together, but if you chance to find any
such thing in their works you may be bold to impute it to the oversight of the
copyers, for copies pasing from hand to hand a small oversight committed by the
first writer, by the second will be made worse, which will give occasion to
the third to alter much both in the words and notes, according as shall seem
best to his own judgment, though (God knows) it will be far enough from the
meaning of the author, so that errors passing from hand to hand in written
copies be easily augmented, but for such of their works as be in print, I
dare be bold to affirm that in them no such thing is to be found.


Phi. You have given us a good caveat how to behave our selves in perusing the
works of other men, and likewise you have given us a good observation for
coming into a unison, therefore now go forward with the rest of the faults of
my lesson.


Ma. The second fault which I dislike in it is in the latter end of the fifth
bar and beginning of the next, where you stand in eights, for the counter is an
eight to the base, and the tenor an eight to the treble, which fault is
committed by leaving out the tenth, but if you had caused the counter rise in
thirdes with the treble, it had been good thus: ^ the third fault of your
lesson is in the last note of your seventh bar, coming from B fa b my, to F fa
ut, ascending in the tenor part, of which fault I told you enough in your
descant, the like fault of vnformal skipping is in the same notes of the same
bar in the counter part, and lastly in the same counterpart you have left out
the Cadence at the close.


Phi. That vnformal fifth was committed because I would not come from the sixth
to the fifth, ascending between the tenor and the treble, but if I had
considered where the note stood, I would rather have come from the sixth to
the fifth then have made it as it is.


Ma. That is no excuse for you, for if your parts do not come to your liking,
but be forced to skip in that order, you may alter the other parts (as being
tide to nothing) for the altering of the leading part will much help the
thing, so that sometime one part may lead, and sometime another, according as
the nature of the music or of the point is, for all points will not be brought
in alike, yet always ye music is so to be cast as the point be not
offensive, being compelled to run into unisons, and therefore when the parts
have scope enough, the music goes well, but when they be so scattered, as
though they lay a loofe, fearing to come near one to another, the^ is not the
harmony so good.


Phi. That is very true indeed: but is not the close of the counter a Cadence.


Ma. No, for a Cadence must always be bound or then odd, driving a small
note through a greater which the Latins (and those who have of late days
written the art of music, call Syncopation, for all binding and hanging upon
notes is called Syncopation, as this and such like: ^ Examples of Syncopation.
^ ^ ^ ^

Here be also other examples of Syncopation in three parts, which if you
consider diligently you shall find (beside the Syncopation) a laudable and
commendable manner of causing your parts drive odd, either ascending or
descending, and if you cause three parts ascend or descend driving, you shall
not possibly do it after any other manner then here is set down, it is true
that you may do it in longer or shorter notes at your pleasure, but that will
alter nothing of the substance of the matter. Also these driuings you shall
find in many songs of the most approved authors, yet shall you not see them
otherwise corded, either in music for voices or instruments then here you may
see.

^ Other examples of Syncopation.
^ ^ ^ ^


Phi. This I will both diligently mark and carefully keep, but now I pray
you set down my lesson corrected after your manner, that I may the better
remember the correction of the faults committed in it. ^


Ma. Here it is according as you might have made it without those faults. ^ ^


Pol. I will peruse this at leisure, but now (brother) I pray you make a lesson
as I have done, and join practice with your speculation.


Pol. I am contented, so you will not laugh at my errors if you find any, but
rather show me how they may be corrected.


Phi. I will if I can, but if I cannot here is one who shall supply that want.


Pol. I pray you then be silent, for I must have deliberation and quietness
also, else shall I never do any thing.


Phi. You shall rather think us stones then men.


Pol. But (master) before I begin I remember a piece of composition of four
parts of master Tauernor in one of his kiries, which master Bold and all his
companions did highly comend for exceeding good, and I would gladly have your
opinion of it.


Ma. Show it me.


Pol. Here it is.


Ma. Although master Tauerner did it I would not imitate it. Faults in this
lesson.
^


Pol. For what reasons?


Ma. First of all the beginning is neither pleasing nor artificial because of
that ninth taken for the last part of the first note, and first of the next
which is a thing intolerable except there were a sixth to bear it out, for
discordes are not to be taken except they have imperfect cords to bear them
out, likewise betwixt the treble and counter parts another might easily be
placed, all the rest of the music is harsh, and the close in the counter part
is both naught and stale like unto a garment of a strange fashion, which being
new put on for a day or two will please because of the novelty, but being
worn thread bare, will grow in contempt, and so this point when the lesson was
made being a new fashion was admitted for the raritie, although the descant
was naught, as being only devised to be foisted in at a close amongst many
parts, for lack of other shift, for though the song were of ten or more
parts, yet would that point serve for one, not troubling any of the rest, but
now a days it is grown in such common use as diverse will make no scruple to
use it in few parts where as it might well enough be left out, thongh it be
very usual with our Organists.


Pol. That is very true, for if you will but once walk to Paul's church, you
shall here it three or four times at the least, in one service if not in one
verse.


Ma. But if you mark the beginning of it, you shall find a fault which even now
I condemned in your brothers lesson, for the counter is an eight to the treble,
and the base an eight to the tenor, and as the counter comes in after the
treble, so in the same manner without variety, the base comes into the tenor.


Pol. These be sufficient reasons indeed, but how might the point have
otherwise been brought in.


Ma. Many ways, and thus for one. ^ The former lesson bettered



Pol. I would I could set down such another.


Phi. Wishing will not avail, but fabricando fabri fimus therefore never leave
practicing for that is in my opinion the readiest way to make such another.


Pol. You say true, and therefore I will try to bring in the same point
another way.


Phi* I see not what you can make worth the hearing upon that point having such
two going before you.


Ma. Be not by his words terrified, but hold forward your determination, for by
such like contentions you shall profit more then you look for.


Pol. How like you this way? ^


Ma. Very ill.


Pol. I pray you show me particularly every fault. faults in this lesson.



Ma. First of all you begin upon a descorde, secondly the parts be vnformall,
and lastly the base is brought in out of ye key which fault is committed
because of not causing the base answer to the counter in the eight, or at
least to the tenor, but because the tenor is in the low key, it were too low
to cause the base answer it in the eight, and therefore it had been better in
this place to have brought in the base in D sol re, for by bringing it in C fa
ut, the counter being in D la sol re, you have changed the air and made it
quite vnformall, for you must cause your fuge answer your leading part either
in the fifth, in the fourth, or in the eight, and so likewise every part to
answer other, although this rule be not general, yet is it the best manner of
maintaining points, for those ways of bringing in of fuges in the third,
sixth, and every such like cords though they show great sight yet are they
unpleasant and seldom used.


Pol. So I perceive that if I had studied of purpose to make an evil lesson I
could not have made a worse then this, therefore once again I will try if I
can make one which may in some sort content you.


Ma. Take heed that your last be not the worst.


Pol. I would not have it so, but tandem aliquando. how like you this? ^


Ma. The music is in deed true, but you have set it in such a key as no man
would have done, except it had been to have plaide it on the Organes with a
quier of singing men, for in deed such shifts the Organistes are many times
compelled to make for ease of the singers, but some have brought it from the
Organe, and have gone about to bring it in common use of singing with bad
success if they respect their credit, for take me any of their songs, so set
down and you shall not find a musicion (how perfect soever he be) able to sol
fa it right, because he shall either sing a note in such a key as it is not
naturally as la in C sol faut, sol in b fa b my, fa in alamire. or then he
shall be compelled to sing one note in two several keys in continual deduction
as fa in b fa b mi, and fa in A la mi re immediately one after another, which
is against our very first rule of the singing our six notes or tuninges, and
as for them who have not practiced that kind of songs, the very sight of
those flat cliffes (which stand at the beginning of the verse or line like a
pair of stairs, with great offense to the eye, but more to the amasing of the
young singer) make them mistearme their notes and so go out of tune, whereas by
the contrary if your song were pricked in another key any young scholar might
easily and perfectly sing it, and what can they possibly do with such a
number of flat b b, which I could not as well bring to pass by pricking the
song a note higher? lastly in the last notes of your third bar and first of the
next, and likewise in your last bar you have committed a gross oversight of
leaving out the Cadence, first in your Alto, and lastly in the tenor at the
very close, and as for those notes which you have put in the tenor part in
steed of the Cadence, though they be true unto the parts, yet would your
Cadence in this place have been far better, for that you cannot formally
close without a Cadence in some one of the parts, as for the other it is an
old stale fashion of closing commonly used in the fifth part to these four (as
you shall know more at large when I shall show you the practice of five
parts) but if you would set down of purpose to study for the finding out of a
bad close, you could not readily light upon a worse then this.


Pol. Then I pray you correct those faults, retaining that which is sufferable.


Ma. Here is your own way altered in nothing but in the Cadences and key. But
here ^ you must note that your song being governed with flats it is as
vnformall to touch a sharp eight in Elami, as in this key to touch it in F fa
ut, and in both places the sixth would have been much better, which would have
been an eight to the treble, besides (which I had almost forgotten) when they
make their songs with those flats, they not only pester the beginning of
every verse with them but also when a note comes in any place where they
should be used they will set another flat before it, so that of necessity it
must in one of the places be superfluous, likewise I have seen diverse songs
with those three flats at the beginning of every verse, and notwithstanding
not one note in some of the places where the flat is set from the beginning of
the song to the end. But the strangers never pester their verse with those
flats, but if the song be naturally flat they will set one, at the beginning of
the verses of every part, and if there happen any extraordinary flat or
sharp they will set the sign before it, which may serve for the note and no
more, likewise if the song be sharp if there happen any extraordinary flat
or sharp they will signify it as before, the signs still serving but for that
note before which it stands and for no more.


Pol. This I will remember, but once again I will see if I can with a lesson
please you any better, and for that effect I pray you give me some point which
I may maintain


Pol. I will show you that piece of favor if you will promise to requite me
with the like favor.


Pol. I promise you that you shall have the hardest in all my budget.


Phi. I will deal more gently with you, for here is one which in my opinion is
familiar enough, and easy to be maintained. ^


Pol. Doubt not but my descant will be as familiar and as easy to be amended,
but I pray you keep silence for a little while else shall I never do any good.


Phi. I pray God it be good when it comes, for you have already made it long
enough.


Pol. Because you say so, I will proceed no further, and now let me here your
opinion of it: there after I will show it to our master. ^ ^


^

Phi. I can perceive no gross faults in it except that the leading part goes
too far, before any of the rest follow, and that you have made the three first
parts go to wide in distance.


Pol. For the soon bringing in of the point, I care not, but ^ in deed I
fear my masters reprehension, for the compass therefore I will presently be
out of fear and show it him: I pray you (sir) show me the faults of this
lesson,


Ma. The first thing which I dislike in it is the wideness and ^ distance of
your parts one from another, Faults in the lesson precedent.
for in your fourth bar it were an easy matter to put in two parts betwixt
your treble and mean, and likewise two others betwixt your mean and tenor,
therefore in any case hereafter take heed of scattering your parts in that
order, for it makes the music seem wild, secondly in your fifth bar you go
from the fifth to the eight in the treble and tenor parts, but if you had set
that mynime (which stands in b square) in D sol re causing it to come under
the counter part, it had been much better and more formal. Thirdly in the
seventh bar, your counter and tenor come into an unison, whereas it is an easy
matter to put in three several parts between your counter and treble.
Fourthly in the eight bar your tenor and base go into an unison without any
necessity. Fiftlie in the tenth bar all the rest of the parts pause while the
tenor leads and begins the fuge which causes the music to seem bare
and lame, in deed if it had been at the beginning of the second part of a
song, or after a full close the fault had been more excusable, but as it is
used in this place, it disgraceth the music very much. Sixthly the last note
of the fifteenth bar and first of the next are two fifths in the base and tenor
parts. Lastly your close in the treble part is so stale that it is almost worm
eaten, and generally your treble part lies so aloof from the rest as though
it were afraid to come nigh them, which makes all the music both vnformall
and unpleasing, for the most artificial form of composing is to couch the
parts close together, so that nothing may be either added or taken away with
out great hinderance to the other parts.


Pol. My brother blamed the beginning, because the leading part went so far
before the next: therefore I pray you let me here your opinion of that matter?


Ma. In deed it is true, that the nearer the following part be unto the
leading, the better the fuge is perceived and the more plainly decerned, and
therefore did the musicians strive to bring in their points the soonest they
could, but the continuation of that neerenes caused them fall into such a
common manner of composing that all their points were brought in after one
sort, so that now there is almost no fuge to be found in any book which has
not been many times used by others, and therefore we must give the fuge some
more scope to come in, and by that means we shall show some variety which
cannot the other may be shown.


Pol. Now (Sir) I pray you desire my brother Philomathes to maintain the same
point, that I may censure him with the same liberty wherewith he censured me,
for he has heard nothing of al which you have said of my lesson.


Ma. I will. Philomathes: let me here how you can handle this same point.


Phi. How has my brother handled it?


Ma. That shall be council to you til we see yours.


Phi. Then shall you quickly see mine. I have rubd it out at length, though with
much ado: here it is, show me the faults.

^ ^


Ma. We will first here what your: brother says to it, and then will I
declare mine opinion.


Phi. If he be the examiner, I am not afraid of condemnation.


Pol. What? do you think I will spare you?


Phi. Not so: but I doubt of your sufficiency to spy and examine the faults,
for they will be very gross if you find them.


Pol. It may be that before I have don you will think them gross enough.


Ma. Go then roundly to work, and show us what you mislike in the lesson.


Pol. Then: Faults in the lesson Precedent.
Inprimis, I mislike the beginning upon an unison, Item I mislike two discordes
(that is a second and a fourth) taken both together after the unison in the
second bar betwixt the tenor and counter: Item, Tertio I condemn as naught,
the standing in the sixth a whole brief together in the third bar in the
counter and tenor parts, for though it be true and withal other shift enough to
be had, yet be those imperfect cords, seldom used of the skillful, except when
some perfect comes immediately after them, and there for being taken but to
sweeten the music, though they make great variety they must not be holden
but in length, and stood upon so long as others, but lightly touched and so
away. Besides, in many parts if the sixth be so stood upon it will be the
harder to make good parts to them. Item, Quarto I condemn the standing in the
unison a whole semibriefe in the last note of the seventh bar in the treble and
counter parts, where you must note that the fault is in the treble and not in
the counter. Lastly, I condemn two fiftes in the penulte and last notes of
the tenth bar in the treble and tenor parts: likewise, that close of the tenor
is of the ancient block, which is now grown out of fashion, because it is
thought better and more commendable to come to a close deliberately with
drawing and binding descant, then so suddenly to close, except you had an
aeuoue or Amen to sing after it. How say you (M.) have I not said prettely well
to my young masters lesson.


Ma. In deed you have spied well, but yet there be two things which have
escaped your fight.


Pol. It may be it past my skill to perceive them, but I pray you which be those
two?


Ma. The taking of a Cadence in the end of the fifth bar, More faults in the
lesson procedent.
and beginning of the next, which might either have been below in the tenor or
above in the treble, and is such a thing in all music, as of all other things
must not be left out, especially in closing either passing in the midst of
a song or ending: for though it were but in two parts yet would it grace the
music, and the (...) i^ were used, the better the song or lesson would be:
much more in many parts: and in this place it had been far better to have left
out any cords whatsoever then the Cadence: and though you would keep all the
four parts as they be, yet if you sing it in G sol re ut, either in the treble
or tenor, it would make a true fifth part to them. The Cadence likewise is left
out where it might have been taken in the ninth bar and counter part, which if
it had been taken would have caused the Tenor to come up nearer to the
counter, and the counter to the treble, and thereby so much the more have graced
the music.


Phi. It greeues me that he should have found so many holes in my cote, but it
may be that he has bin taken with some of those faults himself in his last
lesson, and so might the more easily find them in mine.


Ma, You may peruse his lesson and see that.


Pol. But (sir) seeing both we have tried our skill upon one point, I pray you
take the same point and make something of it which we may imitate, for I am
sure my brother will be as willing to see it as I.


Phi. And more willing (if more may be) therefore let us entreat you to do it.


Ma. Little entreaty will serve for such a matter, and therefore here it is.

^ ^ ^ ^ ^


Pol. In mine opinion he who can bnt rightly imitate this one lesson may be
counted a good musicion.


Phi. Why so?


Pol. Because there be so many and diverse ways of bringing in the fuge showed
in it as would cause any of my humor be in love with it, for the point is
brought in in the true air the parts going so close and formally that nothing
more artificial can be wished: likewise mark in what manner any part
begins and you shall see some other reply upon it in the same point, either
in shorter or longer notes also in the 22. bar when the Tenor expresses the
point, the base reuerteth it, and at a word I can compare it to nothing but to
a well garnished garden of most sweet flowers, which the more it is searched
the more variety it yeldeth.


Ma. You are too hyperbolicall in your phrases, speaking not according to skill,
but affection, but in truth it is a most common point, and no more then
commonly handled, but if a man would study, he might upon it find variety
enough to fill up many sheets of paper: yea, though it were given to all the
musicions of the world they might compose upon it, and not one of their
compositions be like unto that of another. And you shall find no point so well
handled by any man, either Composer or Organist, but with study either he
himself or some other might make it much better. But of this matter enough,
and I think by the lessons and precepts which you have already had, you may
well enough understand the most usual allowances and disallowances in the
composition of four parts. It follows now to show you the practice of five,
therefore (Philomathes) let me see what you can do at five, seeing your
Brother has gone before you in four.


Phi. I will: but I pray you what general rules and observations are to be
kept in five parts?


Ma. I can give you no general rule, but that you must have a care to cause
your parts give place one to another, and above all things avoid standing in
unisons, for seeing they can hardly be altogether avoided the more care is to
be taken in the good use of them, which is best shown in passing notes, and in
the last part of a note. The other rules for casting of the parts and taking
of allowances be the same which were in four parts.


Phi. Give me leave then to pause a little, and I will try my skill:


Ma. Pause much, and you shall do better.


Pol. What? will much study help?


Ma. Too much study dulleth the understanding, but when I bid him pause much, I
will him to correct often before he leave.


Pol. But when he has once set down a thing right, what need him study any
more at that time?


Ma. When he has once set down a point, though it be right, yet ought he not
to rest there, but should rather look more earnestly how he may bring it
more artificially about.


Pol. By that means he may scrape out that which is good, and bring in that
which will be worse.


Ma. It may be that he will do so at the first, but afterward when he has
discretion to decerne the goodness of one point above another, he will take
the best and leave the worst. And in that kind, the Italians and other
strangers are greatly to be commended, who taking any point in hand, will not
stand long upon it, but will take the best of it and so away to another, whereas
by the contrary, we are so tedious that of one point we will make as much as
may serve for a whole song, which though it show great art in variery, yet is
it more then needs, except one would take upon them to make a whole fancy of
one point. And in that also you shall find excellent fantasies both of master
Alfonso, Horatio Vecci, and others. But such they seldom compose, exceptit
either be to show their variety at some odd time to see what may be done
upon a point without a dittie, or at the request of some friend, to show the
diversity of sundry men's veins upon one subject. And though the Lawyers say
that it were better to suffer a hundred guilty persons escape them to punish
one guitles, yet ought a musicion rather blotte out twenty good points then to
suffer one point pass in his compositions vnartificially brought in.


Phi. I have at length wrested out a way, I pray you sir peruse it and correct
the faults.

^ ^


Ma. You have wrested it out in deed, as for the faults they be not to be
corrected.


Phi. what? is the lesson so excellent well contrived?


Ma. No: but except you change it all you cannot correct the fault which like
unto a hereditarie lepresie in a man's body is incurable without the
dissolution of the whole?


Phi. I pray you what is the fault.


Ma. The compass, for as it stands you shall hardly find five ordinary
voices to sing it, and is it not a shame for you being told of that fault so
many times before, to fall into it now again? for if you mark your fifth bar,
you may easily put three parts betwixt your mean and tenor, and in the eight
bar you may put likewise three parts between your treble and mean, gross
faults and only committed by negligence, your last notes of the ninth bar and
first of the next are two fifts in the treble, and mean parts, and your two
last bars you have robde out of the capca^e of some old Organist, but that
close though it fit the singer as that the deformity whereof may be hidden by
flurish, yet is it not sufferable in compositions for voices, seeing there be
such harsh discordes taken as are flat against the rules of music.


Phi. As how?


Ma. Discord against discord, that is, the treble and tenor are a discord,
and the base and tenor likewise a discord in the latter part of the first
semibriefe of the last bar, and this fault is committed by breaking the notes
in division, but that and many other such closings have been in too much
estimation heretofore amongst the very chiefest of our musicians, whereof
amongst many evil this is one of the worst. ^


Phi. Wherein do ye condemn this close, seeing it is both in long notes and
likewise a Cadence.


Ma. No man can condemn it in the treble counter or base parts, but the Tenor
is a blemish to the other, and such a blemish as if you will study of purpose
to make a bad part to any others you could not possible make a worse,
therefore in any case abstain from it and such like.


Phi. Seeing the other parts be good how might the tenor be alterid and made
better.


Ma. Thus, ^ now let your ear be judge in the singing, and you your self
will not deny but that you find much better air and more fulness then was
before, you may reply and say the other was fuller because it did more offend
the ear, but by that reason you might likewise argue that a song full of false
descant is fuller then that which is made of true cords. But (as I told you
before) the best coming to a close is in binding wise in long drawing notes
(as you see in the first of these examples following) and most chiefly when a
fuge which has been in the same song handled is drawn out to make the close
in binding wise, as imagine that this point has in your song been maintained
^ you may draw it out to make the close as you see in the last of these
examples. ^ ^


Phi. I pray you take the fuge of my lesson, and show me how it might have
been followed better.


Ma. Many ways, and thus for one. ^ ^


Phi. You have caused two sundry parts sing the same notes in one and the
selfsame keye.


Ma. That is no fault, for you may make your song either of two Trebles, or two
Means in ye high key or low key, as you list.


Phi. What do you mean by the high key?


Ma. All songs made by the Musicians, who make songs by discretion, are either
in the high key or in the low key. For if you make your song in the high key,
here is the compass of your music, with the form of setting the cliffes for
every part.

^ Canto. Alto. Tenor and Quinto. Basso.

But if you would make your song of two trebles you may make the two highest
parts both with one cliffe, in which case one of them is called Quinto. If the
song be not of two trebles, then is the Quinto always of the same pitch with
the tenor, your Alto or mean you may make high or low as you list, setting
the cliffe on the lowest or second rule. If you make your song in the low key,
or for means then must you keep the compass and set your cliffe as you see
here. ^ The high Mean. The low Mean. Alto. Tenor. Basso.

The musicians also use to make some compositions for men only to sing, in
which case they never pass this compass. ^ Alto. Tenor primus. Tenor
secundus. Bassus.

Now must you diligently mark that in which of all these compasses you make
your music, you must not suffer any part to go without the compass of his
rules, except one note at the most above or below, without it be upon an
extremity for the ditties sake or in notes taken for Diapasons in the base. It
is true that the high and low keys come both to one pitch, or rather
compass, but you must understand that those songs which are made for the high
key be made for more life, the other in the low key with more grauetie and
staidness, so that if you sing them in contrary keys, they will loose their
grace and will be wrested as it were out of their nature: for take an
instrument, as a Lute Orphadrion, Pandorae* or such like, being in the natural
pitch, and set it a note or two lower it will go much heavier and duller, and
far from that spirit which it had before, much more being four notes lower
then the natural pitch.

Likewise take a voice being never so good, and cause it sing above the
natural reach it will make an unpleasing and sweet noise, displeasing both
the singer because of the straining, and the hearer because of the wildenes of
the sound: even so, if songs of the high key be sung in the low pitch, and
they of the low key sung in the high pitch, though it will not be so offensive
as the other, yet will it not breed so much contentment in the hearer as
otherwise it would do. Likewise, in what key soever you compose let not your
parts be so far asunder as that you may put in any other betwixt them, (as you
have don in your last lesson) but keep them close together, and if it happen
that the point cause them go an eight one from the other (as in the beginning
of my example you may see) yet let them come close together again, and above
all things keep the air of your key (be it in the first tune, second tune,
or other) except you be by the words forced to bear it, for the Dittie (as
you shall know hereafter) will compel the author many times to admit great
absurdities in his music, altering both time, tune, color air and what
soever else, which is commendable so he can cunningly come into his former
air again.


Phi. I will by the grace of God diligently observe these rules, therefore I
pray you give us some more examples which we may imitate, for how can a
workman work, who has had no pattern to instruct him.


Ma. If you would compose well the best patterns for that effect or the works
of excellent men, wherein you may perceive how points are brought in, the best
way of which is when either the song begins two several points in two
several parts at once, or one point foreright and reuerted. And though your
foreright fuges be very good, yet are they such as any man of skill may in a
manner at the first sight bring in, if he do but hear the leading part sung:
but this way of two or three several points going together is the most
artificial kind of composing which hitherto has been invented, either for
Motets or Madrigals, specially when it is mingled with reuertes, because so it
makes the music seem more strange, whereof let this be an example.

^ ^ ^ ^


Pol. In truth if I had not looked upon the example, I had not understood your
words, but now I perceive the meaning of them.


Phi. And must every part maintain that point wherewith it did begin, not
touching that of other parts?


Ma. No, but every part may reply upon the point of another, which causes
very good variety in the harmony, for you see in the example that every
part catches the point from another, so that it which even now was in the high
part, will be straight way in a low part and contrarily.


Pol. Now show us an example of a point reuerted.


Ma. Here is one.

^ ^


Pol. Brother here is a lesson worthy the noting, for every part goes a
contrary way, so that it may be called a reuert reuerted.


Phi. It is easy to be understood, but I am afraid it will carry great
deficultie in the practice.


Pol. The more pains must be taken in learning of it, but the time passes
away, therefore I pray you (Sir) give us another example of a foreright point
without any reuerting.


Ma. Here is one, peruse it for these maintaining of long points, either
foreright or reuert are very good in Motets, and al other kinds of grave
music.

^ ^


Phi. Here be good musicians, but in the ninth bar there is a discord so taken,
and so mixed with flats and sharps as I have not seen any taken in the like
order.


Pol. You must not think but that our master has some one secret in
composition which is not common to every scholar, and though this seem absurd
in our dull and weak judgment, yet out of doubt our master has not set it
down to us without judgment.


Phi. Yet if it were lawful for me to declare mine opinion, it is scant
tolerable.


Ma. It is not only tolerable but commendable, and so much the more
commendable as it is far from the common and vulgar vain of closing, but if
you come to peruse the works of excellent musicians you shall find many such
bindings, the strangeness of the invention of which, chiefelie caused them to
be had in estimation amongst the skilful.


Pol. You have hitherto given us all our examples in Motets manner, therefore I
pray you give us now some in form of a Madrigale, that we may perceive the
nature of that music as well as that of the other.


Ma. The time is almost spent: therefore that you may perceive the manner of
composition in six parts, and the nature of a Madrigale both at once. Here is
an example of that kind of music in six parts, so that if you mark this
well, you shall see that no point is long staid ^ ^ ^ upon, but once or twice
driven through all the parts, and sometimes reuerted, and so to the close then
taking another and that kind of handling points is most esteemed in Madrigals
either of five or six parts, specially when two parts go one way, and two
another way, and most commonly in tenthes or thirdes, as you may see in my
former example of five parts, of maintaining two points or more at once.
Likewise the more variety of points be showed in one song, the more is the
Madrigal esteemed, and withal you must bring in fine bindinges and strange
closes according as the words of your Dittie shall move you, also in these
compositions of six parts, you must have an especial care of causing your
parts give place one to another, which you cannot do without restings, nor can
you (as you shall know more at large anon) cause them rest till they have
expressed that part of the dittying which they have begun, and this is the
cause that the parts of a Madrigal either of five or six parts go sometimes
full, sometimes very single, sometimes iumping together, and sometime quite
contrary ways, like unto the passion which they express, for as you
scholars say that love is full of hopes and fears, so is the Madrigall or
lovers music full of diversity of passions and airs.


Phi. Now sir because the day is far spent, and I fear that you shall not have
time enough to relate unto us those things which might be desired for the full
knowledge of music, I will request you before you proceed to any other
matters to speak something of Canons.


Ma. To satisfy your request in some respect, I will show you a few whereby
of your self you may learn to find out more. A Canon then (as I told you
before scholar Philomathes) may be made in any distance comprehended within
the reach of ye voice, as the 3. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9 10. 11. 12. or other. but for
the composition of Canons no general rule can be given as that which is
performed by plain sight, wherefore I will refer it to your own study to find
out such points as you shall think meetest to be followed, and to frame and
make them fit for your Canon, the Authors use the Canons in such diversity
that it were folly to think to set down all the forms of them, because they be
infinet, and also daily more and more augmented by diverse, but most commonly
they set some dark words by them, signifiyng obscurely how they are to be
found out, and sung as by this of Iusquin you may see.


Canon.
In gradus vndenos descendant multiplicantes.
Consimilique modo crescant antipodes vno.
^

For he setting down a song of four parts, having pricked all the other parts
at length, sets this for the base, and by the word Antipodes you must
understand perarsin and the sin though the word multiplicantes be to obscure a
direction to signify that every note must be four times the value of it
self, as you may perceive by this

Resolution.
^

And though this be no Canon in that sense as we commonly take it, as not
being more parts in one, yet be these words a Canon: if you desire to see the
rest of the parts at length you may find them in the third book of Glareanus
his dodecachordon. But to come to those Canons which in one part have some
others concluded, here is one without any Canon in words, composed by an old
author Petrus Platensis, wherein the beginning of every part is signified with
a letter S. signifying the highest or Saprema vox, C. the Counter, T. Tenor,
and B. the base, but the end of every part he signified by the same letters
enclosed in a semicircle, thus: ^ ^

But least this which I have spoken may seem obscure, here is the resolution
of the beginning of every part. ^ Cantus. Altus. Tenor. Bassus.

Of this kind and such like, you shall find many both of 2, 3, 4, 5. and six
parts, every where in the works of Iusquin, Petrus Patensis, Brumel, and in our
time, in the Introductions of Baselius and Caluisius with their resolutions and
rules how to make them, therefore I will cease to speak any more of them, but
many other Canons there be with oenigmaticall words set by them, which not
only strangers have used, but also many Englishmen, and I my self (being as
your Maro says audax iuuenta) for exercises did make this cross without any
cliffes, with these words set by it:

^ Within this cross here may you find,
Four parts in two be sure of this:
But first seek out to know my mind,
Or else this Cannon you may miss.


Which is indeed so obscure that no man without the Resolution will find out how
it may be sung, therefore you must not that the Trausuer sarie or arms of the
cross contain a Canon in the twelfth, above which sings every note of the
base a prick minime till you come to this sign * {vocal join} where it
ends. The Radius or staff of the cross contains like wise two parts in
one, in the twelfth under the treble, singing every note of it a semibriefe
till it come to this sign as before {vocal join} likewise you must note that
all the parts begin together without any resting, as this Resolution you may
see.

The Resolution.
Cantus. ^


Alto. ^


Tenor. ^


Basso. ^


There be also some compositions which at the first sight will seem very hard
to be done, yet having the rules of the composition of them delivered unto
you, they will seem very easy to be made, as to make two parts in one, to be
repeated as often as you will, and at every repetition to fall a note, which
though it seem strange, yet it is performed by taking your final Cadence one
note lower then your first note was, making your first the close, as in this
example by the director you may perceive.

Canon in epidiatessaron. ^

Likewise you may make eight parts in four (or fewer or more as you list)
which may be sung backward and forward, that is, one beginning at the
beginning of every part, and another at the ending, and so sing it quight
through, and the rules to make it be these, make how many parts you list,
making two of a kind (as two trebles, two tenors, two counters, and two bases)
but this caveat you must have, that at the beginning of the song all the parts
must begin together full, and that you must not set any prick in all the song
(for though in singing the part forward it will go well, yet when the other
comes backward it will make a disturbance in the music because the singer
will be in a doubt to which note the prick belongs. For if he should hold
it out with the note which it follows it would make an odd number, or then
he must hold it in that tune wherein the following note is, making it of that
time as if it followed that note, which would be a great absurdtirie to set a
prieke before the note, of which it takes the time: having so made your song,
you must set one part at the end of the other of the same kind (as treble after
treble, base after base, etc.) so that the end of the one be joined to the end
of the other, so shall your music go right forward and backward, as thus for
example.

Canon 8. parts in 4. retro and retro. ^ Canto retro and retro
^ Alto retro and retro
^ Tenor retro and retro
^ Basso retro and retro.


Resolution.
^

If you desire more examples of this kind, you may find one of master Birds,
being the last song of those Latin Motets, which under his and master Tallis
his name were published.

In this manner also be ye catches made, making how many parts you lift, and
setting them all after one thus.

^

The Resolution.
^ Four parts in one in the unison.

Now having discoursed unto you the composition of three, Rules to be observed
in dittying.
four, five and six parts with these few ways of Canons and catches:

It follows to show you how to dispose your music according to the nature
of the words which you are therein to express, as whatsoever matter it be
which you have in hand, such a kind of music must you frame to it. You must
therefore if you have a grave matter, apply a grave kind of music to it* if
a merry subject you must make your music also merry. For it will be a great
absurdity to use a sad harmony to a merry matter, or a merry harmony to a
sad lamentable or tragical dittie. You must then when you would express any
word signifying hardness, cruelty, bitterness, and other such like, make the
harmony like unto it, that is, somewhat harsh and hard but yet so yt it offend
not. Likewise, when any of your words shall express complaint, dolor,
repentance, sighs, tears, and such like, let your harmony be sad and doleful,
so that if you would have your music signify hardness, cruelty or other such
affects, you must cause the parts proceed in their motions without the half
note, that is, you must cause them proceed by whole notes, sharp thirdes,
sharp sixes and such like (when I speak of sharp or flat thirdes, and sixes,
you must understand that they ought to be so to the base) you may also use
Cadences bound with the fourth or seventh, which being in long notes will
exasperat the harmony: but when you would exprrsse a lamentable passion, then
must you use motions proceeding by half notes. Flat thirdes and flat sixes,
which of their nature are sweet, specially being taken in the true tune and
natural air with discretion and judgment. but those cords so taken as I
have said before are not the sole and only cause of expressing those
passions, but also the motions which the parts make in singinng do greatly
help, which motions are either natural or accidental. The natural motions
are those which are naturally made betwixt the keys without the mixture of
any accidental sign or cord, be it either flat or sharp, and these motions
be more masculine causing in the song more virilitie then those accidental
cords which are marked with these signs... which be in deed accidental, and
make the song as it were more effeminate and languishing then the other motions
which make the song rude and sounding: so that those natural motions may serve
to express those effects of cruelty, tyranny, bitterness and such others,
and those accidental motions may fitly express the passions of grief,
weeping, sighs, sorrows, sobbes, and such like.

Also, if the subject be light, you must cause your music go in motions,
which carry with them a celeritie or quickness of time, as minimes, crotchets
and quauers: if it be lamentable, the note must go in slow and heavy motions,
as semibreues, breues and such like, and of all this you shall find examples
every where in the works of the good musicians. Moreover, you must have a
care that when your matter signifies ascending, high heaven, and such like,
you make your music ascend: and by the contrary where your dittie speaks
of descending lowenes, depth, hell, and others such, you must make your music
descend, for as it will be thought a great absurdity to talk of heaven and
point downwarde to the earth: so will it be counted great incongruitie if a
musician upon the words he ascended into heaven should cause his music
descend, or by the contrary upon the descension should cause his music to
ascend. We must also have a care so to apply the notes to the words, as in
singing there be no barbarism committed: that is, that we cause no syllable
which is by nature short be expressed by many notes or one long note, nor no
long syllable be expressed with a short note, but in this fault do the
practitioners err more grossly, then in any other, for you shall find few
songs wherein the penult sillables of these words, Dominus, Angelus, filius,
miraculum, gloria, and such like are not expressed with a long note, yea many
times with a whole dossen of notes, and though one should speak of forty he
should not say much amiss, which is a gross barbarism, and yet might be
easelie amended. We must also take heed of seperating any part of a word from
another by a rest, as some dunces have not slackt to do, yea one whose name is
Johannes Dunstaple (an ancient English author) has not only divided the
sentence, but in the very middle of a word has made two long rests thus, in a
song of four parts upon these words, Nesciens virgo matter virum.

^ Ipsum regem angelo rum so la vir go lacta bat.

For these be his own notes and words, which is one of the greatest
absurdities which I have seen committed in the dittying of music, but to
show you in a word the use of the rests in the dittie, you may set a crotchet
or minime rest above a coma or colon, but a longer rest then that of a minime
you may not make till the sentence be perfect, and then at a full point you
may set what number of rests you will. Also when you would express sighs, you
may use the crotchet or minime rest at the most, but a longer then a minime
rest you may not use, because it will rather seem a breath taking then a sigh,
an example whereof you may see in a very good song of Stephano venturi to five
voices upon this dittie quell'aura che spirando a Paura mia? for coming to the
word sospiri (that is sighs) he gives it such a natural grace by breaking a
minime into a crotchet rest and a crotchet, that the excellency of his judgment
in expressing and gracing his dittie does therein manifestly appear. Lastly,
you must not make a close (especially a full close) till the full sense of the
words be perfect: so that keeping these rules you shall have a perfect
agreement, and as it were a harmonicall concent betwixt the matter and the
music, and likewise you shall be perfectly understood of the auditor what
you sing, which is one of the highest degrees of praise which a musicion in
dittying can attain unto or wish for. Many other petty observations there be
which of force must be left out in this place, and remitted to the discretion
and good judgment of the skilful composer.

Pol. Now (sir) seeing you have so largely discoursed of framing a fit music
to the nature of a dittie, we must earnestly entreat you, (if it be not a thing
too troblesome) to discourse unto us at large all the kinds of music, with
the observations which are to be kept in composing of every one of them.


Ma. Although by that which I have already showed you, you might with study
collect the nature of all kinds of music, yet to ease you of that pain, I
will satisfy your request though not at full, yet with so many kinds as I can
call to memory: for it will be a hard matter upon the sudden to remember them
al, and therefore (to go to the matter roundly, and without circumstances) I say
that all music for voices (for only of that kind have we hitherto spoken)
is made either for a dittie or without a dittie, if it be with a dittie, it is
either grave or light, the grave ditties they have still kept in one kind, so
that whatsoever music be made upon it, is comprehended under the name of a
Motet: a Motet is properly a song made for the church, either upon some hymn
or Antheme, or such like, and that name I take to have been given to that
kind of music in opposition to the other which they called Canto fermo, and
we do commonly call plainsong, for as nothing is more opposite to standing and
firmnes then motion, so did they give the Motet that name of moving, because it
is in a manner quight contrary to the other, which after some sort, and in
respect of the other stands still. This kind of al others which are made on a
ditty, requires most art, and moves and causes most strange effects in the
hearer, being aptly framed for the dittie and well expressed by the singer,
for it will draw the auditor (and specially the skillful auditor) into a
devout and reverent kind of consideration of him for whose praise it was made.
But I see not what passions or motions it can stir up, being sung as most men
do commonly sing it: that is, leaving out the dittie and singing only the
bare note, as it were a music made only for instruments, which will in deed
show the nature of the music, but never carry the spirit and (as it were)
that lively soul which the dittie gives, but of this enough. And to return
to the expressing of the ditty, the matter is now come to that state that
though a song be never so well made and never so aptly applied to the words,
yet shall you hardly find singers to express it as it ought to be, for most of
our church men, (so they can cry louder in ye quier then their fellows) care
for no more, whereas by the contrary, they ought to study how to vowell and
sing clean, expressing their words with devotion and passion, whereby to draw
the hearer as it were in chains of gold by the ears to the consideration of
holy things. But this for the most part, you shall find amongst them, that let
them continue never so long in the church, yea though it were twenty years,
they will never study to sing better then they did the first day of their
preferment to that place, so that it should seem that having obtained the
living which they sought for, they have little or no care at all either of
their own credit, or well discharging of that duty whereby they have their
maintenance. But to return to our Motets, if you compose in this kind, you
must cause your harmony to carry a majesty taking discordes and bindings so
often as you can, but let it be in long notes, for the nature of it will not
bear short notes and quick motions, which denotate a kind of wantonness.

This music (a lamentable case) being the chiefest both for art and utility,
is notwithstanding little esteemed, and in small request with the greatest
number of those who most highly seem to favor art, which is the cause that the
composers of music who otherwise would follow the depth of their skill, in
this kind are compelled for lack of moecenates to put on another humor, and
follow that kind whereunto they have neither been brought up, nor yet (except
so much as they can learn by seeing other men's works in an unknown tongue) do
perfectly understand ye nature of it, such be the newfangled opinions of our
country men, who will highly esteem whatsoever comes from beyond the seas,
and specially from Italy, be it never so simple, contemning that which is
done at home though it be never so excellent. Nor yet is that fault of
esteeming so highly the light music particular to us in England, but
general through the world, which is the cause that the musitions in all
countries and chiefly in Italy, have employed most of their studies in it:
whereupon a learned man of our time writing upon Cicero his dream of Scipio
says, that the musicians of this age, in steed of drawing the minds of men to
the consideration of heaven and heavenly things, do by the contrary set
wide open the gates of hell, causing such as delight in the exercise of their
art tumble headlong into perdition.

This much for Motets, under which I comprehend all grave and sober music,
the light music has been of late more deeply diued into, Light music.
so that there is no vanity which in it has not been followed to the full, A
Madrigal
but the best kind of it is termed Madrigal, a word for the etymology of which
I can give no reason, yet use shows that it is a kind of music made upon
songs and sonnets, such as Petrarcha and many Poets of our time have excelled
in This kind of music wear not so much disalowable if the Poets who compose
the ditties would abstain from some obscenities, which all honest ears abhor,
and sometime from blasphemies to such as this, ch'altro di te iddio non voglio
which no man (at least who has any hope of salvation) can sing without
trembling. As for the music it is next unto the Motet, the most artificial
and to men of understanding most delightful. If therefore you will compose in
this kind you must possess your self with an amorus humor (for in no
composition shall you prove admirable except you put on, and possess your self
wholly with that vain wherein you compose) so that you must in your mnsicke be
wavering like the wind, sometime wanton, sometime drooping, sometime grave and
staide, otherwhile effeminat, you may maintain points and reuert them, use
triplaes and show the very uttermost or your variety, and the more variety
you show the better shall you please. In this kind our age excels, so that if
you would imitate any, I would appoint you these for guides: Alfonso ferrabosco
for deep skill, Luca Marenzo for good air and fine invention, Horatto Vecchi,
Stephano Venturi, Ruggiero Giouanelli, and John Croce, with diverse others who
are very good, but not so generally good as these. The second degree of
grauetie in this light music is given to Canzonets that is little short
songs (wherein little art can be showed being made in strains, Canzonets
the beginnng of which is some point lightly touched, and every strain
repeated except the middle) which is in composition of the music a counterfeit
of the Madrigal. Of the nature of these are the Neapolitans or Canzone a la
Napolitana, Neapolita^s
different from them in nothing saving in name, so that whosoever knows the
nature of the one must needs kuow the other also, and if you think them
worthy of your pains to compose them, you have a pattern of them in Luco
Marenzo and John Feretti, who as it should seem has employed most of all his
study that way. The last degree of grauetie (if they have any at all is given
to the villanelle or country songs which are made only for the ditties sake,
Villenelle.
for so they be aptly set to express the nature of the ditty, the composer
(though he were never so excellent) will not stick to take many perfect cords
of one kind together, for in this kind they think it no fault (as being a kind
of keeping decorum) to make a clownish music to a clownish matter, and though
many times the dittie be fine enough yet because it carries that name
villanella they take those disallowances as being good enough for plow and cart
There is also another kind more light then this, Ballette.
which they term Ballete or daunces, and are songs, which being song to a
dittie may likewise be daunced: these and all other kinds of light music
saving the Madrigal are by a general name called airs. There be also an other
kind of Ballets, commonly called falas, the first set of that kind which I
have seen was made by Gastaldi, if others have labored in the same field, I
know not but a slight kind of music it is, and as I take it devised to be
daunced to voices. The slightest kind of music (if they deserve the name of
music) are the vinate or drincking songs, Vinate
for as I said before, there is no kind of vanity whereunto they have not
applied some music or other, as they have framde this to be sung in their
drinking, but that vice being so rare among the Italians, and Spaniards: I
rather think that music to have bin devised by or for the Germains (who in
swarms do flock to the University of Italy) rather then for the Italians
themselves. Iustinianes.
There is likewise a kind of songs) which I had almost forgotten) called
Iustinianas, and are al written in the Bergamasca language a wanton and rude
kind of music it is, and like enough to carry the name of some notable
Curtisan of the City of Bergama, for no man will deny that Iustiniana is the
name of a woman. There be also many other kinds of songs which the Italians
make as Pasterellas and Passamesos with a dittie and such like, Pastorelle
passamezos with ditties Fantasies.
which it would be both tedious and superfluons to delate unto you in words,
therefore I will leave to speak any more of them, and begin to declare unto you
those kinds which they make without ditties. The most principal and chiefest
kind of music which is made without a dittie is the fantasy, that is, when a
musician takes a point at his pleasure, and wresteth and turns it as he
list, making either much or little of it according as shall seem best in his
own conceit. In this may more art be shown then in any other music, because
the composer is tide to nothing but that he may add, deminish, and alter at
his pleasure. And this kind will bear any allowances whatsoever tolerable in
other music, except changing the air and leaving the key, which in fantasy
may never be suffered. Other things you may use at your pleasure, as bindings
with discordes, quick motions, slow motions, proportions, and what you list.
Likewise, this kind of music is with them who practice instruments of parts in
greatest use, but for voices it is but sildome used. The next in grauery and
goodness unto this is called a pauane, a kind of staide music, ordained for
grave dancing, Pauens.
and most commonly made of three strains, whereof every strain is played or
sung twice, a strain they make to contain 8. 12. or 16. semibreues as they
list, yet fewer then eight I have not seen in any pauan. In this you may not
so much insist in following the point as in a fantasy: but it shall be enough
to touch it once and so away to some close. Also in this you must cast your
music by four, so that if you keep that rule it is no matter how many
foures you put in your strain, for it will fall out well enough in the end,
the art of dancing being come to that perfection that every reasonable
dauncer will make measure of no measure, so that it is no great matter of what
number you make your strain. After every pauan we usually set a galliard (that
is, a kind of music made out of the other) causing it go by a measure,
Galliards.
which the learned call trochaieam rationem, consisting of a long and short
stroke successively, for as the foot trochaeus consists of one syllable of
two times, and another of one time, so is the first of these two strokes double
to the latter: the first being in time of a semibrefe, and the latter of a
minime. This is a lighter and more stirring kind of dancing then the pauane
consisting of the same number of strains, and look how many foures of
semibreues, you put in the strain of your pauan, so many times six minimes
must you put in the strain of your galliard. The Italians make their
galliardes (which they term saltarelli) plain, and frame ditties to them,
which in their mascaradoes they sing and dance, and many times without any
instruments at all, but in steed of instruments they have Curtisans disguised
in men's apparel, Almanes.
who sing and dance to their own songs. The Alman is a more heavy dance
then this (fitly representing the nature of the people, whose name it carries)
so that no extraordinary motions are used in dancing of it. It is made of
strains, sometimes two, sometimes three, and every strain is made by four,
but you must mark that the four of the pauan measure is in dupla proportion
to the four of the Alman measure, so that as the usual Pauane contains in a
strain the time of sixteen semibreues, so the usual Almaine contains the
time of eight, and most commonly in short notes. Like unto this is the French
bransle (which they call bransle simple) which goes somewhat rounder in time
the^ this, Bransles.
otherwise the measure is all one. The bransle de poictou or bransle double is
more quick in time, (as being in a round Tripla) but the strain is longer,
containing most usually twelve whole strokes. Voltes courantes.
Like unto this (but more light) be the voltes and courantes which being both
of a measure, ar notwithstanding daunced after sundry fashions, Country
daunces.
the volte rising and leaping, the courante trauising and running, in which
measure also our country dance is made, though it be daunced after another
form then any of the former. All these be made in strains, either two or
three as shall seem best to the maker, but the courant has twice so much in a
strain, as the English country dance. There be also many other kinds of
daunces (as hornepypes Iygges and infinite more) which I cannot nominate unto
you, but knowing these the rest can not but be understood, Diverse men diversely
affected to diverse kinds of music.
as being one with some of these which I have already told you. And as there
be diverse kinds of music, so will some men's humors be more inclined to one
kind then to another. As some will be good descanters, and excel in descant, and
yet will be but bad composers, others will be good composers and but bad
descanters extempore upon a plain song, some will excel in composition of
Motets, and being set or enjoined to make a Madrigal. will be very far from the
nature of it, likewise some will be so possessed with the Madrigal humor, as no
man may be compared with them in that kind, and yet being enjoined to compose a
motet or some sad and heavy music, will be far from the excellecie which they
had in their own vain. Lastly, some will be so excellent in points of
voluntary upon an instrument as one would think it impossible for him not to
be a good composer, and yet being inioynd to make a song will do it so simply
as one would think a scholar of one years practice might easily compose a
better. And I dare boldly affirm, that look which is he who thinks
himself the best descanter of all his neighbors, enjoin him to make but a
scottish lygge, he will grossly err in the true nature and quality of it.

Thus have you briefly those precepts which I think necessary and
sufficient for you, The conclusion of the dialogue.
whereby to understand the composition of 3. 4. 5. or more parts, whereof I
might have spoken much more, but to have done it without being tedious unto
you, that is, to me a great doubt seeing there is no precept nor rule omitted,
which may be any way profitable unto you in the practice. Seeing therefore you
lack nothing of perfect musicians, but only use to make you prompt and quick
in your compositions, and that practice must only be done in time, as well by
your selves as with me, and seeing night is already begun, I think it best to
return, you to your lodgings and I to my book.


Pol. Tomorrow we must be busied making provision for our journey to the
University, so that we cannot possibly see you again before our departure,
therefore we must at this time both take our leave of you, and entreat you that
at every convenient occasion and your leisure you will let us hear from you.


Ma. I hope before such time as you have sufficiently ruminated and digested
those precepts which I have given you, that you shall hear from me in a new
kind of matter.


Phi. I will not only look for that, but also pray you that we may have some
songs which may serve both to direct us in our compositions, and by singing
them recreate us after our more serious studies.


Ma. As I never denied my scholars any reasonable request, so will I satisfy
this of yours, therefore take these scrolles, wherein there be some grave, and
some light, some of more parts and some of fewer, and according as you shall
have occasion use them.


Phi. I thank you for them, and never did miserable usurer more carefully
keep his coin, (which is his only hope and felicity) then I shall these.


Pol. If it were possible to do any thing which might counteruaile that which
you have don for us, we would show you the like favor in doing as much for
you, but since that is impossible we can no otherwise requite your courtesy
then by thankful minds and dewtiful reverence which (as all scholars do owe
unto their masters) you shall have of us in such ample manner as when we begin
to be undutiful, we wish that the world may know that we cease to be honest.


Ma. Farewell, and the Lord of Lords direct you in all wisdom and learning, that
when herafter you shall be admitted to the handling of the weighty affairs of
the common wealth, you may discreetly and worthily discharge the offices
whereunto you shall be called.


Pol. The same Lord preserve and direct you in all your actions, and keep
perfect your health, which I fear is already declining.


PERORATIO.
THVS have thou (gentle Reader) my book after that simple sort, as I thought
most convenient for the learner, in which if they dislike the words (as bare of
eloquence and lacking fine phrases to allure the mind of the Reader) let them
consider that ornari res ipsa negat contenta doceri, that the matter it self
denies to be set out with flourish, but is contented to be delivered after a
plain and common manner, and that my intent in this book has been to teach
music, not eloquence, also that the scholar will enter in the reading of it
for the matter not for the words. Moreover there is no man of discretion but
will think him foolish who in the precepts of an art will look for filed
speech, rethorical sentences, that being of all matters which a man can
entreat of, the most humble and with most simplicity and sincerity to be
handled, and to deck a lowly matter with lofty and swelling, speech will be
to put simplicity in plumes of feathers and a Carter in cloth of gold. But if
any man of skill (for by such I love to be censured, contemning the injuries of
the ignorant, and making as little account of them as the moon does of the
barking of a dog) shall think me either defectuous or faulty in the necessary
precepts, let him boldly set down in print such things as I have either left
out or falsely set down, which if it be done without railing or biting words
against me, I will not only take for no disgrace, but by the contrary esteem
of it as of a great good turn as one as willing to learn that which I know
not, as to instruct others of that which I know: for I am not of their mind who
envy the glory of other men, but by the contrary give them free course to
run in the same field of praise which I have done, not scorning to be taught,
or make my profit of their works, so it be without their praeiudice, thinking
it praise enough for me, that I have bin the first who in our tongue have put
the practice of music in this form: And that I may say with Horace, Libera
per vacuum posui vestigia princeps, that I have broken the Ice for others. And
if any man shall cauil at my using of the authorities of other men, and think
thereby to discredit the book, I am so far from thinking that any
disparagement to me that I rather think it a greater credit. For if in
divinity, Law, and other sciences it be not only tolerable but commendable to
cite the authorities of doctors for confirmation of their opinions, why should
it not be likewise lawful for me to do that in mine Art which they
commonly use in theirs, and confirm my opinion by the authorities of those
who have bin no less famous in music then either Paulus, Vlpianus, Bartolus
or Baldus, (who have made so many asses ride on foot clothes) have been in
law. As for the examples they be all mine own, but such of them as be in
controuerted matters, though I was counseled to take them of others, yet to
avoid the wrangling of the envious I made them my self, confirmed by the
authorities of the best authors extant. And where as some may object that in
the first part there is nothing which has not already been handled by some
others, if they would indifferently judge they might answer themselves with
this saying of the comicall Poet, nihil dictum quod non dictum prius, and in
this matter though I had made it but a bare translation, yet could I not have
been justly blamed, seeing I have set down such matters as have been hitherto
unknown to may, who otherwise are reasonable good musicians, but such as know
least will be readiest to condemn. And though the first part of the book be of
that nature that it could not have been set down but with that which others
have done before, yet shall you not find in any one book all those things
which there be handled, but I have had such an especial care in collecting them
that the most common things, which every where are to be had be but slenderly
touched. Other things which are as necessary and not so common are more largely
handled, and also plainly and after so familiar a sort delivered, as none (how
ignorant soever) can justly complain of obscurity. But some have been so
foolish as to say that I have employed much travel in vain in seeking out the
depth of those moodes and other things which I have explained, and have not
stuck to say that they be in no use, and that I can write no more then they
know already. Surely what they know already I know not, but if they account the
moodes, ligatures, pricks of division and alteration, augmentation, diminution
and proportious, things of no use, they may as well account the whole art of
music of no use, seeing that in the knowledge of them consists the whole or
greatest part of the knowledge of pricksong. And although it be true that the
proportions have not such use in music in that form as they be now used,
but that the practice may: be perfect without them, yet seeing they have been
in common use with the musicians of former time, it is necessary for us to
know them, if we mean to make any profit of their works. But those men who
think they know enough already, when (God knows) they can scarce sing their
part with the words, be like unto those who having once superficially red the
Tenors of Littleton or Justinians institutes, think that they have perfectly
learned the whole law, and then being enjoined to discuss a case, do at length
perceive their own ignorance and bear the shame of their falsely conceived
opinions But to such kind of men do I not wright, for as a man having brought a
horse to the water cannot compel him to drink except he list, so may I write a
book to such a man but cannot compel him to read it: But this difference is
betwixt the horse and the man, that the horse though he drink not will
notwithstanding return quietly with his keeper to the stable, and not kick at
him for bringing him fourth: our man by the contrary will not only not read
that which might instruct him, but also will backbite and malign him, who has
for his and other men's benefit undertaken great labor and endured much pain,
more then for any private gain or commodity in particular redounding to
himself. And though in the first part I have boldly taken that which in
particular I cannot challenge to be mine own, yet in the second part I have
abstained from it as much as is possible, for except the cords of descant, and
that common rule of prohibited consequence of perfect cords, there is nothing
in it which I have seen set down in writing by others. And if in the Canons I
shall seem to have too much affected breuity, you must know that I have
purposely left that part but slenderly handled, both because the scholar may
by his own study become an accomplished musicion, having perfectly practiced
those few rules which be there set down, as also because I do shortly look
for the publication in print, of those never enough praised travails of master
Waterhouse, whose flowing and most sweet springs in that kind may be sufficient
to quench the thirst of the most insaciate scholar whatsoever. But if mine
opinion may be in any estimation with him, I would counsel him that when he
does publish his labors, he would set by every several way some words whereby
the learner may perceive it to be a Canon, and how one of the parts is brought
out of another (for many of the^ which I have seen be so intricate as being
pricked in several books one shall hardly perceive it to be any Canon at al):
so shall he by his labors both most benefit his Country in showing the
invention of such variety, and reap most commendations to himself in that he
has been the first who has invented it. And as for the last part of the
book there is nothing in it which is not mine own, and in that place I have
used so great facility as none (how simple soever) but may at the first
reading conceive the true meaning of the words, and this have I so much
affected, because that part will be both most usual and most profitable to the
young practicioners, who (for the most part) know no more learning then to
write their own names. Thus have thou the whole form of my book, which if
thou accept in that good meaning wherein it was written, I have hit the mark
which I shot at: if otherwise accept my good will, who would have don better if
I could. But if thou think the whole art not worthy the pains of any good wit
or learning, though I might answer as Alfonso king of Aragon did to one of his
Courtiers (who saying that the knowledge of sciences was not requisite in a
noble man, the king gave him only this answer questa e voce dun bus non dun
huomo. Yet will not I take upon me to say so, but only for removing of that
opinon, set down the authorities of some of the best learned of ancient time,
and to begin with Plato, he in the seventh book of his common wealth does so
admire music as that he calls it (...) a heavenly thing, (...) and
profitable for the seeking out of that which is good and honest. Also in the
first book of his laws he says that music cannot be entreated or taught
without the knowledge of all other sciences, which if it be true, how far has
the music of that time been different from ours, which by the negligence of
the prosessors is almost fallen into the nature of a mechanical art, rather
then reckoned in amongst other sciences. The next authority I may take from
Aristophanes who though he many times scoff at other sciences, yet terms he
music (...), a perfect knowledge of al sciences and disciplines. But the
Authorites of Aristoxenus Ptolomaeus, and Seuerinus Boethius, who have
painefully delivered the art to us, may be sufficient to cause the best wits
think it worthy their travel, specially of Boethius who being by birth noble
and most excellent well versed in Divinity, Philosophy, Law, Mathematics
Poetry, and matters of estate, did notwithstanding write more of music then of
all the other mathematical sciences, so that it may be justly said, that if it
had not been for him the knowledge of music had not yet come into our
Western part of the world. The Greek tongue lying as it were dead under the
barbarism of the Goths and Hunnes, and music buried in the howels of the
Greek works of Ptolomaeus and Arirstexenus, the one of which as yet has never
come to light, but lies in written copies in some Bibliothekes of Italy, the
other has been set out in print, but the copies are every where so scant and
hard to come by, that many doubt if he have been set out or no. And these few
authorities will serve to diswade the discreet from the before named opinion,
(because few discreet men will hold it) as for others many will be so self
willed in their opinions, that though a man should bring all the arguments and
authorities in the world against it, yet should he not persuade them to leave
it. But if any man shall think me prolix and tedious in this place, I must for
that point crave pardon, and will here make an end, wishing unto all men that
discretion as to measure so to other men as they would be measured themselves.

FINIS.
Cantus
Quatuor voc.
^ EHeu * * E- heu * sustu- ^ lerunt dominum meum dominum me- um sustu- ^
lerunt dominum me- um meum, et po sueunte- um ^ * * ^ Nescio v- by. * * * ^ *

Basis.
quatuor voc.
^ EHeu * E heu sustulerunt dominum meum ^ me- um me- um su- stu- lerunnt
dominum me um

^ et posuerunt eum * * Nescio v- by * ^ * Nescio vbi. *

Altus.
A Quatuor voc.
^ EHeu * E heu Eheu sustulerunt dominum dominum meum ^ dominum meum dominum
meum sustulerunt dominum meum dominum me- um meum ^ et posuerunt e um * e um et
posuerunt e um Nescio v by ^ Nesio v by Nescio vbi. * *

Tenor.
A Quatuor voc.
^ EHeu * * E-heu sustulerunt domi- ^ number sustulerunt dominum menum * sustu- ^
lerunt dominum me- um me um et posue- ^ runt eum et posuernut eum et po-
suerunt eum * ^ Nescio vbi. * ^ * * *

Alto.
Canzonetta. A 4. voci.
^ ARd'ogn hora Il'cor las so e may non more * Ilcor las- so e ^ may nom more
il * e may non more e may non more. Ard'ogn hora * ^ il cor las- so emai non
mo- re e may non more. * ^ Ahi ch'il focod'amor, non e mortale * * Easpegner il
su'ardor * ^ acqua non va le * * Easpegner il ^ su'ardor * acqua non va le *
acqua non vale.

Canto.
Canzonetta. A 4 voci.
^ ARd'ognhora il cor las- so e may non mo- re e may non more. * ^ Ard'ognhora
il cor las- so e may non more * ^ il * il cor las- so e may non mo- re e may
non more Ahi ch'il ^ foco d'amor non e mor-tale * non e mortale. Easpegner il
su'ardor * ^ acqua non va- le * * Easpegneril su'ardor * ^ acqua non va- le. * *

Basis.
Canzonetta. A 4. voci.
^ AR'dogn hora * Ilcor las so e may non more Il cor ^ las- so e may non more e
may non more Ard'ogn hora * il cor ^ las- so e may non mo- re. il cor las- so e
may non mo- re * Ahi ch'il ^ focod'amor, non e mortale * non e mortale.
Easpegneril su'ardor * ^ acqua non va- le acqua non va- le * Easpegner il
su'ardor * ^ acqua non vale acqua non vale *

Tenor.
Canzonetta. A 4. voci.
^ ARd'ognhora * il cor las- so e may non mo- re * ^ il cor losso e may non mo-
re. Ard'ognhora * il cor ^ las-so e may non mo- re * il cor lasso e may non ^
mo- re Ahi ch'il foco d'amor non e mortale * * ^ Easpegner il su'ardor * acqua
non vale * * ^ Easpegner il su'ardor * acqua non vale. * *

Cantus.
A 5. voc.
^ O Amica me a O a mica me a ^ * O amica me a Sunt capilli tu i Sunt ca- ^
pilli tu i * Sunt capilli tu i Sicut ^ greges capra rum * quae ascenderunt * ^
de monte gala-ad ga la- ad quae ascenderunt de monte ^ galaad ga- laad de monte
ga- laad

Tenor.
A 5. voc.
^ O Amica me- a O amica me- a * O a- ^ mica me a me a. Sunt capilli tu i tui
tu i Sunt capilli tui Sunt capilli tui ^ tu i Sicut greges caprarum Sicut
greges capra rum quae ascenderunt de monte ^ galaad de monte galaad * quae
ascenderunt de monte galaad ^ * galaad de monte galaad.

Basis.
A 5. voc.
^ O Amica mea * O amica me a Sunt capilli tu- ^ i * Sunt capilli tui Si cut
greges capra rum Sicut

^ greges capra- rum quae ascenderuntde monte galaad. * quae ascenderunt ^ * de
monte galaad * *

Altus.
A 5. voc.
^ O A mica me- a * O amica me a me a. ^ O amica mea Sunt capilli tu i tu i
Sunt capilli tu i * ^ Sunt capilli tui tu i Sunt capilli tu i tu i Sicut ^
greges caprarum quae ascenderunt * de mon-te de monte galaad galaad * ^ * de
monte galaad * * de monte galaad. *

Quintus.
A 5. voc.
^ O amica me a * me- ^ a * me- a Sunt capilli tui tu- ^ i * * Sunt capil- li
tu- i ^ Sicut greges caprarumcapra- rum * quae ascen- ^ derunt de monte gala-ad
ga- laad quae ascenderunt: * ^ de monte galaad * de monte ga- la ad

Tenor.
Canzonetta. A 4. voci.
^ Perch tor- mi il cor mio cor mio per lasciarlo in oblio in ob- ^ li operche
tor- mi il cor mio cor mio per lasciarlo in oblio in ^ obli- o Lofa perch
perchel'ardo- re Ch'hain se nasco- sto ^ * non t'accen- dailcore non t'ac-
cendail core il ^ co- re Ch'hainse nasco- sto * non t'accen- ^ dailcore non
t'ac cendail core il co re.

Basso.
Canzonetta. A. 4. voci.
^ Perch Per lasciarlo in oblio * per lasciarlo in oblio * ^ Lofaperche perch
l'ardore Ch'hainse nasco- sto non t'accendail co- re ^ Ch'hain se nasco- sto
non t'acceudail core il core Ch'hainse nasco- sto non t'ac- ^ cendail co- re
Ch'hain se nasco- sto non t'accendail co- re il core

Alto.
Canzonetta. A 4. voci.
^ Perch tor- mi il cor mio cor mi- o per lasciarlo in oblio oblio per lasci-
^ arlo in oblio perch tor- mi il cor mio cor mi- o per lasciarlo in oblio
oblio ^ * Lo faperche perch l'ardo- re, Ch'hainse nasco- sto * ^ non
t'ancendail co- re Ch'hainse nasco- sto non t'accenda il co- re ^ Ch'hanise
nascosto non t'accenda il co- re Ch'hainse nasco- sto non t'ac- cendail co- ^
re non t'accen dail core.

Canto.
Canzonetta. A 4 voci.
^ Perch tor- mi il cor mio per lasciarlo in oblio * in ob- ^ lio. Perch tor-
mi il cor mio per lasciarlo in oblio * in ob- ^ lio. Lofaperche perch l'ardore
Ch'hainse nascosto non t'accenda il co- re Ch'hainse nasco- ^ sto non t'acc
enda il co- re non t'accen- dail core Ch'hainese nasco- sto ^ * non t'accendail
co- re Ch'hainse na-sco- sto ^ non t'accen dail co- re.

Quintus.
Quinque vocum. Secunda pars.
^ DEntes tui sicut greges Dentes tui sicut greges tonsarum * ^ Dentes-tui
sicut greges tonsarum quae ascenderunt de la- uacro quae ^ ascenderunt de la-
uacro * quae ascenderunt de la- ^ ua cro quae ascenderunt quae ascenderunt de
lauacto de la- uacro.

Tenor.
Quinque vocum Secunda pars.
^ DEntes tui Sicut greges tonsarum Dentes ^ tui sicut-greges tonsarum que
ascenderunt de laua- ^ cro * quae ascenderunt de lauacro ^ quae ascend- runt
de la uacro * ^ que ascend- runt de la- ua, cro

Basis.
Quinque vocum. Secunda pars.
^ DEntes tui sicut greges tonsa- rum Dentes tui sicut greges tonsarum ^ tonsa-
rum quae ascend- runt quae ascenderunt de lauacro dv lauacro quae

^ ascenderunt quae ascend- runt de lauacro * quae ^ ascend- runt de la- ua
cro.

Cantus.
Quinque vocum. Secunda pars.
^ DEntes tui sicut greges sicut gre- ges tonsarum * ^ quae ascend- runt quae
ascenderunt de lauacro * ^ quae ascendeunt da- la- uacro * quae ascenderunt ^
de la- uacto de laua- cro. *

Altus.
Quinque voc. Secunda pars.
^ DEntes tui Sicut greges tonfarum ^ sicut greges tonsarum tonsarum Dentes tui
sicut gre- ^ ges tonsarum tonsa- rum que ascenderunt * ^ ascenderunt de lauacro
* de la- ^ uacro quae ascenderunt quae ascende-unt de la- uacro ^ * * ^ de la-
ua cro

Altus.
A 3 voc.
^ O Sleep O sleep fond fancy O sleep * O sleep fond fan- cie My ^ head
alas thou tyrest with false delight of that which thou desir- est Sleep Sleep
I say fond ^ fancy, and leave my thoughts molesting. Thy masters head has
need of sleep of sleep and resting ^ * * and re-sting of sleep and resting.

Cantus.
A 3 voc.
^ O Sleep O sleep fond fancy O sleep * O ^ sleep fond fan- cie, My head
alas thou ^ tyrest with false delight of that which thou desi- ^ rest. Sleep
sleep I say fond fancy, and leave my thoughts ^ molesting, Thy masters head
has need of sleep has need ^ of sleep and re-sting * * ^ of sleep and
resting. *

Basis.
A 3 voc.
^ O Sleep O sleep fond fancy O sleep O sleep fond fancy, My head alas
thou tyrest, ^ with false delight of that which thou desire, Sleep sleep I
say fond fancy, and leave my thoughts ^ molesting, Thy masters head has
need has need of sleep and resting * ^ of sleep and resting. *

ANNOTATIONS necessary for the understanding of the Book, wherein the verity
of some of the precepts is proved, and some arguments which to the contrary
might be objected are refuted. To the Reader.
WHen I had ended my book, and showen it (to be perused) to some of better
skill in letters then my self, I was by the^ requested, to give some
contentment to the learned, both by setting down a reason why I had disagreed
from the opinions of others, as also to explain something, which in the book
it self might seem obscure. I have therefore thought it best to set down in
Annotations, such things as in the text could not so commodiouslie be handled,
for interrupting of the continual course of the matter, that both the young
beginner should not be ouerladed with those things, which at the first would
be to hard for him to conceive: and also that they who were more skilful, might
have a reason for my proceedings. I would therefore counsel the young scholar
in Music, not to entangle himself in the reading of these notes, til he have
perfectly learned the book it self, or at least the first part thereof: for
without the knowledge of the book, by reading of them, he shall run into
such confusion, as he shall not know where to begin or where to leave. But
thou (learned Reader) if thou find any thing which shall not be to thy liking,
in friendship advertise me that I may either mend it, or scrape it out. And so
I end, protesting that Errare possum haereticus esse nolo.

Page 2. verse. 26. The scale of Music) I have omitted the definition and
division of music because the greatest part of those, for whose sake the
book was taken in hand, and who chiefly are to use it: be either altogether
unlearned, or then have not so far proceeded in learning, as to understand
the reason of a definition: and also because amongst so many who have written
of music, I knew not whom to follow in the definition. And therefore I have
left it to the discretion of ye Reader, to take which he list of all these
which I shall set down. The most ancient of which is by Plato set out in his
Theages thus, Music (says he) is a knowledge (for so I interpret the word
(...) which in that place he uses) whereby we may rule a company of singers,
or singers in companies (or quire, for so the word (...) signifies.) But in
his Banquet he gives this definition. Music, says he, is a science of love
matters occupied in harmony and rythmos. Boethius distinguishes and theoricall
or speculatiue music he defines, in the first chapter of the fifth book of
his music, Facultas differentias acutorum and grauium sonorum sensu as
ratione perpendens. A faculty considering the difference of high and low
soundes by sense and reason. Augustine defines practical music (which is
that which we have now in hand) Recto medu landi scientia, A science of well
doing by time, tune, or number, for in all these three is modulan di peitia
occupied. Franchinus gaufurius thus Musica est proportionabilium sonorum
concinnis interuallis disiunctorum dispositio sensu ac ratione consonantiam
monstrans. A disposition of proportionable soundes divided by apt distances,
showing by sense and reason, the agreement in sound. Those who have been since
his time, have done it thus, Rite and been canendi scientia, A Science of duly
and well singing, a science of singing well in tune and number Ars been canendi,
an Art of well singing. Now I say, let every man follow what definition he
list. As for the division, Music is either speculatiue or practical.
Speculatiue is that kind of music which by Mathematical helps, seeks out
the causes, properties, and natures of soundes by themselves, and compared with
others proceeding no further, but content with the only contemplation of the
Art. Practical is that which teaches all that may be known in songs, either
for the understanding of other men's, or making of ones own, and is of three
kinds: Diatonicum, chromaticum, and Enharmonicum. Diatonicum, is that which is
now in use, and rises throughout the scale by a whole, not a whole note and a
less half note (a whole note is that which the Latins call integer tonus,
and is that distance which is betwixt any two notes, except mi and fa. For
betwixt mi and fa is not a full half note, but is less then half a note by a
comma: and therefore called the less half note) in this manner. ^ Chromaticum,
is that which rises by se mitonium minus (or the less half note) the greater
half note, and three half notes thus: (the greater half note is that
distance which is betwixt fa and mi,^ in b fa mi.) Enharmonicum, is that which
rises by diesis, diesis, (diesis is the half of the less half note) and
ditonus. But in our music, I can give no example of it, because we have no
half of a less semitonium, but those who would show it, set down this
example. ^ of enharmonicum, and mark the diesis thus X as it were the half of
the apotome or greater half note, which is marked thus. This sign of the more
half note, we now adays confound with our b square, or sign of mi in b fa
mi, and with good reason: for when mi is sung in b fa mi, it is in that
habitude to alamire, as the double diesis makes Ffaut sharp to Elami, for in
both places the distance is a whole note. But of this enough, and by this which
is already set down, it may evidently appear, that this kind of music which
is usual now a days, is not fully and in every respect the ancient Diatonicum.
For if you begin any four notes, singing vt re mi fa, you shall not find
either a flat in elami, or a sharp in Ffaut: so that it must needs follow,
that it is neither just diatonicum, nor right Chromaticum. Likewise by that
which is said, it appears, this point which our Organists use ^ is not right
Chromatica, but a bastard point patched up, of half chromaticke, and half
diatonick, Lastly it appears by that which is said, that those Virginals
which our unlearned musytians call Chromatica (and some also Grammatica) be not
right chromatica, but half enharmonica: and that all the chromatica, may be
expressed upon our common virginals, except ^ for if you would think that the
sharp in g sol re ut would serve that turn, by experiment you shall find that
it is more then half a quarter of a note too low. But let this suffice for
the kinds of music: now to the parts Practical. Music is duided into two
parts, the first may be called Elementarie or rudimental, teaching to know the
quality and quantity of notes, and every thing else belonging to songs, of
what manner or kind soever. The second may be called Syntactical, Poetical, or
effectiue; treatinge of soundes, concordes, and discords, and generally of
every thing serving for the formal and apt setting together of parts or
soundes, for producing of harmony either upon a ground, or voluntary.

Page ad. ver. 27. Which we call the Gam) That which we call the scale of
music, or the Gam, others call the Scale of Guido: for Guido Aretinus, a Monk
of the order of S. Benet, or Benedict, about the year of our Lord 960. changed
the Greek scale (which consisted only of 15. keys, beginning at are, and
ending at alamire) thinking it a thing too tedious, to say such long words,
as Proslambanomenos, hypatehypaton, and such like: turned them into Are, b mi,
c fa ut, etc. and to the intent his invention might the longer remain and the
more easily be learned of children, he framed and applied his Scale to the
hand: setting upon every joint a several keye, beginning at the thumbes end,
and descending on the inside: then orderly through the lowest iointes of every
finger, ascending on the little finger, and then upon the tops of the rest,
still going about, setting his last key ela upon the upper iointe of the middle
finger on the outside. But to the end that every one might know from whence
he had the Art, he set this Greek letter G gamma, to the beginning of his
Scale, serving for a diapason to his seventh letter g. And whereas before him
the whole Scale consisted offoure Tetrachorda or fourthes, so disposed as the
highest note of the lower, was the lowest of the next, except that of mese, as
we shall know more largely hereafter, he added a fifth Tetrachordon, including in
the Scale (but not with such art and reason as the Greeks did) seven
hexachorda or deductions of his six notes, causing that which before contained
but fifteen notes, contain twenty, and so fill up both the reach of most
voices, and the iointes of the hand. Some after him (or he himself) altered
his Scale in form of Organ pipes, as you see set down in the beginning of the
Book. But the Greek Scale was thus.

Systema harmonicum quindecim chordarum in genete diatonico.



For understanding of which, there be three things to be considered: the names,
the numbers, and the distances. As for the names, you must note that they be
all Nounes adjectives, the substantive of which is chorda, or a string,
Proslabanomene, signifiesl a string assumed or taken in, the reasonne whereof
we shall straight know.

All the scale was divided into four Tetrashordes or fourths, the lowest of
which four was called Tetrachordon hypaton, the fourth of principals. The
second tetrachordon meson, the fourth of middle or means. The third
tetrachordon diezeugmenon, the fourth of strings disioyned or disiunct. The
fourth and last tetrachordon hyperbolaeon, the fourth of stringes exceeding:
the lowest string Proslambanomene is called assumed, because it is not
accounted for one of any tetrachorde, but was taken in to be a Diapason to the
mese or middle string. The tetrachorde of principals or hypaton, begins in
the distance of one note above the assumed string, containing four strings or
notes, the last of which is Hypatemeson: the tetrachorde of meson or means,
begins where the other ended (so that one string is both the end of the
former, and the beginning of the next) and contains likewise four, the last
whereof is mese. But the third tetrachorde, was of two manner of dispositio^s,
for either it was in the natural kind of singing, and then was it called
tetrachordon diezeugmenon, because the middle string or mese, was separated
from the lowest stringe of that tetrachorde, by a whole note, and was not
accounted for any of the four belonging to it, as you may see in the scale, or
then in the flat kind of singing: in which case, it was called tetrachordon
synezeugmenon, or synemenon, because the mese was the lowest note of that
tetrachorde, all being named thus mese. Trite synemmenon, or synezeugmenon,
paranete synezeugmenon, and nete synezeugmenon. But least these strange names,
seem fitter to conjure a spirit, then to express the Art, I have thought
good to give the names in English.

All the names of the Scale in English.
A re. te. hypaton. Proslambanomene B mi. te. hypaton. Hypatehypaton Principal
of principals. C fa ut. te. hypaton. Parhypate hypaton Subprincipal of
principals D sol re. te. hypaton. Lychanos hypaton. Index of principals. E la
mi. te. meson. Hypate meson Principal of means. F fa ut. te. meson. Parhypate
meson tet. synek. Mest. Subprincipal of means G sol re ut. te. meson. Lychanos
meson tet. synek. Trite synezeugmenon. middle. A la mi re te. meson. mese. tet.
synek. Paranete synezeug. Index of means. B fa mi. tet. diezug. Paramese tet.
synek. Nete synezeugmenon. Next the middle. C sol fa vt. tet. diezug. Trite die
zeugmenon Third of disiunct. D la sol re. tet. diezug. Paranete diezegmenon
Penulte of disiunct. E la mi. tet. diezug. tet. hyperbolaeon Nete diezeugmenon
Last of disiunct. F fa vt. tet. hyperbolaeon Trite hyperbolaeon Third of
exceeding or treble. G sol re ut. tet. hyperbolaeon Paranete hyperbolaeon
Penulte of trebles. A la mi re. tet. hyperbolaeon Nete hyperbolaeon Last of
trebles.

So much for the names. The numbers set on the left side, declare the habitude
(which we call proportion) of one sound to another, as for example: the number
set at the lowest note Proslambanomene, is sesqui octaue, to that which is set
before the next: and sesquitertia to that which is set at Lychanos hypaton, and
so by consideration of these numbers, may be gathered the distance of the sound
of the one from the other: as sesqui octaue produces one whole note. Then
betwixt Proslambanomene, and hypatehypaton, is the distance of one whole note.
Likewise sesquitertia, produces a fourth: therefore Proslambanomene and
Lychanos hypaton are a fourth, and so of others. But least it might seem
tedious, to divide so many numbers, and seek out the common deuisors for so
many fractions, both the distance is set down betwixt every two notes, and
the consonants are drawn on the right side of the Scale. Thus much for the
explanation of the table, but what use it had, or how they did sing is
uncertain: only it appears by the names, that they termed the keys of
their scale, after the stringes of some instrument, which I doubt not is the
harp. And though the Friar Zaccone out of Franchinus affirm, that the Greeks
did sing by certain letters, signifying both the time that the note is to be
holden in length, and also the height and lowness of the same: yet because I
find no such matter in Franchinus his Harmonia instrumentorum (for his
theorica nor Practica I have not seen, nor understand not his arguments) I
know not what to say to it. Yet thus much I will say, that such characters
as Boethius sets down, to signify the stringes, do not signify any time:
for it is a great controversy amongst the learned, if the ancient musytions
had any diversity of notes, but only the sign of the chord being set over
the word, the quantity or length was known, by that of the syllable which it
served to express. But to return to Guidoes invention, it has hitherto been
so usual as the old is gone quite out of men's memory. And as for the Gam,
many have upon it devised such fantastical imaginations, as it were ridiculous
to write, as (forsooth) Are is silver, B mi quicksiluer, etc. for it were too
long to set down all. But it should seem, that he who wrote it, was either an
Alcumiste, or an Alcumistes friend. Before an old treatise of music written
in vellim above an hundred years ago, called Regulae Franchonis cu^
edditionibus Roberti de Haulo, there is a Gam set down thus.

r vt. Terra E la my Saturnus A re. Luna F fa vt Jupiter B mi. Mercurius G sol
re ut Mars C fa vt. Venus A la mi re Sol D sol re. Sol B fa mi Venus E la mi.
Jupiter C sol fa vt Mercurius F fa vt. Saturnus D la sol re Luna G sol re vt.
Coelum. Boethius.

And at the end thereof these words Marcus Tullius pointing (as I take it) to
that most excellent discourse in the dream of Scipio, where the motions and
soundes of all the sphaeres are most sweetly set down: which who so lists
to read, let him also peruse the notes of Erasmus upon that place, where he
takes up Gaza roundly for his Greek translation of it: for there Tullie
does affirm, that it is impossible that so great motions may be moved
without sound, and according to their neerenesse to the earth, gives he every
one a sound, the lower body the lower sound. But Glareanus, one of the most
learned of our time, makes two arguments to contrary effects, gathered out of
their opinion, who deny the sound of the sphaeres. The greatest bodies, says
he, make the greatest sounds,
The higher celestial bodies are the greatest bodies,
Therefore the highest bodies make the greatest sounds.
The other proves the contrary thus. That which moves swiftest gives the
highest sound,
The higher bodies move swiftliest,
Therefore the highest bodies give the highest sound.


The Greeks have made another comparison of the tunes, keys, muses and
planets thus, Vrama Mese Hypermixolydius Coelum stellatum Polymma Lychanos
meson Myxolydius Saturnus Euterpe Parhypate meson Lydius Jupiter Erato Hypate
meson Thalia. Phrygius Mars Melpomene Lychanos hypaton Dorius Sol Terpsichore
Parhypate hypaton Hypolydius Venus Caliope Hypate hypaton Hypophrygius
Mercurius Clio Proslambanomene Hypodorius Luna. Thalia terra. And not without
reason, though in many other things it has been called justly Mendax and
Nugatrix graecia. Some also (whom I might name if I would) have affirmed, that
the Scale is called Gam vt, from Gam, which signifies in Greek grave, or
ancient: as for me I find no such greek in my Lexicon, if they can prove it
they shall have it.

Page 3. verse 22. But one twice named.) It should seem that at the first, the
round b. was written as now it is thus, and the square b. thus ^ But for haste
men not being careful to see the stroks meet just at right angles, it
degenerated into this figure and at length came to be confounded with the sign
of ye Apotome or semitonium maius, which is this And some falsely term Diesis,
for diesis is the half of Semitonium minus, whose sign was made thus X But at
length, the sign by ignorance was called by the name of the thing signified,
and so the other sign being like unto it, was called by the same name also.

Page ead. verse 35. But in use of singing) these be commonly called Claues
signatae, or signed Cliffes, because they be signs for all songs, and use
has received it for a general rule, not to set them in the space, because
no Cliffe can be so formed as to stand in a space and touch no rule, except the
B cliffe. And therefore least any should doubt of their true standing (as for
example the G cliffe, if it stood in space and touched a rule, one might
justly doubt, whether the Author meant G sol re vt in Base, which stands in
space, or G sol re ut in alto which stands on the rule) it has been thought
best by all the musytions, to set them in rule. Indeed I cannot deny, but that
I have seen some Are cliffes, and others in the space: but Vna hirundo non
facit ver.

Page 4. verse. 1. as though the verse were the scale) so it is: and though no
usual verse comprehend the whole scale, yet does it a part there of. For if you
put any two verses together, you shall have the whole Gam thus, ^

Page ead. verse. 34, The three natures of singing) a property of singing is
nothing else, but the difference of plainsongs caused by the note, in b fa mi,
having the half note either above or below it, and it may plainly be seen,
that those three properties have not been devised for pricked song; for you shall
find no long included in so small bounds as to touch no b. And therefore these
plainsongs which were so contained, were called natural, because every key of
their six notes stood inuariable the one to the other, howsoever the notes were
named. As from d sol re, to e la mi, was always a whole note, whether one did
sing sol la, or re mi, and so forth of others. If the b. had the semitonium
under it, then was it noted b. and was termed b. molle, or soft; if above it,
then was it noted thus and termed b. quaratum or b. quarre. In an old treatise
called Tractatus quatuor principalium, I find these rules and verses, Omne vt
incipiens in c. cantatur per naturam. in F. per b. molle, in g. per quadratum.
that is, Every vt beginning in C. is sung by properchant in F. by b. molle or
flat, in g. by the square or sharp, the verses be these C. naturam dat. f. b
molle nunc tibi signas,
g. quoque b. durum tu semper habes caniturum.
Which if they were no truer in substance then they be fine in words and right
in quantity of syllables, were not much worth. As for the three themselves,
their names bear manifest witness, that music has come to us from the
French. For if we had had it from any other, I see no reason why we might not
as well have said the square b. as b. quarre or carre, the signification being
alone. In the treatise of the four principals I found a table, containing all
the notes in the scale; and by what property of singing every one is sung,
which I thought good to communicate unto thee in English.



But for the understanding of it, I must show you what is meant by mutation or
change. Mutation is the leaving of one name of a note and taking another in the
same sound, and is done (says the Author of quatuor principalia) either by
reason of property, or by reason of the voice. By reason of the property, as
when you change the sol in g sol re ut, in ut, by the and in re by the. and
such like, by reason of the voice when the name is changed, for the ascension
or descensions sake: as for example, in c fa ut, if you take the note fa, you
may rise to the third, and fall to the fourth, in the due order of the six
notes, if the property let not. But if you would ascend to the fourth, then of
force must you change your fa, into vt, if you will not sing improperlie,
because no man can ascend above la, nor descend under vt properly: for if he
descend, he must call vt, fa. Now in those keys wherein there is but one note,
there is no change, where two, there is double change, where three is sextupla:
but all this must be understood where those three or two notes be all in one
sound, for if they be not of one sound, they fall not under this rule, for
they be directed by signs set by them. But all mutation ending in vt re mi, is
called ascending, because they may ascend further then descend, and all change
ending in fa sol la, is called descending, because they may descend further
the^ ascend, and thereof came this verse: vt re mi scandunt, descendunt fa
quoque sol la. But though, as I said, these three properties be found in
plainsong* yet in pricktsong they be but two: that is, either sharp or flat,
for where nature is, there no. is touched. But if you would know whereby any
note sings (that is whether it sing by properchant quarre, or b. molle, name
the note and so come downward to vt: example, you would know whereby sol in g
sol re ut sings, come down thus, sol fa mi re vt, so you find vt in c fa ut,
which is the property whereby the sol in g sol re ut sings, and so by others.

Page 9. verse 18. By the form of the note) There were in old time four
manners of pricking, one al black which they termed black full, another which
we use now which they called black void, the third all red, which they called
red full, the fourth red as ours is black, which they called read void: al
which you may perceive thus: ^ But if a white note (which they called black
void (happened amongste black full, it was diminished of half the value, so
that a minime was but a crotchet, and a samibriefe a minime, etc. If a red
full note were found in black pricking, it was diminished of a fourth part, so
that a semibriefe was but three crotchettes and a Red minime was but a
Crotchette: and thus you may perceive that they used their red pricking in all
respects as we use our black noweadaies. But that order of pricking is gone
out of use now, so that we use the black voides, as they used their black
fulles, and the black fulles as they used the red fulles. The red is gone
almost quite out of memory, so that none use it, and few know what it
means. Nor do we prick any black notes amongst white, except a semibriefe
thus: ^ in which case, the semibriefe so black is a minime and a prick
(though some would have it sung in tripla manner, and stand for 23 of a
semibriefe) and the black minime a Crotchet, as indeed it is. If more black
semibriefes or briefes be to gither; then is there some proportion, and most
commonly either tripla or hemiolia, which is nothing but a round common tripla
or sesquialtera. As for the number of the forms of notes, there were within
these two hundred years but four, known or used of the Musytions: those were
the Long, Brief, Semibriefe, and Minime. The Minime they esteemed the least
or shortest note singable, and therefore indivisible. Their long was in three
manners: that is, either simple, double, or triple: a simple Long was a square
form, having a tail on the right side hanging down or ascending: a double
Long was so formed as some at this day frame their Larges, that is, as it were
compact of 2. longs: the triple was bigger in quantity than the double. Of
their value we shall speak hereafter. The semibriefe was at the first framed
like a triangle thus ^ as it were the half of a brief divided by a diameter
thus ^ but that figure not being comely nor easy to make, it grew afterward to
the figure of a rombe or loseng thus ^ which form it still retains.

The minime was formed as it is now, but the tail of it they ever made
ascending, and called it Signum minimitatis in their Ciceronian Latin. The
invention of the minime they ascribe to a certain priest (or who he was I know
not) in Navarre, or what contrie else it was which they termed Nauernia, but
the first who used it, was one Philippus de vitriaco, whose motetes for some
time were of al others best esteemed and most used in the Church. Who invented
the Crotchet, Quauer, and Semiquauer is uncertain. Some attribute the
invention of the Crotchet to the aforenamed Philip, but it is not to be found
in his works, and before the said Philippe, the smallest note used was a
semibriefe, which the Authors of that time made of two sorts more or less:
for one Francho divided the brief, either in three equal parts (terming them
semibriefes) or in two unequal parts, the greater whereof was called the more
semibriefe (and was in value equal to the imperfect brief) the other was
called the less semibriefe, as being but half of the other aforesaid. This
Francho is the most ancient of al those whose works of practical music have
come to my hands, one Roberto de Haulo has made as it were Commentaries upon
his rules, and termed the^ Additions. Amongst the rest when Francho sets
down, that a square body having a tail coming down on the right side, is a
Long, he says thus: Si tractum habeat a part dextra ascenden te^ erecta
vocatur vt hic ^ ponuntur enim iste longae erectae ad differentiam longarum
quae sunt rectae and vocautur erecta quod vbicunque mueninutur per semitonium
eriguntur, that is, If it have a tail on the right side going upward, it is
called erect or raised thus for these raised longes be put for difference from
others which be right, and are raised, ^ because wheresoever they be found,
they be raised half a note higher, a thing which (I believe) neither he
himself nor any other, ever saw in practice. The like observation he gives of
the Brief, if it have a tail on the left side going upward, the Larg, long,
brief, semibriefe, and minime (says Glareanus) have these 70. years been in
use: so that reckoning downward, from Glareanus his time, which was about 50.
years ago, we shall find that the greatest antiquity of our pricked song, is
not above 130. years old.

Page ead. verse ead. and the mood) By the name of Mood were signified many
things in Music, First those which the learned call moodes, which afterward
were termed by the name of tunes. Secondly a certain form of disposition of
the Church plainsongs in longes and Breues example. If a plainsong consisted al
of Longes, it was called the first mood: if of a Long and a Brief
successively, it was called the second mood, etc. Thirdly, for one of the
degrees of music, as when we say mood, is the dimension of Larges and Longes.
And lastly, for all the degrees of Music, in which sense it is commonly
(though falsely) taught to all the young Scholars in Music of our time: for
those signs which we use, do not signify any mood at all, but stretche no
further then time, so that more properly they might call them time perfect of
the more prolation, etc. then mood perfect of the more prolation.

Page ead. verse 22. The restes) Restes are of two kinds, that is: either to
be told, or not to be told, those which are not to be told be always set
before the song (for what purpose we shall know hereafter) those which are to
be told for two causes chiefly were invented. First, to give some leisure to the
singers to take breath. The second, that the points might follow in Fuge one
upon another, at the more ease, and to show the singer how far he might let
the other go before him before he began to follow. Some restes also (as the
minime and crotchet restes) were devised, to avoid the harshnesse of some
discord, or the following of two perfect concords together.

But it is to be noted, that the long rest was not always of one form: for
when the long contained three Briefes, then did the Long rest reach over three
spaces, but when the Long was imperfect, then the Long rest reached but over
two spaces as they now use them.

Page ead. verse. 25. Ligatures) Ligatures were devised for the Ditties sake, so
that how many notes served for one syllable, so many notes were tied together.
Afterward they were used in songs having no dittie, but only for brevity of
writing: but nowadaies our songs consisting of so small notes, few Ligatures
be therein used: for minimes, and figures in time shorter than minimes cannot
be tied or enter in ligature. But that defect might be supplied by dashing the
sign of the degree either with one stroke, or two, and so cause the Ligable
figures serve to any small quantity of time we lift. But because in the book I
have spoken nothing of black or half black ligatures, I thought it not amiss,
to set down such as I have found used by other Authors, and collected by Friar
Zaceone, in the 45. chapter of the first book of practice of Music, with the
resolution of the same in other common notes.

^ The Resolution ^ ^ The Resolution ^ ^

And by these few the diligent Reader may easily collect the value of any
other, wherefore I thought it superfluous to set down any more, though infinite
more might be found.

Page 12. verse 6. Pricks) A prick is a kind of Ligature, so that if you
would tie a semibrief and a minime together, you may set a prick after the
semibriefe, and so you shall bind them. But it is to be understood, that it
must be done in notes standing both in one key, else will not the prick augment
the value of the note set before it, But if you would tie a semibriefe and a
minime, or two minimes together, which stand not both in one key, then must you
use the form of some note ligable (for as I told you before, the minime and
smaller figures then it be not ligable) and mark the sign of degree, with
what diminution is fittest for your purpose, example. There be two minimes,
the one standing in Alamire, the other in elams: if you must needs have them
sung for one syllable, or be tied together, then may you set them down thus ^
as though they were semibriefes, but dashing the sign of the time with a
stroke of diminution to make them minimes. But if you think that would not be
perceived, then may you set down numbers before them thus 21 which would
have the same effect: but if that pleased you no more the^ the other then might
you set them in tied briefes with this * or this 41 sign before them, which
were all one matter with the former.

Page ead. verse 8. A prick of augmentation.) Some term it a prick of
addition, some also a prick of perfection, not much amiss: but that which now
is called of our musicians a prick of per section, is altogether superfluous
and of no use in music: for after a semibriefe in the more prolation, they
set a prick, though another semibriefe follow it: but though the prick were
away, the semibriefe of it self is perfect. The Author of the Treatise De
quatuor principalibus, says thus. Take it for certain, that the point or
prick is set in pricksong for two causes, that is, either for persection or
divisions sake, although some have falsely put the point for other causes, that
is, for imperfections and alterations sake, which is an absurdity to speak.
But the prick following a note, will make it perfect, though of the own
nature it be imperfect. Also the point is put to divide, when by it the
perfections (so he terms the number of three) be distinguished, and for any
other cause the point in music is not set down. So that by these his words
it evidently appears, that in those days (that is about twoe hundred years
ago) music was not so far degenerate from theoricall reasons as it is now.
But those who came after, not only made four kinds of pricks, but also added
the fist, thus. There be say they in all five kinds of pricks, a prick of
addition, a prick of augmentation, a prick of perfection, a prick of
division, and a prick of alteration. A prick of augmentation they define,
that which being set after a note, makes it half as much longer as it was
before: the prick of Addition they define, that which being set after a
sembriefe in the more prolation, if a minime follow, it causes the semibriefe
to be three white minimes. A prick of perfection they define, that which being
set after a semibriefe in the more prolation, if an other semibriefe follow, it
causes the first to be perfect. The prick of division and alteration they
define, as they be in my book. But if we consider rightly both the prick of
Addition, of Augmentation, and that of alteration, are contained under that of
perfection: for in the less prolation when a semibriefe is two minimes, if it
have a prick and be three, then must it be perfect: and in the more
prolation, when two minimes come betwixt two semibriefes, or in time perfect,
when two semibriefes come betwixt two briefes which be perfect, the last of the
two minimes is marked with a prick, and so is altered to the time of two
minimes: and the last of the twoe semibriefes is likewise marked with a
prick, and is sung in the time of two semibriefes, which is only done for
perfections sake, that the ternary number may be observed: yet in such cases of
alteration, some call that a point of division. For if you divide the last
semibriefe in time perfect from the brief following, either must you make it
two semibriefes, or then perfection decaies: so that the point of alteration
may either be termed a point of perfection, or of division. But others who
would seem very expert in music, have set down the points or pricks thus:
this prick (say they) does perfect * *. Now this prick standing in this
place {timeperf-prolatimperf}. * does imperfect. Now the prick standing in
this place {timeperf-prolatimperf} *. takes away the third part, and another
prick which stands under the note takes away the one half, as here *. and
like in all notes. But to refute this man's opinion (for what or who he is I
know not) I need no more then his own words, for (says he) if the prick
stand thus {timeperf-prolatimperf}. * it imperfecteth, if thus
{timeperf-prolatimperf} *. it takes away the third part of the value. Now I
pray him, what difference he makes betwixt taking away the third part of the
value and imperfection? If he say (as he must needs say) that taking away the
third part of the value is to make imperfect, then I say he has done amiss,
to make one point of imperfection, and another of taking away the third part of
a notes value.

Again, allimperfection is made either by a note rest or cullor, but no
imperfection is made by a prick, therefore our Monk (or whatsoever he were)
has erred, in making a point of imperfection. And lastly, all diminution is
signified, either by the dashing of the sign of the degree, or by
proportionate numbers, or by a number set to the sign, or else by
asscription of the Canon: but none of these is a prick, therefore no
diminution (for taking away half of the note is diminution) is signified by a
prick, and therefore none of his rules be true saving the first, which is,
that a prick following a black brief perfecteth it.

Page ead. verse. 16. those who) that is, Franchinus Ganforus, Peter Aron,
Glareanus, and at a word all who ever wrote of the Art of Music. And though
they all agree in the number and form of degrees, yet shall you hardly find
two of them tell one tale for the signs to know them. For time and prolation
there is no controversy, the difficulty rests in the moodes. But to the
end that you may the more easily understand their nature, I have collected
such rules as were requisite for that purpose, and yet could not so well be
handled in the book. The mood therefore was signified two manner of ways, one
by numerall figures, another by pauses or restes. That way by numbers I have
handled in my book, it rests to set down that way of showing the mood by
pauses. When they would signify the great mood perfect, they did set down
three long restes together. If the less mood were likewise perfect, then did
every one of those long restes take up three spaces thus ^ but if the great
mood were perfect, and the less mood imperfect, then did they like wise set
down three long Restes, but imperfect in this manner, and though this way be
agreeable both to experience and reason, yet has Franchinus ^ Ganforus set
down the sign of the great mood perfect thus, ^ of the great mood imperfect
he sets no sign, except one would say that this is it ^ for when he sets
down that mood, there is such a dashe before it, touching all the five lines.
But one may iustlye doubt if that be the sign of the mood, or some stroke set
at the beginning of the lines. But that sign which he makes of the great
mood perfect, that does Peter Aron set for the great mood imperfect, if the
less mood be perfect But (says he) This is not of necessity, but according as
the composition shall fall to be, the less mood perfect not being joined with
the great mood imperfect. So that when both moodes be imperfect, then is the
sign thus ^ And thus much for the great mood. The less mood is often
considered and the great left out, in which case if the small mood be perfect it
is signified thus ^ if it be imperfect, then is there no pause at all set
before the song, nor yet any cifer, and that betokens both ^ moodes
imperfect; so that it is most manifest, that our common signs which we use,
have no respect to the moodes, but are contained within the bounds of ^ time
and prolation.

Page 14 ver. 10. In this mood it is always imperfect) That is not of
necessity, for if you put a point in the center of the circle, then will the
prolation be perfect, and the Large be worth 81. minimes, and the Long 27. the
brief nine, and the semibriefe three: so that moodes great and small, time,
and prolation, will altogether be perfect.

Page 18. ver. 11. Perfect of the more) This (as I said before) ought rather to
be termed time perfect of the more prolation, then mood perfect, and yet has
it been received by consent of our English practicioners, to make the Long in
it three briefes, and the Large thrice so much. But to this day could I never
see in the works of any, either strangers or Englishmen, a Long set for 3.
briefes with that sign, except it had either a figure of three, or then modal
rests set before it, Zar. vol. 1. part. 3. cap. 67. Zacc. lib. 2 cap. 14. But
to the end that you may know when the restes be to be told, and when they stand
only for the sign of the mood you must mark if they be set thus, ^ in which
case they are not to be told: or thus ^ and then are they to be numbered.
Likewise you must make no account whether they be set thus ^ or thus ^ for
both those be one thing signifieng both moods perfect.

Page 8. ver. 18. The perfect of the less) This first caused me to doubt of
the certainty of those rules which being a child I had learned, for whereas in
this sign I was taught, that every Large was 3. Longes, and every Long three
Briefes, I find neither reason nor experience to prove it true. For reason (I
am sure) they can allege none, except they will under this sign
{timeperf-prolatimperf} comprehend both mood and time, which they can never
prove. Yet do they so stick to their opinions, that when I told some of them
(who had so set it down in their books) of their error, they stood stiffelie
to the defense thereof, with no other argument, then that it was true. But if
they will reason by experience, and regard how it has been used by others,
let them look in the mass of M. Tauerner, called Gloria tibi trinitas, where
they shall find examples enough to refute their opinion, and confirm mine.
But if they think master Tauerner partial, let them look in the works of
our English doctors of music, as D. Farfax, D. Newton, D. Cooper, D. Kirby,
D. Tie, and diverse other excellent men, as Redford, Cornish, Piggot, White, and
M. Tallis. But if they will trust none of all these, here is one example which
was made before any of the aforenamed were borne.

^ And this shall suffice at this time for the understanding of the controuerted
moods. But to the end thou may see how many ways the moods may be diversely
joined, I have thought good to show thee a table, used by two good musytians in
Germany, and approved by Friar Lowyes Zaccone, in the 57 chap. of his second
book of practice of music.

Prolation Time Mood Small Mood Great Strokes, that is measures. Perfect
Perfect perfect perfect {timeperf-prolatperf}3 81 27 9 3 1 Perfect Perfect
imperfect imperfect *3 36 18 9 3 1 Imperfect Perfect perfect perfect
{timeperf-prolatimperf}3 27 9 3 1 Imperfect Perfect imperfect imperfect *3 12 6
3 1 Perfect Imperfect perfect imperfect {timeperf-prolatperf}2 36 18 6 3 1
Perfect Imperfect imperfect imperfect *2 24 12 6 3 1 Imperfect Imperfect
perfect imperfect {timeperf-prolatimperf}2 12 6 2 1 Imperfect Imperfect
imperfect imperfect *2 8 4 2 1 Perfect Perfect imperfect imperfect
{timeperf-prolatperf} 36 18 9 3 1 Perfect Imperfect imperfect imperfect * 24 12
6 3 1 Imperfect Perfect imperfect imperfect {timeperf-prolatimperf} 12 6 3 1
Imperfect Imperfect imperfect imperfect * 8 4 2 1 * * * * * * * * *

But by the way you must note, that in all Moodes (or rather signs) of the
more prolation, he sets a minime for a whole stroke, and proves it by
examples out of the mass of Palestin, called l'home arm. There is also
another way of setting down the degrees, which because I had not seen
practiced by any Musition, I was determined to have passed in silence. But
because some of my friends affirmed to me, that they had seen them so set down,
I thought it best to show the meaning of the^. The ancient Musytians, who
grounded all their practice upon Speculation, did commonly set down a
particular sign for every degree of musycke in the song: so that they having
no more degrees then three, that is, the two moods and time (prolation not
being yet invented) set down three signs for them, so that if the great mood
were perfect, it was signified by a whole circle, which is a perfect figure: if
it were imperfect, it was marked with a half circle, Therefore, wheresoever
these signs {timeperf-prolatperf}3 were set before any song, there was the
great mood perfect signified by the circle. The small mood perfect signified
by the first figure of three, and time perfect signified by the last figure of
three. If the song were marked thus *33, then was the great mood imperfect, and
the small mood and time perfect. But if the first figure were a figure of two
thus *23, then were both moods imperfect and time perfect: but if it were thus
*22, then were all imperfect. But if in all the song there were no Large, then
did they set down the signs of such notes as were in the song: so that if the
circle or semicircle were set before one only cifer, as
{timeperf-prolatimperf}2 then did it signify the less mood, and by that
reason that circle now last set down with the binarie cipher following it,
signified the less mood perfect, and time imperfect. If thus *3 then was the
less mood imperfect and time perfect. If thus *2. then was both the less mood
and time imperfect, and so of others. But since the prolation was invented,
they have set a point in the circle or half circle, to show the more
prolation, which notwithstanding alters nothing in the mood nor time. But
because (as Peter Aron says) these are little used now at this present, I will
speak no more of it, for this will suffice for the understanding of any song
which shall be so marked: and whosoever perfectly understands and keeps that
which is already spoken, will find nothing pertaining to the moodes to be hard
for him to perceive.

Page 12. line 9 Augmentation.) If the more prolation be in one part with this
sign {timeperf-prolatperf} and the less in the other with this
{timeperf-prolatimperf} then is every perfect semibriefe of the more prolatio^
worth three of the less: and every imperfect semibriefe (that is, if it have a
minime following it) worth twoe, and the minime one. But if the less prolation
be in the other parts with this sign * every perfect semibriefe of the more
prolation is worth six of the less, and the imperfect semibriefe worth four,
and every minime two, as in the example of Iulio Rinaldi, set at the end of
the first part of the book after the proportions, may be perceived.

Page 27. verse. 18. Proportion is) When any two things of one kind, as two
numbers, two lines of such like are compared together, each of those two things
so compared, is of the Greeks called (...), which Boethius interprets in
Latin Terminus, in English we have no proper word to signify it. But some
keep the Latin, and call it Term: and that comparison of those two things is
called of the Greeks (...), that is as the Latins say, Ratio and habitudo, in
English we have no word to express those two. But hitherto we have abusiuely
taken the word proportion in that sense. What proportion is we shall know
hereafter, but with what English word soever we express those ratio and
habitudo, they signify this, how one term is in quantity to another: as if
you compare 3, and 6 together, and consider how they are to another, there
will be twoe terms the first three, and the latter six, and that comparison
and as it were respect of the one unto the other, is that ratio and habitudo
which we spoke of. Now these things which are compared together, are either
aequal one to another, as five to five, an elle to an elle, an aker to an aker,
etc. and then is it called aequalitatis ratio, respect of aequalitie, which we
falsely term proportion of aequality, or then vnaequal, as three to six, a
handbredth to a foot, etc. in which case it is called inaequalis, or
inaequalitatis ratio. Now this respect of equality is simple, and always one,
but that of inaequalitie is manifold: wherefore it is divided into many kinds,
of which some the Greeks term (...) and othersome (...). Those kinds they
term (...), wherein the greater term is compared to the less, as six to
three, which of the late barbarous writers, is termed proportion of the
greater inaequalitie: and by the contrary, those kinds they term (...),
where the less term is compared to the greater, as 4. to six, which they
term the less inaequalitie. Of each of these two kinds there be found five
species or forms, three simple and two compound. The simple prologa as
multiplex superparticular, and superpartient compound. Prologa ar multiplex
superparticular and multiplex superpartient. Multiplex ratio, is when the
greater term does so contain the less, as nothing wants or abounds, as
ten and five: for ten does twice contain five precisely, and no more nor
less, of which kind there be many forms. For when the greater contains
the less twice, then is it called Dupla ratio, if thrice tripla, if four
times quadrupla, and so infinitely. Superparticularis ratio, which the Greeks
call (...), is when the greater term contains the less once with some one
part over, which one part, if it be the half of the lesser term, then is the
respect of the greater to the lesser called sesquiplex, and sesqnialtera ratio,
as three to two. If it be the third part, it is called sesquitertia, as four
to three: if it be the fourth part, it is called sesquiquarta, as five to
four, and so of others. Superpartiens which the learned called (...), is when
the greater term contains the less once, and some parts besides, as five
does comprehend three once, and moreover, two third parts of 3. which are two
unities, for the unity is the third part of three. and ten comprehends six
once, and besides two third parts of 6, for 2, is the third part of six: in
which case it is called ratio superbipartiens tertias, and so of others
according to the number and names of the parts which it contains. Multiplex
superparticulare, is when the greater term comprehends the less more then
once, and besides some one part of it, as 9 to 4, is dupla sesquiquarta,
because it contains it twice. And moreover, one fourth part of it. Likewise 7
is to 2. tripla sesqui altera, that is multiplex, because it contains 2 of
ten, that is thrice: and superparticular, because it has also a half of two:
that is one, and so of others: for of this kind there be as many forms as of
the simple kinds multiplex and superparticular. Multiplex superpartiens, is
easily known by the name, example 14 to 5. is multiplex superpartiens.
Multiplex, because it contains 5 twice, and superpartiens, because it has
four sift parts more, and so 14 to 5 is dupla superqua dispartiens quint as,
for of this kind there be so many forms as of multiplex and superpartiens.
Thus you see that two terms compared together, contain ratio, habitudo
respect, or how else you list to term it. But if the terms be more then
two, and betwixt them one respect or more, then do the Greeks by the same
word (...), term it (...), the Latins call it Proportio, and define it thus,
Proportio est rationum similitudo. And Aristotle in the fifth book of his
Morals. ad Nicomachum, defines it Rationum aequalitas, as for example. Let
there be three numbers, whereof the first has double respect to the second,
and the second double respect to the third thus, 12, 6, 3. these or any such
like make proportion or Analogy. The Arithmeticians set down in their books
many kinds of proportions, but we will touch but those three which are so common
every where in the works of those chief Philosophers Plato and Aristotle,
and be these, Geometrical, Arithmetical, and Harmonical. Geometrical
proportion (which properly is proportion) is that which two or more aequal
habitudes do make, as I showed you even now, and is either coniunct or
disiunct. Coniunct proportion, is when the middle term is twice taken thus,
as 16 to 8, so are 8 to 4, and 4 to 2, and 2 to 1, for here is every where
double habitude, Disiunct proportion, is when the middle terms be but once
taken thus, as 16 to 8, so 6 to 3. Arithmeticall proportion, is when between
twoe or more terms is the same, not habitude but difference, as it is in the
natural disposition of numbers thus, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5: for here every term
passes other, by one only, or thus, 2, 4, 6, 8, 10, 12, where every number
passes other, by two, or any such like. But Harmonical proportion is that,
which neither is made of aequal habitudes, nor of the like differences: but
when the greatest of three terms is so to the least as the differences of the
greatest and middle terms, is to the difference of the middle and least
example. Here be three numbers 6 4 3. whereof the first twoe are in
sesquialtera habitude, and the latter two are in sesquitertia: you see here is
neither like habitude, nor the same differences, for four is more then three
by one, and six is more then four by two: but take the difference betwixt six
and four, which is two, and the difference of 4 and 3. which is 1, and compare
the differences together, you shall find two to 1, as 6 is to 3, that is dupla
habitude. And this is called harmonical proportion, because it contains the
habitudes of the Consonantes amongst themselves: as, Let there be three lines
taken for as many stringes or Organ-pipes, let the first be six foot long, the
second four, the third three: that of six will be a diapason or eight to that
of three, and that of four will be a diapente or fifth above that of six, thus:

Thus you see what proportion is, and that proportion is not properly taken in
that sense wherein it is used in the book: yet was I constrained to use that
word for lack of a better. One whose book came lately from the press, called
the Pathwaie to Music, setting down the proportions, calls them a great
proportion of inequality, and a less proportion of inequality: and a little
after treating of dupla, he sets down words which he has translated out of
Lossius his Music, but it seems he has not understood too well, for
(says he) dupla is that which takes from all notes and rests the half value,
etc. and gives this example: ^ ^

^ But if he had understood what he said, he would never have set down this
for an ^ example, or else he has not known what a minim or a crotchet is. But
if I might, I would ask him of what length he makes every note of the
plainsong? I know he will answer of a semibriefe timeh. Then if your
plainsong be of a semibriefe time, how will two minimes being diminished, make
up the time of a whole semibriefe? A minime in dupla proportion being but a
Crotchet. O but (says he) the plainsong note is likewise diminished, and so
the diminished minims will make up the time of a diminished semibriefe. But then
how will one bar of your partition make up a full stroke? seeing in the
less prolation a minime is never taken for a whole stroke. Again, no
diminution is ever known, but where the signs of diminution be set by the
notes, and except you set the numbers in both parts, diminution will not be
in both parts. But to conclude, he who set down that example, either knew not
what dupla was, or then understood not what he himself said, which appears
in many other places of his book: as for example, in the tenth page (leaving
out the leaf of the title) A perfect sound (says he) contains a distance of
two perfect soundes. What would he say by this? in mine opinion he would say A
perfect second contains a distance of two perfect soundes. Yet I know not
what he means by a perfect sound: for any sound is perfect not compared to
another, and though it were compared to another, yet is the sound perfect,
though it be not a perfect consonant to the other. But our master who shows
such Pathwaies to Music, would say this, A perfect second contains a whole
note (or as the Latins term it integer tonus) as from vt tore, is a whole
note, etc. In the beginning of the next page, he says, An imperfect second a
sound and a half: but I pray you good M. Guide of the Pathway, how can you
make that a sound (for so you interpret the word tonus) and a half, which is
not full a half sound or half a tonus? But if you had understood what you
said, you would have said thus: An imperfect second contains but a less
half note, as is ever betwixt mi and fa. Also defining what diatessaron, or a
fourth is, he says, a fourth is the distance of the voice by a fourth. And
likewise, a fifth the distance of the voice by a fifth. Notable definitions: as
in the play, the page asking his master what a Poet was, he, after a great
pause and long study, answered that it was a Poet. Likewise, giving the
definition of a note, he says it is a sign showing the lowdnesse or stillness
of the voice, but these be light faults to those which follow after. For the
Ligatures are set down false, and coming to speak of the Moodes, or degrees
of music, he makes no mention at all of the less mood. And defining time he
says, it is a formal quantity of semibriefes measuring them by three or by
two: and prolation he calls a formal quantity of minimes and semibriefes,
and showing time perfect of the less prolation, he sets it down thus. ^
And in the imperfect of the more prolation, he makes two minimes to the
semibriefe. But I am almost out of my purpose, following one quam vincere
inglorium and ^^quo atteri sordidum: For if you read his book you may say by
it, as a great Poet of our time said by another, Vix est in toto pagina sana
libr. What, said I vix? Take away two or three scales which are filched out of
Beurhusius, and fill up the three first pages of the book, you shall not find
one side in all the book without some gross error or other. For as he
sets down his dupla, so does he all his other proportions, giving true
definitions and false examples, the example still importing the contrary to
that which was said in the definition. But this is the World. Every one will
take upon him to write, and teach others, none having more need of teaching
then himself. And as for him of whom we have spoken so much, one part of his
book he stole out of Beurhusius, another out of Lossius, perverting the sense
of Lossius his words, and giving examples flat to the contrary, of that
which Lossius says. And the last part of his book treating of Descant, he
took verbatim out of an old written book which I have. But it should seem,
that whatsoever or whosoever he was, that gave it to the press, was not the
Author of it himself, else would he have set his name to it, or then he was
ashamed of his labor.

Page 27. verse. 40. Dupla) I cannot imagine how the teachers (which these 30,
or 40, years past have taught) should so far have strayed from the truth, as
for no reason to call that common sort of Music, which is in the time
imperfect of the less prolation dupla, or that it is in dupla proportion,
except they would say, that any two to one is dupla: which none (at least who
is in his right wits) will affirm. For when proportion is, then must the
things compared be of one kind: as one aker to two akers is in subdupla
proportion, etc. So when you see dupla set down, you must sing every note so
fast again as it was before. Glareanus gives this example of dupla out of
Franchinus, which because it has some difficulty, I thought good to set down
and explain in this place. ^ ^

The sign at the beginning shows time perfect, so that every brief not
having a semibriefe after it is three semibriefes, and so being diminished of
half their value in dupla proportion, are but three minimes a piece: those
briefes which in dupla have a semibrife following them, are sung but in time of
one semibriefe, the sign of imperfect time coming in after the proportion
destroys it, but these numbers 42 being the notes of dupla habitude,
following within four notes, make up the proportion again: but in the latter
dupla, you must mark that the diminished brief is less by a whole minime
then it was in the former, because the first followed time perfect, and the
half of a brief in time perfect, is three minimes, the latter followed time
imperfect, and the half of a brief in time imperfect, is a semibriefe or twoe
minimes. Likewise you must note, that when dupla or any, other proportion is in
all the parts alike, then can it not be called proportion, seeing there is no
comparison of notes together, according to any imparity of numbers.

Page 29. verse. 3. Tripla) This is the common hackney horse of all the
Composers, which is of so many kinds as there be manners of pricking,
sometimes al in black notes, sometimes all in white notes, sometimes mingled,
sometimes in briefes, sometimes al in semibriefes, and yet all one measure. But
one thing I mislike (though it be in common use with us all) that is, when we
call that tripla wherein all the voices go together in one time with the stroke
of sesquialtera time, or three minimes for a stroke, for that is no tripla, but
as it were a sesquialtera compared to a sesquialtera: and whereas we commonly
make tripla with three minimes for a stroke, we confound it with sesquialtera.
Lastly, true tripla makes three Semibriefes or their value in other notes to
the time of one semibriefe, whereof Glareanus gives this example out of
Coclaeus. ^ ^

But this tripla is double as swift in stroke as our common tripla of three
minims, which though I have used and still do use, yet am not I able to defend
it by reason: so that if any man would change before me, I would likewise
willingly change, but of my self I am loath to break a received custom. But
one may ask me, if our common tripla be not a proportion, what it is? I will
answer out of Glareanus, that it seems to be a kind of perfection flourished
by Art, and different from the ancient and first kind of order, because in it,
both imperfection and alteration have place. And by this, which in dupla and
tripla is spoken, may all other things concerning proportions of multiplicity
be easily understood, therefore one word of sesqui altera, and then an end of
this first part.

Page 31. verse 9. Sesquialtera) Sesquialtera, is a musical proportion, wherein
three notes are sung in the time of two of the same kind, or rather thus.
Sesquialtera, is a kind of musical diminution, wherein 3. semibriefes or
their value in other notes are sung for two strokes. But you may object and
say, If that be true sesquialtera, what difference do you make betwixt it and
the more prolation? Only this, that in the more prolation, a perfect semibriefe
makes up a whole stroke and likewise the value of a semibriefe: but in
sesquialtera, the value of a semibriefe and a half do but make one stroke,
and a semibriefe of it self never makes a stroke. And by this it appears,
that our common tripla of three minimes is false, which is confounded both with
the more prolation and sesquialtera. Therefore take that for a sure and
infallible rule which I have set down in my book, that in all musical
proportions the upper number signifies the semibriefe, and the lower the
stroke, so that if the proportion be noted thus 32 three semibriefes or the
value of three semibriefes must go to two strokes, but if thus 23 then must
tvvoe semibriefes or their value make three whole strokes. And let this suffice
for the pro portions. As for Sesquitertia, sesquiquarta and such like, it were
folly to make many words of them, seeing they be altogether out of use, and it
is a matter almost impossible to make sweet music in that kind. Yet is
sesquitertia one of the hardest proportions which can be used, and carries much
more difficulty then sesquiquarta, because it is easier to divide a semibriefe
into four aequal parts, then into three: nor have I ever seen an example of
true sesquitertia saving one, which Lossius gives for an example, and pricketh
it in Longs, making them but three stroks a piece, and the briefes one and a
half: in semibriefes it is very hard, and almost impossible to use it, but
according to our manner of singing, if one part sing sesquialtera in Crotchets,
and another sing Quauers in the less prolation, whereof eight go to a stroke,
then would we say that that were eight to six, which is sesquitertia.

But if I should go about to say all that may be spoken of the proportions, I
might be accounted one who knew not how to employ my time, and therefore I will
conclude with one word, that proportions of multiplicitie might be had and
used in any kind without great scruple or offense: but those superparticulars
and superpartients carry great difficulty, and have crept into music I know
not how, but it should seem, that it was by means of the Descantors, who
striving to sing harder ways upon a plainsong then their fellows, brought in
that which neither could please the ears of other men, nor could by themselves
be defended by reason. Here was I determined to have made an end, but some
more curious then discreet, compelled me to speak some words more, and to give
a reason why, after the proportions I have said nothing of the inductions. And
therefore to be brief, I say that all which they can say of these inductions,
is nothing but mere foolishness, and commenta otiosorum hominum qui nihil
aliud agunt nisi ut iniuniant quomodo in otio negotiosi videantur. Yet I
marvel, that a thing which neither is of any use, nor yet can be proved by
any reason, should so much be stood upon by them, who take upon them to teach
the youth nowadaies. But yet to refute it I need no other argument then this,
that not any one of them who teach it, delivers it as another does. But to be
plain, those inductions be no other thing (as I said in my book, page 92.
ver. 7) but that number which any greater notes broken in smaller do make, as
for example (though their opinions be false) sesquialtera or prick semibriefe
is the induction to their tripla, for sing your sesquialtera in minimes, and
you shall find three of them to a stroke. Likewise, break either your tripla
of three minimes or your prick semibriefe into crotchets, and so shall the
prick semibrief be the induction to sextupla as they say, but this is so false
as what is falsest: for in whatsoever notes you sing sesquialtera, it is
always sesquialtera, because the value of a semibriefe and a half does
always make a full stroke. Break true tripla in minimes it will make their
sextupla, make it in crotchets, it will make their duodecupla, and this is it
which they call their inductions, which it shall be enough for the scholar to
understand when he hears them named: for no musician (if he can but break a
note) can miss the true use of them. It rests now to give a reason why I
have placed that table of proportions in my book, seeing it belongs no more
to music, then any other part of Arithmeticke does (Arithmeticke you must not
take here in that sense as it is commonly for the Art of calculation, but as it
is taken by Euclide, Nicomachus, Boethius and others) but the reason why I set
it there, was to help the understanding of many young practicioners, who
(though they see a song marked with numbers, as thus for example) yet do they
not know what proportion that is. And therefore if they do but look upon 3 the
numbers, and mark the concourse of the lines in closing them, they shall there
plainly find set down, what relation one of those numbers has to another.

Upon the second Part.
Page 70 ver. 22. The name of descant) This part is the second member of our
division of practical music, which may be properly termed syntactical,
poetical, or effectiue: and though I dare not affirm that this part was in
use with the musicians of the learned age of Ptolomaus, or yet of that of
Boethius: yet may I with some reason say, that it is more ancient then
pricksong, and only by reason of the name which is contrapunto an Italian word
devised since the Goths did ouerrun Italy, and changed the Latin tongue into
that barbarism which they now use. As for the word it self, it was at that
time fit enough to expres the thing signified, because no diversity of notes
being used, the musicians in stead of notes did set down their music in
plain pricks or points: but afterward that custom being altered by the
diversity of forms of notes, yet the name is retained amongst them in the
former signification, though amongst us it be restrained from the generality,
to signify that species or kind, which of all others is the most simple and
plain, and in stead of it we have usurped the name of descant. Also by
continuance of time, that name is also degenerated into another signification,
and for it we use the word setting or composing. But to leave setting and
composing, and come to the matter which now we are to entreat of, the word
descant signifies in our tongue, the form of setting together of sundry voices
or concords for producing of harmony: and a musician if he hear a song sung
and mislike it, he will say the Descant is naught. But in this signification
it is seldom used, and the most common signification which it has, is the
singing ex tempore upon a plain song: in which sense there is none (who has
tasted the first elements of music) but understands it. When descant did
begin, by whom and where it was invented is uncertain, for it is a great
controversy amongst the learned if it were known to the antiquity, or no.
And diverse do bring arguments to prove, and others to disprove the antiquity of
it: and for disprouing of it, they say that in all the works of them, who have
written of music before Franchinus, there is no mention of any more parts
then one, and that if any did sing to the harp (which was their most usual
instrument) they sung the same which they played. But those who would affirm
that the ancients knew it, say: That if they did not know it, to what end
served all those long and tedious discourses and disputations of the
consonantes wherein the most part of their works are consumed? But whether
they knew it or not, this I will say, that they had it not in half that variety
wherein we now have it, though we read of much more strange effects of their
music then of ours.

Page ead. verse. 29. Interualla both concords and discords) The Printer not
conceiving the words concordes and discords to be adjectives, added the word of
perverting the sense, but if you dash out that word* the sense will be perfect.
As for the Consonants or concordes, I do not think that any of those which
we call imperfect cords, were either in use or acknowledged for Consonants, in
the time of those who professed music before Guido Aretinus, or of Guido
himself. Boethius setting down the harmonicall proportions and the Consonants
which arise of them, talks of quadrupla, tripla, dupla, sesquialtera, and
sesquitertia, which make disdiapason, diapente cum diapason, diapason,
diapente, and diatessaron, or as we say, a fifteenth, a twelfe, an eight, a
fifth, and a fourth. But why they should make diatessaron a Consonant, seeing it
mightily offends the ear, I see no reason, except they would make that
Geometrical rule of parallel lines true in consonants of music: Quae sunt
vni and eidem parallelae, sunt etiam inter se parallelae, and so make those
fouds which to one and the selfsame are consonants, to be likewise consonantes
amongste themselves. But if any man would ask me a reason why some of those
consonants which we use are called perfect, and othersome imperfect, I can give
him no reason, except that our age has termed those Consonantes perfect,
which have been in continual use since music began: the others they term
imperfect, because they leave in the mind of the skillful hearer, a desire of
coming to a perfect chord. And it is a ridiculous reason which some have
given, that these be imperfect cords, because you may not begin nor end upon
them. But if one should ask why you may not begin nor end upon them, I see no
reason which might be given except this, that they be imperfect chords: so that
in mine opinion, it is a better reason to say you may not begin nor end upon
them, because they be imperfect chords, then to say that they be imperfect,
because you may not begin nor end upon them. And if the custom of musicians
should suffer it to come in practice, to begin and end upon them, should they
then become perfect chords? No verily. For I can show many songs composed by
excellent men (as Orlando de lassus, M. White, and others) which begin upon
the sixth: and as for the third, it was never counted any fault, either to
begin or end upon it: and yet will not any man say, that the third is a perfect
chord. But if mine opinion might pass for a reason, I would say that al sounds
contained in habitude of multiplicity, or superparticularity, were of the old
musicians esteemed consonantes, which was the cause that they made the
diatessaron a Consonant, although it were harsh in the ear: The tonus or whole
note is indeed comprehended under superparticular habitude, that is
sesquioctaua, but it they counted the beginning of consonance, and not a
consonant it self. The sesquitonus, ditonus, semitonium cum diapente, and
tonus cum diapente, (that is our flat and sharp thirdes and sixes) they did not
esteem consonants, because they were not in habitude of multiplicity or
superparticularity, but under superpartients: the first and second between
sesquitertia and sesquiquarta, the third and fourth between sesquialtera and
dupla. But of this matter enough in this place, if any desire more of it, let
him read the third book of Iacobus Faber stapulersis his music. The second
part of Zarlino his harmonicall institutions, and Franchinus his Harmonia
instrumentorum. As for singing upon a plainsong, it has been in times past in
England (as every man knows) and is at this day in other places, the greatest
part of the usual music which in any churches is sung. Which indeed causes
me to marvel how men acquainted with music, can delight to hear such
confusion as of force must be amongste so many singing extempore. But some
have stood in an opinion which to me seems not very probable, that is, that
men accustomed to descanting will sing together upon a plainsong, without
singing either false chords or forbidden descant one to another, which til I
see I will ever think impossible. For though they should all be most excellent
men, and every one of their lessons by it self never so well framed for the
ground, yet is it impossible for them to be true one to another, except one man
should cause all the rest sing the same which he sung before them: and so
indeed (if he have studied the Canon before hand) they shall agree without
errors, else shall they never do it. It is also to be understood, that when
they did sing upon their plainsongs, he who sung the ground would sing it a
sixth under the true pitche, and sometimes would break some notes in division,
which they did for the more formal coming to their closes: but every close
(by the close in this place, you must understand the note which served for the
last syllable of every verse in their hymns,) he must sing in that tune as it
stands, or then in the eight below: and this kind of singing was called in
Italy Falso bordone, and in England a Faburden, whereof here is an example,
first the plainsong, and then the Faburden.

^ Hymnus:
Conditor alme syderum. ^ The faburden of this hymn
And though this be pricked a third above the plainsong, yet was it always sung
under the plainsong. Other things handled in this part of the book, are of
themselves easily to be understood. Therefore I will cease to speak any more
of them, and proceed to the explantion of other things as yet untouched. ()

Page 147. verse 17. The eight tunes) The tunes (which are also called modi
musici) the practioners do define, to be a rule whereby the melody of every
song is directed. Now these tunes arise out of the tunes of the eight,
according to the diversity of setting the fifth and fourth together, for the
fourth may be set in the eight, either above the fifth, which is the harmonicall
division or mediation (as they term it) of the eight, or under the fifth,
which is the Arithmeticall mediation: and seeing there be seven kinds of
eights, it follows that there be 14. several tunes, every eight making two.
But of these fourteen (says Glareanus) the musicians of our age acknowledge
but eight though they use thirteen, some of which are in more use, and some
less usual then others. And these eight which they acknowledge, they neither
distinguish truly, nor set down perfectly, but prescribe unto them certain
rules which are neither general, nor to the purpose, but such as they be, the
effect of them is this. Some tunes (say they) are of the odd number, as the
first, third, fifth and seventh: others of the even number: as the second,
fourth, sixth and eight: the odd they call Autentas, the even Plagales. To the
autentas they give more liberty of ascending then to the Plagale, which have
more liberty of descending then they, according to this verse, Vult descendere
par, sed scandere vult modus impar Also for the better helping of the scholars
memory, they have devised these verses following. Impare de numero tonus est
autentas, in altum
Cuius neuma salit sede apropria diapason
Pertingens, a qua descendere vix datur illi;
Vult pare de numero tonus esse plagalis in ima
Ab regione sua descendens addiatesron,
Cui datur ad quint am, raroq, ascendere sextam.
Now these tunes consisting of the kinds of diapason or eights, it follows to
know which tunes each kind of diapason does make. It is therefore to be
understood, that one eight having but one diapente or fifth, it follows, that
one diapente must be common to two tunes, the lowest key of which diapente
ought to be the final key of the^ both. It is also to be noted, that every
autenta may go a whole eight above the final key, and that the Plagale may go
but a fifth above it, but it may go a fourth under it, as in the verses now
set down is manifest. So then the first tune is from dsolre to dlasolre, his
fifth being from dsolre to Alamire. The second tune is from Alamire to Are, the
fifth being the same which was before, the lowest key of which is common final
to both. In like manner, the third tune is from elami to elami, and the fourth
from b fa mi to mi, the diapente from elami to b fa mi, being common to both.
Now for the discerning of these tunes one from another, they make three ways,
the beginning, middle, and end: and for the beginning say they, every song
which about the beginning rises a fifth above the final key, is of an
autenticall tune: if it rise not unto the fifth it is a plagall. And for the
middle, every song (say they) which in the middle has an eight above the final
keye, is of an autenticall tune: if not it is a plagal. And as for the end,
they give this rule, that every song (which is not transposed) ending in G sol
re vt, with the sharp in b fa b mi, is of the seventh or eighth tune in f fa
vt of the fifth or sixth tune, in elami of the third or fourth tune, in dsolre
is of the first or second tune. And thus much for the eight tunes, as they be
commonly taught. But Glareanus broke the ice for others to follow him into a
further speculation and perfect knowledge of these tunes or modi, and for the
means to discern one from another of them, he says thus. The tunes or modi
musici (which the Greek writers call (...), sometimes also (...)) are
distinguished no otherwise then the kinds of the diapason or eight from which
they arise, are distinguished, and other kinds of eightes are distinguished no
otherwise then according to the place of the half notes or semitonia contained
in them, as all the kinds of other consonants are distinguished. For in the
diatessaron there be four sounds, and three distances (that is two whole notes
and one less half note) therefore there be three places where the half note
may stand. For either it is in the middle place, having a whole note under it,
and another above it, and so produces the first kind of diatessaron, as from
Are to dsolre, or then it stands in the lowest place, having both the whole
notes above it, producing the second kind of diatessaron, as from mi to elami,
or then is in the highest place, having both the whole notes under it, in which
case it produces the third and last kind of diatessaron, as from c faut to
effaut, so that how many distances any consonant has, so many kinds of that
consonant there must be, because the half note may stand in any of the places:
and therefore diapente having five soundes and four distances (that is three
whole notes and a half note) there must be four kinds of diapente: the first
from dsolre to Alamire, the second from elami to bfabmi, the third from F faut
to c solfaut, the fourth and last, from g solreut to dlasolre. If you proceed
to make any more, the fifth will be the same with the first, having the half
note in the second place from below. Now the diapason containing both the
diapente and diatessaron, as consisting of the conjunction of them together, it
must follow that there be as many kinds of diapason as of both the other, which
is seven. Therefore it is manifest that our practicioners have erred in making
eight tunes, separating the nature of the eight from that of the first, seeing
they have both one kind of diapason, though divided after another manner in the
last then in the first. But if they will separate the eight from the first,
because in the eight the fourth is lowest, which in the first was highest: then
of force must they divide all the other sorts of the diapason, likewise after
two manners, by which means, there will arise fourteen kinds of forms,
tunes, or modi, And to begin at the first kind of diapason (that is from are to
alamire) if you divide it Arithmeticaly, that is, if you set the fourth lowest,
and the fifth highest, then shall you have the compass of our second mood or
tune, though it be the first with Boethius, and those who wrote before him, and
is called by them Hypodorius: also if you divide the same kind of diapason
harmonically, that is, set the fifth lowest, and the fourth highest, you shall
have the compass of that tune which the ancients had for their ninth, and was
called aeolius, though the latter age would not acknowledge it for one of the
number of theirs. Thus you see that the first kind of the diapason produces
twoe tunes, according to two forms, of mediation or division. But if you divide
the second kind of diap. Arithmetically, you shall have that tune which the
latter age termed the fourth, and in the old time was the second called
hypophrygius: but if you divide the same harmonically, setting the fifth lowest,
you shall have a tune or mood which of the ancients was justly rejected: for if
you join mi to F faut, you shall not make a full fifth Also if you join F faut
to b fa mi, you shall have a tritonus, which is more by a great half note the^
a fourth. And because this division is false in the diatonicall kind of music
(in which you may not make a sharp in F faut) this tune which was called
hyperaeolius arising of it was rejected. If you divide the third kind of diap.
from Cfaut to csolfaut Arithmetically, you shall have the compass and essential
bounds of the sixth tune, which the ancients named hypolydius: if you divide it
harmonically, you shall have the ancient Ionicus or Iastius, for both those
names signify one thing. If you divide the fourth kind of diap. from D. to d
Arithmetically, it will produce our eight tune, which is the ancient
hyperiastius or hypomixolydius: if harmonically, it is our first tune and the
ancient dorius, so famous and recommended in the writings of the Philosophers.
If the fifth kind of diap. from Elami to elami, be divided arithmeticallie, it
makes a tune which our age will acknowledge for none of theirs, though it be
our tenth indeed, and the ancient hypoaeolius, but if it be harmonically
divided, it makes our third tune, and the old phrygius. But if the sixth kind
of the diap. be divided arithmetically, it will produce a rejected mood,
because from Ffaut to b fa mi, is a tritonus, which distance is not received in
the diatonical kind, and as for the flat in b fa b mi, it was not admitted in
diatonicall music, no more then the sharp in F faut, which is a most
certain argument that this music which we now use, is not the true
diatonicum, nor any species of it. But again to our division of the eights. If
the sixth kind be divided harmonicallye, it is our fifth tune and the ancient
lydius. Lastly, if you divide the seventh kind of diap. (which is from G to g)
arithmetically, it will make the ancient hypoionicus or hypoiastius (for both
those are one) but if you divide it harmonically, it will make our seventh
tune, and the ancient mixolydius. Thus you see that every kind of diap.
produces two several tunes or moods, except the second and sixth kinds, which
make but one a piece, so that now there must be twelve and not only eight. Now
for the use of them (specially in tenors and plainsongs, wherein their nature
is best perceived) it is to be understood, that they be used either simply by
themselves, or joined with others, and by themfelues sometimes they fill all
their compass, sometimes they do not fill it, and sometime they exceed it. And
in the odd or autenticall tunes, the church music does often go a whole
note under the final or lowest key, and that most commonly in the first and
seventh tunes: in the third it comes sometimes two whole notes under the
final key, and in the fifth bnt a half note. But by the contrary in plagall
tunes, they take a note above the highest key of the fifth (which is the highest
of the plagal) as in the sixth and eight, in the second and fourth, they take
bnt half a note, though sildome in the second, and more commonly in the
fourth. But if any song do exceed the compass of a tune, then be there two
tunes joined together, which may be thus: the first and second, the third and
fourth, etc. an autentical still being joined with a plagal, but two plagals
or two autenticals joined together, is a thing against nature. It is also to be
understood that those examples which I have in my book set down for the eight
tunes, be not the true and essential forms of the eight tunes or usual
moodes, but the forms of giving the tunes to their psalms in the Churches,
which the churchmen (falsely) believe to be the modi or tunes, but if we
consider them rightly, they be all of some imperfect mood, none of them filling
the true compass of any mood And thus much for the twelve tunes, which if any
man desire to know more at large, let him read the 2 and third books of
Glareanus his dodecachordon, the fourth book of Zaccone his practice of
music, and the fourth part of Zarlino his harmonicall institutions, where he
may satisfy his desire at full, for with the help of this which here is set
down, he may understand easily all which is there handled, though some have
causeless complained of obscurity. Seeing therefore further discourse will be
superfluous, I will here make an end.

ERRATA.
Page. 9. line. 1. read tuning line. 20. read the rests (or as you, etc. line
21. dash out them. Page 12. line 2. read understand line 21. read speculation.
p. 31. l. 3. from below 12. p. 45. l. 8. read retorred. l. 14. read three. p.
70. l. 29. blot out of. P. 74 l. 12. read had. p. 75. l. 6. dash out the second
it. l. 15. read twelfth. l. 18 read descant. p. 78. blot out as. l. 42, read
for a semibriefe. p. 84. l. 8 read take not above, etc. p. 88. l. 3. read so
far. p. 89. l. 7. read came to (...). l. 11. read were disposed. p. 110 l. 4.
blot out, and. p. 115. l. 8. read present instruction. p. 116. l. 24. read so
far. p. 110. l. 17. read Pol. p. 125. l. 2. read to be don. p. 129. l. 3. blot
out the. 142. l. 18. read infinity. page 143. l. 11. read. two. page 145. l. 4.
blot out the last the. p. 150l. 9. blot out one. p. 151. l. 41. read cite. p.
155. l. 13. read Phi. P. 158. l. 40. read way. P. 166. l. 21. read unsweet. p.
167. l. 4. read are. p. 170. l. 1. read here be good instrucions. other small
faults there be, both in the matter and music, which the attentive reader may
by himself easily epsy and amend.

Tenor.
quatuor voc.
^ DOmine fac me- cum Domine fac mecum * ^ misericordiam tu- am misericordiam
tu- am tu- ^ am misericordiam tu- am tu- am propter nomen ^ tu- um tu- um
propter nomen tu- um quia ^ suauis est * misericor di a tu- a tu- a
misericordi- ^ a tu- a misericor dia tu- a.

Altus.
quatuor voc.
^ DOmine fac mecum fac mecum Domine fac mecum fac me- ^ cum misericordiam tu-
am misericordiam tu- ^ am misericordiam tu- am propter nomen tu- um ^ propter
nomen tu- um propter homen tuum quia suauis est. * miseri- ^ cordia tu- a *
misericordia ^

Cantus
Quatuor voc.
^ DOmine fac mecum: * Domine fac me- cum fac me- cum ^ misericordiam tu- am
misericordiam tu- ^ am misericordiam tu- am propter nomen tu- ^ um propter
nomen tu- um quia suauis est misericor di a tu- ^ a * miseri cordia tu a.

Basis.
quatuor voc.
^ DOmine fac me- cum fac mecum Domine fac me- ^ cum misericordiam tu- ^ am
misericordiam tu- am tu- am propternomen tuum propter nomen ^ tu- um quia
suauis est misericordia tu- a. * ^ miseri cor di a tua tu- a.

Altus.
Quatuor vocum.
^ AGnus Dei. * qvi tollis * peccata mun- ^ di peccata mun- di ^ miserere
nostri no- stri miserere no- stri ^ miserere no- stri miserere no- stri
miserere nostri.

Tenor.
Quatuor vocum.
^ AGnus dei qui tol lis qui tol ^ lis peccata mun di pec ^ cata mun di
miserere nostri no stri miserere no ^ stri miserere no stri miserere nostri
misererere nostri.

Cantus:
Quatuor vocum.
^ AGnus Dei qui tollis pecca ta mun- di ^ peccata mun di miserere nostri mise-
^ rere no stri, mi se re re no stri. ^ mi se re re no- stri.

Bassus.
Quatuor vocum.
^ AGnus Dei qui tol- lis peccata ^ mun di miserere no- stri mi se rere ^ no-
stri mi se re re no stri mi se ^ re re no stri.

Authors whose authorities be either cited or used in this book.
Such as have written of the Art of Music.

Late Writers.
Jacobus faber stapulensis. Franchinus Gaufurius John Spataro. Peter Aron.
Author quatuor principal. Francho. Robertus de Haulo. Andreas Ornitopar chus.
Jncortus impr^ssus Basileae Ludonicus Zaccono. Iosepho Zarlino. Henric loritus
Glareanus Lucas Lossius. Ioannes Listenius. Ioannes Thomas freigius. Fredericus
Beurhusius. Sethus Caluisius. Andreas Rasselius. Nicolaus Faber. Joannes
Magirus. Manfr^dus Barbarinus Cor^giensis.
Ancient Writers.
Psellus. Boethius. Ptolomius. Arisloxenus. Cited by Franchinus.
Guido Aretinus.
Practicioners, the most part of whose works we have diligently perused, for
finding the true use of the Moods.
Jusquin. Jo. Okenheim Jacobus Obrecht Clement Janequin Petrus Platensis
Nicolas Craen Johannes Ghiselin Antonius Brumel Johannes Mouton Adamus a Fulda
Lutauich senfli Johannes Richaforte Feuin Sixtus dietrich D^^rto Gerardus de
salice Vaquieras Nicolas Payen Basserea^ Francoys lagendre Andraeas syluanus
Antonius a vinea Grogorius Meyer Thomas Tzamen Iacques de vert Jacques du pont
Nicholas Gomberte Clemens non papa C^rt^n Damianus agoes Adam Luyre Johannes
vannius Hurteur Rinaldo del mel Alexander Vtendal Horatio ingelint L^lio
B^rtani Horatio vecchi Orlando de Lassus Alfonso Ferrabosco Cyprian de rore
Alessandro striggio Philippo de monte Hieronimo Conuersi. Jo. Battista
Lucatello Io. pierluigi palestina Stephano venturi Joan. de macque Hippoli to
Baccuse Paulo quagliati Luca Marenzo
Englishmen.
M. Pashe. Robert Jones. Io. Dunstable Leonel Power Robert Orwel M. Wilkinson.
Io. Guinneth. Robert D^^^. M. Risby. D. Farfax. D. Kirby. Morgan Grig Tho.
Ashwell. M. Sturton. Iacket. Corbrand. Testwood. Vngle. Beech. Bramston. S. Io.
Mason. Ludford. Farding. Cornish. Pyggot. Tauerner. Redford. Hodges. Selby.
Thorn. Oclande. Auerie. D. Tie. D. Cooper D. Newton M. Tallis. M. White. M.
Persons. M. Bird.

