FOUR BOOKS, OF THE INSTITVTION, USE AND DOCTRINE OF THE HOLY SACRAMENT OF
THE EVCHARIST IN THE OLD CHVRCH.

AS LIKEWISE, HOW, WHEN, And by what Degrees the Mass is brought in, in place
thereof.

By my Lord PHILIP of Mornai, Lord of Plessis-Marli; Counselor to the King in
his Council of Estate, Captain of fifty men at arms at the Kings pay,
Governor of his town and Castle of Samur, Ouerseer of his house and Crown of
Navarre.

The second edition, reuiewed by the Author.

Saint Cyprian, in the treatise of the Sacrament of the Cup of the Lord. We
ought not herein to regard, what any man has judged meet to be done; but
rather, what he which was before all men, even Jesus Christ our Savior, has
done himself, and commanded others to do: For we follow not the custom of
man, but the truth of God.

ALSO; If some one of our predecessors have not so observed and kept it; God
may have pardoned him in his mercy: but for ^t, from henceforth there will
remain no place for pardon, we having been instructed and admonished by him.

FOR THOU SHALL LABOR PEACE

PLENTY

printer's or publisher's device

LONDON Printed by JOHN WINDEY, for I. B. T. M. and W. P. 1600.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, LORDS AND others of her Majesty's most Hon. Privy
Council.
Having lately (right Honorable) translated out of French this most learned and
fruitful Treatise of Monsieur du Plessis, touching the Institution and
Doctrine of the holy Sacrament of the Eucharist, and how and when, and by what
degrees the Mass has been brought into the Church in place thereof: J have
presumed to present these my poor pains to your most favorable acceptance,
and honorable patronage of the same. Thus have I thought good to do, not so
much in any personal respect of my own private pains, as in regard both of
the Author, and of the matter of this Treatise. For touching the Author, who
may be judged so worthy to take upon them the protecting of the labors of a
Gentleman so learned and honorable, as Monsieur du Plessis is, being also a
Councellor of State to the most Christian King, as they who are likewise
learned, honorable, and of Council to a most religious and Christian Queen?
As for the matter of the book, what is it else, but an ample and singular
Apology of that most ancient, and truly Catholic religion, which her Highness
in the beginning of her renowned reign, by the advice of many most reverend and
learned Divines, by the express warrant of the word of God, by the gracious
direction of his holy spirit, with the free consent of all the States assembled
in Parliament, did most Christianly establish, and ever since for the space of
forty two years (a goodly, blessed, and golden time, the like whereunto all
things well weighed, no nation under heaven, ever enjoyed) by the most singular
providence of God, and her princely prudence, and your Honors assistance, has
most constantly maintained, to the exceeding comfort of all her loving and
loyal subjects, and the great astonishment of all her enemies. Embrace
therefore (right Honor.) the excellent learning of the Author: accept the
travel of the translator, and chiefly vouchsafe countenance and defense to the
cause it self, which is the cause of the true Catholic Church, or rather of
Christ: from whom in most hearty humility I wish to you all the increase of all
true honor here on earth, and everlasting happiness hereafter, in the heavens.

Your Honors in all humble duty and service, R. S.

The Author his Preface to the Lords and Mrs. of the Church of Rome.
THE Apostle Saint Paul said to the Israelites his brethren according to the
flesh, I speak the truth in Christ, Romans 9
I lie not, my conscience bears me witness by the holy Ghost, that I have
great heaviness of heart, that I could wish my self accursed, and to be separated
from Christ for your sakes. This that great Apostle, notwithstanding who would
not know any thing for all, but Christ, who desires to be separated from all
the world, yea and separated in himself, to be with Christ: and therefore
verily for some exceeding great and important cause: as, for to see them
drawn out of the ways of destruction, into the state of salvation: that is to
say, coupled and united to Christ: And therefore it is most evident that he
judged them lost, in that estate wherein they were, in as much as they could
not be found in Christ, and so without salvation, for that they were without
Christ's. They nevertheless (says he) to whom belonged the adoption, and the
glory, and the covenants, and the ordinances of the law, and the divine
service, and the promises: of whom came the fathers, and of whom according to
the flesh came Christ? And yet notwithstanding all this, he lets not to
declare them to be of Israel, and yet not Israel: to be the seed of Abraham,
yet notwithstanding not all children, because (says he) the word of God
cannot fall away, etc.

May I here my masters be so bold, as to say the like unto you? In respect of
my self verily I may not. I desire your salvation with a great affection: I
wish it heartily, with the hazard of this my life: yea I will say in a good
conscience, as the said Apostle said unto Agrippa: That it might please God
to make you all such like as I my self, except these bonds: except those
afflictions, whereunto this profession is subject. For what is more, belongs
not to any man besides the Apostle, in whom the exceeding measure of knowledge
begot an exceeding measure of love toward God, and charity toward his
brethren, which as we cannot imitate in effect: so neither must we in word:
besides that this hyperbolicall kind of speech, can hardly fit us. But rather
in respect of you, I dare be bold to say more: for the covenants and ordinances
of the law, and the divine service, and the promises, were given unto you long
ago: but not unto you alone, but not to you more then others. And many fathers
are sprung up amongst you, and you it may be descended of them, according to
the flesh: but yet for all this, the word of God cannot fall away or perish,
no not although Christ himself, who is God blessed above all things, should be
descended of you according to the flesh. That word verily which gives us to
understand, that there must fall out an apostacy in the Church, that the man
of sin, the son of perdition, should sit in the Temple of God, causing
himself to be adored therein as God. And seeing you cleave unto him under the
shadow of this See, of this pretended descent, I dare be bold to say unto you
freely with the Apostle: Deceive not your selves with thinking your selves to
be the children of Abraham, for you are not children at all, such as are of the
faith, and not of the succession, Galat. 3.7. Romans 9.8.
are Abraham's children, for they are the children of the promise, they verily
are reputed for the seed.

There is question then about this faith, In controversies we must have
recourse to the Scriptures.
and every man says that he has it. To know of what side Christ is, and
every man betaketh himself to him as his aid, and thereupon all Christendom
lives in suspense and doubt, or in trouble. But, my brethren, let us not
believe men: Men, says our Lord himself, who know not of their own
understanding, either from whence he comes, or whether he goes: The spirits
of men, says the spirit of God, which are not able to comprehend his ways. In
a Sea so unknown to man, in these gulfes so perilous, we cannot attain to
the delivering of any sure and certain speech from other where then God
himself: from the father, who has spoken from heaven, showed us the son,
Matthew. 17.5. John. 5.3 9. Psalm. 19. 2. Tim. 3.
and said unto us, hear him: from the son, who cries unto us in the midst of
the Temple in the heat of the Pharisees, and all these great doctors their
disputations, Search you the Scriptures diligently: and from the holy Ghost,
who has said to us, They cause the eyes to see: they give understanding to
children: by the Apostles, they are inspired of God, they make the man of God,
even the Evangelist and teacher himself, instructed unto every good work,
and wise unto salvation.

Our fathers (say some unto you) believed as well, lived as well, whereto serve
these alterations? Verily if you understand this of your carnal fathers, then
what other thing do you say, S. Bern. Epi. 91
besides that which the Jews said to our Lord? or which the Turks or Jews
may not yet say unto us? How far better, says Saint Bernard, speaking of the
reformation necessary in the Church: Let them be cast behind both me and you,
which say, we will not live better then our fathers. If of the spiritual, as
of those that have begotten us to Christ: then who are they, but the Apostles,
and the holy fathers that followed them? And what say we herein, but by their
mouths? And who is there to lead us more from customs, to the law, from
traditions to the holy Scriptures? Irenaeus says, The Apostles preached the
Gospel, Iren. l. 3. c. 1. and 11. con. h. ret. Tradiderunt. Just. Mart in
Dialog. cum Tryphon. and in exposit. fid.
and afterward by the will of God delivered it us in the Scriptures, that so it
might be the foundation and pillar of our faith. Justinius Martyr; We must fix
our faith upon God, and his only instructions: not upon man's Traditions: we
must have recourse to the Scriptures, to the end we may find assuredness in
all things, etc. That David, that the Evangelists, that the Epistles of the
Apostles do teach us, Tert. con. Hermog. Cum Apostolis senti.
etc. Tertullian: I do not receive or admit of that which thou bring of
thine own, without any Scripture. If thou be an Apostolical writer, be
furnished with the doctrine of the Apostles, etc. Bring back the heretics to
the Scriptures, and so (says he) they will not be able to maintain
themselves. What would he have said then at this day of our pretended
Catholics, who abhor nothing more, then to be drawn back to the
Scriptures? Verily and without all doubt, the same which he says of these
heretics: Heretici sunt lucifugae Scripturarum, Like Owls they fly from the
light of the Scriptures. Wherefore if that which thou speak be not written,
beware of that Vae, that curse, which is pronounced by the spirit of God,
against them which add unto the Scriptures. S. Cyprian, Cypr. de laps. and in
Epist. 74.
Do the Martyrs command any thing to be done? But what if it be not written
in the law of the Lord. etc? That (says he) must be done which is written,
for so God appointed Joshua: we must have good regard to see if it be written
in the Gospel, in the Epistles of the Apostles, or their acts: for if it be,
then such holy traditions must be observed and kept. Traditions, as we see,
contained in the Scriptures: for so did the fathers use this word, and not for
all that which may be imagined in man's brain, provided that it be of
continuance and toleration. Origin, Orig. in Ierem. and in 25. in Matthew.
We must call the holy Scriptures to witness: without these witnesses, the
sense and expositions which we give them, work no belief. Whatsoever the
gold be which is without the Temple, yet it is not sanctified, and as little
that sense which is besides the Scripture. Athanasius: Athan. contr. Idol. ad
Iouinian. in 2. orat. contra Arrios. de interpret. Psalm in Synopsi. Theodor.
l. 1. Socrat. l. 1. and 5 Basi. de ver. fid. in Mora^. and Regu. 26. and 80
The holy Scriptures are sufficient of themselves for the demonstrating of the
truth. The stones wherewith the heretics are to be stoned, are fetched from
hence: they are the Mistresses of the true faith, the anchors and props of our,
etc. And this is the cause why in the disputation against the Arrians,
Constantine the Emperor breaking the array unto the Council of Nice,
appoints not any other weapons. The Evangelical books (says he) as also
those of the Apostles and Prophets, do teach us evidently, whatsoever we must
believe. Let us gather from thence the deciding of our controversies. Saint
Basil, It is a most evident sign of infidelity and pride, to go about to
bring in any unwritten thing: for the Lord has said, My sheep hear my voice,
and follow not the voice of any other, etc. Whatsoever we do or speak, must
be confirmed from thence, for the belief of the good, and confusion of the
wicked, Every faithful man has this proper to him, not to add any thing
thereto, neither yet to ordain any new thing: for whatsoever it is, that is
besides the Scripture, is not of faith, Ambros. de vocat. Gent. l. 2. c. 3. and
in lib de Parad. c. 12.
and therefore is sin. Saint Ambrose: Where the Scriptures speak not, who
shall speak? We must add nothing to the commandment, how good soever it
be: who so adds thereto any thing of his own, argues it of imperfection,
etc. Saint Hierome, The Church of Christ, which dwells well, Hieronym. in
Mich. l. 1. in ps. 98. in Ezeen. c. 3. in Agg. c. 1 in Mat. c. 23. in Esa. c. 8.
and all over the world, etc, has her towns, the law, the Prophets, the
Gospel, the Apostles. It goes not beyond her limits, that is to say, the holy
Scriptures. Whatsoever we say, must be avouched from thence. The Scriptures
are our true meat, and our true drink: of this wood is the house of wisdom
built: whatsoever is not authorized by them, should be contemptible to us, and
is likewise stricken with the sword of God, who so is desirous to deliver
himself out of any doubt, let him go thither: but let him know that tends any
other course, that he shall not attain unto the light of the truth, which he
shall grope after in darkness. To be short (says he) what soever is said since
the apostles times, is cut off, it bears no authority with it, etc. Hieronym.
in Psalm. 87.
how holy and prudent soever the Authors thereof might be. S. August. The
Canonical Scripture is set upon a throne, and every faithful understanding
must be subject thereunto. If we, yea if an Angel from heaven, August. contr.
Faust. l. 11. c. 5. and cont. lit ras. Petil. 6 lib. 2. contr. Donatist. c. 6.
tract. 2 in Ep. S. Johan
do teach any thing more then that which is contained in the Scriptures, the
Law, or the Gospel, let him be accursed. In our controversies, let us bring
this balance, these gold waights, as out of the closet of God, to judge that
of weight from that which is light. Let us there judge of errors, for God has
placed in the Scriptures a bright and clear shining firmament, to discover and
confute them. The Councels: for says he unto the Arrians. I allege not unto
thee the Council of Nice, Cont. Maxim. Episc. Arrian. l. 3. c. 14. De Ciuit.
Dei. l. 11. c. 1. Epist. 166. De unit. eccles. c. 1. 3. 4. 5. 6. 16.
neither therefore do thou allege unto me the council of Rimini, but let us
try the maistry by the Scriptures, which both you and I my self do well
approve, etc. The Church likewise: for, The city of God does believe in the
Scriptures, and by them is faith conceived. In the Scriptures (says he) we
have learned Christ, therein also have we learned to know the Church: we have
known the head, and therefore cannot misknow the body thereof. Whether we,
or the Donatists be the Church, the Scriptures alone will teach and instruct
us. Saint Chrysostom, The ignorance of the Scriptures has begotten heresies,
etc. Though the dead should live again, or an Angel descend from heaven,
Chrysostom. in hom. de Laza.
yet we must principally and before them believe the Scripture. The Angels are
but servants and ministering spirits, but the Scripture is the Lord and master.
In Epi. ad Gal. hom. 1. In 5. Mat. hom. 43. and 49. In 1. ad These. homil. 7.
In 2. ad Corin. homil. 33. In Psalm. 5.95.142.147.
In at this gate do both the sheep and shepherd enter, they drive away
heretics, who so enters not by them is a thief. The Scripture is the
kingdom of heaven, it is enclosed therein, and fastened thereunto. The gate of
this kingdom, is the understanding of the Scriptures. Setting our course and
sailing after them, we have the son of God, for our patron and protector:
they are our rule and our squire. As the light is unto the eyes, so is the law
of God unto our spirits, without it all our senses halt. An heir does
willingly possess himself of his fathers will and testament, and so should we
no less of the Scriptures, the furniture and provision for our war against
sin and Satan himself, etc. In which says he in another place, we must
either deny Christ, or blot out the Scriptures, or else become the obedient
servants of the Scriptures. And if he said this then against the heretics of
his time, then much more against Antichrist to come, and upon far more just
causes and considerations. For says he, when this cursed heresy, the army of
Antichrist shall possess the Churches, there will not be found any proof or
manner of help to try and know Christendom by, but the holy Scriptures. By
them alone a man shall know where and who shall be the true church. In this
confusion and hurly burly, there will be no want of broching and blasing
abroad of miracles: for even already the counterfeit Christians have most: but
and if a man look any other way then to the Scriptures, he cannot but be
offended, perish, and fall into the abomination of desolation, which shall be
in the holy places of the Church. And therefore our savior Christ knowing
before hand, that such confusion should follow in the latter days, will that we
fly unto the Scriptures. And now also this is the cause, why according to the
advertisement of Saint Chrysostom, we call you thereunto, we which thus
allege and contend, with the hazard of our lives, and for the working of your
salvation and our own, that that Antichrist is already come, and seated in
your Church: and all this according to the Scriptures, and by the Scriptures.

Hereto you reply, If his Scriptures alone take place in this controversy,
then what shall become of so many goodly traditions? What becomes them of the
traditions 1. Cor. 11.
What shall become of our Church? Verily if you speak of divine traditions
such as whereof Saint Paul says, I have received of the Lord, Quod and
tradidi vobis, whatsoever I have delivered unto you, of those which have their
foundation in the Scriptures, and whereof Irenaeus says unto us; Look what
Gospel the Apostles preached, the same they delivered unto us, tradiderunt,
inquit, nobis, in the Scriptures. Of them says Saint Cyprian, which descend
from the authority of the Gospel, Cypri. in Epi. 74. ad Pomp.
and the writing of the Apostles. Verelie we will be ready to defend them, if
you will believe us, with common armor: we shall be both the one and the
other, quit and freed from all our pains and trouble, for the Scriptures and
they will mutuallie acknowledge one another, as do the little rivers, and their
heads or springs: being touched with the touchstone of the Scripture, they will
hold their value. But if by Traditions you mean man's inventions, and doctrines
that are without, and out of the Scriptures: then we tell you that Christ has
given definitive sentence thereof: In vain do you serve me, Matthew. 15 9
teaching for doctrines the commandments of men. And thus spoke he to the
Pharisees, who wholly rested themselves in the Church, and in the Sorbone of
that time, which said as you do of yours at Trent, that it was no less
grievous an offense to commit against, or omit any thing contained in their
traditions, In Thal. ord 4. tract. 4. did. 10 Esaias. 29, 13.
then and if such commission or omission had been in respect of any point of
the law it self. And there is great like lihoode that it is come upon you,
which was forespoken by the Prophets: They have served me according to the
ordinances of men, Ierem. 8, 8.
and therefore wisdom shall perish from their wise men: They have cast behind
them the word of the Lord, and there is no wisdom in them. But if you suspect
the soundness of the Scripture, Just. in Tryph
or rather the uprightness of God in his own cause, then let us hear the
fathers. Iustine: We must give credit to God and his ordinances alone, and not
unto humane traditions. And that he rules them according to the Scriptures,
appears by that which he said before; That David, that the Evangelists, that
the Apostles do teach us, etc. Cyp. in Epi. 74
Saint Cyprian, If it be commanded in the Gospel, if it be contained in the
Epistles or acts of the Apostles, let us observe it as divine and holy. But if
it be not there, then what follows but the contrary? Saint Basil: We must
learn the Scriptures, Basil. regul. 95
as concerning that which is to be practiced in them, as well to replenish our
spirit with piety, as to leave of to accustom humane constitutions. Saint
Jerome: Hiero. in Esas
It is no marvel (says he speaking of the Jews,) if you follow your
traditions, seeing that every country goes to seek counsel at their Idols:
but God verily has given us his scriptures, and darkness shall ouerwhelme you
if you follow them not. As also unto Christians, for even in his time, says
he, it was come to the lees. In. Matthew. 23.
VVo be unto you wretched Christians, to whom the sins of the Pharisees are
translated and come, even that damnable tradition of theirs, etc. we swallow
down against the commandment of God the things that are great, and hunt
after the opinion of religion, in the small and little ones, etc. And once for
all: The sword, Ad Laetam.
says he, of the Lord strikes at all those doctrines, which are found bearing
the show of Apostolical traditions, without the authority and testimony of
the Scriptures. And this is the very thing whereof Saint Augustine so greatly
complained himself in his time, that in the Church every thing was full of
presumption, S. August. in Epi. ad Iouin. In S. Ioha. tract. 96.97.
and preiudicate opinion, that contrary to the express word of Christ, the
yoke of Christians was become more heavy and grievous, then that of the Jews:
That men made less conscience of the law of God, then of the least humane
ordinances, or rather fancies. All this, or the most part thereof, coming from
heretics, and certain Apocripha books, under the shadow, (says he) of this
word, From the Lord, I have yet many things to say, insomuch as that there is
not the veriest fool that is, that dares not to abuse the same: A place that
some object against us even unto this day about the same matter. But (says he)
when the Lord has kept any thing hidden from us, who is he that is so vain,
as to go about to guess at it, or so rash and foole-hardie as to take upon him
to reveal it. And this is the cause why Saint Bernard, weary of those
insupportable traditions, Bern. Epist. 91 ad Abba. Suissioni congreg.
said, I desire with all my heart to present my self as a party in that
Council, wherein traditions are not obstinately defended, nor suspersticiously
observed: but rather the good and perfect will of God, with all humility and
diligence searched after and sought for. And again: De precepto and dispensat.
If there be any such as charity has been the inuenter of, it is just that
by the same charity they be ceased and given over, if it be so found
expedient. Again, The precepts which are of the ordinances of God, are
necessary, but those which are of humane constitution, arbitrarie, and at
discretion, etc. And in deed the Ecclesiastical history does witness unto
us, that the ancient fathers did leave such things, as were mere observations,
indifferent both unto whole Churches, and particular persons, not enforcing any
thing, but what was of the pure and undefiled commandment of God, as is to be
read in Socrates, Nicephorus, etc.

Can not the Church then ordain any thing? Socrates. Niceph. l. 12. c 14.
Wherein, or how far the authority of the Church stretches.
And wherein shall the authority thereof consist? Nay let us not fear that it
has over little to do. It is not a small thing, in the blindness wherewith
man is blinded, and in the darkness of this world, to keep it self from
straying and wandering out of the way of life, to keep it self from loosing
the heavenly light, through the sight of the eyes, and to guide it self and
others by the same. And would to God it would have contented it self to have
known this only, and to have been ignorant in all the rest. Where as having
touched the forbidden tree, and having transgressed this word, Deute. 4. and 12
Cursed be they which add thereunto, she has opened her eyes to these false
and deceyuing fires, but shut them at the light, and so consequently lost her
purity, loyalty, and innocence; and leaving the truth of God, is further
become left unto herself.

The ancient fathers verily, The Fathers made faith the limits of the Church,
and the Scriptures the bounds and limits of faith. Colos. 2.8. 1. Cor. 4.6.
John 8.13. Not by succession. Iren. l. 3. con:. here is. c. 11. and l. 4. c. 43.
and 44. Tertul. de prescript. and de pudicit. Id verius, quod prius. Tertul. de
virg. ^^land. Con. Praxeam. Tertul. de prescript. Cypr. Ep. 55. De lapsis. In
tract de simplicit. pontif. and in ep. 74. Gregor. Nazianz. in orat. habit ad
laudem S. Athanas. and cont. Arrian. (...)
have not thought it any thing dishonored, when they tied it to the obedience
of her Spouse, for they bounded it by faith, and faith by the Scriptures. And
it would have been on the contrary, a very strange doctrine unto them, that
it should have spoken or heard any other language then her own, seeing it is
said unto her by the Apostle; See that none spoil you through Philosophy, or
vain deceitfulness, according to the traditions of men. Again, Learn of us
not to be wise above that which is written. And in us, says the Apostle, that
is to say, by our example. And by her Spouse himself. If you abide in my
word, you shall be truly my disciples. Irenaeus says; The Gospel is the
pillar and foundation of the Church. It behooves it to fly from all those,
which fly from and forsake the principal succession, and cleave unto the^ that
keep the doctrine of the Apostles. Tertul. The Church is known to be
apostolical, not by number, not by succession of Bishops, but by the
consanguinitie of doctrine. And this doctrine again. In this (says he) in that
the most ancientis most true, and that is most ancient, which was from the
beginning: and that which is from the beginning, is that which is from the
Apostles: from the Apostles (says he) who left the Scriptures for us, upon
whom are come the last ages: the Scriptures, by which the truth is defended,
and not by tradition or custom. For how (says he) could a man be able to
speak of the things of faith, but by the writings of faith? Saint Cyprian;
Those are the Church (says he) which dwell in the house of God. But how?
Verily (says he) who so is separated and divided from the Gospel, the same is
not joined to the Church: for this is all one (says he) after the manner,
whereby Antichrist was brought in, under the name of Christ, by counterfetting
things likely, thereby subtly to frustrate the truth: where as it had
behooued him to have returned to the original of truth, and have hasted back
to the springhead, to see at what place the pipes conueying the water unto us,
were broken, and by this means to have lent his ear unto the doctrine of the
heavenly Master. For says Nazianzene unto the Arrians; The church is not
defined by multitude; if they have the people, we have the faith; if they have
the gold and silver, we have the true doctrine; succession must be valued by
piety, and not by Sea, or seat. Who so retains the same doctrine of faith,
he possesses the same Sea: as he that retains the contrary in the same
Sea, is to be held as an enemy. Because, says Saint Chrysostom; The Church
consists not in walls, but in faith: so that where faith is, there the
Church is; where faith is not, there the Church is not. This is the true
Jerusalem, whose foundations are placed upon the mountains of the Scriptures.
As also, (says he) he goes not out from the Church, that goes out from the
body, but rather he that forsakes the spirit, the foundation of the
ecclesiastical truth. We then (says he) are gone out from them, in respect of
the place, but they from us in respect of faith: we have left with them the
foundations of the walls; but they have left with us the foundations of the
Scriptures. Saint Ambrose; Christ alone is he whom no man ought to forsake, or
change away: to whom it is by good right said, Lord, to whom shall we go? thou
have the words of life. It is then given us in charge above all things, to
seek out the faith of the Church, in which if Christ dwell, how that then we
must make choice thereof, (namely for our habitation:) but if we find therein
either an unfaithful people, or an heretical teacher, that spoileth the
dwelling, such Synagogue is to be avoided. And if, to be brief, a Church
forsake the faith, it behooves us to forsake and abandon it, etc. And he
yields a reason: Christ (says he) is the rock: Petra, non Petrus. S. Ambr.
l. 1 de paenit. c. 9.
the foundation of the Church, that is faith: if thou be in the rock, thou art
also in the church. But to the end we may not take one rock for another, Know
(says he) that they which have not Peter's faith, can neither have Peter's
portion and inheritance. Saint Jerome expounding the Creed, He has not said,
I believe in the holy catholic church; but I believe the holy church. The
holy church is that which keeps the faith of Christ, in the integrity and
soundness thereof. It consists not of walls, but upon the verity of
doctrine. Where faith is, there is it also, and there it was at such time as
heretics possessed all these churches. In Psalm. 133.
Would thou enter into this church, and that by the right way? In Psalm. 5.
It is the reading of the Scriptures. Do thou, O Lord, so lay out and fit my
way, as that I may not fall, or take offense in these Scriptures, seeing that
by them I desire to enter into thy church. Yea (says he) these Scriptures they
are the kingdom of God himself. In S. Mat c. 21.
And when it is said, that the Lord has translated the kingdom of heaven from
the Jews unto us, it is as much as to say, that he has taken the Scriptures
from them, to give them unto us. In them (says Saint Augustine) we find
Christ, in them we are to seek and search for the Church: in them, and by
them, it is showed unto us. Aug de unit. Eccles.
And let us not once imagine that we have and hold the church, because we are
in that wherein Ambrosius, or Optatus have been before us: no nor yet because
there are miracles wrought therein: for even our Lord himself would that his
disciples should be confirmed by the Scriptures, more then by any other means,
and of that nature are the titles, precepts, and foundations of our cause.
Cont. Petil. l. 3. c. 6. and in Psalm. 69.
If then (says he) there be any question, either of Christ, or of the church,
or of any thing whatsoever, that belongs either to life, or faith, cursed be
he that goes out of the Scriptures. To the end that thou may not be
deceived, and that no man may cause thee to take him for Christ, that is not
Christ, and that for the church, which should not be the church, hearken unto
the voice of the shepherd; he has showed himself unto thee, he has showed
thee the church, In Ioh. ser. 131
My sheep hear my voice, etc. The church is the house of God, but it is not
God: we believe the church, but we believe not in the church: It is the
mother, In Epist. Ioh. tract. 3. In Psalm. 103. Obpubilatur Epist. 48. S^rm.
237. de Temp. ad Lucernam. Ber. in conuer. S. Paul. ser. 1.
but the two testaments are her teates; from them we must suck the milk of
all the mysteries of our salvation. The Bishops may err, there have been of
them authors, both of schisms and heresies. The church in like manner is
sometimes eclipsed, and marred with wet and tempestuous weather. The surest
course is to make the Scriptures our looking-glass, as also for us to walk in
the torch-light of the scriptures. O Lord our good God (said Saint Bernard)
such as seem to hold the Primacie in the church, I^ Cant. ser. 76
are the foremost and most forward to persecute thee. It is not enough for such
as should be our guard and watchmen, to give over their care of protection and
vigilancie, except they further work our spoil. At the least (says he
elsewhere) let him abound in his sense and understanding that will, Epist. 77.
but as for us I could wish that they would let us abound in the sense of the
Scriptures.

In the mean time, Durand. appellat mensuram fidei in prefat. Sentent. Thomas
regulam intel ectus in ^ ad Tim. cap. 6 lect. 1. Scot. mensur. Theol. in l. 1.
Sent. q. 1 Gerson, regula^ fid, de co^munic. sub vtraque.
against these Scriptures, the law of the Church, the measure of faith; the
rule and bridle of all manner of understanding: I speak according to the
Schoolmen themselves, Thomas, Durand, Scotus, Gerson, etc. These miserable
Doctors and teachers either of this world, or of the Prince of this world,
enemies of the true light, children of darkness, seeing they please themselves
so greatly therein, do not cease to furnish us with appeals, being employed
ever and anon, more in making of such, then of any other books. So that if we
had nothing else against them, but that we might justly suspect them of
unsound dealing, seeing the ancient fathers of the Church did always make
their appeals unto them, against the heretics: and that in such sort, as that
when they once perceived them to come within the bounds of their jurisdiction,
they held themselves victorers in their cause.

The holy Scripture, say they to us, is not sufficient. And what other
sufficiency do we look for therein, The scripture sufficient,
but to possess God, who is sufficient of himself, even for all manner of
things? or what other, to be brief, but to come to salvation? But and if thou will not believe the Apostle, who tells thee, that the holy Scriptures are
able to make thee wise unto salvation, by faith which is in Christ, that is,
the man of God: the Evangelist, the teacher of others: John 5 39. John 20.31.
at the least believe the son of God, who sends us so expressly to the
Scriptures: Because (says he) that we have life in them. And have thou them to
seek and search for thine own salvation? The Lord commands thee to search
them diligently, in them thou have life. Do thou labor and seek how to
teach it others? They are profitable to teach, convince, correct and instruct.
By them the son of God, the eternal word, did teach his disciples Have thou
to deal against heretics? By the very same he stopte the mouths of the
Pharisees, and confounded the Sadduces, who did not admit of any mo parties
then one. The heretics cannot keep their hold before them: yea they cannot
possibly defend themselves, otherwise then by refusing them: No sooner are
they drawn thereto (says Tertullian) but they are confounded, whether
Ebionites, Hermogenists, or Marcionites, etc. Yea, and if the controversy
should be against the devil himself, we know that from thence the Lord put
him to silence; that he confuted him in all his school points, Apocal.
and sent him back again to the bottomless pit of hell: how much more the
son perdition, for the ouercomming and discomfiting of whom, there are not
any other armor or weapons spoken of? As he that must be overthrown with the
breath of his mouth, and beaten down by the powerfulness of his Scriptures?
wherefore the Scripture having been of such sufficiency in those days, both
for the children of God, and against his adversaries, where shall it sithence
have lost that his ^^sufficiencie? Or who shall not rather suspect that we are
become over sufficient, that is to say, spoiled with presumption? That we
accuse it of insufficiency, because our pretended and devised sufficiencies
are not found therein? And again, if it were so much, at such times as the
Church had no more but the old Testament, both unto salvation and
condemnation: what shall we say of the times succeeding, and those of the
present, According to the Fathers. Iren cont haeres. l. 2 c. 47.
accompanied with the accomplishment of that in the person of Christ, and made
more clear by the new? And verily the fathers also have carefully kept
themselves from this point, rather to be termed infidelity, then error or
heresy. Irenaeus says, We know very well that the Scriptures are perfect:
for they are appointed and spoken by the word of God, and his spirit.
Tertullian: Tertul. contra Prax. and Hermo^g Cypr. de Baptism. Christi.
I adore and reverence the fullness of the Scriptures: the scripture has his
reason, and is sufficient of it self. Saint Cyprian: Speak on Lord, thy
servant hears. Christian religion shall find that out of this Scripture do
spring the rules of all manner of doctrine, and that from thence rises, as
also that thither returns, al whatsoever the discipline and government of the
Church does contain. Antonius the Hermit; Antonius in sui^ Epistolis.
Athanasius cont. Idola. Ad Serapion. In Ep. Senten. Dyonis. Hillar. l. 2. de
Trinit.
The Scriptures are sufficient for all manner of knowledge of God, and all
manner of discipline. Athanasius, who notwithstanding has to deal against the
Arrians, The holy scriptures are sufficient for the demonstration of the truth:
learn only the scriptures, for the lessons which thou find there, will be
sufficient for thee. Although (says he in another place) I have not found this
word (...), co^substantiall, yet so it is as that I have found the thing it
self. Saint Hillarie upon the same argument: The word of God, which by the
testimony of the Gospel has been transfused and conveyed into our ears, is
sufficient for the believers: for what is there belonging unto man's salvation,
that is not to be found contained therein? Or what is there therein either lame
or obscure? Verily every thing therein is full and perfect, Basil, de vera
fide. Homil. 29. In oratione Ethica^ In Esai. c. 2. Chrysostom. hom. 9 in 2. ad Tim.
etc. Saint Basil attributes it to the same pride and infidelity, to bring
in any thing that is not written, or to reject that which is written. The old
and new Testament, (says he) are the treasure of the church. All the
commandments of God are written, and must be observed. All whatsoever is
besides the straight and even line of the Scripture, is a cursed abomination
before God. S. Chrysostom: The holy Scripture teaches thee whatsoever thou
should know, or be ignorant of: Thou art a Gentile, and would become a
Christian: but our controversies do trouble thee. Thou know not to whom to
go, for every man pretends and alleges the Scriptures, etc. Know that
that which agrees therewith is christian; but that which disagreeth with the
same, In Acta. hom. 33. (...) Aug. de bono Viduit. De doct, christ^ l. 2. c. 9.
sermon. 88. ad fratres lib. de confess. 7 c. 7. In S. Ioh. tract. 49. vbi viamad
vitam. De consensu Euan. l. 1. c. v. t.
is far off from the rule of christianity. Likewise, says he in another
place: It is the property of the devil, to add unto the commandments of
God. Saint Augustine: The Scripture (says he) does prefixe and set before us a
law, teaching us not to be more wise then we ought: look not therefore that to
teach thee, on my behalf and part, is any other thing, but to expound unto
thee the words of my master: for even (says he) in the things that are openly
taught in the Scriptures, is fully found all that which is to be done, or left
undone: all that which appertains unto faith, or concerns manners. Some have
made choice to write of all that which may seem to be sufficient for the
salvation of the faithful: In thy Christ, O Lord, and in the holy Scriptures,
I persuade my self, that thou have placed the way of man's salvation.
Whatsoever he would have that we should read of his deeds or words, Cyril.
Alexan. In S. Johan. l. 12 c. vlt.
that has he commanded his Apostles to write, as if it had been done with
his own hands, etc. S. Cyprian Bishop of Alexandria; All that the Lord has
done is not written, but rather so much as the penmen thought to be
sufficient, both for manners, and doctrine of faith, to the end that shining
through a right faith, manners, and the truth, we may come to the kingdom of
Christ. Now those penmen of whom he speaks, were they not inspired of God?
Is it not his holy spirit himself? Again, Lib. 5. in. Leui.
whether it were he or Origin upon Leuiticus. In the two Testaments, we may
find out and discuss, whatsoever matter concerning God, and from the same
gather, whatsoever knowledge of things: in so much as that if any thing remain
not determined by these Scriptures, there is not any third, which we are to
receive and admit of for the authorizing of such knowledge. Cyrill Bishop of
Jerusalem: Believe me not, Cyril. Hierosolim. Catec. 4.
if I show it thee not by the Scriptures: for the salvation of our faith is not
bolted out by the means of any disputation, but plainly demonstrated by them.
Thom. 1. part. Sum. q. 1. art. 3. Supra omne debitum creaturae. Et q. 147, art.
4 p. 3. in add q. 6, art, 6.
And what will they say more, when as Thomas one of their side, says; That the
things that proceed of the only will of God, besides whatsoever is due unto
the creature, cannot be made known unto us, otherwise then in that they are
delivered unto us in the Scripture: That the doctrine of faith and the
Sacraments, cannot be but of Christ: That the ordinances and statutes of the
church are not of themselves of the necessity of salvation? When also
expounding the place in controversy at this day, of the second to Timothy,
chapter the third, he uses these words: That the Scriptures teach the truth,
In 2. ad Tim. c. 3.^
reprove falsehood, persuade unto that which is good, and draw back from that
which is evil: Not (says he) after any faint or feeble manner, but to the
perfecting of the work of salvation; yea (says he) even in the highest
degree, etc. And Scotus after him, That the holy scripture is sufficient for
the Pilgrim, that is to say, for the Christian travailing here below, to come
to the end of his purposed voyage, that is to say, unto salvation: That this
way is not doubtful; but most certain: that in the same likewise is found
sufficiently laid open, whatsoever is to be believed, hoped for, or done. And
Cardinal Caietan upon the place before named; To the making (says he) of the
man wise unto eternal salvation, and furnished with all those parts requisite
for the making of the man of God perfect.

Admit (will some say unto us) that it is sufficient, The scripture is clear
and plain unto salvation. Lactan, l. 5. c. 1.
but yet notwithstanding obscure, difficult, ambiguous, and by consequent
dangerous. This is all that which can be said against a wicked man making his
will, and taking pleasure to set his heirs together by the ears, through
suits in the law. And what would they say then to the Gentiles, to Celsus, to
Julian, to all the Philosophers, who took occasion by reason of the facility
and simplicity of the same, to account thereof as base and contemptible. He
that is the light of lights, and together therewith all goodness it self, shall
he delight himself in becoming obscure and dark unto us? This light that
lightneth every man that comes into the world; shall he be come down here
upon earth to blind the world, even them whom he has chosen and set apart from
the world? Shall not the essential and almighty word of God have power or
knowledge, or will to express and make plain his meaning in his word; when
as he is come from heaven unto us, from the bosom of the father amongst men,
to express and manifest himself? The holy Ghost sent down from the father,
and the son, to teach the Apostles the things concerning salvation, and in
them us; coming down upon them in tongues of fire, to interpret himself in
all manner of languages, shall he be no better then barbarism and darkness?
shall he not be provided of words clear and plain enough, to make himself
to be understood in the Scriptures? Verily we learn not this lesson in the
Prophets, if they be not able to avouch unto us in that they speak their own
cause. Thy word (says David) is a torch unto my feet, Psalm. 119. and 19 and
12.
that is to say, a light, causing our eyes to see. They that speak not
according to this word, (says Esai) it is because they have no light in them.
Neither yet of S. Peter, Esai. 8.2. Pet. 1.19.
who in his judgment has thought it to be so far off from obscurity, as that
he has commanded us to hearken to the Prophetical word, as unto a light
that shines in darkness. And what then shall be the brightness of the
Gospel, which is the light of this light? the Sun in respect of the lamp;
and declared unto us by the Son, the brightness of the glory of the father?
Afterward the Apostle says, that he has spoken diverse ways to the Fathers,
and to the Prophets, etc. And to whom then shall he be obscure? to whom shall
he be hidden, except as Saint Paul says unto us, unto them which perish, 2.
Cor. 44.
to them whose understanding the God of this world has blinded, to the end
that the light of the Gospel of the glory of Christ might not shine unto them.

Likewise the Fathers, they speak not according to our adversaries: According
to the fathers.
for when they answer the Pagans, they go not about to excuse the simplicity
and clearness thereof, by denying them; but rather, say they, it behooved them
to be such, to the end that that which was for the salvation of every
particular party, might be understood of all. Irenaeus says: Iren. cont. hae
res. l. 2. c. 42, and 67. Just. in Tryph. Tertul. de resurrect.
All the Scripture, both Prophetical and Evangelical, is manifest and without
ambiguitie, and may likewise be understood of all. Iustine; Let us have
recourse unto the Scripture, that therein we may find where to be safe and
sure. Tertullian: The heretics shun the light of the Scripture. So far is it
off that they should be able to shrowde themselves under the darkness of the
same. Athanasius: Athan. in Epi. ad Iouinian.
True faith in Christ is clear by the Scriptures. Let us set (says he against
the Arrians) this candle upon the Candlestick, and it is sufficient. Saint
Hillarie to the same purpose: Hillar. de unit. patris and fil^i.
The Lord has set forth the faith of the Gospel, in the greatest simplicity
that possibly can be, and has fitted his words for our capacity, so far
forth as our infirmity is able to bear it. Constantine the Emperor likewise
in the same cause: Constant. in Council Nicen. Socrat. l. 1. Chrysostom. in 2. ad
These. hom. 3. in Genesis hom 13. in S John. hom. ^6. in Esaias. c. 1. in proaem. in
Ep. ad Romans in S. Mat. hom, 49. in S. Ioh. hom. 58. in S. Mat. hom. 22.
The Evangelical, Apostolical, and Prophetical books do plainly teach us,
what we are to believe concerning divine things. Saint Chrysostom: All things
are clear in the scriptures; they declare themselves, not suffering any man to
err. The truth lies not hidden, or obscure therein, except it be unto such as
will not search for it. As the light is to the eye, so is the law of God unto
our spirits: such as look not thereto, do walk in darkness. Our whole
mischief is for that we read it not: that same, which is a door, by which
do enter both the sheep and the shepheard^ more necessary for the simple and
idiot, then for the learned doctor. To be short, in that confusion which shall
happen under Antichrist, we shall not be able to tell whither to have recourse,
but to the Scriptures: and there are none but those which are of a perverse
heart, that do not understand the mysteries, being such as in whom the spirit
of truth rests not. There might a whole volume be compiled of the like
places. Epiphanius: All things are clear and evident in the Scriptures, to
such as with a holy discourse, according to reason, will hear the word of
God. Epipha. haeres. 69. and 70. Hieronym in Matt c. 22. In Esaias. c. 8.
Saint Jerome: They err because they know not the Scriptures: and seeing they
are ignorant in them, they know not the power of God, etc. If we follow not the
testimonies contained in them: darkness will oppress us, and ouerrun our
doctrine, etc. Saint Augustine against the Donatists: Augu. de unit. eccles. c.
5.
Let us make choice of the plain and manifest places: for if they should not
be found such in the Scriptures, in vain should it be said, that we shall
find in them to lay open the things shut up, and to make clear such as are
dark and obscure. Again; Epist 3.
There is not any such great difficulty in the Scriptures, to come by the
things necessary unto salvation: the making likewise whereby they are wouen
and set together, is to be come by of all. There is matter fitting all sorts of
spirits, as to correct the perverse, Praua and parua
to nourish the weak and young nouices, and to delight such as are grown old
and great. In the things that are manifestly apparent in the Scriptures, De
peccat melitis. l. 2. c. vit.
are clearlie found to be all those which concern faith and manners. When we
reason of any thing that is very obscure, if we be not helped by the clear
testimony of the Scriptures, man must be curbed and kept short for presuming
too far. De doct. Christian. l. 2. c. 6.
The holy Ghost has in such sort qualified them, as that in the clear places
they feed our hungry appetite; and in the obscure they sharpen our dull
taste: we are refreshed with the things that are clear, and set on work by
the obscure and dark. The profoundnesse of this word sharpneth, De verb. dom.
sermon. 11. and de verb. Apost. sermon. 13.
and sets an edge upon our endeavors, neither does it for all that deny us
the understanding thereof, etc. Now if thou think to infer hereupon, then
there is obscurity therein: and of this obscurity to conclude, either an
impossibility of understanding of them, or else a secking of something
therein, that is not there to be found: De verb. Apo. Sermon. 13.
To the one he answers thee: The evil spirit hates understanding, for fear
that by understanding he should be forced to do and practice according
thereunto: Planissime. De doct. Christian. l. 2. c. 6.
And to the other; That out of all these obscurities there is not almost any
thing gathered, that is not elsewhere delivered in very plain and clear
sort. In brief, to the end thou may not bring in any distinction betwixt
the word written, and unwritten, where as the Psalmist says; Thy word is a
torch unto my feet, etc. This is (says he) that word which is contained in
the holy Scriptures. And again; The faithful that cleaves to them, cannot be
dazeled with the iniquity of the world; no more then the stars fixed and set
in the firmament, which cannot have their light put out by the night. So far
is it from him, as our adversaries do, to terrify the fathfull with going
about to make them afraid of it, by reason of the obscurity that is therein.

Yet so it is, But there are dark places. 2. Pet. 3.
will you say, as that there are difficult things in the Scripture; for S.
Peter likewise says, That in the Epistles of Saint Paul, there are, etc. And
what book is there in any manner of faculty whatsoever, which has not some,
yea and many more? But if thou had diligently read this text, and well weighed
the Relative, it would have appeared, that he says not, that the Epistles of
Saint Paul are difficult, but cortaine things in certain points, which he
handles in them. And indeed what higher thing is there then the mystery of
our salvation, or more profoundly expounded? What thing more obscure, then that
of the Trinity; or more clearlie uttered? But thou should therewithal have
added that which follows; That the ignorant and unstable do wrest them, as
they also do other places of Scripture to their own destruction Verily for
these obscurities, the Fathers did not drive Christians from the Scriptures;
but rather encouraged them to labor therein so much the more. Iren. l. 3. c.
12. contr. haeres.
You have (say they unto us) this furtherance, that there is not any
contrariety therein; and further, that one place may expound, but not make
more intricate an other. If we could but say as much of the Books of other
sciences, wherein so many contradictions, as also antinomies do encounter and
cross one another, how many difficulties should we avoid? how much of our
way and travail might we think our selves to have gained? Lib. 2. c. 46.
contr. h^res.
Irenaeus says; The whole Scripture, which God has given us, will be found to
agree together; the things spoken manifestly do expound the parables therein,
Ambr. in psalm. 119. sermon. 8.
etc. Saint Ambrose; There is much obscurity in the Scriptures, but if thou
knock with the hand of thy Spirit at their gate, thou shall begin to gather
the reason of that which is there said; and it will be set open unto thee, not
by any other means then the word it self. Augu. de doct. Christian. l. 2. c.
25. Iren. l. 2. c. 46. contr. haeres. Basil in Aseeticis. 267. Aug Ep. 48 and
de doctrina Christiana. l 2. c. 6.
S. August. To illustrate the obscure manners of speaking, let us take our
paternes from the manifest ones; and so of plain and evident sentences for the
opening of the hidden and covert ones. But otherwise, if under the color of
obscurity, thou labor to gather any point of new doctrine, Irenaeus will say
unto thee; Thou must reason from the clear places of the Scripture, and not
from parables. Saint Basil: The things that may seem darkly spoken in one
place, are most clear in another. Saint Augustine: Who is so impudent, as to
expound any place of Scripture for himself by an Allegory, if he have not an
other very clear place in the Scripture, which may make it plain? Seeing
likewise says he in another place, That of all that which is obscure therein,
Lomb. l. 3. d. 5
there rises not any thing almost, but that which is clear elsewhere.
Lombard: Tho. in Sum. q. 147. art, 10. Pet. de Alliac
Where as the Scripture is silent, it will be good for us not to affirm any
thing. Thomas; Thou can not reason from an Allegorical sense, etc. To be
brief, the Cardinal Alliaco, That the scripture is a lamp that gives light;
and that we must have recourse thither to have salvation. Gerson; That an
idiot, a woman, yea a child, Gers. de Script and de exa. doct. Pic. in Quest.
an Papa sup. Council.
are better to be believed alleging the Scripture, then the Pope and a whole
Council. And the Count Johannes Picus Mirandula, after the same manner. So
far off were these men, who yet were the lights of their time, from this
dark opinion, sprung no doubt out of the pit of utter darkness; That the
Scriptures were not any thing but darkness. But in a word, the mischief is,
for that we will find it difficult, because that in the clearness thereof, it
is impossible for us to find out our inventions; obscure because that our
traditions cannot stand before this light; and imperfect, because that neither
by it, nor before it, we are able to defend our imperfections.

Yet so it is, that our adversaries reply, that there are controversies
amongst us, that we cannot agree of the expounding of the places which are
alleged respectively; How they must be expounded.
and therefore who shall expound them unto us? who shall cause us to admit of
one exposition, more then of another? Let us strive thitherward, having Gods
grace to assist us; let us come thereto with the Zeal of his glory, the love
of the truth, and the desire of salvation; and then a mean knowledge joined
with a good conscience, would speedily attain the end. And for some small
taste thereof, may it please the reader to examine certain rules that follow,
being those which the ancient fathers do teach us.

The first is, That we be agreed upon the Canonical Scriptures, thereby to
avoid the confounding of them with the Apocrypha; that is, To agree of the
books called Canonical.
of the setting down of the spirit of God for judge, rightly discerned and
distinguished from every spirit of man: for humane scripture, after the manner
of money, is so much the more hurtful and damnable, by how much the coin that
it has counterfeited is the better: and hereof the old Church has had a
special regard. I call this the first, because that by this door, it did
perceive both vanities and heresies to enter into the Church, under a fained
name of our Lord and his Apostles. They tell us, that the Scripture is the
balance, the rule, and the squire, etc. Hieronym. ad Laetam.
And therefore to render to things, their weight, measure, and straightness,
it is necessary that it should be just. And this is that which S. Jerome
tells us; Let us look unto our selves to beware of the Apocrypha books: and
if we will read them, etc. let us know that they are not theirs, by whose
names they are called, that many faulty things are mingled there amongst; that
it craves a singular prudencie in him, that looks to gather gold out of
mud; and in a word, that we must not read them, ad dogmatum veritatem, for
the confirming of doctrines. So far off is he from being of judgment, that
we should rake together the dregs of all manner of such Authors from all
parts, therewith to defile the Church. And in another place; In Symb. Ruf. in
Praefat, in Prou. and in Reg. in prolog. Galeato. Hiberas naemas.
Certain perverse men, to strengthen their opinions, have inserted under the
name of holy personages, things that they never writ: and notwithstanding
there are some which prefer these Hiberian fables, before the Authe^tike
books. And this is the cause why S. August. does press the heretics
continually with the Canonical Books, and refuses the Apocrypha, wherein they
did their whole endeavor to ground themselves. Let us lay aside both on the one
part and the other, that which we produce from elsewhere then out of the
Canonical books: let us show forth the holy Church, by the holy Oracles; let
us search for it in the holy Canonical Scriptures, etc. To them I yield this
honor, that their Author could not err any manner of way: the others I read
in such sort, how holy or learned soever they might be, as that I believe them
not in that which they say, because they say it, but because they persuade me
either by the Canonical books, or else by probable reason, etc. And therefore
he says further: Ep. 19. ad Hieronym. l. 2. con. Dona. c. 3. con. Faust. l.
11. c. 5.
The advised searcher of the holy Scriptures shall read them first all over,
but those only which are called Canonical; for then he shall be able to read
the others more safely, being already instructed in the faith of the truth,
for fear that otherwise they might forestall and get the advantage of a weak
spirit, abuse it with dangerous lies, and infect it with some preiudicate
opinion, contrary to sound understanding. Lib. de Ciuit. Dei. c. 15.23.
For although therein be found some truth, notwithstanding because of many
untruths, they are utterly without all Canonical authority. And in the mean
time what impudency is it to go about to make him (to give credit to the
decree by committing the offense of a most notorious lie, D. 9. c. in Canonicis.
acknowledged also by Alphonsus of Castres) to have said, That the Decretall
Epistles of the Bishops of Rome, are of the same authority, Cyril Hierosol
Catech. 4.
that the Canonical Scriptures? Cyrill Patriarch of Jerusalem: Study these
Scriptures only, which we boldly and confidently read in the Church, but
have not any thing to do with the Apocrypha. Nazian. de veris Scripturae
libris.
Nazianzene: In them we see the light, etc. But to the end that the books
that are excluded from thence may not deceive thee, learn to know the true and
legitimate number, etc. If you find any other then those, hold them for base
and bastardly ones. Yea, and this was one of the first works of the
Apostolic and Primitive Church, to seal up unto us the Canon of these
books, by the same spirit, which had inspired them, and so called them
Canonical, as if a man should say Reguler, because they are ordained the rule
of Christian doctrines, and stand as a law to guide all our discourses. And to
this first number it belongs not, neither has belonged since then, to any
either man or Church, to chop in, or to add other books, without the
violating of the judgment of the Apostolic Primitive Church. For what other
thing were it but to say, that it had excluded the books which it should have
admitted? Wherefore we may think that what they have said of such as at this
day lead us to Jewish fables, Tit. 1.14.
and to the commandments of men (which Saint Paul so earnestly warns us
of) to the pretended Gospels of Saint James, Saint Bartholmew, Nicodemus,
Joseph of Aremathia, etc. yea and to the very books, which the Church both
Christian and Jewish have pronounced Apocrypha, was not done to teach us to
draw from thence any patterns of good manners, as sometimes the old fathers
do, but pretended articles of faith: not to strengthen any point of Canonical
doctrine, but to lay a foundation of a new invented one, such as never came in
the Canon. Even as Saint Augustine after his modest manner would tell them the
same that he said to the Donatists; These men wanting examples of their
wickedness, do boast themselves to have found in the book of the Machabees,
August. cont. Gaudent l 2 c. 23.
one Razias to imitate, who slew himself: but the Jews make no such account
of these books, as they do of the Law, the Prophets, and the Psalms, to
which God has given testimony, as to his witnesses. They have been received
not unprofitably of the Church, if so be they be soberly read, principally in
respect of these brethren the Machabees, who labored and took pains for the
law of God, etc. Could he have spoken thus of the divine books inspired of God
without blasphemy; Caletan in 1. ad Cor. c. 12. v, 28.
Not unprofitably, if they be read soberlie? etc. And this is the same that in
our time Cardinal Caietan has acknowledged, laying out the difference betwixt
the Apostles, and all others in the Church. The universal government of the
church, (says he) belongs only to the Apostles; not only by word and
action, but also by writing: and therefore the only writings of the Apostles,
or those which have been approved by them, must have the authority of holy
writ.

The second rule is; That for the understanding of these Canonical books, To
have recourse to the originals Hebrew and Greek. Ambros. de S. Spir. l. 2. c.
6. and de incarna. c. 8
or any place in them that is in controversy, we have recourse for the old
Testament, to the truth of the Hebrew; and for the New, to the Greek: seeing
there is never a translation, by whom soever it may have been performed, which
can be called either Canonical, or Authentical: Seeing also, that as from
false premises or propositions there cannot follow but a false conclusion; so
from false Grammar there cannot proceed true Divinity. And this is that which
the Fathers say unto us: If any man strive about the diversity of Latin
copies, that some unfaithful persons have falsified them, let him in such case
look upon the Greek, etc. Again: We have found it so in the Greek copies,
Hillar. in Psalm. 11^.
the authority whereof is far more to be preferred. Saint Hillarie: We have
oftentimes told you, that we cannot be satisfied in the understanding of the
Scriptures by the Latin translation. And this Saint Jerome spoke to him that
was ignorant in the Hebrew tongue. Saint Jerome also, whose translation some
men do so highly esteem, howbeit that the best learned do doubt if it be
his, and all agree that all of it is not: S. Hier. in Epi. ad Paulin. and
Marcel. and ad Suniam, and ad Damas and in Prefat. in 4. Euang. and in Zac. c.
4. and. 8. and ad Lucin. Augu. de doct. Christ. l. 2. c. 11 Epist. 59. and 19
De doct. christ. l. 2. c. 10 and 15 and in Decret. D. 9 c. in veterum. Genes. 3.
It behooves us to have recourse to the original of the Hebrew, for the Old
testament, and to the Greek for the New: For (says he) there are so many
diverse Latin copies, as there are books; and by these originals we must
alter and correct that which has been ill translated by the Interpretors.
Saint Augustine: The Latins to attain to the knowledge of the Scriptures, have
need of two wings, of the Hebrew and Greek tongues: let the Latins have
recourse unto the Hebrew and Greek copies, etc. Again: For to correct the
Latins, let us use the Grecians, etc. Let us rather believe the tongue from
whence the Expositors have translated the Scriptures into other tongues, etc.
Saint Augustine, I say who knew nothing in the Hebrew. And that they had just
cause to say so, may be made to appear unto us by infinite examples. In
Genesis it is said; That the seed shall break the head of the Serpent: that is
to say, Christ: The Vulgar translation says, Ipsa, she^ not Ipsum, that is to
say, semen, and so by that means it is referred unto the virgin Marie^ and so a
Sauioresse set up in stead of a Savior. At this stone good S. Barnard
stu^bled, as Burgensis, Caietanus, and Canusius do acknowledge, etc. And still
they would that we should leave it in the way, to the end that every man may
stumble thereat. S. Paul in his Epistle to the Hebrews, says, Hebr. 13.
That God is well pleased with charity and well doing. The Interpreter has
translated it, That by them men merit at Gods bands. See you not therefore, say
some unto us, Merit proved in the Scripture? Yes, were it not that every man
knows, what the word (...) means, nemely that God takes pleasure, etc.
Melchisedech brought forth bread and wine to Abraham. In stead of Protulit, he
has translated it Obtulit: Genes. 18.
and see you not how thereupon also the sacrifice of the Masse^ But Vatablus,
and Pagnine, and Caietan also, do acknowledge the sooth: and therefore reform
the translation, and withal you wipe out the Mass. So upon the Psalm, 68. For,
To sleep amongst pots or Andirons; he translateth it, Inter Cleros, amongst
the clergy; The lots or heritages: and ex lapidibus sacculi, is made, lapides
saeculi, stones of the balance, that is, of weights, are made eternal stones:
and five hundred such like. Where is the Doctor how holy or great soever he
may be who resting and relying upon any such translation, shall be able to
gather any true sense? Who shall not be forced thereby to deceive both himself
and others? No less then Accursius in the law, when he understands not by
reason of his time, either some exquisite Latin, or some Greek word alleged
by the lawier. And yet the Council of Trent (who set it down for their
position, to make errors authentike) will have this translation to be
authentike, and that in lectures, disputations, Sermons, and Expositions, it be
used ordinarily; yea and that before that of Pagnines, or Arias Montanus, who
have kept themselves nearer unto the Hebrew, And why? Not for any other cause
then that ignorance may continue, so as that error under the darkness thereof
may hide it self, seeing it cannot stand before the truth, true understanding,
or the light.

The third is, Scripture is expounded by Scripture.
That we expound Scripture by Scripture, one place by another, one by many;
obscure and dark ones, by clear and plain ones, or one dark one by many
plain ones: In which attempt we have a far greater facility, then they who
should assay the like in profane authors, because that we are assured that
there is no contrariety therein, because also that there is a perpetual
correspondencie betwixt the new Testament and the old, and both in the one and
the other, in it self: betwixt the new Sacraments and the old; and in the old
and new in themselves, etc. And finally, because that in obscure places, we
are not to search for, or guess out any thing that is new: yea on the
contrary, not any thing; said Saint Augustine, which is not clearly apparent
in such places as are most clear. This is the order, Nehem. 8.8.
which we read to have been practiced by Esdras, who, says Nehemiah; read in
the book of the law of God, and therewith gave the meaning, causing it to be
understood by the Scripture it self: The question at that time was about the
purging and casting out of certain abuses, Acts 17.11
which were crept into the Church during the time of the captivity, by being
mingled amongst the Gentiles. And hence are they of Berea commended, as
conferring the Scriptures most diligently one with another, to see if it were
so as Saint Paul preached unto them. The question was of the resolving of
themselves by them, against the opinion of the Pharisees and Doctors of the
Law, by the Scriptures, Whether Jesus crucified were that Christ or not. And
this also is the precept which the Fathers teach us. Iren^us: The
demonstrations which are in the Scriptures, Iren. cont. Haeres* 1.2. c. 46. and
67. Basil. in asceticis. 267, Chrysostom. hom. 13. in Genesis and in Psalm. 147.
Aug. de verb. dom. sermon. 2. and 11. Tho. 1. p. sum. q. 1. art. 9. Aegid. l. 2.
Did. 37.
cannot be showed but by the Scriptures. Again, The exposition which is
according to the Scriptures, is that legitimate and safe, etc. Saint Basil:
That which seems dark and ambiguous in one place of Scripture, is clear and
plain in another. Chrysostom; The Scripture is expounded by it self this is
ourarmorie against the Devil, etc. Saint Augustine, The words of the Gospel
do carry their interpretation with them. Again: We understand the dark
places by the clear what is darkly delivered in one place, is clearly set
down in another, etc. S. Thomas, That which is spoken metaphorically in one
place, is spoken simply in another. Aegidius Romanus; Of many expositions we
must take that which agrees with the other scriptures, and not that which
hurts any part of them. Following also that which is said by the Canon
Relatum, Can Relat.
That we must not seek out a sense at our pleasure, from the purpose, to
confirm it any manner of way by the authority of the Scriptures but take the
meaning of the truth from the Scriptures themselves, if the place may be drawn
into diverse senses.

The fourth is; In all expositions the analogy of faith must be kept.
That we see that the exposition which we give or take, do always retain and
keep the analogy of faith, that it be proportionable and correspondent to the
body of Christian doctrine, which some of the old fathers have called the
rule of faith: I say, not to establish any new principles or articles of
Christianity, but to conform and refer themselves to those which have been
received therein from all times. For the holy Scripture is the universal
principle of our faith, and it is well said, That there are as many articles of
faith as sillables in it, because it is said of the least iota, that it shall
not pass, and by consequent, that we must most firmly believe it all. But
notwithstanding, as this said Aegidius says, All the Scripture is resolved
into certain articles of faith, to which all the doctrine therein is to be
referred, and those as principles abide firm in themselves, and are not
resolved into others. And from these principles we deduct our Theoremes, and
answer our Problemes, no less then the Mathematicians do their Maxims, (...)
Axioms, and demands: but so much the more firmly, by how much we are the
faster founded upon the Creator, then upon the creature: upon the Lawgiver to
the whole world, then upon the law which he has given it, which is Nature.
Thom. in. Sum. q. 1. art. 5.6, 8.
And this is it which Thomas says: That the holy doctrine takes not his
principles from any humane science, but from the wisdom of God, from which as
from the most sovereign wisdom, all our knowledge must take his direction
and ordering: and that this skill comes not unto us from natural reason, but
by revelation: that is, from the Scripture divinely inspired: and therefore,
that it judges of all. Very far differing from them who dispute of
divinity according to the principles of Philosophy, or other sciences:
against the law of Logic, which says, (...), etc. That we must not leap out
of one science into another, but rather from a true use of Logic, and
discourse of reason from principles of one science, to draw the propositions
and consequences that belong to the same. Our principles then are articles of
faith, against which we must beware that our expositions do not strike and
dash themselves; but one the contrary it is necessary that they become
conformable thereto. To strike thereupon, that is amongst the Mathematicians,
Deduci (...), to be brought to an impossibility, that is to say, from out of
the bounds of reason, of Nature, and of true divinity: this is according to
the laws of combat, to rub against the bands or ropes that pale in their
ground, that is to be overcame, to be convinced of falsehood. Now the primitive
Church has gathered them for us into a brief collection, al those which the
Councels put forth afterward, are nothing but Commentaries thereupon: and it is
the same which Tertul. calls Regula^ fidei: Under which, Tertul. de vela vi^g
de praes. and aduers. Praxeam. August. de Symbol. Beda in S. Ioh. l 1. c. 4.
and l. 3, c 5.
says Saint Augustine, has been gathered together whatsoever was dispersed
throughout the divine Scriptures: to the end that the memory of the most dull
and slow of conceit, might not be ouerlaboured. And whereof Beda after him
leaves us this lesson: That we must beware that, Secundum fidem fit Sacramenti
diuini expositio; That the exposition of the divine mysteries be according to
faith. In such sort as that we have two Canons, but the one nevertheless an
abridgement of the other, the Canonical Scripture, and the Canon of faith,
that is the Creed: that to stay our spirits, so that they may not search for
in substance, any thing in faith, Tertul. de praescript.
(says Tertullian) any where else then in the doctrines of faith. This to
direct them in the expounding of that, that is of the Scriptures and doctrines
of faith; to the end that they may not admit of any sense, how plausible
soever it might be, which is gone, be it never so little, from the articles of
faith. For example (...) we have to deal with an Arrian, we shall say unto
him after the manner of Saint Augustine: let us pitch our selves without any
shifting upon the Canonical Scriptures: we have no other titles whereby we may
learn the right, but them. But if from these Scriptures he allege unto us,
The father is greater then I, etc. we shall call to mind, that it is also
written, I and the father are one: and the Scripture cannot be contrary. To
the end then, that the one and the other may prove true, we shall distinguish:
referring the first unto the humane nature, and the other unto his divine, that
so we may not conclude against that which is said, I believe in Jesus Christ:
for, Cursed be he that puts his confidence in any thing but God, etc. And
let us further observe here, that, as has bin said, there is no society since
that of the Apostles, that can make that Canonical Scripture which is not: as
in like manner there is not any that can make an article of the faith, of that
which of it self is not one. This power says the Cardinal Caietan himself,
did end there, and there is not any, either succession or descent, which can
attribute it unto it self, or which can pretend the same.

What then? How we are to receive and intertaine the Fathers.
And shall the Fathers that have so highly deserved of the Church, that have so
much and so well traveled in the Scriptures, serve us for no use? Yes, but
mark the place due unto them, and the which no other can be attributed unto
them: they could not be called any sooner: It is for God in his word to give us
his law: he is our only Lawgiuer, to whom alone it appertains (says the
Apostle) to save and to destroy. James. 4.12. Expounders not lawgiuers.
The greatest honor that man can have given him in the Church, is to be an
expounder. To take upon him to make any laws therein of himself, this is to
coin money this is to incroch upon the Prince, he cannot do it without
committing of treason, yea without the incurring of blasphemy. Here therefore
we admit of the Fathers, as expounders of the law, word, and divine Scriptures:
we receive their interpretations with reverence admiring their piety, doctrine
and zeal, but always with this exception most reasonable: That they be but
expounders, not law-giuers: dispensers of the mysteries of godliness, and not
authors. In whom we must consider what they have said, not in that they have
said it, but in that they have said it by the way of expounding of the
Scripture; not speaking of their own heads, but according to their capacity
of the sense and meaning thereof. As for example, we reason of purgatory: The
question here is not to know, if it be to be found in Origin, Augustine, or S.
Gregory: this rule abides always firm: That if there be one, it must needs
be that God has made it, for there is not any Doctor that has power and
ability to make it. If it belong to us to know it, let God have revealed and
disclosed it unto us, for it is not to be learned at the guess of any of the
Fathers: let us then have found it in the Church her treasury, the Scripture.
Now there will be some to show us some places out of it, from which they would
collect and gather it: and accordingly they will, that they should be
understood on this sort, and we on the contrary. In this controversy we shall
read over the Text very carefully, as also that which goes before, and that
which follows: we shall examine it to see if it be faithfully translated, we
shall make comparison of the like places. All this hitherto is nothing else,
but to call upon the Spirit of God to be our aid, so much the more to enlarge
and open our spirits, according to that which the Apostle says unto us. 1.
Cor. 14^
Let the spirits of the Prophets, that is of such as have the gift of
interpretation, be subject to the Prophets. We shall here consult with the old
Fathers, we shall compare their expositions, both with the Text, and amongst
themselves, we shall mark if they have used a good translation, whether they
handle the place, by the way, or of set purpose, affirmatiuelie or doubtfully:
and where they differ (as ordinarily it falls out) we shall weigh them, both
according to the age wherein they shall have lived, (for it imports
infinitely,) and according to the testimony that the Church shall have given
of their doctrine, for they are not all of one weight. And in the end,
caeteris paribus. We shall not despise the consent and agreement of many
against a few. But God forbid, that we should receive them for Law-giuers, or
yet for Authors of opinions in the Church, either contrary unto, or without
the scriptures. And as far off must it be, that we should make them
correctors or judges over that balance, which judges them, and wherein
themselves will be weighed. For this should be blasphemy against God, treason
against the Church, and an injury to themselves. We wholly yield unto them in
thus doing, the honor which they have given to their predecessors, as whereby
they have set a law, and given an example for their successors, practiced by
them against those by these against themselves. If they had done otherwise,
where had we been long ago? Seeing there is not so much as one of them that
has not erred in some thing? many of them in the points of faith, and certain
of them so far as that they have fallen into heresy? Verily we had been
Chiliasts, with Irenaeus; Montanists, with Tertullian; Anabaptists, with Saint
Cyprian; Arrians, with Theophilus; Pelagians, with Faustus; the originals of
all errors, yea even of Arrianisme with Origin, we should wound the body of
Christ, not being subject to pain: Zonar. de Ori. in Constant. S. Hie ad
Pammach. and Oceanum de Origin.
we should likewise speak doubtfullie of the Deity of the holy Ghost, with
Saint Hillarie: we should condemn children dying without Baptism, with Saint
Augustine; we should give them the Eucharist with Saint Cyprian, and the
greatest part, until the time of Charles the great, even unto the mouths of
the dead, as certain Councels do bear us witness. In a word, we should have
made with less then nothing, of the Church of Christ, Augeas his Oxehouse;
Canus. l. 7. de locis. Theol. c. 3. Genesis Cent. 3. and seq. ad finem. c. 4.
Villavince^tius de ratione studi^^ Theolo. l. 4 c. 6, obseru. 1. and. 2. Baron.
annal. tom. 2.
of Noah's Ark, a sink of all superstitions and errors. Which thing our
greatest adversaries themselves at this time not being able to dissemble, do
say: All the Saints, such only excepted as have written the Canonical books
have spoken by the Spirit of man, and have sometimes erred, even in the matters
of faith, both in word and writing, what profoundnesse of learning, or
innocence of life soever, that we can observe and mark in them. And they come
so far as to set down their errors, and that both by their names, as also by
their kinds: concluding that the Scriptures are only without error, and
exempted from lies.

As therefore there are rules for the expounding of the Scripture, by the
Scripture, The Fathers must be admitted as expounders, but not as law-giuers.
so there are also for the expounding of them by the Fathers, the first whereof
is always this; That they be received and read as expounders, not as
law-giuers, and that they refer their expositions to the rule of faith, and
the articles thereof, and not to make any new faith, any new articles:
according to that which Saint Jerome says unto us: Hieron. cont. Iouinian.
August. de Bono viduitat.
As often as I expound not the Scriptures, but speak freely of mine own sense,
reprove me who will. And Saint Augustine: The holy Scripture has set us a
rule, not to dare to know more then it behooves: My teaching of thee then, may
not be any other thing, then to expound unto thee the words of the Teacher that
is of the Lord. Vincentius c. 2 and. 22, and 41.
And this is the same that Vincentius Lyrinensis says unto us: The Canon of
the Scriptures (says he) is perfect, and superaboundantly sufficient in it
self for all things. We are not then to make any addition of the Fathers, to
make by them any supply unto the doctrine of the Scriptures: but rather (says
he) seeing that they may be interpreted in diverse senses, it is meet to
join therewithal the authority of the Ecclesiastical understanding: Not to
add unto, or alter any thing that is written, but only to make for the
understanding of it. For, says he elsewhere, It is written, Depositum serua:
That which has been committed of trust unto thee, not what thou shall have
invented: That which thou have received, not what thou have found out, wherein
thou must not be an author, but whereof thou art a gardiant: not an ordiner,
but a disciple: not a guide, but a follower. What thou have received in gold,
redeliuer the same in gold, etc. And in the person of Timothy, this is spoken
unto all Teachers, it is spoken to the whole Church, etc. And what we say of
one of the Fathers, we take it as spoken of all together: for although all the
men of the world could be assembled and called together, and that every one
of them were worth an Augustine, they could not make, or cause to be made one
article of faith, to bind the faith of a Christian to believe any other thing
necessary unto salvation, then that which is in the holy Scripture: Ga^^.
following that which Saint Paul says: Though I my self, or an Angel from
heaven, should preach unto you any other thing, then that which we have
already preached unto you, let him be accursed. And a little after he sets
down the reason: For I have not received or learned it of any man, but by the
revelation of Jesus Christ, etc. And this has been renewed by all the old
Fathers, though but ill fauouredly kept by them which were their successors,
and whereupon notwithstanding our master Gerson, and Cardinal Caietan after
him, have framed this conclusion: That the Church of this time cannot any more,
neither has bin able besides that which the Primitive Church could, to
canonize any book, establish any article of faith, etc.

The second is, That we discern in the works of the Fathers, the true and
legitimate books, from the feigned ones, not to attribute them unto them, and
by consequent suck out of them an other man's errors, in stead of their sound
opinions, and not to receive any doctrine for old, when as the same shall be
either new, or else very sparingly commended unto us of the ancients. For it
cannot be denied, but that there are many such, and those easily found out,
either by the style, being otherwise in one age, then it is in another, yea
differing in some one time of some one father, from that of another, or by some
appearance of contrariety, and that either in doctrine, or exposition, a thing
hardly befalling any one author, or by the alleging of Authors which are
notoriously known, not to have lived till after them, or by the using of some
terms and speeches, not as yet practiced in the Church in their time, etc. Of
all which sorts, the malice of men has furnished us with sufficient store of
examples. For the style of the Epistles attributed to the first Bishops of
Rome, is merely barbarous and Gottish, in the times of the greatest
flourishing of the Latin tongue: and when there could not be found in all
Italy, nor in all the Roman Empire, either learned or idiot, that could
speak this language: The style of Denis the pretended Areoopagite, is nothing
like to Saint Paul's, containing nothing of Apostolical note or mark, nothing
of the spoiling of Ceremonies, so often repeated by the Apostle: The treatise of
Sina and Sion against the Jews, etc. nothing of that vigor which was in Saint
Cyprian his other writings against the very same, but far less of his
elegancie, zeal, and doctrine: The pretended Canons also of the Apostles, how
should they proceed from them, when they forbid that which the others approve?
and command that which they do openly disprove and disallow? And therefore by
so much the more dangerous and poisonfull, for having purloined the name of so
sovereign a drug. And in such sort we are likewise to say of Saint Clement his
reuises, and Saint Peter his peregrination, Hieronym. in Apolog. cont. Ruff in.
Epiph. haeres. 27.
which Saint Jerome and Epiphanius do witness unto us, wittingly to hold and
take part with the heresy of Eunomius and Ebion, the most pernicious ones that
have been in the Church: Of the imperfect work upon Saint Matthew, wherein
Arianisme shows it self most evidently, howsoever notwithstanding condemned
and convinced by Chrysostom in all his books, etc. The Liturgy how can it
proceed from S. James, seeing it every where speaks of this word
Consubstantiall? a name in his time not heard of in the Church? The book of
the Hierarchy, how can that be made by S. Denis, at least the Areopagite,
seeing it cites Clement Alexandrinus? Or that of Christian questions, Iustine
Martyrs; seeing it speaks of the Manichies? De variis quaest. q. 23.
Or how can that of diverse Questions be made by Athenasius, seeing it
alleges Athanasius the great? That of the calling of the Gentiles, by S.
Ambrose, seeing it speaks of the Pelagians? Those by Clement, Abdias, and
Iulianus Africanus, which are full of Temples, of Altars, and of Porches, of
Sextens chambers, seeing they were built in the honor of Saint John at
Ephesus? That of the Resurrection in Ethiopia, and that by the commandment of
S. Matthew, in a time when al Christendom dreamed of nothing but Martyrdom?
When as there was nothing more busily provided then pyles of wood to burn the
Apostles, and their disciples withal? And when they prepared nothing but
Theaters, from whence the people might behold them devoured of wild beasts?
And yet forsooth these are the goodly books, whereto our adversaries for the
most part do appeal, for aid and that oftentimes in those things, which have
been the cause why they were condemned of falsehood, and which have caused the
Church to account of them but as fables. But after all, who knows not how
greatly the heretics have given themselves to falsify the^, how greatly they
have bestirred themselves, to slip in either some of their heresies, S.
Hieronym. in Symb. Ruff.
as Ruffinus witnesses in the books of Clement, and S. Jerome in many others:
or of their Traditions, as it is easy to be observed in those of the
Montanists? And if further, according to the measure of the growth and getting
of foot of errors in Christendom, the Church of Rome have been also
careful, (as we have seen at Trent) to cut off or alter in the books of the
Fathers, what soever might be found to impugn their superstitions: (and who
can doubt of this practice to have been followed for the space of many ages,
having been guided by one and the same spirit) who shall be able to assure
himself of the truth, sincerity, and naturalnesse, even of the most
legitimate? Seeing in Gratian his Decretall, we may mark so many places of
the Fathers and Councels notoriously corrupted, according as the authority of
the Pope, or powerfulness of deceit did grow in the Church, and tempered ad
sensum currentem, as they call it, according to the disease of the time, and
course of the Market? Seeing by name in the Copies of Beda and Theophylact,
(who are of the time when the doctrine of the Eucharist began to vary,) we
perceive by the comparing of them with old books found in Monasteries, places
concerning this matter, either gelded or cut out or added and augmented? And
thus also it is even at this day, wherein great personages have complained
themselves, how they have been driven to labor to discern and find out for
us, the styles and spirits of writers: from whose pains taken herein, we may
ease our selves in the practicing of this rule. And let this be said for no
other end, then of many to give an example in some few particulars of the
cursed practices that Satan has continued in the Church, for the bringing in
of his errors, under the name of the most approved Teachers. And this verily
not new or strange, seeing that even presently after the life time of the
Apostles, if Saint John, who ouerliued them, had not provided against it, he
had fathered some upon Saint Paul, Saint Peter, and certain others, and those
also of the peregrination of Saint Paul and Thecla; which our adversaries at
this day labor to raise again out of the grave, and to set in their former
liuelihood and credit.

The third is; That we mark diligently if the father or ancient Doctor which
we handle, To consider well if such father have used a good translation.
have followed a sound translation, have well understood the words and phrase
of the Text in controversy or not: for, for example, what appearance is there,
that the Commentaries of S. Hillarie, or of S. Gregory upon Job: of S.
Ambrose, S. Augustine, or S. Bernard upon the Psalms, can always reach unto
the sense and meaning, when they have used a translation, wherein there are
almost as many faults as words? That S. Anselme, or S. Genesis 3.
Bernard should be able to gather good doctrine from that place, in the
translation of Genesis; Ipsa conteret caput Serpentis, the woman, and not
Christ shall break the Serpents head* Genesis 4
Or out of that other, Genesis 4. Quam vt veniam merear: from whence our
adversaries gather the doctrine of merit? There where it is: My punishment is
greater then that I can bear. Whereas then we shall find that a Father shall
have followed a false translation, we shall not possibly be able to come by a
true exposition: so that in such case, we are to prefer and make more account
of the least, that shall have had it right, then him who shall have followed
the false, following the precept which they themselves did give us here tofore:
That we are not to rest upon the Latin translation, but to have recourse unto
the original and fountain, whether Hebrew or Greek.

And now behold the fourth, which is, that when we are once agreed of the
literal sense, we should weigh the expositions of the Fathers the
Interpreters, both in the balance of the Scripture, and in the analogy of
faith: respect their piety, doctrine, and time wherein they live, and receive
their opinions with reverence: whether they shall be differing, or agreeing in
one, or arising from diverse and sundry persons; let us prefer that which is
spoken in handling the place of purpose, before that which is spoken in
touching of it by the way: that which is said in teaching familiarly, before
that which may be spoken rhetoricallie, as it sometimes falls out in
preaching: that which is spoken affirmatively, before that which is spoken
doubtfully: that which is spoken from the proper sense of the Author, before
that which is spoken by imitating of another: that which is gathered from the
literal sense, before that which is drawn from some allegorical sense, which
proves not: and above all, that which is spoken of some place in controversy,
before the controversy rise, at such time as there is nothing sought after
therein but the simple truth, yea or otherwise after it has been argued, when
as we shall have searched out thereof, for the fortifying of our opinion. Here
also will occasion be administered, to put difference betwixt the Fathers,
according to the degree and quality that their doctrine and pure life has
advanced them unto in the Church: for there is some such a one that is worth
many, according to their times; according, I say, as they have been nearer,
or further off from the true light, seeing that Saint Jerome complains
himself, S. August. ad Ianuarium. Bed. l. 4. in Sam. c. 2.
that he was in his time come unto the lees. Saint Augustine; That all was now
become full of presumptions, preiudicate opinions, and more then Judicial
Ceremonies. Beda likewise: That it was a lamentable thing, and not to be
uttered without tears, how that in his time the Church grew worse and worse
every day. And this will prove true in counting clean contrary to our
Jesuits: for they to cast dust in the eyes of the world do tell us: Such a
one who lived 800. or 1000. years since, has said this or that: whereas they
should say, such a one who lived 200. 300. or 400. years next after the
Apostles, has spoken thus, etc. For our question is not how long time a lie
has endured. The devil (says the Lord,) is a liar from the beginning: but
what manner of doctrine that was which was first, that is according to
Tertullian the truth, then, when, how, and by what degrees, falsehood and lying
sprung up, increased and grew great, and advanced it self against, Vincent.
Lyrinens. c. 39.
and above this truth, etc. And this is that which Lyrinensis says: For the
expounding of the Canonical Scripture, we must summon and call together the
aduises of the fathers, but prefer that evermore which they have spoken,
either all or the greatest part of them, and that very manifestly, often,
constantly, assuredly, etc. what has been otherwise delivered, what Saint,
Martyr, or Teacher soever he has been, let us hold it, inter proprias and
occultas, and priuatas opiniunculas, for Apocrypha and private opinions.

Furthermore we are ever to proceed forward to the fifth: that they are to be
read as great personages, That we must read them in such sort as they will be
read.
but nevertheless as men, whose writings cannot be equal with the Scripture,
as little as their spirits can match the holy Ghost, yea such on the contrary,
as must be judged by the scripture, examined one by another, even the old with
those which in regard of them are new, as they have sufficiently learned in
some places to reprove them, of whom they had been instructed in many things,
Cyr^l in Leuit. l, 5.
according to the rule which S. Cyril gives us. If there be any thing in the
scripture to be decided, besides the two Testaments, let us know that we have
not any third, the authority whereof we are bound to receive. This also is the
same that the Fathers say unto us. S. Jerome, Let every thing that shall have
bin spoken after the Apostles time be cut off, Hieronym. in Psalm. 86.
let it not carry any authority with it, how holy or eloquent soever the
Author may be.

Saint Augustine: Augu. de unit eccles. c. 6.
Read to me of the Law, Prophets, Psalms, Gospel, and Epistles: read and we
will believe, etc. Al others says he, how holy or learned soever they be; I
read them, not to believe that which they affirm to be true, because they say
it, but in as much as they prove it unto me by these canonical Authors, Ep. 19.
ad S. Hieronym. Ep. 111. and 112
etc. For how Catholic so ever they may be, there is always something in
their writings, which (their honor reserved) it is lawful for us to reprove,
if it do not agree with the truth. Thus am I affected in other men's writings,
and such wish I them to be in mine, etc. And if you would know of what manner
of men he purposes to speak, he speaks of his own books: Rest not thy
self (says he) in my books, Lib. 3. de Trinit. contr Crescon. l. 2. c, 21 Ep.
112.
but correct them by the reading of the Scriptures. Of those of Saint Cyprian:
I do not hold them for Canonical; but I examine them by the Canonical:
Wherein I find them conformable I praise him, where otherwise, there (with his
good leave) I reject and forsake him. Of these, namely Saint Ambrose, and Saint
Jerome, Contr. Faust. l. 11. c. 5. and l. 2. Contr. Donat.
etc. I purposed not (says he) to intermingle their opinions, that so thou
may not think that we should follow the sense of any man, as the
authority of the Scripture. Of all them in general, that have written since
the time of the Apostles. In them all (says be) the reader or hearer has free
judgment, to approve or disprouethem, not being bound of necessity to believe
them, but with liberty of judging, etc. Yea, says he elsewhere: All the
letters of Bishops, (without any exception to those of the Bishops of Rome)
which have been written, or are written after the Canon of the Scriptures, may
be reprehended by the Councels; and the provincial Councels give place to the
general; and the first general are oftentimes amended by the latter; Sine
vllo typo sacrilegae superbiae, without any swelling of wicked pride. In like
manner says he to Maximinus Bishop of the Arrians: August. contr. Maxim. l.
3, c. 14.
I allege not unto thee the Council of Nice, (though the worthiest that ever
was) by way of prejudice, neither allege thou against me that of Rimini: For
as I hold not my self bound to the authority of the one, so neither do I
take thee to be bound to the authority of the other; wherefore let us reason
the matter together by the authority of the Scriptures, etc. Of which only
(says he against the Donatists) by a special privilege, denied to all
others that come after, it is not lawful to doubt. And in the mean time Peter
Abbot of Clugnt, Petr. Cluniac. l, 2.
amongst the pretended errors, for which Peter Bruits, who read the Divinity
Lecture at Tholosa, was burned, about the year 1200. observed this: That he
believed in the Canonical Scripture only, and would not consent that the
Fathers had the same authority with it. And that this was the error of that
time, appears in Gratian; who living at this time, makes the Decretall
Epistles of the Popes, equal with the Epistles of Saint Paul; and falsifieth
Saint Augustine to fortify his own saying. How far better dealt Gerson and
the Count Picus of Mirandula, who do more account of a lay man, an idiot, an
old man, a child, with a place of Scripture, then a Pope or universal
Council without Scripture?

Now, who so shall read the Scriptures, and the Fathers upon the Scriptures,
furnished with these rules, calling upon the name of God, and bringing a right
zeal to the searching out of the truth: let us not doubt but that he may
easily discern of the controversies of this time, as to know on which side
truth or falsehood is; as also the right and natural interpretation of such
places, as are in controversy, as well as the perverted and bastardly. Yea the
Gentile himself (said Chrysostom) will learn by our controversies, Chrysostom
hom. 33. in Acta.
to what Church he ought to cleave; howbeit that both the one and the other do
pretend Scriptures: seeing we say not that we believe in humane reasons, that
might be able to trouble him; but in the Scriptures that are simple and true.
And how much the rather then the Christian, who, as one would say, should be
borne, fed and made, by the language of the Scriptures? And in deed I hope that
in this discourse which we have undertaken of the history and doctrine of the
Mass; it will appear from place to place, that it is altogether in vain for
the most part, that our adversaries fortify them selves with the fathers; who
verily if they were to come amongst (...) again, would never acknowledge for
their children, the deceits and abuses, that are authorized under their names.

But as S. Augustine said; August. Epist. 166.
We have learned Christ in the Scriptures, as also we have there learned the
Church: I dare also here say unto you my masters; therein we shall take
knowledge of Antichrist; therein shall we observe the corruption that he has
brought into the Church: The corruption: for it serves not any more either for
seed grain, or grass, as sometimes: The darnell and good Corn alike perhaps,
until the time of earing, would be able to deceive us a little; but grown into
flower, and being come to their perfection, that fills with the stench of the
smell, and poysoneth with his vapor, all such as should stand a far off: And
even so Antichrist; for there is no more any question of a star, to conduct
and guide us to him; of seeking of him in a Manger, in his swathing band, or in
his first infancy: As at such rhyme (says S. Paul) as iniquity began but to
work. For to make us all inexcusable, the day of the Lord is come to his full
height: He is seated upon seven mountains; encamped in the Temple of God,
extolling himself above God, extolling himself against God; working with all
the efficacy of Satan, in all powerfulness and miracles of lying; making
drunk with his Cup, the Kings and Princes of the earth; opening his mouth in
blasphemies against the highest, against his Christ, and under the name of
Christ. All his properties, all his circumstances are therein so lively painted
out unto us; as that there is nothing wanting, but the putting to of his name:
and yet that is also therein given us in Ciphers in a mystery; which
succession of time, and the evident plainness of his effects has since then
deciphered. To you then my Masters upon whom the last times are come, it
belongs to take knowledge of him; either by the pourtraiture which ye have
of him in the Scripture, or by his working which you see in the Church; or by
his words, or by his works. For then you shall not have to say unto us any
more: Who are you that declare him unto us? Where are your Commissions? Where
are your Bulls? These are the pettifoggeries of the Court of Rome. It is said:
that the Son of perdition shall cause a great Apostasy: Either we must turn
with those of the Apostasy, or protest against it. But you should give him
thanks, that shall have counseled you to fly from the plague into your
town; from the Wolf into your sheepefold; and from fire, into your barn. You
should ring the alarm Bell your selves; to the end that men might run
thereto, that men might seek to succor you. Apoc. 18.4.
You should come forth: for it is said; Come out of Babylon my people, with
great haste, and without looking back; for this is the spiritual Sodom: And
it is said; 1. John. 5. Apoc. 18. and 19
My little children fly from Idols. And we all together will go crying: She
is fallen, she is fallen: Yea we shall go singing; Salvation, and glory, and
honor and power be given to our Lord God: His judgments are true and just: He
has revenged the blood of his servants: He has executed justice upon her
which has corrupted the whole earth: The smoke thereof shall ascend for ever.
AMEN.

THE END AND DRIFT OF THE Author in the writing of this Book.
Jesus Christ our Lord, who is the Truth, Ignatius, Cyprian, and Tertullian
every where. Math. 19.8.
(as ancient writers declare unto us) not Custom, answered to the Pharisees
and Doctors of the Law. In the beginning, (that is to say, at such time as God
accomplished the work of Creation) It was not so. The question was about the
law of diuorcement, a law ordained by Moses, by authority given him by God, a
law practiced amongst the people for the space of sixteen hundred years and
more, without any check or controlement: even amongst the people of Israel,
and Church of God, and yet notwithstanding the Son of God, not waighing
either the prescription, or the continuance of toleration, calls them back
to the consideration of the estate and condition of the thing at the creation,
and to the first institution of the same. God (says he) made them male and
female: what God has joined together, let not man put asunder. Thus likewise
let us learn to answer, according to the example and commandment of our
Lord, but upon much more urgent occasion, whenever the inventions and devises
of men shall be set before us, to the defacing of Gods ordinance and
institution: yea when any shall go about to foist in human fancies, to the
abrogating and thrusting out of his holy word. It was not so from the
beginning, not from the creation of Christ's Church: not from the institution
of Christ, not from his Apostles, not from their Disciples, not from the
observation of the Primitive Church, not from any decree or determination
concluded by the said Church her first councels: what God has once appointed
and ordained, let not us cast off and reject: what the Son has spoken unto us
by his own mouth: John 14.26.
what he has taught us by his Apostles: that son, concerning whom the
Father has given this charge, hear him. Those Apostles of whom the Son
has thus said unto us, I will send the holy Ghost which shall teach you all
things: Him let not us forsake for any other thing that may come, for any
fair and goodly show or appearance that possibly it can have, for any
authority, prerogative, or prescription of time that it may pretend. By thus
framing our selves, we shall be able easily to agree with every soul that has
any taste of godliness, and which has in reverence God his holy word and
ordinances. But the question shall be at this time, whether there be not
abuses brought into the Church of Rome, to the prejudice of his holy service
and worship, and of his holy ordinances contained in his word: of the
observations of the Primitive church, seeing that a very strong preiudicate
opinion has seized the spirits of the greatest part, that nothing is done now
a days in the church of Rome, but after that sort and manner, that to require
any reformation therein, is nothing else but a longing after novelties, and a
removing of the ancients their marks and limittes: and lastly, seeing that
they which make their advantage of such abuses, are not without store of
colors, thereby corrupting and disguising the old and ancient monumentes and
writings, and besmoking the new and latter ones, that so they may carry the
greater show of antiquity, amongst which, that of making, as to receive the
things for old and ancient, which have meerelie regarded the succeeding
times of the church, is very new and lately hatched. This I say, is the
task and text which we are now to finish, and make plain by the grace of God,
that so we may provide helps for the strengthening and supporting of some
simple men, and prevent the malice of the contrary minded, to the end that
antiquity may show it self antiquity, and novelty may appear to be but
novelty: and also to the end that the superstitious and long observation of
some ill established novelty, may not carry away the title of antiquity from
old and ancient verity, That truth which is of all other most ancient, may
not grow out of date by reason of the antiquity thereof. That the
disagreements in religion are for the most part about traditions, established
without the warrant of the word.
carelessly and negligentlie looked unto: Ne, inquam, antiquissima illa veritas,
vel ipsa antiquitate antiquari videatur.

Certainly, he that shall weigh and consider with sound and upright
judgment the controversies which are at this day in christian religion, shall
not find them to be any such things (for the most part) as are founded upon
any doctrine that is truly ancient: upon any doctrine (I say) that is taught
or mentioned in the holy Scriptures: notwithstanding, that the Scriptures be
the true and proper bounds of whatsoever may fall into men's fancies, and the
old and authentike Registers and Masters of the church, to line and square
out whatsoever is the proper due and true possession of any one. And further,
we do freely declare and testify, that whosoever shall dare to remove the
same, though never so little, shall worthily fall into the curse pronounced by
the Prophet against them, which remove ancient bounds and marks. But the
question is of Traditions, which have insinuated themselves, and are sprung
up together with the time by the industry of men, and that to the choking
of the true plants of Christ's field. Of Traditions, which by the reading of
Antiquities, we see and behold first in the bare and naked seed, then in the
bud putting forth, growing and rising up into a stalk, bearing fruit,
ouergrowing in the end the good corn, ouerspreading the earth, watered with the
vanity and ordinary curiosity of men, manured and fed with the ignorance of
the most dark and ouershadowed ages. Of Traditions, one mark or step whereof,
for the most part we cannot epsy or find out either in the holy Scriptures,
or in the Primitive church: but which from age to age we find and see to have
sprung up of some cross or ouertwhart word, or else of some unexpected action,
as herbs coming by chance, and whereof there is no great regard or reckoning
made: or else to grow by a privation, or negatiuelie in some doubtful
question, from thence proceeding into some affirmative not well and firmly
grounded, and finally ending in a full and absolute conclusion, from whence is
drawn within some space of time after, and so throughout every age, such
strange increase and ouerrunning measure, such consequences so far differing
from the first steps and footinges, as that they which first cast the seed
into the ground, not thinking of any such harvest, would not be able (as it
falls out with the fowls of the air, letting fall some nut or acorn) ever
to avouch the same for theirs, if they should return to behold them, yea
which would rather have smothered and stifled them in the birth, if they had
foreseen any show of such monstrousnes to have eusued. And finally of
Traditions, which smoothly convey themselves under the habit of
indifferency, and a certain kind of pretended seemlines into thercome and
place of profit, of necessity of subjection (yea and that greater then any
Judicial servitude) and of the Articles of faith: Articles I call them, seeing
that men now a days (such as are our adversaries,) are far more tenderly
affected and deeplier doting upon their own inventions, then upon faith it
self. And for the which they let not to stand and contend a great deal more
in the church of Rome, to maintain the same, then they do strive and seek to
root out Atheism, notwithstanding it iet up and down like a Lord, and spread
it self into every coast and quarter under the name of Philosophy, privily
undermining, and thereupon forciblie ouerturning the foundations of the church
of Christ, the holy Scriptures, and the holy Sacraments. Articles again,
for the strengthening whereof they are not ashamed, to weaken so much as lies
in them the force and authority of Gods word: and for the procuring of
authority thereunto, they defend the sufficiency, integrity and simplicity
of the same, they make no conscience to call the ministry of death the
ministry of our life, and to pronounce as imperfect and insufficient unto
Salvation the Scriptures, whereof the essential word did say unto the Jews
(and then by a stronger reason to us:) Examine the Scriptures diligently and
carefully, for you think to have eternal life by them: and they are those
that bear witness of me.

Now it were no hard or difficult matter to demonstrate and show forth the
same throughout all the Articles which are in controversy, and indeed the
matter has been performed by diverse already. But I will rest my self for
this time in showing the truth thereof, in the matter of the Mass, and the
appendances thereof: because at this day it occupies the principal place of
Divine Service in the church of Rome: because it seems unto them the badge
and cognizance to distinguish betwixt the good and evil Christian: because
that in not going thereunto, or in going thereunto, is (as they hold in their
opinion) to work a man's damnation or salvation: And lastly, because that it
containing and comprising in it, either the doctrine or the practice of the
principal points which are in controversy betwixt us, it shall stand for a
full reuew of the whole body of their religion, or not want much thereof, if
it be thoroughly examined and sifted. If then it be of such moment and
importance unto salvation, as they would make us believe, we need not to doubt
any thing at all, but that we shall find it so most clearelie and evidently
by the holy Scriptures: as also that we shall be able to derive it from the
first and purest ages, wherein the sacred fountain of man's salvation continued
and stood in his unspotted purity and exquisite bringhtnes, not having been
as yet troubled with our human inventions, not having been as yet defiled
with the superstitions which the preposterous imitarion of Iudaisme, or the
unadvised skill of fashioning themselves after the manner of the Gentiles, did
together with the time, draw in huge and massy heaps upon them. For otherwise
certainly if we can neither become acquainted with it by the holy Scriptures,
nor find out any marks or tokens of the same to have been used in all that
space of pure and uncorrupted Antiquity; but rather that not so much as the
name thereof is therein specified, and that any other service was then offered
up to God: let us be bold to say, that then the mystery and price of our
Salvation lies not therein, seeing that Salvation it self has not instituted
or ordained the same: as also that the Service to be performed by the church,
does not consist therein, seeing the Primitive church did never know it. But
then may we well see and perceive, that it is some bastardly brood and entire
and universal corrupting of Christ his institution, and of the first and
ancient manner of serving of God, transformed and changed by little and little
from an abuse of words, into an abuse of matter and substance, from a Sacrament
to a sacrifice, and from a sacrifice eucharisticall, to a propitiatory
sacrifice, and from the commemoration or remembrance of the only sacrifice of
Christ, into a pretended real and daily killing and offering up of himself,
as also that this said Mass which we see now a days is nothing else but a
collection and patched thing of many ages, and a composition incorporated by
many Popes, for the more precisenes whereof, there have not been admitted
thereunto any other ingredientes from time to time, then the abuses which
Satan, men and the iniquity of time, have been able to bring in, either of
pretended malice, or through careless negligence, or through ignorance into
the church. In so much as that finally, the holy Supper of our Lord, cannot
there retain any thing to be known by, neither has it any thing so
contrary, opposite or repugnant, as the Mass: which from this lawful and
legitimate issue (as some of the old Writers have called it,) is changed into
an illegitimare and bastardly thing, from a public into a private, from the
communion of the faithful in the same Sacraments, into a particular
celebration by one priest, and (to be brief) from a serious meditation of the
death of our Lord, into a cold and ridiculous representation of the same, from
a real and effectual participation of that flesh, given for the life of the
world, and of that blood shed for the remission of our sins, into a dumb
and doltish ceremony, and that to be therewithal such a ceremony, as which
assisting and aiding us (a thing never heard of in any of the former times)
there is more hope and help to be expected. I say not then from the holy
supper of the Lord, administered according to his institution, nor then from all
the Sacraments of the Church of Christ: but then from the very sacrifice
which the Lord has once offered upon the tree of the Cross, for the
salvation of mankind.

Now therefore for the clearer handling of this matter, I will divide this
treatise into four parts. The first shall be of the original and proceeding
of the Mass according to all the parts thereof, and the second of the
circumstances, and whatsoever is depending thereupon, which is all that which
properly concerns the history thereof. The third shall declare how it is to
be considered and tried according to the nature and quality of a sacrifice: and
the fourth, how in the nature and quality of a sacrament: being that which
comes nearest to the touching of the doctrine thereof. And I beseech all
those that love the truth, and are fervently touched with an earnest care of
their own salvation, that they would open their eyes, and bring them to the
sight and view of this matter, clean and purged from all manner of prejudice,
of whatsoever forestalled opinion: as likewise I pray God that he would give me
the grace of coming unto this work with a true and sincere affection and
unfeigned defire to see the church of Christ reformed according unto true
antiquity in these our days, and purged from al novelties, which degenerate
from the same, reformed according unto that antiquity I say, which has for
his foundation the doctrine of the Son of God, and the practice of his
Apostles governed by his spirit, but purged from that novelty which can
allege nothing for his maintenance, but the dreams of men, and those, such as
are always younglings and babes in things concerning God, yea rather always
brutish (as says S. Paul) in that which concerns his service.

The Contents of the Chapters of the first Book.
1 AFter what manner the Supper of the Lord was first instituted and ordained:
and that the Mass has no ground or foundation either in the Scriptures, or in
the practice of the Apostles. 2 That the Masses fathered upon the Apostles and
Disciples of Christ, are notorious and mere suppositions. 3 In what manner God
was served in the Christian Church, in the time of the Apostles, and their
Disciples. 4 What manner of divine service was used in the Church, until the
time of S. Gregory, or thereabout, and namely what manner of Mass that was,
which was so called by those that were catechized. 5 What manner of divine
service there was used, namely in that which was called the Mass of the
faithful. 6 Answers unto certain objections, and what manner of divine service
is most conformable unto that which antiquity indeed commends unto us, as
whether that of the church of Rome, as it stands at this day, or that of the
reformed Church. 7 What change and alteration was admitted in the celebration
of the Supper, about the time of Gregory the great, which falls out to be in
the sixth age of the Church. 8 What manner of growth and proceeding the Mass
had from Gregory the great, until about the time of Charles the great. 9
What manner of proceeding as well concerning the framing and rearing of the
Mass, as also about the use thereof, was after the time of Charles the great,
and particularly of the dismembring of the Sacrament, by the taking away of the
Cup of the Lord from it. 10 That the Communion under both kinds has been
practiced of all the ancient Churches. 11 What manner of effect and working,
the taking away of the Cup of the Lord had amongst the faithful: and under
what color and pretext. 12 VVherin are answered the pretended reasons of the
adversaries, both by the holy Scriptures, and by the fathers. A recapitulation
or brief rehearsal of the matters handled in the first book.
Of the Second Book.
1 OF Churches and Altars: their first beginning and proceeding. 2 Of Images,
that old and ancient Christians had not any. 3 What manner of increase and
proceeding Images had amongst Christians, and of the licentious abuse thereof,
after they were once brought into the Church of Rome. 4 Of unleavened bread,
wine mixed with water: and of such things as served in the administration of
the Sacraments. 5 That the old worship and ancient manner of serving God was
altogether performed and done in such a language as the common people knew and
understood, and by what degrees it was altered and changed. 6 That in the
Primitive Church, and a long time after, the holy Scriptures were read amongst
the people in all tongues and languages. 7 Wherein is entreated of the
Ministers of the Church, and of their charge and vocation in the same. 8 That
the Bishops and Ministers of the old Christian Church were married. 9 How a sole
and unmarried estate of life grew and got increase and strength in the church of
Rome, unto the publishing of the decree made by Calixtus. 10 The reestablishing
of abstinencie from marriage, and the continuing of the same, even unto our
days. A brief rehearsal of the matters handled in the second book.
Of the Third Book.
1 THat the propitatorie Sacrifice of Christ is not reiterated in the holy
Supper, and in what sense the old Church did use this phrase and manner of
speech. 2 Answers unto the adversaries their objections, which they pretend to
draw from the holy Scriptures for the proving of their sacrifice. 3 That the
pretended propitiatory sacrifice of the Mass has no ground or foundation in
the new Testament. 4 That the old VVriters have not ^^knowledged any other
propitiatory sacrifice, then that only one made upon the cross. 5 How and by
what degrees the Sacrament of the holy Supper was turned into a propitiatory
Sacrifice. 6 That there is not any Purgatory, the foundation and ground
pillar of their Masses for the dead, and first how that it was not known unto
the Church of Israel, or unto those that lived under the old Testament. 7
That Purgatory has no ground or foundation in the new Testament. 8 That
neither the Primitive Church, nor the Fathers living in the same for the space
of many ages did ever acknowledge the Purgatory of the Church of Rome. 9
Wherein are answered the adversaries their objections endeavoring to prove
their Purgatory by the old VVriters. 10 In what manner Purgatory has
proceeded in the Church of Rome, and by what degrees. 11 That praying unto
Saints has no foundation in the holy Scriptures of the old Testament. 12
That praying unto Saints has no ground in the holy Scriptures of the new
Testament. 13 That praying unto Saints was not taught in the Primitive Church,
and how it sprung up and grew. 14 The continuing of the purity of doctrine in
the matter of Invocation, and of the springing up of the corruption of the same
in the Latin Church. 15 The springing up of the corruption of invocation,
as well in the Greek as in the Latin Church. 16 That a man eannot merit or
deserve eternal life for himself, and much less for an other: wherein he is
considered first as he is before his regeneration. 17 That a man regenerate
cannot merit eternal life for himself, or for any other. 18 That the law was
given unto man, to convince him of sin, and to cause him to look for his
salvation, from grace through faith in Christ, according to the Scriptures and
the Fathers. 19 That good works are the gift of God, and therefore cannot
merit: and to what use they serve according to the holy Scriptures and
fathers. 20 How the doctrine of merit first set foot into the Church: how it
proceeded: and how it has been oppugned, and set against in all ages: yea
even unto S. Bernard his time. 21 How merit proceeded and went on, ever since
S. Bernard his time until th^se our days: and what oppositions have been
made against it, even unto the time of the full light of the Gospel breaking
forth again. A Recapitulation of the third Book.
Of the fourth Book.
1 WHat a Sacrament is, and wherein it consists: and of the difference of the
Sacraments of the old and new testament, where are likewise laid down
certain rules by the old writers, for the better understanding of their
writings. 2 That the doctrine of the holy Supper must be examined by the rules
before delivered: as all other doctrine whatsoever touching any other
Sacraments, either of the old, or of the new Testament. 3 That the exposition
which our adversaries give upon the words of the holy Supper, destroys all
the foundations of the Christian faith, as also the nature of Christ and of his
sacraments. 4 That the fathers knew not Transubstantiation, nor the real
presence in the signs: and that which is touched of the times, even to the
first Nicene Council, is also included therein. 5 The continuing of the
belief and faith of the fathers of the Church in the matter of the holy
Supper, from the first Nicene Council, unto the time of Gregory the great. 6
Likewise that a long time after Gregory, Transubstantiation was not known:
and in like manner that all the most famous Liturgies amongst our adversaries,
are repugnant to the same. 7 That the old Church did not believe nor teach
Transubstantiation, seeing it neither did, nor observed in respect of the
kinds or Sacraments, that which is done and practiced at this day. 8 In what
manner the opinion of Transubstantiation was begun, increased, and finished,
until the year 1215. and that it was ratified and confirmed by a Decree made
in the Council of Lateran. 9 What manner of increase and proceeding befell the
opinion of Transubstantiation, from the Council of Lateran, until the
Council of Trent: and the absurdities and contradictions rising from the same.
A comparing of the holy Supper with the Mass. A brief rehearsal of the
chief matters contained in the whole work.
THE FIRST BOOK OF THE MASS, AND of the parts thereof.
CHAP. I. After what manner the Supper of the Lord was first instituted and
ordained, and that the Mass has no good ground, either from the Scriptures,
or from the practice of the Apostles.
Our adversaries for the laying of a surer foundation for the Mass out of the
holy Scriptures, have attempted to drive and draw the same from the institution
of the holy Supper of our Lord, and ordinarily now a days, do use to set down
as a note and mark of the same upon all such places as concern the holy
Supper. Here is the institution of the Mass: whereas their predecessors, and
namely the ordinary Gloss was wont to note such places thus: Here is the
institution of the Supper or Eucharist. Wherefore the better to know how like
and how unlike they be, as likewise to see so much the more clearly, how far
the one is swaruing and degenerating from the other; we must first consider
after what manner the holy Supper was instituted, that holy Supper which is the
sacrament of the new Testament, and succeeded the feast of the Passover, which
was the Sacrament of the old: that holy supper which is the true commemoration
and memorial of the sacrifice of the lamb without spot or blemish slain for
our sins; the figure and representation whereof had before been lively set
out in the Paschall lamb. For we do altogether agree in this, all the sort of
us, that as the law was ordained to lead us to grace, Moses and the Prophets
to bring us to Christ: even so all the propitiatory sacrifices of the law were
to fit and to prepare us for the laying hold upon that true and only
propitiatory, the very lamb which takes upon him the sins of the world.
And all the sacrifices of thanksgiving likewise, which were offered for the
acknowledgement of temporal benefits, served to stir us up to the
consideration of this great and unspeakable spiritual benefit which it
pleased God, according to the riches of his mercy, to manifest and lay open in
his Son. And therefore as we must come to the knowledge of the Mass by the
holy Supper: so to that of the holy Supper by the Passover: the holy Supper
having succeeded the Passover by the institution of our Lord Jesus Christ, and
the Mass in the Church of Rome having taken up the place of the holy supper,
through the corruption which has been brought in by the Sea and government of
Antichrist.

Behold therefore the institution of the Passover in Exodus: Pharao
perseuering in his rebelliousnes, Exodus 1^. That the holy Supper came in place
of the Passover.
God declared unto Moses that he would root out all the first borne of Egypt:
and yet nevertheless to the end he might put some difference betwixt the
vessels of his wrath, and those of his mercy; he would spare the first borne
of Israel; spare them I say, not because of any their merits, but for his
own compassions sake, through the favor purchased by the lamb slain for
sin, from the foundation of the world. Wherefore he ordained that in every
family, betwixt two euens a lamb without spot, for a type and figure of the
true and very lamb, should be killed and eaten: that with the blood
thereof, the posts of the houses of his people should be sprinkled, to the
end that the destroying Angel might pass over: as an evident warning and
admonition, that whereas this blood was not sprinkled (what family or person
soever it might be) there was nothing but matter for his wrathful anger to
work and feed upon: that moreover this killing of this lamb should be
renewed every year, and that for ever, to teach and instruct the ages to come,
as well in the memory of the benefits already received, as in the
expectation and faithful looking for of greater that were to come and to be
received.

Now in this institution we have both a Sacrament and a sacrifice to consider
and think upon. In the Passover is a Sacrament and a sacrifice.
The Sacrament given of God unto his people for a seal and assurance of his
promise, and of the fulfilling of the same: for to this end are the Sacraments
given of God unto his people, when he says: And this blood shall be for a sign
unto you in your houses, that when I shall see it, I will passe-ouer, and that
there shall not be any deadly stroke amongst you, when I shall smite Egypt. A
sacrifice offered up to God by his people: for as properly are sacrifices
offered up to God by the people, as Sacraments come from God are given to the
people, as is witnessed when he says: And this day shall be for a memorial
unto you, and you shall keep holy this feast in your generations: in as much
as God smote Egypt, and passed notwithstanding over our houses, etc. Such a
Sacrament notwithstanding as leads us from this lamb unto another lamb,
from this blood unto an other blood, and from this temporal effectualnesse
unto a spiritual; in as much as it is chosen without spotte, it is for a sign
of our Redeemer his innocence; and in that it is slain, it serves us for a
sign of his death and passion; in that it is eaten, it is a sign to us of
that life and nourishment which we draw from his death; and of our
communicating of his flesh and of his blood, as being bone of his bones, and
flesh of his flesh etc. And a Sacrifice also, which besides that it is truly
and verily one of the number of those which were of praise and thanksgiving,
cease not nevertheless any manner of way to hold the place of a
propitiatory: seeing that this lamb offered by the father of the family,
does prefigure unto us the lamb which the heavenly father did sacrifice upon
the tree of the cross, for the salvation of such as were of his household
through faith, and our Propitiation in his blood, as it is expounded by S.
John the forerunner: Ioh. 1.19.
Behold the lamb which takes away the sins of the world. And by the
Evangelist in better form, referring and applying that to the substance and
truth, which was ordained and decreed of the type and figure: To the end (says
he) that the Scripture might be fulfilled: There shall not one of his bones be
broken.

Now our Lord the true and very lamb, The same in the holy Supper, and to
what end.
which came to fulfill the law and not to destroy it, kept the feast of the
typical or figurative lamb with his disciples, both according to this
institution, as also according to all the circumstances thereof. He kept it (I
say) the fourteenth day of the month, beginning at the evening, according to
the order of the Hebrews, the first day of unleavened bread, betwixt two
euens; that is to say, betwixt the evening Sacrifice and the Sunne-set. Therein
he likewise observed the accustomed washing, excepted only that he
therewithal endeavored to draw men evermore from the naked ceremony, (...)
to the doctrine contained therein: there he taught us humility, washing the
feet of his disciples, whose duty it was without all doubt to have washed his.
Thereat after Supper he distributed and gave the bread and the cup from hand to
hand unto his Apostles, as he was wont to do upon that day among the Jews in a
certain kind of collation, which they call Aphicomin, of the greek word
(...): otherwise Kinnuah: but in steed of the words which every householder did
utter in this distribution, which intimated no other thing to those that stood
by, then the miseries they sustained in Egypt, and Gods mercy which had
delivered them from the same; our Lord in this action (as oftentimes elsewhere)
raises their spirits from the type to the truth, from the shadow to the
body, from the temporal deliverance, to the spiritual, from the servitude of
Egypt, to the thra^dome and slavery of sin, and to be short, from the eating
of this lamb which they had solemnized with him, unto that very and true
lamb, shadowed and pointed out so many ages before this paschall lamb, whose
body was likewise upon this day given for them to the death, Ioh. 6.50.15.
and whose blood within a few hours after was shed for the remission of their
sins. Your fathers (said he in S. John) have eaten Manna in the wilderness,
and are dead. But will you see the true bread of heaven, the bread of life,
the quickening bread? that am I my self, which am truly come down from
heaven, and this bread it is my flesh, which I will give for the life of the
world, who so shall eat thereof, shall never die, but live for ever, etc. As
if he should say, as follows. Your fathers have eaten the lamb, and we
again have eaten the same here at this present time: but the true and very
lamb in deed it is my self, even the same of whom Esaias has said unto you. He
is led to the slaughter for the transgression of the people, Esaias. 53:
his soul is offered up for a sacrifice for sin. Of whom not long since John
Baptist said unto you, behold the lamb of God which takes away the sins of
the world: and of whom I my self say unto you at this present: That I go to be
delivered up to death for you; that you shall have from henceforth my flesh to
eat, and my blood to drink, for the remission of your sins, and for the
nourishing of your souls up unto eternal life: your souls (I say) that are
barren and void of all righteousness in themselves, and therefore also void of
true life, but yet such as shall find life in me in my obedience, and in my
justice and righteousness: all which are made yours by the sacrifice which now I
am about to offer up of mine own accord and free will, unto you they shall be
become the food and foison of eternal life: if you acknowledge and confess
your sin, your nakedness, your unprofitableness and great misery: that is to
say, if you truly hunger after my grace; if you find and perceive your selves
changed and altered of righteousness. And to the end that the remembrance of this
great benefit may be always fresh and new in your memory, think upon and
remember it I pray you in such sort and manner, as you would think upon your
meat and drink, without which your bodies cannot stand, and much less your
souls without the benefit of my death, and of the life and spiritual
nourishment of the same, which is secret and hid: Do this, whenever you shall
do it, in remembrance of me: in remembrance of my torn, rent, and broken
body, and of my blood shed for you, and that such a remembrance as shall
notwithstanding exhibit and communicate them unto you, for the assuring of you
of the pardon and remission of your sins, and consequently of the salvation
of your souls. For always, and as often as you shall eat of this bread, and
drink of this cup, you shall express the death of the Lord: that is to say,
you shall receive the new covenant of grace, the seal of your life in him,
until that he come, But this shall be expounded more largely in his place:
and in the mean time consider and behold our Lord and Savior does take
occasion by the Sacrament of the Paschall lamb, to institute and ordain the
Sacrament of the holy Supper, passing (as Saint Jerome says) from the old to
the new; wherein as also in this, we have likewise to consider both a
Sacrament and a Sacrifice. A Sacrament, in that God there presents unto us
bread and wine visible signs, and yet notwithstanding exhibiters of an
invisible grace, of the participation which the faithful have in his body and
in his blood, being members of this head, branches of this vine, flesh of his
flesh, and bone of his bones, etc. A sacrifice in like manner, for that in the
holy Supper we give thanks to God, for this great deliverance which we
receive, from the servitude and punishment of sin in the death of his
well-beloved: and hereupon it comes, that we call it Eucharisticall, and that
it has the name Eucharist given unto it; and which nevertheless retains in
some sort somewhat of the nature of a propitiatory sacrifice, in as much as
therein we carefully observe and keep the remembrance of this only
sacrifice, which is the only true propitiatory, which the Son sent from the
father, has once offered up for all, upon the tree of the cross for us:
differing herein from the Paschall lamb, that the institution of the Lamb was
a Sacrament of the deliverance to come, whereas the holy Supper is the
Sacrament of grace already wrought and purchased: and herein again for that
the Passe-ouer held of the propitiatory sacrifices, in that it represented,
and set before their eyes, that which ought to be accomplished in the blood of
Christ: whereas the holy Supper holds somewhat of them, for that it sets
before our eyes this propitiation made and perfected. And thus much be spoken
briefly, deferring the rest till we come to speak of the Sacrifice pretended
to be in the Mass.

What we have hitherto observed, What was the form of the holy Supper
instituted by our Lord. 1. Cor. 11. The institution of the holy Supper. Math.
26. Mark 24. Luke 22. Paulus Fagius. Deuteronomy. 8. Deutr. 16.3.
is nothing else but that form of the holy Supper, wherein it was first
instituted by our Lord, as we have it set down in three of the Evangelists,
and in S. Paul to the Corinthians, the first Epistle, and the 11. Chapter. The
sum whereof is as follows: that our Lord after Supper, took bread and
blessed it. They use the word (...). This was done after the manner and
laudable custom of the Jews, whose ordinary manner of blessing in this place
is yet to be read: Blessed be thou O our Lord God king of eternity, which
have sanctified us by thy commandments, and have ordained that we should eat
unleavened bread, etc. Afterward he brake it, gave it to his disciples, and
said; Take, eat, this is my body, do this in remembrance of me, Whereas the
Jews were accustomed to say these words: This is the bread of misery, (for
so is the unleavened bread called) which our fathers did eat in Egypt. He
that is hungry, let him come and eat, and he that has need, let him come
and celebrate the Passover. Our Lord in this place making the bread of
misery, the sacrament of the bread of life, that so who so eats thereon
worthily, shall never hunger. Afterward it is said, that he took the cup and
gave thanks, (the Evangelists using the word (...), in the same sense and
signification that the former word (...) was used) and gave it to them from
hand to hand, saying: Drink ye all: This cup which the Jews call Chos
halel, (...), the cup of blessing, the cup of praise or thanksgiving, which
they did bless in these words: Blessed be thou O Lord our God, King of
eternity, etc. which have created and made the fruit of the vine, etc. And in
distributing it they did sing one of the Psalms of David, which begins
Halle-lu-iah, Praise ye the Lord. But to the end, that from thenceforth it
might continue the Sacrament of the new Testament: our Lord adds thereunto
these words: For this is my blood, the blood of the new Testament, which is
shed for many for the remission of sins. And according to the Apostle, to the
end that it might be henceforth a perpetual institution and ordinance in the
Church of Christ. And evermore, and as often as you shall eat of this bread, and
drink of this cup, you shall declare and show forth the Lords death until
his coming. In the end it is said, that our Lord and his Apostles did sing a
Psalm, and afterward went up into the mountain of Olives. (...). Munster
upon S. Mark. Paulus Fagius upon Deuteronomy. c. 8. Scaliger de Emendat. temp. lib.
6. Cassander in his Liturgies.
The Psalm I say which was wont to be sung of the Jews in the closing and
shutting up of this solemn feast of unleavened bread after Supper, and is
recorded in their books of rytes, to be the 114. Psalm: when Israel came out
of Egypt. But Burgensis is of opinion, that it was a Psalm composed of many
Psalms, that is to say of all the Psalms from the 113. unto the 119. which
thing is more at large to be seen in Munster, Fagius, and others: but yet
better in the Lord of Escalles his book of the reformation of time; for it
goes far beyond all the rest in the clearing of this matter.

And now we have to consider, what it is that the Mass has common, and what
it has like, with this holy Supper at this day; this holy Supper I say,
wherein we see that our Lord, the Lord of the Sabbath, the Lord of all the
ceremonies, the Lord of the law it self, did not disdain exactly to observe
all the circumstances of the celebrating of the same as they are ordained in
the law, as namely the day, the hour, and the manner and form there
prescribed, referring the same to his true and proper use only, and to the
only end it respected, which was himself pointed out and prefigured in the
same. Whereas they of the Church of Rome, men and sinners (as all the kind of
man is) have not been ashamed to dispense with the institution of this holy
Sacrament, and to cut and clip it, change and alter it after all, after their
own best liking and fashion. Our Lord distributed the bread and the cup unto
his Apostles, the master of the household unto his children: where is there any
one step or mark of this communion, of this communicating in the Mass? It is
his will and pleasure that this holy Sacrament should be a remembrance of his
death and passion until he come: that we should comfort and strengthen our
selves in this faith, combine and knit our selves in mutual love and charity,
waiting for the participation of his glory, that so we might make up and
perfect his body in the heavens. Where is this remembrance in the Mass? where
every thing is uttered in an unknown language, where all is done by signs
and whisperings, mumbled up and not understood, and the expositions whereupon
are so ridiculous, fantastical and full of controversies amongst their Doctors.
And furthermore who ever having seen the celebration of the holy Supper in the
first ages, could once dream of finding the same in the Mass? Or who is he,
who giving good and attentive ear unto the true institution of the Lords
Supper, read as it is set down by the Evangelists, that can prove himself so
quick sighted, as soundly from the same to gather the doctrine of the Mass?
But say they, The Apostles have not set down every thing, there are many more
ceremonies belonging thereunto: Of the place, Other things when I come, etc. 1.
Cor. 11.
for S. Paul himself says: Caetera cum venero disponam, other things I will
set in order when I come. But do they not make any conscience to comprise
under one Et caetera, the doctrine either of the sacrifice, or of
transubstantiation, the whole force and marrow of their Mass? Is it credible,
that S. Paul would use such delays in things so important and so necessary, as
wherein (according to their own saying) rests their salvation, as without
which the same cannot stand? Neither are they yet ashamed to set before us the
foundation of the Mass, so huge and massy a building, upon a mere guess and
supposall, that has no ground or foundation at all to rest it self upon?
Ambros. in 1. Cor. c. 11.
Nay then let us hear what the fathers say: S. Ambrose, He teaches us that we
must first handle for order sake the head and principal things concerning our
salvation, as wherein one cannot err without committing of some grievous
offense: Caetera, but as concerning other things which are for the edification
of the Church, he passes them over till his coming. Chrysostom upon this
place: S. Chrisost. upon the 1. Cor. c. 11. hom. 28. Theod. upon the 1. Cor. c.
11. Oecum. in 1. Cor. c. 11. Gloss. ordin. upon the 1. Cor. c. 11. Thomas 3.
part sum. q. 64 art. 2. and in 1. ad Cor.
where he speaks (says he) of the same thing or of some other (...), not
very urgent or necessary, thereby to make them careful to reform their
faults, when they shall think of his coming. Theodoret: He could not set in
order all things, but having written of the most necessary, he reserueth the
less necessary till he come in person. Oecumenius, Either he speaks of the
same thing, as if the holy supper of our Lord had need amongst the Corinthians
to be reformed in other points, or else he speaks of some other thing
which has need of his own presence. The ordinary Gloss: Of the same, but
by your selves you cannot wade any further therein. Saint Thomas, He speaks
upon some slight and familiar traditions, he speaks of things containing no
matter of weight, that is to say, indifferent things. And in another place;
But as concerning things which are necessary in the Sacrament, Christ
himself has appointed them. In like manner, Caietanus: Caetera (inquit)
praenarrata, that is to say, the things before spoken of, as that one came
drunken, an other hungry; that there were contentions amongst them; these are
the other things which he promises to redress at his coming. If then these
other things, whereof Saint Paul would speak, be not the Mass, then the
place is ill applied to that purpose: which if it be so, then let them refrain
to make any such collection thereof hereafter: if not, yet how are they able to
prove from thence their Mass, (as that which he reserved (as they say) further
to be laid open and delivered,) not to be one of those things which are not
necessary? and how from thence will they answer such as say, that it is not
of the nature of the Lords supper, the doctrine whereof he had there
delivered them? But we will yet make it more clear, that Saint Paul did not
defer or put off any doctrine necessary unto salvation, as being of the
substance thereof, unto his coming, but only certain circumstances, 1. Cor.
1.
such as were for comeliness rather then for necessity. I make known unto
you (says he in the same Epistle) the Gospel which I have preached unto you,
which you have received, wherein you abide, and by which you are saved.
Wherefore the things which he sets not down in this Epistle, are not of
that nature and quality. But if the Mass be necessary unto eternal
salvation, it is not of the number of those that are reserved, and the place
therefore is altogether misalleadged. Or if it must needs have a room amongst
other things meant in that place, then it will follow, that it is no necessary
thing, contrary to that they hold and maintain. S. Augustine epist. l. ^8. c.
6.
Neither does it make any more for them which they allege out of S.
Augustine. That it appears by this place, that all those ordinances which are
observed in the church, are ordained of the Apostles. For first it is manifest,
that he speaks of the circumstances of the holy supper, and not of the
substance, by the answers which he makes unto Ianuarius his questions: which
are, whether it must be celebtated upon such and such days, at such or such an
hour, before or after meat, etc. Now from hence would they prove matter of
special weight and substance, but not any thing of circumstance, a doctrine of
a propitiatory sacrifice, and not the order and manner of celebrating of it.
Afterward for the circumstance, they had to prove that the order whereof S.
Augustine speaks, is in every point the same with theirs, that is to say,
that the ceremony of the Mass was the same in his time that it is now: seeing
it is our purpose hereafter to show, that the holy Supper was then celebrated
sincerely, and that the Mass was altogether unknown both for his name, and
likewise for his effects. But there is yet more behind, for in this same
Epistle, after that S. Augustine has squared out and established the holy
supper of our Lord according to the holy scriptures, in all the points thereof
concerning faith, in these words: Sicuti communicatio corporis et sanguinis
Christi, etc. How the communicating of the body and blood of our Lord, and if
any other thing be recommended unto us in the scriptures. Again: If the
authority of sacred writ do inioyne us, we must not doubt but that we are to
do whatsoever we read therein to be done, etc. he comes in express terms
unto the circumstances of the same, the day, the hour, fasting, or not, etc.
things whereof the scripture speaks not: and as concerning our carriage,
wherein he wishes us to behave our selves after the most received custom of
the Church, because there is some likelihood that such observation proceeds
either from the Apostles, or from the great Councels: or else according as it is
there received, where one dwells, as S. Ambrose counseled his mother: It
being unreasonable (says he) to trouble men's consciences, about such
observations, either through too obstinately contending for them, or through
any superstitious kind of fearfulness. And yet notwithstanding to show how we
ought to prefer the scripture before any manner of tradition: That the Mass
has no ground from the practice of the Apostles. Act. c. 23. ^^
If our Lord (says S. Augustine) did ordain, that we should receive the
Supper after other meats: I believe that none of the Apostles would have taken
upon them to have altered or changed the same, etc. Howsoever it be (say they)
the Apostles have said Mass. And that this is true, you have in the Acts,
(...), that is to say, that as the Prophets and Teachers there named, ministered
unto the Lord, and fasted, the holy Ghost said unto them: separate unto me
Barnabas and Saul, etc. The question then depends upon the Greek word
(...), from whence comes the word Lithurgie. We say that it signifies to do
ones duty, and they will needs have it to signify, to say the Mass. 2. Cor.
9.12. Romans 15.27. Philip. 4.18.
S. Paul in many places calls the bestowing of alms, (...), a Lithurgie. The
ordinary Gloss: The charitable laying out of our goods upon our brethren.
Oecumenius: The Apostle has not said (...), to make common worldly things, but
(...), that is to say (says the ordinary Gloss) to administer. Because (says
Oecumenius) that hereby he concludes the Romans to be public Officers, for
the paying of tribute unto the Saints, as duly, diligently and justly, as unto
kings. For which cause S. Paul also calls Epaphroditus (...), Philip. 3.
the minister of, or one ministering unto him in his necesties. And for this
cause likewise Suidas a famous Grammarian says, that (...), a Lithurgie, is
(...), a public office or charge, as (...), a freeing and setting of a man at
liberty, either from charge in divine or profane matters. But not to go out
of the place in the Acts: Oecumenius says, What means this word (...)?
truly the same that (...), Oecumenius in Act. cap. 13.
as they preached. And so Chrysostom. The old interpreter, Ministrantibus as
they were administering or executing their office and charge. The Syriacke and
Arabian, as they were at prayers: because he there speaks jointly of fasting.
Nicholaus de Lyra: As they served God every one according to his degree,
fasting to the end, that their spirits might be so much the more raised and
lift up to heavenly and divine things. Caietanus: He speaks nothing of what
kind their ministry was, but in as much as he had spoken before of Prophets
and Teachers, he would insinuate unto us, that he served God in teaching and
prophesying, that is to say, in expounding the scripture. And in like manner
the rest. Amongst all which Expositors, there is not so much as one to be
found, which did ever dream of finding the Mass in that place, until our
yesterdaies sophisters sprung up, and by the same argument and reason would
prove, that the Angels said Mass, seeing that the Apostle to the Hebrews
calls them (...), spirits which serve God and his children, Heb. 1.
as his officers, etc. But let us further grant unto them, that (...) in this
place does signify, how that they celebrated the holy Sacrament; what can they
gather from thence, if so be that they have not first proved, that the supper
is the Mass; yea and further let it be granted the^, that it does signify to
sacrifice: what other thing will this prove to be, Epiphan. haeres. 79. against
the Collyridians.
the^ as Epiphanius says, that they sacrificed the Gospel throughout the
whole world? speaking especially and by name of Paul, Barnabas and others
mentioned in that place? According as S. Paul likewise calls it, (...), to
sacrifice the Gospel? (...). Romans 15.16.
And yet in the mean time they do nothing but play upon the ignorance of the
world, which with shameless faces they go about to make believe, that the
Mass is found in such writers, as in deed never thought of it, translating
out of the old writers these words, (...), into this sense, namely, to say
Masses, to celebrate Masses, etc. whereas in deed they signify no other thing,
then to preach, to assemble, to celebrate the supper, to administer etc. I am
ashamed to refute the invention of one of this time, Genebr. in the Lithurgie
of Denis.
which has persuaded himself, that the Apostles did sing their first Mass
upon the day of Pentecost: and that he could find it in the old Testament,
seeing himself put out of the new. And his reason is most excellent: for so it
pleases them to sport themselves with the scriptures. It must needs be (says
he, that this was the day of the coming down of the holy Ghost upon the
Apostles, following that which our Savior Christ said in S. John: The words
that I tell you are spirit and life. Act. 2.42.
There is some question moved about that place in the Acts, where it is said:
That they did persevere in the doctrine of the Apostles, in communicating, in
breaking of bread, and prayers: from whence he deriueth the whole matter at one
iumpe, namely: that this day S. James began to say Mass. And his proof is,
that in the old Testament God had ordained, that on the day of Pentecost there
should be offered up unto him a new cake for an oblation, which is called in
Leuiticus, Minha Hadascha. In Deuteronomy. says he, Missath Nidbath. Leuit. 23.16.
Minha Hadascha. Deuter. 16.10. Missath Nidbath.
Of this word therefore he will make the Mass to take his original, as
ordained and instituted in this place by way of prophecy, and fulfilled and
accomplished on the day of Pentecost by Saint James. Unto this he joins a
grave and weighty conjecture: For (says he) before it was only said, that
they perseuered in prayer, and not in the communion and breaking of bread, etc.
In stead that he should have considered that this word persevere, cannot
properly be referred to any thing which is but in beginning to be done; and yet
how in that place it is equally and indifferently affirmed both of the
communion and breaking of bread, as also of their prayers. But let us come to
the foundation thereof. In the place which he alleges these words are
contained Missath nidbath iadecha. Thou shall keep (says he) a solemn feast
of weeks unto the Lord thy God, in bringing the free will offerings of thy
hand. The Greek says, (...), according to thy power: Which thou shall offer,
according as the Lord thy God has blessed thee. Who sees not that this
ordinance extends it self unto all and every one of the people: to offer
their first fruits unto the Lord, according to that blessing which has been
received? And who is it that has any smattering in the Hebrew, which knows
not that Nibdath is to be understood to signify a thing which is freely and
willingly given by every one, according as he is touched in his conscience by
the due consideration of his power and ability: as for example, is to be
seen in that contribution which was made for the building of the Tabernacle;
in which place this word is ordinarily used? And what is there then in common
betwixt the Mass, the offering of one only priest, and a contribution rising
from every particular man amongst the people? betwixt his host and the first
fruits? betwixt the Son of God (whom they make men believe to be there offered
up) and these new fruits? But and if he think to strengthen his cause, and
make it good only by reason of the name: how comes it to pass then that so
many expositors, both old and new, (yea and diverse who cannot please
themselves, but by running much into allegories) have not once so much as
pointed at the Mass? As Origin, Origin in homil. 13. in Leuit. S. Hieronim. in
Aggeum.
notwithstanding that he translated the institution of the shewbread in this
place, unto the holy Supper? S. Jerome although he expound this feast very
particularly, citing and expounding this same place upon Haggee? But much more,
how comes it to pass that this word once endowed by S. James, (if we believe
this invention) with this sense and signification, has not still retained it,
and passed it along from church to church, as it befell unto many Christians,
first broached and springing up in Antioch? How lies it buried four hundred
years after, in deep and deadly silence, not any old either Grecian or
Latinist, so much as once renewing the memory of the same? And what should be
the happy influence of this time, that should revive and set it up again? Why
was it not preserved amongst the Oriental Lithurgies, which they bear us in
hand, to be of so high a price and valewe, as well as many other Hebrew words;
namely Amen, Hosanna, Hallelu-iah, Sabbath, Pascha, and others? At the least
why was it not retained in that Lithurgie of Jerusalem, in the Syriacke tongue,
if it were used and uttered in this sense, out of the mouth of so great and
famous an Apostle, upon so solemn a feast day, in so honorable and reverend
an action, and that but once? Again, I cannot perceive that any other man has
gone about to seek or search for that, either in that place of the Acts,
Gloss. ordinaria in Leuit. and Deuteronomy.
or in that other of Deu. or Leui. which this fellow there finds. The Gloss
says; A new sacrifice, because it is made with new fruits, not with corn as at
easter, but with breads: and therefore he adds the breads of the first fruits
etc. And again: A free will offering, because that God loves those which give
cheerfully, those which add more and more unto their good w^rks; In azymis
sinceritatis and veritatis, that is to say, in the unleavened bread of
sincerity and verity. And as for the place of the Acts: They perseuered
(says S. Luke) in the doctrine of the Apostles, Gloss. ordin. in Act. 2.
in the communion and breaking of bread, etc. The Gloss says, Of bread, as
well common as consecrate, that is to say, as well ordinary, as sacramental.
And Lyranus: Partly (says he) because they did communicate together day by
day; partly likewise because they did use their victuailes and goods as in
common. Oecumenius in Act. 2.
And Oecumenius: Breaking the bread (says he) to show the plain and cheap
diet which the Apostles used. Caietanus: Distributing the bread, that is to
say, their provision of victuailes from house to house, according to the store
which they had received by the gift of the able faithful. And when shall we
learn to speak like to the Siriacke and Arabian expositors: communicating in
the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, called the Eucharist: for they, to signify
the same, do use the word Vcaristio, and by the same reason they might have
retained the word Mass. What communion or agreement is there betwixt that and
this new invention? And who is he, that is not out of all doubt, that this was
not any of the Apostles and disciples their ordinary exercises of piety? And
withal mark well how that to establish the truth, the whole body of holy
scripture, is not sufficient to content and satisfy this sort of people,
whereas one only word mis-vnderstoode, falsely construed, drawn into a
by-sence, rent and torn from the best interpretation of most ancient
antiquity, and of the best learned in these latter ages, and even their own, a
guess and conjecture, a dream, is sufficient, yea and more then enough for them
to establish and build a lie upon.

But that the Apostles and disciples of our Lord did keep themselves to his
institution, without any swaruing from it at all: if our adversaries will not
believe S. Paul, when he says to the Corinth. and to us all: I have received
of the Lord, that which I have delivered unto you: Gregor. lib. 7. de Registr.
c. 67.
let us see at the least, if they will believe their own Doctors. Gregory the
great (who notwithstanding has played the part of a liberal benefactor to the
erecting and setting up of the Mass) tells us that, The Lords Prater is said
presently after common prayer: because the custom of the Apostles was to
consecrate the Host in saying the Lords prayer only etc. where he calls the
consecrating of the host, the sanctifying of the signs or sacraments. Platina
in the life of Xistus the first: He ordained, that Sanctus, Sanctus, Platina in
vita Xisti.
etc. was sung in the office or Lithurgie: for at the first these things were
nakedly and simply done, and S. Peter added nothing to the consecration, save
only the Lords prayer. Walafridus Strabo under Jews the Gentle, Walafri.
Strabo, abbas c. 22 in lib. de rebus ecclesiast.
about the year 850. a famous Abbot, as Trithemius writes, What we do at this
day (says he) by a ministry multiplied and enlarged with prayers, lessons,
songs and consecrations, the Apostles, as our faith binds us to believe, and
those which followed next after them, performed in most simple and single
manner, being no other thing then that which our Lord had commanded, by prayers,
and remembering of his passion. And therefore they did break bread in houses as
it appears, Acts 20. And our Elders likewise report unto us, that in former
times Masses were no other thing, then that which it usually done upon the day
of Preparation, otherwise called the Friday before Easter, upon which day
there is no Mass said, Mandatum.
but only the communicating of the Sacrament, after the pronouncing of the
Lords Prayer. And in like manner according to the commandment of the Lord,
after a due commemoration of his death and passion, they did participate and
receive in old time his body and blood, even all they (I say) who were for
capacity and reason meet to be admitted thereunto. Berno Augiensis de rebus ad
missam spectantibus. c. 1.
Berno Augiensis to the same effect: In the birth of the Church (says he)
Mass was not said and celebrated as it is at this day, witness Pope Gregory,
(and therewith he alleges the place above named): And it may be (says he)
that in former times, there was nothing read but the Epistles of S Paul:
afterward other lessons as well of the old as of the new Testament have been
mingled therewith. B. Remig. Antisiado de celebratione nus^ae. Cap. 1.
And all this he may seem to have taken out of the life of S. Gregory, and S.
Remigius Bishop of Auxerre under Charles the bald: It is held (says he) that
S. Peter did first say Mass in Antioch, that is to say, in such sort as the
Lord had given in commandment unto his Disciples, in these words: Do this in
remembrance of me, that is to say, call to your minds that I am dead, to
purchase your salvation, and do ye the like, and that both for his and your
own sakes. And some say, that he said not at that time above three prayers,
which began with these words, Hanc igitur orationem etc. Durandus in his
Rational, Durand. in Rationali.
The Mass in the Primitive church was not such as it is at this day: for it
did not properly consist of any more then these eight words; This is my body;
This is my blood: Afterward the Apostles added thereto the Lords Prayer, etc.
And furthermore, the steps and marks of this truth are yet to be seen in the
Monastery of S. Benet, wherein the three days before Easter, the Abbot alone
does hallow the bread and the wine: and the Monks sitting with him receive
them at his hand: and upon these days there is no other manner of Mass said:
The Lords institution is read, and certain places of the holy scripture, and
that they call Mandatum, that is to say, Mandatum.
the Lords commandment, as Walafridus, Berno, and Remigius, etc. Now in all
these places they use the word Mass, being used in the times wherein they lived
for the holy supper: This which we have run out into of fitting our selves
with the testimonies of such, as speak their own language, and agree with
them in their worship and service, has got us thus much: namely, that from the
testimonies of all the said Abbots, which have professed to write of the Mass,
we get this ground and advantage: namely, that the Apostles did retain the
Lords institution, and as of consequent it must follow, did also deliver the
same unto their disciples and followers. That they had not (as they themselves
do affirm) added any thing thereunto, but that which was of the same spirit
and master, namely, the Lords prayer; and this we must assuredly conceive to
have been, not so much in respect of the form of the Lords Supper, as in
respect that it was commended unto them for their ordinary prayer: And that
there was neither Canon, nor beginning, nor any note or mark of any part of
this Office and service, which now they use more then the bare words of the
institution, which are repeated in the same. Howsoever that Hugo de S. Victor.
Hugo de Sacram. altaris. Gabr. Biel. lectione 36, Innoc. 3. de celeb. missae.
c. cu^ Marth. et ib. glossae.
be not ashamed to say, that the Canon of the Mass is of like authority with
the Gospel, and that Gabriell Biell have much enhaunced the same, saying: That
that only word Enim (which they have added to the words of our Savior
Christ) cannot be left out in that place by the Priest, without committing of
mortal sin.

CHAP. II. That the Masses fathered upon the Apostles and Disciples of Christ,
are notorious and mere suppositions.
WHat shall become then (will you say) of the Masses or Lithurgies, which are
so confidently builded and founded upon S. Peter, S. James, S. Matthew. S.
Andrew, S. Mark, S. Denis Areopagite, S. Clement, etc. all Apostles,
Evangelists, or disciples? I answer, that we will in this Chapter take away
whatsoever scruple of doubtfulnes or cloud of darkness that may arise to the
troubling of any man's mind about the same. Only let the readers bear about
them such care and diligent watch and attention, as they would do in the
receiving of some payment, least they should be deceived with false money, or
as they would use in some suit, for the avoiding of counterfeit writing or
false evidence: yea rather a great deal more, because the son is much
greater, and the inheritance of a far higher nature, as containing in it our
title and interest unto eternal life. Assuredly if these Masses rise from such
authors as are the Apostles and Evangelists, there is cause for us to yield and
stoop: for they were governed by the holy Ghost; and the holy Ghost is
always, like himself, and so by consequent it must follow, that we give unto
them the honor which we use to give unto their Epistles and Gospels. But if
on the contrary it will be proved very clearly, that they cannot be of the
Apostles or Evangelists, then let us confess, that that which they teach, is
worthily to be suspected of us to be the mere seed and tares of the envious
man, which bestirred himself in the night, yea and that in most abominable
manner. For as there is none so hardy as to falsify and counterfeit the coin
of the Prince, but such as in whom the spirit of lying and rebellion reigns:
so there cannot any be found so bold and impudent as to counterfeit the spirit
of Christ the style and hand of his Apostles, save such as in whom the spirit
of Satan bears rule and sway. But I speak not this upon any conceit of
these pretended Masses, which can nothing prevail against us: seeing that our
adversaries themselves dare not avouch them for authentike: seeing also that
there is never a Priest of them all amongst the Latin Churches, which can
persuade himself to have made a good consecration by following of their rules:
seeing also that we can fortify and strengthen our own cause diverse sorts of
ways by them: seeing the confession therein is not made unto any but unto God
alone: seeing the Communion is therein administered unto all the people, and
under both kinds, and for that also that the Canon thereof is far differing
from that of the Latin: and finally, for that they are said in a language that
is commonly understood of all, and for many other reasons which shall be
handled in their place. And that the rather in good sooth, for that it is our
duty, (for that testimony sake which we do owe unto the truth) to make our
selves parties against them, and that the more by reason of the horrible
hugenes of deceiving lies, so impudently broached in the matters concerning our
salvation.

Then let us enter into the listes, The lithurgie of S. James.
and try the strength of that which they pretend and make show of to have
been done by S. James. S. James the just (say they) the brother of our Lord
did first set down the Mass in writing, he has offered sacrifice after the
manner of the Jews, as also after the manner of the Christians: and to him
alone before all or any one of the rest of the Apostles, it was permitted by
the Jews, because of his tribe and holiness of life, to go into the most holy
place. Judge what appearance of truth is in these assertions, when as S. James,
who had seen and learned, yea did teach, that the only sacrifice of our Lord
and Savior Christ did put an end to all the sacrifices of the law, should not
yet give over, but continue to offer sacrifices according to the Jewish fashion
and manner: that the Jews (who did abhor and detest nothing so much as the
Apostles, persecuting S. James unto the death, and Ananias still holding the
place of the high Priest) would ever permit and suffer him to do any such thing:
and that as they add with the garments of the high priests, but principally in
consideration of his stock and lineage, a thing making him to be so much the
more suspected of the Romans, who had the government over Judea. But still
they continue their claim and say, Council. Constant. 2. in Trul. Canon. 32.
that it was alleged in the second Council of Constantinople, against the^
who did not mingle water in the Sacrament of the holy Supper. Let us add then,
that this was near upon seven hundred years after that Christ was ascended,
and that of all that time it had never a tongue to speak. Whereas of a truth,
if it had been true, and known so to be from of old, it would not have been
forgotten of the former councels, seeing the power and authority thereof
coming from so great an Apostle, would have been able to have put down and
made nothing worth all the controversies, though never so great, that were
moved and raised in the same. In the Councels of Ephesus the first and the
second, where the controversy was handled against Eutiches and Nestorius, and
where the Fathers produced no proof of antiquity, besides a certain place
out of Eusebius and Origene, in which the holy virgin is called the mother of
God:) Judge you and think what advantage they had got against Nestorius if
they had had forth coming this Lithurgie, wherein five or six several times
she is called (...), the virgin that did bear and bring forth God? namely all
that which may grow from the saying and testimony of an Apostle, yea all that
which the testimony of the spirit of God is able to afforde, to the
establishing of the truth of a doctrine of such importance and weight, as also
to the authorizing of the first and principal Canon of those Councelles. And
yet notwithstanding some hold that Proclus Archbishop of Constantinople was
present at the first, and disputed against Nestorius: even he the very man by
whom they would bear us in hand, that this Lithurgie of Saint James was
first brought to light. Again, it would as little have been omitted in the
first council of Constantinople against the Macedonians, calling in question
the deity of the holy Ghost, seeing that it calls him Consubstantiall with
the Father. And so in the first Nicene Council, at such time as they sought to
confute Arrius, to establish the word Homousion, (...)
and to declare the Son to be Coeternall and Consubstantiall with the Father:
And in many other councels following, as that of Sardis of Rimini, etc. where
it should have decided the difference betwixt (...) and (...): whether the
Son should be held to be of the same, or of the like substance: seeing that
in this Lithurgie these words are very ordinary, both concerning the Son
and the holy Ghost, and so might have ended all the strifes, and prevented,
without any more to do, so manifold tragical accidents, as fell out in
Christendom. Let us ioyn unto the former, Saint Ciprian, one of the most
ancient Fathers and writers, as one that felt himself sufficiently confirmed
in the lawfulnes of mingling of water with wine in the holy Supper, in the
place where he has recourse unto Allegories. And so likewise Saint Jerome, who
had not got a small advantage against Vigilantius about the ceremonies, for
which he did contend and strive with him. For who can believe, that he which
had read all manner of writings extant, and which dwelled in Jerusalem, where
they would that this Mass should be borne, and where by consequent it should
find most careful and tender custody, for the preserving of the same, should
not so much as have known it. As in like manner it is most certain, that
these words (...) and (...) never used in the Primitive Church before the
Councels of Nice and Ephesus, were not only received in the Church, where
they were brought to light as well as the substance and doctrine, but also
grounded in express and plain sort upon the word of God, and many others of
the like nature, which may serve notoriously to prove unto us, that the devise
of this Lithurgie, was not hatched till after these Councels: for besides that
our adversaries know well enough how to allege for the authority of the
Church, that the word (...) is of the ordinance of the Council of Nice, and
not of the Scriptures, nor of the Apostles. It is evident that before this time
it was not read in any author that can be defended and avouched. Some there
are which allege one Prochorus a pretended Disciple of our Lord, but he
himself which has caused it to be imprinted, has by the same reason made it
to be suspected for false and counterfeyte, and the style or manner of writing
in his own judgment, carries no resemblance of an Apostolic spirit. As also
Justin Martyr likewise about the year 150. Justinius, tom. 3.
in a book entitled, The exposition of the Creed, of the right confession, or
of the Trinity consubstantial, (...). But besides that this book is not named
by Photius, Honorius, S. Jerome, Eusebius, or any others amongst the works of
Iustine, as also for that it is known not to answer or be like unto his
style. It is to be noted, that this word (...) is not mentioned, so much as
in any one place of this Treatise, and therefore may be thought out of all
doubt, that some man has slipped it into the title, for the plainer declaring of
the meaning of these words (...), of the right confession, etc. And for these
reasons it is doubted of, even by Perion himself. You have afterward in the
same Lithurgie a (...), which is sung, and it signifies as much as thrice
holy, or most holy, it consists upon these words (...), Thou O holy God, O
Holy, Mighty, O Holy, immortal have pity upon us. But how did this rise?
Behold and see how Pope Felix the third, writing unto the Emperor Zenon,
lays down the original and first beginning of the singing thereof in the
Church, as namely that the City of Constantinople, being sore shaken with
continual earthquakes and the people crying (...) show mercy Lord, a little
child in the sight of the people and of the Patriarch Proclus, was ravished and
carried up into heaven for the space of an hour, where he learned this Hymn:
and coming down again, taught the same unto the people, who singing the
same, the earthquake ceased. And hereupon it came, that this was received of
the Church into the beadroule of holy Hymns, and ratified by the Council of
Calcedon. For this Felix the third lived about the year 480. the Patriarch
Proclus about the year 460. and this is that Proclus, whom they obtrude unto
us for a special witness concerning this Lithurgie. And can it possibly come
to pass that this Hymn falling out upon this miracle, could not be received
into the Church til near five hundred years after our Lord, and yet
notwithstanding to be found placed, and that in the same place that it is
usually set in in others in this Lithurgie? But let us go forward. There was
public prayers made for them which were in the Monasteries. At this time nor
yet for three hundred years after, were there any Monks in Syria, that is to
say, in the country where Jerusalem is situate, much less were they then in
Monasteries. S. Hieronim. in vita Hilar.
S. Jerome a witness of that assemby in the place above mentioned, they did run
(says he) with emulation from Syria and Egypt to Hilario in such sort as
that many believed in Christ, and became Monks: for at that time as yet there
were no Monasteries in Palestina, neither yet did any know in Syria what they
meant, and there was Hillario, the first founder and ordayner of this kind of
life and conversation: he prayed to God, that he would give us to find grace
with the Apostles, Martyrs and Confessors. But where is read the name
Confessors, Bellarminde missa. lib. 2. cap. 20.
but of a long time after? And for their better instruction I would have them
yet at the least to believe Bellarmin, who would prove the antiquity of the
Roman Canon, because it is not mentioned in that place: In as much (says he)
as the name of Confessors was not admitted into the prayers of the church, til
after long time, even a little before Charles the great, He brings in
Temples, Altars, burning of incense, and making of censors, In a time wherein
every man knows, that no man speaks of any thing but persecution, and
private prayers in houses and caves, and who knows not how many ages were
expired, and spent before ever it grew to that head? But O intolerable
blasphemy. He offered incense unto God: He offered it upon the same terms,
as it seems to him that he offered his own son, as with the same faith
and with the same hope. Receive (says he) at the hands of us sinners this
offering of incense for a savor of a sweet smell, for the remission of our
sins, and the sins of all thy people etc. and this he repeateth again
afterward without changing any thing therein, when he blesses and presents
the Sacraments. How will this agree with the doctrine of the Apostles, which
is, that there is no remission of sins without blood? and that our only
propitiation is in the only blood of Christ, Genebr. in Miss. S. Dionis.
etc. yea, and how will it agree with that of our Lithurgists, who hold that
the offering of incense is an oblation of thanksgiving, not of propitiation,
expiation, or satisfaction: and that altogether concurring and answerable to
the old law (from whence they would derive and borrow their ceremonies)
forbidding to power any oil or put any incense upon the oblations which were
for sin. Leuit. 5.11.
And this we see to be directly contrary to that which they will make Saint
James say, a Sacrificer notwithstanding, say they both of the one and other
Testament. Furthermore there are many things contained therein, which might be
very well observed and noted for the conuincing of the same of error and
falsehood, as the Gloria patri, and the Gloria in excelsis, both which as we
shall see did enter a long time after into the Lithurgies, as also prayers for
the dead, prayer unto the holy virgin, etc. which are yet of later time then
the other, witness hereof is likewise Epiphanius, who condemned praying unto the
holy virgin five hundred years after, who would not have opposed himself as
a contrary party to an Apostle of Jesus Christ. And without doubt this
Lithurgie has been presented unto the world under this name, for no other
end, but that it might give credit and applause unto all these errors. But all
these particulars shall be spoken of every one in more fit and conueniente
places. One thing we will not omit, which runs as a long thread throughout
the whole length of the web of this Mass or Lithurgie, which is that there
is an infinite sort of sentences and whole clauses out of S. Paul his Epistles
wouen in here and there, notwithstanding that they were not written by S.
Paul, till after S. James his death.

All that which we have said of the word (...), S. Mark his Mass.
of (...), of the Prayer for the Monks and Monasteries, of the offering of
incense for the remission of sins, etc. let stand as said (that so we may
not be driven to unnecessary repetitions) and spoken concerning and about the
Mass of S. Mark also. And yet over and besides them, it has his particular
notes and brands of false and feyned counterfettednes, as namely, a prayer for
the Pope? where was the Pope then, in conscience tell me I pray you? or where
was he known then? For the Subdeacons, Readers, Chanters, etc. whereas we are
of the mind, that the Primitue Church knew not any degrees of Officers, under
Deacons. And a third prayer for the City of Alexandria, that God would keep
and preserve it in the virtuous life of the Martyr S. Mark, etc. S. Matthew his
Mass.
who can excuse these contradictions, these fooleries? And Again, in S. Matthew
his Mass, besides whatsoever has been discovered before, you may see the
blessing of the box, the Chalice, and the spoone for the taking up of wine: A
prayer for the Popes, Patriarchs, and Archbishops, though they were not
ordained and extant for many ages after: Mention of the Council of Nice, whose
Creed is likewise sung therein: Of the Councels of Constantinople, Ephesus,
etc. Of Saints, as that Chrysostom, Basil, Gregory the great, etc. Of all
Christian kings, whereas there was not one when S. Matthew lived, who now is he
that is able to protest for these Masses, that they are the Apostles, if he
consider either the matter, or the form thereof? But yet if any man will
reply and say, that for the substance thereof, or in gross these things are
true, notwithstanding that from time to time, there have been some small and
particular circumstances cast in and mingled amongst: expecting that we should
prove the contrary as we will; yet at the least, what man is there that shall
dare to be so bold, as to take upon him to distinguish of that which was the
Apostles, from that which was added by others? betwixt that which was from God,
and that which was from men? that which is authentike and original, from that
which is positive and of it self? etc. Of the Mass attributed to S. Andrew.
Concerning that which they pretend of S. Andrew, we have it not: but they
allege about the same one Abdias, a Bb. of Babylon, made and appointed
thereunto by the Apostles, who reports of himself, that he did see our Lord
in his humane body, etc. This witness (themselves being Judges) may easily be
controld and convicted of falsehood. He has seen (says he) our Lord, and he
alleges Hegesippus the Historian, who lived a hundred and sixty years after:
upon which proposition, S. Augustine against Faustus, lib. 11. and 22. cap. 80.
Against Adim. chapter 17. Of faith against Manich. chapter 38. Cont. aduer. leg. lib.
1. chapter 20. Distich. 21. Sancta Romana.
we may easily infer the conclusion. But which is more, S. Augustine
teaches us in many places, that this is for the most part the same book,
which the Manichies changed for the true history of the Apostles; when we
read therein the History of S. Thomas cursing a man, who by and by afterward
was torn in pieces of a lion. Of Maximilla refusing to lie with Eger her
husband, putting in her room her maid servant Eucleia, etc. cited by S.
Augustine in the same words, and gathered out of the forenamed heretical
books, which he condemned: and Pope Gelasius was of the same opinion. Add to
the former the miracles which he attributes to the Apostles, howbeit unworthy
of them in respect of their worthiness and dignity, as namely, the repairing
and mending of broken fingerstals, the turning of trees and stones into gold,
and a thousand such follies. A temple builded at Ephesus to S. John in his life
time, etc. whereas for more then two hundred years after, Origin was much
troubled how he might answer Celsus, asking of him what might be the cause
that Christians had not either temples or altars, etc. There is yet remaining
(as not spoken of) the Mass, Of the Mass attributed to S. Peter.
which they call S. Peter's, and which they hold to be the same with S. Mark
his Disciple, framed and contrived somewhat near unto that (says Turrian the
Jesuit) which is sung in great Greece, or that part of Italy which is called
Basilicata. But who will believe, or give any credit unto him? seeing that
Gregory tells us, and many others after and besides him, that S. Peter did
celebrate the Eucharist most plainly and simply without adding to the words
of the institution so much as the Lords prayer. And who can persuade himself
that the Church of Rome, holding so much of S. Peter, that under his name, it
exalts it self above the whole world; would offer him the injury, as to
make his Mass inferior to that of S. Gregory's, yea and to drive it out of
Rome, to restrain and keep it within the number of a few poor priests,
keeping the mountains of Basilicata? And such notwithstanding, altogether are
the proofs which they produce for their Masses or Lithurgies, which they
pretend to be the Apostles. Of the Mass attributed to S. Denis. Acts. 17.


Neither yet have they any firmer ground or more assured warrant for those
Masses which they attribute unto the Apostles their Disciples. It is said in
the Acts, that Denis Areopagita, was converted at Athens at the preaching of
S. Paul: a great mischief, if he shall not have left with us the same
institution, which he received of Paul: but yet verily it is greater if S.
Paul delivered any other to him, then he did to the Corinthians, yea such an
other as he never received, or was taught of Christ the Son of God. In the
mean time they clap us up together a Mass of his divine function, and
service, but far differing (as shall be seen) from that which they
themselves do exercise and practice, and yet notwithstanding, the same having
as little part and portion in Denis, as the others had in the Apostles. That
we may not allege against them how that the style is altogether differing
from the Apostolical manner of writing, neither yet the curious speculations
therein, propounding and setting before us, as it were in an Inventory
whatsoever is contained in the heavens, howsoever they be expressly forbidden by
that great Apostle, howbeit that he had been rapt and carried up into the
third heaven: because (it may be) that these things would not content the
contentious. Let us come and see how these books can be thought to be his,
having observed the proofs to the contrary, as they follow. Eusebius
reckoning up all the famous men in the Church, called by the name of Denis, and
whatsoever they had written, says not a word of this man. S. Jerome in his
Catalogue of worthy men, speaks of two or three of this name: but of this
man, or of any of his books he is not remembered. Origene, Chrysostom and all
the first Greeks and Latins, in like manner altogether as little. Gregor,
homil. 33, de december drachmis
Yea Gregory the great, citing the books of this Denis, calls him not
Areopagite. He speaks of the consecration of Monks: who can deny but that
these ceremonies were unknown more then three hundred years after Christ? And
that Denis speaks also of their shauing; which cannot be proved to have
been known or heard of, more then 600. years after: save that the Fathers in
general terms did admonish those of the Clergy, that they should not fashion
themselves after the vain manner of such men, who gloried in their long hair?
Of the use of Godfathers in Baptism; but who is he that is able to show out
of any old, either Greek or Latin writer, I say not this name: but so much as
any trace or small impression of the thing, for many ages after? Howsoever they
have been very exact and exquisite in describing all the ceremonies observed
in Baptism? Dionisius de divine. nominib.
But what Denis soever this might be, he never so much as once pretends that
it should be the Areopagite: for in his books of divine names, he reckons
up Clement the Philosopher, and they will have him to be the Roman: but it
appears that he was an Alexandrian; seeing it is so found and proved by a
place in his viii. book: he lived about the year 200. And therefore further,
or otherwise then he witnesses of himself, what have we to do to expect
and look what others do say? In like manner we see that Theodore Gaza in his
preface upon the Problemes of Alexander Aphrodiseus, Theod. Gaza in praef. in
proble. Aphrod. Erasmus upon Act. 17. Caietan upon the Acts cap. 17. and upon
the third of the Kings. Sixtus Senensis. lib. 4. in dictione, Athanasius.
dedicated unto Pope Nicholas the fifth, pronounces that these books of the
Hierarchy, were never made by Denis the Athenian. So says Erasmus also,
writing upon the Acts, and he adds his reason; I do not think (says he)
that in these first times the Christians had so many ceremonies, etc.
Laurentius Valla: that the learned of his time did attribute them unto one
Apollinaris: as also the Cardinal Caietan shows, that they could not be
his: and Sixtus Senensis does so faintlie and doubtfullie mantain the
contradictorie part, as that he rejects the questions concerning the old and
new Testament attributed to Athanasius: Seeing (says he) that in the fourth
question there is mention made of the mystical Divinity, which I think to
have been unknown at that time. To be short, I doubt not but that it will
befall the man whosoever he be that shall read them through, as it happened
to one Gulielmus Grocinus a worthy man, an English Divine, nothing suspected of
our adversaries; who, as Erasmus makes mention, having undertaken in the time
of king Henry the eight, publikelie to expound this writer in S. Paul's Church
in London; did strain himself mightily, even from the beginning to take away
all doubt from such as should once imagine that Denis Areopagite should not be
the author thereof: but scarce was he proceeded to the midst, before that he
vnsaide it again, and was near to have craved pardon and foregiuenes of his
auditors, whereby we may note what consciences our adversaries bear about
them, not letting to pay out any manner of counterfeyted coin whatsoever.
Nicen. Synod. 2.
Against all this they set the council of Nice: but let us mark, that it is
the second, held about the adoration and worshipping of Images, about the year
800. and therewithal, that in the same, he is not called Areopagite.
Constantinop. Syn. 3.
They allege also the Council of Constantinople the third, wherein there is a
certain place (though cold and blunt enough,) alleged about his books against
the Monothelites. This was held about the year 680. But what is this for to
prove unto us the antiquity thereof. For as concerning that which they take
out of the first Homily of Origin upon S. John, they might blush and be
ashamed, seeing he names none but the Manichies, and Arrians in that place:
and how long was that after him? But what shall we say, seeing in France, where
it is held that he exercised his Apostleshippe; we have so negligentlie looked
to the keeping of this Mass, as that we had it not till after the year 900.
or thereabout: when Michaell the Emperor of Constantinople sent it unto Jews
the son of Charles the bald? where we must not forget that so great ignorance
reigned when it was brought unto us, so able were we to give a sound and
upright judgment upon it; as that to the end we might be able to celebrate
and keep the same yearlie upon S. Denis his day, in the Abbay of S. Denis
near Paris, (as it was then appointed,) it must needs be written in Latin,
in which language it is read as yet unto this day. Let us come to Clement. They
show us his Lithurgie. I dare take them upon their oath, Of the Mass
attributed to Clement.
to speak in what estimation they have it concerning the goodness and
sufficiency thereof: and whether that they would think themselves to have made
a right consecration, and according to the laws of their Canons, if they
should be ruled by the same: and yet notwithstanding, Eusebius. lib. 3. cap. 16.
S. Hieron. de eccl. Scriptor.
they are not ashamed to make it a buckler of theirs. Eusebius and S. Jerome
allow not any work of this Clements, (from whom every day does give us a
new spring of volumes,) save only one Epistle written to the Corinthians:
(and yet that same is lost and perished,) although they let not to confess
that there are many books that walk abroad under his name: but such as are
very much swaruing from the doctrine of the Apostles: those especially which
are entitled his reuiewes, (...): for Ruffinus alleged by S. S. Hieron. in
Apol. aduers. Ruff. Did. 15. sancta Romana. Epiph. haeres. 27. Sixth. l. 2.
Bibl.
Jerome, does affirm that they contain the heresy of the Eunomians in such
evident and manifest manner, as that it might seem to have been Eunomius
himself speaking in them. Gelasius the Pope gives the same censure upon the
book called Itinerarium Petri, or S. Peter his voyage. And Epiphanius adds,
that the Ebionites did make use of the same, for the proving of their heresies.
And the Inquisition (says Sixtus Senensis) has likewise disalowed of, and
condemned them. As for his Epistles unto S. James the Bb. of Jerusalem; it is
apparantlie clear that he was dead 30. years before that S. Clement could be
Bb. of Rome: and yet notwithstanding, he takes upon him this faculty: But
how can it be maintained being before the death of S. Peter? And yet after all
this, who is there that will stand forth, and warrant us, that there is no
falshoode in the books of Constitutions, newly brought over from Candie, by a
certain Venetian called Capellus, in which we may read this pretended
Lithurgie of S. Clements: seeing that the Council of Constantinople held in
Trullo, does complain that these Constitutions of Clement have been
falsified: seeing also that the Cardinal Bessarion, not knowing possibly how
to approve the words of consecration used therein, does utterly reject the
authority thereof, as Apocrypha, and openly suspected of, being counterfeite
and fained. Now therefore what have they merited, or what service have these
books of Clementes done unto the Church, since that time, having been
condemned by the Primitive Church, that they should now find allowance and
approbation in our Church? Shall books containing the seed of controversies
be admitted as deciders of controversies? what should let us to condemn
every particular of the doctrines which they contain, seeing they were every
where, and universally then condemned in the Church? But let us see some notes
of untruth in them, such as are in others, and withal such particular ones, as
are proper unto them alone. Behold, prayer for Confessors, not received (as
says Bellarmine) for the space of 700. years after in the Church of Rome: and
so they would prove that from that time there was a Pope: That the remainder
of the Euchariste should be cast into the Sextens chamber or rooms called
Pastophoria, which in old time were certain galleries in the Temples of the
Painims, appointed for lodgings for such as resorted thither for to offer
sacrifice: and how short came poor Christians, as then of having any such
Temples or buildinges.

Let us make an end of that which remains concerning this matter, Decretall
Epistles.
all after the same manner: what shall we say then of those goodly Epistles,
written by the first Bbs. of Rome, wherein so oftentimes mention is made of the
Mass? shall they also swing in the same balance, and obtain as vile an end?
This would (it may be) but anger and vex them too much. But who can endure
that it should be thought that such Epistles should be attributed unto so
great Clearkes, and personages, and that in those ages, wherein the Latin
tongue most flourished? being more full of incongruities and barbarismes, then
ever were found amongst the very Goths, as for example: Episcopi sunt
obediendi, sunt vener andi, non sunt detrahendi, and in that, written to
Euaristus: non sunt respuendi, non insidiandi, again, in an other to
Telesephorus: Also, ab iis omnes se fideles cauere debent, and such like: who
ever spoke such Latin? or else who cannot say (if they did speak so, that of
all the Latin, the B bs. of Rome (the head city of the whole world) were the
most barbarous and the least Latinistes? But is it in these pretended Epistles,
that we find these goodly Decrees? Of Clement the first. Let not the Laity
enter into the Presbiterie, whilst Mass is in saying: when as at this time,
not 300. years after, there were not any, either Temples or Presbiteries:
witnesses herein are Origene and Arnobius. And as we shall see, the name of
the Mass was as little amongst the Latins, and less amongst the Greeks. Of
Alexander the first. Let not a Priest say any more then one Mass a day. De
Consecr. D. 1. Can. Sufficit. Can Nocte Sancta, etc.
And of Telesephorus: That he may say it thrice upon Christ's day, and that
because the people flock and run together by thousands unto Christianity, and
that every one is desirous to communicate upon that day; yea, he had an
express commandment. And thus they every where deceive with the name of
Mass, in stead of Communion or Eucharist.

And yet of all this while, have they not got so much as one Mass, neither of
the Apostles, nor of their Disciples, neither yet of the first Bbs. of Rome, by
turning over and pressing all the records of one hundred years space after
the death of Christ. And although we should allow for good and current
whatsoever they allege, how far off notwithstanding should we find them from
that great Mass of these our times, and how far to seek for their private
Masses? But they replye, who is able to prove any thing to you, seeing you deny
so many Testimonies and books? Nay rather, how can we receive and admit of
them, seeing they belie themselves? or build our selves upon them, seeing they
pluck down themselves? having received the black sentence by the Primitive
Church, and being confounded by their own mouths and words? And in all this
who goes away with the loss? our adversaries, for producing false witness: or
we for charging them therewithal? they for offering to make up their payment
of counterfeyte coin, and that in a bargain of merchandise of such prices and
worth: or we for touching, and making an assay thereof? But what is the
greatest gain that rises by such faining and counterfeyting of books?
Certes, even such as ordinarily attends Satan, in all the travel and pain
he puts himself unto; namely, to draw and allure, and afterward to
keep man kind in the snares of ignorance or error, by his counterfeyte and
fained devises: The same which fell upon those deceyuing Spirits in the first
ages of the christian Churches, for foisting in the goodly Gospells of
Nicodemus, S. James, S. Bartholomew, S. Thomas and others, which was a
derogating from the authority of the holy and true Scriptures, so much as in
them lay, by the bringing in of those which were false. What did the Manichies
pretend, says S. Augustine, by their false Acts of the Apostles? Even
nothing else but to weaken the truth of the holy history, and to strengthen
the arm of falshoode: which suteth very well with that which Leo the first
said; That these pretended writings of the Apostles, which under this fair
name, contained the seeds of many false doctrines, ought not only to be
forbidden in the church, but quite banished, yea burned. Again, it is most
certain, that one of the hotest persecutions that ever the Primitive Church
endured, and whereof it so grievously complayneth, was that which was kindled
with the bellows of false and counterfeyte writings; and those proceeding so
far, as even to shrowde themselves under the name of Jesus Christ, of the
truth it self: so ragingly did the spirit of lying ouerflow, and so
licentiously did he run loose at his liberty in these first ages: and as
there was not to be found a more deadly wound, then that against the purity of
the Gospel: so the ancient Fathers did fortify and arm themselves, to the
uttermost of their might, for the keeping out of the same: as Ireneus, Iustine;
Origene, Melito and others, by distinguishing the Canonical books from the
Apocrypha: whereas our adversaries now a days, that they may have the better
means to support and bear out their lies, are nothing so careful for, or so
zealously and earnestly set upon any thing, as to shake and weaken the
authority of the holy Canonical Scriptures: and that partly by slipping in
amongst the^ such books as the Primitive Church had cut off as dead and
unprofitable members; partly by reviving, yea by new coining such store of
such manner of fables; such store of such and such fooleries, as possibly they
could devise, and al to that end, that amongst so much filthy and durtie
stuff as they brought, (and as had been of old swept and cast out of the
Church by the ancient Fathers) they might at the least find out some
scantlins more or less, of the stuff wherewith they did infect and corrupt
their Church.

CHAP. III. What manner of divine Service was used in the Christian Church, in
the time of the Apostles and their Disciples.
NOw it may not content us to know that the Mass which is used at this day;
was no part of the divine service of God in the Christians Church, in the time
of the Apostles and their Disciples, nor yet any other thing coming near
unto the same: but we must go further and search what manner of service it
was, though we be put to fish and find out the truth, from the botomles lake
of lying deceitfulnes: a thing become very hard and difficult for us to
atchieue by reason of the piled heaps of ceremonies, and the mighty multiplying
of Novelties, for men to play and sport themselves withal, throughout the
whole continuance of so many ages: and because also that besides all such, we
shall be forced to undertake the clearing of this so intricate and entangled a
matter, by the dark and dim traces (as they may be found) which are apparent
in the books that are left us, and which our adversaries themselves do
approve: to the end that on the one side we may be able to discern of
Superstition, from which we must depart, and that on the other side, we may not
hang in suspense, what is the true service of God, whereunto we are to cleave,
and according whereunto we ought as near as may be to desire and labor for
the reformation of the Church. Now this ought to suffice us, 1. Cor. 11.
that S. Paul has told us, that he has not taught the Churches any thing,
but that which he had received from the Lord, and which also he has declared
unto us: and again, that S. Peter by the books of our very adversaries, is
said to have tied and kept himself to his institution. And who is he that
would receive or believe otherwise of any one, or all the rest? but yet
notwithstanding, men will not be content herewithall, we must be forced for
their satisfaction to handle the matter in a more large and ample manner.

And here first we are to consider what S. Angustine tells us: that is, What
the service was amongst the Christians.
that the church of God, yea of Christ had his beginning in Adam, and shall end
in this world by the last Christian, which is as much to say, as that there is
but one Church ever since the beginning, even unto the worlds end, howsoever it
have his diverse periods: amongst all which that was the chief and principal
which happened upon the change of Iudaisme into Christianity; for to speak
properly, a good Jew was no other thing then a Christian, by faith looking
and waiting for the Messiah, which is Christ: as in like manner a Christian is
a true and natural Jew of the true seed of Abraham; in as much as by the same
faith he has received Jesus for the Christ. The divine service likewise
amongst the Jews, (notwithstanding that they were darkened in their opinions,
by the perverse glosses of the Pharisees) was abiding sincere and pure, purged
and free from all Idolatry, in as great measure, as ever at any time before,
when our Savior Christ came into the world: whereupon we see, he made it not
strange, neither yet his Disciples to be conversant in their Temple and
Synagogues. But on the contrary there was the place, where our Lord did choose
oftentimes to take occasion to teach and instruct the people, and to interpret
the Scriptures, which were therein diligently read; as in like manner his
Apostles did after his example: John 18. Acts 15.
and to this end we have infinite store of plain and manifest places, both in
the Evangelists and in the Acts: As then our Lord came not to abolish but to
fulfill the law: seeing likewise that the Apostles were not sent to change the
pure Service of God, instituted and maintained in the Synagogues, but rather to
establish and confirm it, we need not doubt, but that they did fashion and
conform themselves according to the pattern which our Lord had showed them
for the performing of this holy service: seeing it was not any cause to
disanul or destroy the coming of our Lord and Savior, who did by his only
sacrifice and offering up of himself, abolish all the Legal Sacrifices, which
were nothing, but in as much as they were applied unto him.

Now the Jews had in every town and city a Synagogue, whereinto they
assembled themselves every Sabbath day, there to pray unto God all together,
and there to hear the reading of the law, and the expounding of the same:
again, according to the bigness of the City, they had it divided (as is
amongst us) into many parishes, so that the Rabbines do reckon in Jerusalem to
the number of five hundred, and they were called in Hebrew (...) and (...) as
if one should say, Houses for Congregations, Bathei Midrascoth. Fagius in
Leuit. Paraph. Chald. cap. 231. Luke 4 18. Acts 15.21.
Sermons, Expositions, etc. Of this order we have the steps and prints in the
Gospel: Jesus (says S. Luke) came into Nazareth where he had been brought
up, and entered into the Synagogue on the Sabbath day, according to the custom,
and stood up for to read, etc. and lighting upon the place of Esaias, The
spirit of the Lord is upon me, because he has anointed me, etc. This day
(says he) is this Scripture accomplished in your hearing, etc. In the Acts
likewise, S. James says, For Moses of old time has in every City them
that preach him: seeing he is read in the Synagogues every Sabath day, etc.
And such was the order in those Synagogues that S. Paul went unto, confuting
of the Jews by the Scriptures every Sabath day: for Paul and Barnabas
(says Saint Luke) being entered into the Synagogue upon the Sabath day, they
sat down, and after the lecture of the Law and Prophets the chief of the
Synagogue sent unto them saying: Men and Brethren, If you have any word of
exhortation (which is signified by the word (...)) for the people, speak on:
then Paul stood up, and made a sign with his hand, etc. Where by the way we
have to observe, Acts 15.42.
that upon the other days of the week (...), (that is on the days betwixt
Sabath and Sabath,) they beseeched and entreated the Gentiles to preach the
Gospel unto them, and not as some have delivered, the Sabath following: and
thus we are come to the reading of the Law, and the ordinary expounding of the
same in the Synagogues. But this exercise of Piety, which was practiced in the
holy congregations under the Law, began with prayers, and those prayers
(according to the opinion which is held most probable) with a general
Confession of the people acknowledging their sins, a Confession accustomed of
old in all their Sacrifices, Leuit. 16.5. and the 16. Fagius in Paraph. Chald.
Leuit. chapter 16.16 Numb. chapter 5. Thalmud in the treatise of Sacrifices.
which otherwise without this should have missed of their appointed end, and by
consequent have become unprofitable: and besides that the marks and signs
thereof are in the law, and the pattern and platform thereof in the
Prophets: we have the same particularly in the books of the Jews in these
words: We have sinned O Lord, we have done wickedlie, we have dealt
deceitfullie in thy sight, thy people and all the house of Israel, we repent
our selves thereof, and are ashamed for the same. And therefore O Lord we
beseech thee forgive us our sins, our iniquities, and our transgressions, as
it is written in the book of Moses thy servant, etc. And this confession is
called (...) a verbal Confession, which brought the Jews to remember and call
to mind the true use of Sacrifices, vz. a witnessing against themselves, and
condemning of their deserts and merits: as unto Christians the benefit of the
death and passion of our Lord, without the which both the one and the other
should lie dead in their sins. Then there followed certain Psalms of David,
and other Prophets, which were sung clean through, and certain (...)
thankesgiuings for the free mercies of God bestowed upon his Church, and are
held to have been instituted by Esdras, at such time as he set down orders
for the people returned out of captivity, as is to be seen in the prescript
form amongst them: afterward the reading of the law was divided into 51.
Sedarim, or Pars^ioth, that it is to say, Sections, and of the Prophets, into
as many Haphtaroth, that is to say, openinges of the book, lessons, or as
others take it, Dismissings, because the Service ended there, to the end they
might be of proportionable number with the 50. or 51. Sabathes of the common
year, or to the 54. of the Leap year. Next after this reading and expounding
of the Law, there followed a general prayer for the necessities and wantes
as well of the Church, as of the state, whether public or private, and finally:
the Congregation received the blessing pronounced upon the people, by the mouth
of the Minister, or chief of the Synagogue, and so they had leave to depart.
This was their ordinary service: but in the great feasts, and especially in
the feast of Easter, whereunto answers the ceremony of the holy Supper,
there was this over and above, namely, after the blessings and thanksgiuings
before mentioned, a long prayer delivered by the mouth of the householder (...)
wherein thanks was rendered unto the Lord God of eternity, for that of his sole
mercy he feeds the whole world, for that he had delivered them from Egypt,
and given the^ in possession the promised land, for that he had vouchsafed to
scale up the truth of his covenant in their flesh, and to declare his law unto
them: he did therein likewise humbly entreat him, for his only goodness sake,
to take pity upon his Israel, on his Jerusalem, on his Tabernacle, to hasten
the coming of the Prophet Elias, that is to say of the forerunner, and to give
them to see the days of the Messiah, the Redemer of Israel, etc. which done,
and every one of those which were present, having in a prayer uttered in a low
voice, severally and apart ratified this general prayer, they proceeded to the
distributing of bread, and of the cup, with a prescript form of words, and
that in remembrance, as well of the misery they had suffered, as of the mercy
they had tasted in their deliverance from Egypt.

The first Christians then framed themselves after this manner of service, That
the service of Christians was derived from thence.
excepted one that (after they had with all honorable reverence and tender
compassion buried the old Synagogue) they prayed upon the Lords day, that is
to say, upon the first day of the week, in remembrance of the resurrection,
in stead of the Sabath, and brought in the reading of the Evangelists, and the
Epistles of the Apostles, with that of the law and the Prophets, out of which
the Bb. or Pastor did expound somewhat unto them; then after these lectures the
holy supper was celebrated amongst the faithful, by the reciting of the
institution of the same, and the distributing of the bread and cup unto the
people, the which for the most part were taken from their own offerings, for
the use of the holy Sacraments; which done, there followed certain Psalms of
thanksgiving for the spiritual good things received of God at this holy table,
after which the assembly brake up: and all this was done and said, even till
all was ended in great simplicity and singlenes, and in a lauguage understood,
and in such garments as all the people did wear, as it shall be certainly
proved hereafter from point to point.

Of the Confession of sins, the first profession that every Christian must
make, Matthew 3. Mar. 1
we have some prints and marks in S. John Baptist, for such as came unto him
confessed their sins and were baptized: for without the knowledge of sin, no
man can come to the acknowledgement of grace: Acts 13.
and the shutting up of Paul his sermon to the Jews in the Synagogue at
Antioch, stands upon these words, Be it known unto you that by Jesus Christ,
remission of sins is preached unto you, etc. whereby likewise we see that they
which were converted by the preaching of the Apostles, were touched with
compunction of heart and confessed their sins: and hence comes that which
Lyranus tells us upon those words in Leuiticus. And the high Priest laying
both his hands upon the Goat, Leuit. 16.
shall confess the iniquities of the children of Israel, etc. Not (says
he) declaring all their particular sins, for that were impossible: but in
general, as we do in the confession usually made in the beginning of the
Mass. And yet notwithstanding, now a days the Priest has never a word that
way, save only for himself, whereas the Pastor holding the place of the
high Priest, (that is, which is the mouth of the people in the Church,) ought
to confess unto God the iniquities of that people, in setting before them for
the remission thereof the benefit of the Sacrifice of his only begotten
son Jesus Christ our Lord: which should make us believe, (together with other
signs and marks, which we shall see hereafter,) that this part of service was
of good praise and commendation: as for reading, it was ordinary (as we have
seen) in the Synagogues; whereinto the Apostles came for to instruct and teach
the Jews: Acts 20.
and for the public assemblies we have a manifest example thereof in the
Acts, where S. Paul (the Disciples being come together for to break bread,
that is, to celebrate the Lords Supper,) handles the word of God amongst
them, and continues his speech unto midnight, that is, he did not only read
unto them, but expounded it unto them also; and drew out from thence doctrines
for their use after the manner used in preaching: and likewise he ordinarily
calls his office and function, the Ministry or administration of the word.
And as for prayers to be made for the advancement of the glory of God, for the
necessity of the Church, and state politic, the heads and members of the
same, and for our own salvation, we have both precept and prescript form
delivered us by our Lord; Mat. 6. etc. Mat. 6. 1. Tim, 2.
the admonition of S. Paul, to make intercessions, prayers, supplications, etc.
for all men, for kings, for men set in authority, etc. and the example of the
Apostles, perseuering in prayer and in the breaking of bread, etc. and S.
Augustine does by name, expound that place of S. Paul of solemn prayers, of
the Lords Supper: and as for the administration thereof, we have the form set
down in the 1. to the Corinthians 10. 1. Cor. 10. and 11.
and 11. under the signs of bread and wine, which were wont to be brought to
the common feasts of Christians; they were blessed, according to the
institution of the Lord, as it is there set down; for the communicating of his
body and blood, and in remembrance of his death, which he suffered for our
sins. And this whole action was intermingled with Psalms, and spiritual
giuinges of thanks, taken and derived from the example of our Lord, who after
the holy Supper sung a Psalm with his Apostles: according to the exhortation
likewise of S. Paul, speaking thus unto us; Be ye filled with the spirit,
speaking amongst your selves in Psalms and Hymns, and spiritual songs, etc.
Ephesians. 5.18.19 Colos. 3.
giving thanks always for all things, in the name of our Lord Jesus, unto
our God and Father: upon a solemn or festival day, it is clear and evident
by these words in the Acts: Acts 20.
And the first day of the week the Disciples being assembled, etc. that is to
say, upon the Lords day: confirmed likewise, 1. Cor. 11. where these
assemblies may seem to be appointed properly for the holy Supper of our
Lord. 1. Cor. 11.
To be brief, that all was done in a known tongue, 1. Cor. 14.
we need no other witness then S. Paul, I esteem more (says he) of five
words in the Church spoken to my understanding, then often thousand in an
unknown tongue, etc. And again, this verily was the scope and drift of the
Spirit of God in the gift of tongues.

Now concerning all that has gone before, especially, that of the more often
celebrating of the holy Supper by the faithful, exercising themselves
therein, during the continuance of the first love and zeal, then they did
afterward; it is confirmed by all them that have written any thing of sacred
functions: but we will insist upon and press them only, who are of most
authority and best allowance. For Confession, Lyranus has told us, that they
had a general confession of the sins of the people in the beginning of their
service, imitating therein the manner of the Jews in their prayers and
sacrifices. And to him let us join S. Ciprian as next: The holy Hierarchy
(says he) that is the Minister of the Church, whom the holy Ghost touches
with compunction: Ciprianus sieve quis alius de card. operib, Christi.
let him watch thereto, let him dwell therein, and keep holy the same, etc.
and let him pray boldly and confidentlie for his own ignorances, and those of
the peoples, by making a confession from a wounded heart, etc. Of Psalms and
reading of lessons out of the Scriptures, Walafridus speaks: Who first
instituted and appointed lessons to be read out of the Epistles of the
Apostles, Walafrid. de divine. Oftic. c 22. Microlog. c. 1.
and out of the Gospels before the celebrating of the Sacrifice, it is not
certainly known, but it is thought the Apostles their first successors did so
ordain, especially, because the celebration of these Sacrifices is commanded
in the Gospels: and in the Apostle is taught the manner how it must be done,
etc. And in the same Chapter, Telesphorus (says he) the ninth Bb. of Rome,
ordained that the Gospels and Epistles should be read in the assemblies of the
Christians, in stead of the prophetical writings: And again, Before Pope
Celestine, that is before the year 430. or thereabout, there was nothing
rehearsed before the consecration, but the Epistle and Gospel: Again, (says
he) there was a time when there was nothing read but Saint Paul: namely, (as
may be presumed) the place which concerns the holy Supper: Albinus Flaccus
in like manner says: Albinus Flaccus de diuinis officiis. Rabanus de instit.
cleric. Berno Aguiensis. cap. 1.
Heretofore the Epistle of Saint Paul only was recited, and after it the
holy Gospel; and then the Mass was celebrated: Rabanus likewise, uses almost
the very same words, save only that he adds, that this fashion of
singing was not used in the Church in such sort, as it is at this day. All
these cited Authors were about the year 800. and 900. The Abbotte Berno
alleging the life of S. Gregory: He binds up (says he) into one volume
Gelasius his book of the solemn orders and Customs used in Masses, cutting
off much, changing a little, and putting to somewhat, and calls it the book
of the Sacraments: and it may be, that in the former times, there was nothing
read but the Epistles of Saint Paul: Then afterward it fell out that other
Lessons, Amalar. lib. 3. cap. 5.
both of the old and of the new Testament were mingled therewithal, in such
order ad manner as solemn things are wont to require. Amalarius Bishop of
Trire: Celestine was the first that ordained that the Psalms of David should
be sung by course: not (says he) that they had been used to have been
sung: for before time the Epistle of Saint Paul, and the holy Gospel were
only wont to be read, and afterward the Sacrifice was celebrated: and the
Mass began by the foresaid Lecture, where upon custom has retained it
until this day in the vigilles of Easter and Whitsontide: that is to say at
these solemn feasts, wherein, now in these latter days every man appointed
himself to receive the holy Supper. And this I would have marked by the way
against those that find fault with the reformed Churches, for having taken
the chief ground and principal foundation for their prescript form of
administering and receiving of the holy Supper out of the first Epistle of
Saint Paul to the Corinthians, chap. 11. where he rehearses the institution
of our Lord: seeing they may well perceive, that it was so practiced in the
first old age, as their own Authors do witness unto them. Of Psalms, Radulph
Deane of Tongres, says: That the old Divine Service consisted in Psalms and
in Lessons, but that the Psalms made up the greater part, insomuch as that
the Psalter was run through there every week: and he gives a reason for
it: Because (says he) that it is a perfect abridgement of Divinity, wherein
David has spoken more like an Evangelist then a Prophette: and furthermore, it
is to us and to all true repenting sinners, an example of the mercy of God:
and that for the same cause the reading of Saint Paul his Epistles was so much
used, as wherein we are instructed and taught the manner of his conversion and
profiting; Walaf. c. 26
in them likewise observing the rich and bountiful goodness of God: and in like
manner Walafridus in Chapter 26. Now after these Lectures, there was a place
wherein they used to speak of the preaching that had been made and framed
thereof: for the Bishop or Pastor was wont to expound some one place or
other unto the people, whereupon we read these words in the Lithurgie,
attributed unto Clemente. How that after the Lessons the Bishop speaks unto
the people by way of exhortation; and hereuppon sprung so many Homilies of
the old Fathers, Clemens, sieve alius in Liturgia.
as well Greek, as Latin: as likewise the Bbs. when they took their oath, did
bind themselves by promise to perform this duty, in sign and token whereof
the book of the Gospel was delivered to them with these words: Take the
Gospel and preach it unto the people, that is committed unto thee: as we
shall see hereafter. The traces and steps whereof may seem still to be seen
in that part of the Mass, called in French the Prosne; wherein the Curates do
lay open unto the people some rudimentes of their Christian faith: but the
ignorance, or else the riotousnes of the Prebates, has now through tract of
time so prevailed with these Copiers out of books, as that they have left out
what was mentioned of making of Sermons; and go on with a smooth foot, from
the Lecture to the Offertorie or offering, which Walafridus and Berno affirm to
be sprung up, Walafr. c. 22. Berno Augiensis c. 1.
ex prioris populi consuetudine, of the custom of the Jewish Church.

And these offerings in the Christian Church, were for the most part of bread
and wine, or of the first fruits thereof in corn and in grapes, and these
were consecrated unto God by prayer; afterward they took that which was
necessary for the Communion of the holy Supper: and look what remained, it
was either eaten of all in common, or else given to the poor. And further, let
it be marked, that both of them say in proper and apt terms: We do not
read it in plain and evident forte, who it was that added unto our Lithurgies,
that which is sung inter offerendum, at the offering: and as little of that
singing by course, used in the communion: and as certainly do we receive,
and verily believe, that the holy Fathers in the first times did offer and
communicate without any voice heard: which also is furthermore observed upon
the holy Saturday of Easter. Whereby we perceive very clearelie, that the
Bbs. or Priests did not say, Offero, Sacrifico, Offerimus, Sacrificamus: but
that according to the example of our Lord, after they had pronounced and
uttered the holy words of the institution of the Sacrament, they gave it unto
the people without saying any thing: all those precise and strict ceremonies,
coupled and fastened to a number of words, uttered with one breath and to
certain signs of the Cross, etc being crept in a long time after: and
whereof these honest fellows can render no other reason, save that according
to the measure of the growth of the Church in mightines, Walaf. c. 22
there was show and appearance, that it was meet that it should likewise grow in
pomp and ceremonies. And moreover concerning the circumstances of time, and of
the hour, they say sometimes that it should be before: sometimes they say,
that it should be after Noone: sometimes at Morning: sometimes at Night: and
sometimes in the night season. And for the place, that it was in private
houses, in caves, in dens, and holes, and in most secret places. And for
garments: In the first ages (say they) Masses were said with common apparel,
the priestlie robes having altered and increased from time to time, which
notwithstanding, Walafr, c. 23
there are some in the parts of the world, lying Eastward, which yet use them
as at the first. And as for vessels: The cups in the Primitive Church, were of
glass and of wood, etc. Then (say they) were our Bbs. of gold.

Thus then you hear what these industrious searchers out of the ancient
service of the Church do say, using notwithstanding, the Phrases and terms of
the age, wherein they lived, though unknown amongst the former, as those of the
Mass of the Sacrifice, etc. And they might also have seen in their times and
days, the Books of the rites, or prescript forms used in the Church; before
that the authority of Popes, suborned and underpropped by the power of great
Princes, for so long a continuance of time had abolished both the use and
memory thereof. But to the end that we may not think them to go by guess,
in that which they say; neither yet that we may seem to repose our selves upon
that only which they say, nor regarding how much or little they agree with the
former, and more honorable reports of antiquity, drawing near unto the times
of the Apostles: let us hear in what manner Iustine Martyr about the year
160. describes the holy Supper: On the day (says he) which is called
Sundaye, Justinius martyr, in Apologia, 2. (...).
(that is to say the Lords day) there is an assembling and coming together of
all manner of people, dwelling either in the fields or in the cities into one
place, and there are read the Acts or Records of the Apostles, and the
writings of the Prophets, (...), so long as the time would suffer. Then when
the Reader had left off reading o (...), that is to say, he which was President
or chief in the assembly, (that is to say the Bb. or Pastor,) delivers an
admonition and exhortation, (...), by way of discourse, tending to the stirring
of them up to follow and practice those good things: afterward we rise all
as one, and send our prayers unto God. And as we have said before, prayer
being ended, the bread, the wine, and the water are brought (...): and he
which directs the action (...) delivers with all the power and might in
him, (...)
prayers and thanksgiving: and the people (...), that is, consents, add
thereunto their approving voice, affection and blessing, saying Amen. Then
follows the distribution, which is to every one present, and the
communicating (...), that is, of the things which were blessed by
thanksgiving, and they send of the same unto those that are absent, by the
Deacons. In the end, they which are of ability, and are moved therewithal,
give every one according as it pleases him: and that which is gathered,
abides, (...), (...)
with him which is president or chief amongst them, wherewithal he made
provision for the fatherless, widows, sick persons, captives and needy
strangers, etc. And in another place going before: After (says he) that we
have washed, that is to say, baptized him that has received the faith, (...)
and joined himself with us, we bring him into the assembly and congregation
of the brethren, where they are come together to make their common prayers,
both for themselves, (...)
and for him that has been enlightened: and for all manner of persons in what
place of the world soever, etc. When prayers are thus ended, we salute one
another with a holy kiss: and then there is brought unto him that is president
(...), the bread and the cup of water and wine: and he having taken them,
gives praise and glory unto the father of all things, in the name of the
Son and of the holy Ghost: and makes a great thanksgiving, (...), for that
he has vouchsafed to think them worthy of these things: which being ended,
(...)
all the people (...), join and put their blessing thereto, saying; Amen:
which being Hebrew, signifies as much as, So be it. Afterward (...), the
Pastor having blessed them, (...), and the people answering to this blessing;
those whom we call Deacons, give to every one of those that are present to
receive of the bread and wine and water, so blessed by the said thanksgiving,
(...), and they carry it to those that are absent. And this food is called
amongst us (...), the Eucharist or Sacrament of thanksgiving, which it is not
lawful for any one to receive, which has not before received the truth of our
doctrine by faith, and which has not been washed with the baptism of
regeneration for the remission of sins etc. Now in these two places thus
laying out the form and pattern for the manner of the celebrating of the holy
supper, in the Primitive church, (for our adversaries cite them in these words,
(...), (that is) of the Lithurgie or divine office) we have all that which is
before mentioned, together with the evident marks of the whole Jewish service,
and yet we shall hardly be able therein to find out the Mass. Therein we well
behold and see a flock of Christians, and one Pastor which does call them
together to serve God, and to be fed with his word, and with his sacraments:
the reader that reads the holy scripture: the pastor that frames some
exhortation out of the same unto the people: (...)
devout prayers in a loud voice offered up to God before and after, as well for
the Church, as for all other men. Then afterward how the bread, the wine and
water are brought, and not offered, which are blessed by the Pastor, by
thanksgiving, uttered in a language that is understood of all, and not
consecrated, neither turned or changed by the whispring and muttering of
certain words, the people joining therewithal their vows and inward
affections, and becoming a party in this service. Finally, after a mutual
kiss, the sign of the holy charity, which ought to be nourished amongst them
as the members of Christ: the sacraments are distributed by the Deacons to
every one: yea, unto the^ which through infirmity were not able to come, as a
sign of that conjunction and unity, which they had with the rest: Tertul. in
Apo. (...), Instino, quod Tertulliano caetus. Pro mora finis, that is, either
of the world, or of the Empire.
what can there be found more unlike unto the ceremony of the Mass? or more
like and answerable unto the simplicity of the reformed Church? Tertullian in
his Apologeticall Oration some fifty years after: Now (says he) I will
declare unto you the practices of the Christian faction, to the end that when I
have refuted the evil, I may show you the good: we come together into one
congregation, to have recourse unto God by prayer, forcing him (as it were) by
the joining together of all our prayers: and this violent inforcement is well
pleasing and acceptable unto God. We pray for Emperors, for their Officers,
and Potentates, for the estate present; for the quieting of matters, and for
the deferring and putting off of the end: we come together for the
communicating of the holy scriptures, if the estate of the time present do
press us, or to prevent somewhat to come, or to take acknowledgement of the
present: and thus we shall feed our faith with holy speeches, we relieve and
succor our hope, we make strong our confidence: and therewithal likewise
fortify our discipline and manner of government, by the urgent and incessant
rehearsal and renewing of the memory of good precepts. In our congregation
are likewise used exhortations, reprehensions, and the exercise of sacred
censures: for there matters are judged with great aduisement, as is wont to be
done of such men, as assuredly know, that the face of God is toward them, to
behold and see their doings. And it is a great foreshew of the judgment to
come, if any one amongst us have sinned so deeply, as to be excluded from the
communication of prayer, and of the assembly, and from all manner of having
any thing to do with this holy society and fellowship. The Elders that are
best approved and found most faithful, (...), Iustino.
do sit as Presidentes in our assemblies, advanced and called to that
dignity, not through any sums of money, but upon the weight and sway of the
good testimony, Tertul. de Corona milit.
which they have given, etc. And at their hands (says he in another place)
we receive the Lords Supper. In the second book written by him to his wife,
speaking of the exercises of piety, which a woman married to an unbelieving
man could not enjoy. Tertull. l. 2. ad vxorem.
At whose hand (says he) shall she desire the Sacrament of bread? and of
whom shall she participate and take the cup? What shall her husband talk
and commune of with her, or what shall she talk and commune of with him? Do
you think that it will be meet for one to be talking of Tauernes in the time
of the receiving of the Lords Supper, or of Hell etc? And where then shall be
our due and holy remembering of God, our calling upon Christ, the nourishing of
our faith, and the intermingled reading of the scriptures? Tertull. de anima.
In his book of the Soul: There is (says he) a sister amongst us, unto whom
is given the gift of revelation: In the midst of divine service, she is cast
into an ecstasy: She is brought into the company of the Angels, and sometimes
into the presence of the Lord himself, Adlocutiones proferuntur.
etc. Again according to the scriptures which are read, or the Psalms which
are sung, or the Sermons which are made, or the prayers which are offered, new
matter of visions is administered and offered unto her: she sees and hears
the Sacraments, etc. In which words he may seem to have comprehended in brief
all the substance of the ancient divine service. Tertull. de Pudicit. c. 10.
For the circumstances in his book of shamefastness, there was alleged unto
him a chalice, whereupon was painted our Lord seeking the stray sheep: Out of
this cup (says he) thou will drink, that is, derive and fetch a second
kind of penance: (he speaks after the phrase of the heresy of Montanus)
but as for me, I draw and drink of the scripture of this Pastor, which cannot
be broken in pieces: Tertul. de orat. c. 12.
alluding to the glass cups, which were of Glass in his time. As likewise
in his book of prayer, he reproves them which after the manner of the Pagans,
Posit is penulis orabant, that is, put off their cloakes or upper garments to
pray. Where have you (says he) any commandment either from the Lord, or from
his Apostles? This is superstition, and not religion; a curious and not a
reasonable service: wherein was nothing but an apish imitation of the Gentiles.
I omit to speak of the kiss of reconciliation before the holy supper, which
he calls, Signaculu^ orationis: without the which we cannot pray well unto
God; nor come near unto his mysteries. And therefore he takes them up
roundly, Tertull. in lib. de oratione.
which habita oratione, subtrahebant osculum pacis: that is, which after prayer
did deprive themselves of the kiss of peace, that is, refused the mark of
reconciliatio^ with their brethren. But let it be that we and our adversaries
agree well together about all these places; yet notwithstanding, they will draw
us forth an African Mass. But what will they gain themselves that way, seeing
they shall be able to prove nothing, but that the holy supper was distributed
under both kinds unto all, in general, and every one in particular, by the
Pastor or Minister? That there was used ardent and devout prayers before and
after? that the word of God was there read and expounded by the Praeses or
Pastor of the Church, and applied likewise in reprehensions and censures? That
therein men and women did use to sing Psalms? That all was done there in a
known tongue, without any curiosity about the vessels, and without any
distinction or difference for or about apparel and garments? S. Cyprian in
Epist. ad C^^c^^u^.
Cyprian in an Epistle unto Cecilius, disputing Contra Aquarios, against such
as used water in the holy Supper; which he calls Dominicum, as if a man
should say, the Lords banquet, shows us very well, that we must keep and hold
our selves fast and close to the institution of Christ, without changing any
thing thereof, and that throughout his diocese he used it so: for he sends
them to the Gospel, and to Saint Paul to the Corinthians, 1. Cor. 11.
out of whom he rehearses the place, even through to the very end. Of a truth
(says he) seeing that neither any Apostle, neither yet any Angel from heaven
could declare or teach us any thing, (Praeterqua^ quod Christus semel docuit,)
besides that which Christ has once taught us: I cannot but marvel, how
against all both Euangelical and Apostolical doctrine, men dare to offer (in
some places) water in the cup, etc. Afterward he adds: For they should ask
counsel at those whom they follow: wherefore if in the sacrifice, which is
Christ, we are not to follow any other then Christ; it must of necessity
follow and be laid upon us, that we ought to obey, and do as Christ has done,
and also commanded us to do: seeing he tells us in his Gospel, If you do
the things which I command you, I call you no more servants, but friends. For
that Christ ought only to be heard (says he,) God the father himself has
witnessed it from heaven, saying: This is my well-beloved Son, etc. hear him.
Whereupon then it must follow, that we are not to regard what every one before
us has judged meet and convenient to be done, but unto that which Jesus Christ
has done, which is before all: because we are not to apply our selves to
follow and imitate the custom of man, but the truth and verity of God. But
and if thy conscience check or trouble thee, by reason of the life and doings
of thy predecessors, who have so and so lived, and which have followed such and
such traditions, he puts into thy mouth what to answer unto thy self in
that case likewise: For (says he) if any of our Predecessors, either through
ignorance, or foolish simplicity, have held otherwise then the Lord has
taught us, either by his precept, or by his example: God will pardon such his
simplicity, through his rich and abundant mercy, but unto us forewarned and
taught the contrary by himself, it cannot be pardoned and forgiven. Now in
deed it were meet that we should write out all the whole treatise, because it
drives only and aymeth at the annihilating of all manner of men's traditions,
that so nothing might be embraced, but the pure institution of Christ,
contained in the Gospel, and in the Apostle. But that we may come to the
particular and special points of this divine service, we have already seen
and heard what he has said of the general confession which the Minister or
Priest made of the sins of the people and his own. There was also at this
time in the Christian assemblies a mounted or raised place, out of which the
reader appointed for the same used to read the scriptures, as also the Bb. to
make his sermons upon the same so read. Cyprian de operib. Cardinal. Christi.
Conciliu^ Laodic. Canon. 19.
Which said place Cyprian calls Tribunal ecclesiae, but others Suggestum
pulpitum, etc. And the sermon or Homely was made after the reading of the
Gospel, and before the celebration of the Sacrament, as appears by the
Council of Laodicea: that is to say, before the going out of those which were
to be instructed and catechized in Christianity to the end that they might be
received into the Christian Church. This reading is likewise apparent, Cypr.
lib. 2. Epist. 5.
where Saint Cyprian ordained for the reader, a Confessor of the name of
Christ: He was worthy (says he) not for his age, but for his deserts of some
higher room in the church: but it seemed good unto us, that he should begin at
the office of reading, because nothing sounds better in that mouth, which
has confessed Christ by a glorious professing and witnessing of him; then the
sound of the celebrating of the divine lectures. To read (says he) the Gospel
of Christ, which makes the Martyrs to come from the stocks, to the pulpit,
etc. and because such joy loves not any lingering delay, Dominico legit, He
began to read upon the day of the holy Supper, etc. And as for the sermon
Eusebius makes mention, that it was ordinarily and commonly used in the holy
assemblies of the African Churches: Eusebius. lib. 7. cap. 22.
and we have many places also to that effect out of Saint Cyprian. We learn
also of Origene, that it was the custom, that the Reader should read the
scripture, Socrat. lib. 5. cap. 12. Cipri. sermon. in orat. Doinic.
and the Pastor expound it. And Socrates makes mention, that in the Church of
Alexandria this was Origene his professed practice. And as concerning prayers:
Our praying (says Saint Ciprian) is public and common, not for one man alone,
but for all the people, for that likewise all this people is but as one. And to
the end that all carnal cogitation may be far from us, the Minister before
prayer, prepares the hearts of the brethren by this preface: Sursum corda,
which is, lift up your hearts on high, to the end that the people which answer,
Habemus ad Dominu^: that is, we lift them up unto the Lord, may be forewarned
not to think of any thing but him only. And consequently, the celebration of
the Lords Supper followed, the insticution whereof was read for the blessing
of the sacraments, and after that a general prayer: as appears in a history
of one possessed of a Devil, of whom he says, Cypr. in sermon. de lapsis.
that she was impatient during the time of this prayer. Precis orationisque
nostra impatiens etc. But that solennibus adimpletis, the holy things being
accomplished, that is to say, Et accipientibus caeteris locus eius aduenit.
Cypr. de Caena Dominic.
the blessing of the sacraments, the Deacon beginning to give the cup, she
would have taken it in her place: howbeit very quickly, by a secret instnct,
and motion from God, she began to turn away her face. At which time likewise
all the faithful indifferently without exception of any, did communicate,
practicing the same that he speaks of elsewhere saying: The Priests are not
admitted alone to the communicating of this food, but the whole church, every
one receives his portion equally, etc.

Hitherto you see the simple and sincere manner of divine service, continued
and used in the Church: but let us see what things they were that in this
mean time are reported to have been added thereunto by the Bishops of Rome.
Some attribute to Pope Alexander the first, this clause: Qui pridie quam
pateretur etc. that is, who in the day before his passion, took the bread in
his precious hands, and lifting up his eyes unto thee O God his father most
mighty, and yielding thee thanks, blessed it, brake it, and gave it to his
disciples saying, take, eat ye all, etc. Whereby appears, that in former
times, by their own testimony, these words, Hoc est corpus meum, was
pronounced without any Canon, and without any preface, Justin. Apol. 2. Plat.
in Sixth. 1.
as we may read them all naked, and by themselves in Iustine his second
Apology. Do this in remembrance of me; This is my body, This is my blood,
etc. To Sixtus 1. is attributed, Sanctus, etc. Holy, holy, holy, Lord God of
hosts, the heavens and earth are full of thy glory. And this which Platina did
set down of him, is in the history of his life: Plat. in Telesph.
That in the Apostles time, all things were done nakedly, plainly and simply
in the action of this mystery, etc. To Telesphorus (or according to others, to
Symmachus living a long time after) the song of the Angels to be sung before
the holy supper, that is to say, Gloria in excelsis, etc. But how many things
are there in the Mass, and those of the most substantial points thereof,
which have their several distances and distinctions of the time of their first
being and entrance, as the same is said at this day? And it shall be further
noted here by the way, that the Sanctus and the Gloria, are in the Lithurgies
attributed unto the Apostles and disciples, and before by us confuted, as
nothing else but the counterfeites of antiquity. To Mark 1. in the end, the
song of the Creed, in that manner that it was drawn and agreed upon in the
first Nicene Council, about the year three hundred thirty five, or according
to some, to Julius the first, to be sung by and by after the Gospel, by the
Clergy and the people. D. l. ^. vasa. c. vt Calix de conseer.
And as for the circumstances, Zepherine ordained, that the wine should be put
in glass vessels: but Vrbanus the first, that it should be put into vessels
of metal: Siluester the first, that the priests should not wear any silk,
nor colored cloth, but only linen: but not a word all this while of the
pomp of Rome. For I pray you what likeness is there betwixt all that which
we have here said, and that which may be said of that which is used at this
day; whereof all the Authors going before, until this time, (how many soever
have written in Latin) have not seemed to be acquainted so much as with the
name? That the name of the Mass was unknown at this time.
For where as some would make us believe that the Mass was written of at this
time; I do here once again give you to understand for all that, that this is a
manifest fraud and trick of deceit, and that it is found in the Greek
authors translated in these latter ages, into Latin, only by the imagination
of the translators, who were disposed to find it where it never came. Ignatius
in an epistle to the Church of Smyrna.
Thus it is found in Saint Ignatius, in Saint Denis, in the Tripartite
history, etc. in such places, as where these Authors have written, (...),
that is to say, to administer the Supper, to say service, to preach, and to
call the Church together, etc. they have not been ashamed to translate to do,
say, sing, and celebrate the Mass. Dionis. lib. 3. Hier. Hist trip lib. 3.
cap. 11. and lib. 4 cap. 13. and lib. 7 cap. 31. and lib. 9 cap. 9. etc. That
the Decretall epistles are ridiculous.
And from the fountain of a like good conscience are sprung those glorious
Decretall epistles of Zepherinus, Calixtus the first, Pontianus, Sother, and
such like, wherein indeed the same name of Mass is read, but to the just
making of those to blush who counterfeited them. For who will ever believe,
that at such time as there was a Tertullian and a Ciprian, which did write so
eloquently, exactly, and learnedly, of the deepest and waightiest points of
our faith, and that in Afrike, where the Latin tongue was not so pure and
neat: the Bishops of Rome in the midst of the palace of the world, should ever
busy their heads to make and write laws, of such childish and fond things:
and that in such childish, fond and barbarous manner? Persecutiones patienter
portandae sunt: Praesente^ fraternam syllabam exposuimus: Modernis temporibus
Christianitatem suscepistis: Habent potestatem ordinare regulariter, and these
goodly words: Intronizare, praetextatus modus, charitatiue conuenire: I appeal
unto their own consciences, if these be either Latin words or phrases? Is it
possible that they should be hatched or ever heard of before the ouerrunning
made by the Goths? And again, what ancient and old writer did ever make
mention of these Epistles, Eusebius, Jerome, Damascene, or others, who never
forgot any one of the writings and works of those men which yet were not any
whit so earnestly recommended unto them? And who is he furthermore, but and if
he bring his eyes with him, will say and well perceive that some crafty forger
has framed these lies, for the advancing of their See and jurisdiction? As
likewise the most and best learned do hold, that they were all made after the
time of Syricius, that is near five hundred years after our Savior Christ.
And then from what spirit can they come but from the father of lies?

Thus we have coasted along till we are arrived at the great and famous Council
of Nice, where were come together about the year 328. from all the parts of
Christendom, 318. Bishops, That the Mass was unknown at the time when the
Council of Nice was holden.
all of them utterly without any knowledge of the Mass used at this day,
either by name or deed, for any thing they could gather out of any
antiquities, yea or out of the Roman Church it self. Neither having any
Canon, invocation of Saints, or any such other things, as are now become the
principal parts of the same: and yet the Mass, the most formal part of
service that the Church of Rome has, the Canon, the soul and life of the
Mass: without the which a man cannot possibly seem to them to be a
Christian, and without the which it could not keep the name it has: yea
whereof if there be but the least word left out, it becomes all and
altogether unprofitable and imperfect. But well, we have found the
administration of the holy Supper of the Lord, celebrated with public
prayers: singing of Psalms of all the people: reading of the scriptures, and
the interpreting of the same: blessing of the sacraments, according to the Lord
his institution: and the distributing of the same, simply in their whole and
sole nature unto all the people: and all this in a known tongue, which every
one present understood and answered accordingly from time to time, Amen:
without any superstitious affecting of garments, curiosity in vessels, or
other vain ceremonies. And all this under the name of Coetus Dominicus, (...),
Caena Dominica, Epulum Dominicum, or Dominicum, simply and by it self: that is
to say, of the assembly, congregation, holy supper, or banquet of the Lord.
Wherefore let the readers judge both of the one and the other, as namely which
of them approaches and comes nearest unto the true antiquity, the Church of
Rome, or the reformed Church.

CHAP. IIII. What manner of service was used in the Church unto the time of S.
Gregory, or thereabout: and namely what manner of thing that was, that is
called the Mass of those that are catechized.
NOw in the time of Constantine his rule and government in the Empire, A
notable alteration under Constantine, and afterward.
we see and behold the estate of the Christian Church to change, from
persecution to peace; from servitude and slavery, to principality, rule and
dominion, by removing out of the deserts, to dwell in Cities, and from keeping
in caves and holes, to sit in fair and stately palaces: Here we see it
embraced of the multitude, entertained of Emperors, and those the most famous
and worthiest of all the rest, namely the Emperors of Rome, and received of
whole nations, and those such as bare away the prick and price from the whole
world for pride and riotousnes. Let us not find it strange, if in this great
change we see it altogether changed even at one blow: if the Church embracing
the world into her lap, become sweld and puffed up with the same in a moment;
if the world enter into the Church with the world, being brought thereinto,
by the entrance it obtained: I mean the vanities, superfluities, affections,
and imperfections, together with all the rest of the infections of the world.
The Church had been nourished in mountains and deserts, she came forth of
such places clothed with Camels hair, in all so brietie, simplicity, and
innocence. The Bishops for the most part bringing her forth into the world,
were ashamed to show her in such sort unto the Gentiles, to them which newly
came, or else were willing to come out of Paganism. These good Emperors
likewise desirous to have her received of these people, becoming more curious
in setting out of the utter parts, then of the inner: of the show and
appearance, then of the truth, and of the ceremony, then of the substance: did
not make conscience or spare to deck her up after the manner of Paganism; to
prepare her the glorious ornaments used amongst the Gentiles, and to
accommodate and fit thereunto (as far as they thought possibly they might,
without preiudicing of their holy faith) the service and ceremonies of the
Christians to those used amongst the Pagans. And this their course and manner
of proceeding was called amongst them zeal and prudencie: which Tertullian, a
precise and severe obseruer and challenger of the first purity, had called
sacrilege. Wherein again they thought it meet to keep such a tempering,
because that having at the same time to care for the satisfying of them of the
circumcision, even the Jews, which embraced Christianity, furthered and
helped forward thereto, for the most part upon a conceited opinion that they
had dreamed of, of the greatness of the Messiah; they thought they might thereby
be able to show them the accomplishment of their expected hope in the outward
gorgeousnes of the Christian Church: and where they thought they ought to
beautify her simplicity and nakedness, there they borrowed willingly all
they could, either of words or ceremonies from the Jews.

Seeing then the whole outward service both of the Jews and Gentiles did
consist principally in sacrifices: (those of the Gentiles, having no certain
scope or mark to aim at, and those of the Jews looking all forward unto
Jesus Christ, upon and in whom they were all founded and finished) it seemed
hard and harsh unto them, and like to give much offense, if they should wholly
abolish all sacrifices: because these proselites newly converted to
Christianity, did not believe that religion could stand without sacrifices;
not conceiving the truth, how that all sacrifices are nothing, further then
they are applied unto the only true sacrifice of the Son of God fulfilled upon
the cross. Least therefore they might exasperate and provoke either the one or
the other, the Christians applied themselves to hear and speak both of altars
and sacrifices. And because that the Apostles had taken pain to beat it into
their heads and hearts, that all sacrifices took their end in Christ: they
took pleasure in calling their services, offeringes, and oblations,
sacrifices: the table of the Lord his Altar; the remembrance of his death in
his holy supper, the sacrifice of the Altar, a holy host: the Bishops and
Pastors, Sacrificers, and the Deacons, Levites, etc. These kinds of speeches
being easily to be understood of every one amongst them, and such as at that
time were not hurtful, howsoever in the ages following, falling out to be
fuller of ignorance, and further swaruing from the clearenes of the light:
they became causes of great abuses, because they would adventure further, and
go from the figure and sign, to the thing: from the spirit to the letter; from
an improper manner of speech, into an error of doctrine. The Gentiles likewise
had a multitude of Gods, unto every one of which they had builded churches,
raised altars, and made sacrifices. Now to restrain such a people at once, to
the service of one only God, and that God altogether a spirit, to a service
altogether spiritual: being a carnal people, a people brutishly enamoured
with their pompous manner and ceremonies, with their images of wood and stone:
the wisdom of man found to be scandalous, full of offense, and without the
bounds of discretion: and therefore would have regard of the said Gentiles in
such sort, as that they might build them up, and not pull them down: and feed
them first with milk (as they called it) and afterward with strong meat,
(for so this place was then abused,) (...)
whereas then the first ages had sharply and courageously contested, that to
have many Gods, was not to have any at all: It was found pleasing and
plausible, to turn their Gods into Saints, and their Goddesses into she
saints, and to place our Apostles and Martyrs in their rooms: to dedicate
unto them their temples and Altars, to allow them sacrificing priests, and
high priests, to ordain feasts and services in honor of them. But this
matter is handled hereafter more at large. Where (before that we come thereto)
let us consider, seeing the spirit of man is blind in the things belonging
to God) how that these good men under a shadow of drawing Jews and Gentiles
unto Christ, in course of time did fair and softly bring into the Church both
Iudaisme and Paganism: I mean their ceremonies and outward pompes,
superstitions and vanities, yea and that is worse, many of their presumptions
and preiudicate opinions in the matter of doctrine: and how also it followed
thereupon, that the people did every day apply and join themselves more and
more to the outward part, and put us in danger to be rather Jews and
Gentiles, then true Christians, abusing the example of Saint Paul, who became
(as he says) a Jew to the Jews, a Gentile unto the Gentiles, and every thing
to every man, to win them unto Christ: and that without any manner of
consideration how that the spirit of God is not given to all in one measure, or
how that every man is not capable to stand fast, and keep his hold in such
tickle and slipperie places. Neither yet that S. Paul became a Jew, and
observed the law, but to the end that he might draw them from their rudiments:
or that in like manner by becoming a Gentile, he held not any thing of their
unknown God, but rather preached unto them the son of God come into the
world, that is to say, without the annihilating of the cross of Christ,
without preiudicing, yea to the aduauncing of the verity, simplicity and
purity of doctrine.

But as yet the substance of the truth ceased not to swim and flote a long
time upon the face of these humane inventions, being the good seed, and
husbanded by the care and industry of good teachers, who suffered not the same
to be choked and ouerrun with the darnell at the first blow: until the
ouerflowing stream of barbarous and rude men, which happened some ages after,
did utterly ouerwhelme it, and make an end of the same: by occasion whereof the
dark and palpable thick clouds of ignorance did bury and swallow up
Christianity. The Pastors being partly ignorant and partly negligent, suffered
the darnell to grow: so that the darnell occupied the place of the corn, even
the incorruptible seed of the word: in so much as that the greatest part of
Christendom suffered the famine of the true bread, that is, of the true
preaching of the Gospel, becoming drunken and oppressed in the mean time with
the excessiveness of men's inventions, the proper darnell-bread, thrust upon
them under the name of traditions. And this is that which we have now to
verify concerning the matter of the Mass, going forward with the handling of
the growth and proceeding thereof from age to age.

And here let us call to mind in what estate and condition we left the divine
service in the former Chapter. It consisted of a general confession of sins;
in singing of whole Psalms; in the reading of the holy scriptures; in the
Pastor his preaching upon the same: after that in a general prayer for the
whole world; in the blessing and distributing of the Sacraments to all the
faithful under both kinds; in a thanksgiving for the benefit received of
God in Christ, renewed in the action of the Sacrament: and how that all this
was uttered in a known tongue, and a language understood of all the people,
which answered thereunto from time to time; the vessels and apparel being
such as were commonly used, and every thing done in simplicity, without vain
ostentation, and void of all manner of wavering ceremonies: and all these
things continued unto the times and ages that we are now to speak of, being
the substantial parts of the true and lawful divine service. Eusebius. lib. 10.
cap. 2. and 3.
Eusebius speaking of the ordinary actions of the true divine service, makes
mention of prayers, psalms, lessons, sermons, the blessing and communicating
of the Sacraments, Eusebius. lib. 4. of the life of Constantine. S. Hilarie psalm.
65. S. August. in epist. 119.
of thanksgiving, etc. Likewise (says he) Constantine the Emperor prayed
with the congregation, sung himself, heard the sermon reverently, and that
standing, (says he) not thinking it seemly for him to sit down in that place.
S. Hillarie: If any man stay without the church, he shall hear the voice of
the people which prays, he shall understand the solemn tunes of the Psalms,
and in the offices of the holy Sacraments, the answer of a denout
confession. Saint Augustine in as many words: It is not to the purpose (says
he) to sing Psalms in the Church when the scripture is in reading, or when it
is in handling: (...)
which is the same that he means by these words: Quando disputatur: when the
chief, the Pastors or the Bishops do pray aloude, or when warning is given by
the Deacons, that we must give our selves unto the general prayer. But these
mean whiles excepted, what can the assemblies of the faithful be better
occupied about? what more holy thing is there which they may exercise
themselves in, then in singing of Psalms? Hesychius upon Leuit. lib. 7 cap.
24. Dionys. in Hicratch. lib. 3.
Hesichius: Prayer is holy, the reading of the scriptures is holy, the hearing
of the expounding of the same is holy, yea and holy it is whatsoever is said or
done in the church of God according to his law, etc. This in brief is the
sum of the whole service: as is testified likewise in the Hierarchy of Saint
Denis, (for it must needs be referred unto this time) describing the manner
of the celebrating of the holy Supper, for he affords and grants place
unto every one of these parts, (...)
making it to begin with the harmonious singing of Psalms, the whole ordinance
of the Church singing with the Bishop. Afterward he causes the reading of the
holy scriptures to follow (...), by the Ministers of the Church, and from
thence to draw out exhortations unto the people: after which he gives leave
to those which were not admitted to the sacraments, to go forth of the Church
and temple, as namely those that were catechized, the penitents and the
possessed. Then the holy sacraments are set upon the table, and are blessed and
sanctified by holy prayer: the which are first received and taken by him that
is the chief in these holy actions, as the Minister or Bishop, and after given
to all that are by, after that they have testified their spiritual unity by a
holy kiss. Which done, (...) (says he) (...), that is, having participated
and distributed the Sacraments, that is, the bread and the wine, he closes
up the whole action with a holy Eucharist, that is, a public than kesgiuing
for the benefit received from our God in the receiving of his holy Supper.

Let us now follow on, The Psalms. Chryso. in his eight hom. upon the Heb.
Chrysostom. in hom. 6. de paenitent.
and go forward through every one of these parts. Chrysostom says of the
Psalms: Every week the Psalms are read, twice or thrice. Again: Wherefore
have the Christians the Psalms always in their mouths: seeing we read the
Gospel but once or twice, neither yet the writings of the Apostle? and why
also do we sing those with our own mouths, doing nothing but lending our
ears to these? Saint Augustine recommendeth them unto us by the example of
Christ and his Apostles, for the profit coming of the precepts contained
therein: and for the edge which they set upon our zeal. Again, he takes upon
him the protection thereof, against such as blamed the Church of Carthage,
because it did sing them, S. Augustine li. 2. retract. ca. 2^
whether it were before the offering, or in the time of the distributing
thereof unto the people, that is to say, the Lords Supper. Now it was the
ancient custom to sing them, and that altogether and all throughout, The
Psalms cut in sunder and divided into parts. Optat. lib. 4. Epiph. haer. 64.
as it is to this day used in the Greek Churches. But about this time the
zeal of Christians waxing cold, they began in the Church of Rome to divide
them into certain pieces or pawses, which were called parts, to the end that
service might be made the shorter: as we read in Optatus, who cites the 2.
part of the nine and fortieth Psalm. And alth ought this dividing of Psalms,
into parts, may seem to have been in the time of S. Hillarie, yet it was not
receined into the Church. Epiphanius calls them distinctions. S. Ambrose in
his Lithurgie, Psalmulos, or little Psalms, which are nothing else but verses:
and they were sung within a certain time after countervoicewise, one side
singing one verse, and an other an other.

Of the Institution Theodoret reports of Flauianus and Diodorus in Antioch,
Theodor, lib. 2 cap. 24.
that they caused them to be thus sung about the sepulchers of Martyrs: but in
the Latin Church, Paulinus reports it to be by the appointment of Saint
Ambrose in his Dioces: which was afterward about the year 430. spread abroad
every where, and that by the authority of Pope Celestine, who by name did
practice it, at the first beginning and entrance into ecclesiastical or divine
service.

Of reading, S. Chrysostom reports ordinarily: When it is told thee in the
church, Of reading, Chrysostom. hom. 36. in 1. ad Cor. and hom. 3. in 2. ad
Thessal. Council. Laodi. cap. 17. Cut and divided readings or lessons. Ambr. in
praefat. in Psalm. De Offic. lib. 1 cap. 11. and 44. Sever. Sulpit. de vita S.
Mart. l. 3. De Offi. l. 1. c. 8 De Virg. l. 3. ad Gratian. l. 4. etc. S. Agust.
tract. 9 in Ioann. sermon. 236. de temp. sermon. 7. and 10. de verb. Apostol. etc.
Beloth. c. 57. Berno and Radulphus. The Sermon. Ambr. epist. 33 post tractatu^.
S. Basil. in psalm. 14. and 114. S. August. in 1. Epist. S. Ioh. Amb. epist. 33.
S. August. de ciuit. l. 22. c. 8 August, de doctrina Christia.
the Lord says so, and that the Deacon does bid all the world to be silent and
still, think not that it is not to the end that thou should honor the
reader, but rather him that speaks by his mouth. Again, when thou hear
the Prophet which tells thee, the Lord says this; Remove thy solfe O earth,
and rise thou higher O heaven, think within thy self, who it is from whom the
Prophet speaks unto thee. If these readinges had been such as are now a
days in the Mass; to what end should those exhortations of S. Chrysostom
serve? But the Council of Laodicea, is likewise plain and pregnant in this
point: Let the Canonical scriptures be read in the church, and not any others.
S. Ambrose oftentimes: What severity of punishment have we established in the
Church, to the end that silence may be kept whiles the scriptures are reading?
whereas notwithstanding, the Psalms do keep silence of themselves. And these
readinges or lessons were as well out of the law, as out of the Gospel and
Apostle, as appears in infinite places of S. Ambrose, S. Augustine, and
others: and that throughout whole books, until such time as S. Jerome by the
commandment of Pope Damascene, because the lithurgy seemed as then to be too
long, did make an extract of certain lessons out of the Prophets, Epistles and
Gospels; whereupon he composed the book, called Comes, or the book of
lessons: from which time they began to be in use in the Church. Now the Bishop
or Pastor of the Church was wont to take the place whereof he would make his
sermon, ordinarily out of those lessons as appears by those words of S.
Ambrose, S. Augustine, and others so oftentimes used: We have heard in the
lesson that has been read, etc. and upon the same we must deliver and speak
as the Lord shall vouchsafe to enable us, etc. And sometime out of the Psalm
that had been sung, as may be seen in S. Basil upon Psalm 114. Or else they
took a whole book, as S. Augustine in his treatise upon S. John: save that
upon the days of great feasts, as the feast of the Nativity, Easter, and
Pentecost, they chose out picked places, from thence to entreat of the
history and mystery. And the sermon was called Tractatus Sermo, and from
thence grew these speeches, Homilia tractare, de superiori loco dicere, sieve de
exedra. And it was the custom of the Pastor before he began to speak to the
people, to pray unto God, that he would show him the favor and mercy to
teach them well, and to give them well, and thoroughly to apprehend that which
he should teach them according to Saint Augustine his precept: Before he
speak, let him pray unto God for himself, and for them to whom he is to
preach, and let him be (says he) Orator antequam dictor: which is, let him
pray before he preach. And this sermon did continue (as we learn out of
Saint Basil) about an hour, in the end likewise concluding the same with
prayer. In Saint Augustine: Conuersi rursus ad Dominum, etc. we betake our
selves again unto God, etc. And furthermore, as this is the principal charge
of the Ministers to preach the word: as those unto whom our Lord (delivering
his commission) spoke in these express words: Go preach the Gospel unto all
creatures, etc. So have we from these great and worthy men, infinite sermons,
as by name from Saint Cyprian, Saint Ambrose, Saint Augustine, S. Chrysostom,
S. Basil, etc. but not from any one of these, any book of rites or
ceremonies, neither yet any pattern of any sacrifice: And they let not to take
great pain to prescribe and point out unto us, the qualities of a preacher,
and the parts and conditions of a Bishop, that is worthy the room and place
of teaching the people: especially Saint Augustine in his books of Christian
doctrine: but for teaching of him how many diverse ways, and with how many
ceremonies he should say Mass or offer his pretended sacrifice, they trouble
not themselves at all.

Now after the sermon, That the holy Supper was frequented at that time of all the faithful.
it was ordinarily the custom to begin with the administration of the holy
Supper, especially during the time of their first love and zeal, when as the
Christians for the most part did communicate every week: yea and some every
day, the Sacraments being never set upon the Table of the Lord, but that
there would be a number of faithful Christians to communicate thereof. And
furthermore, S. August. ad Ianuar. ep. 119
Saint Augustine exhorts the faithful to communicate every Lords day:
Provided (says he) that thy soul be not set upon sin. Saint Ambrose gives
warning, and admonishes them to celebrate the memory of the Lord every day:
rebuking certain of the East Churches, which did not communicate oftener then
once a year. And Eusebius says, that the same custom was used in his time.
And the same thing is witnessed by Saint Jerome, Eusebius. l. 1. de Demonst. S.
Hieron. ad Lucinium. Chrysostom. in epist. ad Ephe.
especially of the Church of Rome, and those of Spain. Whereupon we see
likewise that Chrysostom cries out most vehemently, as complaining of the
frosennes of his age: as being such, as that though the supper of the Lord were
celebrated daily, yet there came but a very few people to the holy table: yea
of so great account it was held, as that it appears unto us by a law made by
the Church, and set down in the ancient Canons: that the sacraments being
blessed, all the faithful, that is, all those which were admitted to be of
the communion and fellowship of the Church (for so they called them) should
stay in the assembly, The difference betwixt the faithful, and those that
were catechized.
and should be exhorted, even as they would avoid the punishment for doing
otherwise, to communicate. But on the contrary, such as could not be received
thereunto, namely such as were catechized, as not having as yet been
sufficiently instructed: Penitents, which had not as yet given sufficient,
clear, and manifest signs of their repentance: as also the possessed, for
being vexed of the evil spirit, should be advertised to withdraw themselves,
and to leave the place clean for the faithful. Council. Antioch. c. 2. C.
peracta. D. 2. de consecrat.
And this is it which the Canons say: As for such as enter into the Church of
God and hear the scriptures, but communicate not in prayer with the people,
but rather by some intemperancie do keep back themselves from the holy
communion: let them be excommunicate and cast out of the Church, etc. Again,
The consecration ended, let every man give himself to receive the communion,
if they will not be cast out of the Church: Hiero. in 1. ad Cor. c 11.
Chrysostom. in 2. ad Cor. ho. 18.
for so it was ordained by the Apostles, etc. Whereupon Saint Jerome tells
us: The supper of the Lord must be common to all, for he has given the
Sacraments unto all his disciples equally. And Chrysostom: In some thing the
Minister differs not from the common people: Nihil differt sacerdos a
Subdito; as when the participating of the holy mysteries is in hand: For we
are all alike thought worthy to receive them: Not as in the old law, where
the high Priest took his certain portion, and the people theirs: and so as
that the people could not have any thing of that which was the sacrificers
part: for unto every one there present is delivered one and the same body, and
one and the same cup. And therefore he was greatly offended with those, who
stayed behind with the faithful after those which were catechized were put
forth, Chrysostom. in epist. ad Ephe. hom. 3.
and yet would not communicate, as offering injury unto the Lords table and
feast. Thou art come hither (says he) and have sung Psalms in the place with
all the rest, and in that thou have not departed, have acknowledged thy self
to be of the number of those which are worthy to be admitted thereunto: how
comes it therefore to pass, that thou having stayed, do not receive the
Lords Supper? And if thou answer that thou art unworthy: art thou not so
likewise by consequent of the communion which is in prayers? etc.

As for those which were catechized, put to do penance, and possessed, Of the
catechized which had leave to depart
the Deacon after the sermon, made known and signified unto them in plain
words, that they were to depart and go away: which thing might be practiced
with less ado at this day: when as there is not almost one to be seen
possessed of the evil spirit, and for that the rigor and severity of doing of
pennaunce is much abated: as thirdly, in that there come into our Churches none
but the children of Christians. And this leave which was declared and openly
told them, was called, Mittere, vel dimittere: vnde Missio and Missa, in Greek
(...), From whence the name of the Mass grew.
and hence was the first original of this word Mass in the Church: because
(as Bellarmin himself confesses) that this leave was delivered in these
words: Ite, Missa est, as amongst the Pagans was wont to be said, I, licet,
etc. And by little and little (as abuse is apt to seize upon words that are
most familiar and well known unto us) it came to pass, that that part of the
service, which endured unto the sermon, Raban. l. 1. c. 32. Innocen. l. 6. de
Sacr. Hugo l. 2. part. 8. cap. 14. Tertul. de praescript. and corona
and inclusiuely unto the rehearsing of the Creed, was called the Mass of
those that were catechized: and that which was afterward, that is to say, the
celebrating of the holy Supper, had appropriated and given unto it the name of
the Mass of the faithful, according to the old and ancient distinction made
in the Church, betwixt those which were called the faithful, and those which
were catechized. And this is likewise testified by Tertullian in many places:
and the Mass of the faithful began where that of the catechized ended.

But admit that this sending away was practiced in the Church, Rabbi Leui. in
Leuit. cap. 5.
after the manner of the Jewish Church, which would not suffer that any
leprouse or other infected persons should be admitted unto their sacrifices:
or else according to the Pagans themselves, who would chase the profane from
their mysteries and holy things with these words, (...), that is, leave for
the people to depart: so far it has prevailed, as that without all doubt it
has brought forth a name for the Mass, a name which was never read in any
Hebrew, Greek or Latin Author before this time, that is to say, till four
hundred years after the death of our Lord: and yet so new in that age of the
world, as that Saint Jerome the Pastor of Rome, and one who has written so
many great volumes, has never so much as once made any mention of it: yea and
Saint Ambrose, who utters it once, and Saint Augustine only twice, did yet
never take it in that sense and signification, that we use it: for neither the
one nor the other does speak of it, in touching or delivering the matter and
doctrine of the Sacrament: although that Saint Ambrose have written thereof
six books: and that S. Augustine have handled the matter more amply and
largely, and more often then any other, both upon S. John, and in other places.
But both of them in a signification far differing from that wherein it is
used at this day, that is to say; not meaning or understanding by this word,
either sacrifice or sacrament. Furthermore, the place alleged out of S.
Augustine his sermons are of small force, because the best learned think not
these sermons to be his, as being found elsewhere to be attributed to Saint
Ambrose, or to Hugo de Sancta victoria; such furthermore as have thus found
them without any name, Erasm. de concionib. Amb. and August. ad frat. Eremit.
August. in ser. de tempore. 23/
not knowing to whom well to attribute or impute them. Saint Augustine says:
Ecce post sermonem fit Missa catechumenis, manebunt fideles, that is, that
after the sermon, leave shall be granted unto those that are catechized to
depart, that is to say, such as yet have need to be instructed in the faith,
whereas the sufficient instructed and grounded in faith shall abide. In which
place by Bellarmine his own judgment, it cannot be taken for any other thing
then a simple leave to depart, and not for any sacrifice or Sacrament. Again,
In lectione, quae nobis ad Missas legenda est, audituri sumus: that is, We
shall hear in the lesson which shall be read in the Mass, etc. In which
place he may seem to comprehend, not only the one or the other service, or
part of service, that is to say, that of the catechized, and the other of the
faithful: but even all manner of spiritual exercise in the Church, Cassian.
l. 2. c. 7. l. 3. c. 7. and 8. Amb. l. 5. epis. 8
whether it did follow the celebration of the holy Supper, or not, as it is
ordinarily taken and meant in Cassian, who writ more then a hundred years
after, S. Ambrose: The day following, which was the Lords day, Post lectiones
atque tractatum, dimissis catechumenis, etc. Missam facere coepi: After the
lessons and Sermon, having given leave to the catechized to depart, I began to
say Mass: Where behold how that here seems no other thing to be meant, then
a restrayning of that he did to the service which was proper to the faithful,
that is to say, to the blessing, communicating and distributing of the
Sacraments, very far differing as we shall well see, from the Popes Mass:
once I say for all in Saint Ambrose, never in Saint Jerome, and in Saint
Augustine clean in an other sense: And this assuredly makes the suspicion of
no small weight, which some have had of these books: namely, that they should
be none of Ambrose his works, Hieronymus in Prou. Salo. c. 11.
as contrarying his doctrine in many places. For as for the place that is
alleged out of S. Jerome upon the Proverbs, who will believe that it was
his, seeing that S. Gregory is there alleged? and not rather some work of
Beda, to whom the best learned do ascribe it? But what fatal change or
translation was destinated unto this word, that from an ill thrown Latin
word, signifying leave or liberty, it should necessarily be drawn in first to
signify a part of Gods divine worship and service, then a pretended sacrifice:
Thirdly, a work wrought for the salvation of the quick and the dead: and
finally, to leap into the room of the market place, called Palladium in Rome,
promising as large and plentiful store of wares and merchandise for the
Christian soul, as ever that other did commodities for the carnal body? And
yet here we are not to omit that which we have already touched: namely, that
all the services and exercises of the church, as public prayers, singing of
Psalms, by night, by day, evening, or morning, were called Masses, in the ages
following: although they meddled not at all with the administration of the Lords
Supper: and the reason thereof was, because that all Christian assemblies were
wont to dismiss themselves upon a general prayer made, which was called
Collecta, and sometimes Missa, that is, a leave or liberty to depart, or a
Mass: in as much as the departure followed imediately after the same. This
appears by S. Benet his rule, wherein after he has declared the order of
prayers and supplications to be kept at the hours canonical: there is added,
Et sint, vel fiant Missae, which is as much as if he should say: And then let
them depart, give them leave to go away. The same also appears by Cassian to
be so, who says, speaking of the Monks of Egypt, that after the Mass of the
vigils, they were permitted a little sleep until it was day. And again, that
upon the Lords day they had but one Mass or departure before dinner, which
was reckoned unto them for their thirdes, and sixtes, etc. But in as much as in
this they were wont to communicate and receive the Lords Supper altogether: the
name by little and little, and by succession of time took root and continued,
to the rooting out of all others.

But that we may not content our selves with our former store, and go no
further, we have testimonies of this dismission, Mass, or departure from the
best and most approved of this our time. I speak not of the Liturgies touched
heretofore and which shall be again touched hereafter, in all which these
words are to be found and read: (...), Dionys. in Hierar. l. 3. Hieron. in
^pi. ad Gala. l. 3. c. 6 Chrysostom. hom. 24 and 83. in Math. 24.61. and 79. ad
popul. Antioch. hom. 3. and 4 de nature. Dei.
etc. that is to say, let the catechized and such as are enjoined humiliation
for their transgressions, withdraw themselves, and let the faithful only
stay, etc. And from the time even of Gregory this was the cry of the Deacon
after the Gospel, and not any more after the sermon, because that after that
time there was but little preaching, Si quis non communicate, exeat, which is,
If there be any man that will not communicate, let him go away out of the
congregation. But in Saint Denis, in S. Jerome and in S. Chrysostom this
ceremony may be observed and marked in infinite places. And the Counsels of
the same time show it evidently: Catechumeni in Missa little ne demittantur,
etc. Let not those that are catechized, be licensed to depart from their
Mass, except it be after that they have heard either the Sermon made by the
Bb. Council. Laod. c. 19. Council. C^^thgin. 4. c. 84.
or the Sermon made by the Minister: Neither let the Bb. keep any one from
entering into the Church for to hear the word of God, whether it be Jew or
Gentile, or from staying there until the Mass, that is to say, until the time
of admonition, to depart given to those which are catechized. And thus we have
seen what manner of service it was, whereat they were present, namely, the
first prayers, singing of Psalms, reading of holy Scriptures, the Sermon and
the Creed. It remains that we see what manner of service the second was,
namely, that which was reserved only for the faithful.

CHAP. V. What manner of Divine service was used, namely, in that which was
called the Mass of the faithful.
IT is first to be noted, that in that space of time happening betwixt the two
services, that is that of the catechized, Of Offerings or obl^tions.
and that of the faithful, there was a place and liberty for the presenting
and bringing in of offringes, which the Christians used to offer of their
increase and fruits unto God in his Church, to be employed, partly to the use
of the Sacraments, and partly to the relief of the poor: according to the
example of the Israelites, Exodus chapter 25. Deuteronomy. 16 and 26. Leuit. 23.11. and the
17. c. 34. Deuteronomy. c. 26. De consecr. did. 1. C. omnis Christ, etc. and 12. q.
C. Vulturand. Philip. 4. Heb. 13. Irenae. l. 4. c. 34
to whom it was given in charge: You shall not appear before the Lord your
hands empty: These offerings were brought unto the Priest, and presented with
a protestation made of the grace and mercy received of God: which (says the
Lord) he shall shake before the Lord, to the end that they may be acceptable
for your sake. And this is it which Walafridus and Berno told us hertofore,
namely, that the offering sprang and took his beginning from the old people,
whereof also we have some steps and marks in the Epistles of S. Paul, where
these offerings made for the relief of the poor, are called Sacrifices, Irenaeus
says, The Lord aduising his Disciples to offer unto God the first fruits of
his creatures, not because he has need, but to the end that they should not
be unfruitful and unthankful, takes that which by his creation was bread,
gives thanks and says, This is my body, etc. Again, we offer unto him to
give him thanks for the gift which he has bestowed upon us, and for the
sanctifying of the creature, that is the bread and the wine, consecrating them
in the body and in the blood of our Lord: Then a little after he adds the
other use: To feed (says he) the hungry, to cloth the naked, etc.
according to that which is written, he that has pity upon the poor,
lends upon usury unto God, etc. From whence we plainly gather both the one
and the other, Justinius Martyr. Apol. 2. S. Cypri. de Eleemos. and in Epist. ad
Decentium. D. ^, C. parem igitur. Custom. (...). Paulin. in libel. de
Gazophyl. August. Ep. 121. Ad victorinum. Th^od l 5. c. 17. Nicephl. 1^. c. 41.
P^ul in vita Ambros. August. Ep. 187
and that these gifts were ordinary in the church, and that out of them they
did take the bread and wine for to be sanctified, and served in the holy
Supper, the residue that remained, being reserved for the poor, Iustine
says, The bread and the wine (...), are brought unto him, which is the
chiefest among the Brethren, that is, to the Bb. or Minister, which performs
the action. S. Cyprian is more clear and plain in this point, As rich as thou
art, Dominicum celebrare te credis, that is, thou think to celebrate the
Lords day, or the feast of the Lord, and take no care to bring thy offerings,
and so thou come ad Dominicum, to this holy assembly without any
sacrifice, and will thou take part of the sacrifice, which the poor shall have
offered? So ancient is this ceremony in the Church: and furtherthermore,
Paulinus testifies that there was a table in the midst of the Church,
whereunto these offringes were brought; which S. Augustine calls the altar of
God, after the manor of the Jewish imitation, complaining in a certain
Epistle, that the poor Captives amongst the Barbarians, as the Jews in
Babylon, could not bring their offringes to this Altar, nor yet find any man,
by whom they might offer up the same unto God. And were read of Theodosius,
that he was wont to offer such gifts before the celebration of the holy
mysteries, and of the Emperor Eugenius, that his gifts and offringes were
rejected and refused, because he had polluted himself with Sacrilege: So
likewise of the Earl Boniface, for having ravished one of the Church: for
because (say they) to take of these the Sacrifice which they should bring unto
God, S. Hieron. in Hierem. l. 2. c. 11. and in Ezech. c. 18. l. 6. Innoc. 1.
Epist. 1. c. 2.
were to approve them to be in state to be partakers of the prayers of the
Church. The abuse hereof grew in the end to be such, as that for to inuit
and call every man to it, the names of those which offered, and the gifts which
they gave, were rehearsed with a loud voice in the Church: which likewise was
found fault withal and reprehended at large by S. Jerome. Now these offringes
were ordinarily called (...), in Greek and in Latin, Dona, munera,
oblationes, that is, gifts, presents, fruits, oblations, etc. which did
sanctify and make holy the whole lump: whereupon it comes that these words
are read in the Lithurgies, (...), Tuaex tuis, that is, we give thee of thine
own that which is thine: And they were consecrated and dedicated to God by the
prayer of the Priest, after the manner of the Jewish Church, in these words,
or the like, Has oblationes famulorum, famularumque tuarum benignus assume,
quas singuli obtulerunt: might it please thee favorably to receive these
oblations of thy household servants and handmaides, which every one of them
has offered up unto thee. Sometimes going so far as to name them by their
names, contrary to the good liking and judgment of Jerome, and that in such
manner, as we see by the steps and printes thereof in these words
changeablie used in the Mass, Pro quibus tibi offerimus, vel qui tibi
offerunt, that is, for whom we offer unto thee, or which offer unto thee. In
like manner in the prayers of the fifth, sixth, and seventh Lords day after
Whitsontide in these words, Has oblationes famulorum tuorum, etc. benignus
assume, and accipe sacrificium a deuotis famul is tuis, and pari benedictione,
sicut munera Abel sanctifica: that is to say, take this sacrifice of thy
servants, and sanctify it as the offringes of Abell: Again in these words of
the Mass and of the Lithurgie: May it please thee to receive them for a
sacrifice of praise, and of a sweetesmell, as those of Abell, Noe,
Melchisedech, Samuel, etc. Which form of prayer grew afterward to be most
blasphemously abused, as shall be showed, by being applied unto the pretended
sacrifice of the body and blood of our Lord. Now all the while that these
offringes were in bringing to the table to be laid thereupon, the people were
ordinarily wont to employ the same in praising of God by singing of Psalms,
whereupon came the Offertorie, that is to say, in the beginning certain
Psalms, and afterward certain verses only, which were sung in the mean
space. Neither must it here be forgotten, that one part of these offringes,
according as was the abundance thereof, began to be employed about the
maintenance of the Pastor: and hereupon covetousness and other abuses companions
of the same, was first bred and brought into the Church, to the infecting of
the Ministers of the same. S. Jerome says, Clerici de altari viuunt, altari
seruientes, altaris oblatione sustentantur, etc. The Clergy live of the
Altar; those which serve at the Altar, are fed and maintained of the oblations
of the Altar, etc. And as Walafridus, Berno and others have told us, that the
Offertorie came to be in the Divine service, by reason of such a custom
practiced amongst the Jews, so indeed we find many of the steps threof by
observing and marking of the same. For the books of the Hebrews do teach us,
that there are seven things to be observed in the oblations and offringes of
the first fruits; The first, that the chief and governors of the house, did
bring them themselves unto the Church porch, and having them upon their
shoulders, did every of them say these words of Deuteronomye, chapter 26. verese
3. unto the Priest: I give you to understand this day before God, etc. that I
am come into the land which he had promised unto our Fathers, etc. The second;
that the Priest received the basket of every one from his own hand, and put it
before the Altar: The third, that this excellent place of Deuteronomie, where
this thankefulnes is ordained, with such a lively representation of the
miseries of the people; and of the mercifulnes of the Lord, should be read
unto them all along: Of the elevation. Exodus 29.24. and 27. Leuit. 23.11 etc.
The fourth, that to the offering of the first fruits, there was ordinarily
joined the Sacrifice of thanksgiving; The fifth, that there was an ordinary
singing of Psalms, without which, say they, there did not pass any
Sacrifice: The sixth, that the offering of those first fruits was lifted up on
high by the Priest, which we read commanded in very many places of the
Scripture, and whereof we will speak hereafter in place convenient: they add
thereto the seventh: that they which offered were enjoined to pass the night in
the City, to show that they came not thither either for fashion sake, or in
have, but for to render thanks unto the Lord upon good deliberation.

Here now begins the service of the faithful, General prayer. The Letanie
with a general prayer for the whole world, for the estate of the Church, for
public and particular necessities, which the Grecians call (...), that is to
say, supplication, (...), that is to say, prayers for peace; because that
therein they used to pray unto God for the peace and prosperity of every
particular person: (...), that is, an universal Collect, because it contained
an abridgement of all prayers, whereof it may seem that there abide some notes
and marks in the Prosne, so called, because that every one did fall down
flat upon his face, the Minister of the Church for to say prayers, and the
people for the better joining of themselves in devotion with him: and thereupon
it is as yet called prayers in some places: the form thereof continued (as we
have seen it) since the time of the Primitive Church, is to be found and read
in the writers of that time, S. Ambrose, Oration praemittitur, prayer for the
people, for kings and all others, goes before, etc. S. Ambrose, cont. relat.
Sym match. and Epist. 29. and l. 4. de Sacr. cap. 4. and in 1. ad Tim. cap. 2.
S. Ambrose de vocatione gentium. August. Ep. 119. ad Ianuar. and sermon. de temp.
237. and Ep. 59. ad Paulin. q. 5. Epist. 106. and de bon. perseu. cap. 22. and
haeres. 88. Chrysostom. hom. 79. ad Pope Antioch. and 72. in Matthew. The Lithurgie
attributed unto S. Basil. Chrysostom. in Epist 2. ad Cor. hom. 18. The blessing
of the Sacraments
and this rule is delivered and given unto us and our Ministers by the Master
of the Gentiles, etc. that is, by S. Paul. Insomuch (says he) as that it
became a rule and pattern observed and followed in all the Churches: it became
a rule observed in all the Churches to pray not only for the Saints and
regenerate in Christ: but also for the Infidels and enemies of his Cross, for
the Idolaters, persecutors, Jews, Heretics and Schismatikes. S. Augustine
after the lessons and sermon adds: Aut cum Antistites clara voce deprecantur,
that is, when the Pastors do pray with aloude voice: Again, After the sermon
those which are catechized, have leave to depart, the faithful stay behind,
then they shall come to the place of prayer, etc. And for the form and manner,
for all men, for kings, and for them which are in authority, etc. for those
that are catechized, for the unbelievers, and for the infidels. Chrysostom,
We pray for the whole world, for the Church spread and dispersed every where,
for the unity of the same, for them which govern it, and are the chief in
the same, etc. Again, for the possessed, for the pentients, for sinners, for
the afflicted, and for our selves. S. Basil, for the uire and weather, for the
fruits of the earth, for peace, for Travelers, Sailors, sick persons,
Prisoners, and Captives, for the troubles, the forgiveness of sins, the
Church, the Bbs. and the Emperors, etc. And this is it which S. Denis calls
the holy prayers: others the Letanie, that is Supplication made and offered to
one only God by Jesus Christ, and that every where and for all things. And
that they were made properly, in that place appears by S. Chrysostom: After
(says he) that we have put forth them which may not be partakers of the
holy Table, we have an other prayer to make, and then we are altogether after
one manner cast flat upon the ground, both the Pastor and the people, and do
all of us rise again, after one and the same manner, etc.

This prayer thus ended, which was very long, but divided into Articles, to
every one whereof the people, that they might be kept the more attentive, were
bound to answer, Amen: they came to set the bread and the wine appointed for
the holy Sacraments, upon the holy Table, and that with reverence and
devotion, and certain forespeeches, which might stir up the people to come also
after the same manner: then the Pastor said, Dominus vobiscum, a Salutation used
amongst the Hebrews, that is, The Lord be with you, and the people answered
him saying, Et cum spiritu tuo, and with thy spirit, The Minister said, Sursum
Corda, (...), which is, ^ft up your hearts on high, (...), Do not imagine
here, or think upon any terrestrial or earthly thing, the people answered,
(...), Habemus ad Dominum, we have them fixed and bent upon the Lord. Again,
the Minister, (...), etc. Gratias agamus: Let us give thanks unto our Lord
God: The people, It is meet and convenient, etc. And then the Minister did
handle in manner of a brief preface, the causes why they gave thanks, as
namely, for that he had created man after his own image, for that he having
revolted and forsaken him, it pleased him to recover and recall him in Jesus
Christ, for the giving of his Law unto him, for having admonished him by his
Prophets, for having sent them his only begotten Son in the fulness of time,
to fulfill the law in his own person, for quickening by his death, those that
were dead in Adam to make them capable of eternal life; and for that to this
end he had dyed, risen again, and ascended into heaven: and for that also
he gave himself freene to the death, ready to deliver up his life for the
life of the world; and for having left us a lively representation of this so
great a benefit: and for that he had taken the bread in his holy hands,
blessing, sanctifying, breaking and distributing it unto his Disciples and
Apostles, saying: Take, eat, This is my body, etc. and for having done, in
like manner with the cup, saying, Drink ye all; This is the cup of the new
Testament in my blood, etc. And in this place in the process of this goodly
Preface, was read in a brief manner the institution of the holy Supper, as it
is to be seen also in all the Lithurgies: The Lithurgie of S. Basil. The
Lithurgie of S. Denis.
and this action was shut up and ended, with the answer of the people in these
words: Lord, we remember herein thy death and passion, and do emfesse thy
resurrection, until the time of thy coming, or as it is read in S. Denis, with
a protestation, Lord (...), Thou have said, Do this in remembrance of me: which
done, the bread and the wine were held consecrate, sanctified, and for
sacraments, by virtue of the institution of our Lord, which is always
powerful, and has his efficacy, and not by virtue of certain words spoken
over the elements. Of which thing as shall be declared in his place, the
purest old Churches never dreamed. Then there followed a prayer, that it would
please God to show them all the mercy, as that they may communicate the body
and blood of his Son, by a true and lively faith, and not to their
condemnation and judgment; as also that it would please him to knitte them
altogether in true charity and love, in the communion of his Son by his holy
spirit, even in so effectual a manner, as they did certainly eat and drink
all of the same bread and cup: then the conclusion followed with the joining
thereunto of the Lords Prayer: and after that, for a sign of this holy union
of their spirits and wills in Christ, a mutual kiss, the sign and testimony
either of true and inviolate amity, or else of an unfeigned reconciliation, and
that they had not vainly and for a fashion spoken, The kiss of peace.
Forgive us our sins, as we forgive them, etc. and thereupon also it was
called Osculum pacis, the kiss of peace: as also further, to signify that
this knot of the unity of the faithful, did not end in this world. After this
peace, there was mention made of them, who either had lived well, or which were
dead in Christ, especially of the Martyrs, whose names were read (...), that
is, out of a certain register or catalogue: partly (says S. Denis,) to
signify that they were not dead, but verily living: (and therefore the
Primitive Church, called the death of man, by the name of birth and nativity:)
and partly to stir us up to the same constancy by their example: Now when
this was finished, the Pastors and Deacons, which were to distribute the holy
Supper, did first communicate themselves, and after delivered the bread and the
cup to the faithful, and gave it them in their hands, speaking the
significatiue words of this holy Mystery; but so as that they did not all
bind themselves to utter them in the same terms. And during this whole
action, Psalms were sung by the people, and that such as concerned the thing
in hand: and the same in the end was shut up with a solemn thanksgiving,
and before that, it was not lawful for any man to depart and go away: and
all this was always done in a tongue, which the people understood, and with
so loud a voice as might be, that so the people might be able to say, Amen.
And this order will we run over again, particularly, according to every
part of same.

Of the Preface speaks Chrysostom, saying, when we begin to say, The Lord
be with you, Of the Preface Chrysostom. in 1. ad Corint. hom. 36. and in 2. hom.
18. Chrysostom. hom. de Eucharist. and ad Heb. hom. 22.
the people does answer, And with thy spirit: Again, In the holy and
reverend Mysteries the Pastor prays for the people, and the people for the
Pastor: for these words and with thy spirit, can not tell us or give us to
understand any other thing: The council of Nice 1. says, Let us not rest our
selves in the bread and wine which are set upon the Table: but let us lift up
our hearts on high, that is, Sursum Corda, namely, to the Lamb of God, etc.
Chrysostom, Have not thou promised to the Priest, who says, Lift v^^o your
h^artes and minds on high; we have them fixed and settled in the Lord? This
table is altogether furnished with mysteries: the Lamb of God is offered for
thee, etc. And in an other place; We lift up our minds on high: This is a
table for Eagles, and not for Crows to feed at, etc. S. Augustine; August. de
bono persevere. cap. 13. de vera: elig. c. 3. de bono vid. cap. 16. Epist. 15.
in Psalm. 85. etc. Chrysostom. in hom. 26. in. Genes.
That which is said in the sacrament of the faithful, namely, that we should
have our hearts raised up to God on high, Vt sursum corda habeamus ad
Dominum, shows that it is a gift of God: as also, in as much as the Pastor
says unto us afterward, that we are to yield him thanks, and that we make
answer, that it is meet and right, that we should so do, etc. And these
words are repeated in an infinite sort of places: And yet (says Chrysostom)
not because he has need of our thanks, do we say unto him (...), etc: for
who is able sufficiently and worthily to perform such a service, seeing the
Cherubius cannot attain unto it? but he wills it, to the end that the gain
may redound to our selves, etc. And the reasons of this thanksgiving laid
down by the Minister of the Church, in the short abridgement of the history
of the redemption of mankind, or rather of the Church, are no less to be
noted and marked of us. Chrysostom, We thank God (says he) in this
Sacrament, for that he has delivered us from error, Chrysostom. in hom. 24. in
1. ad Cor.
for that he has adopted us for brethren, so far off as we were from al hope,
by reason of our impieties, and therefore we call it the cup of blessing, and
the Eucharist. In the lithurgie likewise, which is attributed unto S. Basil,
is wholly set down the story of our redemption, and in the very place of the
Canon of the Romish Mass, Of the Canon
and ends with the institution of the holy Supper, no word or mention made
of any propitiatory Sacrifice, other then of our Lord himself: to be short,
it is worth the noting, that we cannot by tracing out, find or meet with any
one step or footing of the Canon of this Mass in the old Writers, though
otherwise diligent enough to anotomize unto us the parts and prices of their
service: if it were not for one only place in S. Ambrose, in his books of
the Sacraments, and yet those books not acknowledged of all men to be his,
howsoever under his name for the foresaid end, abused most notoriously. S.
Ambrose says, S. Ambrose. l. 4. and 67. de Sacr.
Fac nobis hanc oblationem adscriptam, rationabilem, acceptabilem, quod est
figura corporis, and sanguinis Domini, etc. that is, vouchsafe O Lord to make
this our oblation and offering to be allowed us in our account, and hold it as
acceptable, because it is the figure of the body and blood of our Lord, who,
the day before he suffered, took bread in his holy hands, etc. And we have
said enough hereof before, namely, in what sense they used this word oblation,
according to the imitation of the Jewish Church, which is likewise plainly
seen by this prayer, framed according unto that of the law, Let the offering of
their gifts be acceptable. But whereas S. Ambrose uses this word, figure,
their Canon says, Grant that it may be unto us the body and blood of Christ.
Again, of this oblation, that is to say, of the elements of bread and wine,
taken from the Mass, and whole lump of the same, set before and presented
unto the belieuers, for Sacraments, and unto God for a sacrifice of
thanksgiving, in remembrance of the passion, death, and resurrection of
Christ, Saint Ambrose said, Vnde memores eius passionis, etc. precamur vt hanc
oblationem suscipias, etc. We pray thee that in remembrance of his death and
passion, etc. thou would receive this oblation upon thine heavenly altar,
by the hands of thine Angels, as thou did vouchsafe to receive the gifts of
Abell thy servant and dear child, and the sacrifice of the Patriarch Abraham,
etc. Now that which he speaks of the oblation of the Elements, made
Sacraments by the word, the Romish Canon upon the ensuing of the first
corruptions, and deprauing of things, took occasion to speak it of Jesus
Christ himself; so that what the one said of the figure, the other spoke of
the thing it self, and so by consequent make the sacrifice of Christ inferior
to those of Abell, Abraham and Melchisedech: Acceptable (says he) as those,
which indeed we know by the uniform consent of the whole Scriptures to have
been acceptable to God by no other means, save only in Jesus Christ. And let
us further note by the way, that in the Lithurgie which they attribute unto S.
Ambrose, they have razed and scraped out the word figure, that so they might
fit the Canon the better to that of the Romish Mass.

As for the consecration or blessing it was not attributed unto certain
words, Of the consecration or blessing.
and much less unto a prefixed and set number of words, but only to the
institution of the Lord, and to the effectual power thereof. And this
appears in that the old Doctors did never teach otherwise: and in that
diverse men have used diverse and different words herein also, for that in
diverse Lithurgies, the words are diverse, and herein likewise, for that the
Latins doubted not, but that the Grecia^s (as they speak) did consecrate; and
yet notwithstanding the Greeks did not make account that their consecration was
accomplished till afterthe prayer which follows the institution of the holy
Supper: the Latins on the contrary defend at this day, that it was
accomplished in these only words; Hoc est enim corpus meum, etc. Let it be
so. In these Lithurgies, wherewith they would dazell our eyes, and which they
attribute to S. James, S. Clement, S. Basil. S. Chrysostom, etc. according to
the translations of their interpreters, In S. Clement his Lithurgie. Ostendat.
the words of consecration are these, in the prayer which they make after the
reading of the institution of the Supper: We O Lord mindful of the passion of
thy dear Son, do beseech thee according to thy institution, that it will
please thee to send thy holy spirit upon the Sacrament here present and set
before us, who may cause and manifestly declare, that the bread is the body of
Christ, and the wine his blood, shed and powered out for the life of the world:
And so likewise speaks Cyrill in stead that in the Church of Rome, the
consecration is neither attributed unto the institution that goes before, nor
unto the prayer that follows, but unto the only pronuntiation or speaking of
their words, given and delivered by strict accountes without interruption, as
though forsooth it were some precise form of words, for the passing of some
bargain in the civil law, as the Schoolmen are wont to reason:
notwithstanding, that the Cardinal Caietan does hold, that when it is said
Benedixit, it was Benedictione laudis, non consecrationis, and that he was
never willing to make any exposition upon the pretended words of
consecration, because he could not find therein any ground or foundation
laid upon antiquity. Now as for these words how they should be understood
we will handle that point when we come to speak of the question of
Transubstantiation, so that here it shall suffice to have spoken of it by way
of history.

The prayer, The prayer.
that it would please God to make the faithful communicating to become more
and more one body and one spirit, that is to say, the mystical body of
Christ, is in all the Lithurgies above named, according to that which Saint
Augustine teaches. That the Sacrifice of Christians is, their being of many,
one body in Christ: That which is most worthy (says he) and notable in the
Sacrament of the Altar, August. Epist. 59.
is for that in the oblation, which the Church offreth, she is offered up her
self unto God, and to be offered (says he in an other place) is as much as
to be vowed and dedicated unto him: seeing that in this Sacrament we protest
by a sacred and sovereign vow, to dwell in Christ, and in his bond and
covenant: And therefore (he adds) I suppose that the Apostle commanded, that
in the sanctification and preparation going before the distribution thereof,
there should be certain prayers made. S. August. Ep. 118. et 1. Tim. 2.
He calls them (...); (because of the vow, as the Apostle says to
Timothy,) wherein this vow of union and agreement was witnessed: as
furthermore, the scope and drift of the Sacrament is, that we should grow to
be one with Christ, and one amongst our selves.

Of the Lords prayer Saint Augustine says, Of the Lords prayer. August sermon.
237. de temp. Item Epist. ad Paulinum. etc. Ambrose l. 5. de sacr. c 4. Hieron.
l. 3. aduers. Pelag. Council Tolet. 4. The kiss of peace. Chrysostom. in l. 1 de
compunct. cord.
After the Sermon we will come to the Prayer: you know whether we must come,
namely, to the holy Table, and that which you shall have first to demand of
God, Dimitte nobis debita, etc. forgive us our trespasses and debtes, as we
forgive them that are indebted to us. And in an other place: All the Church
almost concludes this whole prayer, with the Lords prayer, etc. And S.
Ambrose, and S. Jerome in like manner: That this Prayer was said, Post verba
Christi, that is, after the words of institution, and it was followed by all
the faithful: and there are also certain councels, which reprove the Priests
of Spain, for that they did not say it but upon the Lords day. And as for
the kiss of peace, Chrysostom says, The Lord commands to leave thy gift
before the Altar, and first to be reconciled unto thy brother, etc. We retain
the shadow of this commandment, and let go the substance and the truth
thereof, for it is a common custom, to be present at the kiss of peace, at
such time as the gifts are offered to God: but J fear me that it does come
from a number of you, from no further than the lips, etc. And in an other place
he puts it presently after the Lords prayer; We do all of us (says he)
fall down together) namely the Ministers and the people, and when we are to
come to the duty of the kiss of peace, we do every one mutually salute one
another etc. Jerome, Is there any that communicates against their wills? or
which in the administration of the holy food do put out their hand to take
it, but turn away their face, and offer the kiss of Judas. Saint Augustine
more plainly: After the Lords prayer (says he) there is said Pax
vobiscum, peace be with you, S. August. Sermon. de vigil. Pasch. In Ambrosiana.
In Graecis.
and the Christians do every one mutually kiss each other with a holy
kiss: but let the sign of the peace of Christ, which the lips do testify,
be rooted inward^ lie in the conscience, that so the hearts may ioyn, and be
united as close together as the lips. And it is the very same which is read in
the Lithurgies: Offerte vobis pacem, (...), Offer to your selves peace: Let us
salute one another with a holy kiss, etc. The peace of Christ and of the
church be always with us, etc.

Now after that they had prayed unto God to unite and knit them more and more
one unto an other in Christ, The Communion.
and protested their sincere union in the Spirit amongst themselves, there
followed the communicating and distributing of the holy Sacraments in this
form and manner: The Ministers did communicate amongst them, then they
distributed them unto the Deacons, and afterward the Ministers and Deacons unto
the faithful: This appears by the Canon of the first Council of Nice,
joined to Ruffinus: Let the Deaconreceiue the grace of the holy Communion, at
the hands of the Bb. Council. Nic. c. 18. Ruff. l. 1. c. 6.
or Pastor: and let the Deacon likewise distribute it in the absence of the
Pastor: where we see, that this action was not thought to depend upon the power
and effectualnes of the Minister, as some afterward would have had it: they did
distribute it under both kinds, the bread and the cup. Whereby it appears,
that (to speak in a word) it cannot be noted out of any old Writer, in any
one place, where the bread was separated from the cup, or the cup from the
bread. In S. Ambrose also, S. Ambrose. in 2 ad Cor.
who yields a reason, though not altogether so pertinent and fit: The
Sacrament which we receive (says he) serves both for the body and the
soul: the flesh of Christ for the salvation of the body, and the blood for
the salvation of the soul. Whereby at the least we learn with what
conscience our adversaries allege against us S. Ambrose his Mass, which they
have most lewdly gelded in taking the distribution of the cup from it: they
did deliver the Sacraments into the proper hands of the Communicants, men or
women: Eusebius. l. 6. c. 43
and this is manifest by that which is spoken by Nouatus, who gave unto every
one his part of the oblation being consecrated; and by the heretical woman,
who made show to take the bread at the hand of Chrysostom: and by these words
of S. Niceph. l. 13. c. 7.
Ambrose unto Theodosius: Will thou take with thy bloody hands, the holy
body of our Lord, etc? a most evident sign, that this opinion had not as then
taken place, that this operation did change the nature of the thing in such
sort, as that it might not be touched with the hands of Christians: and the
bread was given in gobbets, and the cup went along from hand to hand, according
to the multitude of the Communicantes; The words.
speaking and uttering unto them in diverse Churches, diverse words: As in the
Latin; Accipe corpus Christi, Take the body of Christ: Take the blood of our
Lord, and they answered, Amen: let it be so unto me; or So be it. An other
way: The body of our Lord, the blood of Christ keep and preserve thee unto
eternal life: Also, The body of Christ: And they answered, Amen: The blood
of Christ, the cup of life: Answer, Ambrose lib. 4. de sacr. cap. 5. S.
Clemens. in Lithurg. Microlog. c. 19.
Amen: as it is to be seen in the Latin Lithurgies, imitating therein the
words in the Gospel; Take, eat, this is my body, etc. Where in the mean
time we may note and mark, that the words which the Priest rehearses now a
days for himself alone, were then by the Minister spoken unto all the
faithful Communicantes. In the Greek Church, I give thee to communicate,
(said the Minister) the precious body of our Lord and Savior, for the
remission of thy sins, and to the assuring of thee of eternal life. And so
likewise of the cup, according to the words of Saint Paul: The bread which
we break, and the cup which we bless, is it not the Communion of the
body of Christ? And all the prayers in the mean time both before and after
have these words continually mingled amongst them; Let us not here think
upon any thing that is earthly, any thing that is carnal: all whatsoever is
contained herein is full of mysteries: This is a sacrifice of praise,
spiritual, reasonable, without blood: a heavenly bread, which is received
by a firm and constant faith, and by a mind purged from uncleanness: a Christ
which is distributed, without being divided into parts, eaten without being
chewed; and which nourishes, without being wasted or consumed, etc: that so
we may learn always to keep the reverence due unto the Sacraments, and
notwithstanding, not to confound them with the thing it self: that we may not
think of any proper change, that should be wrought in these signs: but
rather of the change, which this spiritual nourishment, which joins us to
Christ, ought to work and does work in us. Let us add hereunto, that it is
most certain, that there was never any Service said at this time: but there
was also the administration of the Communion joined therewith: and that all the
Canon now received, speaks of nothing but of the people their being assembed
and come to gether for a Communion, Cassan. in praefat. ad Ord. Roman.
and their offering and communicating, not mentioning any such thing to be
done of the Priest; insomuch, as that the best learned, and that before we
began to have any controversies with them, did openly hold and dispute it:
that the Canon could not be read, neither have any work or operation in
private Masses; proving the same by S. Gregory. Psalms in the time of the
distributing of the Sacraments.
Now all the while the Sacraments were in distributing, because it was not
without the spending of much time, there were many Psalms sung. Those which we
find to be most usual, are the 23. The Lord is my shepherd, the 34. I will
bless the Lord at all times, and especially this verse: Taste and see that the
Lord is good: the 145. O Lord my God, and my king, I will praise thee: the 103.
My soul bless the Lord, S. Dionys. in ^. De Hierarch. Cyril. Catech. Liturg.
S. Clement. August. lib. 22 Retract. c. 22.
etc: as may be seen in S. Denis, S. Cyrill, S. Clement their Liturgies and
others; especially those of the Greeks, seeing that at Rome they began at
this time to divide them into verses. The place of S. Augustine is clear and
evident for the purpose, speaking of Psalms; Let it be (says he) that they
be sung before the offering, or else at such time, as it is distributing to the
people, which has been offered. And it must not be forgotten, that the Psalms
quoted above, are at this day for the most part, the most ordinary in the
reformed Churches of this Realm, in the time of the celebration of the
Sacrament of the holy Supper.

After the distribution followed a Thanksgiving, Thanksgiving. S. August.
Epist. 50. Dionis. in Hier^. 3.
according to that which Saint Augustine says; Gratiarum actio omnia
concludit: Thanksgiving in the conclusion, and ending of al. And S. Denis, The
holy Communion ends with a holy Thanksgiving. And Chrysostom, After the
hymn sung, they went up to the mountain: This word touches you who do not
abide and continue unto the end of the last prayer: for this song was this man
his shot: Our Lord began and ended with a Thanksgiving, that he might be an
example unto us for to do the like. Chrysostom. hom. 23. in Matthew.
And namely, in the Lithurgie that is called by Chrysostom his name, there is
for a Thanksgiving, the Song of Simeon, as is used in the reformed Churches.
But the ancient custom was (says he) in one place, that the faithful,
after they had heard the doctrine, offered their prayers, and communicated at
the Lords Supper, etc. did not return home to their own houses by and by
after that the Assembly was dissolved; but the richest caused their victualles
to be brought from their own houses, and calling the poor, did feast them
there in the Temple. Loue-feastes. Chrysostom. in 1. ad Corinth. Opotret haereses
esse. Tertul. in. Apolog. August. l. 20. c. 20. Sieve frugibus sieve carn^bus.
Council. Laodic. c. 27.28. August. ad Ianuar. Epist. 119. In a known tongue.
And this was the thing which was called in the Primitive Church by the name of
Loue-feastes, whereof we read in S. Jude: These are spots in our
loue-feastes. In Tertullian, Nostra caena, etc. Our Supper takes his name of
the thing it is called Agape, that is love: whatsoever it cost, yet this is our
gain, that we spend with godliness for the comfort and refreshment of the
poor, etc. And S. Augustine, Our loue-feastes feed the poor, whether it be
with bread or with flesh; you say that the charity of Christians is like to
the Pagans their Sacrifices, etc. But for certain abuses, which were therein
committed, this custom cease, yea, and there were express articles framed
in certain councels, that those loue-feastes should not any more be made in
the places appointed for prayer. Well may we see that in the time of S.
Augustine, the manner of making a Supper was continued, and that upon the day
of the Lords passion, in the breaking up whereof the guestes did communicate in
the Sacrament together: and this is yet continued in the Monasteries of S.
Benet, as shall be seen else where, and they call it mandatum. Let us add for
the shutting up of this speech: that both the one and the other service, as well
that whereat those were present which were cateehised, as that whereat the
faithful were present, was done in a language both well known and
understood: as namely, to the Latins in Latin; to the Graecians in Greek;
to the Syrians in Syriacke, etc. and which is more in a loud voice the people
not only answering, but oftentimes singing with the Ministers of the Church.
S. Ambros. in 1. ad Cor. c. 14
Whereupon S. Ambrose says, expounding that place of S. Paul; Better are five
words spoken in the church in a known tongue, then ten thousand others, etc.
That the intention of S. Paul was to reprove the Jews, which took pleasure
for the commending of their own language, to the use of this Syriacke in their
sermons and oblations, that is, in the celebrating of their divine service and
the holy Supper: directly against those which would maintain, that it is
sufficient, that sermons be understood, and not the service which is said in
the Church.

CHAP. VI. An answer unto certain objections: and what service it is which
comes nearest to that of the purest ancient times: that of the Church of
Rome, as it is used at this day: or that of the reformed Church.
NOw therefore we have seen in part, wherein the celebrating of the holy
Supper consisted, during all this time: that is to say, from the first Council
of Nice where we had left it, until the times of these great lights of the
Greek and Latin Church, S. Ambrose, S. Augustine, S. Jerome, S. Chrysostom,
S. Basil and others. Where we will note by the way, that the church of Rome
has had this il hap or rather curse, as namely, that in so plentiful a
harvest of learned men as that age did bear, it cannot be found to have
brought forth so much as one Doctor of any name or note in the Church; being
(as may be presupposed) more studious to set herself up the Monarch of the
world, then to establish the kingdom of Jesus Christ. But we may
notwithstanding imagine, that although in substance the service of these
churches did agree together, that therefore there was one and the same prescript
form observed and kept in them all. Diverse prescript and set forms of the
holy Supper. Damas. in Ep. ad Hieronym. August. ad Ianuar. Epist. 118. Council.
Veneticum.. Canon 15.
For besides that the differences and diversities amongst them in that respect
be more then palpable, it appears also in Damasus, that the Greek
Lithurgie, was differing from the Latin: again, amongst the Grecians, those
also are differing, which are attributed to S. Denis, S. Basil, and S.
Chrysostom: as amongst the Latins, those which are attributed to S. Ambrose,
S. Isidore, and S. Gregory. And S. Augustine writing unto Ianuarius says, that
Milain and Rome had diverse and differing ceremonies. And the council of
Venice held in the time of Leo 1. That not only in diverse Provinces, but in
one and the same there were differences of service: insomuch as that the
prescript and set forms were referred over to the discretion of the Bbs,
provided that they did keep the institution of the holy supper entire and
inuiolate; such as it is set down in the Gospels and S. Paul. And furthermore,
there is not any Lithurgie, how much soever it has been tumbled and tossed,
wherein the same is not found: which is the same that Optatus, who lived at
this time, calls Legitimum, Optat. lib. 2. aduersus Parmen. The additions of
the Church of Rome. Damas. in Ep. ad Hieronym. Tom. 1. Council.
quod in Sacramentorum mysterio praeteriri non potest: That legitimate, that is
to say, essential part, which cannot be omitted in the mystery of the
Sacraments.

But seeing that we are chiefly to stand upon the Church of Rome; let us
consequently observe and mark that which the Church of Rome has added unto
this service, throughout this whole time. Damasus about the year 368. writing
unto S. Jerome, prays him to send him Psallentiam Graecorum, the form of the
Grecians singing; because (says he) there is such a search and striving
after simplicity, as that upon the verte Lords day, there is not read any
more then one Epistle of the Apostle, and one chapter of the Gospel: Et nec
Psallentium mos tenetur, nec hymni decus in ore nostro cognoscitur, that is to
say, the decent comelines of singing of Psalms is not known in our mouths,
etc. And thus we return to the thing whereof we spoke before; namely, that
of old there was no certain introit in the Romish Liturgy: and so we have
seen that the Psalms were more ordinary there than any other thing: for even
after the council of Nice, for to discern and know the sound and true
believers from the Artians, the Gloria Patri was ordained to be added to the
end of them, and that in the time of the Emperor Constantius. Theodoret. l. 2
c, 34. Sozom. l. 3. c. 19. C. Sacerdos. C. Apost. auth.
The Orthodoxes said Patri, and filio, and spiritui sancto, that is, to the
father, to the son, and to the holy ghost: the Arrians who would seem to
counterfeit them, Patri per filium in spiritu sancto: to the father by the
son, in the holy ghost. Anastasius about the year 405. ordained that as well
Clerks as the unlearned people, should stand at the reading of the Gospel.
Innocentius the first, in the year 411: that at the assemblies and solemn
feasts the Pax should be given to Christians before the receiving of the
Sacrament. This leapt into the room of the holy kiss, which we noted to have
been used before, in sign of mutual reconcilement of every one to another;
D. 1. de Conse. Can. Pacem. de Conseer. Did. 2. Bergom. l. 9.
and was called The publishing of peace, in these words, Pax omnibus
fidelibus, etc. Celestine the first, about the year 418. that the Psalms of
David should be sung by countervoices, that is to say, by course one verse
aunswering an other, by all the people, before the celebration of the holy
sacrament: and from that time ever after, they were divided into verses for the
Introit, the Graduell, and the Offertorie. The Introit was that which was sung
at the entering into the service. The Graduel that, which was properly sung when
the Deacon went up to the steps of the pulpit for to read: and the Offertorie
that which was sung, while the people were offering up their gifts. Leo the
first, about the year 440 added this prayer, Hanc igitur oblationens, etc. We
pray thee therefore o Lord, that thou would favorably receive the offering
of our service, as also of thy whole family, and to settle and dispose of our
days in peace, without going any further, which, who so will diligently weigh
and consider, shall find that these words in the Canon did immediately follow,
Haec dona, haec munera, haec sancta sacrificia illibata, that is, These gifts,
these sacrifices, for it is spoken by name, super oblata, of the gifts and
offerings of the people: and all that in the midst was notoriously placed in
afterward, without any natural coherence or hanging together. The same Leo the
first did likewise thrust into the prayer, Vnde memores (mentioned by S.
Ambrose) after these words, Ambros. lib. 4 c. 6. Sabel. Ennead. 8. l. 1.
Sigibert in Chronic. Polyd. l. 1. c. 21. Nauclerus in Genesis Innocent. 3. de
Sacrament. altar.
Let thy high priest Melchisedech offer unto thee, those which follow, a holy
sacrifice, an immaculate host, drawing the words of the prayer by little and
little ab oblatis ad oblatam, that is, from the gifts of the people, to the
part which was consecrate by the minister for the use of the sacraments. And to
him likewise does Nauclerus attribute Orate per me fratres and Sorores, and the
Deo gratias in the end. Gelasius came about the year 409. who ranged and set
in order the Collects and complends, amongst the which there are some which yet
do stand and continue pure and uncorrupted: and the same were reperused and
handed over again by Gregory, as he reports of himself. He appointed
likewise that the people should be blessed in the end with these words,
Benedicat vos omnipotens, etc, and that service was shut up with the song of
the three children in the furnace. Also, for that now the Church began to be
very rich of gifts, that the sacrifices, that is, the offerings of the people,
should be distributed and divided equally into four portions: for the Bb. or
Pastor, for the Clergy or ministers of the Church; for the poor, and for
the repairing of the church. And thereupon (and that not without cause) every
one being hereby thus tickled and pricked forward to add every day some thing
to the service as their fancy led them, the Mileuitane Council in the time of
S. Augustine took the matter in hand, ordaining that no other prayers,
prefaces, supplications, and masses, that is, Collects, Recommendations or
Impositions of hands should be used in the Church, but those which were
approved in that Council or Synod, Least (as the same says) by negligence or
ignorance, there might slip some thing which might be contrary to the faith:
and this reason is likewise given afterward by the Africane council: and it
came as yet timely enough if it had been well observed by those which after
came in place, yea by Gregory himself.

And thus be hold, The unlikeness of the Romish Mass.
we are come to the five hundredth years after Christ, finding in all this time
one service, consisting of confessions and prayers, Psalms, reading preaching,
blessing and distributing of the sacraments, according to the institution of
our Lord, singing of praises unto God, during the time of the communion, and a
thanksgiving for the end and conclusion, etc. without any new offering or
sacrificing up of the son of God, without any inuocating of the creatures by
praying unto the^, without adoring and worshipping of the sacraments, and
without, and as yet free from infinite other, both impieties and superstitions;
and therefore by consequent far from the Mass used at this day; and on the
contrary side, coming much nearer unto the manner of the holy supper, as it
is now used in the reformed Churches. The Romish Mass, which is the action of
one only man, saying, reading, speaking by figures in a language not
understood, that is, void of edification: then eating and drinking without
communion all alone: and yet speaking continually in the plural number, being
a cold ceremony, if ever there were any. The holy supper on the contrary,
consisting of a fervent prayer, by the which the Pastor makes open
protestation, The coker^ce and agreement of the Lords Supper, with that of old.
and declaration of the misery and destruction of mankind, for the people and
himself: of their serious repentance unto amendment of life, and of remission
of sins by faith in Christ: in Psalms sung with one consent of heart and
voice by all the people, for to quicken and stir up their fainting and over
dull spirits unto God: in the reading of the sacred word, and the interpreting
and applying of the same in his time and place by the Pastor; as namely, after
that he has in solemn sort supplicated the Almighty creator, in the favor
of his only begotten, that it would please him to open his mouth, for to teach
and deliver the same profitably, and the ears and hearts of the people for to
understand well: in a general prayer for the necessities of the Church, and of
the whole world: for Magistrates, pastors, the conversion of Infidels, the
extirpation and rooting out of heresies, the public peace, and all manner of
general and particular afflictions: in the reading of the holy supper, and
expounding of the same, by the which, namely the faithful, are exhorted to
come to the holy table, in humility and devotion, in assurance of faith and
ardent charity, with an earnest acknowledgement of their sins, and
notwithstanding in a steadfast affiance in the mercies of God, manifested and
revealed in Jesus Christ, admonished to renounce all rancour and hatred,
contentions and strife, and carefully to labor to be reconciled, if so be
that they be broken forth, and come to the knowledge of others: but the
impenitent and wilful obstinate are debarred from the same, and that not by
the voice and declaration of the Deacon alone; but by a severe denunciation of
the judgment of God, if they abuse the body of the Lord, as likewise by the
sense and feeling of their own consciences, or by the judgment of the Church.
After which things all and every one came near unto the holy table in decent
order and due reverence, to communicate the body and blood of our Lord; they
received the holy sacraments at the hands of the Pastors, with the most
significant words that are, either in the Gospel, or in any of the Epistles of
the Apostles, lifting up their hearts on high, and praying to God that it would
please him by the virtue of his holy spirit, to give them the flesh of his
son for their spiritual repast and food: and his blood for their drink
unto eternal life; seeing that of his infinite mercy he has vouchsafed to
make them bone of his bones, and flesh of his flesh, etc, that so they may
abide, live, and dwell continually in him. And during all the time of this
action the devotion of the assembly was cherished and nourished with the
reading of the holy scriptures, as most meet to declare the death of the Lord,
until his coming, and to record the unspeakable benefit of the same: with
singing of Psalms also, chosen out of purpose, both for the calling to mind
of man his misery, as also for giving unto them the sense and feeling of Gods
mercy; and thirdly, for the stirring of them up to give unto God for the same,
all unfeigned and solemn thanks. And finally there followed the dismission of
the assembly, with a prayer of the whole people unto God, containing a brief
thanksgiving, for that it had pleased him to make them to see and taste the
assurance of their salvation in the communion and participation of his
well-beloved son, joining thereunto the singing of the song of Simeon, used of
the old Church, as we have already seen, to the same end and purpose. And
after the solemn and accustomed blessing, admonition being given them, how
they should witness and testify the conjunction and unity, which they feel
and find in Christ, by the way and manner of that lively sense and feeling,
which the members of the body have with the head: they were to distribute
every one according to his ability unto the poor, for whom the Deacons were
to receive what should be given. I speak nothing of the order of Catechizing,
both publikelie and privately, which was wont to be appointed and practiced
certain weeks before, for the instruction and examination of such as should be
partakers thereof: the morning Sermon which ordinarily is spent in the
expounding of the doctrine of the Sacrament unto the people: and that also of
the after noone, tending to the stirring of us up to the giving of thanks
unto God. Now then let every man judge without being partial in the matter,
in which of these two it is, that antiquity rests, and in which it is, that
novelty has built her self a nest: as namely, whether antiquity dwell with
the Church of Rome, which of the old and ancient service retains only the
slight and unprofitable rind: or with our reformed Church, which has restored
and reestablished, both all the parts, as also the substance thereof unto his
former estate and whole right.

But here it is objected against us; Objections for ceremonies.
yet you cannot deny but that many ceremonies were now already brought into the
Church, and into the service and ministry of the same, which you allow not of
in your Churches. And who doubts, but that in the space of five hundred
years, containing more then one hundred thousand nights, the adversary Satan,
who uses to rise in the night, had sown mo then a few tares? And who can find
it strange, that in these fields, before time both possessed and husbanded by
the Gentiles, as also by the Jews, there should remain of their seed? And on
the contrary, who is he that will not wonder, where the door is once set open
to licentious liberty, traditions and man's inventions, if there should any
thing abide and continue sound and sincere? But who will not rather find
occasion with us to praise God, who in despite of Satan and all the malice of
the Devil, the tyranny of Custom, the licentiousnes of Tradition, the
slipperie nature of Superstition, the presumption of man's spirit, and the
darkness of ignorance, ouershadowing and covering all toward the end of this
time, has vouchsafed so long to conserve the principal part of his service,
at least so much as was of the substance? Or who will not yet more admire his
goodness, for causing as it were a new creation of the Sun of truth in these our
days, after so horrible a confusion, and after such an eternal and
everlasting night? S. Augustine writing of the ceremonies and Traditions of his
time, said unto Ianuarius; Before all other things, I would that thou
should know the great and maine point of this disputation, August. Ep. 118.
ad Ianuar.
that is, that Jesus Christ our Lord is willing to subject al his, and to bring
them to bear his sweet yoke and light burden, as he calls it himself in
the Gospel, and thereupon also it is, that he has joined and coupled together
the societies and companies of his new people by the Sacraments which are
very few in number, very easy to observe and keep, and yet notwithstanding,
most excellent in signification, etc And what is it that he says unto us
therewithal in the Epistle following? August Ep. 119.
Cortainelie (says he) it displeases me, that there is no more care and
regard had of things that are most safe and wholesome, and commanded in the
sacred books, whereas in the mean time every thing is full of presumptions,
(that is, of forestalled opinions) in such sort as that a man is more reproved
for having touched the ground with his bare foot these holy days, then if
he had made himself drunk with wine etc. So that the state and condition of
the Jews is more tolerable then that of the Christians: who as they have not
known any time of liberty, so neither have they been charged with any
other burdens, then those of the Law, (which was of God, and not with the
presumptions of vain man: for hereby the Church of God seated in the midst
of great heaps of chafe and darnell, undergoes, and is made to bear many
burdensome things, etc. And this S. Augustine said, upon the speeches of
certain Christians, which were given in such sort to abstain from eating of
flesh, as that they judged those unclean who did eat the same. And this thing
(says he) is most plainly against the rule of faith and of wholesome doctrine.
Now then let us shoule away this chafe and darnell, 2. Cor. 3.
laid upon a golden and silver foundation, sown in the field of Christ, and
notwithstanding adjudged worthy to be burned with fire by the word of the
Lord, and by the writ of the Apostle. Let us praise God only, that these good
Doctors have to deal with him; a Lord full of mildnes, a Master full of
clemency: but and if their works and inventions burn before the fire of his
spirit, yet at the least they are saved as concerning themselves, because of
the foundation, through his mercy in Jesus Christ.

They allege against us for the first, that which they call holy water, Holy
water. Basil (...) S. Spiritu ad Amphilochium. c. 27. Ambros. l. 2. de Sacr. c.
5.
going about to prove it unto us out of Basile in his book of the holy Ghost,
written to Amphilochius, where he says: We consecrate the water of baptism,
etc. And out of S. Ambrose; That in the Western Churches there was a prayer
made to God, that it would please him to bless the water, etc. I answer,
that this argument is not well framed, being from the water of baptism to the
holy water: from a prayer by which the use of creatures is blessed, according
to the nature and right use of every one of them, to the exorcising of a
creature turned quite an other way from his right use. And as for S. Basil, you
may add an other answer with Erasmus, that this book from the midst thereof,
contains nothing that is Basils. Gregor. Nazianz. hom. 3. de Sancto Ianuario.
And Gregory Nazianzene his brother had answered him, that baptism may
indifferently be administered with any water. And if the use of their holy water
were at that time in the Church, it had but S. Bafill his particular
approbation: and how comes it then to pass, that it is not found in the
Liturgy which they attribute unto him? For whereas some would impute it to
Alexander 1. let us not go about to offer the Church of Rome that injury, De
consecr. D. 3. Aquam.
either by word or belief, as that at that time when S. John said in his
Epistles: The blood of the son of God does purge us from all iniquity: there
should be a Bishop at Rome, that should say in his: That water besprinkled
with salt, and consecrated by prayer, does sanctify and make clean the people
after the manner of the ashes of the red cow, etc. But the very truth is,
that this water was brought in a long while after, and that by the imitating of
the Gentiles their purging or expiatorie water, who used it at this time, and
with the very same ceremony. Iustine says: The Gentiles when they enter into
their temples, Justinius Martyr. Apol. 2.
do sprinckle themselves with water, and then they go and offer sacrifice unto
their Gods. Valentinian a Tribune of war, under Julian the Apostate,
following him to the temple of Fortune, the Churchwardens which were at the
door, cast water upon all those that went in, in so much as that there lighted
one drop upon his cap: he then turning himself about, gave one of them a blow
with his fist, Theodor. l. 3. c. 15.16.
esteeming himself (as says Theodoret) defiled and not cleansed thereby,
because he was a Christian. And furthermore he says the like elie where: as
namely, that Julian caused all that which was sold in the market to be
sprinkled, to the end that the Christians might not buy any thing at all
there. And that by this sprinkling, they held that sins were defaced,
appears by these words of Hippocrates himself, de morbo sacro: Hippocr. de
morb. sacro.
that I may have nothing to do here with the alleging of Poets: In going in
(says he) we sprinkle our selves with this water, to the end that if we have
any sin, we may be purified and made clean. And Proclus says: That it was
not only made of fresh water, but of Sea water also, Proc. de sacrif. and
Magia. Turneb. in Aduers l. 13. c. 21. Athenaeus, l. 9.
because that salt is detersiue. And they sprinckle Aspergillum, either of
Rosemarie, or of the boughs of the Bay tree, or of the Olive tree: and not
only for the purging and cleansing of men, but Cities, Temples, and other
things without life, as also is practiced at this day in the Romish Church. To
be short, as they had amongst the Gentiles a peculiar and proper form of
sanctifying it, dipping therein, as Athenaeus tells us, a fire brand taken
from off the Altar, whereupon they offered their sacrifices: Durand. l. 4. c. 4.
so likewise have they a peculiar manner of making this, exorcising the salt
first, and then the water, and after that them both, being mixed together: which
being done, both they and the Gentiles do think that it purges away sins.

Of burning of incense, it was so common a custom amongst the Gentiles, Of
burning of incense. Theod. l. 3. c. 16. Sozom. l. 5. c. 17.
as that Julian the Apostate, that he might cunningly bind the Christians to
the same, ordained, that when any came unto him according to the custom, to
receive any gifts at his hands, they should burn incense before him,
whereupon certain notable Christians having understanding of his purposed
intent, came and brought them back again unto him, that so they might not be
polluted: and but for a little he had caused them to have been put to death.
Ruffin. lib. 1. C. 36.
To be brief, Thurificantes, that is, such as burnt and offered incense unto
creatures, no otherwise then to idols, were in old time accounted amongst them,
which had turned aside from the purity of Christianity. But whether it come
from the Gentiles, or from the Jews, amongst whom incense represented the
sweet smell of the holy prayers of the faithful in Gods nostrels: by the same
manner of perverse and lewd imitation it came to pass, that in the end it was
brought into the Christian Churches: but yet not so soon as some would have us
to believe. For S. August. S. Ambr. S. Basil, S. Chrysostom. and other ancient
fathers do not speak one word of it in any of all the books they have written:
if only certain Lithurgies alleged out of them be excepted, which yet
hereafter we will confute and prove to be false and counterfeit stuff. S.
August. in Psalm. 49. and 50.
S. Augustine to the contrary: Behold (says he) we are out of care: we go not
any more to seek incense in Arabia, God requires of us a sacrifice of praise:
and such a sacrifice had Zacheus in his patrimony, etc. Again, shall we not
then offer any thing unto him? shall we come before God in such sort? How then
shall we appease his wrath? Offer, thou have whereof to offer in thy self: go
not about to take any far journey to buy incense, Plat. in vit. Sixth. 1.
Polyd. l. 5.
but say: Thy vows are upon me, O Lord, which I will render unto thee in
singing of praises unto thee etc. The only man wherein it is found, is S.
Denis, an Author better stuffed with vain ceremonies, then with solid and sound
doctrine. And a long time after, about the year 800. we read that Leo 3.
ordained that it should be used in the Mass.

For Tapers, waxe-candles, and lights in the Church: it is to be noted, that
the greatest part of Christians their divine service was done in the beginning
in private, Lights.
and secretly before day; as we may read in Pliny the second, and in all the
ecclesiastical writers, and thereupon they could not be without light. Now
this custom of coming together in the night because of persecution, did
likewise continue and hold on in the times of peace: Eusebius. l. 4. de vit.
Constant.
whereupon it comes, that we read, that Constantine continued in holy watch
until it was day, and caused to be lighted for his going to the place, and
coming back again, great wax candles, Tapers, and very great torches,
throughout the whole City, and lamps in the place of prayer, to give light to
them that were present. Epiphanius calls them thereupon, Psalmos and
orationes lucernales, Epiph. l. 3. t. 2.
that is, Psalms and prayers which were said by a lamp: and this was the
office of the Acoluthes, (...), to light them. after clear day, we do not see
that ever the Primitive Church did ever use them. Tertull. in Apol.
Tertullian on the contrary: Wherefore (says he) do we not deck the posts
with baies upon the days of joy, and why break we not off the daylight, by
lighting torches? Again, Who forces the Philosopher to sacrifice, to play the
malecontent, Lanct. l. 6. c. 2.
and to light fond and vain torches at high noone? because the Gentiles
constrained the Christians to do it. And Lactantius after he perceived that he
had been a long time mocked of the Pagans, at length concludes in these
words: Who can esteem or make account of him to be wise, which offers
candles and lamps for gifts unto him, who has created and given the light? a
reproach which had been unfitly charged upon the Pagans, if then it might have
been cast back upon, and objected against the Christians. To be brief, the
Elibertine Council forbids them upon pain of the curse, to light any in
the places of the burial of the Martyrs, being the places where the Christians
used to assemble and come together: for he called it, The troubling of the
Ghostes and spirits of the Saints and holy ones. But (as a great number of
others did) this ceremony took his passage from the Gentiles to the Christians
in the time of S. Jerome, that is more then 400. years after the death of our
Lord. And Vigilantius the Pastor of Barcelonia writ against the same, Conc.
Elibert. c. 34.
complaining of it, that he should see the superstition of the Pagans drawn
into religion; and derived and fetched from the Gods of Paganism, to be
bestowed upon the Christian Martyrs. Saint Jerome did boldly take him up for
so writing: yea and somewhat too sharply in the judgment of the soundest
writers: so far as that Gregory himself said that he could have desired,
that he had proceeded more modestly against him: and yet at the vpshot he does
not defend them, Hieron. cont. Vigilant.
except you call it a defending of them, to turn his back upon them and run
away from them: We do not (says he) light candles when it is clear and
bright day, as you do slander us, but we do use the light for the mitigating
of the tediousness of darkness, that so we may watch until day, etc.
Elsewhere he confesses, that there are some in deed, which do lighten them
even at noone day, but that it is through ignorance and simplicity in honor
of the Martyrs: With a godly zeal (says he) but not according to knowledge.
These reasons in conscience, are they not directly against the practice of the
Romish church? In an other place he obiecteth against Vigilantius: that in the
Eastern Churches they were used to be lighted, when the Sun did shine, at such
time as the Gospel was read: not (says he) to the end that they should give
light, but for to be a sign of joy and rejoicing. So that in the end, they
grew from the forbidding of them, to wink at them, to a tolerating of them, to
the approving of them: and by these degrees under Gregory the Great, some
hundred years after, to an express commanding and ordaining of them: Gregor.
l. 12. in dict. 7. cp. 9. Platina in Sabiniano. Du^^nd. l. 4. in Ration.
Extrauag. de celebr. Miss. c. sin. etc. Of the cross. Coloss. 1.20. Galat.
6.14.
for he it was that ordained the revenues for the maintenance of wax
candles and tapers. And Sabinian his successor: let the lamps burn continually
in the Temples. Whereupon Durandus and others going about to give a reason,
think it better to say, that this is after the example of the candlestickes of
the old testament, deriuing the Christians from Iudaisme, whereas the Apostles
had taken great pains to draw and pull them quite away from the same.

Of the cross they allege marvelous wonders. They make a thousand
allegories, and as many hyperboles. But what can be said more then S. Paul
says: God has reconciled all things to himself, having made the atonement
by the blood of the cross of Christ: And in an other place: God forbid that I
should desire to know or rejoice in any thing but in Jesus Christ, and him
crucified. But roundly and all together at a blow we see them come down from
this cross, that is, from the death and passion of our Lord, the effectual
powerfulnes whereof is adored of the Angels, unto the only sign of the cross,
namely the form of the wood whereupon he was hanged: and there passing over
according to their custom, from the signs to the things, and from the
things to the signs, they come to attribute unto this dumb and naked sign,
all whatsoever is said either by the Apostles, or by the old fathers, of the
true and very cross of Christ: I mean not that of very wood, that is the
thing that there is least reckoning made of: but that of the precious blood of
our Lord, verily and really shed upon the tree of the cross for us. How much
more worth had it been for them to have dwelt and rested upon the first
terms and phrases of speaking? Galat. 2.29 3.2
To have Jesus Christ (says he) painted before our eyes, crucified amongst us
and we with him. Now S. Paul teaches us, that the cross of Christ was an
offense unto the Jews, and foolishnes unto the Gentiles: and the truth is, that
they scorned and cast in the teeth of the Christians, Minut. in Octauio.
Tertul. in Apol. c. 16. (...)
Cruces ferales, the deadly and mortal cross, and called them, Religiosos
crucis, the religious cleauers unto the cross, etc. as until this day the
latter Jews do not call him by any other name, then the crucified one.
Whereupon the Christians, to show that they were not ashamed of the cross, but
rather that it was their glory; did plant it in the midst of their forehead,
and made it their mark and badge: and whereas the infidels would show it them
in token of a mock, they devised how to use it with honor and reverence, and
turn the matter of their reproach, into a most worthy monument of their
victory, and sign of their triumph. It is to the same purpose, Tertul. de
coron. milit. Augu. de verb. Apost. sermon. 8, and in Psalm. 41.
that Tertullian says: Frontem signaculo crucis terimus: that is, we do
oftentimes mark our selves in the forehead with the sign of the cross. And
S. Augustine, We have a heart, but not such a one as yours: we are not ashamed
of the crucified one, that is to say, of Christ: for by contraries we deal,
placing the sign of the cross, where shame is wont to be most apparent in his
signs, that is, in the face or forehead, the barest and most uncovered part of
man. But think not for all this that they did worship either this sign, or
the figure and shape of the cross: yea rather in the beginning, this sign was
made amongst the Christians in the air, Arnob. l. 8. aduersus gentes, aut
Minutius. Cyril. 6. contra Iulianum.
and so went away, having no abode: and those which have written 300. years
after the first writers, at such time as the Gentiles did reproach and revile
them therewith, say in plain and evident terms: We do not adore or worship
the cross, neither do we wish for or desire it, but rather your selves,
(says Arnobius) who consecrate Gods of wood, and do worship the crosses of
wood, Chryso. hom. 55. in Matthew. August. tract. 118. in Johan.
yea these make you the parties. And Cyril against a like reproach of Julian,
aunsweeth flat; That the Christians do neither adore, nor honor the sign of
the cross. But if in any place, there be any found which happen to fall in
praising of the cross, saying, that it perfecteth all the Sacraments, that
there is not any thing well done without the sign of the Cross, etc. it must
be understood to be spoken by way of alluding unto the cross of Christ, and to
the efficacy of his death, as that whereupon are founded all the Sacraments
and Mysteries of the Church, Hieronym. ad Eustochium. Athanas. de humanitar.
verb. August. de peccat. merit. l. 2. c. 26. Contr. Faust. l. 19. c. 14. and in
Psalm. 141.
and without which all the doctrine of the same is as though it were not. As
when Athanasius said: That the Devil does go away at the sign of the Cross:
he adds presently, that this is by the calling upon the name of Christ. But
and if our adversaries will needs take it strictly according to the letter,
then let them learn also to be of the same mind with S. Augustine, when he
says in the very same places; That the catechized in a certain manner were
sanctified by the sign of Christ: That the sign of the cross is a Sacrament,
which is received in the forhead, as the others are in the mouth and in the
body: improper speeches as well the one as the other, and have begotten and
hatched suitable and like opinions. Else, what will they say to Thomas Aquinas,
who maintains and defends, that the sign of the cross is not necessary
in the sacraments? And how much better had it been to the purpose, for them to
have kept themselves to the serious meditation of the true cross, the death
and passion of our Lord? But all that they thus struggle and strive for, Thomas
3. p. Summae, qu. 84. artic. 42. add. 3.
is to be able to approve and make good, the signs of the Cross, which are so
often in the Mass: but yet they cannot tell how to become friends with S.
Denis, who amongst so many ceremonies reckoned up in his lithurgie, has not
made any mention at all thereof.

But they tell us, The lithurgies of this time.
that all these ceremonies are found in the lithurgies or offices of this time;
as that of S. Basil, S. Chrysostom. etc. as likewise many doctrines which we
approve not. I avouch and confess the same most freely, and reserve the
doctrines to handle them in their place: but I answer here in a word, that I
will not let to indorse and write up the title of false and counterfeite,
against all these lithurgies, and that by proving either that they were never
written nor made by them; or that if they did ordain any prescript form of
the administration of the sacrament in their diocesses (as there is some
appearance and likelihood that they did:) that according to the measure of
abuses that have been brought in, they were corrupted and depraved afterward.
And first, he that shall compare that which the Syrians use under the name of
Basil, with that which we have, shall find most notable differences therein.
Then again of that which we have, there is one pattern and copy which the
old interpreter did use: and another which the latter and new interpreter did
use; and so likewise it stands with it, in the matters of substance.
Secondly, for that that, which is attributed unto Chrysostom, is not agreed
upon by the copies of Leo Thuscanus, Erasmus and Pelargus: one of the making
mention of the dead, and of the inuocating of the virgin, there being nothing
in the other concerning the same: one of them also being printed at Rome, and
the other at Paris: where may also be observed the forward readiness, and
zeal of one place to corrupt and falsify a thing more then another, which is
a matter of no small moment, to cause men to doubt of the truth of them both.
And furthermore, the Doctor of Espence notes: Claud. Espenc. de Missa priuata.
That this Leo went about to alter and change that which Chrysostom had said
of the private Mass, into an ill favored sense, and that far from the purpose
for which he had delivered it: fitting and applying it to the fashion of the
Latin Church in his time, into which as then they had brought the same: for he
was Secretary to Emanuel Emperor of Greece, about the year 1170. and did
interpret unto him the writings of Trithemius the Abbot. Which
notwithstanding (says he) I do not stand upon, either to make it
suspicious, or to be thought unworthy of Chrysostom, and the Greek Church:
but rather to cause that it might be received and certainly known, that as it
was begun by Saint Chrysostom, so it had been amplified and enlarged by
others in succession of time. The same likewise for the same reasons may be
said of Saint Basil. Thirdly, we have the (...), both in the one and in the
other. And we have showed before, that it was not received till about a
hundred years after them, by Proclus Archbishop of Constantinople, and in
both of them there is mention of Confessors, after the Martyrs. Now it is
confessed by our adversaries themselves, that their name was not received into
the service of the Church, till a long time after, and yet also a great deal
later into the Latin Church. We find also in both of them the name (...) the
mother of God, speaking of the holy virgin: the doctrine concerning the same is
as old, and was borne with the Church; but the heresy of Nestorius gave
occasion of the word, first received in the Councels of Ephesus, which were
after them. In both of them we find the offering up of incense (...), for the
remission of sins: a ceremony altogether unknown unto these ancient
fathers, and a blasphemous doctrine not tolerable amongst Christians. In that
of Basil particularly we find the (...); in Latin Panis Catechumenorum, the
holy bread, to be distributed after service, unto them which had not
communicated; not known at this time in the Church of the Grecians, neither
yet mentioned in Basil, Nazianzene, nor Chrysostom: again, in that of
Chrysostom by it self, the Priest adoreth the image of our Savior crucified,
and of the holy virgin: a thing not heard of in the Greekish Church for 300.
years after, neither made mention of in any one of all his books, though he
writ very many volumes; and that amongst the rest, he was given very
diligently to write of the ceremonies of the holy supper: yea and which is
more, condemned by himself in express terms: Is not this (says he) a
shame, that those whom God has endued with reason, Chsysost. in hom. 57. in
Genes. c. 31.
do honor wood and stone? that those upon whom he has bestowed a voice and
speech, should be carried away to the worship of dumb things? yea do we
think that such brutish and beastly Apostasy can be within the compass of
mercy? Fourthly, join to the former, that there is mention made, not of
Chrysostom only, who is inuocated and prayed unto therein in certain copies,
but of many more Saints, who lived after Chrysostom: and that therein is
prayer made for the Emperor Alexius, and for the Pope Nicholas, by the name of
Oecumenius or universal. Now it is well known, that the Greek Church, did
never take any acknowledgement of the Bb. of Rome, by this name and title: but
that ever since the year 1054. the Greeks have degraded him, and set up in
his place the Patriarch of Constantinople, that is to say, more then 30. years
before Alexius came to the Empire. And from other places it is to be proved,
that the first of this name fell to be in the year 855. that is to say, more
then 200. years before Alexius: in so much as that this must needs be Nicholas
the Patriarch of Constantinople, of whom Zonarus makes mention, as living in
the time of Alexius, and not the Pope. Zonar. tom. 3. Bellarmin. de praef. To.
Pont. e Signibert. and Leon. 9. Ounph^fast. lib. 4.
And furthermore, in the said lithurgie are rehearsed all the names of the
other Patriarks: and what appearance of truth can there be alleged, why the
Patriarch of Constant. should be forgotten if it were made by him, and that the
rather, because the Bb. of Rome is remembered therein? as likewise for the
empire of Alexius: And the first of that name reigned about the year 1080.
This was 700. years after Chrysostom. So that he whosoever he was that was the
co^pounder and mingler of these liturgies, should have looked a little better
upon his receipt, and taken better aduisement with him in his matters. And
nevertheless, we gain and get the advantage in these points over and above:
namely, that by them it is said, that the people communicated every day in the
sacraments, and that under both kinds, not the clergy alone, as they call it:
that as then it was not known what should be meant by the private Mass,
neither yet by the Opus operatu^, the work wrought: and that there are in the
same many things for to condemn the Romish Mass: but no one thing to induce
or lead us to the approbation thereof: and let the same serve likewise for
other the lithurgies, which are attributed unto the same time.

As concerning the Decretall epistles of these times, Decretall Epistles.
they are not of any better pass then the rest going before. The very same
reasons persuade me to reject them: besides the barbarousnes, the fooleries and
ignorances apparent and evident in them. If we allow them to have been written
by the Popes, the^ let us also give this allowance unto the Popes, as to be the
most insufficient and least capable Bishops of any that were then living: and
to have been more Gothish then the Goths themselves. And yet in the mean, I
am not ignorant, how that the piety of these times was grown to a very great
confusion, as being much mingled with superstition, through the intermingle of
infidels with Christians: by reason also of the deep and dead bed of
negligence that Christians were fallen into: the great swarms of barbarous
people, and the ignorance of the Prelates: all which did one after another, as
it were hand in hand follow and fall out. But I say, that these as yet were but
the doting devotions of some particular persons, and were not grown up so
far, as to get a law upon their heads: Particular Superstitions.
(...), Vere appellemus, we may call them with the scripture, wil-worships or
services; the wandering and unruled devotions of some men, rather then of the
Church. As for example, when we read in S. Cyprian, that certain women carried
away the Eucharist in their handkerchefes, kept it in their coffers, and took
it every morning fasting. In S. Jerome, that it was wont to be sent to new
married folks, to take it at their own house together. In S. Augustine, that
it was wont to be given to infants, Council. Carthag. 3. cap 6. Council.
Hipponensis compendium. Council. Altisiod. Amphiloch. in vita Basil.
mistaking this place following: If you eat not the flesh of the Son of man,
you have no life in you, etc. In the third council of Carthage, and in that of
Bonne in Afrike: That it was put into the mouth of the dead, contrary to that
which is said, Take and eat, which likewise we read to have been practiced
by S. Bennet, about a woman that was dead, and forbidden in the Council holden
at Auxerre in express words. And likewise to be brief in that goodly book
of Amphilochius (if we will believe it) which tells us: that S. Basil caused
a piece of it to be buried with him, which he had kept, I cannot tell how
many years for the same purpose, etc. all of them being superstitions, which
have presidentes and examples of great antiquity; though nevertheless at this
day condemned by the Romish Church, which yet is feign to build and boulster
up her self with such antiquity. For who can tell into how many by-waies man
erreth and wandreth, when once he is out of the right path; or into how many
falsities and untruths he falls, when once he departs from the
institution of the Lord, to follow his own humor and floating fancy.

CHAP. VII. What a metamorphosis and misshapen change was wrought upon the
celebration of the Supper, about the time of Gregory the great, which happened
about the sixth age of the Church.
WE pass now from out of the calm paths of silence, into the rough and
unbeaten way of darkness; and from the glittering beams of dazeling pomp,
into the black duskish clouds of the dreadful ignorance of the Church; I
mean in respect of the outward face and appearance of the same, as it was then
to be seen. If the first did mightily enlarge the bounds of vanities and
ceremonies, no doubt the other was not behind in the promoting of superstition
and false doctrine. And that we may the more easily comprehend and compass the
truth hereof, let us briefly call to mind in what estate and plight we have
left, either the holy Supper, or the Mass, (and by this name only let us call
it hereafter, seeing that this name begins to get the upper hand in this
time and age, whereof we are now to speak.) It was an assembly of
Christians, calling upon the name of God by Jesus Christ, singing his praises,
hearing his word, attending unto the expounding of the same, as it was
delivered them by the Pastors: then offering afterward unto God, in giving
thanks for his graces, for the fruits and goods that he had given them, that
some part thereof might be consecrate to the use of the Sacraments, and some
part employed in the sustaining and nourishing of the poor, or for other such
like necessities of the Church. And as for the Canon, that is to say, that
principal part of service, in which the Sacraments were blessed, received and
communicated, we have left it, as it was composed and made of a preface, which
lifted up the spirits of those who were at it, on high; of a rehearsal of the
pure and holy institution of the Supper; of a prayer unto God, that it would
please him to give an effectual power, and operation to the sacraments, to
knit and unite together more and more those which were communicantes, to Jesus
Christ their head, and to the members of his body, which is the Church, and as
such to foster and feed them up unto eternal life, with a commemoration of the
holy Martyrs; of their life, and of their death, for the stirring up of the
zeal of every one so far, as that they may not grudge at, or be sparing in
any thing which might serve for the setting forth of the glory of God, neither
yet prefer any thing whatsoever to the working and assuring of their own
salvation: of the participating and communicating of the body and blood of our
Lord, under the Sacraments of bread and wine, distributed and delivered into
the hands of the faithful: during which action the Christian assembly was
occupied in singing of Psalms, and finally there was the dissoluing or
breaking up of the whole assembly concluded and finished by a
post-communion, that is, by a solemn thanksgiving, for the benefits received
in Christ, and recorded and sealed in the holy Supper. All this service was in
a language understood of all, common both to the Ministers of the Church, whom
they call Clearkes, and also to the rest of the people, whom they call lay men,
or the layetie: all, and every one of which, even to the simplest amongst them,
did answer Amen: that is to say, did ratify all the whole action, so much as
lay in them, and put to their vows and requests unto all that which was said
and done, as unto things by them well understood. Now let us in order look
upon, and see that which was added thereunto afterward, and let us judge
without all partiality of affection, whether this service be amended or
impaired by such addition and enlargement.

Certainly if the Mileuitane and Africane Councels had been well obayed, The
change and cause thereof.
we should not have had this trouble: for the ancient godly learned fathers
that were present thereat, seeing the licentious scope and liberty, that
every one gave unto his own conceit and fancy: one sort under the shadow of
tradition, and an other under the color of good intention, had very
excellently ordained and provided, that no man should dare to take upon him,
the placing or putting in of any thing without the advice of the most
graue-wise, and the authority of the Councels. But bold ignorance, which is
never without presumption, did quickly ouerskip all these bounds: and that so
much the more daungerously, by how much it was joined with preuayling
authority, which then grew up to his height: the authority, I say of the
Romish Church, which then succeeded the authority of the Emperors, and by
little and little inthronised her self in their seats of more then royal
estate, thereby growing mighty in power and credit, and nothing less or
inferior in being followed in every thing, as a most perfect pattern and
example. Then the Goths, the Hunnes and the Vandales, etc, more then a whole
hundred years, spoiled and made havoc of the Western Empire, and the
Persians and Parthians of the Eastern: whereupon it followed, that all good
literature lay raked up in the dust, and in no less wise did they weaken the
flourishing estates of all good and natural policy. The great and worthy
personages both in the East and Western parts, were taken away by death,
having been in their life time the lights of the Church, and the scourges of
heretics, and heretical opinions: their successors borne and brought up in
barbarousnesse, did go before them in power and authority, but they did not
succeed them in like measure of sufficiency. And this caused that the seeds
of Pelagianisme and other heresies, having lain a long time rather covered
then quenched, did revive, and found more careful husbanding then the good
plants: because they had more affinity with common sense, and the proud
aspiring driftes of our corrupt nature. So then those which could not so well
make their part good by sound learning, would yet bear the bell away with
setting a good face on it: and such as could not feed their flock with the
word of God, would fill them full with superstitions and ceremonies, and for
want of milk, like unto dry nurses, they would serve them with the first
licour that they met withal: and for lack of bread, they would set before
them husks. So then in this time and age we see all these novelties and
innouations to flow in with full stream, without any bar, without any manner
of let or bridle. Now became the computation of the shepherds Calender, to be
accounted of for a worthy piece of history, and the dream, of men for sacred
Gospel. And the Church likewise does then come forth upon the stage all masked
and disguised with the Pagane and Jewish guise, and that in a moment; and that
not by shifting her robes only, but (which is the worst of all the rest) by
shaking off all the commendable parts of gesture and matter.

Let us begin at the Greek Church. Additions in the Churches of the Grecians
We have spoken heretofore of the (...), brought in by Proclus a Patriarch of
Constantinople, and received into the Church, upon the naked report of a
certain child, who being extraordinarily rapt and carried up into heaven, said
that he heard it sung there. We have likewise handled the point, how in the
Council of Ephesus, as a thing following upon the disallowing and condemning
of the heresies held by Nestorius and Eutyches, it was said: That the holy
virgin might be called (...), that is, the mother of God. And now further
behold a certain man Petrus Gnapheus, who started up in Antioch, and thought
to make his advantage thereof, for the establishing of heresy and
superstition: this fellow was a priest of Chalcedonie, and of the sect of
Eutyches, who through the favor of Zeno Isaurus, afterward Emperor, shufled
himself into the Bishopric of Antiochia, by discarding Martyrius the true
and lawful Bishop of the same: and being received, then it was ordained in his
Church, which was of very large precinctes; Theodor. Anagnostes in Collecta.
that at the end of Trisagium, the hymn so called, because it contained these
words, Sanctus Deus, sanctus fortis, sanctus immortalis, miserere nobis, there
was added, Qui crucifixus es pro nobis, which wast crucified for us, applying
the same to God the father, whom in the unsoundness of his heretical
assertions, he held to have suffered for mankind, confounding both the persons
and the natures: and Nycephorus says, Nyceph. lib. 16
that the same continued even until his time. And moreover, that in all the
prayers made in his church, the name of the virgin the mother of God was
called upon, with an intent and purpose to make this doctrine plausible and
well liked of the Council of Ephesus, and as a bait for the giving of free
passage to the swallow of the rest of his heresies. Now it followed presently
hereupon, that the Emperor Leo the great being advertised of these novelties,
condemned him into banishment, until such time as he promised to disclaim and
give them over, which in deed he did, and made not show to the contrary,
until such time as that false and forsworn Basilicus went about to seize upon
the Empire, by the means whereof he recovered his liberty and license to
work mischief both at one time, his doctrine likewise being afterward
supported and borne out by Anastasius the Emperor, being himself an Eutychian.
Justinian the Emperor added somewhat, but destroyed no good thing: for it was
by him ordained that there should be sung in the Christian assemblies this
hymn, Paul. Diac. lib. 16.
(...), etc. Thou son of God, thou divine word, who being immortal, did
vouchsafe for our salvation, to take upon thee human flesh of the holy
virgin the mother of God, and always a virgin, dead, risen again, etc. save
us. This may seem to have been by the authority of the general Synod of
Constantinople, for the repressing of the Samosatenians, Arrians, Monothelites,
etc. And this was to honor the holy virgin, according to the intent and
purpose of the Council of Ephesus, being without all preiudicing of the honor
due unto God, and denied to all manner of creatures.

At this time also the Letanies or supplications were hatched, and that first
of all in the Eastern Churches, and then afterward in the western: not
without some imitatation of the Pagans their Ambaruales, or Gangweeke: and the
occasion thereof did first rise from Constantinople, by reason of a plague: then
from Lions, by reason of an earthquake, from whence they took their flight all
over the East and West. The form and manner thereof was this: They contrived
and drew into certain articles, the public necessities and calamities, that
did press them or threaten them: unto every one whereof, as it was uttered
and spoken by the Priest or Bishop which went before, the people answered:
(...), Lord have mercy upon us, Lord hear us. Praying unto Saints, or yet
unto the virgin Marie, was not admitted till a long time after, save only
where as Anastasius the Emperor, an Eutychian and favorite of Petrus Gnapheus
his opinions, and an innouator in this behalf, did undertake to set them a
foot, and give them force to stand.

But let us come to the church of Rome, where we shall find a great deal more
matter, Alterations and chaunges in the Romish Church. Alcuinus, Berno,
Rabanus, Walafridus, etc.
Symmachus the Bb. of Rome, about the year 506. ordained that every Lords day,
as also upon every festiual day, there should be sung Gloria in excelsis: but
this is attributed to Telesphorus by others. Other some distinguish betwixt
both, and say, that this man did not ordain it at all, but only upon the day
of Christ his nativity. So far is it off that the Grecians should have it
any sooner, for this is the same which they do call (...). He added in the
Council of Rome held under him: That no Priest in the Church of Rome shall say
any Mass without his priuitie. Now let men judge hereof, if this be not to
come back to that which we read and speak of in other places: That there was
not any more then one Christian assembly in every parish, in which the
faithful did pray unto God, heard the Gospel, and communicated together in
the Sacraments. Agapetus the first did institute the processions, Petr. de
Natalibus.
at the first, before the Mass at Easter: because (says Durandus) that the
Angels said to the women: Tell the disciples, that he will be before them in
Galile. And of these processions did spring those which were afterward said
upon the Lords days. This was about the year 535. Vigilius ordained about
the year 536; That those which were to celebrate the Mass should look into
the East: Petr. de Natal.
and ever since the most part of the altars were set and turned to serve for
the purpose: Also, That the festival days should have their particular
readinges and lessons: and yet notwithstanding he would have the gifts, oblata
munera, Vigil. ep. 3.
to be consecrated unto God every day after one and the same order of prayers.
Wherein we see, that the Canon was not then grown to a rule and set thing, as
we see it was afterward: and in an other place, that the prayers whereof he is
understood to have spoken, are referred; ad oblata munera, to the gifts which
were offered by the people: and not to the sacrifice of Christ the Son of
God, that pretended oblation made by the Priest, unto his father. The feast
also of Candlemas is attributed to him; and there is a reason given us for the
same. The Pagans, Rhenan. in Tertul. de corona milit.
(says Rhenanus) in the entrance of February did celebrate the feast of
Proserpina with burning tapers: Now that their wilful obstinacy might not be
incensed or provoked to coffeehouse, it was ordained, that the same day
there should be the like burning of them unto the virgin Marie: Jacob. de
Vorag. sermon. 82. de Sanctis.
and Iacobus de Voragine speaks of the same thing after the same manner.
Pelagius the second, about the year 580. ordained, that mention should be
made of the dead in every Mass, after the elevation of the host: (whether he
meant it of all the offerings, which after the manner of the old Testament were
wont to be elevated or lifted up, for a presenting of them unto God; or of that
part which was put apart for the Sacrament:) for so speaks Hermanus Gigas,
Hermanus Gigas.
using the terms current in his time to express what was then practiced in
this point, not being as then grown to that head and height of corruptnesse.
Whereby appears the truth of that which we said a little before: namely,
that that which was done for the dead, was a custom fetched and derived from
the Paganes, and not grounded upon any Christian law; a sufferaunce and not an
ordinance of the Church. And thus behold we are come to Gregory the first,
who of all these ingredientes thus dispensed and many more, makes one Mass,
which he calls the Romish order, or Gregory his Mass. And this is the
point whereupon we are now to insist.

Gregory then (as Historiographers do tell us) being come to the
Archbishopricke, The notable change and alteration under Gregory his time.
purposed to reform the whole order of the church in all the parts thereof; so
far forth, as that after that Platina had specified the masses, songs,
letanies, stations, processions feasts, Plat. in Grego. magno.
etc. What shall I say more, (says he) seeing all the whole order and
institution of the ecclesiastical office, (especially of the old and ancient
one) is invented and approved by him? which would to God we had kept, and not
received this barbarousnes, which so much distasteth all the learned men that
are living at this day, etc. But of a certainty under the shadow of redressing
the order and discipline which had sustained great injuries by the barbarous
inuaders and spoilers, he did not a little damnifie the truth and sincerity of
doctrine: wherein yet those which came after and succeeded him, (as says
Platina) did worse. The Introit.
For the lithurgie: It had no Introit in the beginning; and after that
Celestine had made one, Gregory would have it doubled and sung twice. The
Psalms at the first were wont to be sung entire and whole of all the people,
and with one voice, where afterward they were divided into pauses, and in the
end into verses; in the singing whereof the Clergy and the people did by
course sing one one verse, Hermanus Gigas in Flore temp. Psalms.
and the other the other. Gregory appointed an Antiphonarie for the time and
space of the whole year, consisting of Versicles and Responsories for every
day. Likewise he ordained a school of singers to sing the lithurgie, and he
labored greatly to have his song or manner of singing received every where
throughout the Latin Churches, finding himself much offended with the
barbarous voices of the French, Singing.
German and English men, Ioann. Diaconus. l. 2. c 6. and 7. Walafr. c. 22.
Kyrie cleison.
as not having been able to fit and tune themselves thereunto. He takes the
Kyrie eleison from the Grecians, and was found fault with therefore: for said
some: This is far off from reducing the Church of Constantinople under the
church of Rome, seeing thereby he did nothing else but draw their fashions and
manners unto Rome. But he excuses himself in these words: Amongst the
Grecians all the people do say it; but amongst us the Clergy (that is the
Ministers of the Church) only, and the people answers. Greg. l. 7. epi. 63.
indict. 2. Prayers.
Again, Look how often we say Kyrie cleison, so many times also do we say
Christ eleison: which is not done amongst the Grecians. For prayer, he made a
book, some part whereof was taken and drawn out of that of Gelasius, which is
called the Sacramentarie, containing those things which were to be said every
day throughout the year. If there be found (says Walafridus) any thing in
this book which halteth, it is to be thought, Gregor. l. 2. c. 17. Walafr. c.
22. Lessons.
that it is none of his, but that some other has added the same thereto
afterward: yea and there are old Masse-bookes to be seen, where are noted the
prayers, secrets, and Post-communions of Gregory, to make them tobe known
from the others, which in deed are more corrupt then his. For the lessons of
the Gospel and Epistle, he follows directly and altogether the book of
lessons, or the books called Comes, attributed unto Saint Jerome: save only
that upon the festival days, the institution of Pope Vigilius was received
and kept: and thereto also was his book of Anthemes fitted and squared,
endeavoring to raise and draw Anthemes taken out of the Psalms, to answer to
the several drifts and purposes of the lessons: whereas before this prescript
form of reading, the Gospels, Epistles, Prophesies, and other books of the
old and new Testament were read through. Sermons.
And as for their preachings and expositions of the word of God unto the
people, he speaks of himself in a certain place, that he had expounded
forty lessons out of the Gospel, as it had been accustomed to be read upon
certain days in the Office: Gregor. in praef. Homil.
and that some of his expositions were delivered by word to his Clearke or
Secretary, that he might afterward read them to the assembly: and that he
had himself pronounced and uttered other some of them with his own mouth. But
therewithal he complains himself greatly of the iniquity and abuse of the
time, which had prevailed so far, as that The Pastors of the church had left
and abandoned the chair of teaching and preaching of the Gospel, Gregor. D.
92.
and would not find leisure to do any other thing then sing. And this (says
he) grew, because singing men were advanced and placed in the Ministry of
the Church, who supposed themselves to have discharged their duty, when they
had opened their pipes, and tickled the people with their singing, though they
had done nothing unto them, either in instructing of them in the articles of
their faith, or in the doctrine of manners. For offerings, Offeringes.
they continued and were brought in every day, notwithstanding that the Church
was grown very rich: in so much as that diverse of the old Fathers complained
themselves saying, that the Bishops had not done as Moses did, who caused
proclamation to be made amongst the people, that they should not bring any
more, Gregor. in Dialogis.
when he saw that there was enough for the building of the tabernacle. For we
find likewise that in the time of Gregory, there were offered sheep, and
calves, etc, against the express Canon which commanded that nothing but bread
and wine should be offered. But the greater abuses happening about the
consecration of the offerings, cause us to leap over the other which were not
so weighty, with a lighter foot.

Now we have already seen that it was the peoples custom to offer of their
fruits and increase unto God, as the old people of the Jews did: and that
these fruits were consecrated unto him by a holy prayer, after the manner used
by the Priest amongst the Israelites; wherein he was humbly entreated to take in
good part that their thanksgiving, and to accept of this their sacrifice of
praise. And these fruits, as all the peace offerings amongst the Jews, were
lifted up or shaken for to show them unto the people: after that of the same
fruits, that is, of the bread and wine, was taken that which was sufficient for
the Sacraments, and the remainder reserved for the poor, etc. Now all this so
commendable a custom began not to degenerate, but to turn into a plain
poison, about this time of Gregory: Walafr. c. 22.
and not without just cause says Walafridus, seeing he ordained the order of
Masses and consecrations as well as of singing. For in deed the form of
consecration was so far changed at that time, by changing of the subject: as
that the words properly used in the blessing of the gifts and offerings, were
appropriated directly to the Sacraments. The Canon.
There then began the work about that part of the Mass, which properly they
call the Canon. In the Primitive Church the holy Supper was celebrated every
Lords day, and all the faithful there present, were bound to participate
thereof: by little and little their zeal waxed cold, whereof we hear S.
Ambrose, S. Chrysostom, and others to cry out. In the end it came to that
point, Can. non iste C. quotidie. de consecrat. did. 5.
that the people did not for the most part accustom any more to communicate,
neither were they pressed any thing thereunto by the diligence of the Pastors.
Whereupon likewise followed a tolleration and ceasing from the looking unto of
the severity and straitness of the Canons; namely those, which enjoined men,
that they should communicate at the least three times a year, at the nativity
of Christ, Easter and Pentecost: otherwise they should not be taken for good
Catholics, which afterward was restrained to the Nativity of Christ only.
And thus it came to pass, Synod. Agath. c. 18.
that there was not any one ordinarily to communicate, save the ministers of
the church, whom they call Clearkes or the Clergy. And what came upon this?
The Priests notwithstanding would not leave taking of offerings: and to the
end that the people might not quail, or let fall their devotion that way, they
make them believe, that the work which they do, does not cease to profit
them, being but only present. But by little and little these offeringes were
not any longer brought from the table to the Altar, or from the body of the
Church into the Quire, for to be consecrated by the priest: as also in deed it
had been indecent, seeing they were of such things, as the Canons did forbid,
that is to say, consisting of silver, wool, cattle, etc: only that part
which consisted of bread and wine, and was to serve in the Sacrament, continued
his former course. And yet whereas they were wont to consecrate many loaves for
the service of the whole assembly, being cut into pieces and distributed; now
the Priest contenteth himself with the blessing of so much as he thought would
be requisite and needful for the number of communicantes, and that was very
small. In so much as that ordinarily he needed not to consecrate above one
loaf, which in Gregory his time was great, large and round, kneaded after the
manner of common bread, and of no other substance or matter then the ordinary
bread then used was: he calls it Coronam, or Corollam, and this loaf grew
lesser, Greg. l. dial. 4.
even as devotion it self diminished, in so much, as that within a little
after it became nothing, as the Canon testifies, which says: That the Priest
cannot celebrate the Communion with fewer then three to communicate with him.
And thereupon also it came up for a custom to break the bread made so small
and thin, into three pieces; whereupon afterward, as we shall see in place
convenient, diverse and sundry allegories have been framed and made.

Now we come by these steps and degrees, The change and alteration, which was
ab oblatis ad oblatam.
falling out in this time, to pass ab oblatis ad oblatam; that is, from all
such things in general as were offered, unto this small petty part reserved
for the Sacrament, which by corruption came to be called a Wafer cake; from
such breads and loaves, as were usually brought for offeringes, (as Saint
Gregory teaches us) to one only bread without leaven; which also the priest
himself within a small time after took upon him to provide for the service of
the Sacrament. Gregor. in dialogis.
And so also the prayers and supplications which were wont to be said and made
in the consecration of these first offerings, came to be transferd and applied
unto the bread and wine appointed and put apart for the priest, and that small
company that was to communicate with him. And here it was, that they found
themselves encumbered, whether it were Scholasticus, or Gregory, when as the
question was of reforming these prayers that made up a part of the Canon: for
in deed these words, Vt accepta habeas and benedicas haec dona, haec munera,
haec sancta sacrificia illibata: that is, that thou would accept these gifts,
these offerings, these holy and whole sacrifices: Again, Qui tibi offerunt hoc
sacrificium laudis: that is, which offer unto thee this sacrifice of praise:
Again, Supra quae propitio vultu ac sereno respicere digneris, and accepta
habere sicuti dignatus es munera pueri iusti tui Abel, etc, that is, that it
would please thee to behold them with a merciful and favorable countenance,
and accept of them, as thou did of the offerings of thy righteous Son Abel,
etc: Again, Iube haec perferri per manus Angeli tui in sublime Altar tuum,
etc: that is, Command that these may be conveyed by the hands of thine Angel
upon thine high Altar, etc: I say, all these words cannot be soundly
understood, but of these offeringes: nor without folly be turned to the
blessing of the sacraments, which we receive from God, and in stead whereof it
pleases him to receive again at our hands the sacrifice of praise. No not
without blasphemy can they be wrested to the oblation which the Priest
pretends to make of the Son of God, seeing likewise that it is said: Qui
tibi offerunt; they which offer unto thee: for this must needs be meant of
the people that are present, and not of the priest alone. And yet
notwithstanding all this, they skip me at one iumpe in their Canon, ab oblatis
ad oblatam, from the oblations and offeringes, to the Wafer cake: without any
manner of agreement, coherence or consequence: from a sacrifice of praise, to a
Sacrament: and from a Sacrament, to a sacrifice propitiatory: from the sign
to the thing signified: and from the remembrance of the death of Christ, to the
pretended real sacrificing and offering up of himself. And they will have it,
that all this which has been spoken and said of these offeringes, should be
spoken of Christ, whom they pretend to offer and sacrifice up unto God:
notwithstanding whatsoever absurdities in construction and divinity utterly
conuincing and overthrowing them in their fond and blind assertions: As namely
in Divinity these: That he would be entreated to vouchsafe to accept of the
sacrifice of his only begotten son, as he did of that of Abel: That his
Angels should offer him up unto him upon his Altar: and a thousand such
impertinent things, which shall be better examined in their place. And
notwithstanding after certain prayers which stand indifferent betwixt both,
they cannot look to themselves to go on with the course which they are fallen
into, but they return again unto these offringes, yea and that after the
consecration: Per quem (say they) haec omnia Domine, semper bona creas,
sanctificas, viuificas, benedicis, and praestas nobis, by whom thou O Lord,
do always create, sanctify, quicken, bless and give us all these good
things, etc. which is most evidently and directly applied to, dona, munera,
sacrificia illibata, to the gifts, offerings, and whole sacrifices: and was
wrested by them first to the Sacraments, and afterward to the sacrifice of
Christ himself, which by such their account and reckoning, they did
acknowledge for a creature, that was to be created, sanctified, quickened and
blessed day by day. And in deed in the lithurgie which they attribute to
Clement, yea and that after the consecration they pray, Pro dono oblato, for
the gift offered: but in no such sense or meaning as the Romish Mass, that is
to say, after this manner: That it would please that our good God, to receive it
upon his holy Altar by the intercession of Christ, for a sweet savor: which
cannot by consequent be spoken of Christ himself.

In the Services going before there was mention made of Saints and Martyrs,
The Prayers of the Saints.
the names whereof, as says S. Denis, were read (...), out of a certain
register or catalogue: partly to show us that they did live and make up one
part of the Church: and partly to encourage us to follow their example: and
afterward the devotions or rather superstitions of some particular people had
brought it so about, as that they were prayed unto. But in this Canon they are
a great deal more forward; namely, to pray unto God, that he would receive
their merits and intercessions for the living. And it was in this time that
Gregory would have it put into the Letanies, for the virgin Marie; Ora pro
nobis Deum, pray unto God for us. And this in tract of time, became common, and
was not thought unmeet or unworthy of any one of the Saints. And indeed it is
most clear, that in the time of S. Augustine, not the Saints, but God alone was
prayed unto in the prescript form of the celebrating of the Lords Supper. The
place is plain and evident; They are named (says he) as men of God, August.
de Ciuit. Dei. l 22. c. 10.
which by standing unto their confession have overcome the world: but they are
not prayed unto by the Priest, which sacrifices, that is, which performs the
holy office, etc.

Afterward there was taken up a custom, that they which died, Prayer for the
dead.
should bestow some gifts upon the Church; and their kinsfolk for them; that
they might be distributed unto the poor: and these gifts were wont to be
blessed, as the other gifts and offerings were: but by this means men fell
into the foul errors of the Pagans, as namely either to pray for the dead, or
to move it themselves, that they might be prayed for after death. And this is
it which we have before observed to have in express words been ordained by
Pelagius the second. As then offringes grew to come in place of sacrifices: so
these gifts in their place did grow to be sacrifices for the dead: and
thereupon we read those words in S. Gregory: Gregor. in Dial. 4. and passim.
To offer a wholesome and saving host for every one; unknown to the a ges
going before; and after which a certain time sprung up the Masses for the
dead. And thus this part is received again into the Canon, in more forcible
terms then before; although as yet not received and practiced every where:
for there are as yet some Mass books to be found, The old Mass book of
Zurich. Bullinger de origin erroris c. 8.
and those very ancient and authentike, where prayer for the dead is not any
thing specified at all. Again, if we weigh and consider well the words of the
Canon; Pro his qui dormiunt in somno pacis, for such as sleep the sleep of
peace: they may seem rather to concern the memorial of such, whose salvation
is sure and certain, or the opinion of men, as it was then most commonly
received, of a place of refreshment, or rest, where they wait and attend the
fulness of glory to be inioyed after the resurrection, then any opinion of
Purgatory full of torments: or else the form of prayer used at this day, for
the delivering and setting at liberty of the dead.

For the living, For the living.
Gregory brings in the custom of making mention of them in the place of the
mysteries, (as we see) he writes unto Constantius Bb. of Millaine, Gregor.
l. 3. Epist. 37. and l. 6. Ep. 71.
that it is done (by name) of John Bb. of Rauenna: although before the
ordinance and appointment of Innocent the first, there was nothing spoken of
any in that place, save such as had offered, whose names were wont to be read
in the place of the consecration. And thus we see clearelie, that all that
which is said and done in the Canon for the living and for the dead, is
traduced and wrung from the Sacrifices of praise, that is from the offringes
which the Christians offered, whether they were as tokens of their plentiful
increase, or for to impart and bestow upon the poor, to this pretended
propitiatory sacrifice of the Priest.

Now Gregory tells us that the author, be it of the Canon, Who should be
the author of the Canon. Gregor. l. 7. Ep. 63.
or be it of the prayer of the Canon, was one Scholasticus: and of him we find
not a jot in Eusebius, S. Jerome, Sophronius, yea nor in Gimodius, though he
have drawn a catalogue of ecclesiastical writers, about the year 500.
insomuch, as that he cannot be either any ancient author, or worthy
personage, as may also be easily gathered of his work. And as for them, who to
acquit themselves somewhat the better, say that it was Pope Gelasius called by
Gregory, by the name of Scholasticus, as willing by this title to signify the
worthy account and name which he had obtained before he came to the Popedom:
it is answered them that it appears by other places of S. Gregory, that this
Scholasticus was a proper name, and very usual: for a Judge of Champagnie in
Italy, Gregor. lib. 2. Ep. 54. and l. 6. Ep. 14.
and an other, who stood out for a defender of the Church, are both of them
called by that name. But we know from else where by the history of the
Church, all whatsoever is attributed to Gelasius, who therein is never called
nor qualified by the name of Scholasticus: besides, that it is most plain,
that Gregory had rather have adorned and marked it with his proper name, which
carried so great honor with it, then with a borrowed name, which we know not
whether ever it were bestowed upon him or no. Again, it is not the phrase or
custom to call men, yea and those great personages, by the first and least
offices which they have borne, but by the last, as being ordinarily the most
worthy and excellent.

But whosoever it was that was the author, The three petitions.
S. Gregory does not let to take it in hand again after him, as is very
apparent unto us: and indeed it is agreede upon that he did add thereunto;
Diesque nostros in tua pace disponas, etc. which they call the three petitions;
issuing and proceeding evermore from that spirit, which wresteth the offringes
of the faithful unto the sacrifice offered by the Priest. For the prayer of Leo
the first, which was called (as yet the Mass is called) Super oblata, upon
the gifts and oblations, it did only carry and contain, That it would
please thee O Lord to receive and take in good part these gifts of our bounden
duty, and of all thy family; And after some Authors, And dispose of our days
in peace, that is, to continue unto us of thy favor and mercy, thy holy
blessings, according to the prayer of the Israelites. But Gregory, which
sticks fast to the pretended offering of the body of Christ, goes further;
To deliver us from eternal damnation, and to ingraft us into the number of
thine elect.

Now after this consecration, the Priest and Ministers of the Church were wont
to communicate, That the Communion is the most part of it suppressed. John Diac.
l. 2. c. 41.
as we have said, and consequenthe the people; to whom the Sacraments were
distributed, even yet in the time of Gregory, with these words: The body of
our Lord Jesus Christ, preserve thy soul unto eternal life: The blood of our
Lord, etc. that is to say, so often as they did present themselves at the same.
But as the people became careless and negligent in the communicating of the
sacraments; and the Priests very eager and forward in having them still to
continue their offringes, they begin to give them to understand, that it is
sufficient for them to hear the Mass without any communicating in the same.
Whereupon within some time after, there began to grow up this manner of
speaking, to hear the Mass, and to sing the Mass, which was unknown, and
never had been heard of in all the former ancient times: and in sum, that if
they did not communicate in the Sacrament, that yet they had their part in the
sacrifice, etc. And so from hence by little and little crept in the private
Masses, especially in the Monasteries, at which the people would be present;
but the Priest alone, or with him some certain number of Monks, or Clearks,
did only communicate. And then these words; Corpus Domini, etc. and Sanguis
Domini, etc. custodiat animam tuam in vitam aeternam: The body or the blood of
our Lord preserve thy soul unto eternal life: which were wont to be spoken
to all manner of persons, and to either sex; and who answered thereunto,
Amen; took up their habitation in the Mass; at the first, for those few
persons which did communicate with the Priest, and in the end, for himself
alone. And yet notwithstanding, to continue, and hold on always in their
contradictories, although he tell them, that they are for himself, and
accordingly do take them himself: yet in the Prayers following afterward, he
speaks fondly of al; Quod ore sumpsimus Domine, fac pura mente capiamus:
Grant Lord, that what we have taken in at our mouths, we may receive with
pure and clean minds, etc. Which is the cause that some old expounders of the
Canon, held opinion, that it could not be read but in public Masses, such as
in which the people was wont to receive the Sacraments, that is to say,
according to the Canons of this time, in any case at the feast of the
Nativity, at Easter and at Pentecost; because it is altogether set down in
terms of the plural number.

And yet S. Gregory had this one good thing in him, namely, that he always
left it in the liberty of the Churches, Gregory does not press others to
receive his Mass. Gregor. in Ep. ad August. Anglic. Episc. Change of speech.
Sabel. En. 8. l. 5.
either to receive the order which he had newly set up at Rome, or else to
retain their own. For in the Epistle likewise, which he writ unto Augustine
a Bishop in England, who would have brought it into England, he uses these
words: The Churches have diverse forms of celebrating the mysteries: It is
left in the liberty of every one of them to follow that which shall like them
best: In every Church take and retain that which thou shall find the best.

Let us yet furthermore add two other very great changes and alteratio^s in
this time; the rather, because they are in things that are sensible, and to
be conceived of every one. The one is, that about the year six hundred, (as
we read in Sabellicus) the swarms of barbarous people continued in Italy,
France, and Spain for a long time, where the Latin tongue was received, and
by consequent the service of the Church in Latin: but by little and little it
was found in such sort to be corrupted and changed into Italian, Spanish,
and French, as that it was not any longer to be understood of the common
sort, and further in space of time, from age to age it still became more
obscure and intricate. Whereupon insued though not by any decreed ordinance,
but either by too much tolleration and sufferance, or else by negligence, that
the service continuing in Latin, and the people growing to understand it
nothing at all; every thing was done in the Church, contrary to the
institution of the Apostles, the use of the ancient Churches, Justin Nouel.
123.
yea and the very ordinances of the Emperors, in a language that was not
understood: and by consequent without edification, and the means for the
people to come by instruction.

The other is, that in stead of the Christian simplicity, Alteration in
apparel.
which was easy to be seen and observed, in the habites, apparel, and
garments of the Pastors that celebrated the Sacraments and other holy
exercises: Gregory brought in the pontifical and stately garments;
imitating therein, Raban. l. 1. Institut. c. 14.
(as says Rabanus) the Jewish Church, the Priests and Levites; as also their
consecrations, annointinges, and purifyinges; yea, and that in the matter of
Temples, Altars, garments, vessels, and every thing that is of use in the
Church; things altogether unknown unto his time, and not finding any manner
of ground or foundation in any of the old Writers, except one weak and
reeling Canon, which appoints for the Readers, Laeuam lino tectam, the left
hand covered with some linen; and some Surplisse made of them for the
Priests. And yet this rises from hence only, namely, that Innocent the
third, maintained that the ceremonies of the law were not abolished. Innoc. 3.
lib. 4. de Sacr. Altar. cap. 4.


And yet it was too great a work, (notwithstanding that the foundation of
abuses, and superstitions, were deeply laid in the time of Gregory:) for
the upper building and top-frame to be finished therewithal at a trice. For
both in his time and afterward that law remained in the Church: That the
faithful did communicate after the consecration of the Sacraments: and the
good Pastors did blame and find fault with all careless negligence therein,
as they espied and found it out: exhorting and stirring up their
Parishioners to continue their zeal and forwardnes in the participating of the
same: they continued also to administer it under both kinds, yea, and it was
ratified and confirmed by the ordinances of the state Politic, now and then,
as we shall see hereafter.

CHAP. VIII. In what sort the Mass prospered, and grew greater from the time
of Gregory the great, until about the time of Charles the great.
Gregory was no sooner dead, but that Sabinian his successor caused his books
to be burnt, Platin. in Sabinian.
either for hatred and envy, or for some other sinister opinion that he had
conceived. Insomuch, as that whatsoever we have of his at this day, was saved
at the request of one Petrus Diaconus, having some care of the same. But it was
to very good purpose, that he had in his life time left the form of service,
to the discretion of the Pastors; and that those, which presently after
succeeded him, did not stir much or trouble themselves in causing of his to
be observed; for by that means the Churches remained a long time, inioying
their liberty, in such sort as we have already acknowledged to be contained
in the Canons of the Council of Venice and Gerond, held about the year 500.
and 550. that is to say, that all whatsoever was to be got thereby, was; That
in one and the same Province, or under one and the same Metropolitan, there
was observed one and the same service: except it were in such countries, as
where Christianity did settle it self a fresh, for there the reformers, sent
thither from the Popes, caused them strictly and directly to admit and follow
the Romish order.

In France, this Augustine a Monk of Rome, of the Order of S. Bennet,
traveling on the behalf of Gregory into England; found himself offended,
that the Order of Rome was not observed, and thereupon did write unto Gregory,
who repressed and redressed his over forwardnes in these words: That he must
take that in every Church which is good, etc. Again, the authority of the
French Church was then so great, as that it held his councels apart, and
within it self, and not fearing or standing upon whatsoever any man could or
would gainsay, as caring but a little, or else nothing at all for the Church
of Rome.

In England, The Romish Mass first received in England.
where he thought he should find a green ground, that never had been
husbanded or tilled, he proceeded further, insomuch as that he procured from
the Pope, to be created Archbishop of Canterbury: and the rather, because of
his good hap so serving him to meet with an ignorant king, and a
superstitious Queen: and there he preached (so was it called) the Christian
religion, that is to say, all the ceremonies and trumperie of Rome; as their
Masses, Letanies, Processions, Copes, Vestmentes, Altars, Candlestickes, holy
Waters, Consecrations, etc. and there he brought to pass to have them
received: and yet upon condition, That no man should be forced or constrained
thereunto. Beda lib. 1, and 2.
But going about to purchase still further credit to himself, and beginning
of a wily Fox to play the fierce and furious Lion, a famous Abbot named
Dinoth, a great Divine, who taught under him more then two thousand Monks,
for the Nurcerie of seven Diocesses in England, opposed himself very
stoutelie against him, in a full Synod, and boldly avouched, that he ought
not to change the old and ancient forms of Christian religion, refusing
therewithal to acknowledge him for an Archbishop, etc. insomuch, as that
this good Augustine did incense Ethelfred king of Northumberland against him,
who caused him to be knocked in the head with twelve hundred of those that did
belong unto him. From that time forward, the people being bold, and far from
fear, about the year 637. at the earnest suit of Pope John the fourth, and
the solicitation of Laurentius, Mellitus, Iustus Honorius and others, sent from
the Sea of Rome one after an other, to press and urge forward the kings and
Clergy of England, for the entertayning of this change and alteration,
began to celebrate the feast of Easter after the manner of Rome. And about
the year 666. the Bishops received shauing and unction: and the Pastors
which were there, began to be called Sacerdotes, that is to say, Priests.
Afterward, about the year, 679. there was established the manner of
celebrating in the Latin tongue, Beda lib. 4. c. 18. de geshs Anglor.
at the great labor and diligence used by an Archchanter, or chief singing
man of Rome, whom the Pope Agatho sent thither: and as for the playing of
organes, it being added unto the Romish manner of singing by Pope Vitalian,
Beda could not abstain but say; Heretofore in stead of these things the
principal service of God consisted in the preaching of the Gospel, and
hearing of the word of God.

But as the Romans thought not themselves absolute Lords and Conquerours of
any Country, who did not consent to live according to their laws, The Romish
Mass first received in Italy
and speak their language: even so the Popes at this time aspiring unto, and
greedily gaping after the Monarchy of the Church, did not think, or make
account of having the same in good earnest, except they brought it to be
subject unto their law of the Latin service, and that joined with the Latin
tongue. And as Pipin and Charles the great, new usurpers both over the French,
as also over the Empire in the West, had great need of their favor, for the
authorizing of them, and making of their places to be granted and
acknowledged, as rightly descending unto them by the people: so the Popes did
not spare to look to receive from them again, a give for their gave: as
namely, to establish their laws, services and ceremonies, so far as they
should be able, that is, so far as their authority or sword might establish
and settle the same. Thus Adrian the first, about the year 790. held a
council in Rome, Adr. D. 63. Durand. l. 5. c. 2.
wherein he caused to be ordained, that Gregory's Mass should be observed in
all Christian Churches. And Charles the great living at the same time, ordained
that the decrees of the Pope should be obeyed throughout all his Empire and
Dominions; and particularly, that Gregory's Mass should be received into all
the coasts and countries of the same: and for the easier accomplishing of the
execution of the same, which could not but be full of difficulties, he did not
spare either threatninges or punishments: The history is set down all at
large in Nauclerus, Naucler. Gene. 2^. fol. 44. Jacob. de Vorag. in legenda
Gregor. and B. Eugenri.
Iacobus de Voragine and others, to the breaking out of these words: Carolus
Imperator omnes Clericos minis and suppliciis coegit libros Ambrosiani Officii,
etc. He compelled all the Church men by threatninges and punishments to burn
all the books of S. Ambrose his Office or Lithurgie, etc. Yea, there was no
sparing of miracles; whereupon the malice of a few became very pregnant and
fruitful, prevailing much against the ignorance of a great sort. It is
reported that in this Council of Rome, the Masse-bookes or Offices of S.
Ambrose, and S. Gregory, were laid upon S. Peter's Altar, the doors of the
Temple close shut, and sealed with the seals of diverse Bishops, they all
abiding in fasting and prayer, until such time as it should please God by
some sign to show which of the two was most acceptable to him. Now in the
Morning when they should come to open the door, they found the Masse-booke of
S. Ambrose open and whole, and in the same place where they had laid it: and
contrariwise, that of S. Gregory's all rent and torn in pieces, and scattered
round about the Temple. Thereuppon it seemed to be the law of the game, that
S. Ambrose his Masse-booke should continue whole, and that of S. Gregory's rent
and torn in pieces. But on the contrary, they expounded it quite after an
other manner: Quia placuit, aut placeat, because it so pleased them, as they
say in their councels (for they never give any other reason:) That that of S.
Ambrose, should not be permitted in any place but Millaine: but that of S.
Gregory's should be licensed to pass throughout the whole Church. And thus
behold it was first received throughout all Italy, there being no other place
properly left or remaining to come and witness any thing against it, except the
Diocese of Millaine, by reason of the authority of S. Ambrose.

Berno Augiensis testifies, that before the time of Gregory, The change and
alteration in France. Epist. Hildewin. ad Ludouicum pium
there was an other manner of service in France then there was at Rome, and
this he proves by a certain epistle written by Hildewinus to the Emperor
Jews the Gentle; and that notwithstanding Pope Innocent, Gelasius, and
Gregory (Bbs. of Rome,) had done their uttermost endeavor by gentle entreaties
and fair words, to bring them to conform themselves to the Order of Rome: and
he says as much of Spain and Germany: yea further, that in the Registrie of
his Monastery, he has as yet an old Masse-book, that is far differing from
that of Rome. Guaguin. l. 3.
Pipin then to show himself devoted and inwardly affected toward the Sea of
Rome, which had set him in the throne of the kingdom, defrauding Chilperich
(the lawful king) of the Crown of France, at the instant request of Pope
Steven, who came of purpose into France for to hallow it, received at the first
the whole order of Rome, and gave charge for the establishing of the same unto
Giles or Remigius Archbishop of Roan, his brother. But as it falls out in
such changes, that they cannot be done all at a dash, Charles the great, under
color, that by combining and knitting together of both the services, the
church and the Empire would be united in a nearer and straiter bond of love and
agreement, took it to be needful for him of his own accord to intermeddle
in the matter, and to show some part of his power and authority, seeing
especially the favor of Pope Adrian the first (acknowledging him for Emperor)
did somewhat stir him up thereto: for so also he constrained (says Durandus)
all the people of the Church, that were of the nations under him, by torments
and punishments to observe the service instituted by Gregory: and yet by
reason of the resistances, that he met withal in that attempt, he was
contented to begin his purpose by the help and assistance of the Monks, which
at that time had Masses in their Monasteries; whereas the custom had been,
Carol. l. 1. c. ^0
that they should be bound to those of the Parishes. And this is that which we
read in the ordinances of Charles the great, Let the Monks (says he)
observe and keep the manner of singing used in Rome: (for now it was come to
that, that no man spoke of any thing but singing) according as our Father of
worthy memory Pipin, decertauit vt fieret, Alias decretauit.
did his endeavor to bring to pass, when he took away gallicanum cantum, the
French manner of singing; for the confirming and better ratifying of the
concord and unity betwixt him and the Sea Apostolic, etc. which also he
continued by the Governors in the Churches; Lib. 5. c. 219.
Let every Priest (says he) celebrate the Mass, ordine Romano, after the
manner of Rome with sweet so unders; and let the people be put in mind to
offer every Lords day, and that the same be received without the place
compassing in the Altar. Sigibertus in Chronic. Odo Cameracen in Canon. Walas.
c 25. Joan Salisburiens. lib. 1. Policr. c. 6 Chronic. Engolis. Gregory his
Mass received in Germany.
And yet the soundest opinion is, that the fifth book and those following, are
of the constitutions of the Emperors that came after him. But so it is as the
Chronicle of Engolisme says, that Charles demanded some of Pope Adrian his
singing men, to conform the manner of the French singing to that of Rome; and
that thervppon he granted Theodore and Benet, whom he calls doctissimos
Cantatores, and the books of Anthemes, which S. Gregory had noted with his
own hand, that he might correct those of France by them. And the greatest
maistrie of singing (says he) does abide in the City of Mets.

About the same time the Popes forgot not Germany: Gregory the second
shooting at the same mark with those before him, sent thither for Legate a
certain Englishman, named Venofridus, a slave well known for his ambition;
who afterward for having preached his own inventions, and not the Christian
faith, which continued pure and vncorrupt there for a long time, was surnamed
the Apostle of the Germans. This man after he had well sounded the state of
Germany, and thoroughly looked into all their affairs, returned to Rome;
where the Pope for the easier atchieuing of his purpose, created him
Archbishop of Mentz, and appointed that he should be called Boniface: he
gave him the book of the Decrees of Rome, according to the ordinances whereof,
he willed that the Churches of Germany might be reformed; and thereupon to
that end takes an oath of him. He sets him out with many letters of
recommendation of diverse and sundry Princes, Estates and Nations; insinuating
by them that he craves nothing, but that they would patiently and willingly
suffer themselves to be reformed: he promises Paradise to all such as shall
help forward this his enterprise; but denounces a curse against all them which
shall not receive him as the Legate of Jesus Christ himself: and for to make
up the pair, he ordained Charles Martell to stand by him as a stout
Champion in the defense and patronage of this attempt and great enterprise, in
respect of the high conceit and hope that was put in him for his prowes. 2.
Tom. de council. vbi epist. Gregor. 2, and 3. Auent. lib. 3. Naucl. Gent. 25.
Gregory the third comes after and walks as crookedlie as the crab Gregory
the second, that went before; he fortifieth himself in his place with as much
care, using Pipin and Charles the great with their joint power and authority:
Pipin by name being indebted and bound unto this Boniface, whom the Pope
Zachary had used as his Agent in the deposition of Chilperich, and the
establishing of him in his place; and in absoluing and discharging of the
French men of their natural oath: insomuch, as that they induced the people of
Franconia, Hessia, Bauaria, Saxony, Frisia, etc. to receive the Romish Order:
they prevailed by might against such as with stood them, Vide literas
Zachariae ad Bonifacium and cius rursus ad Zachariam. Item Iuranie^tum quod
Papae dedit.
as Virgilius the Bb. of Iuuauia, otherwise called Saltzburge, Clement, Scotus,
Samson and other great personages; as also one Albert a French man by nation,
whom Boniface suffered to dye in prison, for writing of a book against his
innouations: then to continue this order, he created new Bbs. in the country,
and there accordingly installed the^ after his manner; as namely, at
Wirtzburge, Bamberg, Erford, Eichstat, Hirtafeld, etc: all which were shortly
after confirmed by Pope Zachary; and these in their places instituted and set
up the Romish ceremonies: the which that they might be so much the more
strongly avouched, it was ordained, Munster. aetat. 3.
that there should be a Synod held yearly in Germany. The particular words
of the oath that Boniface made unto the Pope, are not to be ouerpassed without
noting; Fidem meam atque concursum tibi, and vtilitatibus Ecclesiae tuae
exhibebo; I promise thee my faith and help, in, Auent. lib. 3.
and about every thing which shall concern the profits of thy Church. Again,
writing to Zachary; As many Disciples (says he) as God does give me in
this my embassage, I am not slack or cold in drawing their affections unto the
obedience of the Sea Apostolic. Whereupon may easily be discerned whether his
chief scope and drift were to win them to Christ or to the Pope; to preach the
Christian faith, or the Romish authority. Nevertheless, Annals Care^tanorum.
we read that about the year 860. a great and holy Personage, named
Methodius Illiricus, did bend himself again and again against these abuses;
turning the holy Scripture to this end into the Sclauonian tongue;
reestablishing the ancient service in all the Churches of this language;
assaying likewise to do the same in Bauaria, Austria, Sueuia, and other
Provinces of Germany; abolishing from thence the Latin Mass, and the
ceremonies of Rome: against whom these new Bbs. raised the princes and people,
which notwithstanding, he dyed peaceably in Morauia, being buried in Olmuntz,
the Metropolitan City of the Country, and where his name is yet had in
great reverence.

In Spain (the people being given to cleave fast unto the thing which they
shall once take hold of) the Popes had not so soon won this goal. The Mass
received in Spain.
In the beginning they had many prescript forms of service as we learn out
of the Council of Gerund, wherein it was ordained, that under one
Metropolitan at the least, there should be but one form of service. And
after that in the fourth council of Toledo, it was decreede, that in all
Spain there shall be used one order in prayers, in singing, Council. Tolet. 4.
cap. 2. C. Bracar. 1. c. 22.
in the Sacraments, and in the solemn celebrating of the Masses, etc. which
thing also was confirmed by the council of Bracare: and it may seem that the
form or order instituted either by S. Leander, or by Isidore the Bb. of
Civil, and Disciple of Saint Gregory (commonly called the Office of the
Mozarabes) was preferred before all the other, because the Moors mixed amongst
the Christians, did use the same in Spain, not much differing in the rest from
the Gregorian service, no not any more then the Disciple differs from the
Master. And indeed it appears by the Council of Bracare, that the
Metropolitan Profiturus had brought it from Rome, into the Church of Bracare,
by the authority of the Sea of Rome. Notwithstanding the Popes to procure unto
themselves all manner of further credit, would have that all manner of
considerations, consultations, deliberations or aduises, being omitted and
quite forgotten, the order of Rome should be received in Spain: but this they
could not obtain, till a long time after that they had gained all other
nations: namely, in the time of Gregory the seventh, and Urban the second,
about the year 1090. and that because of the contradictions and resistances,
which were brought in and made against the same. Then says Roderico
Archbishop of Toledo in his history; Pope Vrbane the second reproving the
ways of Pope Gregory the seventh, Roderie. Tole. lib. 6. c. 24.
called Hildebrand his predecessor, sent a Legate into Spain named Richard,
Abbot of S. Victors of Marseilles, at the request of king Alphonsus the 6. to
reform the Churches of Spain, endamaged by the long and hard persecutions
which they had suffered, which Richard under this color having persuaded the
king Alphonsus by the means of the Queen Constance his wife, which was a French
woman; he ordained that the French Order, and that was then the Romish or
Gregorian Order should be received, and that of Toledo otherwise called
Mozarabique abolished and banished out of Spain. The three estates of the
Realm fell to be very turbulent; and yet notwithstanding the king would not
go back from his word, to the procuring of his least discredit: insomuch as
that in the end the thing came to this issue, namely, that it should be
decided by a combat: and thereuppon there was named and chosen for the king a
Knight, and he should fight for the French or Gregorian Office, and by the
States an other, and he should fight for the Office of Toledo. But the kings
Champion, as says the history, was quickly overcome, not without the
exceeding joy and rejoicing of the States, for the victory obtained of their
Champion for the Order of Toledo, who was of the house of Matanza near unto
Pisorica, whereof there is a hardy and valiant race and offpring remaining
alive yet unto this day. The Queen Constance having so much the more edge set
upon her, did not give over to follow the point with the king her husband,
alleging for herself that the trial of the combat should not stand as a
righteous sentence, or become Judge and Vmpier in such matters, etc. upon
which words the States were much discontented, and near unto the raising of a
tumulte and moving of sedition. Insomuch as that it was the second time
agreede upon, that the book of the French Office and that of Toledo, should
be both of them cast into a great fire, and that the Primate, the Legate, and
the Church men should in the mean while keep all the people in fasting and
prayer. And now likewise it so fell out, as that the book of the French Order
was burned and consumed all into ashes, whereas on the contrary, that of the
Order of Toledo remained whole, not so much as smelling of any flame. And
notwithstanding, (says the Historiographer) The king continued as yet
obstinate, without being moved to fear at the sight of the miracle, and
nothing turned at the humble suits and requests of the people: but on the
contrary commanded under the pain of loosing goods and life, that the
French, that is, the Romish Order, should be kept throughout all his
Countries. Then it was said to the great heart grief of every one, and that
not without doleful tears: Quo volunt Reges, vadunt leges etc. The Law must
sing as likes the king, etc. Now this Legate Richard was called home again to
Rome from out of his Embassage, because of his insolences, by Pope Vrbane the
second, after he had effected this mutation and change: which
notwithstanding for some manner of contentment unto the people, the ancient
office and service was retained in six parishes at Toledo, and there it
continues still unto this present, as it does likewise in the Cathedral
Church, in the Chapel of Cardinal Ximenes, and in that of Doctor Talabricas,
in the City of Salamanca. But we need not doubt whether after all this time
that Lithurgie be much altered or no, no more then of that of S. The service
of S. Ambrose corrupted.
Ambrose, wherein they are not ashamed contrary to all his writings to rob
the Communion of the cup, which continued without gain-saye, more then six
hundred years afterward in the Church. Neither have they less spared to
thrust into it certain prayers, as well in the little Canon (as they call it)
as in the great, which by their own confession (as we shall see) were not
received into their Mass till a long time after, as Suscipe sancta Trinitas
communicantes, etc. Otherwise who could believe that of so small differences
should rise so great a discord, or of so few words, so dangerous and
notable an alteration in things of estate?

But what manner of Order, that Romish or Gregorian order was at that time,
What manner of Order the Romish Order was. Ordo Romanus ex Cossandro and
caeteris.
which was brought in both with such earnest desire and difficulty; it may be
seen in the book which is left us, approved and allowed by the most diligent
searchers out of antiquity: wherein notwithstanding we observe and note, that
during the time that the Offertorie verses are singing, the people present and
bring their offringes, that is to say, men and women, and nothing but bread and
wine, and the Priests and Deacons bread only: that he which says service,
receives the offringes, the Archdecon following him, who powers all the
little wine pots into one great cup, and the Subdeacons do receive and wrappe
up the loaves in a sheet or white table cloth: that these offringes being
received without the room enclosing the Altar, are by them brought in and set
upon the Table or Altar: then the Offertorie being ended, that they are
blessed with a prayer uttered in a low voice: and that either by the Bb. or the
Pope himself, for in this Order whereof we have the book, he describes the
Mass of the Bb. of Rome: That the Bb. after he has communicated himself,
causes the hosts or offerings (for so he calls the consecrated bread) to be
broken by the Priests which are assisting, and partly he distributeth them
himself: partly he causes them to be distributed by the Bbs. Suffraganes, or
by the Priests unto all the people, both men and women: That those to whom
the Pope or Bb. of Rome has ministered the Communion, are confirmed by the
Archdeacon (these are the terms and language of that time) that is to say, the
Archdeacon gives the cup to those, to whom the Pope has given the bread,
etc. That during all the time whiles the people are in communicating, the
School of singing men sings Psalms by counteruoices; which done, the
postcommunion does follow, that is to say, the Thanksegiuing after the
Communion, and that shuts up all, making an end of the service. And it is
not to be forgotten, that both leprouse men, and those which had the falling
sickness, were admitted to this public Communion: the Leapers at one table by
themselves, and those which had the falling sickness came all together, and
always last, as it is to be seen in the Epistles of Gregory the third,
Epist. Gregor. 33 and Zachar. ad Bonifacium.
and Zachary unto Boniface Archbishop of Mentz. Now unto this form
appertained those ordinances which were made either by Charles the Great, or by
Jews his son, and they are those which follow: No Priest can sing a Mass
alone: Lib. 5. c. 93. Add. 2. c. 7.
for how then should he say, God be with you: Lift up your hearts on high?
And in an other place: We find not by the words of our Savior, the precepts
of Paul, nor the practice of the Apostles, that one Priest can celebrate alone
the mystery of the body and blood of our Lord, etc. where he calls such
Priests, Solitarios, consecratores, sole and solitary consecrators: and such
courses to be, Dehonorationem mysterii, to dishonor the mystery or
sacrament. On the contrary, L. 5. c. 182. festiuitates praeclaras. l. 6. c.
167. Ad. 3. c. 38
Charles the great wills and understands that things should be done
according to the ancient Canons; That all upon the Lords day and good feasts
do communicate the Eucharist: Again, That they offer daily in the Church, and
at the least have one Sermon and communicate upon the Lords day: because it
is said, who so eats not my flesh, and drinks not my blood, etc. albeit the
ecclesiastical censure and punishment was practiced principally against
those, which did abstain and keep themselves away three principal feast
days, and especially upon the day which they called the day of the supper.
But now in all this what similitude or agreement is there betwixt the Mass
which is used at this day, where so many people present, are nothing else but
so many gazers on, not participating, not hearing, not understanding, and that
which was then used? and by much stronger reasons, how far unlike must it be
unto those, for the retayning whereof, there was such opposing and resistances
made against the Romish Mass? And indeed the Latin Mass, which was used
before the universal receiving of that other, about the year 700. What manner
of Mass the Latin one was about 800. years ago. Index expurgatorius. p. 77.
such as it was when Cassander brought it forth unto us, and printed it in
Germany, has not that part which is called the Canon; which yet is esteemed
as the very life and soul of the Mass. Wherefore they must not be abashed
if the Index expurgatorius ordained by the Council of Trent, inioyne that the
Lithurgies of Cassander, as well as the Catholic Romish and that Latin Mass
should be razed and quite blotted out. And here let every man note and
observe the good faithfulness and sound dealing of that Council: for this book
is an Index or table of all the places, And what it is
that do displease them throughout all the authors, which have written at any
time within this hundred years; yea, of some such as have written seven or
eight hundred years ago, all which they appoint in the first next following
impression to be either omitted or changed, or cut off, and namely, those
which are found in the commentaries which have been written upon the ancient
Doctors. Amongst others, they do not forget Volaterrane, Polydore Virgill,
Faber Stapulensis, Reuchlinus, Munster, Langus, Rhenanus, Viues, Erasmus,
Cassander, etc. and to be brief, the most worthiest men of this age, that
profess, as the Church of Rome professes.

That therefore we may return to our former purpose, such was the Mass in
the time of S. Gregory, yea and a long time after Charles the Great, through
the greatest part of Christendom: such I say, as against which,
notwithstanding for many novelties contained therein, there were that opposed
themselves, and yet nevertheless such as in which there remained the communion
entire, administered under both kinds, and unto all the people: Council. Bracar.
2, c. 84.
neither did there any Canons or Doctors appear at that time, which did any
thing contresay the same. The Council of Bracare the second: Jf any man enter
into the Church of God, and there hearing the Scriptures, do insolenthe avoid
himself from the communicating of the Sacraments, Council. Altisiod. c. 42.
etc. we will that he be excommunicated and cast out of the catholic Church.
The Council of Auxerre: Let every woman when she communicates have her
Sabath: but and if she have not, then let her not communicate the next Lords
day. And Rabanus describing the service of his time: After the Sanctus (says
he) the consecration of the body and blood of our Lord is celebrated, then a
very earnest and fervent prayer unto God, and after that the Lords prayer;
afterward when they come to communicate, the faithful do mutuallie give and
take the kiss of peace one at a another, singing, O Lamb of God that bear
the sins of the world, have pity upon us: to the end, that receiving the
sacrament in peace, we may be thought worthy to be numbered among the
children of God. And indeed to show that the consecration served not for any
other purpose then for the Communion, Alexander Hales the auncientest of all
the schoolmen, has uttered these words a long time since; Alex. Hales. 4. q.
35. memb. 2. Ibid. solut. 2.
Consecratio est propter communionem, communio mayor est in effectu
sanctitatis, quam consecratio, etc. that is, the consecration is for the
communion, and the communion is more holy in effect then the consecration,
etc. And Cardinal Humbert, Hoc quotiescunque feceritis, etc. As often (says he)
as you shall bless, as you shall break, and as you shall distribute and give,
Humber. cont. libel. Nicet. Monach. Gabr. Biel. Lect. 38.
you shall do it in remembrance of me: because (says he), that if any one of
these three (which soever it be) be omitted; it is not perfectly to represent
and show the remembrance of the Lord. And Gabriell Biell of our time has these
words; The consecration is not always the end of consecration: but rather the
vsa that the faithful make thereof, for the body and the blood are properly
consecrated, to the end that the faithful may make use thereof in eating of
the same, etc. And nevertheless, we are not to doubt, but that the private
Masses were very nimble and full of endeavor after the best manner that they
could, to plant and establish themselves, though it were against the discipline
of the Church, and that for both respects, that is to say, in the first place
under the name of being private; and secondly in as much as they were without
communion: for against these we have the express laws of Charles the Great,
and of his sons: Lib. 5. c. 38. Addi. 4. c. 39. Lib. 1. c. 25. and 154.
The Priest which performs the Agenda, that is, the services in private
places without the license of the Bishop, let him be degraded: let no man
do it in an other man's parish: yea, and let none be ordained, but such as are
appointed to some certain parish, etc. And against the same in a further
degree then the former, Walafridus, who lived in the time of Jews the Gentle,
after he has discoursed unto us by what degrees the Mass came to be so
common, as that in stead of one, which was wont to be celebrated upon the
Lords day in every Parish, at such time as the faithful were wont to
communicate all together, does come in the end to make comparison or rather
opposition betwixt the legitimate and lawful Masses, and the solitary or
private ones, calling the lawful and legitimate those, Where there are (says
he) a Priest, Answerers, Offerers and Communicants, as the form of prayers
used does show; and by consequent the solitary or private ones (as he calls
them,) wherein there is no communion, Walafr. c. 22.
illegitimate, unlawful, and bastardly. Add hereto further, that in the time
of Charles the Great, it was not wont to be said, Pro quibus tibi offerimus,
for whom we offer unto thee: but which offer unto thee this sacrifice of
praise, Qui tibi offerunt hoc sacrificium laudis: seeing it was the people and
not the Priest which of fered unto God, Lib. 6. c. 173.
and that a sacrifice not propitiatory, but of praise. Again, it is not to
be forgotten, how that amongst all the Churches which professed the name of
Christ, there was not one but the Latin Church which did receive them: witness
to all those of Greece, Russia, Syria, and Ethiopia, No Lithurgie but the
Romish without a Communion.
in all which there was not used any private Lithurgie or Mass: yea, some go
further and say, that there was not any at all used, either for the living or
for the dead, neither yet upon any other particular devotion: but rather a
public one, and that according to the multitude of the people, whether it were
daily, or but every Lords day, and that in the language of the common
people, and in which they did all communicate together in the Sacraments, and
that under both kinds.

Now let us come to that which these ages and latter times have added over and
above unto the making up of the Mass: first, we read how that in the time of
Agatho, Additions to the Mass after the time of Gregory. Plat. in Agath.
that is to say, about the year 670. John Bishop of Port did say the first
Latin Mass in the Temple of S. Sophie at Constantinople, whereupon the
allowance of Masses is drawn from the Grecians: and then we answer them,
that if they approve and allow of that which was then, and not of that which is
now; that then it must be now at this day such as it was then. But was he not
ashamed for the insinuating of himself into the favor of the Grecians, to
father upon Chrysostom a book of the Mass, seeing we find it evident by
that which has been said heretofore, that it was not possible for him to
hear it once spoken of in this signification? Processions.
In the second place, Gregory the first had instituted a procession to be
made upon Easter day with a supplication or Letanie. Now the ordaining of
these supplications or Processions, did first rise upon the occasion of
public calamities, as of the plague, of the earthquake, etc. for the taking
away whereof the people joined together in prayers unto God. But Honorius the
first appointed that every Lords day, there should be a Procession made at
Rome, from the day of S. Apollinaris unto the day of S. Peter, with Gregory
his Letanie. Some attribute that ordinance to Agapet. Sergius as a third
Promoter of this work of augmentation follows about the year 690. and
casts in unto the rest all the festival days, as namely, the four Lady
days: and thus more and more superstition increased, as the Moon when she is
past the change, until it had gained the place and pre-eminence upon the Lords
days, and that in all places. This is the thing that Charles the Great, the
true and trusty aduancer of all Romish inventions speaks of: Let the Priest
with the company of singers go about the Church, etc. This same Sergius did
further appoint, that whiles the bread of the Communion was in breaking, there
should be sung, Agnus Dei, etc. he gave censers to the Churches: he ordained
that the Priest should make three parts of the bread which he held in the
Mass, according to the custom which was then established, namely, that there
should always be an ordinary and set number of Communicantes: and that there
should not be any Mass without a Communion: The breaking of the bread into
three parts
and that the casting of the bread (ordained for the same) into three parts,
should be to the end, that the Priest might have one part; the other officers
of the Church an other, and the people that did communicate the third. But
whereas then also; these private Masses began, in which the same order of
breaking and dividing of the bread into the said parts was continued
notwithstanding that no man but the Priest alone did receive and eat of it,
that no absurdity might seem to cleave unto this practice, it was clapped into a
mystical matter: the meaning whereof says he is, Because that one part of
Christ is risen, another part walking upon earth, and a third part of him
remaining in the Sepulcher, etc. Others there are, who had rather understand it
to signify and have relation to the faithful in heaven, on earth, and in
Purgatory. Others again understand thereby the Patriarchs Abraham, Isaac, and
Jacob: and so every man according as his invention pleased him, The Pax.
and Allegories likewise of the same stamp. The fourth Master of this
augmentation was Innocent the first, who in stead of the custom used amongst
the ancient faithful to kiss in sign of peace, ordained a Canon, whereout
leapte that law and decree of Charles the great: Lib. 1. c. 53. and l. 5. c. 94.
Vt pax detur ab omnibus, confectis Christi sacramentis: that is, that the
peace, that is, the kiss of peace should be given of al, etc. And he yields a
reason: because that therein is signified the true concord, etc. Now a little
before the time of Charles the great, Leo the second had changed the same into
superstition, ordayning in stead thereof the plate of silver or copper, which
is wont to be held out to kiss after the consecration, Of taking of the
Eucharist with the mouth. Lib. 7. cap. 367 Council. Altifiod. c. 36.37.
which within a while after was received together with the rest of the
ceremonies. The fifth practice of augmentation was, that where the Eucharist had
wont to be delivered into the hands of the Communicantes, yea and that in the
time of Charles the great, as appears by this Canon: Vt qui acceperint,
sumant, That those which have taken it with their hand, may take it with their
mouth, for otherwise let them be shut out and excluded for sacrilegious
persons. It was now forbidden women to touch it with their naked hands, yea,
and to touch the linnens wherein the Sacraments were wrapped: far from the
practice which was used by Gorgonia, the sister of Nazianzene, who handled it
with her hands, and kept it about her, going about her business. Then they
began to give it them at their mouths, Alber. Krantz. in Metrop. l. 1. c.
19. Beda de rat. temp. lib. 2. Paul Diacon. l. 6. de gestu Longobard. Adon.
aetat. 6. Many Masses.
as we read of Justinian in Nicomedia, who took it with his mouth at the
hand of the Bishop of Rome; and of Witikind which saw, as he said, a little
child, who had it given into his mouth; for even such fables were plentiful
at this time. The sixth, there was wont to be celebrated but one common supper
for all, and so by consequent they had in every Temple or Church but one Table
or Altar. But as the people grew slower and slower in communicating; so they
persuaded them so much the more to bring offerings, yea constrained them thereto
by the Canons of their Synods, and by the laws of the Empire: and to this end
they made men believe that it was sufficient for them to be present only, so
that they forget not to offer, in so much that Masses and Altars did multiply,
the communion in the mean time withering and falling away; and that so far
forth, as that the Priests themselves sometimes did not receive it, Lib. 7.
c. 50.
though they had consecrated the same. This is faithfully witnessed by Charles
the great his laws: Let the people be warned to offer, Iugiter, continually:
Whereas the former went no further, but to communicate often, and the reason is
added: Because that these offringes are very profitable for those which offer
and for theirs: Lib. 6. c. 16^. Council. Altissi. cap. 10.
Again, Let the people offer daily to the Priests, or at the least every
Lords day, etc. And for the multiplying of Masses these goodly Canons: It is
not lawful to say two Masses upon one Altar in one day: neither yet for any
Priest to say any the same day upon the Altar, whereupon the Bishop shall
have said one. And of the not communicating of the Priests themselves: We
will (says Charles) That so often as the Priest does offer the body and blood
of Christ, so often he do receive the same, etc. Because (says the Canon)
many do otherwise as it is reported unto us: Council. Tolet. 12. De consecr.
Dict. 2. c Relatum est. Lib. 6. Car. c. 118. Council. Worm. c. de purgand.
Monach. Council. Altisiod. c. 12. Carol. lib. 1. cap. 161.
insomuch, as that there is need that the Emperor his authority should
provide for the same. The seventh, and by this you may see how far the abuse
was now grown: namely, as that if a Monk had robde the Monastery of never
so little a thing, for his purgation, he was put to receive the Sacrament in
these words: Corpus Domini sit tibi in purgationem, Let the body of the Lord
be thy purgation; that is for a proof and trial, whether thou be guilty or
no: whereas they were wont to say in the supper: To feed thee unto eternal
life: Some gave it unto the dead; whereupon the Canon in the council of
Auxerre was made, De Eucharistia mortuis non danda: and all did use to give it
to young children: whereupon came the constitution and law made by Charles
the great: To have the Eucharist ready for to give to children every day.
Others, did wear it at their breast, as they use to do the Agnus Dei, the
blessed grains, etc. at this day. The eight practice was the beginning of the
consecrating of it in honor of the Saints, the Mass drawing to their profit
and advantage, all the abuses and poisonous infections which were sprung up
together in the Church. Whereupon we read, that Gregory the third added these
words unto the Canon: Quorum festiuitas hodie celebratur, whose feast is
solemnized this day: About the year 750. and 800.
because that at this time began the invocation of Saints to be very rife in
the Church of Rome. To be brief Adrian the first, as we have seen, redoubled
and drew out the Offertorie into a far greater length; to the end that there
might be the more time and leisure for the bringing of their offeringes, and
caused to be received, so near as he could, the Gregorian office in every
place. So likewise did Stephen his successor: and ordained moreover, that in
every Mass said upon the Lords day, there should be sung Gloria in excelsis;
whereof we have a law by Charles the Great: lib. 6. c. 170. The saying of
Masses for the dead, was not yet established by law. Ep. 2. Gregor. ad.
Bonifac. in Tom. 2. council. Naucler. Ge. 25
so careful was he to apply himself to all their decrees and novelties. And
all this fell betwixt the time of Gregory the first, and the third, which
fell about the time of Pipin and Charles toward the year 800. And yet this is
to be noted, that Masses for the dead were not as yet established by law: for
Boniface the great Apostle of the Roman ceremonies in Germany, consulting
with Gregory the second about his commission, demanded of him amongst other
questions: If kinsfolks should offer for their dead, and so thereupon was
enjoined by the Pope to see it done and observed.

CHAP. IX. What was the manner of the proceeding of the Mass, and of the
making up of the same, as also of the use thereof after the time of
Charlemaine, and particularly of the taking away of the cup of the Lord.
NOw we have hitherto seen the setting together and building of the Mass, and
that for many ages, and by many authors and rearers of the same; and of the
diverse and differing pieces whereof it was patcht. From henceforward we are to
look upon and take the view of the rising, not so much of the building, as of
the use and manner of usage thereof, falling out more pernicious and faulty
then the former. Let us always call to mind; that the holy Supper by hy his
first institution, was a remembrance of the death and passion of our Lord, and
a communicating of the faithful in the body and blood of the same, with the
creatures of bread and wine, as seals and assurances of eternal life: and we
have seen the making of a Supper without any Communion; a pretended sacrifice
without any remembrance of the death of Christ. But now it becomes a custom
to use it in remembrance, not any more of the passion of our Lord, and of the
merit of his cross, but of the Saints, Masses in the honor of the Saints,
and for diverse other uses.
of their sufferings, and of their merits. It is made good for all uses, for
the living and for the dead, for the whole and for the sick, for men and for
beasts, for the fruits of the earth and the distemperatures of the air, etc.
This is now from henceforth become a Catholicon and universal remedy, good for
every thing, except for that from which it is fallen and degenerate: as namely
for that for which the holy Supper was instituted: and contrariwise, there is
not left unto the holy Supper, (whose place it usurps) the least mark or
sign of it self.

It is good for the dead: Let the remembrance of the dead be made in all
Masses, Council. Cabilon. Can. 33.
(says the Council of Caualion: and the reason is added though it be smally
to the purpose: For even so (says it) therein is prayer daily made for the
living. And it was likewise at this time, that they were begun to be ordained
by tennes and thirties, etc. as it appears by the Epistles of Sigibaldus,
Torchelmas, Cuthbertus, Lullus, etc. of giving lands to the Church, in these
words: Offero Deo omnes res quae in hac chartula continentur insertae, pro
remissione peccatorum meorum and parentum, ad seruiendum Deo ex its, in
sacrificiis, Missarumque solemniis, etc. I offer unto God all that which is
contained in this scedule, for the remission of my sins, and the sins of my
forefathers; for the service of God practiced in the offering of sacrifices and
saying of Masses: a thing never heard of to be uttered and spoken of by any
former writers. Good against tempests: Call to your minds (says Lullus) and
remember to sing the Masses, which are accustomed to be sung for tempests. Good
against sickness: The priests (says Wigbertus) at this time have said every one
of them five Masses, for the recovery of Lullus. Good for wars: Let the
Priests (says Charles and Lotharius) say the Masses used for them that go to
wars with us. Good for to purge offenders: If any man in the Monasteries (says
the Council of Worms) be suspected of theft, let him be purged by the taking
of the Sacrament. And Sybicon Bb. of Spire in the council of Mentz, about the
year 1100. did by it purge himself of adultery. Good to hallow cities and
fortresses: Leo the fourth about the year 900. did hallow the City Leopolis,
against the Saracens. And finally, good against inchanters (for the priests do
use the hallowed linnens, wherein the Eucharist is wrapped) for to quench and
put out fire. And it was requisite, that the Council of Schelestat should
help and remedy the same by an express article. Council. Selegstad. c. 6.
But how far off are all these uses from that which is ordained by the Son
of God: He that eats my flesh, and drinks my blood, he abides in me, and I
in him. Again: All we (says the Apostle) which do eat one and the same
bread, are one body, etc. But let us proceed: if it be S. Gregory's, it
delivers souls out of Purgatory: if of S. Roc, from the plague: if of S.
Anthony the Hermit, it saves cattle: if of S. Sigismund, it cures the
fever: if S. Anthonies of Padua, it brings again lost things: if S.
Apollines, it takes away toothache: if S. Lucies, it clears the eyes: if of
the holy Ghost, it gives a fair husband or a beautiful wife, etc. And for
every one there must be observed a particular ceremony; a set number of tapers
lighted, and to say them upon some certain altars, etc. And would S. Paul
say, Paul, or Apollos, or Cephas, were they crucified for you? And is there any
other death or passion auailable amongst Christians, but the Lords? or any
other commemoration and remembrance ordained in the Church but that of Christ's?
what more? Gabriel Biel says: It profits very specially, indifferently, and
very generally: most specially him which says it, for it is worth eternal
life to him: most generally, that is, all the Church: for all the members
thereof do participate of the same though they be not there: and yet but
indifferently, that is to say him, for whom it is particularly said: (and in
his greatest efficacy, and highest prerogative) Ex opere operato sine bono
motu vtentis, only by the work done, and being present thereat, though there
be never a good motion brought thereto by him that is present. How far then
(if we will believe them) is it more precious then the holy supper instituted
by Christ? for the worthy receiving whereof, every man is to prove himself,
enter into judgment with his deeds, turn over the book of his conscience,
and foresee the wrath of God in coming unworthily? And who will find it
strange, that the people did cast off the holy supper, for to run to the
Mass, the practice whereof is so easy, and yet withal so ready to bring
salvation? where there is nothing to do but to cast abroad the eyes, without
taking any due consideration of any thing, or to open the ears, without the
understanding of any thing. Again, it is scarce credible, how under the
ignorance of these times, it was received of kingdoms and commonwealthes, and
the Lords supper laid aside, as a manifest judgment of God, for the
despising of his holy institution, and casting of it far from them, for from
hence forward you hear not any thing spoken, but of the founding of Masses:
all whatsoever duties belonging to the quick or the dead are reduced into
that: all the whole order of priesthood has no other occupation. And whereas
our Lord had said unto all his Apostles: Go and preach the Gospel unto all
nations, baptize, do this in remembrance of me: about the year 1000. they
began to ordain and make priests, Vid. Iuellum, c. 13. Synodus
Selestadiensis, c. 5. Synod. Romans c. 5. c. 21. q. 2. Praecipimus.
with these words: Accipe potestatem Missas celebrandi, and sacrificium
offerendi provinis and mortuis, take thee power and license to celebrate
Masses, and to offer sacrifice for the quick and the dead: yea you may see the
Councels busied and bent to the keeping in of the forwardness of the
ouerflowing streams of the same. Let it not be lawful (say they) for any
Masses to be said in public places: let it not be lawful for any more to be
said in one day in the Monasteries then one Mass, yea and that by the decree
of Saint Frauncis: Francise. in ep. ad fratres. Carol. l. 1. c. 25
Let it not be lawful (says one) for the Priest to say any more then one:
says an other, not to say any more then two: and an other then three at the
most in one day. There shall not any priest be made absolutely, that is to say,
without title, or without a certain parisp; and he shall say but one in the
place of the public assembly. On the contrary, there is now no more spoken
of the Supper of the Lord in the Church: the Chambermaid has put her leg over
her mistresses bed. One Canon says: That who so shall not communicate three
times a yare at the least: as at the Nativity of Christ, Easter, and
Whitsontide, shall nor be held for a Catholic. But an other does yet rebate
of this number, and says: Who so shall not communicate at the least once a
year, shall be held as excommunicate. And then comes the custom of
distributing the holy bread unto them, that is, a great loaf coming of the
offerings, in stead of the bread of the holy supper. And which is worse; to
advance and raise themselves in authority from day to day above the laytie:
first they bring in a custom, that the laity should not communicate any more
with the Priest but only three or four of the Clearkes: and afterward
neither laity nor Clearkes, setting it down that it was sufficient if there
were one answerer, whom they called Gampanarium, that is, he who is wont to
ring the hell. And finally the laity came to be almost quite shut out from
all, for the Priests even then when they were to communicate, did take from
them the cup of the Lord; and to leave them some shadow and blind picture of
the same, they allow and permit them only to wash their mouths: whereas the
Lord had said, Drink ye all of this: which all the church understands to
be, that, All the people have commandment to take and to drink. Now also
this is the reason, wherefore by degrees they came to this little bread or
wafer cake used in the Mass. For as the assemblies were great, so they brought
many great loaves, which were cut in gobbets, and distributed unto the people:
and as they grew to draw back, and to diminish in number, came the decree of
Clement the third: that there should not be any more bread set upon the altur,
then should be necessary and requisite for the number of the people that was
to communicate. And so in the end it coming to this, that there did not any
more but the priest and his clearke communicate; yea and for the most part none
but the priest himself alone: from many loaves of an ordinary bigness, they
came to one great one, and from one great one to a middle sised loaf: and in
the end to this little one (says Durandus) of the bigness of a penie,
denarioli. And to help and salve all the whole matter, Gemma animae. c 36.
he goes about to pay us with an allegory, for lack of sound reason to make
better payment withal: Because (says he) our Lord was sold for the like
piece of money. Let every man judge here again, who ought to be accounted the
innouator, and new fangled: they which would restore and set antiquity in her
place again, to the shouing out of these novelties, which are we: or else they
who would uphold and maintain these novelties against antiquity: and those
our adversaries do evidently show themselves to be.

And yet let us not think that this spirit of novelties, Additions to the Mass.
which has of so long time accompanied the Romish church, has cast it off and
forsaken it in these latter times, for we have manifest marks and signs to the
contrary. All the curious ouerlookers and expounders of the Romish order are
of one mind and consent; that betwixt the offering and the Canon, or the
secret, as they call it, there was not any prayer wont to be said. But now we
find within the space of these four hundred years, or there about, five to be
placed and put in, as they themselves also do acknowledge; and it is the same
which they call the petty Canon: that is to say, Suscipe sancte Pater hanc
hostiam: or else as it is in some others, Suscipe sancta Trinitas hanc
oblationem, Belarm. de Canon.
receive O Lord God this oblation or host, which I offer unto thee for my
sins, which are innumerable, and for those of all them which are present, and
for all faithful Christians either alive or dead, to the end that it may be
profitable unto me and them unto salvation, and eternal life. Again, O Deus
qui humanae substantiae: Offerimus tibi Domine calicem salutaris, in spiritu
humilitatis, etc. Ven: Sanctificator Spiritus: Then the blessing of the
incense, Anno 1065.
wherein there is mention made of a propitiatory sacrifice: and of the
intercession of Saint Michael: new prayers cast and molded according to the
metal of the time upon new and strange doctrines. Alexander the second, put
the Alleluiah out of office, from the time called Septuagesima, Herm. Gigas.
until Easter: albeit that by an epistle written from Michael of Constantiple,
Anno 1090. 1165. 1200. 1370. 1250. Nauclerus Gezer. 42. Under the Emperor
Rodolph. The Council of Colen.
it may seem that that decree was more ancient. Vrbane the second ordained a
Mass to be said upon every Saturday in the honor of the Virgin Marie.
Calixtus the third ordained the office of the transfiguration. Innocent the
third, commanded that the Psalm Deus venerunt Gentes, should be sung after the
Agnus Dei. Gregory the ninth, brought in the Salve Regina, with the ringing of
the bell. Albert the great, compiled the sequences for the most part. And
Thomas of Aquin the Office. which they call the Office of the feast of God. A
Council held at Colen ordained how the host should be chosen, namely round,
and very smooth and sleeke, not too old, of what bigness, how it should be
covered, how it should be elevated, what manner of wine it should be, and what
water, in what proportion and quantity, how the priest should discern and
judge of them by their odor and smell: what manner of ones the hallowed linnens
should be, what cautions, prouisoes, and remedies are to be used in respect
of the sowring and moulding of it, as also to keep it from the rats, mice,
cobwebs, etc. that is to say, according as the error of Transubstantiation
increased, An. 1165.
so likewise the errors in ceremonies accompanying the same increased.
Whereupon it came, that Innocent the third, in the Council of Laterane willed
that the host should be kept in some coffer or casket appointed of purpose for
the same: Anno 1216. Blond. l. 7. dec. 2.
and declares how that the words of the Canon are equal to the words of the
Gospel. And Honorius the third enjoined every man to kneel down at the
elevation of the host: and that it should be carried in decent habites unto the
diseased and sick. And Grergorie the ninth for notice or warning sake, added
the ringing of the bell. It was likewise instituted and ordained in these
latter times, that the Canon should be uttered in a low voice: whereupon it
is called a secret. And Hugo de Sancta Victoria, Durand. l. 4. c. 35. Beleth,
cap. 44.
Durandus, Honorius, and Beleth do yield a reason: Because (say they) that
every man can it by heart, and because that some of the Pastors abused it to
transubstantiate their bread into flesh, as it came to pass, and yet they were
nevertheless miraculously punished by fire from heaven: Gabriel Biel.
contrary to the ancient use of the East and West Churches, as appears by
all their lithurgies, in which the words of the consecration are pronounced
with a loud and audible voice.

And yet notwithstanding it is to be noted, The prescript forms of the Mass,
were diverse and not all one till the year 1200.
that it was a long time, that is to say, more then 600. years after Gregory
the first, before it could be obtained, that there should be but one prescript
form of the Mass throghout all the latin church. For we read about the
year 1000. and Bellarmine confesses the same; that Bruno the brother of Otho
the Great, Archb. of Colen, did as then reform the office and order of the
Mass in his diocese, according to that of Rome. And likewise in France they
had Masses, which they called two faced, three faced, and four faced Masses,
bifaciatas, trifaciatas, etc. becaused they respected three or four diverse
subjects: as namely diverse Saints, and for that they were to diverse ends, save
only when they came to the offertorie; and notwithstanding they concluded with
one Canon, which time has at length abolished, Petrus Cantor in verbo
abbreuiato, Such as have spoken against these abuses.
or rather the good husbanding of the priests, who would have dispatched all
at twice or thrice. Tantae molis erat (says one speaking to that purpose)
Romanam condere Missam. Lo here you may see how that the Mass would take his
foundation and root from the holy Supper, has in the end cast it quite out of
house and harbor, so that now the place thereof does not know it, or any the
signs and marks thereof any more. And therefore they need not to marvel, if
Petrus Cantor more the^ 400. years since, did tax and confute the multiplying
and profaning of Masses: blamed the priests for having left the preaching of
the word, for to sing Masses: for having sewed and set together again the vale
of the Temple, Petrus Cantor in verbo abbreuiato, citat. per Cardinal. Alliac.
rent in sunder by the death of our Lord, to bring Iudaisme again by their
ceremonies: and in sum (says he) for having neglected the commandments of
God to follow the inventions of men. Neither yet if Arnoldus de Villa noua one
of the most famous men of his time and age, said: that for these three hundred
years, the Masses and sacrifices for the dead have not been any thing but
abuses and departinges from the verity of Christ: that the Priest in his
pretended sacrifice, does offer nothing unto God; and that the Devil by
succession of time has turned out of their right way, and caused to err all
Christian people from the truth of our Lord and Master. If the Waldenses, and
after them the Albigenses, which have replanted Christianity by their
dispearsinges and scatteringes, according to the pureness and sincerity of the
Gospel, did teach at this time; that the Mass did retain and hold nothing of
the institution of Christ, neither for the living nor for the dead: that the
consecration was not tied to the words of the Canon, but to the Lords
institution: that the holy Supper ought to be celebrated according to that
institution, or else that it is no supper: that all other ceremonies therein
are unprofitable, and the vulgar or natural tongue of every people necessary
for the instruction of the people, etc. If also, the king S. Jews, (although
carried away with the streams of custom,) did exhort Henry king of England to
hear sermons taken out of the word of God, rather then to frequent Masses:
Matthew. Paris. addit.
Because (says he) the one will be much more available unto you to salvation
then the other. But because we have handled it before, how that the priests
had got so much by their days labors, that they had in the end cut off, and
taken away the cup of the Lord from the people: it concerns us now
consequently to look about us, and see by what proceedings they attained
thereto, being no change or alteration, but a mere dismembring and violent
rent, undertaken in so deep a degree of presumption, and performed with so
high and horrible an enterprise of sacrilege.

CHAP. X. That the Communion under both kinds was practiced all in the old
Church.
SEeing for certainty that our Lord Jesus Christ has once said, The communion
under both kinds.
Take, drink ye all, this is the cup of the new Testament in my blood, which
is shed for you: where shall be found such a priest, as dare under the name of
the church, refuse and deny to give the same unto the faithful? and what
faithful person should he be, that should not be so bold as to urge and
importune the priest, if he deny the cup, the blood, and the salvation in the
blood of our Lord shed for us: the cup of the covenant, if we will not
willingly be excluded and shut out from it: the cup of the new Testament, if
we will not by too open and evident a contempt, frustrate and make of no
effect our inheritance: if we will not be blotted out of the book of
children? And yet such are excommunicate, as require that they may have the
communion in the blood of Christ: and which do stiffly hold and contend, that
the one half of the legacies bequeathed them by their Lord and Master his
last will and testament is stolen from them, those are called Sacramentarie
Heretics, which complain, that the Sacrament of the blood of Christ is
taken from them. And it is nothing but novelty, newfanglednes, and innovation,
to have recourse to this will and testament, whose title is so ancient and
authentike: or to sue by force and virtue of the couenantes and conditions
contained and agreed upon therein. It is antiquity to eiect, disseise and
dispossess us, by a new ordinance, which has no ground nor foundation but
mere fancies; no reason but presumption; an antiquity which cannot but very
hardly and with great difficulty derive his pedigree further then one
generation. But now let us look into the stately march and proceeding of this
great abuse. The holy Supper of our Lord is cut off, as we have seen close by
the ground and upon the ruins thereof is built the Romish Mass. By this
means the people has been frustrate of the ordinary use of the body and
blood of Christ. From weeks it has been reiourned and put off to months:
from months to quarters: and finally from quarters to once a year. In stead
of the bread of the Eucharist, there is given the holy bread when they go out
from the Mass: In stead of the cup of the Lord in the communion: they are
now vouchsafed as much as will wash their mouths, and all this from time to
time covered with the glorious name of the Church. And what shall we then say
if all the old Church be clean contrary thereunto? If of all the deformities
and corruptions of the same there be not one that is newer or later then this?
Let us trace over therefore the ages of the world, and the works of the
fathers: for I am willingly diposed to take the pains to make it plain unto
the readers, though they might envy me for the same; and though this matter be
of the nature of those, whereof S. Augustine has given this rule: Valeat ad
sui demonstrationem ipsa rei ouidentia, let the evidence and clearnes of the
thing it self, deal and speak for the proof thereof.

Saint Paul in the first to the Corinthians begins at that end: 1. Cor. 11.
I have received of the Lord, that which I have also given unto you: he is not
so bold as these fellows, which give clean contrary, even that which they
have never received; and that which he had received, and that which he gave,
that is, the communion under both kinds. Let us use this word kinds for the
signs or Sacraments, that so we may the better apply and fit our selves unto
them. As often (says he) as you shall eat this bread and drink this cup, etc.
Let every man prove himself, and so let him eat of this bread, and drink of
this cup, etc. The man (says he) and not the Apostle, nor the disciple, nor
the Priest, nor the Clearke, but every Christian, for so he writes unto the
Church of God which is in Corinth, to the sanctified in Jesus Christ, to them
which are called Saints: Yea and unto all them (says he) which call upon
the name of our Lord, in what place soever they be.

Ignatius writing to the whole Church of Philadelpha: The consent of the
fathers Ignatius ad Philadelph. Anno salutis. 100. Iren. lib. 4. c. 32 33.34.
I exhort you (says he) that you use all one faith, one public ministry and
preaching of the word, and one Eucharist: for there is but one flesh of Jesus
Christ, and one blood shed for us; one bread broken for all, and one cup
distributed to all. He says to all and not to the priests only: for even in
the same epistle before these words he had made mention of the Bb. Elder,
Deacons and people.

Irenaeus joins and coupleth both of them together continually. The Lord has
commanded (says he) unto his disciples, to offer unto God the first fruits of
his creatures; the bread to be his body, and the cup to be his blood, etc: and
we never find them separated the one from the other in him.

Saint Cyprian writing unto Cornelius the Pope: Epist. 2. Anno 200.
How (says he) do we teach, how do we incite and stir up the faithful to
shed their blood, for the confession of the name of Christ, if we deny unto
them his blood? unto them who have to fight for him? How shall we fit them for
the cup of Martyrdom, if we have not first received them into the Church,
to drink the cup of the Lord, by the right of communicating? And in an other
place making mention of the history of a Deacon, which gave the Sacrament of
the wine unto a young maid possessed of a Devil: Sermon. 5. de lapsis.
As (says he) after the solemn consecration accomplished, the Deacon began to
give the cup to those that were present, and that the rest having received the
same, it came to the young maid her turn to take it; she began to turn her
face away, by the instinct and motion of his divine Majesty, etc. Lo here the
distributing thereof unto the laity both men and women, and not upon special
privilege, but by common right, for he calls it, Vis communicationis.
Besides that all the rest of the dispute which he maintains against them
that took nothing but water, Contra Aquarios, may be brought into this
purpose, in as much as his scope and drift is to bring them continually to use
both kinds, Gabr. Biel. lect. 84. litera R.
commanded in the holy Supper. Whereupon Gabriel Biel says: He spoke (says
he) according to the manner of the Church which he governed, in which it may
be that in his time the communion was administered under both kinds. And in
like sort Ecchius De sumptione Eucharistia, hom. 33. Both these notwithstanding
great schoolmen in our time.

Tertullian says: Lib. 5. aduersus Marcionem. Tertul. ad vxorem. lib. 2.
By the Sacrament of bread and of the cup, we have proved in the Gospel the
verity of the body and of the blood of our Lord against the fantastical
dreams of Marcion. And in an other place, speaking of the woman which was
married to an infidel: At whose hand shall she desire, vz. the sacrament of
bread: With whom shall she participate of the cup? that is, the sacrament of
wine.

Origin never otherwise: The faithful (says he) do eat in the bread the
body of Christ, they drink in the wine his blood: For so said our Lord unto
his disciples: Take and eat, take and drink, etc: and he would not that
either the one or the other should be reserved for the next day, etc.

Justinius Martyr is yet more plain: After the Pastor has given thanks, Just.
Mart. Apol. 2. (...)
and the blessing of all the people, the Deacons gave unto every one of those
that were present, a piece of bread, and of the cup delaied with water, by
which is administered the Eucharist or Sacrament of Thanksgiving: and likewise
they left off the carrying of it unto those which were absent. And this is it
which we call the Eucharist, etc. And this place is so much more forcible,
because therein is described the whole form of the holy supper in the Primitive
church.

And as for S. Denis, I can produce him as a witness in this point in his
Lithurgie, where he speaks orderly of the communicating and distributing of
both kinds: but I let it alone for a fitter place, in as much as I have
sufficiently showed, that this restraint of the cup could not be either in the
first or second age. In the same manner the lithurgies attributed unto S. James
and S. Clement: besides that in this latter by name, speaking of them which
communicate in the body and blood, by the distribution of the Bb. and Deacon,
he uses these words: After that, let the Bishop take the Eucharist, then let
the Elders, Deacons, Subdeacons, Readers, Chanters and Ascets: and of women,
the Deaconnesses, maids and widows, and in the end the children and all the
people, every one in his order and place, with reverence and without any
tumult, etc.

The Article of the Council of Nice which is found in the library of Vatican,
Anno 300
says thus: At this divine table let us not abase or bow our selves before the
bread and cup, which are there set before us, but lifting up our minds, let us
by faith think and consider, how that the lamb of God taking away the sins
of the world, lies in this table offered by the priests, without being
sacrificed; and how that we receiving in truth his precious body, do believe
these things to be the signs of our resurrection. This is the cause why we
take not much, but a little, to the end that we may know that we take them not
to fill us, but to sanctify us. Now we cannot doubt of whom he speaks, for
there the question is of all the faithful.

S. Hillarie: The body and blood of our Lord taken and drunk, do cause us to
be in Christ, Accepta and hausta. Hillar. l. 8. de Trinit. Hillar. de
consecrat. D. 2. C. Si non.
and Christ in us. These two terms are used respectively, and have relation
to the two kinds. And in another place: If that a man's sins be not so great
as that they let and hinder him from the Communion, then let him not in any
case separate and keep away himself from the physic of the body and blood
of our Lord.

And as there were at this time, (that is to say, about the year 340.) some
which would not altogether cut off the use of the cup, but give bread dipped in
wine, which they called Intinctam, under the color, Eusebius. l. 6. c. 44.
Cyprian sermon. 4. de lapsis. Prosper de promis. c. 6.26. q. 6. C. Is in Decret.
Julius Papa de Consecratione did. 2. Canon. Cum omne paragr. illud. Anno 400.
Ambr. l. 2. Offic. c. 41. Ambr. l. 4. c. 6. de Sacram. and l. 5. c. 3. l. 5, c,
1, 2.3.
that in extraordinary cases it had been practiced in the behalf of children
and those which were sick, as may be seen in the history of Serapio, in S.
Cyprian de lapsis, and in Prosper de Promis. etc. So Julius the Bb. of Rome
maintained the contrary, and that very roughly, namely, that it was against
the institution of Christ, against the doctrine of the Apostles and
Evangelists, and against the custom of the Church. And that for to decide the
controversy, there was no other course to be taken, but to repair to the head
and fountain of truth, from whence the mysteries of the Sacraments do proceed.
Where (says he) has our Lord-ordained the bread by it self, and the cup by
it self? etc. And what would he say then if he should see his successors,
cutting the cup off altogether? and condemning of heresy those which demand
it? Or what can they answer unto us, when we are able to prove against them,
both by authority, as also by the very same reasons that their predecessors
used?

In S. Ambrose, Laurence the Deacon says, that the Bb. Sixtus had committed to
him the dispensing and administering of the blood of our Lord, (and so in deed
this was the ordinary Office of the Deacons:) and he called it Consummationem
Sacramentorum, the accomplishing of the sacraments: as not accompting it
perfect without the cup. Yea, and he himself did never separate the bread from
the cup: Thou have (says he unto the people) received the heavenly
Sacraments, the body and blood of our Lord, etc. And thereto applies the words
of the Canticles: I have eaten my bread with my honey, Canticl. chapter 5.
and drunk my wine with my milk, etc. Again: If as often as the blood is
powered out, it be unto the remission of sins, ^e consecrat. ^st. 2. c. Si
^uotiescu^que. Ambr. in epist. ^. ad Cor.
I ought to receive it every day, to the end that every day my sins may be
forgiven me. And in another place, to the end that we may not think that he
speaks of himself, he speaks unto every faithful one: Thou receiuest the
remission of sins, and art drunk with the spirit, etc. And yet more
plainly: for he will give a reason, although it be but a bad one: Because
(says he) that that which we take serves for the defense of the body and of
the soul: for the flesh of Christ is offered for the salvation of the body,
and the blood for the salvation of our souls, as Moses did foreshew: The
flesh (says he) is offered for your body, Ambr. in 1. ad Cor. 11.
and the blood for your soul, etc. Which agrees well with the rule which he
gives, entreating of this sacrament. He is unworthy (says he) of the Lord
which celeb rateth this mystery otherwise then it has been given him: for
he cannot be devout therein, who presumes to give it otherwise then it has
been delivered unto him by the author, etc. And yet notwithstanding impudent
and shameless dealing has so reigned heretofore, Officium Ambrosianum.
as that in the office going under his name, there is no mention made of the
communion of the body, against the express doctrine of S. Ambrose.

S. Jerome upon Sophonie: Hieron. in Soph. cap. 3.
The Priests which serve in the administration of the Eucharist, and which
distribute unto the people of the Lord his blood, do transgress wickedly
against the law of Christ, in supposing that the words and not the life do
make the Eucharist, etc. He speaks by name of the people. Ad Damas.
And unto Damasus: We are fed every day with the flesh of the Lord, we are
watered with his blood: this banquet is celebrated every day.

Saint Augustine: August. in lib. sentent. Prosper. de consecr. d. 1. canon. Du
frangitur. and Can. Qui manducant. August. in Leuit. c. 57.
When the host is broken, when the blood is powered out of the cup into the
mouths of the faithful, that is, of all the communicants, what can be meant or
signified thereby but the body of the Lord offered upon the cross, and the
blood shed out of his side? Again: They which eat and drink Christ, do eat
and drink life: To eat him is to make himself again; to drink him is to
live. And the Gloss does say excellent well upon that place, Under the kinds
of bread and wine. And in another place he proceeds further: So far is it off
(says he) that it should be forbidden any man to take for spiritual
nourishment, the blood of this sacrifice, (seeing it was so taken of the old
Churches) that on the contrary, all they which will have eternal life, are
exhorted to drink the same.

The Grecians have not spoken otherwise at any time, and yet to this day they
practice no less, The consent of the fathers of the Greek Church.
communicating all of them under both kinds, holding it for a horrible
sacrilege to do otherwise: notwithstanding whatsoever our sophistical
schoolmen under color of some fables, or cold and foolish histories would go
about to make them believe. The lithurgie of S. Denis is very plain for the
communicating and distributing of the sacraments under both kinds unto all the
people, in these words, (...), etc.

S. Basil says: Basil. de Bapt. l. 1. c. 3.
It behooves them that shall approach and draw near to the body and blood of
the Lord, to prove themselves, etc. He speaks simply of all the faithful, and
not of the priests: De accedente, non de offerente: For fear (says he) least
he should eat and drink to his judgment. In the lithurgy which they use when
it pleases them, he did not administer otherwise unto his people. Basil. in
ep. ad Caesar.
And as for that which they allege out of him; that there were certain
hermits in Egypt which had no priest, but kept the communion in their
hermitages, taking it by themselves: our adversaries striving to conclude from
thence, that they had nothing in their co^munions but bread, in as much as wine
will hardly be kept in Egypt: assuredly, in stead of deciding this tavern case
as they do, I answer, that whether wine keep well in Egypt or not, it were
better for the^ to conform and fashion themselves both unto S. Basil, and the
holy assemblies of the church of his time, the^ unto these hermits: and yet
they should have done far better then so, if they had learned the sharp and
severe sentence, Basil. in Moral. Summa. c. 14. Nazian. in oratione in sanct.
Pascha.
which he tells them of in that place, which is: He that commands what God
forbids, or forbids what God commands, let him be accursed unto all
them that love the Lord. Nazianzene in the prayer of Easter, says unto the
people, Without shame and without doubt eat the body and drink the blood, if
at the least thou desire eternal life. The example of his sister Gorgonia does
not prove the contrary, being but the devotion of one private person, which
cannot make against the public use and practice of a church: but in deed to
prove the quite contrary there is mention made of both kinds as thus: That she
did mingle her tears with the types or figures of the precious body and blood
of Christ, etc.

Saint Chrysostom will yet give us in a clearer testimony, himself
administering the Sacraments in that famous city of Constantinople: for we may
not imagine to find in him this Maxim grounded: Chrysostom. in 8. ad Cor. ho.
18.
that it behooves that in the sacraments the priests should be privileged to
receive one kind more then the laity, seeing even in the entrance he gives us
an other rule clean contrary: There is a thing (says he) wherein the priest
differs nothing from him over whom he has charge, that is, from the lay man:
as for example, when the enjoying and receiving of the high and reverent
mysteries is called in question: for we are all alike thought worthy to receive
them: and not as in the old law, Hom. 84. in Matthew.
where the priest did eat his part alone, and the people theirs by themselves;
so as that it was not lawful to take part of that which was appointed for the
part and portion of the priest. It is not so at this day, but there is set
before and given to all one and the self same body, and one and the same cup.
The lithurgie also which they attribute to him, does so celebrate the same. And
when he would stir up the people to reverence the sacraments, he does it
always by joining together of both kinds; What manner of mouth will thou
bring for this bread? Chrysostom. de Eucharist. Theophilact. in 1. Cor. c. 11.
Idem in Ioha. c. 10. Idem in Ioh. c. 10.
and what manner of lips for this cup? and such like speeches. Whereupon also
Theophilact, which has made in manner an abridgement of Chrysostomes works,
says: That the cup of the Lord was ordained for all equally and alike. And in
another place: When (says he) thou come to the cup of the communion of the
blood of Christ, so dispose thy self, as if thou came to drink of his
proper cost and charges. These words when thou come, can not be vnderstoood
but of the faithful people.

In the time of Leo the first, about the year 440. The condemning of them that
take but the bread. Leo sermon. quadrag. 4. Romans 16.
the communion under both kinds was so ordinary and certain, as that it was
the mark whereby to know the Manichees, the most pernicious heretics that
were in the Church. And thereupon Leo the Pope says in a sermon: They take in
their unworthy mouths the body of the Lord, and refuse altogether to drink
the blood of our redemption: which he calls a sacrilegious hypocrisy, and
applies to the same purpose the words of S. Paul to the Romans; Beware of
them that raise dissentions and offenses, contrary to the doctrine which you
have learned, etc. What would he have said then if the priests and Bishops had
refused to administer it to the people? But as every Process does intend an
arrest, and heresies engender decrees: so there being certain presumptuous and
superstitious priests about the year 540. which were tampering to separate
the bread from the cup, Pope Gelasius utters his judgment; De consecrat. D.
Can. 2.
We have heard (says he) that there are some me^ which having received the
body, do abstain and refuse to receive the cup of the sacred blood: whom,
seeing superstition has blinded them, we will either wholly and entirely to
receive the Sacraments, or else to be wholly and utterly restrained and shut out
from the same: because that the renting a sunder and dividing of one and the
same mystery cannot be done or tolerated without great sacrilege. Note and
mark that he says Superstition, not heresy. He speaks not then of the
Manichees, as Leo does, but of other persons received into the Christian
Church. Again, that Gelasius says and declares; that not to receive any more
then the body, is not to receive the whole Sacrament: but to the contrary, it
is so far from receiving the Sacrament, as that it is nothing else but a
notorious inwrapping of a man in sacrilege. And here Gratianus his Gloss is
not to be admitted, that this Canon is to be understood of certain priests, who
having consecrated both kinds, did take but one of them: neither yet the
deprauing and corrupting of the same, as it is done by some Chroniclers, who to
apply themselves to the abuses of their times, say that Gelasius ordained this
Canon, that the priests should not consecrate the one kind without the other.
For here I would ask of them, if they consecrate both, what must be done then
with the other? but if one only must be consecrated, then I would know of the^
where I might find any history making mention thereof? But the truth is, that by
that Canon are condemned such superstitious persons as would receive but the
one, as may well be collected out of these words: Ab integris arceantur, let
them be wholly put back and debarred: which must needs be applied unto the
parties receiving, and not to the parties distributing. Now superstition is
called of the schoolmen, Cultus Dei indebitus; that is, when one serves God
after his own manner, and not according to his commandementes.

Let us add as an ouer-measure of these first five hundred years, S. Remigius,
who is called the Apostle of the French men: Hincmarus Archb. of Rheimes
writing a book on set purpose of him, tells us, that he never celebrated it
otherwise: For (says he) these verses are yet found written upon his cup unto
this day. Hauriat hinc populas vitam de sanguine sacro,
Iniecto aternus quem fudit vulnere Christus:
Remigius reddit Domino sua vota Sacerdos.


S. Gregory, The further continuance thereof after the time of Gregory the
Great. an. 600. Gregor. in ho. de Pasch. De consecrat. di. 2. C. Quid sit.
Greg. Dialog. l. 3. c. 36.
notwithstanding that he was a great changer and alterer of religion in his
time, yea, and in that part thereof, namely, the administration of the
Sacraments, does not meddle any thing with this point. In the Homely on Easter
day: What is it (says he) that you have not yet learned of the blood of the
lamb, in hearing of it, as also in drinking of it: which blood is then
sprinkled upon the two posts, when it is drunk not only with the mouth of
the body, but also with the mouth of the heart: now he speaks in that place
unto all the people. He says the same in the Homely which begins, Fractus
longa molestia. And writing to Augustine Bishop of Canterbury, as also in his
dialogues he reports, how that a certain man named Maximinian, afterward Bb.
of Sarragossa in Sicilia, being distressed by tempest, all they which were in
the vessel, received the body and blood of our Lord, after they had prayed
for the peace one of another: in stead whereof they use not now a days to say
any but dry Masses upon the sea. Ordo Romanus. Micrologus.
But that which is more, the Romish order which is held to have been ordained
in his time, does carry it in express terms: as that the Archdeacon did
distribute the cup to all them to whom the Bb. did give the bread, and the
blood to those to whom the body was given: whereby the one was called by the
name of communicating, and the other of confirming: and that these words were
uttered and spoken unto them; Corpus Domini, sanguis Domins, etc. custodiat te
ad vitam aeternam: the body of our Lord, etc. the blood of our Lord, etc.
preserve and keep thee unto eternal life: and there are by name comprised and
specified the clearkes and the laity, men and women of every condition. And in
deed the prayers before and after have these words: We beseech thee O Lord,
that all we which have received the holy body and blood of thy Son, may be
replenished with all grace and heavenly blessing, etc. And the Post-communion,
that is, the Thanksgiving after the communion was there: Thy body O Lord which
we have taken, and thy blood which we have drunk, let cleave unto our inward
parts, and let not any spot of uncleanness abide in us, which have been
refreshed with so precious Sacraments.

Beda in the homily upon these words of S. John, An. 700. Beda in hom. Vidit
Johan. etc.
John s^^ Jesus coming unto him, etc. Jesus Christ (says he) does wash us
daily in his blood, when the memory of his death and passion is unfolded upon
the Altar, when the creatures of bread and wine by the unspeakable power of the
sanctification of the holy Ghost is translated into the Sacrament of his flesh,
and of his blood: for then his body and his blood are no more slain or shed
by the infidels to their destruction, Council. Tolet. 11. c. 11.
but taken by the mouths of the faithful to their salvation. And the eleventh
Council of Toledo of the same time witnesses, that the one and the other kind
were carried unto the sick, when it excuses them from excommunication, which
through weakness did cast out of their mouths the one or the other. Beda l. 4.
c. 3. Vincent. l. 23. c. 7.81.97. Vadianus in Aeoli. and Troade. Anno 800.
Carol. Mag. l. 2 and 3. de imaginibus. Gregor. 3. Pap.
And Beda makes mention of Ceadda a king of England, and Vincentius of Bauon,
Furseus and Richarius, that they did receive both the one and the other at the
time of their death.

Charlemaine says: We take the flesh of our redemption for the remission of
our sins, and we escape the stroke of the Angel, being besprinckled with his
blood. And again, The mystery of the body and of the blood of the Lord is
daily received by the faithful in the Sacrament etc. And Pope Gregory the
third at the same time says: That there is need that two or three cups
should be provided to set upon the altar, at such time as the Masses are
celebrated, that the people may communicate. And thus likewise do all the great
men of this age witness and testify unto the same.

Rabanus: Anno 900. Rabanus. l. 1. c. 33. de Instit. Cleric. Lib. 1. c. 29.
The water and the wine in the cup do show the sacraments, which did run out
of our Lord his side upon the cross, wherewith we are watered. Again, the
faithful in the church do daily eat the body of Christ,, and drink his
blood. And in another place he teaches by the comparing together of corporal
food, which consists in meats and drinks, that we have need of both
kinds: likewise he commands that all those which are baptized, do
communicate in the body and blood of our Lord.

Paschasius says: O man as often as thou drinkest this cup, Pasc. de Euch. c.
15. c. 48.
think not that thou drinkest any other blood then that which has been shed
for thy sins. And afterward he adds: Take and drink ye all, as well the
ministers (says he) qua^ reliqui credentes, as the rest of the believers. And
again: The flesh is well accompanied with the blood, because the flesh cannot
be by good right communicated without the blood, neither yet the blood without
the flesh. And therefore he says in another place: We are refreshed with the
flesh, c. 7. Anno 1000. Haimo l. 1. c. 2. in Apoc. and super haec verba, Ecce
Agnus Dei. Super haec verba, In Cana Galil. Item, tum venit Jesus in parts
Caesar. Philip. In 1. Cor. c. 11. Conc. Worm. 1.36. Rup. Abb. Tuicens. in Mat.
c. 27. in Ioh. c 6 De Offic. Diui. l. 6 c. 9. and 22. Vincent. l. 24. c. 75.
Regino Monach. c. 119. de discipl. eccl. Radulph. Tungrens. in Leuit. lib. 14.
c. 4. Anno 1100. Ansel. in epist. ad Cor. c. 10. Lanfranc. de Euch. Alger de
Euch. l. 2. Damianus in Apol. ad Nicol. Papam. Berno in sermon. de purific.
Mariae. S. Bernard. in Psalm. 90. ser. 9 Ser. 3. de Ram. palm. Sermon. 2. de
Coen. Dom. Sermon. 3. super Cant.
of the divine word and we have our thirst quenched with his blood. Haimo the
Bb. of Halberstat, writing upon the Apocalips: The faithful do daily eat in
the Church the body of Christ, and drink his blood. Again: The cup is called
the communion, because of the communicating therein: for all do communicate
thereof. And in like manner upon S. John. chapter 1. and 2. and upon S. Math. Chap.
16.

The Council of Worms speaking of the incestuous: Let him abstain for the
space of three years from the communion of the body and blood of our Lord.
And moreover, that about this time, Gisilbert upon the ensuing of the real
Transubstantiation, taught the doctrine of concomitance, that is to say, that
under one of the kinds there is comprised as much as under both: and further
infers, that it were more to the purpose not to be in danger of shedding,
that the people might not communicate of the cup at all, howbeit that
continual and daily use be to the contrary. Witness Robert, Abbot of Duits,
who makes mention how that the Sacrament in his time, was given and taken
under both kinds, purposely handling this matter. And Vincent, who says, that
a certain holy Lady named Elgyfa received them at the time of her death.
Regino the Monk: The souls of the infirm and weak must be refreshed with
the body and the blood of our Lord. And Radulphus Tungrensis yet more
plainly: The people receive the sacred body of Christ, and drink a holy
draught of his blood, etc.

Anselme, Archb. of Canterbury: All we which take of the same bread and of the
same cup, are made one body. And Lanfranc: The host of the Lord is broken, when
the blood is powered out of the cup into the mouth of the faithful. And Alger:
The body and blood of our Lord are taken of the faithful together, to the
end, that having received the body and soul of Christ, the whole man in body
and in soul may be quickened together with Christ. And Damian: How may we
think that the Lord is agreeued, when a wicked man comes to the holy altar
to receive his body and his blood. And Berno Abbot of Reichenaw; We are not
only fed every day with the bread of Christ, whem we are refreshed by the
nourishment of his flesh, by the Mass of the altar: but we have also our
thirst quenched with his blood, as he has promised us: He that eats my flesh
and drinks my blood, etc. And so are all those above named, especially they
that writ against Berengarius.

Saint Bernard: He that sows nigardly and sparingly shall not be without a
harvest, but it shall be but a poor and niggardly harvest: for this reaping is
to receive hire. But we know him who has promised, that he that shall give a
glass of cold water for his sake, shall not be without his hire and reward:
but this is to be known, whether that it shall be measured back again unto
him in the same measure which he measured out and gave: or whether in the
recompense he shall be made equal to him, who not in giving of water, but in
shedding of his blood, shall have drunk the cup which God the father has
powered out unto him. Assuredly here is not any cup of cold water, but a cup
full of strong wine to make drunken, a cup of pure and neat wine, etc. For my
Lord Jesus and no other has the pure wine in his possession, etc. In another
place: Jesus Christ the night before his passion prescribed unto his disciples
the form of this Sacrament, gave it power, and commanded them to do it. The
prescription given for the form, consists in bread and wine. Mark the
order: As they were yet at supper, he rise from the table, washed the feet of
his disciples; and returning to the table, instituted the sacrifice of his
body, and of his blood, giving the bread by it self, and the wine by it
self, saying of the bread: Take, eat, this is my body: of the wine thus,
drink ye all of this, This is my blood, etc. And the same may be gathered out
of diverse other places. And in deed Vincent reckons up one Tundatus, Vincent.
l. 27. c. 88.
a wicked man, who seeing himself smitte^ from heaven with a mortal blow,
required the communion: and when he had taken the body of the Lord, and drunk
the wine, he cried, O God thy mercy is greater then mine iniquity, how great
soever it be. And William Duke of Normandy having to give the Danes battle in
England, we read that he caused all his army to receive the sacrament, and by
name under both kinds. But it is more then time to see by what manner of
proceeding, and under what color the blood of Christ was cut off and taken
away from the people: and this will afforde us matter enough for an other
Chapter.

CHAP. XI. How the cutting off of the cup of the Lord from the faithful
proceeded and grew, and under what pretext and color.
NOw in deed the case stands thus, that the Devil, the enemy of the blood
of Christ, who never shrinketh back, or gives over, did from time to time and
at an inch prosecute the point of cutting off of the cup from the faithful:
and which is worse, under the shadow of devotion. For we have seen that about
the year 350. under the shadow of children and sick folk, it was labored to
bring in bread dipped in the wine: which Julius Bishop of Rome did hinder,
expressly opposing thereto the institution of the Lord. And again we read,
that about the year 950. the Monks of the order of Clugni, under the color
of fearing to shed the cup, did institute in their conuents, to deliver bread
wet in wine, Intincta^ unto their nouices, though freely acknowledging, that it
was against the use and order of other Churches: Because (say they) that there
are of our nouices so raw and grosse-headed, as that if they did receive the
blood by it self, they would fall into an inconvenience: and this
inconvenience is that which they call, Periculum effusionis, the danger of
shedding, bred and brought up as we shall see, with transubstantiation, and
has spread it self abroad into as many countries as the other. From that time
forward, in a Council held at Tours, for the same consideration, it was
permitted to give Intinctam, bread dipped in wine, unto the sick, and that not
only in Monasteries, but in Parishes: and the reason thereof is added; Yuo de
diuinis Offic. Hildeb. se Epise. vocat, epist. 64.
To the end (says he) that the Priest may truly say, The body and blood of
our Lord does profit thee unto the remission of thy sins, etc: so needful
did they always judge both the kinds to be. In the end of the time of Yuo
Bishop of Chartres, it came to be given in some places unto the whole and
sound. But Hildebert Bb. of Mantz, kept a great stir about it, finds fault
with the custom, and insisteth upon the institution of Christ, urging the
same: That either kind ought to be given by it self, and that otherwise it is
but to give Judas his sop and not the body of Christ.

And in deed it is clear, About the year 1280. Hugo de Sacr. Altar.
that at this time the greatest and most autentike writers did speak no
otherwise. Hugo de Sancta Victoria says: Men receive both the one kind and the
other, to signify that this sacrament has a double effect: for it is the
redemption of the body and of the soul, which will not be sufficiently
expressed and signified, if it should not be received under any more then one
kind. And in another place: The receiving under both kinds signifies his
redemption unto him that so receives them, and that both of body and soul,
etc. Now the^ of which of the two will they frustrate and deprive us? Peter
Lombard says the Master of the sentences makes this question: Lombard. did.
11. l. 4.
Wherefore do men receive Jesus Christ under both kinds, seeing be is whole
and entire in one? Who answers him with Saint Ambrose his answer, vz.
Because this Sacrament profits both body and soul, and because that our
Lord would show thereby that he had taken upon him the whole nature of man,
that so he might redeem whole man. So that now already there was some
dreaming of a concomitancie, (that is, an inseparable fellowship and union of
the flesh and blood of Christ) a thing derived and springing from
transubstantiation, as in deed followed to be maintained more fully afterward:
and yet notwithstanding this consequence did not enforce that which followed
afterward: namely, That of necessity against the express words of the
institution the cup must be cut off from the Laity. On the contrary,
Lombard l. 4. did. 11.
The Eucharist dipped in wine (says he) must not be given to people in stead
of the Communion: for we read not that the Lord has given it so unto any of
his Disciples, but only unto Judas, etc. Gratianus the compiler and Author of
the decree, entreating at the same time of this matter in his Treatise, Of the
consecration, repeateth it more then twenty times, that Jesus Christ his
ordinance unto his Disciples, was under both kinds, and never speaks
otherwise: so far off is it, that there should be the printes and marks of
the forbidding of the cup in his decree gathered out of all the Fathers. De
conse. did. 2. Canon. tun^ ^is Petrus. ex August. de vtilitate credendi. and
Psalm. 33. and 35. Vide de consec. did. 2. C. Comperimus. C. quia passus. C. Si
non sunt. C In Caena C. Timorem. C. Quum frangit. C. Quid sit Sanguis. C.
Sacerdotes 1. q. 1. Hymnus iste extat in Officio. fest. Sacram. quod S. Tho.
attribuitur and ea de causa co referendus est.
And indeed the places which he there alleges out of the old Writers, are
very express and fit for the purpose: 'Peter (says he) preaches unto them
to believe in him, whom they had crucified, to the end that believing, they
might drink the blood which they had spilt in their mad and furious mood.
Again, The same blood which they shed in their folly, they drunk by his
grace, etc. And the Canons which he draws out of Julius, Gelasius, and
Gregory the Great, do utter the same: neither does the Gloss upon the decree
speak otherwise in any part thereof, de Consecr. d. 2. To be brief, the old
Agends, even to this day in the Rubric of the visitation of the sick, do
bear these words; Let the body and the blood of the Lord be administered
unto them under both kinds, yea and since that superstition brought in that
which they call Periculum effusionis, the danger of shedding; so that until
this time there is not one bare word to be found in all the old Writers to
the contrary, but that the cup was administered unto the people: Sufficient
proof of the same are the verses engraven upon the old cups: as likewise
this Hymn in use as yet unto this day.

Dedit fragilib us corporis ferculum,
Dedit ex tristibus sanguinis poculum:
Omnes ex eo bibite:
Sic Sacrificium istud instituit,
Cuius Officium committi vo luit,
Solis Presbiteris quib us sie congruit,
Vt sumant and dent caeteris.
As likewise Beatus Rhenanus reports, that in his time there were to be
seen in some cathedral Churches the cups wherewith they ministered unto the
people, and that they were called ministering cups: likewise in the Romish
pontifical, which were covered, and of the weight of some 480. or 560. ounces:
having a certain pretty little beak or pipe, at which the people did drink
to avoid all shedding. And namely, there is to be read of that of the
cathedral Church of Mentz, and of that of the Abbye of S. Gall in Swisserland.
And as yet to this day in the Abbye of Clugni at the great Mass, the Priest
does consecrate three hosts, the one whereof, they say is for himself, and
the others for the Deacon and Subdeacon; which being received, he drinks in
the cup one part of the consecrated wine with a hollow reed or pipe; and
then after him his Deacon and Subdeacon, one after another do drink the rest
with the same reed or pipe. And the Christians called Maronicks of the City
Marcinas in Syria, remaining still until this present in Jerusalem practice
the same.

And now we are come to twelve hundred years and more after the death of our
Lord, observing in all ages, and pointing out from age to age this use of both
kinds in the Church. And then what manner of antiquity is that which our
adversaries can object against us from that time forward? But as the doctrine
of Transubstantiation, authorized by the Council of Lateran after the year
1200. had within a while after engendered and brought forth by consequence the
concomitancie or joining and coupling of the body and blood of Christ
together, as also the danger of shedding, this new conclusion followed of
these two ouer-measures about the year 1300. That therefore it was sufficient
(seeing also that it was less dangerous,) to give unto the Laity only the
kind of bread. And yet hitherto it stood rather by toleration then by
ordinance or constitution; for it was not yet thoroughly found out as being
but in certain Churches, not in all, and the rather seeing the daily
resolution of the best learned, was, That the Sacrament was not perfect, but
under both kinds.

Gulielmus Durandus Bishop of Miniat, Gulielm. Durand. in ration. diuinorum.
L. 4. p. 3. titulo de osculo pacis.
did every where maintain and defend, that our Lord did institute it for all
under both kinds, and that they are requisite for the perfection of the
Sacrament: in brief, he says, All those in the Primitive Church, which were
present at Mass, did communicate, because that all the Apostles had drunk of
thee cup the Lord commanding them, Drink ye all: for they offered a great
loaf sufficient for all, which thing is as yet practiced of the Grecians.
Where is now the difference betwixt the Priests and the Laity? Again,
Although that under the kind of wine the body be received with the blood:
Duran. l. 2. p. 2. tit. simili mod.
notwithstanding, according to the judgment of Innocent the third, the blood
cannot be drunk under the kind of bread, nor the body is not eaten under
the kind of wine: because that like as the blood is not eaten, nor the body
drunken; so neither is the one and the other drunk under the kind of bread,
nor eaten under the kind of Wine, etc. And this is the cause why he adds in
certain places after the taking of the body and of the blood, there is
reserved and kept behind in the cup some little quantity of blood and wine
powered upon it, to the end that the other Communicantes may take it, because it
should not be convenient to make so much blood, and because also, that there
cannot be any cup found to contain it: and notwithstanding, (says he) in
many places, men do communicate with bread and wine, that is with the whole
Sacrament: and this is also confirmed unto us by Thomas. And hereof it comes,
that some do attribute the taking away of the cup unto this Innocent,
notwithstanding, that he made not any decree for the same. Balaeus, l. 5. de
vit. Pap.
But yet it was much about the very same time, that the giving of wine to wash
the mouth withal was brought in; in stead of the cutting of the kind: for
we read in the Synodall book of the Church of Nisme these words: We
command and inioyne all Priests, Synodalis liber Nemau, eccles.
that they have pure wine ready in the Church, to give unto every one of the
people presently after that he shall have received the body of the Lord,
forbidding them in express terms, not to depart out of the presence of the
Priests, until they have taken some, and very well washed their mouths
therewithal. And notwithstanding, this error did not universally as then
possess all Christendom: Abbas Visper.
for we read that the Christian Soldiers which were to undergo the assault
made upon Damiata, before that they would buckle themselves thereunto, did all
of them communicate the body and blood of our Lord, etc.

Alexander Hales makes mention, how that in his time the devout and religious
persons found it strange, that the cup should be taken from them, demanding
that it might be restored unto them again: and that this their request was
made of no effect by a pretended miracle, which was by the making of blood to
come out of an host, Alexand. 4. q. 40. M. 3. art. 2. and 4. q. 53. M. 1.
etc. And yet in respect of himself, you may perceive what his judgment was
by these words: Though it may seem to receive but one kind, notwithstanding
to receive both is of greater merit and desert: Again, Whole Christ is not
sacramentallie contained under either of the kinds: but the flesh under the
kind of bread, and the blood under the kind of wine. Again, it appears
that the rule was not generally received in his time, when he says, Jtafere
vbique fit a Laicis in Ecclesia, fere vbiqua non vbique: it is almost thus
practiced in every Church by the Laity, almost every where, says he,
Linwold. de sum. Trinit. and fide Cathol.
but not every where. As likewise when Linwoldus says, That in the less and
inferior Churches it is not permitted save only to the Priests to receive
the blood, under the kind of consecrated wine: for in that he says, In the
less or inferior churches, he means the Country Churches, thereby
excepting those that were in the Cities, presuming that Citizens had more
knowledge then Country men. Insomuch, as that this Sacrament instituted by our
Lord, to signify in the Communicating of one and the same bread, and one and
the same wine, the union and agreement betwixt all the saithfull in one body,
would serve by means of this corruption, to sunder and separate in manifest
and open show, first them of the Clergy from those of the Laity: and
secondly the Country people from those that dwelt in Cities: as though
forsooth the souls of the one sort were more dear then the other, to him who
has purchased all with one and the same blood. It springs likewise out of
the same Divinity, which Thomas Waldensis a white Friar says in his book,
which he has written, of the Sacraments against the Wickleuistes, and yet
approved by an express Bull from Pope Martin the fifth: for after that he has
reasoned mightily for the maintaining of the Communicating of the Laity under
one kind, he comes in with this exception, vz. That it is notwithstanding
permitted the Pastors, if they have not made an end of the Sacraments, but
only received the same in part, that is, if they have not drunk all, that
then they should distribute the remainder unto those of their Parishioners,
which are strong in faith, and discreet persons: Even as (says he) the Pope
is wont to deal with the Deacons and Ministers, and with other persons famous
for their faith, or advanced in dignity and worthiness, with Doctors and with
Kings, or as the Church deals at this day, with religious persons, or men of
great place, etc. And again, we do not allow it them (says he) generally,
neither do we generally forbid it them: for we know that it is reserved of
purpose for the Church and Prelates, to communicate and distribute the cup
unto such persons, etc.

And yet in the mean time, it has thriuen so well in their fingers, as that
indeed Kings having kept the Charter and privilege of this liberty, all
others have by one means or other lost and forfeyted the same: and yet Kings
hold not this tenure (say they) as they are Laye-men, but as they are sacred
persons: whereupon we read that the great king Frauncis demanding the
reasons of his Divines: Because (said they) that kings are anointed as the
Priests be: Which thing S. Ambrose as it may seem by this reckoning did not
understand aright, when he caused the Emperor Theodosius to come out of the
Queare of the Temple, as a mere Laye-man.

Thomas Aquinas shows us plainly, that it was in his time, Thomas de
sacram. altar.
that this abuse was brought into the Church: for in the place where Lombard
had made this question, Wherefore the Sacrament was received under both kinds,
Thomas did propound the contrary: why do not the people receive the blood
under the wine. And there is some difference betwixt them, in respect of some
certain years; during which distance this sufferance crept into the Church.
Now these are his reasons: first, That as there is need of a more special
vessel to put the wine in, then to put the bread in; so it is meet and
requisite, that it should be a more special and sacred person for the
receiving of the blood, then for the receiving of the body: which must be
expounded of the holy Priests only, and not of any of the unholy Laity.
But how shall those words of Chrysostom then take place, where he says:
That in the receiving of the Eucharist, there is no difference betwixt the
Priest and the people? The second, That there is danger therein, least the
people should shed the blood, which was not to be feared in receiving of the
body. And then what place should be found for the prudencie of the old
Church to abide and rest in? how has she maimed and wounded herself for
these many ages, at such time as the people flockt and ran to the receiving of
the Sacrament by millions, that she did not foresee, yea remedy and help
this inconvenience; but only because that new opinions have begotten new
prouisoes? The third, For fear least the common people, which is given to be
wilfully rude and ignorant, having taken the blood under the kind of wine;
could not afterward believe the receiving of it under the kind of bread; how
true notwithstanding soever it be, that it is therein truly and verily.
What other thing is this, but to reach us that Transubstantiation has begotten
concomitancie, and concomitancie the communicating under one kind; and by
consequent, that the Communion under both, practiced by the space of twelve
hundred years in the Church, did presuppose and take for granted a far other
kind of doctrine, then that of Transubstantiation or concomitancie? But this
said Thomas did acknowledge in an other place, that both the kinds are the
institution of the Lord: for he says expressly: Thomas aduers. Gentes. l. 4.
c. 51.
Because that the working of our salvation was accomplished by the passion of
Christ, by the which his blood was separated from his body; the Sacrament of
his body is given us apart and by it self, and the Sacrament of blood under
the wine by it self, to the end that under this Sacrament may be contained
the remembrance and representation of the death of our Lord, and that so it may
be fulfilled which he says: My flesh is verily meat, and my blood verily
drink, etc. And there he speaks expressly, not of the pretended Sacrifice of
the Priest, Iodoc. Clitho. in Elucidario Theologico.
but of the distribution of the Sacraments unto the faithful. Likewise in the
Office appointed for the feast of the Sacrament, ordained by him, this Hymn
does testify the same unto us: Dedit fragilibus, etc. Again, in the Hymn
Verbum supernum prodiens, he says.

Quibus sub bina specie,
Carnem dedit and sanguinem,
Vt duplicis substantiae,
Totum cibaret hominem.
Where he acknowledges the institution of Christ. Thom. in 1. ad Cor. 11.
lect. 5.
But upon the Epistle to the Corinthians, This Sacrament (says he) is given
under a double kind for three reasons: The first, for the perfection thereof,
for seeing it is a spiritual sustenance, it must needs have a spiritual
meat, as also a sprituall drink: wherefore it is said in the tenth Chapter:
that all have eaten one spiritual meat, and all have drunk one and the same
spiritual drink: The second, by reason of the signification thereof, for this
is a remembrance of the death and passion of our Lord, wherein the blood was
separated from the body: and therefore is given alone, and by it self in this
Sacrament. And the third reason is this, because of the saving effect that is
in this Sacrament: for it serves to the salvation of the body, and therefore
the body is given: it serves to the salvation of the soul, and therefore the
blood is given. But tell me I pray you, how far more fit these three reasons
are for to prove, that it ought to be given, then the other three are to prove
that it ought to be taken away? And what follows hereof then? but that to
cut off the same, is to deprive men of their spiritual food? to weaken the
remembrance of the passion of our Lord? yea and to frustrate his people, so
much as in them lies, of their salvation? But see how time carries things
away: Thom. in Summa par 3. q. 8. art. 12.
for after that he had said: To the perfection of this Sacrament there is
required manducatio and potatio, eating of the body and drinking of the blood
and by consequent he that shall take the body without the blood, should have
but a lame and imperfect Sacrament: he adds unto this truth (the error of
the time carrying him away: Notwithstanding, there had great care and reverence
need to be used of them which receive the same, that so nothing may be
committed which might turn to the misprision and contempt of so great a
mystery: which is most chiefly like to happen by shedding of the blood, if it
should be vndiscreetlie handled, (this is that which they call periculum
effusionis): and because the Christians increasing in number, and that there
are amongst them old men, young men, and children, all which cannot bring such
discretion as were requisite to so bolie a Sacrament, it is observed in some
Churches, not to offer the blood unto the people to be taken of them; but the
Priest takes it himself alone: he says that it is observed, wherein we
way well pick out this construction, Thom. Opusc. 58. c. 13.
vz. that it is not a law, but a custom, and in some churches, that is, that
as yet in his time this custom had not prevailed every where: And his reason
of the great number of Christians is not to the purpose; for the question is
not of the danger of spilling, or of the number of Christians, but of the
number of Communicantes. Now we have showed before, that the zeal of the
Primitive Church in frequenting the Sacraments, did far exceed and go
beyond the zeal of this time. In brief, for the upholding of this opinion, it
is resolved upon and concluded by him, that the blood under the sign of bread
is joined with the body, per connexienem, Scotus in Rep. did. 10. q. 3.
as all the rest of the humors, which is one branch of his Transubstantiation.
But Scotus disputes against him, both in the stock and in the branches in
these words: Non est certum, nam vtrumque potest sustineri, and noutrum
probari: This is not certain, for the one and the other may be argued and
reasoned, but neither the one nor the other can be proved.

Richardus de Media villa, and Petrus de Tarentasia, who lived since Innocent
the fourth, do witness that in their time the Sacrament was distributed under
both kinds, not only to the ministers of the Altar, but also to the best of
the parish, being such as by reason of their discretion were not to be feared
of committing this matter of danger. Petrus de Palude says: Petrus de Palude
in 4 Sent. d. 11. q. 1.
That in certain Churches this was done unto all manner of persons in his
time, by the good order that was taken to avoid shedding: also, It is meet
and of necessity that there should be a twofold matter in this Sacrament,
meat and drink, D. 11. art. 1.
because the effect of the Sacrament must be perfectly represented by the
figure: now the effect of the sacrament is the perfect nourishing of the soul,
etc.

Cassander out of Gulielmus de Monte-landuno; Idem in 4. Sent. d. 11. q. 12.
art. 1. q. 1.
Qui recipit corpus Christi, totam veritatem recipit, sed non totum
sacramentum: and ideo multis in locis co^municatur pane and vino. i. toto
sacramento: He that receives the body of Christ, receives the whole truth,
but not the whole sacrament: and therefore in many places they communicate with
bread and wine, that is to say, in the whole sacrament, etc.

Bonauentura, a gray Friar famous amongst the schoolmen, In the sacrament two
things are to be considered, the efficacy, and the signification: Bonauent. in
lib. 4. Ser. t. d. 11.
and therefore to be of the perfection or soundness of the sacrament, is meant
two manner of ways: either according to the efficacy and power fuluesse
thereof, and so every part is the whole: or as concerning the signification,
and in this sort and manner, the two kinds are of the perfection and
entireness of the sacrament, in as much as this sacrament is not sufficient in
one of them but in both. Also, Of the two signs there rises a perfect
sacrament, of the integrity and perfection whereof, the dispositiue reason
rises naturally: because neither the bread nor the wine do either of them
apart, refresh and feed man, but rather both together. The reason completiue
rises also of the holy institution, which has ordained these two signs, to
represent a perfect nourishment. And he never speaks otherwise.

In so much, as that yet even in these latter ages and times, men were not come
so far as to deny, that the Communion under both kinds was the institution
of Christ, or the observation of the ancient Church: Lyran. in 1. ad Cor. c.
11. and Proucrb. 9. Sup. haec verba, bibite vinum quod miscui vobis. Dionys. in
1. ad Cor. c. 11. and 2. part. sermon. In die caenae Dom.
or else to allege any other cause of the taking away of the cup, then the
danger of shedding: for Lyranus says plainly, expounding the place of the
first to the Corinthians, He speaks here of two kinds, because that in the
primitive Church, they were both given unto the faithful: but for fear of
spilling, there is nothing given now a days unto the laity, but only the
kind of bread. And a long time after him, Dionys. Carth. called the Doctor of
trances, said upon the same place: In the primitive church the sacrament was
given under both kinds to all the faithful: afterward the church did forbid the
distributing of the kind of wine unto the people, propter periculum effusionis.

And now we are come to the notable opposition that John Hus and Jerome of
Prage made against this abuse, about the year of our Lord 1400. At the same
time (I say) that the taking away of the cup gained and got entrance in Church
after Church throughout Christendom, by the practices of the ingrossers
amongst the Clergy. And it is to be noted, that this John Hus, as Pope Pius
the 2. Aeneas Syluius hist. Bohem. c. 23.
makes mention in his history of Bohemia, was a man Lingua pote^s, and
mu^dioris vitae opinione clarus, mighty and powerful in speech, as also in
being reputed to live a holy life: and which is more, one that was called to
the function of the ministry: for besides that, he was principal of the
College erected at Prage by the king Wenceslaus, according to the foundation
of that of Paris: he was called to preach the word of God in the vulgar
language, in the Church of Bethelem (as they call it.) This man then began to
preach against the abuses of the Romish Church, and namely against the
profaning of the holy supper, and the taking away of the cup, contrary to the
institution of Christ and practice of the Primitive Church: and he was seconded
herein by Jerome of Prage, and followed of many. But whereas the Romish Church
should have reformed what was past, and returned into the old and ancient
way, repenting her self, and correcting her bywaies and doctrines, by the
original of all wholesome and sound doctrine, the holy Scriptures: she calls
a general Council at Constance, at the instant request of the Emperor
Sigismund, and summoneth or calls to appear there before them, upon
warrantize of being equally and uprightly heard by the pawning of their faith
and faithful promise thereupon, the said John Hus and Jerome of Prage: they
against the public and sacred oath and promise passed both by the Emperor and
Pope, did condemn them before they had heard them: the one of them forthwith,
and the other (after long imprisonment) to be burned quick, leaving in the end
a writ for the posterity succeeding to learn and hold: that there is no faith
or promise to be kept with pretended heretics: to the end, that from thence
forward, all hope of reforming the Church, or curing and reconciling of the
pretended schisms by that Council, might be cut off. We have not any to
believe or give credit unto, concerning the matter of their martyrdom, save
Pope Pius or his Secretary Poggius, who in their own persons did sit
iudicially upon them in the same Council: Pertulerunt (says he) ambo
constanti animo necem, and quasi ad epulas inuitati, ad incendium properarunt,
nulla^ emittentes vocem, quae miseri animi possit facere indicium. Vbi ardere
caeperunt, hymnum cecinere, quem vix flamma and fragor ignis intercipere
potuit. Nemo philosophorum tam forti animo mortem pertulit, quam isti
incendium. Poggius Florentinus aetatis nostrae nobilis scriptor, de morte
Hieronymi ad Nicholaum Nicol, conciuem suum elegantem scripsit epistolam, etc.
Both of them suffered death very courageously, and went as merrily to the fire,
as if they had been invited unto some great feast or banquet, without uttering
of any one word, that might argue a sorrowful heart: when they began to burn,
they sung a hymn, which could hardly by flame or noise of fire be kept from
being heard. Never did any Philosopher suffer his death so constantly as they
endured the fire. Poggius in Epist. ad Leonard. Aretinu^. Fasciculus rerurn
expetendarum.
Poggius a Florentine, a worthy Secretary of our age, has written an
excellent epistle unto Nicolas Nicol, his fellow citizen, of the death of
Jerome, etc. And as for this Poggius alleged by Pope Pius the second (who was
Secretary to the Council) writing to Leonardus Aretinus, his Epistle
deserves to be read upon that place, or else to be here set down at large: It
is not credible (says he) how he defended himself by arguments, how well
he was furnished both with scriptures and Doctors, etc. He never uttered one
word misbeseeming a good man. If he believed as he spoke, he was so far from
being worthy of death by just desert, as that indeed there was not any cause
of offering him the least discourtesie that may be. Every man took his case
heavily, in bewailing him, every man desired that he might be saved: but he
desired rather to die, than to unsay any thing that he had delivered. Was there
never Cate, Scaeuola, or Stoike, that inaured with such courage and patience
the loss of one member, as he did of his life: nor that so went to his death,
as he to the fire. But this (says he) deserves a more large discourse, etc.

But the Council kicking against the prick and hardening their hearts of a
custom brought in by sufferance, made a law: and in stead of restoring the
communion, excommunicated all those which were urgent and earnest suitors for
the same. The very words are (let every man judge whether the spirit of Christ
or Antichrist did speak in this Council:) Seeing we are given to understand
that in many Churches there is continued the administration of the Sacrament
under both kinds unto the laity, we pronounce and declare that although Jesus
Christ having supped, did institute and minister this reverend sacrament, unto
his disciples under both kinds: and that since then it has been received a
conficientibus, by those which have administered it, that is by the Priests,
under both, and by the laity under that only of bread: yet notwithstanding
all this, the laudable authority of the holy Canons, and the commendable
custom of the Church, has observed and does observe, that for the avoiding of
certain dangers and scandals, this sacrament shall be only administered under
one kind. Thus then you may see the Pope his Canons opposed to the institution
of Christ, the only Canon and rule of all sacraments: the Church of this time
opposed to the Primitive, howsoever it be the pattern by which all others
ought to square and fashion themselves throughout all ages. And therefore he
adds, we command under pain of excommunication, that no Priest do
administer the communion unto the people, under both the kinds of bread and of
wine, contrary to that he had reserved and kept in the power of the Church
and Pastors, to judge of the discretion of them to whom they were to
administer, as we have already seen out of Thomas Waldensis, who writ at
this very same time: yea and it is a work of this time which our master
Gerson drew into a treatise against the heresy of the communion under both
kinds; thereby conde^ning of heresy both Jesus Christ, the author of the
sacrament, and the whole Primitive Church, but he was entreated to do it by
the fathers of this Council, two years after this decree, for the justifying
and confirming of the same after the best manner that he was able. And this he
performed to the uttermost that he could, as may appear by the proud,
arrogant, and presumptuous clauses he inserted into the same, to the offending
of all Christendom therewithal; Licet Christus aliter instituerit, licet
Primitiua ecclesia aliter obseruauit, howbeit that Christ have otherwise
instituted it, The foolish reasons of the Council. Can. Interrogo vos D. de
Consecrat. 6.
and the Primitive Church otherwise observed it, etc. and that with this
Notwithstanding following upon the said clauses: and a little more, grounded
upon the reasons of these good fathers alleged in the said Council, which
are those that follow. The first, That a licour may be shed. S. Augustine in
like manner says, that the bread may fall: and is he therefore of judgment
that it ought to be cut off, and not at any time to be used in the sacrament?
Secondly, That it cannot be carried without danger, neither indeed was it ever
ordained to be carried: and the Churches which carried the same to the sick,
did never busy or trouble their minds with this inconvenience. Thirdly, That
it might be frosen in winter, and that it might turn and become tart in
summer. And thus it was subject to do during those 1200. years, wherein it was
used, and yet not a word in all the old fathers to be seen concerning these
questions, Quid siacescat? quid si congelescat? aut computrescat etc. Fourthly,
That it may hurt and annoy the heart, after that so many people have drunk of
it: but in the Primitive Church they used to communicate as often and oftener, and
in greater multitude. Fifthly, That in some countries wine is not to be come
by, but either at a very dear rate, or otherwise very hardly. Neither was it
less dear or scarce amongst the Christians in the Primitive Church. Sixthly,
That whiles it was practiced, the laity did touch the cup. Where are they
forbidden to touch it, seeing they are bidden to take it? Seventhly, That some
have over long beards, and that other some have the Palsy, etc. How much more
tolerable were it to cut off the beard, then the cup? and to supply the
infirmities of such as have the Palsy, rather then to cut off the perfection
of the sacrament? And who sees not that all these reasons are hatched under the
hen of Transubstantiation, unknown unto the whole Church for ever before? The
eight, That the dignity of the Priests and of the laity by this should be all
alike: where have they ever read that our Savior Christ and his Apostles did
make any distinction or difference in the sacrament? The ninth, Men would then
co nceiue that the sacrament consisted more in taking of it, then in
consecrating of it; in receiving of it, then in seeing of it, and thus we
should come back again from our pretended sacrifice unto the sacrament. And who
can doubt hereof, seeing our Lord has said: Take, eat, drink, etc. The
tenth, Every man will judge, if it shall be given to the people, that then it
will be always necessary and needful. And what more urgent and unavoidable
necessity can there be, then for the disciples of Christ to fulfill the will of
their master? Lastly, That then the Church of Rome should have failed in the
sacraments, and the Council of Constance in the matter of faith and manners,
whereupon would follow a contemning of the Church, and consequently a schism
in Christendom. Now here indeed is the sore and pinching grief: and it is
for nothing else but for the top of honor, that all this contention falls
out. But how much better had it been to have bewailed and wept for the fault
committed, when they heard the cock crow? And do we not see how God has
cursed all these reasons bent upon the setting up of a pomp and
stateliness, and not to the establishing of the Church? when as under pretense
of avoiding of a pretended schism, they have made themselves odious and
abominable unto the greatest part of Christendom? But our worthy master
Gerson, does take the check, and is offended at this clause of
Notwithstanding, and therefore sets his wits upon the rack, to find out
some others, but no less blasphemous, then those alleged by the good
foresaid fathers, were sottish and ridiculous, That the cup had no ground in
the word of God, and that it was not of the necessity of the sacrament? That
it was not appointed or ordained for any but the Apostles, and in them for the
Priests: That men must not hold so much of the scripture, as they must of the
traditions of the Church; that is, as Cardinal Cusanus says in his second
epistle to the Bohemians, That the institution of the scripture does change in
time, and apply it self unto the ceremony that is current and received in the
church, Secundum currentem ritum ecclesiae. But the strongest of all the rest,
and that which already has been practiced in that place, is, that in this
point, Viendum est (says he) brachio seculari contra refragantes, that is,
there must the secular power be stretched out, and punishment with all hot
pursuit be executed upon those that will not obey unto this Canon: never
trobling the brain with disputing and arguing about the matter, and that the
Emperor must be exhorted to put his helping hand thereto freely and
willingly.

But it is not to be believed, how much blood has been shed in Bohemia,
Morauia, and other Provinces, for the taking away of the blood of Christ from
the faithful. The Pope will have obedience what price soever it cost; the
people to keep this precious pledge of the blood of Jesus Christ, freely
exposing themselves to loss of goods and life. In fine the affairs of
Christendom so urging in respect of the Turk, The Council of Basil.
there was held some twenty years after, the Council of Basil, where the
Pope (whose custom it is to stretch out and shrink up his constitutions and
ordinances at his pleasure, according to the length of businesses which he has
in hand,) did decree clean otherwise: The faithful (says he) whether they
be of the Laity or of the Clergy, are not bound by the commandment of the
Lord, to receive the holy Sacrament of the Eucharist under both kinds, but the
Church governed by the spirit of truth must ordain, how the Communicantes,
Conficientes.
and not those which consecrate it, ought to receive the same, according as it
shall seem expedient in respect of that reverence which is due unto the
Sacrament: whether therefore a man communicate under one kind or under two,
according to the ordinance and observation of the church, it avails unto
salvation, unto such as worthily communicate therein. Note that for the
saluing of the honor of the Council of Constance, he will have the thing not
to depend upon the institution of Christ, but upon the custom of the church.
Again, how that he makes that to be a matter of indifferency in the
Sacrament, which is indeed essential unto the same, and further, he will have
the Bohemians, not only to take it thankefullie at his hands, but also bind
themselves, that when he has sold them the blood of Christ, they should
quite claim and wholly bury in silence, whatsoever other agreeuances which
they had conceived against the Church of Rome, especially that of the
jurisdiction and Primacie of the Pope; If (says he) the Bohemians persist to
demand this communion, and according lie send their Legate with express
commandment to be instant and importunate for the same, then the holy
Council shall give liberty to the Priests of Morauia, and Bohemia, to
administer the communion unto their partishioners under both kinds: but yet
with condition, says Nauclerus, that if so be, in all other things, the
only matter of communicating under both kinds excepted, they do conform
themselves unto the faith, Naucl. Genesis 48. f. 174.
ordinances and ceremonies of the church of Rome. Wherefore were those deadly
and cruel wars, wherefore was there so much blood shed, to purchase this
decree in the end? Let every man judge, if it were not upon good ground and
cause, 1500.
that Albertus Pigghius one of our great adversaries said, speaking of these
two Councels: That they have made decrees against the law of nature, against
the clear and manifest Scriptures, against the authority of antiquity, and
against the Catholic faith of the Church. As also the Thomists do hold that
the Council of Basil was assembled and called in ill sort, and ought to be
held as no Council. And yet after these Councels the Doctors stood not firm
and well assured of the soundnes of their determinations: so hard a thing is
it for falshoode to get out of the clouches of Verity and Truth: for Gabriel
Biel says that, The Priests are more worthy then all the holy Laity,
Gabr. Biel. Lect. 52. litera f.
yea then the virgin Marie, because that they do communicate under both
kinds. And therefore the Sacrament under one kind, (notwithstanding their
concomitancie is more excellent, then under both kinds.) And yet in another
place he lancheth deeper. That it is not sufficient to have the grace of the
communion by the taking of the body which is signified by the element of
bread, if we have not the grace of redemption by the blood, signified by the
element of wine: otherwise says he) The Sacrament is imperfectum alimentum,
that is, an imperfect food and nourishment.

In the end we are come to the Council of Trent: Council. Trid. Sess. 6.
wherein as appears by the tenor of the same, it was required by many great
Princes and estates of Christendom, that the cup might be restored unto the
people: which thing was put to be consulted upon, and about the same was the
whole summer in the year 62. passed over with great strife and contention in
words; some holding with the inhibition ordained in the Council of Constance,
Consule. Cassand. de communione sub vtraque specie, edita Coloniae. 64.
the hard terms only (whereof they had been admonished by Gerson) being
somewhat qualified, and others for the grant and allowance thereof, made in the
Council of Basil upon certain conditions, which being indifferent; Talis
confessio fieret sine detrimento and imminutione plenariae potestatis ecclesiae
Romanae: such grant and allowance should be made as might stand without the
prejudice or diminishing of the full power of the authority of the Church of
Rome. But many words having passed to and fro, they keeping a middle way,
ordained, That non conficientes, that is, such properly as make not the
sacrament, but receive it only, as well Priests as the Laity, are not bound
by the institution of Christ to receive both kinds; Wherein they do not
stretch the privilege of the Priests, but quo ad actum conficiendi, so far
forth as it concerns the act of Consecration: But what greater necessity
can we look for to be laid upon us then the commandment of God: they go
about to prove That it has been always in the power of the church to
dispense of the Sacraments, as he shall think best, salua eorum substantia,
that is, reserving their substance safe and entire unto them. But from whence
shall we learn the substance thereof, but from the institution of Christ? And
yet notwithstanding they conclude, That it is very considerately and well done
of the Church to ordain the communion under one kind alone: as if that the
receiving of it under two were not of the substance of the Sacrament. But what
is there notwithstanding, that can be more substantial in the sacraments,
then that which makes them Sacraments, that is, the signs instituted by
Christ? And moreover, That seeing that Jesus Christ is whole and entire under
one of the two kinds, it is not needful to take any more then one, and that
those which take that one alone are not defrauded for all that of any thing
necessary unto their salvation. Who doubts that this Divinity was unknown
unto the Primitive Church: That Christ in what place soever he be, is there
whole and entire? And notwithstanding who ever was so bold to draw from thence
a conclusion directly contrary to the express institution? and is the
question in this place about the practicing of that rule of natural
Philosophy: That which may be done by the fewer and less number, should not
be done by the greater, etc? And if this might find place, who would not take
up some one colorable excuse and reason, or other, to reject all the
sacraments? seeing it is said, That Jesus Christ dwells in our hearts by
faith: Ephesians. 2. Heb. 3. John 6. Calat. 3.
that we are made partakers of Christ by faith in his word: that he dwells
in the belieuers, and the belieuers in him: that we put him on in Baptism,
etc. For who cannot conclude from thence, Baptism is sufficient, what have I
to do with the holy Supper? The word suffices, what need have I of the
Sacraments? if it were not that we did give that reverend and Christian
regard unto the institution of Christ, to bound and limit all our conclusions
within the terms of the same. In the mean time it curses all them which
hold that the Communion under the two kinds is necessary, either in respect of
salvation, or otherwise in respect of the commandment of God: as all those
likewise which say, that the cup has been taken from the Laity without
any manner of sound ground or sufficient reasons: and as for the suit and
request amde by Princes, that it might be restored to them and their
Subjects; they commit that to the Pope alone for to decide and answer,
together with the advice of diverse Bishops: and in every case they send
unto him certain conditions and articles, whereto he is admonished to bind
them, by whom he shall be won and overcome; and these articles are such as
are not contained in the Decrees of the Council, but were then retained in
mente Curiae, and were afterward communicated unto the said Princes.

First, Those that will co^municat under both kinds shall protest that they agree
in heart and mouth unto all that the church of Rome has received, as well in this
matter of the sacrament, as in all the rest, either of faith or ceremonies, and
that they do religiously embrace all the Decrees of Councels, as well
published as to be published. How many errors may they thus gain and get in,
whiles they do nothing but grant some one thing or other that is done?

Secondly, That the Pastors and preachers unto those nations or people to whom
the use of the cup shall be granted, do believe and teach that the custom of
communicating under one kind, is not against the sacred institution of the
Lard, but rather laudable and worthy to be observed and kept as a law, if the
Church ordain not otherwise. That such as teach or believe otherwise are
heretics: and that they shall not administer under both kinds unto any but
such as shall both believe and confess the same. But and if this be to apply
themselves only to the infirmity of the people, that they thus give place and
yield unto them in this their request, then what a hell is that, to force and
violently to wrest this profession from them, contrary to their infirmity; by
this means offering them one favor with the left hand, and in the mean while
drawing twenty from them with the right?

The third is, That they shall promise to acknowledge the Pope to be the
lawful Pastor and Bishop of the universal Church, yielding to him as
dutiful children, all manner of reverence, from a free and loyal heart. Who
will believe that such things did ever come from the Apostles? or who will
believe that Saint Peter before that ever he would grant the sacrament to the
faithful, had gone about to draw such an oath and homage from them? And
again, who does not see that they sell the blood of Christ to the people? yea
the same blood which Christ himself did so freely and without any price shed
for them, do they not make them buy with the high price of the servitude of
their souls? and not of their souls only, but of the whole Church? yea and
of the truth it self?

But in as much as these conditions seemed unto the Princes and Estates too
hard and heavy a yoke, and too much ouerlaid with tyranny, it was thought
good that things should stand and continue altogether in such state as was
granted and allowed by the consent of the Council. And let them not marvel
any more at that which Luther said; That it was wisdom to be well advised and
wary in taking any thing that the Pope shall yield and agree unto: namely,
seeing that for to take away one abuse, he would undoubtedly aim at and
stand for the establishing of all others how many soever. And it stands him
upon, seeing that of all the Christian Churches that are, whether Greek,
Russian, Syrian, Armenian, or Abissine, etc. there is not so much as one, but
the communion is administered therein under both kinds: and contrariwise, the
administration thereof under one kind disallowed and condemned. And this is
the reason why they wish so much mischief unto the writings of Cassander
containing the Lithurgies, rather then the reformation of their own profession:
Index expurgato. p. 38.
ordaining in their Index expurgatorius (in that book, I mean, wherein they
have set down a register of all the places which they would have razed and
defaced in the reimprinting of the good and sound books that are now exta^t)
that what soever Cassa^der has written of both kinds, should be blotted out,
Deleantur apud Cassandrum, quae de vtraque specie, etc. Now I would gladly
know, 2 Thessalonians. chapter 2.
by what privilege or dispensation the Pope is able to claim and challenge to
himself alone this power, if it be not from that which is belonging only to
the man of sin, the son of perdition, who is deciphered in the second to
the Thessalonians; That he opposes and lifts up himself against all that
which is called God: or that is worshipped, so that he does sit as God in the
temple of God, showing himself as if he were God, etc.

CHAP. XII. Wherein the pretended reasons of the adversaries are answered: as
well by the holy scriptures as by the Fathers.
THus then it behooves us briefly to examine the reasons which they pretend
to bear them out, The co^sutation of the reasons that are made against the use
of both kinds.
in so bold and hardy an enterprise of change: howbeit indeed to go about to
allege and oppose reason against Christ his sound and solid institution, is
properly, as the Poet says, Cum ratione insanire. And first they infer that
the cup is not necessary in the sacrament, because (say they) that the
sacraments of the old Testament, which did prefigure and foreshew the same, had
no drink; as the Manna, the Paschall lamb, etc. Indeed those sacraments were
figures and types of this, the Manna of the true bread, which was to come down
from heaven; the lamb of the true lamb, which should bear and take upon him
the sins of the world; in the communicating of whom we are saved. But what
force can this reason carry with it, being drawn from a figure or shadow,
against the express word of Christ? So then, Baptism coming in place of
circumcision, because that in circumcision men were cut and not washed: should
it follow that in Baptism men should be cut, seeing they were so in
circumcision? or else that it should not be needful to wash in Baptism,
because in circumcision there was no washing? On the contrary, Paul speaking
of the sacraments of the old law; as of the sea, of the cloud, etc. 1. Cor.
10.
Our fathers (says he) were all baptized in the cloud and in the sea, they did
all eat of one spiritual meat, and they did al drink of one spiritual drink,
etc. and from hence have some of the old writers proved the communicating under
both kinds. But what will they say of Melchisedech, who^ they (the said old
writers) would have to represent in bread and wine the sacrament of the
Eucharist, when as we cannot but see that he did distribute them to Abraham,
and those that were with him, as his servants and soldiers? It is said, Drink
ye all, all say they, that is to say, all the Apostles: and therefore this
precept proves nothing for the rest of the faith full. Math. 26.
These men boast much of antiquity, whom will they have to be their expositor?
S. Paul: But he gives (says he) that which he has received. 1. Cor. 11.
He gives to the Church of Corinth both the kinds: then he had received them
for it. And indeed Lyranus says upon this place, That is, because the
faithful in the primitive Church did communicate under both kinds. Do they
believe the primitive Church? the old doctors? we cannot possibly judge better
of their expounding of the word, then by their practice which we have seen,
and by their condemning of them which did abstain from the one kind, would
they hear the Councels? That of Constance guided (as they say) by the holy
ghost, publishes and proclaims with a loud voice, That although Jesus
Christ have instituted the Sacraments under both kinds, when he gave it to his
disciples: and although the Primitive Church has so distributed it unto the
faithful, etc. In brief, Jesus Christ did either speak unto his Apostles
alone; or else in their persons, to all the faithful, or to the Priests only.
To his Apostles alone it cannot be avouched: for it is written, Do ye this in
remembrance of me; Declare the death of the Lord until his coming. Unto the
Priests alone under the names of the Apostles; but what apparent show or
likelihood is there of that? For the Apostles in this action, Non erant
conficientes, sed sumentes, they did not occupy the places of Priests, but of
the faithful, not of Pastors, but of sheep. And to take it then at the
hardest, Jesus Christ having spoken unto them, whom they call non conficientes,
and having commanded them to take the cup, it should follow, that the
commandment of God does of necessity charge them to communicate under both
kinds, which is directly contrary to the Article of the Council of Trent:
which says, Clericos non conficientes non obligari ad viramque speciem, etc.
That Clarks themselves not consecrating the host, are not bound to receive
under both kinds. It remains then that those words are spoken unto them, as
being faithful; and so representers of al other Christian people, that is to
say, that Jesus Christ as the householder and master or Pastor of the church
has dispensed and distributed the Eucharist unto his disciples; and ordained
and instituted it for them which did believe their word, that is, his own; and
that he did appoint them to distribute unto them, every one in his place, that
which they had received at his hands. Gerard. Lorichius in lib. de priuata
Missa abroganda.
And indeed Gerardus Lorichius, howsoever he be a great patron of
Transubstantiation and the Mass, is ashamed of this starting hole, in these
words: There are (says he) false and counterfeit Catholics, which make no
conscience of hindering the reformation of the Church by all manner of means.
They to the end that the other kind maey not be given to the laity, spare not
to utter blasphemies, for they say that Jesus Christ said unto his Apostles
only, Drink ye all: and therein do nothing consider the proper words of the
Canon; Take, eat ye all. Let them now therefore (I pray them) tell us, if
these words also should be intended and meant only to the Apostles, for then
also the laity must needs abstain from the bread, which would prove an
heresy, and a pestilent and execrable blasphemy. Wherefore we must conclude
(says he) that both the one and the other word, was intended and meant unto
the whole Church.

It is said; S. Luke. chapter 22.
Do this in remembrance of me, sooth indeed (say they) but this comes only
after that the bread is distributed: and therefore this commandment does not
bind the Pastors to distribute the cup. But assuredly the Evangelist does
show it plainly enough in the words that follow; likewise also he took the
cup, etc. that if these words Do this, etc. have relation to the bread: that
then by the same proportion they are to be understood of the cup. 1. Cor. 11.
But Saint Paul does resolve us in this difficult point: for after that he has
said; This is my body which is broken for you, do this, etc. he adds
thereupon, This cup is the new covenant in my blood, do this ever and as often
as you shall drink it, in remembrnnce of me, that is, you Pastors administer
the bread and the wine; you that are the faithful receive them at their hands,
being the Sacraments of my body and my blood; manifesting my death until my
coming. And this also is the opinion of John of Louaine taken out of the old
writers.

What shall we say, Luke 24.
if they will not only make us believe, that our Lord has not only not
commanded it, but that he has done the contrary? S. Luke in his 24. chapter
makes mention, that our Lord after his resurrection, being at table in Emaus,
took bread, gave thanks, brake it and gave it to two disciples whom he had
met withal; and that then their eyes were opened, and that they knew him, etc.
They would that this should be the bread of the supper, administered by
consequent, under one kind unto his disciples. The frame and scope of the
history is clean contrary: for he had said before, that they had travailed
far, that they came near unto a village, that the night began to come on,
etc. all which is as much as to say, that it was time to eat and refresh
themselves. Esa. 58.41. Lament. ler.
And the word of breaking of bread is ordinary amongst the Hebricians in this
sense. But here again, whom shall we cleave or give credit unto in this
controversy? The Syrian Interpreter says, They knew and perceived who he
was, as he broke the bread. Saint Ambrose, Theophilact, and other old writers,
in their commentaries at large make mention of no such thing. Hugo, The bread,
that is, the word of God, which the Pastor must bless by prayer, break by
expounding of it, and give unto the hearers by preaching of it, etc. Lyranus,
They seeing him break it (says he) as smooth and eauen, as if he had a
knife, according as he was wont before his passion, that is, whiles he abode
with them. And the Cardinal Caietanus in like sort, and Dionysius
Carthusianus upon this place, Caietanus in Luc. Dionysius Carthus. Gulielm.
Widef. contra Wicklef. Alph. de Castro lib. 6. August. de consensu Euangel; l.
3.
Not as in the supper, but according to the ordinary manner of blessing of
meat. And the great Postill, as he was ordinarily wont before his passion.
Gulielmus Widefordensis, writing against Wickliffe, goes further, It cannot be
gathered (says he) neither from the text, nor from the gloss, nor from the
old Doctors, that the breaking of bread spoken of by Saint Luke, was the
breaking of consecrated bread. And Alphonsus de Castro would not define or say
any thing thereof by way of expounding of the same. And indeed the Councels of
Constance, Basil, and Trent durst never allege this place, leaving it to
such Advocates and mainteiners of their errors, as had put on a more brazen
face, to make their best advantage thereof. For whereas they allege, that S.
Augustine calls this breaking of bread, Sacramentum panis, they themselves
know that it never came into his mind, to gather and frame the sacrament under
one kind: and that in his Church to the contrary it was always administered
under both. And that this came by allegorizing upon the place: and that Sensus
allegoricus, as they call it, is not argumentatiuus, that allegorical senses do
not prove any thing. And that it is after the same manner that he calls by the
name of Sacraments, that is, mysteries, other ceremonies, which in deed are no
Sacraments at all, as the sign of the Cross, all the observations of
Baptism, the bread of those which are catechized etc. As likewise S. Hillar.
in Mat. c. 11 12. ^. and lib. to de Trinit. Bernard. in s^r. de caena D^.
Hillarie calls, Sacramentum orationis, ieiunii, saturitatis, sitis,
lachrimarum: The Sacrament of prayer, fasting, refreshment, thirst, tears,
incarnation, etc. S. Bernard, the washing of the feet a Sacrament, etc.
Likewise S. Augustine allegorizing upon this place, expresses the two kinds:
The man (says he) that does not eat nor drink his judgment and
condemnation, does know Jesus Christ in the breaking of bread. Wherein he
manifestly acknowledged a Synecdoche, which is when one kind is named for two.
But his intent and drift is more manifest in these words: In as much as they
have loved hospitality, they have known in the breaking of bread him, whom
they could not knowan the expounding of the Scriptures. Then follows S.
Augustine his conclusion: Let no man think that he knows Christ, if he be
not a partaker of his body, that is (says he) of the church, the unity
whereof the Apostle recommendeth unto us in the sacrament of bread, when he
says, we are all one bread and one body, etc. And in deed, Lyranus does
necessarily infer of these words of S. Augustine, that it must not be
understood of the natural, but of the mystical body of Christ, which is the
Church. And their own Doctors likewise at this time do jar and disagree
about this place of S. Luke. For as Belarmine confesses, John of Louaine would
have it understood of the Eucharist, and would also fit S. Augustine to his
humor. Cornelius Iansenius is of the contrary judgment, and rests satisfied
in himself, in taking it for a figure of the Eucharist, and not the thing it
self. And he proves his collection out of the place of Saint Augustine above
named, by Beda, Theophilact, Innocent the third, etc. But in the end what
manner of divinity will this come to be, by a place very intricate and
doubtful, to overthrow that which is grounded upon very many most plain and
pregnant places? by the story of a matter passed and done in an Inn, the
prescript and precise institution of the sacrament in the assembly of his
Apostles? And what will they say to Lyranus, who says, that S. Luke was one of
these traveling pilgrims? And unto Epiphanius, which says, that it was
Nathaniel? if they will not conclude, that even the ecclesiastical persons
themsel^es ought to be debarred from the cup as well as the laity.

They go forward: The Apostles themselves likewise did never use it otherwise.
Act. 2. and 24.
And this is proved by the Acts: for there it is said, that they did
communicate in the breaking of bread. In deed some of the old writers do
understand it of the Eucharist; others of the society and brotherly fellowship
that was amongst the Apostles, but never a one of them all of the communicating
of the sacrament under one kind. But Chrysostom and all the Greek expositors,
collected into one by Oecumenius, interpret it of the sober diet, which they
used being come together. And the ordinary Gloss is somewhat doubtful upon
this place, In fractione panis (says it) tam prophani quam sacri; as well
common as holy. So far off are they from such impudent collections, as
Gardinall Hosius would seem to gather, namely, that S. James in his church did
administer the sacraments never but under one kind; howbeit that S. Paul did
deliver two: wherein they are confuted both by the hand of fellowship, which
these Apostles had given one unto another, Galat. 1. in respect of the unity
of doctrine: Galath. 1.
as likewise by the lithurgie which they attribute to Saint James, where there
is distribution made of two. But this is a marvel, that these men should in
another place go about to gather the whole body of the Mass from this place
as if the day of Pentecost had then been first celebrated: and now they
content themselves, that it stands them in stead for the establishing of
their communion under one kind, Acts 20.
nothing at all considering, that it is said Acts 20. that S. Paul took
bread, being the man that did consecrate the sacrament, and so they make him to
communicate under one kind, that is, to commit sacrilege; it being a Maxim
amongst them, that no consecrating priest, may omit to take either of the kinds
without sacrilege. What then? will it be collected any thing more directly out
of Act. 27? Act. 27.
They had been fourteen days upon the sea without eating: S. Paul exhorts
them to take food: for the better encouraging of them so to do, he himself
takes bread, he gives thanks, he breaks it, and eats it, and then they
do the like after him. Whereto does all this discourse and all these
circumstances carry us, but unto an ordinary manner of taking of meat?
Wherefore should that be a sacrament unto S. Paul, which was but an ordinary
food unto the sailors? And again, if it had been the sacrament, how could it
have been given unto them which were infidels? And if it were but for
himself, was he not then also Consiciens, that is, he that consecrated it? And
wherefore then did he not communicate but under one kind alone; that is to say,
why would he commit yet a second sacrilege? If it were not yet further, that
they would draw from hence, their goodly institution, of not being able to say
any other but dry Masses whiles they are a shipboard at sea? But and if they
say that he blessed it, that he gave thanks, who can make any other thing
hereof, but that he only did according to the laudable manner of the Jews,
who never take either bread or wine without this blessing? Blessed be the Lord
that gives us, etc. Again, the ordinary Gloss says in that place: He took
bread, that he might be an example to others to do the like: Et gratias egit,
he gave thanks: Iuxta morem solitum in comedendo, according to their wonted
custom in eating: Et cum fregisset, coepit manducare; and having broken it he
began to eat: Exhortationis verbo (says it) and operis exemplo, in the word
of exhortation and example of work, etc. The same which Oecumenius says,
(...): And Chrysostom, that he persuaded them to eat, for fear that after so
long fasting they should die with hunger: and the Cardinal Caietan likewise
did not understand it otherwise. In this place then there is nothing that
touches the Supper: and in deed the foresaid Councels durst not allege it.

But the great word remains behind, Oecumenius in Acta. Chrysostom. in Act.
Cardinal. Caietan. in Act.
Caetera cum venero, disponam, I will set in order the rest at my coming. We
have answered thereunto before: under one Et caetera, they would make S. Paul
the father of all that which they have changed, added and taken away from the
holy supper. They will have to dispose and set in order, to be to ouerturne:
what all the old writers have understood, as we have showed heretofore to be
meant of certain circumstances, they would stretch to the substance. They
would (to speak in a word) that by virtue of this word, every thing might be
lawful for them. But how much more commendablie and soundly deals Durandus
de S. Portiano, Durandus de S. Port. d. 7. q. 3 art. 10. and 11.
he whom they call in Sorbone by the name of the most resolute Doctor,
entreating of this matter? We must hold and keep fast (says he) according to
the common doctrine, that nothing which is of the substance, and essence of the
sacraments, or else of the things belonging unto them, being instituted by Jesus
Christ, may be changed by any man whosoever: for in such things Christ has
not given commission to any man, no not to the Pope himself, further then for
the simple administering of the same: and that which is more, the church has
very small authority to change, take away, or diminish any thing about the
order and manner of the administration, Lib. 4. Act. 10.
etc. And in another place: The matter (says he) and the form are of the
perfection of every sacrament, that is, it can not be kept sound and entire,
except they be kept sound and entire. But I ask of them, even in their
consciences, if the bread and the cup be not the matter? if they be not
Sacramenta, neither yet Sacramentalia? And what will follow hereof then, but
that all manner of men, all the Popes, and all the Councels in the world cannot
touch the same?

Finally, they renounce the Canonical scriptures, and fly for refuge unto the
Apocrypha; they let go sound and authentike histories, to take hold of fabulous
tales. It is read (say they) in the Gospel according to the Hebrews, that our
Lord after his resurrection gave the Eucharist unto James the Just under one
kind. In the Legend of S. Denis, Roffensis.
that our Lord administered nothing unto him but only bread. What itching
fingers these fellows have, to cut off and pare away this sacrament, seeing
that all the holy scriptures elsewhere cannot satisfy them: and that here they
should content themselves with such writings? And of how contrary sorts of
spirits are they composed and made, when as in the form of this Sacrament
they do so press the letter, and in the matter of the same they build so much
upon figures and allegories? The adversaries their contradictions.
that they which have taken so great pains and labor in the kind of bread, by
heaping additions of their own ^hereupon, should please themselves so greatly
in paring and cutting away of the kind of wine? But let not us forget their
manifold contradictions, the ordinary train attending upon false doctrine.
For sometimes they say, that the Jews did not drink in their sacrifices, and
from thence would draw a consequence for the holy Supper. Sometimes they
allege this place of Exodus; how that after that the people had sacrificed to
the golden calfe, they sat down to eat and to drink. Also, it was (say they)
left indifferent in the primitive Churches, Verga de Euch*
to communicate the sacrament under one only kind, or under both, and as it
were with one breath they by and by again avouch the contrary. As that two
were ordained for the Gentiles, Idem Verga
and but one for the Jews: as being a people that loathed wine in their
sacrifices; and neither the one nor the other grounded upon the scriptures.
Again, the two kinds were instituted for the Gentiles: and yet in the turning
of a hand they go and exclude the laity, and allow them unto the priests
only. Again, sometimes they say, Verg. and Bellarm.
that the use of the one kind is come from the Apostles: and a little after
they say, that the Church did ordain it against the Nestorians, who did not
confess or admit of concomitancie, where of notwithstanding the
ecclesiastical histories do not speak a word. In brief, in one place they
say, that Hoc facite, do this in remembrance of me, respects both the
kinds: and in another that properly it must be restrained unto the bread, as
meant thereof only: for it (say they) was given a long time before, yea and
was disgested before that our Lord had distributed the cup. And thus you may
see how in parting the kinds of the sacrament, or rather the signs, and
pulling them a sunder, they are rent and divided one from another, and every
man in himself.

And as for the practice of the old Church, when they are not able to deny it,
yet they will not cease to extenuate and diminish the same: The Council of
Trent especially in these words: Licet in Primitiua ecclesia vtriusque speciei
vsus non infrequens fuerit, although that in the Primitive church the use of
both kinds was not seldom used: whereas the Council of Constance had
declared with an open mouth, Licet in Primitiua ecclesia hoc sacramentum a
fidelibus reciperetur sub vtraque, etc, although that in the Primitive church
the faithful received this sacrament under both kinds. Now we have seen,
that for the space of 1200. years the holy supper was not otherwise
distributed throughout all Christendom: and that when it began to be
administered otherwise, it came to pass but by sufferance, and not by any law;
Latomus.
until the time of the Council of Constance. Others say, that the Primitive
Church being as yet rude and dull of conceit, Latomus.
did observe most religiously, the institution of Christ: but that afterward
she learned of the fathers, that the two kinds were for the priests, and not
for the laity: Bellarminus.
a learned ignorance and eloquent rudenes, to keep themselves to the law of
their master, but an ignorant learning, and rude understanding to depart from
the same and leave it. Others say, that the course was good whiles there were
but a few Christians: but that after there grew to be such great concourse and
flocking, it was no good order: and by this goodly reason they would clear
themselves of all the old fathers. But what will they say to Tertullian, who
says: Tertul. in Apol.
We have filled your cities and your fields, your palaces and your armies:
where is the empire that can withstand us, if our doctrine did not carry with
it the doctrine rather of dying, then of killing? And notwithstanding all this
people did receive the communion under both kinds. Or to S. Chrysostom, where
we see soldiers pressing and endeavoring desirously to receive the cup? And to
the conversion of the nations unto Jesus Christ, all which entirely and wholly
we read to have received both kinds? I mean the cities, provinces, nations,
and armies, yea and that in the wide open field? whereas we see on the
contrary that this custom came in when Christendom began to decline and
fall away from her first zeal, even at such time as there was not such
pressing forward nor devotion, either unto the word or Sacraments.

They say, What the lay man's communion is.
yea we do ordinarily read in the old writers, Communionem laicam, the
communion of the laeitie: that was this which is administered under one kind.
This guile and crafty shift is too plain and manifest, the distinction and
difference of the laity and of the Clearkes, is well enough known what it
meant in the old Church: these being such as were to take charge in the
ministry upon them, as to be Pastors, Elders, Deacons, Subdeacons, etc. and
those to be such simply as were faithful, governed and led by the ministry
of the others. Now the old Church, that they might the better contain and keep
such as had charge of the dispensing of the word in the performance of their
duty, did hold them under a more strait and severe kind of discipline: and if
it had happened, that any one of them had swarued in the confession of Jesus
Christ, or grievously failed in any part of his duty, according to the
quality and measure of his fault, he was suspended from his ministry, or else
he was wholly deprived and put from the same, notwithstanding whatsoever
acknowledgement of the same that he made: reserved notwithstanding their
liberty to be received into the Christian society, and to communicate in the
sacraments, after the manner of other faithful people, that is of the laity:
but not to dispense or distribute the sacraments in the charge and place which
before they had inioyed, neither yet to communicate amongst them of the
clergy. Eusebius. l. 6. c. 33
And this is that which they call, recipi ad laicam communionem, that is, to be
received to the communion of the laity. And in the Canons, Ad veniam non ad
dignitatem, etc. In this sort says Eusebius, that of three Bishops which had
upon importunate suit and request laid their hands upon the heretic Nouatus,
there came one incontinently unto the Church, confessed his sin, and was
received into the communion of the laity, and that at the request of the
people, that is to say, not to be any more a public person in the Church but a
private: Cypr. 2 cp. ad Stephanum.
and to be simply a sheep and not a shepherd. And Cyprian lays the matter
open in more plain sort writing unto Stephanus: If there be any Elders or
Deacons (says he) which having been ordained in the Catholic church, are
become rebellious, or carrying themselves disloyally or undutifully toward
her, etc. we add and set down this by common authority, that if they repent,
communicent laici, that is, let them be received into the communion of the
Church, as lay people, and let them rest satisfied that they are received into
the peace of the church, having been the enemies thereof: but not to hear
arms or any ensign of ordination or honor, seeing they have abused them to
rebellion against her, that is, that which commonly they call Orders, etc. as
if they should say, let them be received into the church, to receive the
Eucharist with the faithful, but not to bless and distribute it. And the
reason which he adds, taken out of the old Testament, does witness as
much: For it behooves the Priests and Ministers (says he) which serve at the
altar and sacrifices, C. 1. Q. conuenientibus.
that they be without spot and blemish. The Gloss of Gratian says: By this
authority we learn, that those who have been willing to be ordained by the
heretics, if they came to forsake their heresy, are received into the Church;
but yet so as that notwithstanding they cannot exercise their office. And by
that of S. Cyprian: That they are excluded and altogether restrained from all
ecclesiastical Ministry. This is then to say, Ad laicam communionem recipi:
to be received to the communion of the laity: is interpreted by these words:
Administratione ecclesiastica prohiberi, to be excluded from all
ecclesiastical administration, Did. 84. C. Quisquis Clericus. 1. q. 4. C.
homini.
etc: which a certain Canon of Pope Syricius calls, Omni dignitatis
ecclesiasticae priuilegio denudari, to be stripped of all manner of privilege of
ecclesiastical dignity. And by one pronounced by Innocent against them which
are baptized by heretics, that Laicam quidem communionem accipiant, ne ex iis
aliquis in clericatus honor vel exiguo subrogetur, Council. Sard. c. 1. Conc.
Agath. c. 34.
let them receive the communion with the lay people, but that no one of them
be admitted unto the least dignity of the clergy: that is to say, that the
granting of the one presupposes the denial of the other. And thus also it is
understood in the Council of Sardis, of Agatha, and others, wherein is handled
the question of Bishops, going from one city to another, of Elders and Deacons
offending in matters of life and death, etc. Whereupon also Georgius Wicelius
does confess, that Laica communio in S. Cyprian, Georg. Wicel. in lib. qui
inscribitur typu^ ecclesiae prioris. Cyprian. lib. 4. c. 2.
is no other thing, but that Triphonius a Pastor revolted from the truth, and
repenting of the same, might communicate with the lay people, but not
celebrate the communion according to his office of ministry. Add hereunto,
that all these canons are of the same time, wherein as we have proved, all the
faithful did receive both kinds. And it is nothing to the purpose that
Bellarmine says, that these canons do speak for the most part of Deacons, to
whom it did not belong to consecrate. For besides that he speaks there of
Bishops also, he does not deal only with persons whose office serves to
consecrate, but with all manner of persons having charge in the Church: besides
that it was the ordinary function of the Deacons to administer the cup. As
little consequence is there in that which he gathers of that, that the
ambitious Bbs. at the request of Osius were not received to the communion of
the lay people, no not unto the death: which is likewise affirmed afterward of
all heinous crimes: for the severity of the old Church did excommunicate all
such as had committed any criminal trespass, from the holy supper, Council.
Sardic. c. 1.
for the reverence they had of the sacrament, and detestation of malefactors,
according to the quality of their offenses; for ten years, for twenty
years, for the whole time of life, and sometimes so as that they would not
give it them, no not to the death. Whereupon at this time rises that practice
which we see, of not giving it to such as are convicted of any enormous
crimes, nor unto those which are going to execution. But in the mean time they
lay amongst the penitentes, in a place separated both from the Clergy and
laity. And of them if they be lay people, speak the Councels: Ne in fine
quidem iis communionem dandam, that they should not have the communion, no not
to their dying day. If they were Clearkes, then there is added: no not the
Communion amongst the laity, Ne laicam quidem: for ten, twenty, thirty
years, yea not to death. And when they did grant it upon the manifestation
of their repentance, and shedding of their abundant store of tears, yet it
was not to any other effect, but to account and take them as lay men, without
any inabling of them to their former places of dignity, that so the Ministers
of the Church might be the better brideled and kept in the doing of their
duties. For as for that which Bellarmine says: That there was nothing given
them but bread, because they durst not touch the cup: what appearance of
truth is there in it, that they should take the bread in their hand; a thing
that some do agree unto, and durst not touch the cup? that they durst not
touch the vessel, and yet touched the Sacrament? Again, what punishment had
it been to give the body and not the blood, and the body according to their
concomitancie, which extends to the containing of the blood? And had not this
rather been an injury to the sacrament, then a punishment to the crime? In
brief, it is apparent by many examples, that both the one and the other was
given to the sick. Justinius says, Just. in Apol.
that the one and the other was carried to those that were absent. Saint Jerome
speaking of Exuperius Bishop of Tholosa, says: De canistro vimineo, and de
vase vitreo, out of a wicker basket for the bread, and out of a glass for the
wine. The history of Serapio uses these words: to run and to pour into the
mouth: which cannot be understood but of licor. But even as we have said
before, that wheresoever they find Eucharist, Iustia. Apol. 2.
they have translated it Mass: so now they will understand by this word
Eucharist, nothing but the sacrament of bread, against all antiquity, which
speaks it both of the one and of the other: And this food we call the
Eucharist. Again, When the word comes to the wine mingled, and the bread
broken, they are made the Eucharist of the body and blood of our Lord. And as
for the sick, the old fathers did not carry it indifferently unto all,
Irenaeus lib. 5.
but unto them which were near unto death, having been suspended from the
Sacraments, as may be seen in the history of Serapio, that so there might
effectually be declared unto them their reconciliation with God, and their
peace with the Church, to the establishing of their consciences, upon their
departure out of this life into another, which otherwise should have been
diversely tossed and perplexed in this agony; dying under the censure of the
Church. To this purpose S. Cyprian says: In the extreme peril of death, the
excommunicate must not stay till he be reconciled by the Bishop, but let him
testify his unfeigned repentance before the Deacon, August. ep. 180
and so depart in peace. Saint Augustine: When it is come to that point (say
they) they run to the Church, some desire to be baptized: others to be
reconciled: others, the testisying of their repentance, etc. And if the
Ministers fail, into what danger do they cast them which depart from the
church, either not baptized, or bound with the censures ecclesiastical? But
the history of Serapio clears this matter. In the time of persecution he had
sacrificed to an Idol; the Church had excommunicated him, delivering him up
unto Satan: then he was as a heathen and idolater, shut out not only from the
communion of the sacraments, but from the society of Christians. Having in the
end beseeched his brethren with tears, he fell sick through sorrow and
heaviness of heart, losing his speech within three days, which he recovered
again upon the fourth, and said: How long will ye hold me in this case? bring
me hither a minister, that I may be reconciled unto God, and restored unto the
church before I die. And then the sacraments were administered unto him, in
token that the Church was at peace with him again.

Against the ordinary use of the Church which we propound and stand upon, they
continue to oppose the extraordinary abuses of certain women or private
persons. There are found (say they) such as did take the cup in the Church, and
notwithstanding carried home to their houses the sacrament of bread. And
thereupon they allege unto us the example of Gorgonia the sister of
Nazianzene: Tertul. lib. 2. ad vxorem. Ieronym. aduer^. Iouinian. Nazianz. in
funere Gorgoniae.
of Satyrus the brother of S. Ambrose, etc. and of a certain infidel woman, who
stole the bread from Chrysostom, etc. as also of S. Ambrose himself, who died
after he had taken the sacrament of bread. etc. what can the authority of
these private examples do, against a public law and custom? these examples
of poor silly women, of infirm and weak persons, or such as had been
slenderly taught, against the institution of the Son of God? And if these
examples be so infalliblie certain, why then did they not rather deprave them
of the bread; seeing they all agree, that they carried it home with them and
took the cup in the Church? And afterward, why did they not call to mind, what
is said of Gorgonia, that she kept both the one and the other kind (...),
says Nazianzene, (...), the signs of the precious body and blood? And that
in the history of Satyrus there is mention made, Haustionis and fusionis in
viscera, of the shedding and poowring of them into the entrails: which cannot
be understood but of licour? And that this pretended Paulinus which has
written of S. Ambrose, is he, as says Erasmus, Which has marred all S. Jerome
and S. Augustine: borne (says he) only to spoil good writers? But as we do
not deny unto them, that these superstitions took place at the least amongst
some particular persons: so they should not have concealed and kept back,
Council. Tolet. 1. c. 14. Council. Caesar. August. c. 3. Liturg.
Praesanctificatoru^ Interpret Genebrardo.
that they were condemned by the Councels. The first of Toledo says: If any
man do receive the Eucharist of the Minister, and do not eat it, let him be
put back and excommunicate as a Church robber. And that of Saragosa: If he
do not eat it in the Church, that is, in the very place, let him be accursed
for ever. Whereas Bellarmine alleges the lithurgie of the presanctified
amongst the Grecians, which was said in Lent, pretending that therein they did
not consecrate or take any more then one kind: for certain, the lithurgie says
expressly; that after that the Minister has sanctified the bread, he powered
out the wine and water into the cup, and pronounced the accustomed words. And
the prayer of the faithful says; For behold his body without spot and his
quickening blood, etc. which are set upon this table. And in the Post-communion
they give thanks unto God, for the receiving of the one and the other. That
which is more special and proper herein, is, that they consecrate for many in
one day: whereof they allege some one or other tradition. But these are their
cold and frivolous arguments upon this point: and in deed how can they be
otherwise against the express word of God? But we against these particular
devotions so endless and bottomless, do set this Maxim and general rule: In
vain do you serve me after your own fancies: being properly called in the
scriptures (...), will worship. And against that custom, Tertul. de virg.
veland. Cypr. ad Quin. and ad Iuba^^num. August lib. 2. contra Donatist c. 6.
and de Bapt. cont. Donat. lib. 2. c. 14.
that every man frames and fashioneth to himself whether new or old, as best
pleases him, let us set the true antiquity: Jesus Christ (says Tertullian
and S. Cyprian) has said: I am the Truth, and not Custom. And whereas Custom
has prevailed against the law, let us say with S. Augustine: We must weigh and
ponder the doctrines in the right balance of the scriptures, and not in the
false and deceiptfull scales of Custom. But let us draw all unto a conclusion,
and let us not be ashamed with S. Cyprian his saying: That what others before
us have erred in and done amiss: let us correct at the admonition and warning
of the Lord: (and where does he speak louder and more clearly, then in his
word?) to the end that when he shall come in his glory and heavenly Majesty,
he may find us holding fast such admonitions as he has given us, observing
that which he has taught us, and doing that which he has done. So be it.

And now by this time we have looked into all the parts thereof, A
Recapitulation.
how and by what degrees the holy Supper of our Lord is degenerate and turned
into the Mass: how of the corrupting of the one, the other was first begotten,
then nourished: and afterward brought up to that state wherein it has stood
for these certain ages, and that so long, as until it has utterly brought
the other to nothing in the Church of Rome: So strange an alteration, as that
in the whole frame and book of nature there is not the like to be met
withal: seeing the Mass now retains no more of the holy Supper, either in
his outward or inward parts: seeing that the best sighted, having considered
the one, could not observe or find so much as one step or note of the other:
because also, it is to go against and exceed the laws of nature, to pass
from one extremity to another: a thing not credible, not possible to be
acknowledged, if the diligent observation of histories did not point out unto
us both the first proceedings, and also the growing of the same, till it came
at the midst. The holy supper was an assembly, a body of the faithful,
united and knit together in one spirit, strengthening the faith; stirring up
the charity; and kindling the zeal one of another: in one common manner of
celebrating of the service of God. The Mass what contains it, being said by
a priest, in some corner of the church, and shuffled up by a cleark who
understands not for the most part of the time, one word that he speaks? The
holy supper did resound with songs to the praise of God, sung indifferently by
all the people: it taught them by the reading and expounding of the holy
scriptures: it lifted them up unto God, and raised them out of themselves by
fervent and ardent prayer. But what impression can the Mass make in the
hearts of men? being a certain kind of muttering noise, posted over by one
man alone, not understood of those which are present, yea hardly understood of
himself, where the scriptures are read of purpose, so as they may not be
understood: the prayers uttered with a low voice, in an unknown tongue, that so
they may not be heard with attention, and less followed devoutly by the
people, where by consequent they abide fixed upon that which they see, not
minding any higher matters: it has signs, without any signification: it has
pretended mysteries, without any thing mystical in them, except it be the
muttered hums, artificially affected by him that consecrateth, and the careful
regard of a premeditated ignorance to be wrought and effected by such means
upon and in the poor silly people. In the holy Supper was celebrated the
memory of the death and passion of our Lord, by a plain and open rehearsal of
the cause, manner, and benefits of the same: and thereby the faithful were
taught to acknowledge and call to mind the greatness of their sins, and to
admire and magnify the great and unspeakable mercies of God, stirred up
consequently to renounce and forsake themselves, to give themselves unto God,
to die unto their lusts and concupiscences, to live unto Christ: to Christ I
say, who having once delivered himself to the death of the Cross, for to give
them life, did yet further vouchsafe to give himself to them in his
sacraments every day, as meat and drink unto their souls, to the feeding
of them up unto eternal life. In the Mass I appeal unto the consciences of
all those that either say or see the same, who of them it is that can say by
being at the same every day, that he can learn or carry away any of all
this; that the infidel can thence play the divine; that thence he can
receive any instruction, either of the deadly fall of Adam, or of the quickening
death of Christ; that the Christian can profit thereby any thing be it never so
little, in the true acknowledging of the mercies of God; or in the knowledge of
himself, or in brief that he can therein perceive his transgressions, that so
he may run to seek the remedy: or this drynes and alteration of the soul and
mind, which our Lord calls the thirst of righteousness, to quench the same in
the welspring of life, this reviving water, gushing out unto eternal life,
this precious blood of our Lord, which is made our justification, yea our
justice? Again, in the holy Supper all the faithful did communicate together
in bread and in the cup, in the body, and in the blood of our Lord: being
taught thereby, that they were but one body, even the body of Christ; but
diverse members, quickened, moved and governed by one spirit, even by his
spirit: living one life, and consequently taught mutually to love one another,
mutually to embrace one another: the greater becoming servants to the lesser,
the strong unto the weak, the learned to the ignorant, and the wise and
prudent to the foolish and simple, referring all their actions to the glory of
their head, to the service of the body, and to the salvation of his members.
In the Mass, what is there that may imprint this brotherly love and charity
in us, or express and teach us any such instruction? yea on the contrary,
which does not suppress and bury charity, which does not oppress and
smother, and that in all dispightfull manner such lessons and doctrine? where
the Priest (if he may be lawfully so called) communicates alone, one for all:
where the ancient bread of the communion of the body of Christ: great,
according to the proportion of the communicants, is brought to one wafer, and
that in some places no greater then a penie, being for the priest alone;
whereas our Lord delivered himself to death for all, and gave himself to all:
where also so often as any are admitted thereunto, they are deprived of the cup,
of the communion, so much as in them lies, of the blood of Christ. Then what
proportion holds it with the supper? yea, what opposition and contrariety is
there, that it maintains not against the Apostle: We are one only bread, 1.
Cor. 10.17.
and one only body, etc. To be short, in the holy supper, man was taught how
he was indebted unto one only God for his creation, as likewise that he was
not bound to any for the work of his regeneration, justification,
sanctification and salvation, but to one only Christ the eternal son of God,
the beginning, midst, and end of our spiritual life: in so much as that he
which does regenerate us in baptism, and does nourish and feed us in the holy
supper, is made our meat himself, and in so much as that he which washes us
from our sins, does cloth and cover us with his righteousness. In the Mass
what shall we say? where of the holy table of our Lord, they have made us an
Altar of all sorts of saints: where of the remembrance of his death, they have
made us a legend of the Saints, their sufferinges and passions: where, in
stead of his blood, the only propitiation for our sins, they pretend to
administer unto us their prayers, intercessions and merits: where, to shut up
all in a word, is pretended to sacrifice in honor of the Saints, him, for whose
glory and names sake all the Saints have offered whatsoever they have
sacrificed, yea and for whose names sake they ought to sacrifice themselves. To
be short, let us set before us on the one side an assembly of faithful
people praying unto God, singing his praises, hearing his word, and attentive
to the expounding of the same: a servant of God in all simplicity, so ripping
up their sins, as that he makes them to have a sense and feeling of the
same by the word, declaring thereupon the remission thereof in the death and
passion of our Lord, distributing unto them round about the table, his body
and his blood, in the sacrament of bread and wine, which he has instituted,
and provoking and stirring of them up to the giving of all hearty and
everlasting praise unto him for this so great a benefit: This was the holy
supper of the faithful in the old Church: this is ours. And now set before
your eyes on the other side a Priest with a strange garment, his face fixed
upon an Altar, with a Clearke standing behind him, muttering in an unknown
language, interlarded with signs, lifting up a Wafer in an affected and
ceremonial sort, causing it to be worshipped; dippping it in his wine,
eating it alone, using no word of interpretation or exhortation, neither yet
giving the people any other taste thereof by any manner of instruction;
persuading them notwithstanding, that by thus much as has been done, being at
their or his request, and bought with some piece of money, he has sacrificed
our Lord for them or him, that he has with this his one labor set his father
in Paradise, drawn him out of Purgatory, etc. This is the Mass of Rome: that
same which we so greatly complain of, and whereof there is so much talk: but
how differing and disagreeing both for manner and effect (I call their own
souls to witness) from the service of the fathers? how far off then from the
institution of Christ, and how far off from the order of the Apostles? But it
is now time to finish this discourse: let us leave the parts, and look into
the circumstances; and so we shall come to behold the truth of this matter in
more clear and evident manner.

The end of the first book.
The Second Book. WHEREIN ARE HANDLED THE CIRCVMSTANCES AND APPERTINANCES
BELONGING TO THE Divine service; as those also which belong unto the Mass.
CHAP. I. Of Churches and Altars, and of their original and proceeding.
IT follows after we have spoken of the parts of service, their first
original and beginning, as also of their increase and proceeding, deprauing,
corrupting, etc. that we now examine the circumstances thereof. And therefore
let us begin with the Churches, Altars, and images, and therein consider how
by the good husbanding of the matter by the Sea of Rome, the circumstances have
taken the place of the substance, and the accidents of the subject: in such
manner, as that in Papistrie there is more regard had of a pretended adorning
and beautifying of places, the^ to the form and substance of that which is to
be done therein, for the salvation and instruction of men.

The ancient Jews by the commandment of God had built a temple for
sacrifices; Act. 2.5.21. Act. 9.13.
and after that many Sinagogues like parish Churches, therein to read and
expound the word of God. Our Lord did often use to go into the same, to draw
the Jews to the knowledge of the truth: his Apostles likewise did imitate his
example. But in as much as it was not lawful for them to do the service
ordained in the new Testament therein, they are content to do it in their own
private houses; Act. 1.2.4.5.10.12.20.28.
no less consecrate and dedicate, then the temple and the synagogues: seeing
it is the service that sanctifies the place, and not the place that
sanctifies the service: yea so much the rather, in that the voice of Gods own
Son manifested in the world did sound therein, Eusebius. lib. 2. c. 16. and 17.
in the doctrine of the Gospel. For whereas Eusebius would apply unto
Christians, that which Philo says in the treatise (...), that they had at that
time sacred or consecrate houses, which they called (...), the best learned do
understand and acknowledge, that he speaks there of those religious and
Monkish Jews which were called Essei, for that he says that they are (...),
alluding unto their name: De praeparat. e. uang. l. 8. c. 4.
and Eusebius himself in another place does expound it of them. Those which
have written after him, as Sozomenus, Epiphanius, Nicephorus, etc. as they
followed his steps, so they stumbled at the same stone. And that which
Onuphrius says, that Anacletus the first in the life time of S. Peter, did
build the temple of Laterane at Rome is very fond and frivolous.

And in deed the first Christians were without temples for certain ages: That
there were no churches at the beginning. Orig. contr. Celsum. l. 8. Minutius in
Octauio. Eusebius. l. 9. c. 10. Tertul. cont. Valentinian. Onuph. in appendice
Platin. Eusebius. l. 7. c. 9. Eusebius. l. 9. c. 42.
which appears by Origin and Arnobius, who were reproched by the Painims, for
that the Christians had not any. As also by Eusebius, who says, that the
places wherein they prayed, were caves and dens, as having made them places
for to pray in: whereas on the contrary our Savior Christ reproves and
reprocheth the Pharisees, for that of the places of prayers they had made
dens for thieves. Tertullian shows us that in his time they had no where to
assemble and come together, but in simple and silly houses, where he says: The
house of our dove is but a simple one, situate in high places, and daily
invaded and beset. This was about the year 200. and their first public
assemblies were in the places where they used to bury the Martyrs. So we
read, that in the time of Valerian, Aemilianus, govern or of Egypt, defends
the exercise of religion in the Christians of Alexandria, by these words: You
are unthankful for the mildnes and lenity of the Emperors, etc. you are not
like to hold and enjoy your Synodes and assemblies in the places of burial of
your Martyrs any longer. And it is said of Galerius: That he may spoil us and
bring us to nothing, he will take away from us the liberty of our assemblies,
in the places of the burial of our Martyrs. Eusebius. l. 6, c. 3.
But contrariwise of Galienus: That he restored them the places of the burial
of their Martyrs, to the end that they might celebrate the divine service: that
is, says Onuphrius, baptisings, the holy Supper, and sermons, etc. But in time
they began to build and erect certain slight manner of buildings to defend
them against the injuries of the weather, and them they called frames. And this
is attributed to Fabianus a Bishop of Rome, and a Martyr by Damasus. And hereby
is seen the impudency of those men, which have imagined and devised these
goodly legendes; wherein is reported, that Sauinian did build a temple unto
Saint Peter in his life time: and Alexander the first another which he called
Advincula. And Hyginus ordained, that temples should not be dedicated without
Mass, and that the stuff brought into the place to build withal, should not
be converted unto profane uses, etc. All such as lived in the heat and raging
times of persecution, being more busy to build the Church by their death, then
by any such monuments which might be the remembrauncers of their life. After
the year 200. at certain spaces of time which fell out calm, they assembled
more freely, and builded more solid and substantial places of prayer, and
that in Cities, in the time of Alexander Seuerus, Gordianus, Eusebius. l. 8. c.
1. 2
Philippus, Aemilianus, Marcus Aurelius, etc. Whereupon Eusebius cries out:
Who shall be able to describe unto us these goodly assemblies in every city,
this great concourse of people unto the places of prayer, which are so far
enlarged and made much bigger then the old? But within a short while after they
were seen, pulled down again and overthrown by Dioclesian, The beginning of
Temples.
in so much as that their foundations therewithal were razed; and in this
ruinous and unprovided estate they continued, till it pleased God to raise up
Constantine, who did not only command that they should be built again with
all diligence: but himself began to erect and build them in most sumptuous and
costly manner, going on from necessity to utility and profit, and from
profitablenes, to wast and superfluity, converting and turning by little and
little in the great and famous cities, the temples that had been dedicated
unto idolles, unto the use of Christians: the like did his successors according
to his example. And from that time forward we find the Bbs. of Rome more
careful and industrious to build churches, as they call the^; then the Church
it self: the Doctors on the contrary, calling upon them, that rather (to the
praise of God through the beauty and brightness of the same) they would labor for
the true ornaments of the Church. Lactantius the Master of Constantine says;
It behooves not to build such sumptuous temples unto God, but it behooves
every man to consecrate his breast unto him, to retire and betake himself into
the same, therein to fall down and worship. And Chrysostom: Would thou
build a house to God, give unto the poor faithful ones, to sustain their
lives withal, and then thou have built him a reasonable house. Chrysostom. in
Matthew.
The Martyrs take no delight or pleasure in it to be so honored with thy
silver: when the poor in the mean while do mourn and weep. But Jerome more
then any other, Hieronym. ad Demetriad.
howsoever ordinarily too much given to outward decking and trimming: Let
others (says he speaking to Demetrias) build Churches, parget the walls with
marble rough-cast, let them gilde the heads of these huge pillars, which do
nothing at all perceive their beautifying, etc. I speak not against it: but it
behooves thee greatly to have some other drift and purpose: and what must that
be? To cloth and cover (says he) Jesus Christ in his poor, to visit him in
those that languish, to feed him in the hungry, to harbor him in those that
have no house or roof to lie under, but especially in those which are of the
household of faith, etc. Meaning by these speeches that Christian charity
proves a far better lodging and house, then all these goodly and stately
buildings. And upon Aggee: Hieronym. in Aggeum.
Would thou know what I mean by the money, wherewith the temple of God is
to be garnished? verily the words of the holy scripture whereof it is written:
The words of the Lord are pure words: they are as silver purified in the fire,
purged from the earth, and refinedeuen seven times. And what gold is that
whereof the Prophet speaks? verily such as is hid from the outward senses of
the Saints, but in the inward closet of their hearts is bright, and shines
with the light of God, according to that which the Apostle says: that some
build upon gold, others on silver, and others on precious stones, etc. And thus
behold how that, faith and true doctrine is the true building of the Church.
And again: Many people do build walls, and raise pillars, etc. but where is
the choice that is made of the Ministers of the church? And let not any man
allege here unto me the temple of the Jews, the table, the lamps, the
censors, etc. These things were good when the priests did sacrifice beasts,
when their blood was the ransom for sins, etc. Idem in c. 7. Ierem.
But now that our Lord (poor though he were) has dedicated the poverty of
his house: let us not think upon any thing but his cross: let us make less
account of riches then of dirt: let us not be in love with this Mammon, which
our Lord has called unrighteous: let us not love that whereof Saint Peter
confesses so freely and cheerfully, that he has none; let not us say of our
goodly marble stones, as the Jews did: The temple of the Lord, the temple of
the Lord: for the temple of the Lord is there where a true faith, a holy
conversation, and the society of all manner of virtues do dwell. That is to
say, if we believe S. Jerome, that the temple of God is that place, Chorus.
what manner of one soever it be, where pure doctrine is preached by good
Ministers, and where it is received by the faithful unto obedience of faith
and charity, etc. Whereby we also see, that after that Christians had these
gorgeous temples, they now and then forsook and cast them off, to retain and
hold fast the pure service of God. Victor. l. 1. and 3
Under the time of the persecution by the Vandals, Victor makes mention, that
they came again to celebrate divine service without making any difference of
place, even wheresoever they could: and further, that because of the furious
outrage of the Arrians, they assembled in private houses. And at Constantinople
we read, Sozom. l. 8. c. 21. and 27.
that the Orthodoxes, for the unjust exile of Chrysostom, did forsake the
temples to come together in private: First at Constantine his cestern: the^
without the city, in a kind of old theater: and finally, during the sharpnes
and rage of the persecution, Socrat. l. 6. c. 18 Chrysostom. ho. 46. in Math.
sometimes under close walks in the suburbs, sometimes in the fields. Whereupon
Chrysostom, says in certain places: We have retained the fundamental points of
doctrine, howsoever we have left for them, the foundations and groundworks of
the temples and walls thereof. Now the places of Christian assemblies, according
to the diversity of the time, and manner of building had diverse names. In
Acts 1. (...), a high hall; in other places (...), houses; then (...), places
or houses of prayer; Dominica, the Lords places, Martyria, because they met in
the places of the Martyrs their sepulchers, for the kindling of their zeal. As
they grew in the faith about the time of Constantine, they called them
Basilicae, borrowing their names from the palaces where Princes were wont to
sit and hold their assizes: Then Temples, at such time as Christendom fell to
gratify and temporize with Paganism: as is to be seen in the time of Saint
Augustine, S. Jerome, etc. And in the end the thing containing, taking the name
of the contained, they were called Churches, because that the Church was there
assembled, as profane authors do say, (...), Lueia. in Dial. Merc. and Maiae.
to make clean the Church or assembly, or banquet, that is, the place where
these things should be done.

In this first antiquity it is not read that they were built or dedicate to
any other then God only: To whom they were built. Sozomen. l. 2. c. 3. Eusebius.
l. 3. de. vit. Constant. and l. 5. c. 2. Sozom. l. 2. c. 26. Socrat. l. 1. c. 16
and therefore were called Dominica, (...): and from thence came the name
Kirk, as yet in use amongst the Germains. And Constantine did not use to do
any otherwise: and therein they had a purpose to differ from the Paganes. In
the place of Christ's sepulcher he builded a stately Church: Eusebius calls
it Martyrium magnum, because (says he) it was consecrate to Jesus Christ the
great and faithful Martyr, etc. At Constantinople he named one Irenen, by
reason of the peace of the Gospel: and another, the Church of the Apostles,
because of their doctrine, but both of them dedicated unto the Son of God.
For as concerning that which is read in Nicephorus, that Constantine did
dedicate the city of Constantinople (...), to the Mother of God: Langus
(although a Romanist) has very well noted and proved from Eusebius, that the
accent is abused, taking (...), for (...), Dei genitricem, for Deo genitum,
that is, the mother of God, for the Son of God, where there is nothing to
make the difference, but only the accent. And Nicephorus in another place
acknowledges the same. Niceph. l. 8. c. 49. and l. 7. c. 49. Athan. in lib. de
passione Domini. August. aduersus Maxim.
In Athanasius, (but this little book cannot be his) the Jews of Beryta being
converted, did dedicate their Sinagogue unto the Savior of the world: and many
others afterward by their example. And Saint Augustine also reasons from
thence against Maximinus the Arrian; If we build (says he) a temple of stone
and of wood unto any holy Angel, be he never so excellent; should we not be
accursed of the truth of Christ, and of the church of God: seeing that thereby
we should give unto the creature, the service which is due unto none but unto
God only? Idem de ciuitat. Dei l. 8. c. 27. l. 22. c. 10. August. in Psalm. 94.
As likewise he teaches in every other place, that the temples, the pastors,
and the sacrifices are not belonging or due to any but to God: Vni magno
debentur: And that there was not any temples or altars built unto the Martyrs:
Because (says he) they are no Gods, but have the same God that we have: but
although there be sepulchers built for them, memorias sicut hominibus mortuis,
they are but as memorials of dead men, whose souls notwithstanding live in the
presence of God. Whereby we learn, that if we read (yea though it were in his
time or somewhat after, as abuses crept in) that there were places of prayer,
as chapels, chauncels, or temples, called by the names of Martyrs, or of
saints, that the doctrine of the Church was contrary thereunto, holding them
as monuments rather then temples, and differences of names, rather then of any
such intentions. But the great abuse sprung up under Justinian the Emperor,
and in the time of Gregory, about the sixth age: after that the great
personages which did underprop the Church, and bear it up against the assaults
of idolatry, were dead, when barbarousnes had ouerflowed all nations, and
consequently ignorance had besotted the Church: For then it was, that after the
imitation of Paganism, saints crept up into the places of Gods, and challenged
or was thought worthy of, every one his temple: that all the edifying and
building up of the Church seemed to consist in buildinges, and not any longer
to assemble and couple together, according to the doctrine of S. Peter and S.
Paul lively stones: that successively and by degrees, sins began to be
ransomed thereby: And that so greatly, as that Chroniclers ordinarily, after
that they had set down and delivered all the wickedness and mischief that they
could of any king or Emperor, yet they would conclude in these words; and
notwithstanding Erat pius and deuotus, he was full of piety and devoutly given
toward God: For (say they) he builded such a monastery, such a church, etc.

Together with excess in buildings, The dedication of Temples.
there entered into the Church the ceremony of dedications, taken from the
Jewish rites; for the simplicity of Christianity knew no such thing, and that
which we read in the Epistle of Clement unto Saint James, is very frivolous:
for seeing there was no Temples in their time, it could not possibly come to
pass, that there should be any dedicating of them. But as Solomon had
dedicated the Temple by a solemn prayer, which he uttered and delivered with
his own mouth in the presence of all the people; Constantine consecrated the
City of Constantinople unto God in the presence of the Fathers of the Council
of Nice: the Temple of the holy Sepulcher at Jerusalem, Eusebius l. 4. de vit.
Constant. Athanas. Apo. 2.
before them that were assembled at the Council of Tire. And this manner of
consecration was performed by solemn prayer, and in homilies and exhortations
taken out of the word of God; as also in the celebrating of the holy Supper,
then with a public and general joy and rejoicing, in large and bountiful
gifts from the Prince, and such like things. But as for holy water and all
such odd trumperies as are used at this day, there was not a word: but as the
authority of Bishops grew, so they drew unto themselves this power and
faculty of dedicating Temples. And thereupon it is that Gelasius his Decree
came forth a little before the year 500. 26. q. 5. De Conse. 1. C. Nemo.
Socrat. l. 2. c 8.
That the Basilickes or new Temples should not be dedicated without the
commandment of the Bishop of Rome: and that of Felix the third a little
before the year 600. That the Bbs. should dedicate them and not the Ministers.
And Socrates adds thereunto this word, with the consent of the Bb. of Rome.
Whereupon Durand gives an excellent reason, saying, Because he carries the
image of Christ, of whom it is said, without me ye can do nothing. Again,
If the Lord build not the house, the builders labor but in vain.

For the form, who would believe Clement in his Epistle unto S. James; Clem.
in Epist. 2. ad Iacobu^. Euarist. in Decret. Epist.
Diuinis precibus sacrabantur; they were consecrated by prayers: For it is too
clear and manifest, that as then there were no Christian Temples. Or who in
like manner would follow Euaristus his assertion, that says it was with
saying of a Mass: when as we have proved that this word was not known of
more then 300. years after him: and yet it is from this place and assertion,
that Gratianus would have it that the Mass is of the substance of the
dedicatio^. But the truth is, that the first was made by Constantine, Anno 350.
with prayers, sermons, Psalms of praise unto God, etc. And Siluester the
first, consecrating the Temple of Lateran, added unction thereunto, after the
custom of the Jews, as says the Bull of Clement the sixth. Clemens. 6. in
Bulla. An. 6 oc.
But this was with a purpose to do some manner of extraordinary honor
thereunto, the like whereof was not practiced again till the time of Gregory
the first, who ordained furthermore that there should be used perfumes and the
relics of Saints: but this was yet no further grounded then in a simple
admonition: but thereupon comes the idolatrous Council of Nice, namely the
second, and makes it a law; Anno 788. Council Nic. 2. c. 7. Synod. Bracar. 2.
c. 5.
That there should be no more consecrating of Temples without the relics of
the Saints. It was an usual custom in the time of their joy and rejoicing,
willingly and freely to give somewhat to the maintenance of the Church: and
this also was drawn into a Decree; That they were not further to consecrate,
then when and where as they did see means for the maintaining of the Priests,
Clergy, Lamps and all the rest of the service: and this they term to be
assured of a dowry: And thereupon the history delivers great and plentiful
store of the deceitful and crafty sleightes which the covetousness of the
Priests did thereupon practice and devise: Then they made a Sacrament,
consecrated them to the name of the holy Trinity, and in uttering the words,
gave the name unto the Temple, and they accounted it as a great error to
consecrate the thing twice, as though forsooth it had been so deeply
imprinted, as that it could never be worn or blotted out, and thereby they
proceeded to strengthen it with the same laws that were due to Baptism, as
we find in the Epistle of Zachary unto Boniface, Anno 800.
about the year ^00 wherein he says; If in the time of his Priesthood he
have consecrated Churches in the name of the Trinity, or baptized infantes,
let such consecration and baptism abide firm and immovable: And in this
goodly Decree devised by Gratianus saying, The churches once consecrated, must
not be consecrated again, no more then a child once baptized in the name of
the Father, of the Son, and of the holy Ghost. Finally, toward the year
1000. it was grown into a full and absolute form, Anno 1000. D. 68. c. ecles.
stmel.
as namely, that the Bb. after a short prayer, should besprinckle the outside
of the walls with holy water, with a bunch of hysop, and afterward strike the
door with his pastoral staff, saying, Lift up your gates, O ye princes, etc.
and that thrice, which being opened, then he painteth it with some manner of
letters on the inside of the walls, he coniureth the salt, the wine, the water,
the ashes, and makes a composition thereof, wherein he dippeth his thomb, using
ever amongst certain prayers hanging together like sand-ropes. And for the
making up of the full measure of his superstition, he utters these words;
Sanctificetur hoc te^plum in nomine patris, and filii, and spiritus sancti,
Amen, hallowed and consecrated be this temple in the name of the Father, and of
the Son, and of the holy Ghost. And yet nevertheless Durandus has taken the
pains to allegorise upon all these apish tricks (which have no other
foundation but fickle man's fancy,) Anno 1300. Thom. test. 1. Summae. q. 83
art, 3.
unto good purpose. And Thomas is not ashamed to say, That Churches and other
things without life consecrated as before, do put upon them a spiritual
power, by the which they are made the more apt for the service of God. Let
every man here judge and consider how auailable unto edification all this can
be, and withal what ground or foundation it has in Jesus Christ. If in
brief, this have not been the same, that S. Paul said, that is, to build
upon it, wood, hay and stubble.

Let us come to the Altars: Of Altars or Tables.
Behold the honor, behold the reverence that is done unto them, is there any
man that can be so blind or hard hearted as to think that these were
unknown in the old church? assuredly and without all doubt, together with the
accomplishing of the sacrifice of our Savior Christ, all other sacrifices were
complete and fully finished: this same being evermore new and fresh before the
eyes of God must serve and suffice. Neither need we doubt but that in his
Cross are abolished all Altars whatsoever, Heb. 13.10
there being one only left unto us, even that whereof the Apostle speaks,
saying; We have an Altar whereupon they may not eat which serve in the
Tabernacle, that is, Jesus Christ our Lord. The Pagans did ordinarily reproach
and vpbraide the Christians, for their not having of any Altars: and we see
how they justified their doings. It had been a more easy and ready thing
for them to have answered that they had Altars, and that in saying that they
had none, it should seem that they were misinformed. Clem. Alexan. l. 7.
strom.
Clemens Alexa^drinus, says; Yea rather we have an Altar: and what manner of
one? The earthly congregation and company of those who bow themselves in
prayers, which have one voice and one common intention. And again, one holy
Altar, one just soul, one holy smell of a sweet savor which proceeds out
when we are in prayer, but they believe it not. Origin has the same thing
objected unto him by Celsus, he tells him not that he abuses him, Orig. l.
8, cont. Celsum.
but he says; Yea rather our Altars and our Temples are the spirits of good
men, which smell as sweet incense, and the vows and prayers of a good
conscience. What comparison is there betwixt those of thine, and these O
Celsus? thine are perishable and subject to corruption, but these of ours as
immortal as the soul it self. Minutius Felix likewise in his Octauius,
brings in one Cecilius a Pagan, moving this question. Wherefore have not the
Christians Altars, Arno. l. 2. and. 4
Temples, nor Images? And this reproach continued in the time of Arnobius, that
is, near 300. years after our Lord; for he says; You accuse us that we
have no Temples, no Images, nor Altars. And these are the most ancient Doctors
of the church. Our adversaries say, that seeing there were Altars, there were
propitiatory sacrifices of the Mass also, etc. but we reason to the contrary;
There was never a Mass in all this time, because we cannot see that there were
any Altars.

It is objected against us, that Sixtus the first ordained that the Mass
should be said upon an Altar. These forenamed Fathers have told us, that
for 200. years after him there was not any: Tertul. de paenit. c. 9. Cyp. l.
1. Ep. 7. and 9. l. 3. Ep. 13.
and I have proved unto them, that for 400. years after him the name of the
Mass was not known: then I would have them give us leave not to believe
them. They reply with greater likelihood and appearance, that Tertullia^
makes mention, Adgeniculationis panitentiu^ aris Dei, of penitent persons
kneeling at Altars: That S. Cypria^ likewise speaks sometimes of the Altar.
Certainly they cannot be contrary, being all of one faith, and al of one time,
there must then be admitted somedistinction. Now as concerning the place of
Tertullian, Pamelius Archd. of S. Omer, corrects it by the copies of Vatican,
wherein there is a mutual harmony and concord, Caris Dei adgeniculari, and
non aris, and they maintain this correction by a very plain and evident
reason; That the Penitents were not suffered to come vsque ad Pastophoria
virorum and mulierum, until the men and women were departed: much less to the
grates of the Clergy, and least of all near unto the Altars. As for the
place of S. Cyprian, it is certain that in the Primitive Church, there was
presenting and bringing of offerings, as we have said, partly for the use of
the holy supper, and partly for the relief of the poor; and that in the
midst of the said assembly there stood a Table, whereupon they were laid,
or whereto they were brought. And because that these offringes which the people
brought of their fruits unto God, were by them called sacrifices, (imitating
therein the old law,) yea and by S. Paul himself (who calls the alms
sacrifices) this Table by consequence, did likewise sometimes bear the name of
the Altar: at such a Table did our Lord celebrate his first supper, with his
Apostles: and of such a like one, S. Paul says; 1. Cor. 10. ver. 11. 1 and 8.
You cannot participate at the Table of Christ, and at the table of Devils. Now
he in that place speaks of the Communion, which we have with Christ in his
holy supper: and before he had said, Those which eat of the sacrifices, are
not they partakers of the Altar? drawing his reason from the old Altar unto
this Table. Of the Tables that were ordinarily of wood, the old writers have
made mention to have been in the Church long before. The first Council of
Nice entitled the Article of the holy supper, (...), Athanas. in Epist. ad
Orthodox.
that is of the holy supper. Athanasius speaking of the furies of the Arrians
and Macedonians, says, It is not credible what impieties they commit, and
what outrageous speeches they cast out against the holy Table, as you shall
see there sacrificed and offered birds, pine-aples, etc. And in his Epistle to
such as lived a solitary life, he says plainly, Idem in Ep. ad solitariam
vitam agentes. Theodor. l. 3. c. 11. Idem l. 5. c. 18. August in Johan, tract.
26.
that they were of wood. So Theodoret amongst the insolences of Julian, the
uncle of Julian the Apostata, says, that being at the Temple builded by
Constantine the Emperor, he pissed against the sacred table. And in an other
place he says, that in Millaine there was a Table, whereupon were offered
gifts. And S. Augustine upon S. John, That the Sacrament of the body and
blood praparabatur in mensa Dominica, and in mensa Dominica sumebatur, It was
prepared upon the Lords Table, and upon the same it was taken. And after that
he had called it a Table, he calls it also sometimes an Altar in the same
place: where by we see that the table of offringes, the table of the Lord, and
the Altar were one and the same thing, he says: Men vow unto God that which is
offered unto him, especially the oblation of the holy Altar. Idem Ep. 50.
And if we doubt either of the offering or of the Altar, he makes himself
plain, saying, When that which is upon the Table is sanctified and blessed.
And Durandus acknowledges that this Altar is the Table, whereat our Lord
banqueted with his Disciples: Durand. l. 1. c. 2. That the Tables were of wood.
Optat. l. 6.
and those Altars were of wood, (if we may believe Optatus) who says, In
some places for want of wood, they have scraped them; and whereas there was
good store, there they broke them, etc. And Saint Augustine in his fifty
Epistle, where the Donatists break the wood of the Altar, after that they had
hurt the Bishop. And those, such as were to be taken in sunder or removed
and not set fast, or made all of a piece: for in another place he says, that
the office of the Deacon was to carry the Altar, that is, this Table.
Chrysostom calls it ordinarily the holy or sacred Table. The Greek
Lithurgies in like manner. August. in quaestione veteris and nouitestamenti. q.
101. Iraen. l. 4. c 24.
And when they speak otherwise, it is but by a Metaphore: and yet
notwithstanding, not that I deny altogether that they use this word Altar, in
this sense, but more often in the other. Thus says Irenaeus: Our Altar is in
heaven, whether our prayers and oblations are directed; that is to say, Christ.
Origin gives the same name unto our heart, and the Greek Lithurgies do pray
God, That it would please him to receive the spiritual Sacrifice, the
Sacrifice of praise upon his heavenly and spiritual Altar, etc. And the
Mass, Iube haec in sublime Altar tuum ferri, nimirum dona. But after the time
of Constantine, use prevailed by little and little, whereupon they became to be
made of stone, as witnesses Gregorius Nyssenus, (but yet not at the first dash
in every place,) and to make them immovable, according as the estate and
condition of Christians grew more and more stable. Whereupon Gerson says,
that Siluester the first was the first that made them of stone: Gerson l. 4.
cont. Florent. Gab Biel. lect. 13. in Can. De Conse. D. 1. Can. Nemo. Durand.
l. 100. 7. and l. 4.
And Gabriel Biel: That in former times they used a portable Altar of wood,
which Clement calls the Table of the Lord. And Durandus having witnessed the
same, yields a reason worthy of himself, why they were made of stone,
saying: Because that the rock was Christ, the stone which the builders
refused, the stone cut out of the mountain without hand, etc. But whether we
call them Tables or Altars, they were consecrated to the participating of the
holy Supper. And to the end that men might come unto it on all sides, it was
placed in the midst of the Temple, The Table in the midst. Eusebius. l. 10. c. 4
enclosed and set about with a certain kind of lattise-worke to hold out the
press and throng of the people. Eusebius describing the famous Temple built by
Constantine, says, After that the Temple was finished, and raised seats
placed for the Presidents, August. in Johan. tract. 42.
etc. there was placed in the midst, the Sanctum Sanctorum (after the manner
of the Hebrews) that is to say, the Altar. And S. Augustine teaches us that
this was the custom: Jesus Christ feeds us daily, behold and see the Table
prepared in the midst: whereof comes it O ye hearers, that you see his
Table and come not to eat of the meat? Council. Constantinop. 5. c. 1.
Whereupon we see that in the Council of Constantinople the fifth: Sub tempus
Diptychorum, at the time of the commemoration of the Martyrs, all the people
ran with silence round about the Altar for to hear. And how had that been
possible, if they had been as at this day, trussed close up to the end or
utmost parts of the Temple or place, wherein they stand, or fastened into some
wall? But further, the Minister or Pastor, at such time as the holy supper was
distributed in the Church, did not turn his back upon the people, but saw
them, and was seen of them all upon the face: and hereof there remain some
prints and marks in the Cathedral Churches of Rome, Millaine, Naples,
Florence, Lions, Maguntia, etc. where the Priest turns his face toward the
west, and has thereby the people continually before his eyes: and Durandus
does acknowledge the same. Durandus l. 4. One only Altar. Ignatius ad Phila.
Eusebius. l. 10. c. 4 Chrysostom. in 2. ad Cor. ho. 8.


This Altar likewise was only one, and this did show the Communion of
Christians, communicating at one Table; Ignatius says, There is but one Altar
for the whole Church: Eusebius speaking of this great and magnificall Temple,
built by Constantine, says, One only Altar in the midst, and that a great
and stately one. And this Altar is interpreted by Chrysostom in these words,
saying: One Baptism and one Table. And indeed in all the ancient Christian
Temples of Greece and Italy, their manner of building was not fit to receive
any more Altars then one, as has been observed by the studious in
antiquities, and where there are more to be found they are not used. And as to
this day, there is but one in the Temples of the Grecians, and that in the
midst of the Quire.

And consequently this one Altar was dedicated unto the one only God.
Dedicated unto God only.
For the first ages or antiquity which worshipped not Saints, did not yield
them any: for else with what face should S. Augustine have reproched unto the
Gentiles, the Altars consecrated to the Gods? And what power or force should
this argument have had in the mouth of the Christian against the Gentiles:
There may no Altar be consecrated, Augustinus, ^.10. sermon. 6. de verbo Domin.
but to that which is called God: If at such time the Christians should
consecrate any unto Saints, and again, if the Saints of the Christians were
not taken of them for Gods? It is the Altar (says he) which testifies that
he is taken and held for God, to whom it is erected and consecrated: for
otherwise what should the erecting of an Altar do, if there were not a Deity
believed and firmly received? Let no man tell me: It is no Godheade: It is
not a God: what was pleasing and acceptable to God, they believed and knew
as well as we do know or believe any other thing that is. But notwithstanding,
so it is, that the Altar does testify, what they took that to be, for which
they made and erected the Altar, etc. Now with the invocation of Saints,
entered the multiplying of Altars, after the manner of the Pagans, and yet the
multitude thereupon received, did not satisfy the^, but afterward they added
thereunto according to the fruitfulnes and manifold increase of their Masses,
according to the verse of the Poet; Vbi Templum illi, centumque Sabaei, Thure
calent arae: or rather according to the saying of the Prophet; Osee. c. 8.
Ephraim has multiplied his Altars, etc. But in the mean time it came to
pass, that there was never a Table to be found in the Temples for the
ordinary Communion of the holy supper, for the which and not for any other
use, all, whether Tables, or Altars were at the first instituted and ordained,
in such sort as that the Mass has wholly displaced the holy supper, and the
Altars the holy Table of the Lord.

Hereupon followed, as one abuse begets an other, Consecration
a thousand superstitious decrees, and a thousand apish toys, some derived
from the Jews, and some from the Gentiles: Let the Altars be consecrated, let
them be anointed with cream, Council. Epaunense. c 26. Gratianus de Consec D.
1. C. Altaria. and C Nullus. Council. Bracar. c. 37.
but not any save those only which are made of stone: thereby they have by
little and little banished the Tables: Let the Bbs. only do it, if any
Clearke do meddle therein, let him be degraded: and if any Lay man, let him
be excommunicated. Was this the charge which S. Paul enjoined Bishops? And
what foolerie is this, that a Priest should receive the body and the blood of
the Lord for the people, and not to be held able or allowed, to power out a
little oil upon a stone? The Consecrating of these Altars, is made of the same
ingredientes with that of the Temples: that is, of a sprinkling with water
mingled with salt wine, and ashes, of crosses made with holy water at the four
corners, and in the midst, the Bishop his going about it seven times, the
singing of the one and fifty Psalm; Asperges me Hyssopo: not without the
profaning of the wholesome Scripture, and in particular that doctrine of the
remission of our sins. Therewithal he prays to God, that he would
vouchsafe to accept of his sacrifices; not without the making of the Cross of
Christ, as the Apostle says, of no effect. Therein he burieth some relics:
Three (say they) are too few, four sufficient, and fiu^e too many: he
puts them in some pretty little case with three grains of incense, to the
end, that for the affection and good will that God bears unto them, he may
receive the prayers and sacrifices which shall be offered thereuppon, etc. Then
he annointeth the Table of the Altar: andas he is anointing of it, sings:
Erexit Jacob lapidem, etc. Jacob set up a stone and anointed it, etc. All of
them late inventions, growing long after the times of the Apostles, 700. 800.
900. or 1000. years, and that from their own doctrine, which is a great deal
further swaruing from that of the Apostles, without sense and signification,
yea and without all solid and sound foundation. And this same ceremony
extends it self within a while after unto all the ornaments, as linnens,
cups, wine-pots and censers; and that with far more carefulnes and industry,
then ever they took about the Lord his lawful Sacraments. What may we think
that these fellows will answer, when he shall say; Who has required all
these things at your hands? And howmuch better had it been to have taught
Christians the abolishment of all sacrifices, by the one only sacrifice, and of
al Altars, by the Altar of the Cross? then to have led us from the corner
stone, to Jacobs stone; from the anointing stone, to the stone anointed; from
Christianity to the Jewish religion, and to the erecting and setting up of
Altars after the manner of the Jews, in hope of some new sacrifice to be
offered up, to the annihilating of the sacrifice of the Lamb, slain before the
foundation of the world, and yet new and fresh in the eyes of God to the end
of the world? And again, how much more worthy a thing had it been, to have
destroyed the Altars of the Gentiles, then to have dedicated them unto Saints?
and to have plucked their ceremonies up by the roots, then to have
transplanted them into the Church? seeing it is most plain and evident, that
they were not derived or borrowed from any where else, as appears, when as
we see that the Soothsayers take ashes from the towne-house, Pausaanias l. ^.
to mingle them with the water of the floode Alpha, and therewithal to
besmeare the Altar of Jupiter Olimpius, etc. For what is there that can come
more neerelie unto the same then our manner of Dedicating? And again, when we
see our Altars washed with wine and water, and rubde with the boughs of Sauin,
Durand. l. 6. c. 76.
with the singing of some penitential Psalm, Arnob. l. 7.
etc. For is it not like the washing of the picture of the mother of the Gods
with soap, wherewith our Country man Arnobius sporteth himself in his time?

CHAP. II. Of Images, and that the old Christians had not any.
NOw follow the Images, the ornament and goodliest garnish at this day, that is
about either Temples or Altars, the refuge and succor of such as are devout:
without which the Temples seem profane, notwithstanding, whatsoever holy
manner of service be offered to God therein in all holy and reverend sort,
neither are the people thought to be sufficiently instructed, how clearelie,
purelie, and shrill soever his word do sound therein. Who doubts but that
(if they be of such importance, (if they have any such room and place in the
Church,) there is either precept or example to be found for the warrant of the
same? And again, who will not conclude and acknowledge it for manifest
impiety, or extreme lightness, if there be nothing to be found for the
maintenance thereof, but much to the proving of the contrary. The eternal God
says in his law, in the law which was given to his own people in the top
of the mountain, with thundering and lightning, the visible threatners of the
dreadful sound that was to ensue; Thou shall not make to thy self any
graven Image, nor any likeness, etc. thou shall not bow down to them, nor
worship them. When God speaks so clearelie and so loud, what is it that
men can possibly find out to cavil at to the contrary? but he adds a
reason: For I am a strong, mighty and ielous God, visiting the iniquity of
the Fathers upon the children, etc. setting forth under this title of jealousy
a burning fire, and such a severe taking of vengeance as never sleeps, as
also so aggravating and laying out the hainousnes and enormitie of this sin,
and the extremity of the punishment, and that by the drawing out and
continuing of the same, as he does not the like again in any other of the
commandments. And again, we see this commandment repeated in the old
Testament almost in every line: and in all the holy histories, nothing more
usual, then the revenging of this sin, upon kings, upon people, upon
whole estates and kingdoms. In the Prophets nothing more vehement then the
threatninges against Idolaters, and alarums against Idols. And if any should
reply and say, that all this is against Idols, and not against Images (a
pitiful distinction against the express commandment of God. It is
answered, that he manifestly speaks there of every similitude and
likeness, before which there is any bowing or kneeling, and of every
resemblance, which is worshipped. And all the Church under the law has so
expounded and practiced the same, insomuch as that thereuppon they have refused
to receive the pictures of Emperors, and the Eagles of Rome into their
Churches. In like manner (says Origin) to the end they might not be tempted
of this sin, they have decreede not to admit or tolerate any ordinary
abode, Origin, cont. Cols.
and being for Painters, or Caruers of Images in their common wealth: and yet
notwithstanding, they did not want puissant kings, holy Prophets, and other
excellent servants of God in all this time; by whose hands and Ministry he
manifested his power; by whose mouths he declared his will, and who as
subjects meet and worthy for his service, would have entertained and
retained Images in the Church, if it had not been the very indirect and
contrary course; yea and would have honored, worshipped, offered incense
unto them, yea and prayed unto them; as Moises, Aaron, Joshua, David, Ezechias,
Josias, Elias, Elizaeus, Isaye, Daniell, and diverse others more. In all whose
days and times this was not to be found, notwithstanding whatsoever
corruption otherwise, that took place under the law yea notwithstanding
whatsoever the Pharisaical mis-interpretations and Gloses had afterward brought
in. Now if under the law in his people of Israel, the Lord have so greatly
abhorred, and so straightly forbidden and condemned Images, who will believe
that the Son, the lively Image and engraven form of the Father, has approved
them in the Gospel, has accepted of them in his Christian church? And who
doubts on the contrary, whether being come to teach and judge the world, he
teach according to this law or no? as we see in S. John: My little children
fly from Idols: 1. Cor. 6.10. Apoc. 22.15.
As likewise judge according to the same; following the sentence set down by
S. Paul, saying; Idolaters shall not inherit the kingdom of God. Yea,
himself speaking in the Apocalypse not of old and ancient Idols, but of them of
the latter times, he says; They which shall do my commandments, shall eat of
the tree of life, they shall enter in at the gates of my city, but without
shall be Dogs, Enchaunters, Idolaters, and all those which make and love lies.
Wherefore? but because Idolatry, as says the Gloss, is directly against the
commandment of God, yea even against himself, as also because it is the
school of vanity and lies.

Again, the Christian Primitive church, did never practice it otherwise; and
that we shall see by the succession of times. Clemens Alexandrinus says: That
there were no Images amongst the first Chrians. Clemen. in Paraenetico, and in
6. strom.
It is forbidden us to use this cosening and deceitful art; for the Prophet
says, Thou shall not make the likeness of any things, that are above in
heaven, or below here on earth, etc. There belongs not unto us any sensible
Image of sensible matter, but that only which is apprehended by the
understanding and inward mind, inasmuch as God, which is the only true God, is
apprehended of the understanding and inward mind, and not of the outward
senses, etc. And therefore also he says: There belongs not unto us any manner
of Image, or the counterfeyte of any thing in this world, because that amongst
all the things created, there is not any one that can represent the image of
God. But and if you will needs have Images says the other Clement, which was
more ancient, and Bb. of Rome, Successor (say they) to S. Peter, writing as
they pretend unto S. James: Yet make you not any (says he) of stones, to
entitle them with the name of God: Clem. Episco. Romans ad Jacob. fratres Dom. l.
5.
for who dare be so bold as to make any of the Emperor? But and if you will
honor them, then this is that which we persuade you unto, you do good and
bestow the honor thereof upon men your neighbors, which are the image of
God: look to the feeding of the hungry, give drink to the thirsty, cloth
the naked, visit the sick, harbor the stranger, succor the prisoner, etc.
And not to run (says he) unto these Images of wood and stone, to honor
pistures and Images that have no soul: and in the mean time to make no
account of thy neighbor, the true and very Image of thy Creator. This is
nothing but the suggestions of the old Serpent, who makes you believe that you
are very devout, when you honor the insensible things, and to forget that
you are impious and wicked, when you offend the reasonable, not only
sensible. And what manner of impiety, (says he) and how great an
ingratitude is it, to receive the benefit from God, and to give thanks unto
stocks and stones. Whereby it appears, that these first Christians had no
Images, that they did not acknowledge any other here on earth, but the members
of Christ, their poor Brethren. And this lesson had this Clement learned of
Simon Peter, not making any distinction betwixt Idols and Images by the names
that are given them but by the honor which is bestowed upon them: but our
adversaries have received and learned the contrary doctrine of Simon Magus,
and not of Simon Peter: of whom it is written by S. Theo. and Aug. de haeresib.
Augustine and Theodoret, that he gave unto his Disciples his own image, and
the image of his concubine Selene to worship, in the form of Jupiter and
Minerua, as also of Basilides and Carpocrates very ancient Heretics, of the
sect called Gnostici: of whom Irenaeus says: That secretly they used
certain Images, either painted or graven in gold and silver, Iren. l. 1. c.
23. and. 24. Epiphan. l. 1. haeres. 27. Tertul. de coron, Milit.
which they affirmed to be Jesus Christ, whereunto likewise they did use to
sacrifice.

Tertullian ordinarily does either mock at, or else is angry with Idols. And
that no man may think that he distinguishes them from Images, he expounds
himself in plain terms, saying; S. John cries aloude: Little children
keep your selves from Jdols: not so much (says he) from Idolatry, that is,
from yielding any duty or reverence toward them, as from the Idols, that
is, even from the very shapes and images: For (says he) it is a great
indignity, that the Image of the living God should be translated into the Image
of an Idol or of a thing that is dead. Now there is no cause for the^ to object
against these plain and express words of the old Father, Tertul. lib. de
pudicitia.
that in his book of shamefastnes, he makes mention of a certain cup,
whereupon was painted the history of a good Pastor, going about to gain and
get again his stray sheep: for what agreement is there betwixt the painting of
a cup, and the worshipping of an Image? the workmanship of a glasier, with the
judgment of the Church?

Origin against Celsus handles the question thoroughly. Origin. cont. Celsum.
l. 7.
This Pagan did object against him: That the Christians were worse then the
Barbarians, yea worse then Atheistes: who would not see or look upon (says
he) either Altars, Images, or representation of any thing, etc. The answer
whereto, if he had believed or taught, as our adversaries do, had been easy
and ready, vz. It is not our intent or desire to have any Idols, but rather
Images, we will not honor the resemblances of your Gods, but of our Saints,
etc. But what says he? The Christians abhor Images, (says he) but not for
the same reason that the Persians do, whom thou call Barbarians. For they
verily do not suffer any worshipping of Jesus Christ in Temples, in Altars,
in images, etc. but it is, because it is written: Thou shall have no other Gods
but me: Thou shall not make to thy self any likeness: Thou shall not
worship them nor serve them. Then the question in this place is of the Images
of Christ, and not of the Gods; which notwithstanding, he takes to be no
less forbidden in this place, then those of the Gods themselves. Heraclitus
said: It is a folly to pray unto Images, that do not know the Gods. Origin
goes further, saying: Yea rather we know God: we know his only begotten
Son: we know the Saints: Statuis. Simulachra.
but we do much more confidentlie affirm, that it is impossible for to know
God, and to kneel down to Images: and it is not only folly to fall down
before them, but even to make a semblance or similitude of them: and therefore
we worship not Images for fear least any man should think that we
attribute unto them any manner of Deity. What does Origin here in this place
leave us to conclude, but that he sets the Images of the Son of God, and
of the Saints, in the same row and rank with the old Idols? Furthermore he
says, that he knows very well to put difference betwixt the true God, and
the false and counterfeite: the Son of God, and the Saints: and betwixt
Satan and his Angels. But if Celsus reply, as others do against us: who is
so ignorant but he knows that Images are not Gods, etc? he takes not this
excuse for good payment: For says he, You cannot acquit your selves from
being in fault, seeing that you honor them: The poor idiote seeing what you
do, takes them to be Gods: though we do not so, which know that they cannot
be so much as Images: seeing that God cannot be represented by any Image,
seeing likewise that man is not his Image, but inasmuch as regard and
consideration is had of his reasonable soul, which he has inspired into him,
and not in any respect of his outward form and shape. In brief, if Celsus
say, You abhor our Images: Origin. l. 8.
he says not: It is to set up others in their places: But rather: We have
others in our selves, fashioned according to the word of God, the examples and
patterns of virtues in our Souls, drawn and fashioned according to the
pattern of our Lord, the first borne of every creature. And if he say
again, why set you them not upon Altars? No rather, We will lodge them in our
spirits the true Temples of God, wherein he vouchsafes to dwell by his holy
spirit, etc. Now there is no cause that any should after so many plain and
pregnant proofs, allege unto us the distinction that he makes upon Exodus,
betwixt an Idol, Idem hom. 8. in Exodus
and the likeness of a thing: Inasmuch (says he) as that the Jdoll is a
fantastical picture of some thing which is not in nature: but a likeness is a
representation and shadowing out of a thing that is. For besides that, the
Hebrew will not bear it, what skilleth it us how or by what names he calls
them, seeing he condemns both the one and the other? and seeing he declares
and manifestly shows by the law of God, that both the one and the other sort
is disallowed and condemned? So far as that they are not to be honored,
either in affection inwardly, or by any outward appearance. And this to be
meant of all those, which either are not but in our fantasies and imaginations,
as well as of those which have a bodily substance in some one place or other,
as well of those which are of the true God, as those which are of the false Gods,
and as well of those, which are of his only Son, God and man, and therefore
representable in the human nature, as of that of the eternal God, which is
not able to be comprehended of us, either by our inward spirits or outward
senses. And this suteth with that of S. August., cont. Faustum. l. 20. c. 3.
Augustine, uttered by him in a word; Pagani ea colunt quae sunt, the Paga^s
worship the things which are: and therefore not fancies, and yet such things as
are not to be worshipped for Gods; Sed quae pro Diis colenda non sunt: Wherein
rests the effect and work of Idolatry. And hereby likewise is taken from
them that which they allege out of S. Paul; An Idol is nothing. Sunt quidem
Idola (says Chrysostom) sed nihil possunt, 1. Cor. 8.4. Chrysostom. in 1. ad
Cor. hom. 20. Theoph. ibid. August cont. Foust. l. 20 c. 5. Beda, Bruno. Hugo
victor. Dionys. Carth. Faber Stapul. Genebrard, in Psalm. 65. and 96. Arnob l 2.
aduers. Gent. Lactan. l. 2. c. ^ 4.18.
Idols (says he) are something, but they can do nothing. And S. Augustine.
They are, but they are nothing unto salvation. And their own Doctors:
Formaliter sunt, efficaciter non sunt, if you look upon them outwardly, you
shall perceive them to have a form and shape, but and if you look upon them as
effectual and powerful, then they are nothing at all.

Arnobius and Minutius Felix say, We have neither Altars nor Images; and they
do defend and answer for themselves against the Pagans, who reproched them
therewithal, and that so far, as that Arnobius tells them, that they can
have no religion, whereas there are Images, he says, Simulachra, and not Idola.
How far was this man from being of their minds, who can find no religion, if
they see no Images? But Lactantius his Disciple and Schoolemaister to
Constantine the Great, does lay open this matter at large in these general
rules: That Images, Imagines, inquam, were not taken up for any other cause,
then for such as were absent, and that the Image of God is always superfluous,
because he is present every where: That man is the truest Image that can be
made of him, as represe^ting him in the actions of the soul: That it is a mere
foolerie to paint such things as one has, and after to fall down and worship
them, seeing that the Images to the contrary, if they had understanding, have
just cause to fall down and worship man, who has made them. It is likewise a
great blockishnes for them which have sense to worship senceles things, and
for those which have reason, the unreasonable, as it is for them which are
heavenly borne to worship the earthly: That Images are nothing else but the
shapes and similitudes of dead men, or the works of mortal men: In the end
concluding after the manner of his Master in these words; No^ dubium est quin
religio nulla sit, vbi simulachru^ est, It is most certain that there is no
manner of religion whereas Images are. But with what face could he say this, if
in his time, that is in the time of Constantine, the very time wherein was held
the famous Council of Nice, the Christians had Images? seeing that all the
reasons which he alleges against the Pagans, are as well to be applied to the
Christians, in as much as they may equally and as indifferently be spoken
against their Images? And indeed the Council of Elibert held at that time,
Council. Elibert c. 36.
delivers unto us this writ in express terms: Placuit picturas in ecclesia
esse non deberi, ne, quod colitur aut adoratur, in parietibus depingatur, It
has seemde good unto us, that is, it is decreede, that there should be no
pictures in the Church, for fear that what men do honor and worship, should
be painted upon the walls. Yuo. in decret. l. 2.
Therefore not the three persons of the Trinity, for we worship them: but so
do we not the Angels, neither the Saints in the same sense with our
adversaries, who worship and adore them: Neither is that to be taken for an
answer which some men allege, namely, that this was in the time of
persecution: for the reason serves indifferently for all times: As that that
which is worshipped should not be painted, etc. But on the contrary it may seem
that this Decree was made for fear that the rest, which then the church
inioyed, should minister occasion to the Christians to follow the lewd manners
of the Pagans, it having bin freely confessed before by the Pagans, that the
Christians did not use the^ at all; as may be gathered as well by the
reproaches wherewith they were ordinarily given to reproach them; Lampridius in
Adriano.
as also by the testimony of the Historiographer Lampridius: as That the
Emperor Adrian willing to receive Jesus Christ into the number of the Gods,
caused to be prepared for him many Temples without Jmages, which were well
remembered unto the time of Constantine, and called the Temples of Adrian, etc.
Athanas. cont. Gentes.


Athanasius says, The invention of Images is not good, it sprung from that
evil one: and that which has an evil beginning cannot be judged good, but
altogether and wholly naught: for how I pray you can God be known by Images?
If it be by the matter, then what needs any form? And does not his glory
appear in all things? If by the form, what need is there then of colors
and painting? and might he not be better known in reasonable creatures? And
otherwise what a pitiful and lamentable thing is it, that the seeing should
worship the blind? the hearing pray unto those which cannot hear: for where is
there any creature that can save an other, etc? Reasons altogether alleged
against the Pagans, but so, as that they have the same force against the
Christians: and as for that little treatise of the Image of Christ, slipped in
amongst the works of this great and worthy man; let it be far from any man
to object it against us: there is indeed recorded therein, that Nicodemus did
make one, and that it fell into the hands of Gamaleel, Zacheus and others, and
after that into the hands of the Bbs. of Jerusalem, and that after the
destruction thereof it was carried into Barutus a City of Syria, where being
pierced and thrust through by a Jew, there issued out of it blood, and that by
it likewise were miracles done etc. For besides that this fable may seem to
come out of the Legends budget, and for that also it is not confirmed by any
Author, Nannius in praef, in Athanas.
Nannius a Doctor of Louaine, who has reduced the works of Athanasius into
tomes, does not let to put it in the number of the books imagined falsely to
be his: and Bellarmine himself for shame cannot deny it: whereunto you may
also add the testimony of Sigibert, who says, that that accident in the
City of Barut happened in the year 765. Sigibert in Chronic. Legend 30.
and the history of Lombardie in the year 750. that is near 400. years
after the death of Athanasius: as indeed this Treatise is never found to be
alleged before the second Council of Nice, about the year 800. and thus you
see how upon this and other such untruths, this doctrine of lies is founded
and built. And indeed we read these words in Athanasius: He that worshippeth
the Image of the king, worshippeth in it the king himself. And this our
adversaries use to serve their turn withal against us but they do willingly
let pass to speak what image it is that he means: Sermon. 4. cont. Arrian.
for indeed he means not that made by Nicodemus; seeing it would have served
his purpose for the maintaining of the worshipping of the Son of God against
the Arrians: but the substantial Image of the Father, Jesus Christ our Lord,
whom he concludes to be worthy to be worshipped in himself, August.
Epist. 119.
and the Father in him: as S. Augustine says by the same reason: That whereas
it is forbidden in the law of God, to honor his similitude or likeness; it was
not as though there were not an Image of God, but because he had but one which
ought to be worshipped, even that which is himself, namely, the Son of God,
and that not for him and his sake, but with him: not Christ himself considered
as a man, how glorious soever he be, seeing that the holy Fathers do call the
Arrians Idolaters, because they honored Christ as they held him to be a
Creature: and likewise the Nestorians, worshippers of men, because they
separated the two natures, that is the Son of God, Athan. cont. Arrian. orat.
1. Greg. Niss. in laud. Basil. Synod. Ephesians. in Ep. ad Theo. and Vale^t c. 67
Synod. Nic. 2. Act. 7. in Epist. Synod. ad Constanti. and Iren. Amphilo. Ambros
de obitu. Theod. and in Epist. ad Romans
from the Son of Marie. Athanasius, Gregorius Nissenus, and the first and
second Synodes of Ephesus, and the second and last of Nice: how beit otherwise
very idolatrous: and yet with this privilege and prerogative, that if any
creature were to be worshipped, who should be more worthy then Christ the man,
because Christ was acknowledged by these heretics to be the Savior of men?

Amphilochius Bb. of Iconium; We take no care to set out in colors or tables
the Images of Saints, because we have no need: but we ought rather to call to
our minds the purity of their lives And this he may seem to speak against
the Carpocratian Heretics so called, which did honor the Images of Christ and
his Apostles.

S. Ambrose says: Helena found out the title. What did she? she worshipped
the king and not the wood: because this is an error of the Pagans, and an
impious vanity: The^ she worshipped him that was hanged upon the wood, who was
described by this title. Now he speaks there of Helena the mother of
Constantine: the contrary whereof our Legends would make us believe. And in
another place he says: By what reason or by what authority ought we to
worship the Images of Angels or of Saints, when as the Angels and Saints in
their life time did never suffer themselves to be worshipped?

Optatus Mileuitanus makes mention that the Donatistes to make the Catholics
to be hated, did threaten the coming of a people amongst the^, Optat. cont.
Parm. l. 2.
which would set Images upon their Altars: And worthily says he, if the thing
had succeeded according to the report: but there was no such matter seen, there
was not seen amongst them any thing but the accustomed purity and ordinary
sole^nity, etc. S. August. skirmisheth very hotly in many places against
Images: as in the Epistle 222. and on the 114. Psalm, August Ep. 222. and in
Psa. 114.
which is very plain and powerful against the vanity thereof: and we can
bring from thence whole leaves: for he abaseth them, and makes them more vile
then bruit beasts, carrion, or any other creature, calling them the instruments
of error, and the habitations of Devils, etc. And adds his reasons agreeable
with those of our times: but trussed up in a few words, saying: They worship
what their own hands have made of gold and of silver: and we have like wise
certain vessels of gold and of silver for the use of the Sacraments, which are
called holy, for the ministry sake wherein they serve. If there had been any
such like Images in the Temples of his time, who sees not but the scope of the
text, did carry him to have spoken much rather of the^, then of these vessels?
whereunto he annexeth a conclusion which cannot by any means be deluded,
saying: They have more power to bend and bow our miserable souls, because they
have mouths, eyes, ears, nostrils, etc. then to correct and amend them:
Cassand in Consult. 4.151
inasmuch as they neither speak, see, hear nor smell, etc. And indeed Georgius
Cassander in his consultation with the Emperor Maximilian, proves from this
place: That there were not any in the Temples within S. August. his Diocese.
But to the end that no man may gather to himself any opinion, that he means
here the Pagans only: he says in his book of the manners of the Catholic
church: August de morib. Cathol. Ecclel. l. 1. c. 34.
I know many that are worshippers of Sepulchers and pictures, which make good
cheer upon the graves of the dead, and bury or power wine upon those that are
buried, and place these their actions amongst the works of religion, etc. If
any man say that he reproves this fault in the Manichies, how would he then
have taken it in the true professors of Christ? For the Church (says he)
condemned these dealings, and forced herself as much as she could, to correct
and amend them from day to day. Idem contra Adimant c. 13
And against Adima^tus the Manichie, he says: Adimantus reproves our zeal,
that is, Of the Catholics: by which we abstain to honor Images: his meaning
is therefore that we should believe that he favors them: which for certainty
no man need call in question, or doubt of concerning the Manichies, who by that
means seek to win grace and favor to their accursed sect from the Pagans.
Then it appears hereby, that to honor Images, is to play the Pagans, Idem in
l. 6. de fi^d. and Symbo. c. 7.
and contrariwise to live as a true Catholic, is to detest and abhor them.
In his book of faith and of the Creed he says: Whereas we say that the Father
is set, we do not imagine, that it is as men use to sit with their hams bended:
for that were an impious and ungodly part for a Christian to place such an
Image in a Temple, but much more in his heart, which is the very Temple of God?
And what would he then have said of these Images of the Trinity, which are
painted at this day, where the Father is set with a gray beard, a crown
imperial upon his head, Index expurgatorius. 146. Pet Ram. in Schol.
Metaphysic. Damas. de Orthod. rid. l. 4. c. 17. Nicaetas in vit. Isaaci,
comme^. Niceph. l. 18. c. 53. Synod. Nicen. 2. Act 6.7. art. 3.4.5 6.7. Thom.
part. 3. q 23 art. 3. Oleaster. in Deu c. 4. Abusens. Epis. in Deuteronomy. c. 4.
and the Son in his arms, etc? And what would he have said to Bellarmine, who
blusheth not in the clear light of the Gospel to maintain the^? To Pope Sixtus
the 5, and Pope Clement the 8. who pictured themselves in the beginning of the
Bibles, which they caused solemnly to be imprinted? To the Council of Trent,
which appointed that these words should be raced out of a certain book? Taxat,
inquit, cos qui Trinitatis Imaginem humana specie depingunt in Templis:
deleatur, etc. A thing detested and accounted of in the Church as abominable,
even to these latter ages, and to the most part of the worshippers of Idols? To
Damascene, telling us, that to paint God is an extreme impiety? To Nicaetas
calling it a madness and doting fury? To Nicephorus calling it an heresy? And
to the Idolatrous Council of Nice the 2. judging it impossible, vain and
wicked? And to Thomas and Oleaster maintaining in plain terms, that God
cannot be pictured in the old Testament, but rather in the new, since such
time only as the word has become flesh? Whereupon Abulensis does note 2.
inconveniences in those which picture the Trinity: Of Idolatry, for fear that
we should worship the Image: for so goes the case (says he) that God does not
forbid only to worship Images, but likewise to worship him in Images: Of
heresy also, least that by such means we should attribute to God a corporal
and bodily Mass, or essential difference, such as we may observe to be given
unto him in these three figures and shapes. And thus much be said by the way
of the pictures of the Trinity. And in another place S. Augustine shows the
danger generally of all Images in these words saying: When men see them set
in places appointed to honor in, the resemblance which they have with our
members, touches and strikes the spirits of the infirm and weak, with some
affection of praying and sacrificing unto them, especially at such time as the
multitude is seen to run and flock thither. August. l 1. de consens. Euang.
c. 10.
And in an other place speaking of such as devised Epistles and letters from
Jesus Christ to S. Peter, and S. Paul: Can it be (says he) because they
had seen them pictured together. And thus deserve they to be mocked, which
have sought Christ and his Apostles on painted walls, and not in the holy
scriptures.

Chrysostom upon Genesis, Chrysostom. in Genesis c. 31. ho. 57.
mocketh at Labans Gods: Wherefore (says Laban unto Jacob) have thou stolen
away my God? A deep dotage: And thy Gods (says he) are they such as that
one may steal them from thee? Again, You know that when you were Gentiles, you
were turned aside unto dumb Idols, even you, who speak, see and hear, unto
insensible things, and is it possible that this thing should be pardoned? But
and if in the Temples of Constantinople any such abuse had been, how had he
been able to have spoken these things, and not to have become ridiculous? But
yet (says he) to the end that it might be known that these rules reached to
the Images of the Christians, We have not to deal but with the Images of our
Saints: for we do not enjoy their presence, by their bodily Images, but by
the Images of their souls which we have, in as much as that which they spoke,
Litur. Chrysostom.
was the Image of their souls. Now there is no cause why any should object,
that in the Lithurgie attributed to him, there is mention made of the Image of
the Crucifixe: for how can that be Chrysostomes, seeing therein is prayer made
either for Pope Nicholas the first, near hand 500. years after him: or for
Nicholas the Patriarch of Constantinople, who was more then 700. years after
likewise for the Emperor Alexius the first more then 700. years after? for
who cannot perceive and see that it was made 400. Hieronym. in Esa. c. 2. Idem
in Iere. Idem in Danicl. c. 3.
years or thereabout after his death, a long time also after the second
Council of Nice, which established Images.

S. Jerome says, Man a living and reasonable creature, does worship copper
and stone, etc. And again, This error has overtaken us, even to place and put
religion in riches. And in another place notwithstanding, that he entreat of
the matter of the three children in the boat fiery furnace, yet he gives this
general rule: The servants of God must not worshi^^e Images. And upon the
113. psalm, he deals no better with them then S. Augustine did before. But
amongst the rest of his Epistles, there is one of the famous man ^piphanius,
Bb. of Salamine in Cipres, writing unto John Patriarch of Jerusalem which S
Jerome has not disdained to translate: by which it appears manifestly unto
us, what opinion the Church had conceived of Images even unto this time, Epist.
Epipha ad Ioh. Hiero
although as hitherto it never came in their minds to worship them, but
only to have them as remembrances. As I was come (says he) into a village
called Anablatha, and had espied as J went along a burning lamp, and
therewithal learned, (after some inquiry made) that it was a Church: I went
in to pray, and found at the entrance into the same a veil hanging, dyed and
painted, having the Image as it were of Christ, or of some Saint, for I do not
perfectly call to mind of whom it was. Then when I had seen this thing, that
in the church of Christ, against the authority of the Scriptures, was hung up
the image of a man: I cut in pieces the veil, and furthermore gave counsel to
the keepers of the place to bury some poor dead person therein, etc. And now
also I am to entreat you, that you would give in charge by straight
commandment, that there be not any more such vailes hung up in the church of
Christ, as do stand against our religion: for it is more seemlie to take away
this disquieter of a tender and soft conscience, being unworthy of the church
of Christ, and of the people which are committed unto thee. They labor
themselves and fall into a great pusle about this place, some one way, some an
other way: some disputing against Athanasius, and indeed these are they that
have undertaken the weight and burden of the strife and contention: others in
most solemn and deep sort, auouching that this Epistle was but lent him, which
notwithstanding is alleged under his name in the famous Synod of Paris,
whereof we shall speak by and by. But whom may we better believe then
himself, if he teach the same in his works? Epiphanius tom. ^. cont. haereses,
l. 3.
In the second tome against heresies, he makes a beade-roule of the
traditions then observed in the Church, and our adversaries would make us
believe, that images come in by Apostolic tradition: but of images
notwithstanding not one word. What is there of more honor in the Church of
Rome, then the image of the holy virgin? and yet you shall see what he says
even of her self; We understand (says he) that there are some, which would
bring her in for a God, and which do sacrifice unto her Collyridem, (this was
a certain kind of tarte or cake) and which assemble and come together in her
name: but this is a blasphemous work, contrary to the preaching of the holy
spirit, a devilish work, and the doctrine of the unclean spirit. And herein
are accomplished the words of the holy Ghost: Some shall depart from the
faith, giving themselves to fables, and the instructions of devils, etc. And
let it be then (says he) that she be dead and buried; admit that she were
taken up, or suppose that she abides and lives still, let us take out this
lesson, that we may not in any case honor the Saints, further then is decent
and becomes, but rather the master of the Saints, our Lord. And let this
error broached by these seducers vanish and cease: for Marie is no God: let no
man offer in her name: for he that does it, destroys his own soul, etc.
Who will believe that he which spoke these words should ever approve of
images? Yea, on the contrary, who doubts but that he would have thundered
against them, in the fiery flames of his holy zeal, if he had seen these
couents of Friars, and other fraternities, these vows, hanging tablets, these
gorgeous garments, of cloth of gold, and silver, renewed and repaired according
as the fashions alter and change? And all the idolatries of the Pagans of all
ages heaped together in these our days, and bestowed upon the image of the
holy virgin? But let us hear what he says of her image in express terms:
This love and longing lust to make images, Haeres. 79.
what is it, but the uttermost endeavor and whole strength of the Devil, who
under a color of justice, conueieth himself into the understanding part of
man, seeking to set up and advance to the place and dignity of God, mankind
that is mortal, making Gods of them by pictures and images, bearing the shapes
of men? But those whom they worship are dead: but not content therewith, they
set up their images to be worshipped, which in deed cannot possibly die,
because they were never alive: And thus man goes a whoring from the true and
only God, as a common harlot, prostituting her self to every man's couch and
company, etc. In deed the body of Marie was holy, but not a God: and as
certainly she was a virgin, and an honorable virgin, but not given unto us,
that we should fall down and worship her: but rather she worshipped him, who
according to the flesh was begotten of her, but yet descended of heavenly
nature, by the father-side. And therefore the Gospel armeth you against this
error, when he says: What have I to do with thee O woman? as it were thereby
prophesying of the sects and heresies which should rise thereupon in the
world, least that any doting upon, or too deep falling in love with her
holiness, might be plunged into the pit of this rauing and senceles madness of
foul and filthy heresy, etc. But she is honorable and renowned as Elias, as
John the Evangelist, etc. yea and more renowned by reason of the dispensation
of the mystery, for which she was thought to be a fit and worthy instrument:
but yet not so worthy as to be worshipped and adored no more then the other.
For far be it from us, that we should ever be overtaken with that old error
of leaving and forsaking of the living God, to fall a worshipping of the things
which he has made. For if he will not have any man to worship the Angels, how
much less her that was borne of Anna, which was given by Ioachim to Anna,
begotten of the seed of man and woman, after the ordinary course of all other
men and women, etc. Let not Marie then go without her due honor, but let us
bow before and worship the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost: let no person,
whether man or woman worship and bow before Marie. This mystery is due unto
the one only God: the Angels look not for any such glory: let us blot out
all such abuses as have been cursedly carved and written in our hearts: let us
take from before our eyes the coveting of wood: and let every creature turn
and apply themselves to him which has made them. Now he which speaks thus of
the Virgin Marie herself, what would he then have said of the Saints? what
would he have said of her image and theirs? He that condemns the idolatry
that was committed in respect of her, which was but then in sproute, and as it
were in the husk, Epiphan. tom. 1. l. 3. contr. Anom. haeres. 76. and l. 2.
tom. 1. haeres. 55. contr. Melchised, and in Amir.
what would he have said at this day, if he should come and see it in the
flower; yea, if he should come and see it in the heap? He lets not to say
the same in other places of those which worship the image of Moses in Arabia,
and that of Iephtha his daughter in Samaria, etc. But that which is alleged
of him in the seventh Council of Constantinople is more notable: Beware (says
he) and take heed to the observing of the traditions which you have received,
decline not either to the right hand or to the left. Remember your selves my
dear children, and go not about to bring any images into the church, nor into
the places of the burying of the Saints, but bear you always God in your
hearts, likewise suffer them not in your private houses: for it is not lawful
that a Christian should be tied by the eyes, Alphons. de Castro in verb. Imago.
Theodor. epis. Ancyrae
but rather that he should be intentive in the spirit. To be brief, Alphonsus
of Casters upon this occasion entreating of heresies, imputes the same to
Epiphanius, namely, the condemning of images.

Theodore Bishop of Ancyra, near about Epiphanius his time, and somewhat
treading Epiphanius his steps, says: We do not judge it to the purpose, to
make the pictures or images of Saints, of material colors, but rather now and
then to renew the virtues which we read of them as of living images: for by
that means we may come to the imitating of them. And as for such people as
do set up their images, what profit I pray you, can they report unto us, that
they reap thereby? Is it because they would after a certain manner and sort
be put in mind of them by looking upon them? But that is very apparent to be
nothing but a vain cogitation, and an invention of devilish deceit. And
Theodoret of the same time upon the 113. Theodor. in Psalm. 113.
Psalm, says: God makes what it pleases him; but images are made such as it
pleases men to make them: they have the receptacles of sense, but they are
senseless; and that in this thing more then flies or fleas, or any other
vermin: and it is just that such as worship them, should lose both reason and
sense.

Now this is to come to that which Erasmus says in his Catechism; Erasm. in
Cateches. and in ecclesiast. l. 2.
that unto the time of Saint Jerome, and as we see somewhat later, images were
not approved of them which were of the best approved religion, no not the image
of Christ himself. And therefore, after he has turned himself round, that he
might apply himself unto the time, yet notwithstanding he comes to
conclude: That there is neither law of God nor man, which ordains images in
Temples. And that it is both more easy and more sure to take them all away,
then to go about to deal with the people, that they would use them sparingly,
or to prevent that superstition, do not mingle it self therewithal. And that
although otherwise the spirit were very free and void from all superstition:
yet herein it is entangled and inwrapped with a certain kind thereof, by
kneeling before an image of wood, by having his eyes bent thereupon, by
framing his speech thereto, by kissing the same: and in a word, in holding it
unmeet to pray in any other place, but before an image. Likewise the good
Fathers of Trent, proceeding in good earnest, Index expurg. page 255.
as they are wont in all their matters, have not forgotten to appoint, that in
printing the works of Erasmus again, this place should very diligently be
looked unto and razed out.

Now if the Church have been 500. years, and those in her chiefest
flourishing without setting up or harboring of any images in her temples, what
profit could there be in receiving of them, or what peril can there now be in
taking of them away? what conscience in persecuting of such as remove them?
what audacious and impudent boldness in calling such heretics? when as the
first fathers called it heresy to have any of them, and a devilish invention
to bring them in? and what would they have said of the worshipping of them?

But least they should be accounted as dumb as their images, The adversaries
their objections. Damas. l. 4. c. 17. Niceph. l. 2. c. 7.
they will not be without some thing to reply. Abgarus (say they) king of
Edessa, sent a painter to take the proportion, and portraiture of Jesus Christ.
They read this in Damascene and Nicephorus, who writ after the year 800. How
comes it then to pass that Eusebius a writer both more ancient and autentike
says rather that he has read in the records and Monuments of the commonweal
of Edessa, that Abgarus sent unto our Lord to be healed of him, and speaks
not a word at all of the drawing of his portraiture? And what is there in that
which is common and equally fitting our question, if we must have images in
the Church to worship them; and if the Primitive Church have had them? For
there is nothing to be gathered but the curiosity of a Prince, strangely
affecting a portraiture, and that of a prince which was no Christian; so that
here can nothing be concluded for Christians. And why do they not remember
themselves, at the least that Pope Gelasius in his decree, as also Isidore do
place this history amongst the Apocrypha, whose original is unknown? They
charge us a fresh with the Veronique (that is, the lively picture,) and that
has no manner of testimony or approbation, save only in their Legenda Aurea.
What will they say to Viues, where he says? The golden Legend consists for
the most part of Iron or Lead: so as the author thereof could not but have a
heart of lead, or a mouth of Iron? And then with that of Nicodemus. But how
will they answer the untruths clearly proved, freely confessed even by
themselves of the pretended treatise of Athanasius, which only makes mention
thereof? yea rather for all these images of Christ, how will they salve
themselves of the Epistle written by Eusebius to Constance the Empres? saying:
Seeing thou have commanded me to send thee the image of Christ, Eusebius. in
Epist. ad Constant. Augustam.
I desire to know which it is that thou meanest, whether the true and
unchangeable one, which carries with it the characters and engraven forms of
his divine nature, or rather that which he took upon him for us, clothing
himself in the shape and habit of a servant; that is, the human nature,
etc. But without all peradventure thou desire the image of this carnal body
which he took for us, and yet notwithstanding the same joined with the glory
of his deity, rather then subject to passions and mortality. But who shall be
found able to express in painting with dead and liuelesse colors, the shining
brightness of so great an excellency, of so great a glory? But and if they
were not in the time of Eusebius Bishop of Cesarea in Palestina under
Constantine the Great, where were they then found out afterward? And further
what a vanity is it, to go about by false and counterfeit images to prove the
truth of images? The like is that of the image of the virgin Marie, painted
(say they) by S. Luke. And this is told them by one Theodorus Anagnostes, who
writ after all the rest; and one Simon Metaphrastes the compiler and gatherer
together of the Legendes, Master of the school at Constantinople, and a very
late writer. But the Apostle S. Paul tells us, that S. Coloss. 4.
Luke was a Physician and not a painter: and being a Jew, what likelihood is
there that it should be he, if you do but mark that Origin says, that the
Jews did not suffer any amongst them? But certainly as the Jews heretofore in
conuersing and keeping company with the Gentiles had taken up their images,
even so the Proselite or converted Gentiles affecting to become Christians,
brought them with them: the Christians also thereupon became very easy and
ready to apply themselves unto their fashions, in things (especially)
indifferent, to have them as records and remembraunces, and not for to worship
them; and so those which followed after, went somewhat further, as man's nature
in things tending to superstition cannot keep any measure. But this point
shall be handled in the Chapter following.

CHAP. III. What manner of proceeding Images had amongst Christians: and of the
most licentious abuse thereof after they once came into the Church of Rome.
IT is certainly agreed upon by all the Christian Doctors, The Gentiles the
inuentors of images. Ambr. in psalm. 118. Council. Nic. 2. Act. 6. Cypr. de Idol.
Vanic. That images were brought in amongst the Christians by the Gentiles.
Eusebius. l, 7, c. 18
that the Gentiles were the first inuentors of images. S. Ambrose: The Gentiles
worship wood as the image of God. Gregory Bishop of Neocaesarea; The religion
of the Pagans did invent and give entrance to images. S. Cyprian; They were
made at the first for to retain the countenances of the dead: but after that
which was brought in for the comfort and consolation of the living turned to a
religious carriage toward the dead. That the Gentiles brought them in amongst
the Christians also, still keeping and cleaving fast unto some of this their
old leaven, Eusebius bears us witness: for speaking of her picture, whom our
Lord healed of a flux of blood in Cesarea Philippi, and of that which she had
erected unto him of brass, near unto that of her own, he says: There is no
cause why we should marvel, that those which had believed amongst the Gentiles,
for the benefits which they had received of our Savior, should offer unto him
such a thing, as it were in manner of a present: seeing that we do behold even
yet to this day, the pictures which were intended and drawn for the Apostles
S. Peter and S. Paul, yea and our Savior himself, and the tablets which are
made of them, as likewise certain old ones which have been kept. And this
seems to me to have been retained (...), without the changing of the
fashion according to the custom of the Gentiles, which were wont so to honor
them whom they judged worthy of honor, and whom they acknowledged for
Saviors. Whereupon also Beatus Rhenanus says upon Tertullian: Beat. Rhenan.
in Tertul. de Coron. Milit. Niceph. l. 20. c. 30.
That the Gentiles which received the Christian religion in their old age, did
very hardly forsake the fashions which they had been accustomed unto all their
life long. But that it was but for a monument or remembrance, and not for any
religious use, appears by Nicephorus likewise, though the most superstitious
of all other the ecclesiastical writers. For besides that we see that this
image is not in any Church, but in a street, there were not for whole 300.
years any either Altars, sacrifices, perfumes, prayers or pilgrimages made
unto it: He speaks properly as of an old one, when he says: That process
of time had worn out all remembrance of it, concerning wherefore it was there
and whose it should be: that the dropping of water, slime, and moss had so rot
it, that there was not any of the letters about it, to be known: and that
this miraculous herb within some short time after, was not any more to be
found, etc. Assuredly if images deserved either reverence or worship, then that
more then any other, being the image of Christ, authorized by a miracle, etc.
And therefore if that were so utterly neglected by the old Church, we cannot
excuse it of a most notorious contempt; yea and of an unavoidable error. Or
else certainly, seeing that it made no greater account thereof, being that
Church which we follow and set before us for our pattern, let us say, that it
was because they then believed as it now behooves us to believe, that there is
not due to speak according to the terms of religion, either worship or
reverence unto any image whatsoever. And if not at those times when images
might have been kept in some true proportion of resembling them for whom they
were made, how much less at this day, when every man painteth as his humor
and fancy persuades him? etc.

We say the same of the cross, Of the Cross. August. de verb. apost. sermon. 8.
Galath. 3. Tertul. in Apol.
and we have also said it before in another place. In the beginning it was
nothing else but a sign, which was made with the fingers in the air, as we
read in Tertullian. And S. Augustine gives a reason thereof saying: To the
end that men may not imagine that we are ashamed of the crucified. How far
better had it been to have had him graven, to have had him crucified, says
the Apostle before our eyes? Thereuppon the Paganes called the Christians, as
says Tertullian, Religiosos crucis, the religious of the cross, in way of
derision: but truly, for as much as (as the Apostle says) this cross was a
stumbling block unto the Jews to be offended at, and foolishnes unto the
Gentiles, it was acknowledged of them for a mystery of the unspeakable
wisdom of the eternal God. Arnob. sieve Minutius lib. ^ contra Gentes.
But when the Pagans object unto the old Christians, that they adore and
worship it, how do they take it in the question of honor? Arnobius tells
how, saying: We do not wish for, neither yet do we worship the Cross: but
rather you, who consecrate Gods of wood, do worship also, it may be, the
crosses of wood, as parts of your Gods. For what are your banners of arms,
but gilded crosses? And what are your Trophies and Monumentes of victory, but
men fastened to the cross, nothing but crosses? Constantine to show to whom he
gave the honor of his victories, (namely to Christ) altered the Labarum, that
is to say, his oriflam or imperial banner, causing the name of Christ briefly
written and abbreauiated to be set therein, after he had had the vision, for
the confirming unto him of his calling and vocation to the deliverance of the
Church. For as for the Cross we have seen in Arnobius, that from the times
of the Pagans, the staves of their Ensigns were crosse-wise made and fashioned.

But what communion is there betwixt a temple and a camp; a warlike banner or
standard, and a banner of procession; an ensign ordained for the atonement
and keeping together of an army, with a tablet carried about to be
worshipped? And again, where will they find that Constantine did ever worship
it, Cyril. lib. 6. co^tra Iulianum.
or cause it to be worshipped? And what will they say of Cyrillus the Patriarch
of Alexandria, who answered the Emperor Julian a long time after the death of
Constantine, reproching him for the honor given unto the Cross: that the
Christians did not give any worship or honor unto the sign of the Cross?
Petr. Crinit. l. 9. de Honest. discipl.
Or unto the Emperors Theodosius and Valens, which yet after that did forbid
Crosses by express edictes, saying: In as much as we have not any greater
care for any thing, then for the service of God; we forbid all manner of
persons to make the sign of our Savior Jesus Christ, either in colors or in
stone, or in any other matter, or to grave him, paint, or carue him: but on the
contrary, we will and command, that in what place soever any such be found,
that it be taken away, upon pain of being grievously punished for
withstanding and doing to the contrary. Whom notwithstanding we see not to be
reprehended by the great and famous Doctors of that time, Saint Augustine,
Saint Ambrose, etc. men like enough not to have concealed or kept back any
good admonition, or instruction from them, which they were to know or to be
admonished of, much less by the Councels of the Church, which at this time
were more usual then in all the former. And as for the Poet Prudentius his
words, they are not any bar or stop against the soundness of this matter:
Crux pellit omne malum: The Cross drives away all evil and mischievous
things, etc. For this is a poetical phrase, and their ordinary manner of
speaking, attributing to the sign, the properties of the thing signified, as
unto the Cross the effects of the shameful and reproachful death, which the
Son of God suffered thereuppon for us. As in deed it is very plain and
manifest in that treatise of Saint Cyprians, called Lignum vitae, and has
been observed by the best learned, that the old writers by the Cross did not
understand the wood, but the Lord himself fastened unto it, fastening
thereunto by his death, the hand writing of eternal death, wherein we stood
obliged and bound. In so much, as that the Council of Trent has decreed,
Index expurg. page 28. and 30.
that this should be raced out of the books of Georgius Fabricius, touching
his censure upon the works of Christian poets.

Now as we have seen the diligent endeavor and industry of the first
Pastors of the Church to remove and put far away all idolatry, That images
were first used but as monuments and remembrances, in the nature of histories.
by the keeping out of Images: so consequently and in the next course we shall
see, how by little and little it was brought in by the careless negligence of
their successors, and under their receiving and admitting of the same, which
Satan devised to be by a gentle kind of secret creeping from private houses,
to public houses; from a profane and historical use, to the abuse of worship
and adoration, and that altogether upon mere devotion. Chrysostom. invita S.
Meletri. Niceph. l. 12. c. 14.
We read of Meletius of Antiochia, who died in the second Oecumenicall
Council, that he left behind him such a desire in the people to have him, as
that every man was willing to have his picture upon his walls, vessel,
ringes, etc. This came partly of too much curiosity; partly of the seeking of
human comfort. In as much also as there were celebrated and solemnly kept
the yearly memorials of the most famous Martyrs, as namely the Panegyricks in
their praise and commendation, and the day of their martyrdom, thereby to
kindle the zeal of the Christians, that they might be the more constant in
holding out, after their example: It was to be seen, that in certain temples,
histories containing such matter were painted, the better to revive and keep
alive, what memory might let slip and fall away: As that of Martyr Barlaam in
S. Basil, Basilius in orat. de Barlaam.
saying: Better painted upon the wall, then described in his oration and
speech: and that of Theodorus in Gregorius Nissenus, saying: Where the Mason
has polished the stone, as if it had been silver, and where the painter has
not spared any thing of his art, etc. And lastly, the histories of the old and
new testament upon the walls of the temple of Nola, which Pontius Paulinus
about the year 430. caused to be painted for to keep occupied with the
consideration of those tablets, those that came to the feast which was made in
the honor of S. Felix the Martyr, who otherwise (as says Trithemius) suffered
themselves to be carried away, and wholly given to their wine and good cheer.
But how far off is all this from worshipping and adoring of them? There is
one only place alleged against us under the name of Saint Basil, wherewith
they go about to dazell the eyes of the world: I honor (says he) the images
of the Apostles, and I honor them publicly, for they have left us the same
by tradition, and therefore it is not to be gainsaid or forbidden, and
thereupon also we erect and set up in all our Churches, their memorialles and
histories. But upon their own consciences let them speak if ever they have
found any such word in all S. Basil his works? and in deed what likelihood is
there thereof, that he should at the same time call that an Apostolical
tradition, which Epiphanius holds to be a Devilish invention? And further,
how can this word Adoration stand and agree with his time? which was heard, but
little spoken of for many ages after, yea in the most idolatrous, and which is
as yet to this day dissembled and carried only under hand? Council. Nic. 2.
And in deed this is only the allegation of Pope Adrian the first, writing to
the Empress Irene, from the second Council of Nice 400. years after S.
Basil his time, and when as the power and heat of Images did most furiously
rage.

Now Images were scarce any sooner received into the Churches and Temples, The
beginning of the worshipping of images.
then that the people which had lately left and cast off their paganism,
thinking to have found in those of the Apostles and Saints, that which they had
lost in their images of their own Gods, began at their pleasure to yield them
the very same honor. And this abuse was spread and propagated in diverse places
diversely, according to the ignorance or capacity, negligence or diligence of
the Bishops: but still so as that it gained in all men's sight great and large
countries at that time when barbarousnesse had ouerrunned the whole Roman
Empire, by the invasion of such infinite multitudes of fierce and barbarouse
nations: and that in such sort, as that being once admitted and received, there
was not any means left to cast them out again; the most part of the Bishops
thinking they had done sufficient service, in letting the worshipping of them.
But how much more provident were they that had utterly cast them out? And how
much more wisely had they dealt if they had taken heed to S. Augustine his
admonition: August. in psalm. 113.
That they are more mighty to deceive souls, in as much as they have eyes,
then to reform and amend them, in as much as these their eyes see not at all.

Therefore Serenus Bishop of Marseillis in the time of S. Gregory, Oppositions
and withstandings of the worshipping of Images.
about the year 600. was offended that his people did worship them: he is
moved with a holy zeal, according to the example of king Ezechias, and
breaks them. Alphonsus of Castres reckons him amongst the heretics for
doing so: Bellarmin notwithstanding says, that he did him injury therein.
Gregor. l. 7. Epist. 109.
But what says the foresaid Pope Gregory unto him, notwithstanding that for
the most part he was the father of all the superstitions wherewith the Church
was corrupted? It has been given us to understand, that your brotherhood
seeing certain adorations of images, has broken and cast the^ out. And
certainly we have commended your zeal, in that you would not suffer that any
of all the things that are wrought by the hand of man should be worshipped: Ne
quid manufactum. Gregor. l. 9. Ep. 9.
but therewithal likewise we judge that you ought not to have broken them:
which thing he speaks of more at large in an Epistle to Serenus. And adds
afterward: It is one thing to adore a picture, and another to conceive and
apprehend by the picture, that which is to be worshipped: for the picture is
for idiots, and that which is written, for them which can read. He did not
not then acknowledge them for any other thing then remembrances and stories:
and thereby doubtless in great danger to have been condemned of heresy, if
he had been at Trent. And in the end, to hold the mid way, he says: It is
needful and requisite, that thou should call the children of the church,
that is, those of thy diocese, and that thou let them see and understand by
the testimony of the scripture, that it is not lawful to adore or worship any
of the works of men's hands: because it is written; Thou shall worship the Lord
thy God, and him only shall thou serve. And that thou should after this
then signify unto them that thou wast offended with them, for that they had
abused themselves by adoring and worshipping of such pictures as were not made,
but only to teach the histories of such as they did represent to such as could
not read: and that that was the occasion wherefore thou did break them. And
therefore upon condition that they will contain themselves within the bonds
for which they were admitted and received, that thou art content to suffer them
to enjoy them. And to be brief, if any man will make any, those hinder not:
but if they begin or offer to worship any, then look about thee and suffer
it not in any case. Now I could have wished that as Gregory said to him; Teach
them by the scriptures, that they must not worship them: for it is written,
etc. that he also had added: yea, but they ought not to have them for
instruction: for so also it is written, etc. But the mischief is, Ierem. 10,
Abacuc. 2
that the good man found the clean contrary in the scripture. In Jeremy:
Ierem. 10, Abacuc. ^
That the wood is a doctrine of vanity. In Abacuck: That molten images are
nothing else but the tellers of lies. So that this Bb. though carried away with
the wave of time, and the multitude of people, is one who speaks all one with
a certain Council, which was held in the same age: If thou can, without the
people their making of any stir or talk about it, Council. Carthag. 4.
beat down the Altars which have been erected to any other end, then to be
memorials of the Martyrs: but let them alone and tolerate them, if they begin
to stir. And who has not any other reasons then those of the Pagans, even the
very same which the heathen Philosophers did use, to allege against Serenus,
for the supporting of these relikes of Paganism; Which (says Athanasius) when
they perceived themselves pressed hard by the Christians in the matter of their
images, answered, Athanas. contr. Gent.
that they were visible signs to know the nature of the invisible God, and
that they are as books unto the ignorant, by which they come to the
understanding of celestial things. But Athanasius and Eusebius do scoff at
these answers. And hereupon also S. Augustine has told us: That those are
subject and apt to learn lies, who seek for Christ Jesus and his Apostles in
the paintings of walls, and not in the scriptures. Within a short time after
Pope Boniface (the same who advanced Phocas the parricide to the Empire for
images, had exceeding great need of the patrons and protectors) opened the
temple of all the Gods that were at Rome, called Pantheon, by the licentious
liberty and free permission which he gave to every man to devise and do
therein, and in stead of the images of all the Gods, Sigibert. and Plat. Blond.
l. 9 Dec. 1.
he placed therein the image of the virgin Mary and of the saints: as likewise
at the same time there were set up in the Chapel of Laterane the images of
Phocas and Leontia his wife, because he had granted the Pope the supremacy and
supreme authority over all other Bbs. Afterward about the year 700. it was
ordained by the sixth general Council: Synod. 6. c. 82. Constant. 3. Gregor.
Cedren. in hist.
that whereas it had been the custom to picture and represent our Lord under
the similitude of a lamb, he should from thence forward be pictured in the
similitude of a man; seeing that the truth was come in place, and had abolished
shadows: for thus it says: To the end we may be put in mind of his
conversation in the flesh, and of his passion and death, and in them of our
redemption. And all this while no one word of the adoring and worshipping of
them, howsoever Gratian do most falsely cite and bring this Synod for the
adoration of images, Gratian. de consecrat. D. 3. c. venerabilis. Zonara. tom. 3
taking in stead thereof a cano^ of the second council of Nice, which began
Venerabilis, as Zonora^ does teach us: and that Polydor, who had not as yet
seen the canons of this council, alleges at the sight of the country: that
the worshipping of the images of the Saints was resolved upon.

Now at this time fell in the great strife and contentions which happened about
this worship and adoration, Wars falling out about images.
or to speak more properly, the wars of images, or rather of the Empires
under the color of images. This sixth general council had condemned the
heresy of the Monothelites, that is, their heresy who acknowledged but one
will in Christ, namely, a divine will. And Constantinus Pogonatus had caused to
be painted in the porch of S. Sophies temple in Constantinople, the images of
all the fathers which had been present at that council. But Philippicus
holding the foresaid heresy, and coming to be Emperor, caused such images to
be taken away. Pope Constantine in despite caused them to be painted in S.
Peter's porch, and not those only, which had been at the sixth general
council, but all the fathers which had been at the 6. general councels.
Wherefore now the question of images which had been but as an accessorie,
becomes chief and principal, especially after the Synod held in the time
of Constantinus Copronymus, Bedo. l. 2. Paulus Diacon. l. 6. c. 11.
wherein all the decrees of the sixth general Synod were approved, (that
especially against the Monothelites) save only that therein images were
condemned, for which alone the strife and contention continued, the
controversy of the Monothelites lying extinct and buried. Then Constantine the
Pope called a council at Rome, Lib. Pontisic. Plat.
where he caused it first to be affirmed and decreed, that images ought to be
honored, and excommunicated the Emperor Philippicus, etc. And it is no
marvel, seeing he also was the first which would have his feet kissed in the
city of Nicomedia by the Emperor Justinian. And from that time forward, the
cruel wars for images betwixt the East and West, the Greek and the Latin
church, the Emperors and the Popes, entered and set in footing. Philippicus is
driven out of his kingdom by Arthemius, and Arthemius by Theodosius: who
having need of the Pope his favor, for the installing of him, ordained, that
images should be restored. But this man dying about the end of the year, Leo
the third, called Isauricus succeeding him, took upon him the hearing of this
matter, Anno 730. Sigibert. Paul. Diacon. l. 21.
together with his divines, and to that end assembled a Council at
Constantinople: all things being reasoned and debated by the scriptures, the
worshipping of images and making of prayer unto them, was therein condemned:
the Archb. Germanus, who defended the^, deposed, the idols broken, and the
painted pictures defaced and blotted out, a commandment and iniunction from
the Emperor, Bonfin. l. 8. dec. 1. Anton. Arch. Florent. 1. 14. c. 1. S. 1.
Canon. Perlatum D. 3. de consecr.
that the determination and sentence of this council should be obaied. Gregory
the 2. to the contrary takes this occasion to strengthen himself, and make his
part strong in Italy, calling an other council at Rauenna, and therein causing
it to be established, that whosoever should destroy, profane, or speak evil
of images, should be declared and pronounced accursed: (he durst not say,
whosoever did not worship; or this had been against the canon of Gregory the
1.) He further excommunicated Leo the Emperor; quit of all manner allegiance
unto him all Italy, and forbad his subjects to pay him any thing: he
confederated himself with the French against him, couenanting to part the
western Empire betwixt himself and them. Again, this was one principal cause
moving the^ thereto, for that images were nothing but images. Chroniclers
observe, that upon these alterations, there appeared extraordinary eclipses of
the Sun and Moon, lightnings and thunder, floods and earthquakes, as warnings
of Gods wrath, and of the declining and falling away of the church: but whereat
the Popes did no more stir then their images. Anno 755.
After Leo succeeded Constantinus Copronymus: he assembled again an other
council at Constantinople against the pretended one of Rome: the Pope was
called thereto, but he would not appear. Therein it is decreed, that images shall
not be honored: and Gregory Bb. of Naeocesarea, had the charge of drawing into
one book all the reasons: whereupon the council grounded this their decree,
committed unto himal which were read and solemnly published in the hearing of
all the people. Germanus the Patriark, and Johan. Damascenus the son of Manzar,
were in express terms condemned: which treatise of Gregory is as yet extant
and to be read. Now this Emperor was no Monothelite, but rather had taken his
oath for the establishing of the six general Councels, and whereto he
ordained, that this should be added for a seventh, and this he signified to the
Pope, to the end that he might have him to cause it to be kept and observed.
Again, he sent in like manner to Pipin into France, who at that time did bear
all the sway there; who caused a Council to be assembled at Gentilli: Pipin
holding his place by the benefit of the Pope, did therein what favor he could
to his part, and so it was concluded therein, that images should be tolerated:
it was not as yet said, that they should be worshipped. Yea there were as yet
many that resisted and stood out against them, and about this time it was, that
they were received in England. At this time also it was, namely, in the time of
Adrian the first, that Bbs. began to subscribe their public acts and writings
with the sign of the cross. In the mean time Stephen the third cause it to
be decreed in a Council at Laterane, Anno 768.
that there should be burning of incense before the images: but his chief and
principal scope therein was to make his part good against Constantine the
Pope, whom his faction and partakers had deposed, because he seemed to place
and set himself above the Emperor in authority: as in deed he was brother to
Didier king of the Lombards, who sought aid at the Emperors hand against the
Frenchmen. And thus continually the matter of Divinity was crossed and
thwarted by the matters and affairs of the state.

But as Irene the Empress, daughter to a king of the Tartars, Anno 790.
being by birth and country a Pagane, and widow of Leo the fourth, came to be
gardeant to her son, and so to the regencie of the Empire: she sought for some
means to enter again into the West, and for that purpose could not bethink
her self of any more fit, then to gratify the Pope with the making of images,
she then called a Council at Constantinople: Council. Nic. 2 Diacon. l. 23.
a great part of the Bishops there present, maintained the abolishing of
Images: the Empress for diverse colored considerations; went about to exclude
them who had been present in the former: the people were offended, and
thereupon she interrupted and brake off the assembly. But the year following,
after she had disarmed such as were of the contrary opinion, she banished the
best and most powerful families maintaining the same, and armed those which
were the favorites of images, and so called another Council in the City of
Nice. There appeared and were to be seen Pope Adrian the first his letters full
of special favor and good will to her and her Patriarch Tharasius. There it
was also in plain terms (for the devil was there set loose in all manner of
licentious liberty) pronounced, contrary to the opinion of all those which had
gone before, yea even of Gregory the great himself: That the images of Christ,
of the virgin Marie, and of all the saints must be worshipped and adored. And
there (to be brief) were accursed all those which should think the contrary:
and the Bbs. who had condemned them in the former Council, constrained to
revoke their sentence, as namely, Basil of Ancyra, Theodore of Myra, Gregory
of Neocaesarea; not that old Gregory, but a later: and so when they had thus
done, they were set every man in his charge and place again. And it was
decreed, that this should be called the seventh general Council, and not that
of Constantinople, held under Constantinus Copronymus. This Council was held
about the year 800. which our adversaries are accustomed to allege for
images under the name of the Nicene Council, but making semblance as though it
were the first Nicene Council, and not the second, that so they might grace
themselves with the name of that famous council, which maintains the
divinity and adoring of the Son of God, whereas this, that is the second does
attribute both these unto images, whereas there is almost five hundred years
betwixt the one and the other, the one being held in the time of Constantine
the great, the deliverer of the Church, and the other in the time of a mad and
brutish woman, that was the bloody butcher to murder her own son, addicted
to southsayers, borne of Paganes, and continuing no less by profession, of
whom histories make mention, that the Sun was eclipsed, Eutrop. and Abb. Vsperg.
that it might not behold her enormous and detestable deeds, and that the earth
did shake the City of Constantinople as weary of bearing them.

And notwithstanding at the same time, as Adrian the first had sent to
Charlemain the decrees of this Synod, Council. Francford. contr.
that he might approve them, there was a Council held at Franckford by the
Bishops and Prelates of Italy, France and Germany. Therein were examined and
discussed the two contrary Councels, Eginard. in vit. Carol. Regino. Add.
Vsperg. Ammon. l. 4. c. 85.
that is to say, that of Constantinople, and the second of Nice, and a decree
passed, that the Nicene should not be held either for a general one, or for
the seventh general one, neither in deed for any thing else of value. Vt nec
septima, nec aliquid diceretur: but for an imagined and deceitful Synod,
calling it a bastardly Synod: the decrees of the worshipping of images cut off
and cast away, a book framed in express terms approving that of
Constantinople, and confuting for false and counterfeit that of Nice, the same
being signed by all the Bishops. And furthermore, for the further gracing of
the same, published under the name of Charles the Great, which is yet at this
day to be read: and was put forth here some forty years since, by my L. Iean
du Tillet, Bishop of Meaux. This book keeps the mean or middle way betwixt
the Synodes of Constantinople, and that second of Nice: that is to say, That
images might be had to be remembrances of things; which the Council of
Constantinople denied: but, that they might not be worshipped, and this the
Council of Nice affirmed. Neither does it make, as the sophisters of our time
use, by a false Grammar, that common distinction betwixt an idol and an image:
but it rather affirms according to sound Divinity: We call not idols those
images which are in Temples, but we forbid them to be worshipped, for fear
that they should be called idols, that is to say, that by worshipping of them
they become not the thing which they are not. And to the end that no man may
call this book in question, Augustinus Steuchus Bishop of Agobio, and the
keeper of the Popes library, testifies that it is kept in the library of
Laterane, Hinemar. Archiepisc. Rhemens. c. 20 Bellarm. de eccles. triump. l. 2.
c. 19.
written in old Lumbardie letters: and Hinemarus Archbishop of Rhemes, does
allege whole pages out of the same: and Bellarmine likewise does acknowledge,
that in it is contained the Council of Franckford, yea and that which is more
marvelous and strange, that is, that Adrian by letters which he writ unto the
Emperor of Constantinople, and to Tharasius the Patriarch, the furtherer and
aduauncer of images, does approve that which was done at Franckford: as in deed
the truth is, that he had his legates there which were ashamed of that which
was done at Nice. But seeing that images had been retained in Churches, when
Charlemaine was once dead, idolatry found an easy reentry in the West, as
will be seen in the time of Charles his son, who was constrained to write a
sharper book then the first: as on the contrary Constantine the son of Irene,
coming to his age, would not observe and keep that Council, held in the time
of his mothers regencie, who for that occasion wrought his death and
dissolution. And this contention in the Empire of Greece, endured more then
200. years, according as the Emperors were well or ill inclined, working
sometimes the ruin and overthrow of images, and sometimes, the establishing
and confirming of the same.

In this contrariety of Councels, A comparing of these two councels together.
to which of them I pray you, shall Christians have recourse to stay and rest
their consciences upon? To whom say I, when as they see the East armed against
the West, about this cause and quarrel? yea the East against the East, that
is, the Churches and Empires of those parts at jar amongst themselves?
Doubtless nothing can assure or certify them but the word of God: Thou shall
not make to thy self any graven image, etc. thou shall not worship or serve
them. The word which the Popes and Emperors never could, neither ever shall be
able to dispatch and quite destroy from out of the world, neither yet out of
the hearts of such as are truly faithful: howbeit, it may be observed, that
from this time, this commandment begins (such is the shameless boldness) to
be raced out of the law of God: as may yet be seen in the ancient laws of
England, Archaeonomia Anglicana.
written and published shortly after the second council of Nice; whose first
title contains the ten Commandments, but the second commandment is wholly
wanting therein, and the third continued in place thereof.

But let us notwithstanding briefly weigh the reasons of these Councelles, the
one against the other: because it may be, that out of their disagreement, we
shall make the truth and light to appear. The Nicene does allege the image
which Jesus Christ sent to Abgarus, that which Nicodemus painted under the name
of a false Athanasius, which we have proved to be only imagined and supposed:
likewise the vision of Constantine, as it was foretold him by Peter and Paul
before that he was baptized, which all ecclesiastical histories, together
with those next before mentioned, do note for Apocrypha. It plays and sporteth
it self with the scriptures, as men use to do with Pasquils. Adrian the Pope
in his Synodall Epistle: Council. Nic. 2, Act. 2,
God took of the mire and clay, and made man according to his own image and
likeness. And the Prophet David says: Confession and dignity are before him.
Again, I have loved the beauty of thy house, O Lord, I will seek thy face,
etc. It behooves therefore (says it) to have images in Temples. Theodorus
says, As we have heard, so have we seen: wherefore we must have images to
look upon them. And God is wonderful in his Saints: therefore we must have
painted pictures. And, No man lights a candle to put it under a bushel:
therefore it must be set upon Altars. To be brief, the Psalmist has said:
Worship his footstool, worship him in his holy mountain: O Lord, all the
riches of thy temple, shall worship before thy face: wherefore we must worship
images. But I would very gladly, that of all the ancient Doctors that have
written upon the Psalms and Prophets, they would show me but one, who has
from these places, or any one of them found out images. They allege the
fathers with like conscience, Quest. 16.
citing an Epistle written by Basil to Julian, which is not to be found, and
another of Gregory the Great, which is manifestly known to be written by
Gregory the third: a certain book of questions under the name of Athanasius
in the sixteenth question, and it is found to have been written by one
Leontius, almost three hundred years after, in the time of the Emperor
Mauritius. And how should they spare the Doctors, when they have not been
ashamed to corrupt the first Council of the Apostles held at Antioch; daring
to affirm, Acts 15.
that they therein ordained that the image of our Savior Christ should be
worshipped in stead of the images of the false Gods? Although it be so, as
that there were not according to their own confession, any images in the
Christian Churches before Constantine his time; thereby charging the Primitive
Church with an unsupportable crime, for having made so small account of the
Apostles their ordinance, yea or rather of the holy Ghostes, and that in a full
Council. In the end they come to the legends of the Saints, and to pretended
miracles. And what miracles? How that there was a woman healed of the gnawings
and gripes that she suffered in her belly, by looking upon the images of Saint
Cosme and Saint Damian: an other of the flux, in looking upon the image of
Simeon: and that an other found a Well, by causing the image of Theodosius the
Abbot to be brought her. An image of the virgin Mary kept the candle of a
certain Abbot from going out a long way: and an other helps to conueigh
water from the cesterne to the house. And how a woman was tempted of the Devil
by forsaking and leaving to use the image of the virgin; whereupon the Abbot
Theodorus shows her, that it were better to go to the stews and
brothell-house a thousand times, then to leave and forsake the worshipping and
adoring thereof. What baggage are these to oppose and set against the holy law
of God, Given (as says the Apostle) by the ministry of Angels, and uttered by
his own mouth: Thou shall not worship images?

Now let us hear on the contrary the foundations of the Council of
Francford: We must not (says it) worship images, seeing we must not worship
any besides one only God, and one only Jesus Christ, who with the father and
the holy Ghost reigns eternally. Because likewise, there is neither
commandment nor example, either of the Apostles, Patriarchs, or prophets, or
of the fathers of the primitive Church for the same. And on the contrary, that
if any man have images for remembrances and monumentes, that yet
notwithstanding it ought not to be any president for the trimming and decking
up of the Church: that such ornaments and courses are nothing else but the
ways of the Gentiles: that the good fathers Antonius, Hilarious, and others, who
loved well the beauty of the house of God, did yet very well leave off to
have any dealing with them. And as little for the instruction of the people.
That God has given them the holy scriptures to this end; the law whereby to
come to the knowledge of Christ, and not by Images. And not any more for
imitation or example sake to be followed: That the virtues of the Saints, as
faith, hope, and charity, are invisible: and that we must therefore seek them
in their works, and not in their painted pictures. It further proves, that
whatsoever the patrons of images allege of scripture, it is either to no end,
or contrary to the end for which they allege it; that their tales of the
image of Christ are Apocrypha, their authorities out of the fathers merely
imaginary, and their pretended miracles no better then either doubtful, or
notoriously false, or else devilish; Yea and although (says it) that they were
true: because that God appeared to Moses in a bush, shall we therefore worship
all bushes? or under the color of Aarons rod, shall we worship all rods? And
so for Sampson his iaw-bone, all other iawbones? Or from the shadow of S.
Peter, all other shadows? etc. That this assertion of the Nicene Council is
damnable: I adore and worship the image with the same worship wherewith I
worship the Trinity it self, and do curse those that say otherwise. The word
being so plain and evident. Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and that
exclusiuely meant, (say they) of all other manner of worship, besides that which
is due unto God alone, not excluding only that of images, but of whatsoever
other creatures, be they never so excellent. In like manner, that their other
reason is as weak, which they would draw from the nature of relation and
reference, which the image has with the thing whereof it is the image, seeing
that Christ said not: He that receives Images, but he that receives you,
receives me: Nor that which you have done to images, you have done to me: but
rather, what you have done to one of these little ones. And therefore that
whosoever does say of a picture, This is Christ, sins, lies, and commits
villainous wickedness: instead that the second Nicene Council has by name said
and affirmed, that a man may speak it in godly and religious manner. And all
these things with such gravity, learning, and religiousnesse, together with
such reasons drawn so to the purpose from the scriptures and fathers, S.
Jerome, S. Augustine, S. Gregory, etc, and pressed with such good consequence
and so necessarily, as that all the Dagons of the Philistines, be they never
so firmly underpropped, shall not be able possibly to stand before them. And
yet furthermore this book is approved by Hincmarus Archbishop of Rheimes, who
alleges a whole Chapter out of the same against Hincmarus Bishop of Laon,
who lived in the time of Charles the great: and as for Ecchius himself, he
does not once call it in question.

Let us go forward with the effects and success ensuing upon these two
Councels. The effect of these Councels
It appears that that of Franckford did stay the course of idolatry for a
time in the Churches of France and Germany: which is gathered hereby, namely,
for that Haimo and Rabanus, who followed shortly after, do not speak a word of
the worshipping of images: and in that Walfridus Strabo, living at the same
time, continues all one phrase and manner of speech: Walfrid. Strabo. c. 8.
That it is not lawful either to worship them, or else to banish and cast them
out. And because likewise that Claudius a famous Priest brought up in the Court
of Charles the Great, was no sooner made Bishop of Turin in the time of Jews
the Gentle, then that he pulled down and defaced the images: when as he
found the people of his Diocese given to worship them, by reason of the
Romish superstition which had gained and prevailed so far amongst them.
Claud. Taurinens. de adorat. imaginum.
An Abbot called Theodomirus set himself against his proceedings: whereupon
this Claudius writ a book unto him, against the worshipping of Images, which
he was not afraid to send to the Emperor Jews, who committed the same to
Jonas of Orleance to examine. But he never vouchsafed to utter his judgment
of it, till after that both Jews and Claudius were dead, neither is it found
that Claudius was disturbed or troubled by the French Church upon this
occasion: Anno. 840. Jonas Aurelian. aduers. Claud. Taurinens.
a sign that the doctrine of images was governed by the Council of
Franckford. Now of this book of Claudius Bishop of Turin, there is no part
to come by, more then that which Jonas his book (wherein he goes about the
confutation of the same) does afford us, and that after his death. It may
justly be doubted whether he have dealt faithfully with it in alleging
and setting down the whole: but only that his own aunsweres do sufficiently
witness that Idolatry as yet was very young and tender in the Churches of
France. Claudius reproves the worshipping of Images according to the Council
of Francford: Jonas does not maintain the same: for he answers only as
Gregory, answers Serenus, that they may be had for instruction sake to the
people, and not for to be worshipped; proceeding even to the cursing of them
who do worship them. Claudius maintains and proves by Origin, S. Jerome,
Fulgentius, Lactantius, etc. That they ought not to be honored either with
inward affection, or worshipped with outward gesture: That we ought not either
to worship or serve any creature, etc. And that it is likewise an error to do
it for the contemplating of them, whose Images they are made to be. And it is
so far off, that Jonas should gainsaye this, as that on the contrary he
says; As for those that maintain the worshipping of Images, and say that
they give not that worship unto the similitude and thing representing, but unto
them which are therein represented; as do (says he) they of the East Churches,
who are overtaken with this most mischiuous error: we do reprove and detest
them even as thy self: And the Lord become both to the one and the other
gracious and favorable, as that they may be pulled from this vile and
detestable superstition. Claudius affirmed against the worshippers of Images:
The law, Exodus 20. forbids us not only the Images of Gods, but all
whatsoever in general, that we should worship them. And Jonas acknowledged
that this was a wholesome, sound and holy belief. Again, If the works of
Gods hands be not to be worshipped (said Claudius) much less the works of
men's hands. And Jonas thereto adds, Sobrie nobiscum sapis, testifying that in
that point he dealt like a wise and prudent teacher. What is then the odds
betwixt them? Truly this, (says Jonas) namely, that Claudius ought to have
condemned superstition, and reproved ignorance; and not to have defaced the
Images, and that he ought to have left them as they were, not to the end that
any worship should be done unto them, but that they might serve both for an
ornament in the Temple, and for a memorial of things past unto the ignorant.
As indeed says he, France has and suffers them; howsoever it be held and
reputed for a great abomination to worship them, and so likewise the case
stands with Germany. In brief, that it is a plain and manifest fault,
ignorance, error, and superstition to fall down before the Images of Saints,
but yet that the offenders are to be reclaimed by reason, and not by curses:
in as much as that it can hardly be believed, that they abiding and continuing
in the free and holy confession of the blessed Trinity, should have any
purpose or resolution to turn aside to the worshipping of Idols. But how far I
pray you was the belief of the French and German Churches at that time (that
is, about the year 850.) differing from the faith and belief of the times
that now are? yea and what great odds is there betwixt the present, and that
which Jonas held and believed, notwithstanding that he was fully armed and
provided for the defense of Images? And indeed Nicetas teaches us, that even
in the time of Frederick Barberossa, about the year 1160. Nicetas in vita
Isaac. Angel. l. 2.
the worshipping of Images was forbidden the Germans: For (says he) as he
took and surprised Philippople, the Armenians staying in the City, did not
estrange themselves because of the Germans, inasmuch as the worshipping of
Images was condemned and utterly detested both of the one and the other. As
also Anastasius the Library Keeper, in his Epistle unto pope John the eight,
Anno. 1160. Anast. Bibliot. in praef. in Syn. Nycen. 2.
witnesses that the worshipping of Images was freely received in his time in
the Church of Rome, but not in France: and this was about the year, 900. But
the story following will make us to see the truth much more clearelie: It is
therefore to be known, that in the year 824. the Emperors Michaell and
Theophilus, the Father and the Son being troubled in the East, about the
contention raised for Images, the same not being possibly able to be quieted
by the second Council of Nice, do send Ambassadors of purpose unto the
Emperor Jews and Lotharius in France, setting before them on the one side,
the superstitions that were practiced about Images, since the breaking out of
this pretended Council: and on the other side, the severity used for the
beating down and suppressing of them every where, that so the very roots of
superstition might be plucked up and dye, desiring their best advise and
council thereupon. Synod. Paris. Ann. 825.
Jews and Lotharus for the shaping of their answer, caused a very famous
National Synod to be holden at Paris, which is yet forth coming entire and
whole: wherein the learned that were assembled made a collection of the
judgments and opinions of all the ancient writers upon this point, and the
same was sent with a goodly Epistle from the whole Synod unto the said Jews
and Lotharus, by the hands of Halitgarius and Amalarius Bbs. Halitgarius.
The sum and brief whereof behold as follows: That with special care they
have read the letters of Pope Adrian the first, who ordained that Images should
be worshipped, calling them Saints, and pretending that it was the way to
great holiness to serve and worship them, which (with the leave of his
pontifical authority be it spoken) is contrary to the truth, and cannot be
avouched without the note of vndiscreetnes, superstition and error: and that
all the places whereupon he groundeth himself, whether they be out of the
Scriptures, or out of the old Writers, are drawn by the hair, and that the
same was likewise well advertised the Emperor Charles the Great, by Engelbert
the Abbot, sent for the same purpose unto him, who finding himself hardly
pressed, did in the end declare, and make known that he would contain and
keep himself within those limits and bounds which Saint Gregory had drawn
and set down; which were, that Images might be had for memorials, and
remembrance sake; but for to worship or honor them was open impiety: That
this superstition did afterward prevail in some Countries, partly through
ignorance, and partly through mischievous custom: and that in very deed they
are not ignorant, how that the Seat and Sea of S. Peter is tainted and defiled
with this plague and pestilent error, Pessimae consuctudinis vsu
(for so they call it) but that as yet sustained and strengthened by Gods grace,
they had not given it place of entrance in France: and by his further favor
and assistance aiding them, they meant not to give it any more in any time to
come. To this end they brought in all the places before by us alleged out of
the Fathers, and that all along in their whole answer, but it shall be more fit
and convenient to read the^ as they are there set down in the Synod, then
tomake any repetition of them here again. If any should go about to establish
this action and course of worshipping Idols with custom; Their original is
from the Pagans, Egyptians, Simon Magus, Carpocrates, etc. That God is not to
be found out or known by his old age, but by his eternity: That this is in
sum, to run (as Jeremy says) after the Idols, which they have learned of
their Fathers: That we must cleave and stick to God, as he is manifested
unto us in his Scriptures. August. l. 3. de doctrine. Christ. Idem de locu. ad
Genes.
As for that which is objected of the Cherubins, they answer it by S.
Augustine; That there is a commandment from God for the making of them, and
that it is the taking of the signs for the things. To the anointing of the
pillar of stone by Jacob, they likewise answer from the said S. Augustine:
That Jacob did it to signify a mysterte in the anointing of this stone, and
not for to honor the pillar of stone. Coming in the end to that point, as to
affirm, That when there had never been any Images in the Church; that then
faith, hope and charity were no whit in worse plight: and that when they are
in the same for monuments and remembrances simply, that then the same virtues,
are not thereby embased or made worse. But that they may not be forced upon
them, who would not have them, nor permitted them in any wise, who would have
them to worship them in any manner or sort: whether it be by praying unto them,
kissing them, or gilding them, and much less in offering unto them, etc. Now
this book is sent unto Pope Eugenius the second, by the foresaid Emperors,
by the hands and mediation of the Bbs. Jeremy and Jonas, that they may impart
the same unto him, being therewithal enjoined, to beseech him in their names,
that he would examine it thoroughly, and show himself willing and forward to
satisfy the consciences of the Emperors of the East: as also that he would
vouchsafe to send his Legates together with the said two Bishops unto them,
with whom they shall also find for the same purpose, at the place of taking
ship, Halitgarius and Amalarius in the behalf of the Synod, for the better
yielding of an answer and reason of the resolution and judgment, which they
embraced and approved therein. And it is to be marked, that in the letters
which they writ unto Jeremy and Jonas, containing their advise how to demean
themselves, they writ unto them that they should entreat the Pope kindly,
and rather to incline to yield and give place, then to dispute and argue the
matter: for fear (say they) of incensing the Romish obstinacre, pertinaciam
Romanam, whereby he might take such an opinion, as from which he would never
be removed. This was in the year, 825. Anno 825. Of the Cross.


As concerning the Cross, we have seen what the old Writers have taught: and
again, it is very certain, that those ages were far off from that, which is
practiced at this day. For the Synod of Francford speaks of the Cross
after the manner of S. Paul, and of the purer antiquity, understanding by the
same the whole mystery of our redemption accomplished upon the Cross, as
likewise the afflictions which happen continually amongst the members of
Christ. In this sense S. Paul says: That he gloryeth in the cross, and
would have that Jesus Christ should be crucified daily before our eyes, that
is, that we should every hour remember the sham full and ignominious death
which he has suffered for us, by dying for our sins, Chrysostom. ho. 1. and. 2
de Cruce. Homil. de Cruce. and latrone, and de Cruce Dominica.
and so seek for our life in him. In the same sense Chrysostom says: The
Cross is unto us the cause of all blessedness, the hope of the Christians, the
resurrection of the dead, and the over throw of the Devil. But of what Cross
does he speak? assuredly of the same whereof he had spoken before: To day
he did hang upon the Cross; that is of the death and passion of our Lord: That
Cross (says he) which he has not left here upon earth, but carried up to
heaven, that is, which he has overcome by his resurrection: which he has
garnished and clothed with all manner of glory: that Cross which we must
bear: Not by laying (says he) a piece of wood upon our shoulders, but by
preparing and making our selves ready to shed our blood at all occasions for
his glory, etc. And S. Augustine in like manner: All the sacraments are
perfected by the Cross. S. August.
For what are the sacraments both of the old and of the new law, but dumb
signs without this Cross? Likewise Honorius Bishop of Autun: Honor August.
in Cemma Animae.
Nowise man worshippeth the Cross, but rather Christ, that was crucified
thereon, etc. notwithstanding, that he lived in the midst of gross and
palpaple darkness. But what Communion or Fellowshippe is there betwixt the
Cross, thus taken and understood, and these two cross pieces of wood, whereto
Jonas does apply the former benefits and blessings? or with this doctrine of
Pope Adrian? That when we see the Cross we must say unto it: We worship the
Cross, and we worship the Spear, etc. And therefore the foresaid Claudius,
Bishop of Turin, and brought up from his childhoode under Charles the Great,
Adrian in Ep. ad Constan. and Iren.
reasoned very well to the purpose: and doubtless like unto himself both for
his style and intention, saying: If we must worship the Cross, because that
our Lord sufferd his death and passion upon such a piece of wood, then let us
worship all virgins, because he was borne of a virgin: let us also worship the
maunger, and swathing cloutes, because he lay therein, because he was wrapped
therein: thorns, reeds and spears, for such were instruments used about him
in his passion: Asses, for Jesus entered into Jerusalem sitting upon an Ass,
etc. But so the truth is, that our Lord has commanded us to bear, and not to
worship the Cross, etc. And I do not as yet see, that Jonas has devised or
found out any thing to answer him withal.

As for the second Council of Nice, as it was in all men's sight ill begun,
so it contented not the consciences of the Grecians in any respect at all. For
Constantine, as he grew out of his minority and came to age, and his liberty,
did repeal and difanull the same. The Emperor Michaell did set it up again,
and persecuted the gainsayers. The Emperor Leo the fourth an Armenian,
encouraged by the Monks of Greece, which cried out, that to worship Images
was idolatry, did pull them down again. Michael le Begue and Theophilus his
son, Zona. tom. 3.
did chastise and correct such as did maintain them. Theodore his wife, came
by his death to the Regencie, and being persuaded by other Monks, did
reestablish them with great severity. Her son Michael Bardus being come to
full age, did destroy and ouerturne them again. Likewise Zonara the great
patron and maintainer of Images, does tell us, that he made the Pope his Legate
to consent and agree thereunto. Insomuch as that pope Adrian obtained of Basil
the successor of this Bardus, that there should a Council be held at
Constantinople, Anno 870.
which they call ordinarily the eight general Council, whose Acts and
decrees we cannot find extant in the volumes of the Councels, and but a very
few of them else where in histories. And Bartholomeus Caranza says that he
met with them so depraved and falsified, as that he durst not coppie them out.
Only the Popes favorites do affirm, that therein should be confirmed the
worshipping of Images: and the curses of the second Council of Nice repeated.
So that we need not doubt, if we consider the proceeding, such as it is set
down in the Pontifical book it self, Lib. Pontificalis.
that is to say, that Adrian the Pope gave unto his Legates a little book
containing all that he would have to be believed of the supremacy of the
Pope, and of the worshipping of Images, with this charge, that they should not
receive or admit any man into counsel or consultation with them, before they
had first signed the same: but that by this means he prevailed in the cause
having no adverse party to stand against the same. Again, that which is left
remaining with us, is such stuff, as that it would make a man quake and
tremble to read it; the Emperor Basil uttering these speeches therein; Now
are you out of the Diuelles clouches, true Christians, worthy of eternal life:
for if you had not abandoned this heresy, Christ could have profited you
nothing. How many heresies, yea and how many blasphemies be there in these few
words? Christ (says the Apostle) does profit us nothing if we bring in
again the ceremonies of the law. But what manner of conclusion is this: If we
observe and keep this Commandment being one of the ten: Thou shall not make
any graven Image: Thou shall not worship them, etc. Christ does profit us
nothing. An other Canon says: We ordain that Images be worshipped as the
holy Gospel. The reason hereof is worth the noting: for say they, As men are
saved by the sillables of these books: even so are both the wise and foolish
mightily helped by Images. And notwithstanding these their beetle headed
reasons; Nicaetas and Zonara, do write, that from that time forward, all such
were accounted Heretics, as did not adore and worship Images. And yet so as
that this kind of superstition, did never proceed or prosper in the Churches
of Greece, as it did amongst the Latins; for besides the Greek Churches had
but a few and those painted pictures only, and not any graven or carved
Images, the difference betwixt them in the manner of worshipping them is so
great, that Emericus in the volume of his inquisitions, rehearsing the errors
of the Greeks, sets down these; That they may not pray unto Saints, no not
unto the holy virgin Marie; That they hold, that to offer unto them, is to
offer sacrifice unto the Devil; as also that to worship or kiss the Cross,
is mere impiety, and senceles sottishnes. But this must be distinguished of,
according to the times and countries.

But from hence forward, let us lanch forth into the depth of Idolatry. We
make our selves offensive to the Jews in giving them matter to stumble at, and
as loathsome as any stench unto the Turks, whom it had been our duties rather
to have won and drawn to have been one with us by the purity of doctrine,
and the holiness of our ceremonies. The more contradiction we find, the more
care and industry do we bring with us for the propagating and spreading
abroad of the same, the more authority for to establish it, and the greater
rage and fury for to warrant and make good the same withal. The Princes
working the same sometimes in despite, sometimes upon envy and malice, which
they bear one against an other, but all of them to gratify and pleasure the
Bishop of Rome: The Pope by his Decrees, censures and curses, by degrading
and putting down of Emperors, by absoluing their subjects of their oaths, and
by rooting out and burning of all whosoever shall dare to say any thing to the
contrary, etc. In fine the pure service of God, maintained so long a time
under the Primitive Church, becomes heresy, and from hence forward, no man
speaks of them, which will not worship Images by any other name or trtle then
heretics: the worshipping of them on the contrary, is accounted for sound and
good to be believed, yea and is reckoned up amongst the marks and principal
signs of the Church. In the mean time to bring about the worshipping of
Images in the French and German Churches; Frivolous and ^^fling distinctions.
the Church of Rome was forced from the beginning to bring into them some
certain distinctions and limitations, carrying some more plausible
construction and consideration as that of Dulia, and Latria, from the thing
representing, to the thing represented: howbeit they are not of any force or
worth either in Grammar or Divinity; but only as certain vizardes serving
in the time of shamefast bashfulnes, to cover the folly of the second Council
of Nice. For as for the first, such as are any thing acquainted with the
Scripture, do know that Dulia and Latria are ordinarily used to signify one
and the same thing: Genesis 9. Exodus 2 Esa. 14. vbi Septuaginta. Deuter ^8.34 Romans
1. Ephesians. Coloss. vbi Occumenius. Matthew. 6. Eustath. in Homer and Suidos.
August. l. 8. c. 28 27. de ciuit. Dei. Idem de verb. Domini Secundum Mat. Sermon.
6. Idem cont. Faustum Manich. l. 15. c 9. and contra Arrian. Sermon. 5. c. 17.
Ide^ ad Quod vult Deum. L. 3. de Tradit. 9. consider.
and those likewise that understand the Greek tongue do know, that Dulia is a
more strict kind of service then Latria: because that to speak properly,
Dulia is the service performed by a slave, who is altogether at the check,
control and command of his Master, and Latria the service, which the
mercenarie and hireling takes himself bound to perform, who upon the offer of
the wages or the reward does weigh with himself what it may be unto him, and
accordingly undertakes some such piece of service, as his pay shall
counteruaile. And thus the best learned in the Greek do interpret and take
it, what reason is there then, that the less part should be given to God, and
the greater unto men? And who can think that S. Augustine who first brought up
this dinstinction, did understand it after that manner; who shuts the
deceased Saints and Martyrs out of al Temples, and from having any Altars,
sacrifices or services done unto them? And that yet our adversaries, should
give them the same under the color of this word Dulia? And in very deed S.
Augustine has no such intent or scope in that place, namely, to give us free
liberty to serve creatures, but rather to detain and draw us back from the
same, showing us what is the true service of God, that so we may not give it
unto any creature. For he that reproved Marcellina because she burned incense
to the Image of Christ, what would he have said to them which burn incense
every day unto the Images of the Saints? And hereupon also it came that the
Spaniard Peresius found fault with this distinction. And as for the other,
namely, That they do not worship the Image, but the thing whereof it is a
sign: can they deny that the Pagans said not as much unto S. Augustine,
Lactantius, Arnobius and Tertullian, who yet did not therefore surcease or give
over to reprove and condemn them? And if they could not tell how to excuse
the matter or defend themselves against those Fathers; Idem l. 3. de doctr.
Christi. c. 7.8. and 9.
what hope is there left that our Idolaters can speed any better in the same
cause and matter? But S. Augustine cutteth off al excuse by a general
proposition, saying: The signs of the Jews are profitable, because they are
ordained of God: but those of the Gentiles unprofitable, as their Images,
pictures, etc. notwithstanding that in them they be properly given to honor
their Gods. Afterward he speaking of the one and the other, says; If thou
honor the signs, in stead of the thing signified, intending the honor unto
these, and not to them: yet this is notwithstanding a carnal scruitude, whereas
Christian liberty has even delivered the Jews. And so by this means this
respective kind of worship goes down the stream, Cassand. in consultatione.
which Cassander likewise sincerely acknowledges never to have had any
place, nor yet to have found any reason to plead for it in the old Church.

But after this, they speak a great deal more plainly: The growth and
proceeding of Idolatry.
and Idolatry begins to lift up her Mask. Theodore Bishop of Myra, had
said in the second Council of Nice: There are not two sorts of worshipping,
Latria and Dulia, there is but one: There is likewise no question to be made
of relation or respective regard, the resembling thing and the thing resembled,
are worshipped both the one and the other in one and the same degree and
measure. But this proposition was not well and equally liked of all. Thom. in
3. sent. D. 2. Idem Sco^us.
But behold the Schoolmen have now found out the means to remove the block
out of the way, by virtue of a place out of Aristotle, (but what has he to do
with our Divinity?) saying, The thought that is bent upon the Image, and that
which is bent upon the thing signified by the Image are both alike: and
therefore the worship of the one and the other is alike. And therefore they con
clude and resolve that the Cross and Image of Christ must be worshipped with
Latria. And therefore they use to sing to the Cross in the Church of Rome;
Behold the wood of the Cross, we worship it; O holy Cross, grant that
Justice may grow and increase in good men, and pardon thou the transgressors
and the sinners, etc. And of this opinion are likewise Thomas, Jacob Nancl.
Clugiens. Epis. Anno 1557.
Scotus, and Bonauentura, etc. so long as till that Iacobus Nanclantus, Bb. of
Chioggia in Italy, did sharply reprove them which said, that Images ought to
be worshipped, and would have had the words to worship Images to be cut out.
But what increase insued there, upon these goodly principles? Surely thus
much, that eue^ as they held their Images by the tenure of imitation,
counterfeyting therein the Pagans; so they borrowed of them all the fashions
which they used to worship their Gods withal, as to offer offringes unto them,
to make vows, Temples, Altars, and Sacrifices, to say also their Masses, that
is to say, to sacrifice the Son of God, Tertul. in lib. de Idololatria.
Germanus in. Ep. ad Thom. in Nice. conc. 2
so far as in them lay, unto them: and afterward gorgeous apparel, garlandes
of flowers, burning of incense, wax-candles, burning lamps, fastinges and
solemn feasts in honor of them: the carrying about of their pictures, and a
worshipping of their bones. What one thing is there of al these, that was ever
practiced in the Church of Israel, or in the Primitive Christian church? Or on
the contrary, what one is there amongst them al, which is not confirmed both
by testimony and example in the stories of the Pagans? And what then can they
have reserved as proper and peculiar unto God himself under the name Latria?
Or what becomes of Lyranus with his distinction: That we are not to bow or
kneel upon both our knees to any but to God alone, when as it is in this
service done unto the creatures made by God, and the works of men's hands? But
neither have they yet contented themselves and stayed here: for after the
manner of the Pagans, they have likewise so consecrated these Images in such
blasphemous sort, as that Paganism it self would have been ashamed and blushed
to have done the like: a thing (as appears by the Council of Francford)
utterly unknown, at such time as it was held and kept. For in consecrating of
the Cross, they pray unto God: That all such as shall kneel down unto the
same, may have remorse and compunction of heart and remission of their sins.
Now what remains besides this for the true Cross, that is, for the mystery
of our redemption, accomplished in that death upon the Cross suffered by
Christ? Again, That this wood of the Cross, (so they call it) may besaluation
unto the soul, health to the body, and a remedy unto mankind, for the
strengthening of faith, the increase of good works, the ransom of souls, and
for a defensatiue against the Devil. What shall now be left behind for the
power of the holy Ghost to effect and work, for the spirit of Christ which
regenerateth us, sanctifies and strengthens us, making us inheritors of
eternal salvation, etc? Pope John the 22. In Antidotar. Animae.
ordained a prayer to be said, that to the Veronique, that pretended Image of
Christ, which was imprinted in a handkerchife: Salve sancta facies Redemptoris
nostri, etc. And in the same place it is prayed unto: To cleanse and wipe away
all the stains of whatsoever vices: to vouchsafe to infuse light into the
heart: to increase and add unto the merits of such as do believe therein: to
destroy heretics: to defend the Christian faith: to conduct and guide those
which pray unto it: to the fruition of eternal life: to the beholding of God:
to their conjunction and joining with Christ, who of bread is made God, etc.
And the Pope last above named, grants in the same place ten thousand days
indulgences to him that observes the same. And what do they reserve more for
Christ himself? Or who shall allege and say, that this is but some particular
man's devotion, when the pope himself is author thereof? Pius 2. comment. l 8.
And when as likewise Pius the second, ordained that upon Easter day it should
be showed at Rome, and that the people with a loud voice crying and weeping,
should ask mercy of the same? When in like manner they consecrate an Image of
the holy virgin, they pray: That it may be of power against thunderinges and
lightninges, against floudes, civil wars and invasion by foreign and
barborous people. What will they ask of God himself, if they pray unto the
virgin for these things? yea which is more, if they ask them of her image?
But yet much more, That who so shall pray unto this Image, the Queen of Mercy
may by it obtain pardon for whatsoever sinful deeds he has committed, and
for every good work which he has omitted, as also merit present grace and
salvation for all that time that is to come. What means all this, but to make
the Cross of Christ of no effect? These and such like blasphemous
superstitions are those which are practiced about the Images of Saints, yea
even to the blessing of the incense; That the Devils may run from it, that such
as shall be senced therewith, may never be bitten of the old Serpent: that is may
be exempted from sin, etc. He that expects and looks to receive such
graces of a dead creature, what remains for him to hope, or look for to
receive of the Creator? But these and other such like things have been handled
by others more particularly; and their Pontifical book does testify and
witness the same, so that this which is now done, is rather but to point out
then to examine the things. And who is there that cannot thereby discern the
spirit and word of Christ from the spirit and word of Antichrist: of Christ,
as being he who even of stones does raise up children unto Abraham: of
Antichrist, as being he who of the children of Abraham makes stones, yea worse
then stones, seeing that he makes them to fall down and worship stones?

God in the mean time taking care of his church has not left these
abominations without contradictions: Such opposite ons and gainsayinges as have
beer taken up against these abominations. Durand. in ration. Divine. Offic.
Holcot. in l. Sapient. lect. 158.
but rather in the thickest of the darkness has caused some light to shine
forth, and that even out of the darkness it self. The first Council of Mentz
says; Images are not set up in the Churches that they should be either
worshipped or honored. Durandus the Bishop of Miniate says; If neither men
nor Angels must be worshipped, let them look well to themselves what they
do, who under the color of devotion do worship diverse Images: for it is
not lawful for us to worship the work of man, aliquid manufactum, etc. There
is but one Image of the Father, which we must worship as the Father, that is
to say, the Son, etc. Robertus Holcoth a Friar Iacobine, living about the
year 1350. whom they called Doctorem Moralissimum, reproves the deciding of
the difference by Thomas, saying: Latria cannot conveniently be given to any
thing but only God, the Jmage of God is not God, and therefore Latria or
divine worship cannot be attributed unto it, for if it should, then should
also the Creature and the Creator be worshipped after one and the same manner:
that is to say, otherwise Idolatry should be committed. And therefore the
Fathers of the Council of Nice are Idolaters. Durandus de S. Durand. tit. 57
Portiano is of the same opinion, both for the Cross, as also for the Image of
Christ, but he fears the censure; Loquendum (says he) vt plures, we must
speak as the greatest number do. And so are Henricus de Gandauo, Petrus de
Aquila, Johannes de Guiuerra, and other schoolmen. About the year 1380. in
the time of the schism of Urban the 6. and Clement the 7. Anno 1380. lib. de
Council.
whereof Theodorus a Niem has written, there was published a book de Concilio,
wherein is handled how necessary a council were, both for the taking away of
the schism, as also for the reforming of the Church. And amongst other abuses,
he complains much of the multitude of Images, saying: That they gave occasion
to the people to commit Idolatry. In the time of the Council of Constance,
Gerson the Chancellor of the University of Paris, Gerson in Ep. de neglig.
praelat. Anno 1415.
writ an Epistle of the negligence of prelates, saying: It is great pity to
see how religion falls away from day to day, and becomes worse: every man
is continually adding unto it some one or other thing that is naught: but no
man does cut off or lop away any part of all that is cuill. All abroad in our
Temples we see not any other thing exercised, but the relics of the
Idolatries of the Pagans, and our Spirituality will not have any man so much
as to touch them. And for the like reprehensions and reproves, he was driven
out of Paris, and died at Lions. The same thing was taught by Nicholas de
Clemangis, a Doctor of Sorbone, and Archdeacon of Bar, in his book Of the
corrupt estate of the Church. So in like manner did the Cardinal of Alliaco in
his book Of the reformation of the Church, presented by him to the Council of
Constance. And these were the lights of their time. That great worthy Picus de
Mirandola in his Theses, which he propounded for to be disputed at Rome,
says: Conclus. 3. Gab. Biel. in Cant. lect. 43
Neither the Cross nor the image of Christ can be worshipped with Latria,
neither yet after that manner that Thomas sets down. Gabriel Biel the
interpreter of the Canon of the Mass, holds with them that taught: That an
Image could not be worshipped either in regard of it self, or in regard of
the thing which it represented, saying: That in what manner soever it be
considered: yet it is ever more a senceles thing and a creature, for both which
respects it cannot be worshipped with Latria. And hence (says he) we may
see the sottishnes of such as attribute a certain kind of Divinity, grace or
holiness unto Images, waiting and looking for the healing and curing of
diseases, or some other miracles from them: and likewise the vndiscreetnes of
some others, which are more willingly drawn to worship such as be fair then
such as be foul, the new rather then the old, and the trimmed and tricked
up, rather then the rude and nakedones: and the gross lightness of others, who
make their vows unto them, bind themselves to go on. Pilgrimages, sometimes
to one Church, sometimes to an other, to behold and take the view of certain
Images, think to find some miracles or powerful works more in one then in
an other, or more in one place then in an other. All these things are
altogether wrapped in superstition, whereinto we shall never fall, if we know
what the right serving of God is, or else be willing in humility to learn
the same. For the way to serve God is found out in his sovereign and singular
works of creation and government: in the creatures also there are some
virtues, which are communicated unto them by God: in the Image there is neither
the one nor the other: Polyd. Virgil. l. 6. c. 13.
for it can neither see, hear, nor understand, etc. Polydor Virgill does
likewise take offense against these superstitions, and concludes in these
words: We are fallen into such a vain of folly, and doting rage toward
our Images, as that the duties and services of piety, Caietan. in Pentatcu.
Exodus c. 20.
which we seem to perform in that behalf, are nothing but very impieties
themselves. The Cardinal Caietanus is taken up and checked for comprising
and lapping up together both the Idol and the Image in a like defense,
notwithstanding that he make a distinction inter Dolatum and Similitudinem, in
respect of the words: and Paulus Burgensis likewise one of the most learned
Hebricians which had been amongst them: and in whom notwithstanding our
adversaries do place and put their chiefest hope of defense. Paulus Ricius
says frankly and freely, after he had weighed all the reasons and
aunsweres to the same, which were brought to that end and purpose: If we must
abstain from things sacrificed to Idols, because of the infirm and weak in
faith, how much more then (whatsoever Thomas can say) from this pestilent
worshipping'of Images, etc? These are the wild vine growing up, and
ouerspreading the natural vine of Christ: these are the Darnell in his field.
The Jews have brought in the works of the law, and the Gentiles Images, etc.
which I would to God that they had never come in our Temples, then we should
have learned to have lift up our hearts to heaven, in stead of bowing and
casting them down to fix them upon Images. In a word Ludouicus Viues writing
upon S. Augustine says: That he cannot see any difference betwixt certain
Christians addicted to the honoring of Images, and the Pagans, worshipping
their Idols. And Erasmus concludes: That it is more safe and sure to take them
away, then to expect or wait until there be some rule and good directions for
the moderating of the same, Cassand. in Consult.
devised and established. But Cassander after that he has alleged Biel,
says; Who shall be able to do it? who shall be able to bring back the people
from this their entered course of superstition, especially seeing that such as
teach them, are themselves the authors of these superstitions, Michael Episc.
Mersburg. in Cathechismo.
are those that nourish and cherish them in their hearts, to the end they may
suck out some profit from them? But our Fathers of the Council of Trent
imagined that they had well looked into the curing of all the mischiefs
threatened against them by all these so evident testimonies, when they ordained
in their Index expurgatorius, that these places of Polydor, Viues, Erasmus,
Cassander and others, should be raced and left out in the first impression
ensuing. But the very defenders of these abuses committed in this our time have
bin in some sort ashamed of their doctrine, as Martinus Peresius, Ambrosius
Catharinus, and Nicolaus Saunderus, entreating of this matter, holding against
Thomas, Scotus, and Bonaue^tura: That the Images cannot be worshipped after the
same manner that the persons may, whom they do represent. And Alphonsus of
Castres their resuter of heresies, proceeds yet further, That we must not at
all worship or do any reverence unto Images, but rather before the Images, for
fear of being condemned for Heretics our selves. And Bellarmine willing to
set them at one, comes so far as to say, Bellar. de Ima. l. 2.
First; That we must honor, but not adore or worship them by praying unto
the^: Secondly, That no man may teach especially in any sermons, that they
ought to be worshipped with Latria, no not the Image of Christ himself, but
rather the contrary: Where is now the second Nicene Council affirming? That
there is but one kind of Worship, one I say for the original, and for the
image framed after the same, etc? Thirdly, That images cannot properly and of
themselves be worshipped, as the patterns themselves, whereby they are made,
and that neither Latria, nor Huperdulia, nor yet Dulia, or any other adoration
or service is properly due unto them: but I know not what, after the
proportion of those, whereof they are Images. What will now become of Thomas
his ordering of the controversy betwixt Scotus and Bonauentura, etc? And
finally, That there is no other honor dew unto them, then such as is
vouchsafed and given to the books and vessels of the Church, as to the cups
and their couerings, etc. And what is now become of these kneelings,
inuocations, and clear and evident worshippings? For who did ever worship the
Mass books, the holy linnens or cups, etc?

But how much more brief and shorter course had it bin, to have held themselves
to the pure and undefiled word of God, and to the obseruatio^s of the ancient
church, the^ to incumber the people with so many superstitions, ignorances and
impieties, as that no man is able to free them again, no not with all the
distinctions, limitations, and fine devises or shifts that can be imagined? And
how much better had it been to have followed the counsel of Gratianus in his
Decree, and that upon far better ground, Gratian D. 63. C. Q^ia Sancta.
seeing that all Images in the Church of Rome are of man's ordinance; whereas
the brazen Serpent in Israel was of Gods ordinance? And notwithstanding he
says, Ezechias destroyed the brazen Serpent which Moses had set up in the
desert by the express commandment of God, because the people moved by the
miracles which they saw, betook themselves to the worshipping of it: whereupon
(says he) we see the greatness of the authority of the church, as that if our
fathers and predecessors have done any thing in their time blameles, and
without falt, and that the same afterward do turn into superstition or error,
that the^ and in such case the succeeding persons are to destroy and undo the
same, without delay, and that with great authority. In the end they make God a
party with them: It is he, (say they) who has taught it us: for wherefore did
he commaud Moses to erect a brazen Serpent in the desert, and to make Cherubins
over the Arc? As if God had bound himself by the commandments that he has
given us, and left us free: As if Abraham had answered God, I will not
sacrifice my Son: for thou have said; Thou shall not kill. But we have
authority to bear us out for the caruing and worshipping of Images; let them
show us a contrary commandment, forbidding us to make any. To this blasphemous
objection, by which they make God the author of their abomination, they shall
be answered by Tertullian for me; Tertullian being beaten with this argument
by the Idolaters of his time: Tertul. de Idolo.
(for even as they have borrowed their Idols, so have they also their arguments
for their defense,) says; It agrees very well, that the same God who has
forbidden in his law to make any similitude or likeness, has likewise
commanded by an extraordinary commandment for to make that of the Serpent:
If thou worship and fear this same God, thou have his law for thy direction
therein: Make not any similitude or likeness, and if thou consider the
commandment that comes after, inioyning one to be made, in that thou art
to imitate and do as Moses did: Make no image or likeness contrary to the law,
if this same God do not expressly command it. And by this means Tertullian
cutteth them off quite, inferring that the law of God is general, and that no
man must dare or presume to do any thing to the contrary, without an express
exception, and the same to issue and come forth of the same mouth: which thing
Paulus Ricius though one of their side does resolve them of in this manner,
saying: The law of the Lord forbids thee to kindle any fire for thy family
upon the Lords day, and thou sinnest mortallie if thou do it, and yet
notwithstanding he commanded thee to kindle a fire in the very same day in
the Tabernacle. The like is that of the Cherubins, ordained by the express
word of God, howbeit to have Images is fetched from some other fountain, then
his commandment, being such an abomination and mischief as cannot be
answered. Wherefore our adversaries deal herein, as our first Father did,
being taught thereunto by the Devil: for when God went about to tell him of his
sin, he would post it over to another, saying: The woman which thou gave me
was the cause: and so they became the woeful accusers of the most upright God.
If we be Idolaters it is thy work: for wherefore did thou ever cause that
the similitude of Cherubins or Serpents should be set up, etc? But their
condemnation waiting for them is just, having drawn it upon themselves, in
as much as they will pretend unto themselves license and privilege to lift and
advance themselves above all that is of God, yea even above his plain and
express laws. And that such a privilege, as may seem to belong to him
alone, and that in this very respect, being denied unto all others: For the
Greek churches notwithstanding, the curses and excommunications of the second
Council of Nice, did cleave unto their pictures: but honoring them rather
after a civil then a religious sort. The Abissines and Armenians in like
manner, howbeit there are also some, as Aluarez reports unto us, which have
not any at all, and those which have, to show that they be the goodly
presents of the Bb. of Rome, do foresee that it is good, that they should have
no other but Latin inscriptions: so now this same which would be but the
fountain and original, is become the stream to ouerflow the service of God, and
as a mighty flood, to cover and drown up the whole earth.

CHAP. IIII. Of unleavened bread, wine mingled with water, and of the things
which served to the administration of the Sacraments.
NOw we have entreated of Temples, and of their principal ornaments (as our
adversaries esteem them) that is of Images: we have likewise spoken of the
holy Tables, otherwise called Altars: whereupon the bread and the wine ordained
for the sacrament were wont to be set, the wine in certain clean vessels,
either of Glass or of metal, the bread wrapped in a linen cloth, that so
nothing might fall upon it: without any manner of superstition or curiosity,
and in some places these Tables were shadowed with some veil or curtain. It
remains now that we look about us to find out, how this simplicity did
change into curiosity, and this purity into superstition, as likewise how the
indifferency and liberty, which was in old time in these things, is turned
into a necessity and slavish servitude, worse then ever was that of the Jews.

Our Lord celebrating the Passover with his Disciples, Leauened or unleavened
bread.
used unleavened bread. And there is no doubt thereof; for the Passover
according to the law must be celebrated without leven, it was by express
ordinance so appointed: and our Lord came to fulfill the law, and that in
matters of far more weight and difficulty: howsoever Epiphanius and the
Grecians after him may seem to say, that he did keep the feast sooner then it
was appointed by the law, and that he also gave unto his Disciples leauened
bread. 1. Cor. 5. v. 7.8.
But that the institution should bind us to this circumstance, S. Paul the
true Interpreter of Christ, shows to the contrary, saying: Our Passover
has been sacrificed, etc. Let us there keep the feast not with the old leven
of maliciousnes and bitterness, but with the unleavened bread of sincerity and
truth. It might then be kept and observed, but without keeping of a leaven more
dangerous, namely, a schism betwixt the Greek and latin Churches: as also
without binding of themselves to the circumstances of leaven, being a ceremony
belonging unto the Jews; seeing that the Christian Church had taken thorough
acknowledgement, how that the Passover might be celebrated without offending
of the law upon the Saboth after the 14. day of the Moon of the month Nisan,
and not the 14. according to the institution, as also that the day of rest
might be kept upon the Lords day, and not upon the Saturday, after the manner
of the Jews, whiles as the substance of the institution was kept whole and
inuiolate, inasmuch as the feast of the spiritual deliverance accomplished by
the resurrection of Christ was celebrated in stead of the carnal and corporal
deliverance, and the feast of the second birth and creation of mankind in
stead of that of the first creation. Now in the time of the Apostles and their
first Disciples, we see not any title of this distinction. It is to be
thought, that they did keep themselves to S. Paul his admonition: Purge out
the old leaven, that so you may be a new lump: That is, that they should
purge and cleanse their hearts to become new creatures in Christ. For as for
the Decretall Epistle of Alexander the first, it is not good, but that it
should be read, that so it may be reputed and held for a devised and
counterfeite thing. In the Council of Laodicea about the year 400. Council.
Laod. 29.36.37.38.
it was forbidden that any Christians should use any part of the ceremonies
used in the Jewish service, as to rest upon their Sabath, to have Philacteries,
to keep any solemn feasts upon the days of their solemn feasts, and by
name to take of their unleavened bread, that is, to tie themselves unto the
Jewish cer emonies, and more particularly unto that. This had not been to
any purpose, if the^ the Church had taken herself to have been bound to use
unleavened bread at the celebration of this divine mystery: as indeed there is
never any mention made but of bread simply. And all the offringes from amongst
which the bread of the holy supper was taken, was such bread, as was
ordinarily used to be eaten in houses, which as al men might see, was not
without leaven, seeing that the old church did communicate every day; except
we will not believe that the Christians likewise did not eat any other bread
at their own houses but unleavened bread. Chrysostom. 1. Cor. c. 5.
Chrysostom says: Take no care hereafter about this leaven: for now likewise
thou have an other lump, the shadows are past. And Gregory the Great makes
not mention of any other bread in the holy supper, then the common and
usual, such as they kneaded and baked at the Bakers house, and was sold in
the market at Rome. Gregor. in Registio.
Likewise in his Register we have these words; When we take the bread,
whether it be leauened or unleavened, we are made a body of the Lord our
Savior. Again, expounding the Passover unto the Christians he says: He
eats unleavened bread which does good works, and when they are done, does not
mar them with vain glory, and he that does the works of mercy, without
the mingling of sin with them, etc. To be brief, Niceph. l. 8. c. 53. and 54.
Nicephorus entreating of the heresy of the Theopaschites, and Monophysites,
so called because they taught that the Godheade it self did suffer, does
observe and note for our behoof, that in the supper they used unleavened
bread; and not common and ordinary bread. And this they affirmed that they
held from Gregory the great, Bb. of Armenia, so far was it off to be held at
that time, either for an heresy, or for an error, to use common bread in the
celebrating of the holy supper. And this was after the year 700. Insomuch as
that it may seem, that this custom entered into the Latin Church about the same
time that the popes delighted themselves to trim up their churches, with all
manner of Jewish ceremonies, after they had once spoild and robbed it of al her
principal and goodly ornaments indeed, as humility, simplicity, purity, etc.
And indeed the Decretal of Clement the third, about the year 1188. against the
Priests which used cups of wood and leauened bread; shows that this ordinance
was not as yet thoroughly established. De celebrat. Miss. cont. lit.
We read that about the year 1100. there began a schism betwixt the Greek
and Latin Church about this matter, and that the reasons were handled on the
one part and on the other by Nicaetas Monk of Constantinople, standing for
the party of Michael the Patriarch, and Humbert Bb. of Sylua Candida, standing
for the side of Leo the 9. the one and the other, showing himself but weak,
in that they strive to make that necessary, which the Church had held
indifferent. The worst was that upon this question and controversy, these two
Bishops fell into an other, namely, the Primacie or supremacy: Durand. l. 4.
c. 41. Extrauag. de celebr. Miss. C. finali. Thom Aquin. op. 1. cont. error.
Grec. c. 32. Hildebert Ceneman. Ep. 44.
which caused that neither of them to avoid the impeachment and weakening of
his authority, would yield a hairs breadth from his conceived opinion. For
about this time Durandus wrote, that the Mass might be celebrated with
leauened bread, and brought in to prove his purpose the Extrauagantes de Celeb
Miss. And Thomas Aquinas after him: That of a truth it agrees better with the
purity of the mystical body, to use unleavened bread in this sacrament: but
not (says he) as though it could not be well administered with leauened
bread. And the Epistle of Hildebert Bb. of Man's, which censureth the Priest
that had offered common bread, uses these words: Therein he swarueth from
the rule of custom, but not of faith and it behooves thee to correct the fact,
Council. Ferrar.
as a scandal and offense, rather then as a sin, and that thou carry thy
self rather like a Father toward him, then like a Judge. And this thing was
afterward decided by a Council held at Ferrara, for the agreeing and reuniting
of the Greek and Latin Churches: That it was indifferent to celebrate the
holy Supper either with leauened or unleavened bread. And therefore why
should such differing and disagreeing affections continue so long, for things
so reasonable and indifferent? Of the wine.


The like has been about the wine of the Lords Supper. Some under the color
of sobriety, would use water and not wine. Of such S. Augustine and Epiphanius
make mention amongst the Heretics, and not without cause, seeing they
abolished one part of the substance of the Sacrament. But S. Cyprian does
refute them sharply: and brings them back to the institution of Christ,
who only must be heard in all things concerning them. And hereupon it is,
that he has it so often in his writings: That in this sacrament which is Christ,
no man is to be heard but Christ himself. Others would have the wine delaied
with water: and the most ancient Christians did so use it, and that not
without apparent show: inasmuch as the people of the East, did not ordinarily
use wine without water, as the Hebrew and Greek phrases of speech do prove:
howsoever they allege other reasons for thus their using of it: as, that there
came out of our Lord his side water and blood: That this is a sign of the two
natures in Christ, or rather of the union of Christ with his church,
allegorizing upon every thing according to their accustomed manner. Howsoever
it be notwithstanding, it may be that the course of the text, would not show
us in this particular point of the blood and water, any thing but the true and
undoubted death of the Lord: in this that the wound had pierced the case of his
heart: because also, that if we should fall to allegorizing, then with the
greatest part of the Fathers, we should thence collect and gather the two
sacraments of the Church, that is, Baptism from the water, and the Eucharist
from the blood, etc. Only let us not find fault with this observation,
provided that it be void of superstition, that is, free from condemning of
those, which do not administer any thing but only wine, as also without any
prejudice to the liberty which Christ has left unto his children, which will
not admit any manner of necessity, but that which is grounded upon the holy
word. If any do contrariwise bring in any other necessity, we affirm that
it is not without an error, because as they themselves do say, to make that to
be a matter of faith, which is not, is to sin and err in the faith: And
therefore we condemn the Canons of the church of Rome, which say absolutely,
that the wine cannot be administered without water, Canon. Oportet. and C. in
sacrament. D. 2. de Cons^.
seeing there is nothing said or spoken in the scriptures, but of the fruit
of the wine: showing thereby how much dearer their own inventions be unto
them, then the institution of our Lord, in as much as they have made the wine
of the holy supper, according to their doctrine to be superfluous, he having
by his institution made it necessary, and the water on the contrary, which is
of their own invention necessary, which the institution of our Lord has left
indifferent. It is certain that the Churches of Armenia unto the time of the
Council of Ferrara, which was under Eugenius the fourth, did not use any thing
but only pure wine, and yet were never excommunicated therefore: and as yet
to this day, they do not obey unto that which they were made subscribe unto in
the Council. And the Abyssines stand so strictly upon the point, as that they
would never consent, that the daughter of their Prince should be married to any
that received the Communion without the wine. And as for the Grecians,
Durandus, Scotus and Innocentius do say that in their time for the most part
they did the like: howbeit that in the Lithurgies, which we can come by,
Niceph. l. 8. c. 54. Council. Aurel. 4. c. 4.
it is mingled and delaied, and that with warm water, which thing says
Cabasilas, is, That it may represent the blood the more fully: so deeply is
the spirit and mind of man tickled and delighted with his own inventions.
And as for the Churches of the Latins, the Council of Orleance forbids to
offer wine delaied with water, adding the reason thereto: Because it is
sacrilege to offer any other thing, then what our Savior has instituted.
Conc. Worm. c. 4. Council. Tiburt. c. 19. C. Sicut. D. 2. de Consecr. and ibi.
gl. Thom. 3. part. q. 74, art. 7. and q. 8^. art. 6. and ad 4. Sentent. D. 11.
q 2. art. 4. and in 1. Cor. c. 11. Johan. Scot. D. 11. q. 6, l. 4. Sentent.
Innocent^ de Offic Miss. Bonauent. D. 11. q. 3. Richard. D. ead. art. 3.
Vessels. Hieronym. ad Rusticum.
And this was in the time of King Childebert, when as Pelagius lived, that is,
before S. Gregory. The Council of Worms more then 200. years after ordained
the contrary: after which followed the Council of Tiuoli or Tibur, a City of
the Sabines, wherein it was ordained, that there should be one third part of
water put to two third parts of wine. And these differences may at the least
suffice to show the indifferentnesse. But the Gloss of the decree says, that
this is De honestate tantum, only in regard of honesty. And Thomas: that this
is not fetched or derived from the Gospel, but that it has some apparent show
for it self, as that by reason of the strength of the wine, it is delaied in
some countries. And Hales, Scotus, and Bonauentura say, It has no hold or
warrant in the scriptures. And Richardus: Non de necessitate, sed de
congruitate: not for any necessity, but for seemelines. And thereupon it
follows, that the council of Trent does excommunicate and cut off from
salvation, as far as lies in it, for fantasies and things nothing making
unto salvation. That more is, that this mingling of wine and water is not any
whit significatiue or respecting the mysteries which are therein sought and
searched for; but growing only, either of the custom of the country, or of
some apparent seemelinesse.

Now the bread provided and prepared for the holy Supper, was carried either in
a linen cloth, or in a small chest, as we read in S. Jerome, and set upon the
holy table, covered with some table napkin, for to keep it clean, without any
other ceremony. Men and women did touch it without any superstitious
scrupulousnes, according as they brought their offeringes, yea and after the
blessing or consecrating of it. It was distributed unto the faithful, not into
their mouths, as we have seen it, but into their own hands. And as for the
wine, it was carried, as we read in the same S. Jerome, in vessels of all
sorts, even of glass, notwithstanding the danger of breaking of them: yea and
sometimes it was sent in that sort, in sign of unity and agreement from one
to another. Vain and curious superstition came in afterward, first forbidding
women, and then afterward men also, to touch either the linen clothes, Council.
Altisiodor. c. 36.37.
wherein the bread was wrapped, or else the cups. Transubstantiation was set at
a higher price and rate then all the rest, for in respect thereof the cups must
be hallowed, as also the patines of the same, with unctions and words expressly
uttered, because of it, all the instruments and vessels of this sacrament, were
turned into Sacraments, the Altar stone was called the sepulcher or grave, and
the linnens, the shroude wherein the body of our Lord was inwrapped: that from
thenceforth the cups should be of metal, and that silver, not any longer of
glass. Things which antiquity (more regarding the things the^ their signs) did
never so much as once dream of: because that she could never once bethink her
self, or conceive any thing of this monstrous doctrine of transubstantiation,
the fountain and welspring of so many and so foolish vanities. And in deed
whereas the Primitive and ancient church had care according to the admonition
of S. Paul, that the faithful the proper vessels of the body and blood of our
Lord, should receive the^ worthily: we see the councels after these times to
convert and turn all this zeal, and all this care, from the spirit to the
flesh, from spiritual temples, to material ones: from the vessels of God,
elect unto salvation, to the implements and instruments only which they used
in the administration hereof. Witness hereto let be the Council of Rhemes, held
about this time, Council. Rhemens.
as the decrees thereof which are extant do show: Let the cups or chalices be,
if not of gold, yet at the least of silver, and let the people be exhorted to
contribute thereunto, as for the tabernacle in the time of Moses: not of
copper, neither of brass, for fear they should provoke men to vomit, the wine
being apt to make them rust: but in any case neither of wood nor glass. Let
the clothes wherein it is wrapped be a very fair and clean linen cloth.
After the Mass let them be put into a book of the Sacraments, and before they
be delivered to be scoured and washed clean with lee, let them be washed in
the Church by the Priest, Deacon or Subdeacon: because (says he) that they be
spotted and stained with the blood of our Lord. Conc. Colon. c. 7.
We read the same and something worse in a Council held at Collen about the
year 1300. Let the priest smell diligently the little pots, that he may know
the water from the wine by the smell thereof: and then let him so mark them as
that he may know afterward the one from the other, and not be deceived: let the
cup have a sound and large foot, least it might ouerturne. But and if there do
any thing of the body or of the blood fall upon the covering or pall of the
Altar, let them in any case cut it away and burn it, and lay the ashes in some
clean place, etc: a great matter, if so be such regard and care were so
necessary, that the ancient church should forget this; or that the ancient
church whereof we stand so greatly, having neglected it, we should
notwithstanding hold it so needful and necessary.

Before the holy table, The veil.
whereupon the elements gifts or offerings were set, there was especially in
the Greek church a veil drawn, which after that they, which were as yet to be
catechized, Chrysostom. in hom. ^d. Pop. Antioch. and hom. 36. in 1. Cor.
were departed and gone forth, was drawn together: and then they went forward
with the blessing of the Sacraments. Chrysostom in many places: When thou
hear, let us pray altogether: and therewithal see the veil drawn
together, then think that heaven is about to open, and the Angels to descend,
etc. This custom was retained as having been first borrowed from the Jews,
for they had a veil in the midst of the temple, and this veil was cloven and
rent in sunder, in sign of the uniting of the Jews and Gentiles, the one with
the other: or else from the Gentiles, for they likewise had vailes spread and
drawn abroad before their altars. Tertul. in Apol.
Apuleius says: Velis candentibus reductis, the white vailes being drawn
together. Tertullian: Conspectus caeterorum velo oppanso interdicebatur: There
were (says he) not any but priests that came near, for even the very sight
was kept from all others by the means of a veil hanging before it. And in
these indifferent things the ancient church did apply it self very wisely,
sometimes to the Jews, and sometimes to the Gentiles. But all this great ado
and preparation came in a long time after, the Church through the corruption of
the time proceeding by little and little from the inward to the outward, from
the center to the circumference; from the substance to the circumstance; and
from the discipline of Christ, to an imperial stateliness and eminency in
the world.

Now these sacraments being there placed, we have declared the manner of the
blessing, consecrating and distributing of them to the faithful, with what
prayers and with what holy words, etc. But there is yet behind one
circumstance, which is, whether these prayers and words were uttered in a
language known and understood of the common people or not: which is a matter
in controversy betwixt us and our adversaries.

CHAP. V. That the old and ancient service was said in a language understood
of the people: and by what degrees it was altered and changed.
ASsuredly, That the service used in the Church of the Jews was understood of
all
the care that it has pleased God to take for the instruction of his people
throughout the whole course and carriage of the Church, should be able in a
word to make this question frivolous and needless: He that would have all his
people to know all his law and all the ceremonies likewise of the same at their
fingers end; who so much commanded them to get knowledge, and condemned
ignorance so sharply; who would have it as a frontlet betwixt their brows,
and as a glass before their eyes, that the father should teach it unto his
children in the fields and in his house, lying and standing, etc. cannot in any
wise be thought that he would have it kept hid and secret from him by the
barbarousnes of a language not known or understood, that is locked and clapped up
in ciphers, that it might not be comprehended or attained. He likewise that so
expressly commands fathers to teach their children the cause of the
institution of his sacraments, (namely, that of the Passover, into whose room
that of ours, called the holy Supper is come:) who would that children should
question their fathers thereof, and that fathers should answer their children,
and that in the time of the shadows of the old Testament, and rudiments of the
law, shall not be understood and taken to have meant, that his people should be
taught in a language not understood, neither yet to have taken it for an honor
and worship to be prayed unto and served of them, without understanding. And
in deed the Sacraments of the old law are instituted in the Hebrew tongue,
which was the vulgar and common language amongst the people. And again, when
he would terrify and make them afraid, he threatens them with a strange and
barbarous language, 1. Cor. c. 14
and with lips which they do not understand. And S. Paul concludes, saying:
Tongues are signs not to the believers, but to the infidels and unbelievers.
And there is no cause why it should be here alleged, that from the time of
Esdras unto Christ the people had learned the Chaldee tongue under the
captivity, and that yet notwithstanding the Scriptures were always read in
the Church in the Hebrew tongue. For the question is not in what tongue it was
read: but whether it were understood of the people or not. Nehem. 8.2.
And for that let Esdras himself be believed, saying: Esdras the Priest
brought the law before a multitude of men and women, and all those which could
understand. So then it may be seen hereby, that not so much as the women but
they understood it. He read the same unto them in the street before the water
gate, from the break of the day until noone: and the ears of all the people
were attentive to the book of the law. Wherefore were they thus attentive, but
that they had a purpose and intent to understand? But that is more: Nehem. 8.8.3
They themselves did read distinctly and plainly for to understand, and did
understand it in reading of the same. What is that other properly, but to read
Esdras, without having any purpose to understand him? But say they, It is said,
that Esdras and the Levites did expound the law unto the people. True, but it
is as plain and clear, Nebe. 8. v. 7.9.
that it was the sense and meaning of the law and not the words or phrases of
speech, for this self same Chapter has already certified and assured us that
they understood them. And in the same sense it is said, Act. 8.35.
that our Lord and Savior expounded Esaias in the Sinagogue, whereat the people
were ravished: and the scriptures likewise unto his disciples in Emaus: Suk.
24.27.
that Philip expounded the 53. of Esaias to the Eunuch. Who will believe that
this great noble man did not understand the words, seeing he did read the^?
seeing also he demanded whether the Prophet did speak of himself or of some
other? But in deed he did not know that this prophecy was of Christ. For
whereas they go about to make us believe, that the Jews did not understand
Hebrew, under the color of certain words, which their familiarity with the
Chaldeans had dropped into their language, Ioh. 5.39. Act. 17, 11.
the truth may easily appear: for wherefore then should our Savior have said
unto the people: Search the scriptures? And how should the Jews of Berea have
otherwise done as they did. And what will they say to that in the Acts, that
S. Act. 21.40.22.2.21.
Paul made an oration unto the people in the Hebrew tongue, and that the people
hearing him speak unto them in that language made the more silence? And if
they did not understand, whence comes it, that when he spoke of going to the
Gentiles, the people should be in a mutiny, and cry out: Away with such a
fellow, let him be taken from off the earth; it is not meet that he should
live?

Now therefore we stand resolved and firm: That it was not otherwise under the
new Testament.
that in the time of the old testament the service of God was practiced and
exercised in a language understood of the people: and who can believe that it
was otherwise in the time of the new? who will believe that the light should
be more dark then the shadow? and the fullness of knowledge more barbarous and
rude then the rudiments? without all peradventure our Lord is come to dismaske
the mystery concealed and kept close from before all worlds, to unfold them,
and lay them broad open to the Jews, to the Gentiles, to all nations and to
all languages. Gal. 3.
And before him (says the Apostle) there is no distinction or difference
betwixt the Jew and the Grecian, nor yet betwixt the Grecian and Barbarian.
Therefore let us conclude, that whatsoever has served for the better clearing
and manifestation of his holy mysteries, or for the instruction of Christians,
has likewise been acceptable and well pleasing unto him. But let us not once
imagine, that any thing tending to the darkning and dimming of that which is
light and bright, can proceed from any example given by him: and then much
less from his laws and commandementes. He instituted his holy Supper amongst
his disciples: who doubts but that all the words thereof were uttered in the
same tongue and language by him, which he ordinarily was wont to speak in unto
them? It is his will that it should be celebrated after his example in his
Church: that so we may therein show forth his death until his coming. What
manner of showing forth and declaration does he require, to utter it in a
language which the people does not understand? Now in deed, in as much as it was
decreed, that his Gospel, death and resurrection should be preached unto all
nations, and that it was hindered by reason of the manifold variety of
languages that possessed men, he sent his spirit in tongues of fire unto his
Apostles, he granted and continued the gift of tongues a long time unto his
Church. Such as affirm that upon the same day of Pentecost the Mass was
instituted, and will notwithstanding, that throughout all Christendom the same
should be said in Latin, let them tell me I pray them in what language it was
delivered, if it were delivered but in one, or what tongue was excepted if it
were delivered in all? There are some that come after, and do abuse this gift
unto vanity and ostentation in the Church. What says S. Paul unto them? 1.
Cor. 14.
Languages are for signs, not to the belieuers, but to the unbelievers: they
are given unto us for the gracious work of edification, and not for our
overthrow and confusion. If you utter a language that is not understood, you
speak in the air: you are as Barbarians one unto an other; unprofitable as
the trumpet which gives a sound that no man understands. If thou bless with
thy spirit and not with thy understanding, the simple and vulgar sort of people
that are there, how shall they be able to answer Amen, to thy thanksgiving?
how can they possibly be edified by thee? And the Conclusion is after all these
general propositions, (the least whereof all the rabble of our adversaries are
not able to avoid: I love it better to speak five words in the Church, in my
understanding (that is, that are understood) then ten thousand in a language
that is not understood, etc. And a little after, I teach so in all Churches: if
any man be spiritual, let him understand and know that what I write unto you,
are the commandments of God. Hieronim. in 1. Cor, c. 14.
If they doubt of the interpretation and meaning of this place: let us hear
the Doctors what they have delivered upon the same. S. Jerome expounding it in
plain and express terms: Every word which is not understood, must be judged
and thought barbarons. Again: The spirit signifies in this place the tongue,
as when he has said: he that speaks tongues, that is to say, an unknown
speech. He makes no question whether Greek or Latin. Ambr. in 1. Cor.
S. Ambrose: This is spoken because of the Jews, who in their sermons and
oblations did use amongst the Greeks sometimes the Hebrew tongue. And yet this
was the holy tongue, the language of the Patriarchs: and he says in their
oblations by name, that is, in the administration of the Sacraments: as in deed
it seems that in this word (...), S. Paul would speak of the holy Supper.
Again, he says; If thou bless with the spirit, he speaks of such a one as
speaks unto himself in a language which he knows: and says, that he
gives thanks well, in as much as he knows what he says, but another
(says the Apostle) is not edified: so that if you come together to edify the
Church, you must speak such things there as the hearers do understand. For to
what end is it, that a man should speak in it a language that he himself does
only understand, and whereby the hearer does not profit a dodkin? but rather
he should hold his peace in the Church, to the end that such may speak, as can
profit the hearers. And his conclusion is; So the ignorant which does not
understand, cannot say Amen: for he knows not the end of the prayer, to
answer thereto with this word, Basil. in reg. contract.
which is the confirming and sealing up of the blessing in his place. S. Basil
makes this question, entreating upon this place: How can the spirit of any
man pray, when his understanding is idle and unfruitful? This (says he) must
by name be meant of them which make their prayers in a tongue unknown unto the
hearers: For when the words of prayer are not understood of those that are
present, his understanding that prays is unfruitful, Chrysostom. in 1. Cor. 14.
in as much as no man reapeth profit thereby. Chrysostom: S. Paul would say,
if I speak not the things which you may easily and plainly understand, but
that I go about as it were no other thing, but to show that I understand
tongues, you cannot choose but go away without profiting any thing: for what
good can there come of a word not understood? you altogether in like manner if
you speak, but not with such words are as significant and sensible, do
speak to the wind, that is, to no body. Again; Idem in ho. 36
If the unlearned do not understand that which thou prayest, he is not edified,
he cannot give his consent unto thy prayers: thou speak to the wind and by
consequent in vain. Again: Thou who speak an unknown language, if there
be not any that can interpret and expound it, hold thy peace: for in the church
there is no place to do any thing that is superfluous or tending to
ostentation. Let such a man speak unto God and himself, that is, Theodor. in
1. Cor. 14.
in his spirit, without making any noise, and by himself. Theodoret: The
Apostle commands that every thing may tend to edification in the church: and
therefore (he says) he that has the gift of tongs, let him pray unto God,
that he may also have added thereunto the gift of interpretation, that so he
may be able to do some service in the church: for the fruitfulnes of the
speaker consists in the profiting of the hearers, and this cannot he
possibly have, that speaks in an unknown language. He therefore calls the
spirit the gift of tongs, but the understanding, the interpretation or giving
of the sense of that which is said, etc. Oecumenius, who has made a collection
out of all the Greek fathers: I call the spirit the spiritual gift of tongs;
the understanding, the faculty and ability to interpret and expound that
well which is said: To pray then with the spirit, does no good to any, but
himself that so prays: but to pray with vndetstanding, is available unto
the edifying of thy neighbor. And therefore when he says: If thou bless with
the spirit, it is as much as to say, that thou thy self do only
understand, and art not understood of others, etc. Whereunto Chrysostom. added:
And there is as much difference betwixt the one and the other, as there is
betwixt the whole Church and one man, and as there is betwixt the edifying of
the whole Church and himself only. Justin. Nouel. 123. S. interdicimus.
Justinian the Emperor in his Nouelle, wherein he commands the Ministers of
the Church to do the divine service in a language that is plain and
understood, has not otherwise expounded this place: for he says: Thus the
divine Apostle teaches us in these words: If thou bless with the spirit
alone, how shall the simple people be able to say Amen unto thy blessing,
seeing that they understand not what thou say? And this he commanded with
such earnestness, as that he proceeded against them to the death, which did
the contrary. And yet no more then the Council of Aix does the Chapter, which
Council says: The speech and the understanding of those that sing unto God,
must accord: that so it may be fulfilled which the Apostle says, I will sing
with the spirit, and I will sing with the understanding also. Haimo Bb. of
Halberstat in the time of Jews, the son of Charlemaine, says: Haimo in 1.
Cor. 14.
I am a Grecian and thou an Hebrew: if I speak Greek unto thee, I shall seem
to be a Barbarian. I pronounce the Creed in Greek, because I have found it so
written, and I am a Latin: I am a Barbarian unto thee, etc. If then (says he)
an idiot be with thee, a man that knows no more the^ his mothers tongue, and
thou say thy Mass in a tongue not understood, how shall he answer thee Amen,
when he knows not what thou say? etc. I had rather therefore (says he) to
speak five words in the assembly of the faithful that are understood by them,
then ten thousand otherwise which will do no good. And Cardinal Hugo in like
manner. In a word, Hog. Cardin. 1. Cor. 14.
Lyranus expounding this scripture in his place: The Apostle speaks here of
public prayer: wherein if so be that the people do understand the Minister his
giving of thanks, he is a great deal the better stirred up to God, and made
the more devout and ready to say Amen. And Thomas after him: That in the
Primitive church service was celebrated and solemnly done in a language that
was understood. And S. Augustine his general rule tends to the same end:
August. l. 12. de Genes. ad lit. c. 8. The practice of The old church.
That no man can be edified by hearing that which he understands not. Now
next after the institution of our Savior Christ and his Apostles, it follows
that we look into the practice of the ancient Church. And first it is to be
noted, that the practice of the public service was such, as that the people
did answer the Pastor: whereupon it must needs follow (as says the Apostle)
that they did understand him, but which is more, that all of the^ did answer
to all, the people doing their part in the office and service, no less then
the clergy: which could not well and conveniently be done without
understanding. S. Paul says: how can he (qui supplet locu^ idiotae) that
occupies the room of the unlearned, say Ame^? Theodor. in 1. Cor. 14. l. 7.
stromat. Iostin. in Apol. 2.
S. Jerome: He speaks of the laity, and not of the clergy. Chryso. and
Oecumenius after the same sort. Theodoret; He calls him an idiot, which is of
the order of the laity, as we likewise call them idiots, which are void of
subtlety and craftines. And all the old writers do testify this custom and
use. Clemens Alexa^drinus: In their prayers they have but one co^m on speech,
as likewise one spirit. Hieronym. in 2. procem in Galat. Chrysostom. in 2. Cor.
hom. 18.
Justinius in the description of the holy Supper says: All the people (...),
speak aloude in sign of approbation, Amen. And the pretended Dionisius
Areopagita uses the same words. And S. Jerome: All the Church like a thunder
sounds out, Amen. Chrysostom: The prayers are common both to Pastor and
people: they say prayer together: the people pray for the Pastor, and the
Pastor for the people, etc. Again, All that which is used about the Eucharist
is common to both: all the whole body of the sacred liturgy is common unto
them: why do thou marvel then to see them speaking together in their
prayers? Basil. in exa. hom. 4. Idem epist. 63.
S. Basil: Men, women, and children cast forth their prayers unto God: you
would say that they were floods beating against the shore. In another place he
describes how they sing Psalms divided in the halfes, and intermingled with
prayers, meditating deeply, and with a fervent zeal upon that which they did
sing. And can any man in his conscience affirm this of those who understand
nothing of all that which they say? And now what follows hereupon, but that,
(seeing that the lay man did understand the service to say Amen,) all the
laity, (for that all had to answer, and did perform a part and duty
therein) had also the understanding thereof, and by consequent, that the
service of the ancient Church was solemnized in a language understood of every
particular person. And how could every particular person understand it, if it
were not their vulgar and common speech?

The proofs of this practice, Proofs from all nations.
drawn from several and particular nations will make the same more clear and
manifest. In the Church of Jerusalem and regions thereabout, it is not doubted
but that they used their prayers in the Hebrew tongue; and we have proved that
it was commonly known and understood of all. But to the end that they may not
allege that this was one of the three tongs which were sanctified by the
title upon the Cross of our Lord, Theodor. l. 4. c. 29.
Theodoret tells us that Ephraim an Archdeacon of the town of Edessa in
Syria, used the Syriacke, a corrupt kind of Hebrew, and that his Homelies were
in this language, and so were his canticles likewise and songs, says
Sozomenus, which were sung in the Churches of Syria. For as concerning the
Greek tongue, Hieronum. de Eccle. Scriptor. Basil. ep. 63.
Theodoret and Amphilochius do testify, that he was ignorant therein. Now this
was above 400. years after the death of our Lord. S. Basil after he has
delivered and set down, how that all the church did sing together, and kindle
their zeal by meditating of that which was sung, which cannot possibly be
conceived to have been in a tongue not understood, adds these words, saying: If
you avoid and shun us for this, the^ also shun the Egiptians, the Lybians, the
Thebanes, Palestines, Arabians, Phenicians, Syrians and Euphrateans, for
amongst al these, the vigils, singing of psalms and prayers that are common,
are had in honor and chief account. Hyeronym. ad Heliodor. in epitaphio
Nepotian.
S. Jerome in like manner, says: Now the tongues and lips of all manner of
people do sound out the death and resurrection of Christ. I cease to speak of
the Jews, Greeks and Latins, which our Lord has consecrated by the title of
his cross: but the wild and savage nation of the people called Bessi, even
this whole people clothed in skins, and who sometimes were wont to kill and
sacrifice men, have broken the harsh and rough vein of their tongue, and
turned it into Christian hymns: and now what speech or talk does there sound
throughout the whole world, but only Christ. And furthermore at this time the
Maronites had their service in the Chaldie: the Armenians in the Armenian
language: the Abyssines, in the tongue of the Abyssines: and these namely which
make such a sum and measure of the name Christian, as that all the countries,
which at this day have given their names to the Bb. of Rome, do not amount or
rise to a greater number. In the Churches living after the manner of the
Greeks, their liturgies were kept and continued in Greek, and that throughout
every place, whereas this language had planted it self: as appears by the
liturgies attributed to S. Basil and S. Chrysostom: as also by the very use
and custom of Greece. But to the end they may not attribute that, either to
the worthiness of the tongue, or to the prerogative which they pretend to be
purchased by the title of the cross; in such place as where their language is
not greek, and yet their Church ordered after the manner of the Greek
churches, their service is in the vulgar language of their country, and not in
Greek. This is evident by all the Churches that are in that great Empire of
Muscouia and Russia, in all which there is no other language received or heard
then the common and vulgar: howsoever they acknowledge and approve of the
course of the Patriarch of Constantinople and the Greek confession.

And as for the Latin and Western Churches, The like in the La^ine churches.
let us not imagine that there was any other rule kept and observed in them.
The Greek tongue, says Cicero, went in his time almost over all the world: the
Latin, also because of the Empire had spread very far. And this is it which
makes some show and likelihood, that the service of diverse of the Western
regions was said in Latin: but yet so notwithstanding as that even there also
the rule will prove general, namely: that were it in Latin, or were it
otherwise: yet in the old and ancient Western Churches it was always so as it
was in others, namely, in a language understood of the hearers. The vulgar and
natural speech in Italy was Latin, and therefore we are of judgment, that in
the neighbor provinces of Spain, France, etc. there is likelihoode, that the
Empire in establishing his laws, did likewise propagate and multiply the use
of his language: as in deed the provinces were reported to speak Roman, that
is the tongue of the Empire; howbeit that their original language was never
altogether abolished and extinct. But if it be doubtful whether the service
there were done in Latin or no, yet it stands certain and firm, that it
was done in a language known and understood of the people. Sulpicius in the
life of Saint Martine, says; As the Reader, Sulpicius in vita Martin.
whose course it was to read upon that day, was detained by the throng of
people, one of his assistants taking the Psalter, betook himself to the first
verse that be met withal. Now the Psalm was, Out of the mouths of babes and
sucklinges thou have perfected thy praise, etc. Which place being read, there
was a shout and cry made by the people, in such sort, as that all their
adversaries were ashamed and confounded. The people no doubt was moved with
that which they understood: yea it is most clear and manifest, that it was so:
for if this portion of scripture were read at this day in the midst of our
common people of France: it is most certain, that seeing the ignorance that
reigns amongst them, there is not one that would be moved to cry, in as
much as not any one would take any regard thereto. And as for Spain, it
appears that the Latin tongue has been familiar in it of old, by the
steps and marks thereof remaining amongst them still, by the laws which the
Goths established amongst them, by the Gothish Code (as they call it) which is
written in very good Latin, Lucius Marmiculus. l. 5.
and by those worthy personages which have sprung out from amongst them, as
lights of the Latin tongue, as Lucane and the Senecas, with diverse others. In
so much as one of their Chroniclers says, that if the Goths and the Mores had
not come into Spain, the Spanish tongue had remained as pure and incorrupt, as
the Romans their language was in the time of Cicero: and therefore if their
service were in Latin, it was vulgar: if it were not vulgar, then had Isidore,
Archbishop of Seuill, said in vain: Isidor. de eccle. Offi. c. 10.
That when there is singing in the church, it behooves every man to sing, and
when there is praying, that every man do pray: for what edge or quickening to
the spirit can the singing of a Psalm, or the making of a prayer that is not
understood afford and bring? And so of England; the language of their Island
was peculiar to themselves, and no Latin amongst them, save what the Romain
Colonies did speak. They will have it, that Christian religion was established
there in the time of Joseph of Aremathia: howbeit Chrysostom says, that it
was about his time. And yet nevertheless S. Gregory says, that in his time,
the tongue of the ancient inhabitants of great Britain, called at this day
England, Gregor. in Job. c. 27.
had no better a sound then a barbarum frendere, a rude and barbarous kind of
grunting: and how then could the Latin service be found there? But the truth
is, (as certain English Jesuits do confess) that S. Augustine the Monk sent
by Gregory, did there change and alter both the form and tongue wherein they
had before celebrated their service: for they could not fetch or derive the
antiquity of their religion any further off. They say, it cannot at the least
be denied, but that the Latin service was used in the Churches of Afric:
then let us add thereto, that the Latin tongue was also common there amongst
the rascal and poorer sort of people. This appears, for the sermons of
Saint Cyprian and S. Augustine Bbs. of Afric, were made in the Latin tongue.
Now we are of the same judgment with our adversaries: that sermons ever were,
and so ought to be made for the instruction of the people in the common and
vulgar tongue: because (say they) that properly they are to be applied and fitted
for the capacity of the people, and prayers directed unto God. But in another
place. S. Augustine says, that being borne in the City of Tagusta in Africa,
Idem. l. 1. retract. c. 10.
he had learned the Latin tongue, Inter blandimenta nutricum, by means of the
sporting and pleasing speeches which are current amongst cockering nurses: that
is, in his swathing clothes, or whiles he was very young and tender: whereby it
appears that nurses had the knowledge of it. Again he says: To the end,
that even the most simple and ignorant may see and perceive, that it is of
purpose because of the Donatists, I have turned a psalm into Latin, that it
may the better remain with them and be remembered. Hence is proved, that it was
common to the basest and coursest kind of people. And for as much as that the
people there did not speak good congruitie, S. Augustine applies himself unto
their Solaecismes, Idem in psalm. 118.
saying; ossum for os: and sometimes taking one case for another, saying:
Because it is far better that the Gra^marians should reprove us, the^ that the
people should not understand us. In a word, he says, This is a Proverb
amongst the Carthaginers: I will tell it you in latin in as much as you al do not
understand and conceive the Punicktong. Hence it follows that the Latin tongue
was better known in Afrike, then the Punicke it self. But will you further
see, that whereas the knowledge of this tongue was wanting in this country,
there they did not tie themselves to have their service in it? Throughout all
Sclauonia, they had their service in the Dalmatian tongue, Ecchius de Missa
Latina.
and S. Jerome likewise did translate it into their tongue: and our adversaries
are of judgment, that it is still so observed there unto this day. In this
part of Italy likewise called great Greece, over against Sicilia, it is said
in Greek, because the Greek tongue was there vulgar and common. In Germany, to
the coming in of the pretended reformation of Boniface, that is to say, until
after the year 800. Walasr. c. 7.
it was observed after the like manner and order: in so much as that Walafridus
the Abbot says, that even in his time the Northern countries had their service
in the German tongue. Aeneas Sylu. histor. Bohem. c. 13.
And Aeneas Syluius after the time of Pope Pius the 2. reports after many
others, that as Cyril and Methodius were converted to the Christian faith,
certain people speaking the Sclauonian tongue were come to entreat the Pope
about the year 800. that it might be permitted them to have their service in
their vulgar tongue: whereupon the Consistory being gathered together, and
standing doubtful what to do therein, there was heard a voice, as it were from
heaven, in these words: Omnis spiritus landet Dominum, and omnis lingua
confiteatur ei, let every spirit praise the Lord, and let every tongue confess
and acknowledge him. And in deed whatsoever our adversaries do allege against
this, as done, is more then 600. years after the death of our Lord: that is to
say, all that which they allege, after the time that the Popes for to
establish their authority did undertake as we have said in another place, to
impose and thrust the set form of the Romish service upon all nations,
abolishing others as theirs came in place: and that in their Roman language:
for so of this exploit some attribute the first attempt and onset to Pope
Vitalian, about the year 700. Now this old custom of the Church is to be
compared and joined with those goodly Maxims and general rules of the ancient
Doctors. S. Augustine says: August. in psalm. 18. Basil. in ps. 28.
Let us be well advised and look that we take hold with a clear and
enlightened hear of that which we sing with one consent of voice. And Basil
conformablie: Let the tongue sing, but let the heart and understanding at the same
time sound and reach the sense and meaning of that which is sung. Cassiodor. in
psalm. 46.
And Cassiodorus; Let us look that the understanding of the thing, be joined
with the singing of it; for nothing can be done wisely without the
understanding of it. Which things cannot concur and go together after the
rules and practice of popish doctrines. And Justinian the Emperor for to
remedy such abuses took the matter in hand, about the time that the Pope
labored with might and maine to bring them in, in these words saying: We will
and command, that the Bbs. and Pastors do celebrate the oblation and prayers in
baptism with a loud voice, Justin. Nouel. de diverse. eccl. c. 123.
such as may be understood of the people, to the end they may be stirred up to
greater devotion to praise God, etc. alleging for the confirmation of his
constitution, the places of S. Paul, 1. Cor. 14. and menacing and roughly
thundering out against the^ the judgments of God if they should do to the
contrary. And whereas they answer, that this constitution was not further of
force then in the Greek churches, it is not to be taken for any answer. Eusebius.
in vita Constan. ora. 4
For we know that if the jurisdiction of Rome have bound the whole empire, that
then in like manner this constitution made by Justinian, and his drift in the
contriuing and ordaining of his ecclesiastical laws, is known by these
words: C. de Iudic. l. propemod. C. de Epise. and Cleric. I. generaliter.
Carol. l. 1. c. 70. and 173. l. 6. Orig. contr. Celsum. l. 8. Thom. in 1. Cor.
14. Lyranus ibid. Ioh. Belet. in summa de dium Offi. Cardin. Caieta. in 1. Cor.
14
Which we understand and take to be of force, not in the old and new Rome
only, but universally without any prescription of place throughout the whole
world. Charles the great for the same purpose ordained, that the people should
know and understand that which they demand of God, and that which is said in
the Mass, and not the priest alone. Thus we have sufficiently proved, that
which Origin says in one word: That all the people of his time did praise and
call upon God in their own proper language. Whereupon Thomas and Lyranus do
both of them say upon the 1. Cor. 14. That that without all doubt was the
custom of the Primitive Church, and by that means more zealous and devout.
And John Belet says further: But what shall we do now a days, since there are
so few that understand any thing, whether you mean the hearers or the readers?
But that we should rather hold our peace then sing? In a word, our
adversaries, even the most wilful and obstinate amongst them, are constrained
here to submit themselves. The Cardinal Caietan who says: That it is more for
edification to do service in a language understood of the people and of the
Clergy, then in Latin: Sixtus Senens. lib. 6. ^nnot. 263.
and is reproved by Ambrose of Compsa a city of the Hirpines, and censured by
Sixtus Senensis. Harding likewise, who acknowledges that that was necessary
in the time of the rawnes of the Primitive Church: which being confessed, let
him show a reason why it should be less necessary in ours? and let him lay
his hand upon his conscience and answer, if the darkness of that Church were
not more precious and of greater value, then all that which we call light? and
their rawnes and unlettered condition, better then our learning? But what will
this matter come to, Innocent. 3. Extrauag. de offi. iud. ordin.
if we conclude and shut it up with a sentence against the Pope, and that
uttered by a Pope? For thus says Innocent the third: In as much as in diverse
places in one city or diocese, there are people, which holding the same
faith, use diverse tongues, we most straightly charge and command the Bishops of
the same, that they be provided of capable and sufficient persons, who
according to the diversity of ceremonies and tongues may celebrate and say
them scruice, and administer unto them the Sacraments. Council. Latera. c. 9.
And the same is ordained in the Council of Laterane, Chap. 9. Our adversaries
say, that the same extends no further then to the two languages of Greek and
Latin: which thing we desire to be proved. Yea rather let us say and boldly
affirm to the contrary, that this was decreed upon the requests of diverse
nations that had taken Constantinople: as namely, Germans, Frenchmen, Italians,
Englishmen, etc. whereunto they reply and answer, how that at least it was
never yet kept or observed. And I can tell them, that Leo the tenth did permit
unto the Chaldeans and Syrians their service in their vulgar tongue, and that
at Rome. But for a second answer, who knows not that the best Canons are
neglected even in the Church of Rome? And further therewithal take this, how
that this decree was about the year 1200.

It is then the next question to know how so great a change and alteration
should happen? In which point let us note, that it is but in the Latin Church:
A tongue not understood in the Roman Church only, and by what means.
for in all other places service is understood of the people: a prerogative
purchased and obtained partly of ignorance, and partly of malice, which is
fallen upon them more then upon any others. But yet further, how and by what
means in the Latin Church? certainly in part by the alteration and changing
of tongs, and in part by changing of services, for that Pope Gregory did
undertake the change and alteration that is in the Latin church, which the
Popes his successors caused to be received, as we have already said by the
authority of princes, and above all the rest by the work of Pipin and
Charlemaine: the Popes and they, the one of them lending their hand to the
other, the one by the authority of the spiritual Monarchy, and the other by
the authority of the temporal. And to the end, that all might depend and
rely upon Rome: they caused their service to be received in all the Western
provinces, and that not only after the Roman order, but also in the Roman
tongue. The abettors and furtherers whereof were Remigius Archb. of Roan,
brother to Pipin: amongst the French men, Boniface an English man, Archbishop
of Mentz in Germany, and Augustine the Monk an Italian Archbishop of
Canterbury in England. And afterward, as the nations of the infidels were
sudbued by the Christian Princes, the Latin service was established amongst
the^, after the manner of the Romish Church, as in Sueueland, Denmark, Saxony,
Bauaria, etc: The tongues also, in as much as the Northern nations did
ouerflow the whole Western Empire for a long time, did likewise there take
root, and settle their abode: whereupon insued so great and gross a
corrupting of tongues, and especially of the Romish, which was for the most
part admitted and received in those places, in so much as that by little and
little it came to pass, that the common people did not any more understand it:
so far differing from it self, in process of time became the tongue which
had been ordinary and common, that is to say the Roman tongue, from that
which sometime it had been, when they did use both to speak and write in it.
Which thing is easily found out and perceived to have happened in Italy,
Spain, and France, where the tongues used at this day were but dialects or
manners of speech somewhat differing at the first: and then afterward all of
them, Or the Latin tongue somewhat corupted.
corruptions of the Latin tongue. The service therefore continuing still in
Latin, and the vulgar language altering and changing: the service, which at
the first was easy to be understood of the people, became rude and barbarous
unto them, that is, such as they understood not, the prelates having no care to
draw them back again to the first institution, whether lulled asleep through
careless security, or willingly admitting the means whereby they might
excel and go beyond the laity, and therewithal the well inclined being still
oppressed and kept down by the authority of the Pope. Even just after the
same manner as it would have fallen out in other cases with us in France: in
as much as the case so stood in the beginning, as that matters of suit and law
were pleaded in Latin, and all manner of writings made in Latin, howbeit that
the common people by reason of the change that happened, did not understand it:
but that our kings as those which did more carefully watch over the goods of
the people, then the Romish Bishops did over their souls, have been very
provident wisely to foresee, and by their ordinances to provide for the same.

CHAP. VI. That in the Primitive Church and a long time after, the holy
scriptures were read amongst the people in all tongues.
THe liturgy then or divine service, That the scriptures were translated into
all languages, even from the first times.
was retained in the Church in the vulgar and common tongue for a long space,
following the precept of Saint Paul: Let every thing be done to edification in
the Church. And as for the Maxim of the Church of Rome, which is to hold the
people in ignorance, that so they may not come to the knowledge of their
faluation, it did not take place but of late, and that for no other end but to
bind their consciences and knowledge, to go no further, neither yet to come
short of the conscience and skill of their curates, that so they may pray upon
their simplicity, either by leading them into vain superstition, or into
servile subjection. The holy scriptures of the old Testament, say they, were
written in Hebrew, and those of the new Testament in Greek, and not in any
other tongue. Let it be so, and good cause why, seeing the Hebrew tongue was
the language of Israel, to whom the law was properly and peculiarly given, and
the Greek likewise very common, known unto all the East parts, where
Christianity did first spring and spread abroad. But what prerogative do they
show us why they should so advance and cleave unto the Latin? Let them answer
them that the Gospel was notwithstanding preached by word of mouth in all
tongues, and to that end was the gift of tongues sent unto the Church: which
was no sooner ceased, but that the scriptures both of the old and new Testament
were found as a supply of the same, translated into diverse tongues, as Hebrew,
Syrian, Arabicke, and Scythian, as the ecclesiastical history does witness
unto us: that this diligent endeavor continued and endured by the industry of
good pastors, in such measure and sort, as that the knowledge of Christ, gained
and got ground in the world. Thus we see that Saint Jerome translated the holy
scriptures into the Dalmaticke tongue: Hieronym. in ep. ad Sophron. Gregor.
Patriarch. Alexand. in vita Chrysostom. Sixtus Senens. in l. 4. in lit. l. k.
Postellus in ep. ad Ambr. Theseum.
Chrysostom into the Armenian: Vlphilas, Bishop of the Goths into Gothicke:
Methodius into the Sclauonian: and their translations are found as yet both
extant and in use. And that the same zeal was followed and imitated in the end
in all Churches, so that we have as yet the Gospels in the Ethiopian tongue,
the Psalter in the Egyptian, as also in the Indian tongue, but imprinted in
Syriacke Characters: the five books of Moses in the Persian tongue: the
Psalter and all the new Testament in the Gothish or old Frizeland speech: all
the Bible, from the time of Ethelstanus king of England, that is, nine hundred
years, in the British tongue, etc. And therefore Chrysostom says: The
Syrians, Egyptians, Indians, Persians, Ethiopians, and innumerable other
nations, have the heavenly doctrine translated into their natural tongues, and
by this means have left off their barbarousnes to play the philosophers in
good earnest. Theodoret: Theodor. de corrig. Graecor. affect.
The Hebrew books are not only translated into Greek, but also into Latin,
Egiptian, Persian, Indian, Armenian, Scythian, Saromatian, and in a word, into
all tongues, which the nations use as yet unto this day. All these good Pastors
zealously and fervently affecting the wholesome instruction of their flocks,
and all these famous Churches had not yet studied or busied their brains about
the title of the Cross, to conclude from thence, that the scriptures could not
be read but in three tongues: because in deed they had no desire or will by
any such shift, so to work their purpose: as that the poor people might not
learn the way whereby they might be saved, that so they might hold their
consciences in homage unto them. Whether it be dangerous or no for the common
people to read them.


But whatsoever any man may seem to be able to say to the contrary (say
they) it is and always has been dangerous for the people to have and read
the holy scripture in their common and natural tongue. And to whom then was it
that our Lord said: Search the scriptures? And wherefore had all Christian
Churches so translated them? But now therefore let them hear, even they which
make such vauntes of the ancient writers, into what danger those ancients
did bring men's consciences, by the reading of the holy scripture: and into what
danger, if a man will believe them herein, they brought the whole Church.

Irenaeus without all doubt did not conceive any such danger to be therein,
Iren. l. 4. c. 12. and 31.
when he said of the heretics the Valentinians: That their not knowing of the
scriptures had brought them to this heresy. He found preservatives therein:
and our adversaries are afraid to meet with poison. And as little pains did
he take to draw back the faithful from the reading of them, because of
obscurity, for he says: The scriptures are open and clear, without
ambiguitie or doubtfulnesse: Origin. in Esa. hom. 2. in Exodus hom. 9.
they may be alike heard of all. Origin in like manner, who took so great
pains to translate and publish them in all tongues, says: Would God we all
believed and did that which is written: Search the scriptures: they are shut
and sealed to the negligent, but they are found to be open and unlocked to
them that seek and knock at the door. By them he would have his
parishioners, his people that were, still to be instructed and catechized, and
his disciples to try and examine his doctrine, for he says: Origin in
Iosuam, hom 20. Idem in Leuit. hom. 9.
When I teach you that which I think, then examine and judge you, whether it
be right and true, or no. For we desire (says he in another place) that
you should not only hear the words of God in the Church: but therewithal
that you should exercise your selves in them in your houses and meditate in
his law day and night. Idem in Ios. hom. 20.
Yea and to the end that they may not be afraid of any difficulty, he says:
Whatsoever difficulty thou shall meet withal, yet if thou read them, thou
shall profit by them: for if our Lord find us occupied in the scriptures, he
will not only vouchsafe to feed us, but also if he find these meats ready
dressed at our houses, he will bring us the Father thither with him, Hieronym.
in Epist. ad Ephesians. l. 3. c. 4.
etc. Saint Jerome gives a general rule, saying: We must read the
scriptures with our whole affection, to the end that as good exchaungers, we
may know to distinguish the good money from the false. So far off was he
from fearing least we should therein receive the false and counterfeite. For
(says he in another place) our Lord has spoken by his Gospel, Idem in Psalm.
86.
not to the end that a few might understand, but all. The laity are not
excluded: but rather on the contrary, he says: The laity must not only have
sufficiently, but abundantly, that so they may instruct one another, that so
they may also reprove one another. Idem in ep. ad. Coloss. c. 3. Idem in
Epitaph. Paulae. Idem de virginitate ad Demetriad.
And he takes his assertion from the third to the Colossians. Let the word
of God dwell abundantly amongst you, etc. The women in like manner as little:
for he says of his Paula in praising of her: It was not tolerated or winked
at in any of her sisters, that they should be ignorant in the Psalms, or
fail to read and learn something daily out of the holy scripture. And he
gives the same counsel to Demetrias. On the contrary, he condemns
certain of his time, who did refrain to read them as our ignorant friars
do, under the shadow of humility, Idem in 1. ad Tit.
saying: They give themselves to ignorance, idleness, and sleeping, thinking
in the mean time, that it is their only sin to read the scriptures: and
therewithal they contemn and set light by those which meditate in the law of
the Lord day and night, accompting of them as prattling and unprofitable
fellows. And Saint Augustine speaks to the same effect: August. sermon. 1.
fer. 6 post Dom. passione^.
We take great comfort and consolation in the reading of the scriptures: for
in them a man may view and see himself as in a mirror. This reading purifieth
and purges him from the filth of sin, partly by setting before him the
horror of hell, and partly by kindling the fervent desire of coming to
heavenly joys. Who would be often with God, Idem in psalm. 33.
let him pray and read. When we pray, we speak to God: when we read he
speaks to us. And he further gives this lesson to all, saying in these
words: Read the holy scriptures, for God has commanded that they should be
written, Idem in Volus. epist. 3.
to the end that you might all receive consolation both learned and unlearned,
and as well Clergy as laity: for (says he) God speaks in the scriptures
as a close and private friend: He speaks without any color or painting,
unto our hearts, whether we be wise and skillful, or ignorant. And he is not
contented, that one should hear in the Church: Idem in c. Ieiunn.
But furthermore, says he unto those of his Diocese, It is not sufficient
that you hear the holy lessons in the Church: it behooves you to read them
your selves in your own houses, or that you seek out such as may read them
unto you. On the contrary, he censureth certain people of his time, who
thinking to be more humble then the rest, would not read them, who fear
(says he) to learn, least they should grow proud: Idem in psalm. 131. Idem in
lib. 2. de doctr. Chri. c. 6. and (...) tract. 45 in Johan.
And by that means (says he) they continue still as sucklinges in their
milk, which the scripture reproves.

In like manner he armeth us with couragiousnesse against all obscurity and
difficulty that may be conceived or thought to be in them, saying: There is
nothing spoken obscurely in one place, which is not made very clear and
plain in some others. All whatsoever belongs to faith and good works, is
therein set down very clearly. There are therein plain and clear points to
satisfy thy hunger, and there are again some obscure and dark places to whet
thine appetite. And the same thing is given out by Fulgentius and Gregory in
other words: Fulgent. in ser. de co^fessionib. Gregor. in ep. ad Leandrum.
Basil. in psalm. 1.
There is store and plenty for a strong man to eat, and for the child and
weakling to suck upon: in this river the lamb may sport it self and be
merry, and the Elephant may swim, etc. Saint Basil: The holy Scripture is
as an (...), a shop or storehouse furnished with medicines, from amongst which
every man may make choice of that which is fit for his disease: the only
way to come to find out the truth, is the meditating of the scriptures: And
he handles this point at large. Bellarmine replieth, saying, Idem in Ep. ad
Greg. Mang.
that he sent the Steward of the Emperor Valens his kitchen unto his
kitchen, when he went about to be speaking of the Scriptures. And what and if
against so many places, he did allege this one little story in truth? But
Theodoret only says, that this was not in respect of the Scriptures,
Theodor. lib. 4 Eccles. hist. c. 19. Chrysostom in hom. de Lazaro.
but in respect of his course and barbarous carriage toward him. But let us
hear Chrysostom: for he perplexeth them greatly, and makes them in a
pitiful case, saying; The reading of the scriptures, is a great bulwark
against sin: the ignorance and not knowing of the Scriptures, a headlong
downfall, and a bottomless mudpit. To know nothing of the law of God is a
mighty means of the overthrow of our salvation: This is it which has
begotten heresies, and corrupted the manners of men, which has turned all
things vpside down: Idem ad Hebrae. hom 8.
The Manichies (says he) and other heretics do beguile and deceive the
simple: but if we have acquainted our souls with discerning betwixt good and
evil, it shall be easy for us to know and find them out, and this
acquaintance and familiarity we shall attain by the use of the scriptures.
Theophilact, who follows the^ almost step by step, says of the scriptures,
which arm us to withstand such delusions, because that they are that light
which does discover and catch the thief, etc. They are good for our Monks and
Doctors of Sorbone, will our adversaries say. But to this point let us hear
further, for the same Chrysostom says; Idem in Mat. hom. 3.
Lo here the plague and bane of all, you think the reading of the holy
scriptures does not belong to any but Monks: but it is more necessary a great
deal for you then for the Monks; and it is so much the more your sin, to
think that one ought not to read them, then not to read them your selves.
Such speeches cannot but come from a devilish meditation. We are assaulted by
the weapons and fiery darts of the Devil, how shall we shun or quench them?
surely by the reading of the scriptures: for I tell thee, and tell thee
again; Idem in hom. 3. de Lazaro.
that without the continual reading of the scriptures no man can come to
eternal life. Every artificer is furnished with such tools and instruments as
serve for his mystery and occupation, as are necessary for his work: and I
tell thee O thou Christian, that the books of the Prophets and Apostles are
the instruments of a Christian to amend his soul, to redress what is amiss,
and to renew that which is grown old in us, etc. But thou will say, happy is
every simple soul, he that walks simply, walks surely. But S. Idem hom.
16. in Ioh. Proverb. 10.9. 1. Pet. 5.15. Colos. 3.16.
Peter has said unto thee: Be ye always ready to render a reason to any
whosoever shall ask you any question of the hope that is in you. And S.
Paul, let the word of Christ dwell plentifully in you, etc. The cause of all
evil is, that for the most part there is not any, that know how to allege
any places of scripture to the purpose for that which they speak: for the
simple is not there to be taken or understood of one that is a sot or an
ignorant person, but for that man which is not given to wickedness, which is not
given to guile and deceitfulnes, etc. For otherwise how should our Lord have
said: Be wise as Serpents, but simple as Doves. Chrysostom. hom. 3. de Lazaro.
But I have an occupation or office to attend upon in the kings Court, or in
some of the Courts of the law: I have a trade: I have a wife: yea, but is it
not the property of those that have forsaken the world to read the scripture?
Is it not the property of those which sit upon the tops of the mountains? O
man (says he) what will thou here say unto us: have thou nothing else to do
but to turn over the books of the scriptures? and certainly that a great
deal rather then they: for they being freed of these worldly cares, are as it
were in a haven: But thou who art tossed continually amidst the waves of this
world, have thou not so much the more need to take unto thee these same to
be thy consolation? But certainly they who shall use such speeches, I know
not how they should be worthy to live and breath, how they should not be
ashamed to look upon the Sun. But we cannot all have books, we are too
poor to buy them: I pray thee tell me, Idem hom. 10. in Johan.
have thou not as poor as thou art, the tools and instruments of thy craft and
occupation? and will thou excuse thy self of poverty, when thou should
provide thee instruments of thy professed Christianity? these implementes and
tools, whereby there grows so great commodity? But in the end, for he
stops as it were by the way of prophesying of these latter times, all the
holes that our adversaries do set open; We shall not (it may be) understand
that which we shall read in the holy scriptures. But (says he) will you
do well? At the least upon the sabath day be diligent to read the Gospel.
Idem ibid.
And before that you go to hear the sermon, repeat me it often at home, take
pain and diligently endeavor thyselfe for to find out the sense: Idem hom.
de Lazaro.
which will show it self to be either plain or obscure and dark, or will
seem to hang and agree well together, or to disagree: mark me these things
well, and then prepare thy self to hear the sermon with all attention. I tell
thee moreover, that although thou do not understand the things which lie
therein hidden and secret, that yet there does not cease to rise and come unto
thee a great measure of sanctimonie and holiness. Notwithstanding it is
impossible that thou should be every where alike ignorant in them, seeing
that the holy Ghost has in such sort tempered them, as that the Publicanes,
Fishers, Dyers, Shepheardes, his simple Apostles, and in a word the unlearned
were saved by the same. And that to the end, that the most ignorant may not
excuse themselves in that sort, to the end that it may appear that the
things which are there spoken of, may appear unto all to be most easy to be
known: and finally to the end, that the artificer, the servant, the widow,
the silly woman, and the most rude and barbarous, may take profit by the
reading of the same, seeing they are not written upon any vain glory of
them that were the Penmen thereof, as the books of the Pagans were, but for
the salvation of the hearers. For it was the course of the Philosophers, that
although they delivered that which was profitable, yet they would fold it up
in obscure terms, the rather to be admired: the Prophets and Apostles their
course was contrary, for they delivered all things plain and clear, they
made them manifest and evident to all men, as they which were the common
Doctors of the universal world: insomuch as that every man may learn by the
only reading thereof, the things that are delivered therein. Idem hom. 3. in
2. Thessal.
Learn (says he again in an other place) without a Preacher: For (says
he) in that we have Preachers, it is but as the remidie of our negligence. All
things are clear and plain in the holy Scriptures, all the necessary
doctrines therein are manifest. And as for you which are otherwise addicted to
be hearers rather then readers, you become delicate, and given to seek forth
such Preachers, as will please and flatter your cares. But Thou aunswerest
again, and say I understand not the scriptures. And tell me why? Are they
written in Hebrew? are they in Latin? are they in any strange and unknown
tongue? have thou not them in Greek? But thou aunswerest, so in Greek, as
that therein abides much obscurity. From whence should this obscurity come?
are they not stories which thou understand clearelie? and do thou speak
unto us of obscurity? These are but excuses and vain words. Idem hom. 12 in
Genes. Idem in Psalm. 95. and 49.
The scripture says he in an other place, expounds it self, it suffers
not him that gives his ear thereto to err: So soon as the testimony
thereof is produced, it confirms both his word that speaks, and his
spirit which hears. And that so far as that the common people by them may
be able to judge of Antichrist. If you have not (says he) recourse to the
scriptures, if your affections run after other matters, you will stumble and
take offense, you will perish, you will not be able to discern which is the
true Church, you will fall into the abomination of desolation, Idem opere
impers. hom. 29. Idem in Ep. ad Coloss. hom. 9.
which is in the holy places of the Church, etc. Because (says he in another
place) that we must not believe the Churches, if they say not and do the
things which are agreeable to the Scriptures. Now then what is there further to
be expected after so many reasons, but that we should cry out with him: Look
about you, you of the secular sort, ye Laity which have wives and children,
how you are here commanded to read the scriptures: (and he takes this his
exhortation from the Coloss. 3.16.) not simply, nor slightly, but
diligently: Coloss. 3.16.
look about you (I say) and consider well of the matter, buy ye Bibles, the
medicines of your souls, at the least the new Testament, the Acts of the
Apostles, the Gospels, etc. And here you have no need of Logic: the pesant
and the simple women understand them, the husband may talk thereof with his
wife, the father with his son, etc. The heretical Priests do shut the
doors of truth upon you, Chrysostom. hom. 1. in Ioh. Idem in opere imperf. hom.
44. Sixth. Senens. l. 6 annot. 152.
because they know that you forsake their Church, and that they shall come
from the Priestlie dignity wherein they are, to be no better then popular
persons, and of the common sort. But what do our adversaries answer
hereunto? There was a time (say they) when the faithful received the Sacrament
with their hands: which custom was afterward, as having been an unworthy
manner of using of it, corrected, and an ordinance made by the church that they
should not touch it any more: the same has she thought good of the holy
Scriptures. Is this in conscience to unloose and dissolve the hard tied knots,
or else to cut them in pieces? to answer, or to wrangle? And has not the
Council of Trent yet dealt more frankly, who have appointed in their Index
expurgatorius: Ind. Expurgatorius. page 27
That wheresoever these words, Scripturae omnibus necessariae, the Scriptures
are necessary for all persons, are found in the Tables of the works of the
holy Fathers, that they should be raced out, and that to the intent that the
Tables thus wiped, there might not remain any direction to guide a man to the
places in their works, where this doctrine is handled. And how much rather
would they have raced the very places themselves out of the books, if there
had been but one or two copies of them? Epiphanius was not altogether agreeing
and of one mind with Chrysostom, and yet the truth has conjoined and knit
them together in this point, for he says: Epiphan. cont Anomantas.
All things are clear and manifest in the scriptures: no contradictions or
contrarieties, no deadly traps laid in them. For such (says he elsewhere)
as with the upright sway of sound reason have to do with the same, not coming
thereunto with a devilish conscience, to throw themselves down headlong into
the bottomless pit of destruction. And wherefore (says Lactantius,) Lacta. l.
6. c. 26
He that has made the understanding, the tongue, and the voice, was not he
able to speak so as that he may be understood? Yea on the contrary, he
would in his singular providence ordain, that the divine things which he spoke
for all, should be without all painted and deceitful coloring, to the end
that they might be understood of all. Whereupon also Theodoret says,
Theodor. de natura hom.
We see commonly that the points of Christian doctrine are not only
understood of them, which are the chief in the Church, and teach the people:
but even of Shoemakers, Lock-Smithes, and those that work in woole, and of all
other sorts of Artificers, yea and which more is, of al sorts of women, as
Semsters, Chamber-maides, and others which get their living with their handie
work, as well having no learning, as those which have learning, if any such be.
Again, they which dwell and keep in the cities, are not only become
skillful therein, but in very good sort those also, that are laborers in the
fields, as neatheardes, and setters of plants, whom thou shall find
disputing of the holy Trinity, and of the creation of all things, yea, and
those more skillful in the nature of man, then ever was Plato or Aristotle. Now
let it be judged by this place, if this people had been thus instructed and
taught by that manner of instruction which is delivered and taught in the
Church of Rome.

Now it remains, that after we have done with these good Fathers, The
answer of the Council of Trent. Index lib. prohib. Reg. 4.
that we take a view of that which the Fathers of the Council of Trent shall
say unto us. Inasmuch (say they) as if the Bibles should remain in the vulgar
tongue, men through their rashness would take more harm, then good thereby, we
forbid them to have any without the leave and license of the Bb. or Inquisitor,
and that under their hand writing; who will be ready to grant the^ the same,
upon the certificate or witness of their Curate or Confessor. If any man have
any otherwise, we declare and make known unto him, that he cannot have
absolution from his sins until he have given up his Bible unto his Curate or
Ordinary. And as for the Printers, they shall loose the value of such books
to be bestowed upon the poor. Likewise it is our meaning that the Regulars
shall not read or buy them without the permission of their Prelates. What
shall we say here or rather what shall we not have to say? The old Writers did
chide the Laity as culpable of a notorious crime, for not having of Bibles,
and here the Pope and his shauelinges do punish the Laity for having of them,
they do confiscate the Bibles, they forbid them not as a sin only, but upon
the penalty of not having their sins forgiven, yea and which is more, the
Regulars themselves vowed by their institution and ordaining to the study of
holy Scripture, are likewise subject to the penalty. I pray you, is it
possible that one and the same spirit can say and unsay? And what will follow
hereupon then? but that those good Fathers being assured of the soundnes of
their doctrine, did take pleasure that it might be viewed and looked upon in
the light, and that these which avoid and shun the same, who can doubt but
that they do doubt of theirs, as convinced in their consciences of abuse,
superstition and heresy.

Now they are not satisfied with having their service in an unknown language,
The secret of the Mass.
as if the strangenes of the language did make it so much the more to be
reverenced, even as it falls out in the receipts of coniurations, and
witchcraft, whereof we read in Cato, Trallianus, Scribonius, etc. But further
they have added thereunto the pronouncing and uttering of the principal part
thereof, according to their construction, which is that, which contains the
consecration to be done secretly and closely, and thereuppon they call it a
secret, and that of purpose in such sort, as that neither the words nor the
sound thereof can be understood of the people, learning the same of the
Pagans, who under the muttering of certain strange and unknown words,
concealed and privily covered their mysteries: Whereas the glory of our
Master is to publish and make open proclamation of his, this great secret
especial which has lain hid from before all worlds, of the salvation
purchased for mankind, by the blood of his Son, whereof he says unto his
Apostles: Preach my Gospel, this good tidings unto all creatures: which by
name he would have published and repeated at all times in his holy Supper,
instituted of purpose for this end in these words: You shall show forth the
death of the Lord unto his coming. But what means this showing forth, but to
utter and speak it so loud, as that it may be heard and so plainly, as that
it may be understood? And what then is there more contrary to the institution
of the holy supper of our Lord, and to the renewing of the remembrance of his
death and passion in the Church, then this pretended mystery? this strange and
unwonted kind of muttering and whispering? Council. Coloniens.
yea and yet furthermore the Council of Colen, about the year 1300. has
added: That the Priest must hasten as fast as he can, in the saying of the
Canon, for fear of being interrupted by some hicket, yexing, neesing or
otherwise: as if it were the property of our God to take us at a word, or at a
half syllable, or as if this mystery depended, and had his whole force upon
the bare pronunciation after the manner of the conceived words of the Pagans
their sacrifices: whereas indeed our God works therein by his holy spirit,
which cannot be interrupted, and looks therein at the faith, as we shall see
afterward (and yet so as that he examineth and tries the same in great
mercy) of him who presents himself unto this holy Table. But let us hear
notwithstanding what the Fathers will say unto us. Saint Paul will that the
people should be able to answer Amen; which they cannot do, as we have
already seen, except they understand, and yet a great deal less, if they do
not hear. So also it was observed and noted by all the ancient Writers.
Clemens Constit. Apost. l. 8
Their Clement whom they so much allege unto us, testifies as well in his
Lithurgie, as in his Apostolic co^stitutions, that after the uttering of the
words which they call the words of consecration, that is, of the institution
of the holy supper, the people said Amen: a sign that they heard and
understood them. Seeing then that the Apostles had so ordained, Ambros. de
Sacram. l. 4. c. 5.
by whom and by what authority is this change and alteration? S. Denis says
of one who had been baptized by the Heretics: That he heard the Eucharist,
and said Amen, together with the rest. S. Ambrose says: And after these
words, thou say Amen, August. in Psa. 33. Cardinal. Bess. de Sacrament.
Euchar.
that is, it is true. S. Augustine, Our brethren likewise do celebrate the
Sacraments, and answer the same Amen. S. Basil. S. Chrysostom, and all the
Greek Churches do the same to this day in their Lithurgies, whereupon also the
Cardinal Bessarion says; The Priest according to the order of the East
Church, utters with a loud voice these words: This is my body, etc. And
Justinian the Emperor in his new constitution before alleged, commands
the same upon pain of grievous punishment, adding thereto the threatening of
Gods judgments, grounding the same upon the precept of Saint Paul, and
rendering this reason thereof, saying: To the end they may be the better
understood of the faithful people, and that the hearts of the hearers may
be so much the more pricked with repentance, as also moved and stirred up so
much the more to praise God. And all are of that mind, that in the Primitive
Church it was never practiced otherwise. Where then will these our adversaries
ground this their new devise? Gab. Biel. in Exposit. Can. l. 15. Lit. D.
And of what time, by what Scripture, Tradition, or Council? They say, we must
have a reverent regard of the Sacrament. And our Lord will say unto them, who
has taught you this pretended reverence? Who has required this honor at your
hands: And that S. Basil says: That contempt is companion unto that which is
common. From whence Innocent the third, does ground his speech: Ne sancta verba
vilescerent, Laicis nota, for fear that these words being understood, should
become vile. But why do they not rather say with Moses: Would to God they had
all prophesied: with S. Paul, Labor above all things that you may prophecy;
that is, that you may understand your selves, and make others to understand?
But and if S. Basil would have stretched this rule to this Sacrament, and to
this kind of pronunciation, wherefore has he left us a contrary example?
And why do we not as quickly call to mind the saying of Lactantius:
Lactanc. l. 5. c. 20.
That these mutteringes so greatly recommended, have been devised and
ordained by wily and crafty Marchantes, to the end that the people might not
understand what they worshipped. Council. Laod. c. 19.
They are not ashamed to allege the Council of Laodicea, but yet so as that
they will not seem to know that there is any thing spoken of the Canon, nor of
the consecration made by the Priest: but rather of the first prayer of the
service of the faithful, which every one of them being exhorted thereunto by
him, made unto God, with a low voice, praying him that it would please him to
bless this holy action and ministry, the steps and printes whereof are
yet to be seen in the Lithurgies. In the end, when they can say no more, they
fly unto miracles: as that certain shepheardes who had learned these words
by heart, did abuse them in saying them over their bread: for which they were
presently punished of God: and from thence forward, the church ordained that
these words should not be spoken otherwise then in secret. But where may we
read this history? Where is the council or decree that followed upon this so
evident and important a miracle? And what other thing do they herein, but
oppose and set a tale made for sport, and in a word the whole shepheardes
Calender, against the institution of Christ, the use and custom of the whole
Church, the constitutions of Emperors, and the testimony of all the Fathers?
Yea and therewithal our adversaries are not ashamed at this day to say: that
who so does use them otherwise, Harding.
does fulfill the saying of our Lord, In giving pearls unto swine, and casting
holy things before dogs. And what will they say then of all the old Church?
and amongst whom shall all the faithful during the time of so many ages be
accounted, but amongst hogs and dogs? Again, the Council of Trent is so bold
as to pronounce and say; Council. Tride^t. c. 8.9.
If any man condemn and disalow the manner and fashion of the Church of Rome,
for speaking the Canon and words of consecration very low, or by affirming
that the Mass ought to be said in a common and vulgar tongue, let him be
accursed. Now it is certain that this custom slipped in for company with the
rest of the abuses of the Mass. The Lords supper was wont of old to be
celebrated every Lords day, and never without the communicating of the
faithful in the same: all the people made one party, both of the whole
service, as also of the holy supper. By little and little it began to be more
rare and seldom, as also less frequented and resorted unto: insomuch as that
in the end there came but a very few people to it, yea there was not any to
communicate in the same. The Pastors notwithstanding, to hold fast their former
authority, were very ready to persuade them that their alone presence was
profitable, and to this end they went and disguised this sacrament, and put
upon it the visarde of a sacrifice: and closed up this general communicating
of the faithful in a particular action performed by the Priest. The Priest
then which was either alone with his only Clearke to answer him, or else
very slenderly accompanied, began to speak with a lower voice: and
Transubstantiation coming upon this solitary condition of the Mass, tied the
force of the sacrament to the pronunciation of words: which the old Church was
always wont to attribute in part to the power of Gods spirit, and partly
to the faith of the communicants: Gab. Biel. in expos. Can. l. 4. l. f. g. h.
and that so far as that Gabriel Biel was so bold as to say, that the
consecration was wrought by a hidden and secret power of these words, even
altogether in such sort, as charmers and witches are wont to draw milk out of
a bench or form, and a helue out of a hatchet. So that to give honor and
reverence unto the Mass, but especially to the consecrating thereof, it grew
by little and little to be a custom, to pronounce these words as secretly
and mystically as may be. And this for a certainty was not found to be
observed before the Council of Lateran in the Roman Church, nor after it in any
other.

CHAP. VII. Wherein is entreated of the Ministers of the Church, and of their
charge and calling in the same.
IT follows that we entreat of persons; That the Ministers of the Church are
to preach the Gospel, and not to offer sacrifices.
and inasmuch as the Mass has no ground in the scripture, or if it would,
yet it cannot have any other then that of the institution of the holy supper,
whereof we avouch that it is the mere deprauation: the Ministers of the same
can consequently be no otherwise sought or found in the scripture, then in
those which have the charge of administering the holy supper, that is to say, in
those which are called Ministers of the word, as Pastors, Ministers,
Bishops, diverse names, but signifiing one and the self same charge, that is
to say, the preaching of the Gospel, and dispensation of the sacraments: for
as for sacrificing Priests, which they call Sacerdotes, we have none of them
in the new Testament: inasmuch as all the sacrifices of the law (as we shall
see hereafter) had relation all of them to the only sacrifice of our Lord,
finished and consumate upon the Cross: and inasmuch as that in this sacrifice
were ended and accomplished all the other sacrifices, there remaining none
other but the sacrifice of thanksgiving, instituted in the holy supper, to
declare this death, to renew it unto the belieuers, and to stir up in their
hearts the praises of God, in acknowledging of this benefit. And in this
sense (says Saint Peter) all the faithful are sacrificing Priests. Neither
was there any order of Priesthood more fitting the name; and the rather, for
that they are all anointed, in as much as they are Christians, and so have
received the anointing of the holy spirit from Jesus Christ the first borne
amongst his Brethren. Our Lord sends his Apostles, Matthew. 18. Mark 16.
he gives them his holy spirit. But is this to offer Sacrifices? Preach
(says he) the Gospel unto all creatures: Baptize in the name of the Father,
of the Son, and of the holy Ghost, etc. that is, declare my word, dispense
and distribute my Sacraments. Tit. I. 1. Tim. 3.5.
S. Paul says: Let the Bb. be firm in the word, faithful and mighty to
exhort by wholesome dostrine, fit to instruct and teach, as also to reprove and
correct the sinners, etc. Of the sacrificing of the body and blood of our Lord
for the quick or dead, not a word. And furthermore we do not see that in the
ancient Church at such time as they received the imposition of hands, that any
such charge was given unto them, notwithstanding, that for to apply themselves
both to the Jews and the Gentiles, the ancient Doctors did sometime call them
Sacerdotes, and their Ministry, Sacerdotium, that is to say, Sacrificing
Priests, and the action of Sacrificing: as S. Paul also says, Romans 15. Orig.
in Ep. ad Romans l. 10. Nazian. in ora. ad plebem. Chrysostom. in Ep. ad Romans hom. 19.
Pac^ym. in Dionys. 1. Pet. 2. Cyprian. de Vnct. Chrisma. Origin in Leu. hom. 9.
August. in exposit. inchoata ad Romans
I sacrifice the Gospel of God: calling the Ministry of the word a
sacrifice: and so in like manner the most ancient Writers. Origin: This is the
work of a Sacrificer to preach the Gospel of Christ. And Nazianzene to his
people: I have offered you to God, as an offering or beast that is sacrificed.
And Chrysostom: My offering and sacrificing is to preach and publish the glad
tidinges of the Gospel. Whereupon also Pachimeres the expounder of Dionisius
says, He calls a Priest him, who is properly called (...), an Elder,
because that custom has so obtained. On the contrary, all Christians are
called Priests in S. Peter: You are a royal Priesthood. In the Revelation of
S. John in like manner, etc. Whereupon S. Cyprian utters these words: All
those which of the name of Christ are called Christians, do offer unto God a
daily sacrifice, and are ordained of God Priests of holiness. And Origin. All
such as are anointed with the holy unction, that is, with the holy spirit of
Christ, are made Priests thereby. And he presses the place of S. Peter to
that purpose. And S. Augustine goes further, saying: Every man offers the
whole burnt offering of the passion of our Lord for his sins. Which is the
cause also, that S. Ambrose would have men to be thoroughly intentive; Ambros.
1. Cor. 83. Chrysostom in 2. Cor. hom. 8.
To the end (says he) that this oblation which is of many, may be celebrated
together. And Chrysostom seteth it down unto us for a general rule; That in
the mysteries, that is in this sacrament, the Pastor differs not from the
Parishioner, etc.

In like manner the form and ceremony of ordaining and instituting of
Ministers in the Apostolic Church, is most clear and evident. The manner of
the laying on of hands, used of the old Church.
The Church prayed God that it would please him to be present by his holy
spirit, at the election, and to bless it. And to the end that they might be
the more fervent in prayer, they used to fast before: after which, those which
were elect by the Church, received the imposition of hands, in the beginning by
the Apostles, and afterward by the Pastors and Bishops, but never without a
perfect knowledge and trial of their doctrine and life. It is also to be
observed, that whereas our Lord breathed upon his Apostles, saying unto them:
Receive the holy Ghost: the Primitive Church notwithstanding, did not practice
the same, because such signs have no other power then that which God has
given unto them, and therefore must not presumptuously be conceived to have
any such, except there appear the express institution and ordinance of the
Lord for the warrant of the same.

In the election of the Bb. Fabian, Eus^b. l. 6. c. 29
we see the simplicity that was in the old Church. The Church came together,
as well the Elders and Deacons, as the other people: many were propounded, as
thought worthy to undertake the charge: in the end Fabian by the common consent
and voice of the whole Church is named Bb. and sometimes we see the common
people make the election and after to present the elected to the Presbytery,
that is, to the ecclesiastical assembly: and other sometimes we see the
Presbytery to propound them unto the people for to approve them, if there be
no man that can say any thing against them: only it was always used, that
before they were ordained and installed in their Ministry, there was a
general agreement and consent of the people and ecclesiastical order, that
is, of the whole Church, as concerning the soundnes of his doctrine, and
vnspottednes of his life, which was to be chosen Bishop or Elder. And this
we could prove through all ages successively, if so be it were any
controversy amongst us. For the present, the question is, first of the charge
of the Minister of the church, whether Bishop or Priest: for the first were
entitled by the Ancientes, with the name of Ministers, and the old Episcopal
books do yet make mention thereof: secondly, of the ceremony, which was
observed in the ordaining of the same. And seeing that these two points do
one of them clear and make plain the other; we purpose to insist and stand
upon them. The charge of such a one I say, was to preach the Gospel and
administer the Sacraments: not to say Masses, not to sacrifice the body of
Christ for the living and for the dead. The form of giving of orders in the
ancient time. Theodoret l. 4 c. 23. Council. Carth. 4. c. 1. and 2. Epiphan. l.
1. tom. 2. Sozom. l. 4. c. 24. Just. Nouel. 123 de eccles. diuer.
The ancient form and manner also (say we) had not any ceremony that did
show any thing either of Priests or sacrifices. And this we must prove by
taking the search and view of the ancient records of antiquity. Theodoret
teaches us in the election of one that was to succeed Meletius the Great,
that it was the custom in ordaining of a Bb. that all the Bbs. of the Province
should be present thereat, at the least three or four. Where he was examined
of his doctrine, and sometimes called to make confession of his faith: and in
his life, so far forth as that he was to answer therein to whatsoever he
could be accused of, or charged withal; whereupon we have a most express
law made by Justinian the Emperor. Afterward it was agreede that the
Metropolitan, or in his absence the most ancient Bishop should lay his hand
upon him and bless him: and all the others likewise laid to their hands in
sign of consent. And to the end that he might be advertised and put in mind
of his duty by an eye sign, two Bishops held the holy Gospels over his
head, to the end he might know that his calling tied him to the preaching of
the Gospel. And this ceremony was ordinarily done before the holy Table,
where the Sacraments were wont to be administered. Nazian in leudem Basil.
In some places likewise it was observed, that the Bishop passed through all
the degrees of the Church, before that he came to that place and room. S.
Denis describing this ceremony, says The Bishop is kneeling before the
Altar, he has the books given of God, held over his head, and the hand of
the Bishop, that is, his, who lays his hands upon him, and is blessed of
him by most holy prayers: the consecrating Bishop does set upon him the
sign of the Cross, etc. but of the Mass, or any sacrifice, or yet any other
ceremony, he speaks not at all. August. l. 3. cont. Crescon. c. 21. and 22.
Sozom. c. 19. l. 8. Chrysostom. 2. Cor. 8. hom. 18 Volaterr. l. 22. Herman. Gigas
Council. Aquisgran. c. 9.
The same form and manner was practiced in the person of Cresconius,
Maximilianus, Theophilus Alexandrinus, etc. and these always with public
prayers and fasting going before. And from thence the Roman Church retains
as yet the fastes of the four times, because that Pope Gelasius did ordain
that Orders should be given only four times a year, upon a Saturday, the
days going before being spent in examining their lives and manners. The ages
following added thereto the staff and the ring, saying; The staff as a
shepheardes crook to reform and call the straggling into the way, as also to
uphold the infirm and weak, and the ring in sign of the honor due unto
Bishops, and for to seal their secrets withal. But the truth is, that this
was after that they were become Lords of great Lordshippes, and that the Popes
and Emperors would receive fealty and homage from them; inuesting them with
these ensigns and badges, as Knights and Squiers are wont to be noted out by
the spear, the sword and shield, etc. But what get we hereby? but that the
Bb. both in his election and examination, as also in the whole form and manner
observed in his ordination, was charged only to teach the word of God well
and faithfully, and to administer his holy sacraments purelie and sincerely,
and to correct his people by his prescribed form of discipline, and his church
with such a government as is truly Christian? And look what we say of the Bbs.
Bishops and Priests in old time were all one. Paul. in Ep. ad Philippens.
Acts. 20. Tit. 1. 1. Peter 5. 1. Timoth. 4. Hieronym. in Ep. ad Titum. in Ep.
ad Euag.
in the old church, the same we say also of Priests, and that by a much more
stronger and more forcible reason: first, because there is no likelihoode, that
the Priest should have power by his orders to sacrifice the Son of God, and
that it should be denied unto the Bb. secondly, because as we have already said
the minister or priest, and the Bb. in ancient account were but one. And indeed
S. Jerome entreating of this matter, proves the same by many plain and
express texts out of S. Paul as may be seen in the place, and thereupon he
also infers, that they were diverse names of one and the same person; the
one having relation to the age of the party, the other to the dignity of his
office: and that the Priests had power in the old time to lay their hands
upon such as were to be ordained: and that whereas the Priests did choose one
from amongst themselves to be Bb. it was not because indeed one was greater
then an other, but only for the continuing of unity, and cutting off of
schism: and that by the law of God, the Bb. could not assume or challenge any
more to himself then the Priests: and that the Priest or Elder did nothing
which the Bb. did not, Ambros. in Ep. ad Ephesians. c. 4. Chrysostom. in 1. Timoth.
Isidor. D. 12. c. Cl^ros. Beda ad Philip. Sedul. Scotus. in Epist. ad Titum.
Anselm. Cantuar. ad. Titum
and so on the contrary: that in his time Ordination and giving of Orders was
allotted to the Bb. for the reasons abouesaid, and he handles this matter of
purpose, not by the way, and that even to the very bottom. S. Ambrose, S.
Chrysostom, Beda and Isidore affirm the same, concluding in fine, that the Bb.
had not any more to do to give Orders then the Priest: whereupon it should come
to pass, that the controversy would remain always undetermined amongst the
Schoolmen and the Doctors of the Canon law, the Schoolmen striving to place
the Bbs. in the Order of the Priests, and the Doctors lobouring to make a
several Order, for the Bbs. And of all this we conclude: seeing that the office
and charge of the Bb. and Priest was but one, and that the Bbs. did not consist
in any thing, as we have seen, but in the dispensation of the word and
sacraments, and in the conferring and exercising of discipline, and
ecclesiastical policy: that there were not besides these any Priests,
sacrificing for the quick and the dead in the Primitive Church.

In like manner we shall find as little of the Priestlie anointing in S. Of
Unction. Dionys. Hierar. c. 5. Ambros. de dignit. Sacer. 5.
Denis himself, though he may seem to be wholly composed and compact of
ceremonies: for although he say, that the Bb. did use unction or anointing in
many of his offices and functio^s, yet it is not mentioned that he ever used
it about Ordination. And from the practice of Bbs. we conclude the same of
Priests. S. Ambrose says: Man lays on his hands, but God gives the grace,
Sacerdos, the Priest lays on Supplicem dextra^, his right hand, making
request to God for him, and God blesses with his powerful right hand. So then
this was his place, for in this book he entreats expressly of the Priestly
dignity. The very same is set down in the Council of Afric, which was held
in the time of S. Augustine, Council. African. c. 2.3.4. etc
and from whence we have heretofore brought and alleged the Canons concerning
Ordination, and yet all the ceremonies used thereabout are handled throughout
the same. In a word amongst so many elections and promotions of Bbs. to be
found in the ecclesiastical history; there is not any manner of mention made
thereof, except we will believe the Legends of one Simeon Metaphrastes, who
taught in the College at Constantinople about some 150. years ago. They
object unto us S. Cyprian: Cyp. de vnct. Chrysin.
but Bellarmine himself is of judgment, that the book of Chrisme is not his
work, and for any place elsewhere, he speaks of the ordination of a Bb. not
one word. On the contrary, he makes the true unction or anointing common not
only to all the Clergy, but unto all Christians. They themselves are
ashamed of Anacletus his Epistle. To be short, the first that speaks
plainly thereof is Gregory the Great, Gregor. 1. Reg. 9.
in the sixth age in his Commentaries upon the Kings; who as much as lay in him,
did cast upon the Christian Church all the Jewish ceremonies, for the
abolishing whereof the Apostles took so great care and pain, saying; Now we
anoint them which are in Culmine, that is, which have the principal charge in
the Church: as though the thing had but sprung up in his time. The Greek
Church did not use it, as is confessed by Pope Innocent the 3. Innoc. 3. de
vnct. sacr.
in his time, that is, about the year 1200. neither in the ordination of
Priests, nor in the consecration of Bbs. He adds moreover, that for this
cause the Church of Rome was taxed of certain ancient Writers, for having
fashioned themselves to the Jewish Traditions. We allege the text his proper
words, howsoever Bellarmine do change it after his own fancy, and will that
it should have Aliqui, Duran. in Rational. l. 2. c. 10
and not Antiqui And Lombarde says by name, that it is borrowed from the old
law. Durand also says, that it was derived from the Priesthood of Aaron,
commanded by Moses, Leuit. 8. Now therefore what may we judge of the audacious
boldness of the Council of Trent, in pronouncing such accursed, as should not
think unction to be necessary, that is, against the whole ancient Church?

We have heretofore touched the matter of garments: The Priestlie garments.
but this place craves that we should say somewhat more thereof. The
simplicity and plainnes of the old Fathers made no difference thereof, save
only in respect of modesty, and not of the fashion: insomuch as that the
habites or apparel of a Minister, when he was to be occupied in discharging
his place, did not differ from his ordinary garments. Walafridus Strabo,
Walafr. Strabo
who has written of the time of Charlemaine and since, does speak it very
plainly: That in the Primitive Church they used no other apparel in the
action of their Ministry, then their ordinary; and that likewise in his time
in many places of the East, they lived as then after that sort and manner. The
Council of Gangres likewise, held near the time, Council. Gangr.
when the Nicene Council was, does excommunicate them which judged that one
garment was more holy then an other, as our Monks do at this day. And Erasmus
notes upon S. Jerome, that the apparel of Churchmen was all one with the
apparel of the time, Index Expurg. pa. ^6.
and not of any set or affected sorts or suits. As likewise the garments of
the Monks of the Order of S. Benets, were not any other thing then the
Latus-clauus of the Romans. Which when our Fathers of the Council of Trent
perceived, they caused this place in the Table of the notes of Erasmus upon S.
Ierom, to be set down amongst other places that they decreed to be raced out
and defaced. Afterward as the apparel of men does hardly continue in one
state, they begun to alter amongst the secular sort, and were notwithstanding
continued in one fashion amongst the Churchmen, and thereupon grew the
difference betwixt the one and the other. And notwithstanding that the ancient
Canons do stay there, yet by and by after the time of Constantine, Plat. in
vita. Syluest^.
when the church was in her prosperity, it followed that the Ministers were
appointed to wear a special kind of garment by the ordinance of Syluester the
first: Let them refrain and abstain from all cloth of silk, and from dyed or
colored cloth, contenting themselves with linen at the time of the
administration of the Sacraments: and further let them not go. But as Gregory
had undertaken to reduce all the old Testament into the new; changing the
Elders into the sacrificing Priests of the law, the Tables into Altars, the
sacraments into sacrifices, and the Deacons into Levites, then there entered an
endless piece of work. And then also began from time to time these priestlie
garments, consecrate for the action of their Ministry, which we read to
have been given to Churches, sometimes by princes, as by Charles the Great,
and Jews his son: as also these goodly Canons and Rules: that every man
even to the Porter should be apparelled otherwise then the common people, and
that of these garments there should be a differenec betwixt those which were
to be worn on working days, and those which should be worn on festival
days: as also that they should be diverse, according to the diversity of
feasts, as white, black, read, green, etc. white ones, upon the festival
days of Confessors and Virgins; read ones, upon the festival days of the
Apostles and Martyrs; black ones upon the days of affliction and abstinence:
and from Aduent to the Nativity of Christ, as also from Septuagesima sunday,
to the Saturday before Easter, green ones, upon common and working days: and
a thousand other such like particular observations, which it would be too
long to repeat, wherewith the Romish Church has sported herself from time to
time, to hold up with novelties, and not to instruct in the old and ancient
truth, the poor simple people. Through which also the Doctors addicted to
speculation, as Innocent the third, Durandus in his Rational and diverse
others, have run themselves out of breath in allegorizing upon the
vestmentes of the Massing Priests, upon their stoles and tippettes, etc. and
in blazoning of the colors, after the manner of the old Romans: fond
Curiosities, which the first antiquity did never think of, but have been
devised by that antiquity, which in respect of the former is but as a
yesterdayes Novelty.

Now it was likewise about the same time, How Unction and the Order of
Priesthood grew up and prospered.
that Unction grew to be received for a Priestlie Order. Gregory the Great
began the same by a perverse imitation of the Jewish religion. The times so
shaped, whiles the Barbarians did bear swaye in Christendom, that every man,
as the scripture says, filled his hand, that the calling of the Ministry
was prostituted to every ignorant fellow, and the imposition of hands
offered to every one that came. By the same means also the zeal of
Christians waxed cold, and resort unto the sacrament of the holy supper was
rare and seldom. So that what through the negligence of the Bishops busied
with the affairs of this world; what through the multitude of Priests,
unable for the most part to teach the word of God; and lastly, through the
coldness and benummednes of the faithful, in the bestirring of themselves in
holy exercises, all these abuses were bredde and brewed; namely, that the
Bishops and Priests preaching the word of God no more, and the faithful
repayring to the sacraments but certain times in the year, the whole service
was become a hearing, or as the Italians say, a seeing of the Mass. As also
that whereas the Bbs. and Elders were wont to be called to the preaching of the
gospel, the Elders from henceforth were not ordained, but only to celebrate
the Mass: which at the first they termed to consecrate, and afterward to
sacrifice. They were ordained by these words, Accipe potestatem, etc. Take the
power of sacrificing for the quick and the dead, Duran d. l. c. 9.
without any one word spoken of the preaching of the Gospel: set into their
charge per calicem and patinam, with a cup full of wine, and a dish full of
hosts, and not by the delivering of the Gospel, as being enjoined to this
only duty, and with these words: Take unto thee power and authority to
offer unto God, hosts able to appease his wrath, etc. And they were anointed
for this work, by the anointing of hands with this prayer: Vouchsafe O God
to consecrate and sanctify that which these hands shall consecrate and
sanctify, Anno 1000.
etc. And this change fell out about the year 1000. in a time most famous for
all manner of ignorance, of all others that had been since the time of our
Lord, and that in the common opinion of all men, and wherein all manner of
superstition grew and increased more then it had done in many ages before. In
the end, Transubstantiation was added unto the rest, and that the Priest who
was to be received into the Order, Hostia 40. dierst Fulbert. Epise. Carnot
Ep. 2. ad Finard.
should have given him by the Bb. a consecrated host, which he should be eating
for the space of full 40. days, every day taking some part thereof, though
never so little, that so he might be sanctified by little and little, in sign
of the forty days which our Savior Christ conuersed with his Disciples after
his resurrection etc. But what ground have all these new inventions in the
scripture? what stay or hold in that which is true antiquity? If so be that
we will not entitle with this name all that which may be alleged and
brought within the compass of some hundred years, against the privilege of
the Church: whose privileges and laws, and much less doctrine, but least of
all, the truth of Christ, there is no prescription, or number of years that
can prejudice or impeach.

CHAP. VIII. That the Bbs. and Ministers of the old Christian church were
married.
THere is yet remaining to be spoken of, The scripture contrary to their
single and unmarried life.
the unmarried estate or sole and single life, a law and ordinance of the
Romish church, by which the Ministers and Pastors of the Church are bound to
abstain from marriage: those which do administer their sacraments, to
abstain and renounce (according to their doctrine) one of their sacraments.
But the scripture speaks plainly, how that our Lord ordained and blessed
marriage from the Creation: he vouchsafed to honor it in the Patriarks, to
command it to his Priests, to approve it also in the Prophets, the clear
and manifest vessels of Gods spirit, having an extraordinary vocation in the
Church, approved by signs and miracles. These good fellows which otherwise
are most forward in bringing back again and heaping upon us all the
ceremonies of the old Testament, why do they banish and drive from us this
order and ordinance? In the new Testament our Lord works his first miracle at
the marriage of Cana, the comparisonis often used in the Scripture of the mar
riage of Christ and his Church. If it had been a work of the flesh, as they
say, would he have been present at it? If it had been a profane conjunction
and copulation, was it for necessity and lack of other comparisons, that the
holy Ghost should use this? 1. Cor. 7. Hebr. 13.
and that in laying open and pointing out of so high and holy an union? But
furthermore the Apostles say generally; Let him that cannot live continentlie
take a wife, the marriage, and bed undefiled are honorable among all men: and
afterward particularly: A Bb. and a Deacon must be the husbands each of them of
one wife, etc. If the Bb. do not govern his children well, how shall he govern
the church of God? They likewise give caueats and prouisoes against the
contrary doctrine; For it will come (says S. Paul) upon the people given over
to spirits of deceit and doctrines of Devils: teaching lies in hypocrisy,
seared in their conscience with a hot iron, who shall forbid to be married,
etc. But after all this I leave to speak of diverse other places for breuities
sake, what will they have to say unto us? against so plain and manifest a
matter, what needs either reason or interpretation? against the express
commandment of God, why should we admit the invention of man? and from whence
can it come but from the spirit of lies? covering it self with the spirit of
hypocrisy? and from whence comes this fained holiness, this making of
conscience of that which is no sin, but from a conscience which is dead and
without feeling of any manner of sin, and which, that it might not seem past
feeling of all sin, shows it self indifferently and alike feeling of that
which is, and of that which is not?

If we object against them the example of the Priests of the old law, they
tell us, that this was because it behooved that they should come of the same
stock and race. Who has told them then, that the Ministers of the new
Testament ought not to have any? They add further and say, that those Priests
did one serve after an other in their several courses, and that then they
abstained from their wives. Let them prove unto us therefore, if for that cause
they renounced and altogether forsook marriage. And how did the high Priest
use his married estate, who was commanded to sacrifice evening and morning? 1.
Paralipom. 24.
And how in a word did they pass over all the other whole four hundred
years? For they cannot dissemble or cloak the matter, how that this order of
serving by courses came not in but by David, a long time after the law. And
where will they find us, that it was commanded them during the time of their
service to forsake their wives? and yet we see that all manner of uncleanness
which might defile them, was most precisely forbidden them, and all manner of
clensing and purifying of themselves so distinctly commanded them. If again,
we object unto them the Prophets, who all of them were married, Chrysostom. in
Matthew. hom. 56 in fine.
and are acknowledged so to have been by all the old Writers, but more
specially by S. Chrysostom: then look what they cannot unloose, they will
not let to cut in sunder, saying: They had not the charge of sacrificing. Or
else they imagine, that they did put away their wives during such time. And in
the end they are not ashamed to ordain in the Council of Trent by their
Index expurgatorius, that it shall be raced out of the Table of Chrysostom his
works: That all the Prophets were married.

Jesus Christ was found present at the marriage in Cana of Galilie. Marriage
therefore (say we) is not accounted amongst the things that are unclean and
do pollute, nor amongst the works of the flesh. But (say they) he was
present at it, because it was the marriage of S. John the Euaugelist, that he
might hinder the marriage, and to that end they find us out by and by, one
Abdias Babilonius a late compiler of Legends, who tells us the whole story
from point to point: If thou waste not mine, says our Lord in that place unto
S. John, I would suffer thee to marry. Directly against the express word:
for God the Creator did institute and ordain it, as also consecrate it both by
his blessing and presence. And to the manifest calling in question of S. John
his faithful and sincere dealing, who should have had great wrong and injury
to be thought to authorize and allow marriage, as by the contents of this
story, it may seem he did; if Jesus Christ had condemned it in himself, and
so also it should follow, that it is not possible to be the servant of Jesus
Christ, and to be married together. August. sermon. 1 Dom. 2. post Epiphan. and
tract. 8. in Ioh.
But how comes it then to pass, that the old Fathers were not advised of
this point? As S. Augustine, who handling this place, says: That the Lord
has not disdained or thought scorn of marriage, that it was his will and
pleasure to honor it: that it was his will that thereby children should be
begotten: that he has by his presence established the laws of unity and
concord therein, and turned the marriage songs into holy psalms to the
glory of God, Cyril in Io l. 2 c. 22. Chrysostom. cont. Iudae. Gentil. and
Heretic. Heb. 13.4.
etc. Saint Cyril, That therein he would declare the holiness of marriage, and
sanctify the principal cause of our birth, etc. Saint Chrysostom, That he
has honored marriage, and that therefore it is not any let or hinderance
unto piety; and indeed (says he) why should it be more hinderance to ours,
then unto Moses, Helias, or S. Peter his p^etie and godliness? The Apostle
says; Marriage is honorable in all men, (...), and the bed vnde filed: but
God will judge fornicators and adulterers. There is no manner of exception to
be made against this general affirmation? And Paphnutius does allege it in
the Nicene Council, against those that would forbid Churchmen to marry, and
this place decideth the whole controversy by the clearnes thereof,
notwithstanding whatsoever cauillations, that may be brought to the contrary,
insomuch as that this manner of expounding and taking of it, is ratified by
this famous Council. And yet the spirit of lies does take an exception against
it saying; In omnibus continere non valentibus, amongst all them that have not
the gift of continency. What ground can this exception find in this text? which
is so wouen and set together, as that this exception does cut away the whole
strength of the Apostle his argument, which is such, God will judge al
fornicators and adulterers so much the more severely, for that he has given
them a remedy against the concupiscence of the flesh, even marriage, which is
honorable amongst al, of what condition soever they may be: namely, says
Chrysostom, Against the pollution of wandering pleasures, the bed undefiled:
Chrysostom in ep. Heb. in Marn. 15 hom. 52. 1. Cor. 7.2. 1. Timoth. 3. Caretan.
ibid. ad Hebr. Haimo ibid.
following herein the same, which the Apostle says in an other place: For the
avoiding of temptation, let every man have his wife, and every woman her
husband, etc. And this is also the very same that Cardinal Caietanus says:
In omnibus, that is to say, non in aliquibus, sic in aliquibus, non; that is,
not in some; yea, and in other some, no. And Haimo Bishop of Halberstat adds;
That a man rises from the marriage bed undefiled, in using it according to the
institution of the Lord.

Saint Paul presses the matter further, saying; A Bishop must be unblameable,
1. Tim. 3. Titus. l. 6.
the husband of one only woman. The same also is delivered of priests, and
that in the same words. Wherefore to be married is a thing for which they
cannot be blamed: seeing that one and the same man may be unblameable, and the
husband of one woman both together. Again, he says: It is meet and
requisite, 1. Tim. 3. and 5. Tit. l. 2. and 3. 1. Timmoth. 3.4.5.6.
that he hold the mystery of faith and wholesome doctrine, that is, that he
be able to teach: Let him pray for himself, and for the Church; let him know
to govern it with a holy wisdom in all the parts thereof, to establish the
ministry, to convince the adversaries, to censure the offenders, and to be
earnest for the relief of the poor: that he do all this with a good
conscience: exercising himself in godliness and charity, in faith, and in
holiness, giving all manner of virtuous example, avoiding all contrary vices,
even so as he may make the enemies of the truth to blush with shame, etc. And
yet notwithstanding it is meet and convenient that he should be married, that
he should have children, that he bring them up in the fear of God, that in
the trayning up and instructing of them, he express the scantlin of that care,
which he has over the Church. Then it must needs follow, that all these
virtues may agree together with marriage: seeing that S. Paul will, that
Bishops and Priests may be married, and yet all these virtues looked for at
their hands, and which is more, even chastity, shamefastness, and honesty
of life. This place needs no clearing, and notwithstanding against the sonues
of darkness, we will not find fault with the light of the Doctors, if it shine
thereupon. Chrysostom says: Thou demandest why S. Chrysostom. in ep. ad Tit. 1.
and in 1. Timoth. 3.
Paul does here lay out unto us, that a Bishop should be the husband of one
only wife? do thou know wherefore? It is to shut up all be^etickes months,
which give out and teach abroad, that marriage is impure: thereby showing them
to the contrary, that it is so honorable and precious, as that a married man
may notwithstanding be admitted and advanced to the great and honorable place
of a Bishop. And yet that there may be observed a modest and commendable
measure, he says but of one only, that so they may not unlawfully take unto
themselves liberty to enjoy two together, after the manner of the Jews.
Theodoret. in 1. ad Tim. 3. and ad Tit. 1.
And Theodoret says the same upon these places, confuting such in express
words, as would abuse them against the second marriages of Churchmen.
Chrysostom also says the same: The Apostle says, if he know not to govern
his family, etc. seeing that he which is a good house keeper, becomes quickly
wife and skillful in matters concerning a common weal: and he that has
attained, to keep and contain within the compass of duty, a wife, children,
and servants, is so much the more able to govern all sorts of people in the
Church: as if marriage were an introduction and way of direction, teaching him
to become fit for the degree and dignity of the government of the Church: so
far is it off, that he should hold it as a means to cause him to stumble
and fall. S. Jerome, Hieronym in 1. Tim. 3. and ad Titum. 1.
though sometime not very favorable to marriage, expounding this place unto
Timothy, does not find therein any argument to disprove the marriage of
Ministers: upon the place to Titus he doubts whether he should understand it,
that a Bishop cannot have but one wife as who say, that thereby their second
marriages should be excluded, or else that he may not have two at one time, as
the ancient Patriarchs, whose example the Jews following, took it for a
dispensation for them to do the like: and yet he prefers and makes more
account of a modest and chaste second marriage, then of one sole and only
marriage wantonly and lasciuiously entertained. Idem aduersn-Iouinianum.
Being overcome of choler (as he oftentimes was) against Iouinian, he cutteth
off all, saying, that the Apostle means, that he has been married, Idem ad
Oceanum. ep. 83.
but not that he may be. But his heat being quenched, and passion ouerpast,
writing to Oceanus, he pleads the cause of Carterius Bishop of Spain, who had
had one wife before his baptism, and one afterward, saying: For him it is
written: Marriage is honorable, and the bed undefiled: but for thee who find
fault with him, (he speaks of his adversaries) God will judge the fornicators
and adulterers. Again: The Apostle was amongst the Jews, and the first Church
of Christ was of the residue and remainder of Israel; he knew that it was
permitted by law, and accustomed amongst the people by the example of the
Patriarchs, and of Moses, to beget and multiply children by diverse women: yea
and this liberty extended even to the priests: wherefore he ordained that the
priests (Sacerdotes) of the Christian Church should not give themselves such
license, as that they should have two or three wives (vno tempore) at one time,
etc. Coming again afterward to Carterius: And do thou think therefore,
that this good man did offend against the Apostle, who accompteth it amongst
the virtues of a Bishop, that he be the husband of one wife only? And all the
world (says he) is full, not of priests, nor of inferior persons, but of
Bishops, so that the number would become greater then that which was found in
the Council of Rimini, etc. Tertullian himself, Pertull. de Monogam.
although he were a Montanist, alleging these places of Timothy and Titus,
is of judgment, that Bishops and Priests should be married: only he stands
upon the disalowing of second marriages, for which he is reproved by Saint
Jerome in the place above named. But this point should not be to our purpose.
In the mean time we are not to believe, as some would go about to wrangle out
the matter against us by this place of Saint Jerome, disagreeing with himself,
whiles he was carried away with the stream of contention, that we should
nourish this opinion, that the Bishop had been married, but that he may not be
so, derogating and detracting the credit due to other places, wherein he
handles the question, and that of purpose and void of all passionate
affections. Let us say then, for it follows by like reason, from the
coherence and scope of the text: that the Apostle does likewise understand,
that the Bb. has been vigilant, sober, of good report, given to hospitality,
apt to teach, etc. but that he may not be so any more. But the holy Ghost has
prevented such wrangling and false assertions, who says: In the present time
Let the Priest be established, Tit. 1. 1. Timoth. 3.
and let him be the husband of one only wife: let the Deacons also, (...), be
the husbands of one only wife, etc. And Saint Paul does describe afterward
unto us what manner of women the wives of Bishops, Priests and Deacons should
be. And thus you may see whither a blind passion had almost led us, against
the clear and evident light. Chrysostom. in ep. ad Tit. hom. 2. In ep. ad Heb.
hom. 7.
Chrysostom therefore says better: There are some that affirm, that S. Paul
his purpose is to speak of one that has been married, but that he may not be
so any more. But (says he) although he shall be so still, yet he may
demean and carry himself honestly therein. Use (says he) marriage soberly,
and thou shall be the chief in the kingdom of heaven. Ambros. D. 26. C. Qui
sine.
Likewise Saint Ambrose says: Who so otherwise blameless is the husband of
one only wife, is beld by the law to be capable of the office of the
Priesthood. Saint Augustine: August. in quest. ex vtroque testam. Hug. Card.
in 1. Tim. 3. Caiet. in 1. Timoth. 3. and ad Tit. 1.
The Apostle says, that he which has a wife, may and ought to be made
(Sacerdos) a priest, a Minister, a Bishop. Cardinal Hugo says: At that time
it was lawful for Priests to have wives. And Cardinal Caietan after him:
This estate and condition must be understood negatiuely, that is to say, Non
plurium vxorum virum, not a husband of many wives. But Pope Calixtus the second
about the year 1100. did turn and make it into an other manner of sense: The
husband of one only wife, that is, consecrate and put apart for one only
Church for one only Bishopric, and that to be taken so, as that he was not to
have any more then one, or that he was not greedily or proudly to labor, to be
translated and removed from one to another. And in S. Jerome his time this
Allegory was begotten and borne, and by some preferred and better liked then
that which was according to the letter: and Carterius his adversaries
themselves, says he, did find that interpretation to be violently forced, and
very harsh. To whom he answers thereupon: Restore them to the scripture his
simple sense and meaning, that so we may not reason against you, from the
constitutions and conclusions of your own laws: that is to say, that we may
not oppose allegory against allegory, and judgment against judgment, but
may hold and keep our selves simply to the words of the Apostle. Otherwise,
what will become of S. Paul his argument: If he know not to govern his own
children, how shall he be able to direct and guide the Church of God? As also
when the Apostle shall tell us of widows: that choice must be made of such as
have been the wives of one only husband; shall we understand it of Bishoprics
or Diocesses, that have had but one only Bishop? But, to draw to an end, what
should hinder the Apostle, that be could not more plainly say: It behooves that
the Bb. to the end he may be without blame, abide unmarried, or at the least be
a widdower? etc. But shame makes them mingle these absurdities with a
blasphemy: as that during the weakness of the church these marriages were
permitted, but prohibited and forbidden, when it came to be strong. And what
will they say to Chrysostom, who says plainly: That S. Paul gave this law to
Timothy, not for himself only, but for all them which were to come? Or
rather unto Egesippus, who ends the flower and virginity of the Church, at
the death of the Apostles: Eusebius. l. 3. c. 32
And presently after there followed (says he) an infinite number of impurities
and corruptions.

They labor further to prove the matter in controversy against S. Paul, by
himself: 1. Cor. 7.5.
for (say they) he tells us in another place: That they must abstain from
women, to attend upon fasting and prayer. And what shall they do then who are
to pray every day? let them with conscience carefully read this place, and
they shall see that which Chrysostom observes in the same: that he speaks
not there of an ordinary prayer, but of an extraordinary made with rare and
singular attending thereunto by fasting. And therefore he says: Defraude not
one another, except it be by mutual consent, and that for a time. Again, And
come together again, to the end that Satan do not tempt you, because of your
incontinencie: And Chrysostom says expressly: If he said, (...), that the
married which lie together, could not pray; how should that which he commands
all Christians in another place agree therewith? Pray without ceasing:
wherefore he speaks of an extraordinary prayer (says he) which requires
an exact attention: not that the society betwixt the married, does convey or
carry about it any impuritie, (...), but rather business and affairs, (...).
Whereupon also Saint Ambrose says: Ambr. in ep. 1. Cor. 7.
We must pray without ceasing: but this is spoken, Vt orationi insistatur: by
courses and distances of time (says he) to strengthen and increase
meditation. And Theodoret: For to sanctify the fast. And likewise he says in
another place: That the Apostle has deemed him worthy of a bishopric, that
lives and dwells chastely with one only wife. Now I am not ignorant, that
Origin, who gelded himself, against the express Canon, C Apostol. cap. 21.22.
which they attribute to the Apostles, which declares him to be a manslayer,
has badly expounded those words: Qui potest capere, capiat, and that he was
reproved of the church for the same: as having therein gone about to conclude
from this place, that it appertains not to any, but such as are chaste, to
offer a continual sacrifice unto God; although notwithstanding that he speak
it simply, It seems so unto me: which he would not have done, if it had
been an ecclesiastical determination, wherein he was imitated of S. Ambrose in
a certain place: whereas (in good sooth) they should both have learned of S.
Paul, that the bed undefiled is not at debate with chastity, neither yet by
consequent with the sacrifice. And the Council of Gangres, Council. Gangrens.
4. D. 28. c. Si quis discernit.
held about the time of that of Nice, for the repressing of such superstitions,
does remedy this ill thrown exposition by an express Canon, saying: If any
man make a difference of a married Priest, as though by reason of his marriage he
ought not to offer: and do for that cause keep away from this oblation, let
him be accursed. But it is further said, 1. Cor. 7.33.
that married folks have care of the things of this world, and the unmarried
of the pleasing of the Lord, etc. Grant that to be true: but let them consider
therewithal, that which Chrysostom observes against the superstitious of his
time: that Saint Paul speaks not there of Churchmen, but generally of all
Christians. And what is it then that can follow thereupon, but that all
Christians indifferently and without exception should abstain from marriage?
whereas he that has ordained the Bishop, will that he should have care of
the Church the house of God, and his own together. And as for his own, to the
end he might receive comforts for the cares which this world might minister,
he has assisted and seconded him with a wife: such a one (says Nazianzene)
as was his mother to his father, Nazianzen. de matre.
who helped him much, yea so much as that thereby he had a great deal the more
leisure and time to his Ministry. And Chrysostom would have a Bb. to be a
good housekeeper, before that he come to be a good politician. And our Bbs. at
this day who have no wives, do nothing slack their desire to have the
government of all the world. But O man, who art thou which iudgest another man's
servant? who would teach God, how, and by whom he must be served? who
controulest the state and government of his house, and the rule of his service;
after that he has given and published it in such plain and express terms?
and which know better then he what is agreeable for his service? when as
that which thou addest of thine own invention, what is it but (...), a service
framed according to thine own will and pleasure; condemned by his spirit,
because it proceeds from thine? And again, who knows better then he, how
deep man may plunge himself; That the unmarried and sole life does stand only
by the positive law. D. 23.28. etc.
or how high he may rise by the power which he gives him? But furthermore,
they have been constrained to acknowledge after all their shifts and turning
wiles, that there is not any place in the holy scripture, which binds
ecclesiastical persons to a sole and unmarried life. Gratian says absolutely:
The marriage of Priests is not forbidden either by the authority of the law or
Gospel, neither yet by the Apostles: but rather by an ecclesiastical law.
Hereafter we shall see what manner of one and from whence it is. D. 84. vbi
Gl. Thom. in 2. secundae. q. 88. art. 11.
And the Gloss upon the decree says in another place: That before the Pope
Syricius, marriage was permitted unto priests. Thomas Aquinas: That the vow of
continency is not essentially tied to the order, but only by way of accident,
and by occasion of ecclesiastical constitution. And of this opinion were many
of the most famous schoolmen. Caietan. in opusc, tit 1. tract 27.
Cardinal Caietan of our time: It cannot be showed either by reason or
authority, that a priest sins in being married, neither can his order, in
that it is an order, neither yet in that it is a holy order, hinder or let him,
either before or after the taking thereof, he abiding within the bounds
prescribed by Christ and his Apostles, etc. The Cardinal Cusan writing to the
Bohemians, Thom. in summa quae incipit, Commiserationes Domini, c. 165. Posthac
dicendum. Durand. sent. 4 D. 38. q. 2. Innocent. 4.1. de conuers. coniug C.
Placet.
does likewise hold the same. Thomas of Aquin also goes as far, saying: But
and if an ecclesiastical person make known to his Confessor, that be cannot
contain himself, the Confessor shall not commit any great sin, to counsel
him to marry secretly, without the knowledge of his bishop. And who cannot
gather hereby what he would have said, if he had not feared the censure?
Durand, the author of the work, called Speculum Iuris, speaks more boldly:
That the Council should restore the liberty of having wives to the priests
again, seeing that it is but in vain, by the strictness of a number of Canons
to go about to force them to chastity. And yet nevertheless he holds that
the Council can do nothing contrary to the express word. Pope Innocent the
fourth, who lived about the year 1250. says: Marriage by the law of nature
does not hinder any man from being received into orders, and he which should
be ordained, may enjoy and use a married estate, being already contracted, as
it is practiced in the East Church: as also contract a new marriage, if the
ecclesiastical constitutions did not hinder the same.

Now as a sole and unmarried life has no law in the scripture, That abstinence
from marriage was not observed in the old Church. Ambr. in 2. Cor. 11. ^. Cor.
9.5. Clem. l. 4. and 7. strom. August in quaest. ex vir. jest.
nor yet constitution from the Apostles, so likewise has it no maintenance or
defense from any practice of the Apostles, or from any of their disciples.
Saint Ambrose upon the 2. Corinthians. holds that all the Apostles except Saint
John were married: and all of them (but that some writers do except Saint
John) notwithstanding, Martyrs. The Gospel makes mention of S. Peter his
mother in law. S. Paul says: Have not I power to lead with me a wife, a
sister, as well as Cephas. And Clemens Alexandrinus does expound it of a woman
in the state of marriage: and from thence reasons against such as were given
to boast and brag of the goodlines of an unmarried life. S. Augustine says,
that S. Peter did not cease to be the chief amongst the Apostles, because he
had begotten children. And we must not say, that he had had one, but that after
his calling he had not any: for from this example in the same place, S. August.
concludes thus: And for this cause the Apostle shows, that he that has a
wife, Fieri posse and debere sacerdes. Clem. l. 7. stro.
provided that in other things he keep the commandementes, ought and may be
made a priest, using by name the word Sacerdos. In a word Clement and Eusebius
witness, that Saint Peter lived to lead his wife unto death, for the name of
Christ, and comforted her, being joyful that she was called thereto. Of Saint
Paul the place of the 9. to the Corinthians, alleged by Clemens Alexandrinus
does give a sufficient and most evident note and mark, howsoever our
adversaries by the word (...), would understand Mulierem, a woman, not Vxorem,
a wife: and as for the word (...), which is joined therewithal, they weigh it
not. But yet notwithstanding Clemens Alexandrinus, near unto the time of the
Apostles, understood it of marriage. And Tertullian alluding thereunto, Tertul.
in exhor. ad castir. c. 8. Hillar. in Psalm. 118. sgnat. ad Philadeph.
says: It was allowed the Apostles to marry, and to lead their wives about
with them. And Saint Hillarie concludes: That virginity and abstaining from
marriage, is of free will and not of necessity. These are the oldest writers.
But Ignatius the disciple of S. John cutteth off all, saying: Virgins I
rejoice with you because of your holiness, even as I rejoice in Elias, Joshua,
Melchisedech, Elisaeus, Jeremy, John Baptist, S. John, Timothy, Titus,
Euodius, and Clemens; all which lived unmarried: But not (says he afterward
(that I would detract or withdraw any thing from the rest of the Saints,
(...), for living in marriage: For on the contrary I long and earnestly desire,
that God would make me worthy to sit at their feet in the kingdom of
heaven, even at the fecte of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, Joseph, Esaias, and other
the Prophets; of Peter also and Paul, and other the Apostle, who led a
married life. Note this word, Lead or keep company, to signify that they had
not put away their wives: as also it is to be noted, how he puts them in the
number with Abraham and Isaac, who continually without ceasing kept household
together with them. Then he concludes: If therefore any man confess God and
Christ, Mixtionem legitimam, vz. copulam. Habet (...). Eusebius. l. 3 c 30. ex
Clement. Act. 21.
and notwithstanding call (...), the lawful bed, uncleanness or pollution, or
abhors any kind of meats, by the same name, such a one is inhabited and
possessed by the Apostate Dragon, that is, by the Devil. Clement says of
Philip the Apostle, that he was married, had children, and married his daughters.
The Acts make mention of Philip the Evangelist, how that he had four
daughers. In a word Platina makes mention, that S. Luke lived a married man,
having his wife in Bithynia, till he were fourscore and three years old. And
the Nicolaitans do take their name from Nicolas the Deacon, companion to S.
Stephen; of whose wife there is so oftentimes mention made in the history of
the church. And likewise Clement the pretended successor of S. Peter, Eus^b. l.
3. c. 29.
in the Epistle which is attributed unto him, speaks of wife and children in
such sort, as that it is likely that he was married himself. To be short,
Polycrates Bishop of Ephesus, says to Pope Victor, that he is the eight
Bishop of his race, being come of seven predecessors, Bishops.

Our adversaries do make great account of the Canons of the Apostles though
they be declared to be Apocrypha, by Isidore himself. Notwithstanding let us
hear them: If the Bishop, priest, or Deacon, etc. do abstain from marriage,
flesh or wine, Canon Apost, 50.
not for to have his spirit raised higher, and lifted up in the exercises of
piety, but as having them in detestation, let him be deposed and rejected of
the Church: and let him remember himself, that God created them male and
female, etc. They will say, that this is meant against heretics, which
absolutely condemned marriage, and that they are no such. But listen what is
said upon the same matter: Let the bishop (say they) Priestor Deacon, Cano^.
Apost. c. 5. D. 28. Si quis docuerit, and D. 31. quicunque declar. C. 11. in
^ecret. Clem Alex. l. 2. c. 10. Paedag. and 3. strom.
have no cause to put away and reject their wives, under the color of
religion: but and if they do it, let them be cut off from the communion; and if
they persevere and continue, let them be deposed. Let us go on and see further
of the old writers. Ignatius his opinion is well enough witnessed unto us, by
the place above alleged. As also the opinion of Clemens Alexandrinus, who
teaches, that the married and unmarried life have both of them their diverse
gifts and means to serve God by: that to live well, whether it be in the one
or in the other, is his gift; so that he makes the^ equal. Irenaeus makes
mention of a certain man named Mark, an heretic, who had corrupted and defiled
the wife of a certain Deacon, being a very fair woman; whereby it apeareth,
that the orders of those times did not forbid them to marry. Hieronym. de
eccles. script.
Tertullian was a priest, as may appear by that which Saint Jerome says, and
married, as it may appear by his books to his wife: and yet a Martyr
notwithstanding, if we credit some men. But the matter is, that he falling to
be of Montanus his heresy, did likewise embrace Montanus his opinions against
marriage, the steps and signs whereof are very manifest and evident in his
latter books: but in so doing, Tertul. in exhortat. ad castit. c. 8.
he gives some more scope unto the word above alleged. Licebat and Apostolis
nubere, and vxores circumducere, Licebat and de euangeliis viuere, etc. It was
lawful for the Apostles to be married, and to lead their wives about with them:
and it was lawful for them to live of the Gospel, etc. joining these two
lawful things together, although he conclude, that whatsoever is lawful, the
same is not expedient. And although he condemn second marriages in all
persons, yet he teaches us, that the Catholics or Orthodoxes of his time did
not so: when he vpbraideth them with their Bishops, which were not once only,
Tertul. de Monogam. c. 12.
but twice married, saying: For it seems that all things amongst you are
lawful for Bishops: how many are there that rule over you, and have been
twice married? which are not ashamed of themselves, when they read the words
of the Apostle, the husband of one only wife? Eusebius. l 4. c. 23.
Dionysius Bishop of Corinth, in an Epistle which he writ unto the Gnosians
about the year 170. disswadeth Pynitus, who labored to bring in the condition
of a single life amongst his brethren, that is, amongst his fellow ministers:
That he would not impose the heavy yoke of a single life upon his brethren, as
of necessity to be observed, but rather that he would have regard unto the
infirmity of many. And it is to be noted, that in the Index expurgatorius,
Ind. Expurg. page 76.
the Council of Trent ordained, that Langus should be raced, which had noted
the same in his annotations upon Nicephorus. And Spiridion used the like
custom, Sozomen. l. 1. c. 11. Eccles. histor. l. 10. c. 5. Tripart. l. 1. c.
10.
who being ordained Bishop of Cypres, was reported by Sozomene to have been
neither worse in that which concerned piety, nor less diligent in his charge:
and whom the story calls a person of the order of the prophets, having a
daughter whose name was Irene. And so likewise in Dionisius, Faustinian,
Syluerus, Cecilius, Sergius, Hormysdas, Talatus, Valerius, Tertullian, Leo, and
Felix, all Bishops and Priests, and confessed by our adversaries themselves
to be married: Athan. in ep. ad Dracont.
and in many others of these first ages, of whom Athanasius reports, that
he knew in his time many Bishops, yea many Monks that had children: and
this continued for many ages after. To be brief, the determination of the
Synod is expressly for the same, as it was set down in the first general
Council of Nice, about the year 330. where it having argued by many, that
from that time forward Bishops, priests, Deacons, and Subdeacons, should not
lie with their wives, Paphnutius, a Confessor rose up and said: Marriage is
honorable, and the company of a lawful wife is chastity: as we shall declare
more at large hereafter. Whereupon all the Council being moved, Socrat. l. 1.
c. 8. Sozom. l. 1. c. 22.
it was left to the liberty of ecclesiastical persons to continue married,
etc. Neither will the lie or double dealing, which Bellarmine charge upon
Socrates and Sozomene the ecclesiastical historiographers in this place, be
sufficient to salve the sore.

CHAP. IX. What bath been the manner of growth and proceeding of the ordinance
of abstaining from marriage, in the Romish Church, until the time of Calixtus
his decree.
ANd thus behold we are come to the first council of Nice, a notable Period of
the Christian Church: ended and shut up with a law containing great favor to
the cause which we defend. But notwithstanding let us not persuade our selves
that this spirit of lying, 1. Timoth. 4.2.
wherewith the Apostle has threatened us, was asleep all this while: but
rather that under the shape of an Angel of light, he was sowing the doctrine
of the Devil, and under the hypocritical mask of chastity, he set up the
standart of shamefastness and honesty, but in deed bringing in all
lasciviousness, foolish love, adulteries, (and yet worse then all these) into
the world. Abstinente from marriage proceeded from the Gentiles. Hieronym, l. 2.
contr. Ioum. Clem. Alex l. 3
The Christian Church was compounded of Jews and Gentiles, and was not well at
ease till it had brought their leaven into it. Now the spirit of fornication
had so blasoned marriage amongst the Gentiles, as that it was forbidden to many
of their Priests, namely, to their Hierophantes, who (as we read) did make
themselves chaste with the use of hemlocke, to those which were consecrate to
the Mother of the Gods, and to those of Egypt, etc. And of them (says Clement)
the first heretics learned to condemn marriage. And the heretics called
Essaei, about the time of the wearing away and declining of the Jewish religion
had likewise learned of the Gentiles, but especially of the Pythagoreans, as
says Josephus, to contemn and despise marriage: Joseph. Antiquit. l. 15. c.
13. and l. 18. de bell. Iudaic. c. 2. Philo apud Eus. l. 8. Epiphan. l. 1. t. 1.
and those are they of whom Philo speaks; and not any Christian Monks, as
we have observed before. Likewise Epiphanius teaches us, that this
superstition passed on even to the Scribes and Pharisees, whereby we need not
doubt but that by the husbandry of the spirit of lying, it glided forward very
smoothly: First amongst the heretics called Marcionites and Gnostikes, who by
Irenaeus and Epiphanius are reported to abhor and detest marriage altogether:
grounding themselves upon an uncertain Gospel, written (as Clement says) by
the Egiptians. The Manichies also, who defended the same, at the least in their
elect and chosen: and finally, by contagion into the Church of Christ. The
dispute which is in S. Paul, affords a lively and round testimony, as the
thing is. 1. Cor. 7.
For let us not think that Saint Paul fights there with his shadow, but that
he makes way for his entrance into the matter: namely that to live and lead a
single life, is not fitting all men: that he has no commandment from God,
for virgins: that he would not put a snare about their neck: that he that
cannot contain himself should marry. And in another place he stretches this
generality unto the several kinds and sorts of people, as meaning thereby to
repress and beat down the lightness of young widows, counselling them to
marry, and to keep the Bishops in the way of giving good example, to direct
them in express and plain terms, even so far as to say, Ehiphan. l. 1. c.
2. haeres. 25.
that the forbidding of marriage is the doctrine of Devils, etc. Then it
infected Nicholas one of the seven Deacons. Epiphanius reports, that he
seeing that many were admired and highly accounted of by reason of the leading
of a single life, resolved, and renounced his wife, notwithstanding that she
was a fair and beautiful woman: and then not being able to contain himself,
neither for shame to return unto her again, he gave himself (as did likewise
all his sect and followers) to all kind of uncleanness, even to the committing
of Sodomitrie, persuading himself, that all was holy unto him, or at the least
tolerable, provided that he came not near his wife to touch her. And as there
is not any sect so infamous, but it has his followers, so there was no wast of
these kind of people in Asia, being a delicious and pleasant country, who of
their captain were called Nicolaitanes. But S. John who taught in the cities
of Asia, did oppose and set himself in his holy and godly zeal against this
seducing deceiuer, and shut the Church doors against him.

The Apostles for the most part being dead, Apocal. 2.
and thereby the great lights wholly and for ever eclipsed: the spirit of
darkness assured himself the better to work his feats: but the holy scriptures,
which they had in this point left so clear and bright, Apocripha books.
did stand in his way to his great trouble. Whereupon he opposes and deuiseth
others against theirs, namely Apocripha, and bastardly writings against the
canonical and manifest books of the scriptures. As for example a certain
pamphlet, of the peregrination of S. Paul and Tecla, made by a priest, and the
contents thereof are, that S. Paul having found this young maid betrothed to a
certain man named Themirus in Iconium, Tertul. de baptism. Ambros. de virginit.
Hieronym. de script. Eccesiast.
did so overcome her by the praises of virginity, as that he should take her
away from her espoused husband, drawing and leading her after him throughout
the world; that he had put a veil upon her, and given her power to do the like
to others, as also to teach and baptize. Now think with your selves how
answerable this is to the scope of S. Paul his doctrine, who teaches that
wives should cleave to their husbands, who will not have them to speak in the
Church etc. S. John, who was as yet alive, saw the book, caused the priest to
come before him, co^uinced him of having forged it, deposed him from his
ministry, and for the instruction of the posterity to come, condemned the
book: which book notwithstanding the Monks of our time have absolved and set
at liberty again, under the name of the legend of Tecla, for the founding of
their Monkery; although it have been rejected and put down again since the
first time, by Pope Gelasius. And thereby we learn how to esteem and think of
the traditions, which they thrust upon us under the name of the Apostles, and
also of those goodly books whereupon they so build and stay themselves: the
Protoeua^gelion, Abdias the Babilonian and such like.

After false and counterfeit scriptures, what remained but a forged and false
holy Ghost? Montanus.
And here behold starteth out Montanus his Comforter, about the year 230. who
buckleth himself with spear and shield to bid marriage the combat. He makes
Tertullian holding a hot and fiery pen, Tertul. de Monogam.
his champion; especially after that (being turned about upon a certain
conceived spite and stomach) he had embraced the heresy of Montanus: but yet
not being able to purchase the establishing of a single life to be observed by
the Priests, he stands and strives that they may not be permitted any more
then one single marriage: he presses (I say) and urges that against the
sincere and Orthodoxe Church, falling upon the same in plain terms with
bitter reproaches, for the practicing of the contrary. And in as much as he was
a man of great reputation, he caused to fall away a great number after him:
whereby we may see, that some think that they have never sufficiently praised
virginity, if they reproach not and speak evil of the married estate and
life: others make scruple, that married persons should administer holy things:
Eusebius in l. 9. de monst. c. 9.
Opinions which at the first were amongst some few, the seeds whereof we have
in Eusebius and Origin, uttered in some dumb and muttering manner, and
defended as yet in very faint and feeble sort: That it seems to them that it
would do better so, that the Bishops might be at more leisure to receive this
great multitude of people, which flock in so fast unto Christianity, etc. And
which notwithstanding within a while after, had so far prospered and
prevailed, Prouincial Synodes. c. 10. 2. c. 19. Council. Elibert. c. 33. Council.
Arelat. c. 2. D. 16. Council. Ancyr. c. 10.
as that in the Provincial Synod held at Neocaesarea, it is said: That the
Priest that is married, shall be deposed, and he that shall commit adultery
shall be rejected of the Church. And in the Synod assembled at Rome: That he
that shall be married, shall be deprived and put from his charge for ten or
twelve years. And in that of Elibert in Spain: That Church men shall abstain
from their wives upon pain of being degraded. And in that of Arles the
second, somewhat more mildly: That married men shall be no more received or
admitted unto the same: and all these were held under Pope Syluester the first,
before the Council of Nice, which fell to be in the time of Pope Julius the
first. And in that of Ancyra: That the Deacons, which shall protest that they
cannot contain themselves, may marie, but with the license of the Bishop. Thus
the presumption of man runs on headlong, when once it has taken liberty to
it self, further then the word of God does grant it.

In the end, The general Council of N^ce. D. 31. C Nicena Synodus.
the question already forestalled by these Provincial Synodes, comes to be
debated and examined in the Council of Nice: The writ given out, the parties
heard, and the holy scripture sitting as Judge, by the report of Paphnutius,
(an old man, who had been always married, and suffered much for the testimony
of the truth, setting before them the pollutions and manifold uncleanness, which
might spring up in the Church by this inforcement unto a single and unmarried
life,) it falls out, that the liberty of marriage, as we have seen,
remains whole and entire unto the Church men. And yet so great is the
subtlety and wiliness of the Devil, and of such power with frail and weak
men, is a preiudicate opinion, when it has once taken further liberty, the^
ever the word of God did give it, as that rather then all should be lost, they
would be content with small pay, and so they obtain: That those which shall have
been received into the ecclesiastical orders unmarried, shall not be permitted
to marry, because of the tradition of the Church. Even as it fell out with
Montanus his Spirit of Comfort, who not being able to obtain a law for the
cutting off of second marriages in the laity, did forciblie and violently wrest
it out against ecclesiastical persons.

Now this general Council became a bridle unto superstition for some time,
and held back the execution of the Canons of these Provincial Synodes, in as
much as the most famous and notable Bbs. from out of all the nations and
provinces of Christendom were found to be present at the same. Hosius Bb. of
Corduba did subscribe thereunto for Spain; Mantuan. de Hilario. Non nocuit
tibi progenies, non obstitit vxor, legitimo coniuncta thoro.
who carried away with him from thence instructions for the correcting of the
Canon of Elibert. Hilarious Bb. of Poitiers, so renowned and much spoken of in
ancient writers, who without all contradiction was married, testifies
likewise, that it was observed and kept amongst the Frenchmen, notwithstanding
the Synod of Arles. And so likewise of other provinces, as appears by
Oceanus, Numidicus, Seuerius, Restitutus, Cheremon, Philogonius, Apollinaris
and Synesius; all of all them Bbs. or famous priests, who lived and exercised
their charges with great commendation, and yet were married. Whereunto for an
overplus we will add Gregory Nazianzene his father, S. Basil his father, and
Gregorius Nyssenus his brother, Greg. Nazian. in Monach. Niceph. de Basil.
Mantuanus, Praesule patre satus, nam tunc id iura sinebant, Pastorale pedum
gessit post funera patris. Sozom. l. 3. c 44 (...). Council. Gangrens. c. 4.
Epipha. l. 2. t. 1 haeres. 59. contra Cathar.
all Bbs. and great men in their time. But this Nicene Council was not better
executed in any place then in Armenia, by the diligent endeavor of the fathers
of the Council of Gangres. Now Sozomene says, that a certain Bb. in those
countries, called Eustathius brought in new devises, and amongst other, did
forbid the marriage of the Elder of the Church, commanding all men to abstain
and refrain the prayers and Sacraments administered by such as were married, as
profane and polluted: and under the shadow of holiness this abuse prevailed
in certain countries, the neighbor Bishops not daring to make head against
it. Those then who had been present at the Council of Nice, being returned,
condemned his Monkerie: and suitable to that of Nice, they make the Canon under
mentioned: If any man put difference betwixt a married Priest and another, let
him be accursed.

About some 40 years after, Iouinianus was not thought to speak highly enough
in the commendation of virginity. S. Jerome makes himself an adversary party
in the matter, and takes him up very roughly, as it was his manner to do in
all other things. And Epiphanius in the Greek Church becomes of a strong
opinion, that the Church ought not to receive into the priesthood, (...), Such
persons as yet did beget children. These were the remainders of the old leaven,
that had been cast out in the Council of Nice. And these men did not think
themselves to have praised virginity sufficiently, if they had not detracted
from the married estate: and yet both of them the gifts of God, as Iustine and
Clement do both of them teach very well. Of this controversy did rise
hyperbolicall and improper kinds of speech about this doctrine; which by reason
of the reputation of the persons delivering them, did prove to be of great
moment in the Church: and yet notwithstanding to signify that the use and
practice of the church was contrary to their opinion; Hieronym. l. 1. contr.
Iouinia.
S. Jerome teaches us in the example of Bb. Carterius, who had had two wives,
and that without contrarying of the precept of S. Paul 1. Tim. 3. that the Bbs.
of his time might be married. Against Iouinian he uses these words: If Samuel
brought up in the temple, was married, what makes that against virginity? Are
there not at this day priests enough married? and that so far, as that in some
places he would break forth into some signs of anger, that there was choice
made rather of such as were married, then others. And against Vigilantius he
says: That in his time the Deacons were married before they were made Deacons,
Sacerdotes. Idem contra Vigil.
to the end that they might afterward be promoted and preferred to higher
dignities and orders; very contrary to that which he would seem to conclude
out of S. Paul: namely, that those which had been married might be made Bbs.
provided that they were not so any more. But we have showed before, that he
lets not to be contrary to himself. And as for Epiphanius how hard soever
he be, yet he praises a Bb. of Co^stantinop. for that he was descended from a
priestly race: and teaches us, that in his time it was an usual thing for
priests, Deacons; and Subdeacons to have wives and children. He adds, that it
is against the Canons. But what Canons? considering what we have showed out of
the scriptures, and pretended canons of the Apostles; out of Ignatius, Clement,
Tertul. and all the old writers; Chrysostom. contra heretic.
yea and from the general Council it self which was held at Nice. And therefore
Chrysostom. himself in that point unto him, and that roundly, maintaining that
marriage is no impeachment unto piety, seeing that Moses, Peter, and the
Centurion were married: and that S. Paul has freed and set the Church at
liberty from such heresies, Idem in 1. Tim. 3.
when he placed marriage in the Episcopal chair, and seat of the Bishops
themselves. And although that these disputes had left some doubt and scruple in
some places of the East, as in Thessalia (where he that was married after he
had taken orders in the Church, was put out of his place) yet Socrates tells
us that this was against the custom of other Churches: Socrat. l. 5. c. 22.
Nicephor.
and that as many famous Bishops in the East did abstain from marriage of their
own voluntary inclinations, (...), not compelled thereto by any law: so also
very many during the time of their exercising of their Bishoprics, had and
did beget children of their lawful wives, and that in the houses belonging to
their Bishoprics.

In the end (notwithstanding the authority of the scriptures, of the old
Church, and of this famous and worthy Council) the Church of Rome, Syricius
his law.
about the year 400. made a firm and stable law of these particular opinions.
And in deed from whence could it rise or spring, but from the mother of
fornications, seeing that according to the prophecy of Paphnutius, she was to
broach and set abroad Sodomitrie throughout the whole world? And whereas this
law is fathered upon Syricius, it may be that he has wrong, Syricius, ep. 4.
c. 9. Innoc. 3. c. 1. ep. 3. D. 27. 32. 81. 82.
in like manner as certain decretal Epistles written concerning the same
matter, may seem falsely to be attributed to Vrbanus the first, Lucius the
first, and Calixtus the first: for thus they have delighted and pleased
themselves to abuse the people, under the color of antiquity. Wherefore it
says: Suademus sacerdotib. and Leuitis, etc. Our advice and council is to
priests and Deacons, not to lie any more with their wives: because they are
occupied in the ordinary Ministry: then it fowlloweth, that they were
married as yet at that time. D. 14. c. Is qui C. Christiano.
But this mild advice ended in a fierce and furious commination in these
words: If any man carry himself contrary to this Canon, be it known to him
that he is not to be partaker of our Communion, and furthermore that he is to
endure the pains of the infernal Lake. 1. Cor. 7.
And by the Consuls (concerning the date) it appears that this Epistle was
written in the year, 405. But that which the Apostle calls, The bed
undefiled, it there calls, Carnal concupiscence. And whereas the Apostle
has termed, him blameless, that is the husband of one only woman: it
interprets it, that it is upon condition, that he shall forsake her, and
cease to keep any company with her, adding this reason: Because that they which
are in the flesh cannot please God. And shall God then have commanded a man to
displease him, for he has ordained and appointed, That they shall be two, one
flesh? Now therewithal be it known, that it is of the same time which we read
in the Canons. That he which has not a wife, may have a concubine, and not be
put from the communion for having of the same. And this course of life they did
not judge to be to live in the flesh, or to live reproachable and worthy of
rebuke, etc. against the express commandment of Christ. Gentilitas. Grounded
upon the Gentiles and heretics.
But look a little with me I pray you to the spring and fountain from whence
their divinity flows. Let us take away (says it) this reproach, which the
Gentiles might justly object against us: that is to say, because that the
Gentiles (as we have said) ordained and decreed in many places, that their
priests should be unmarried. Innocent who lived not long after, in his Epistle
unto Exuperius Bb. of Tholosa, utters the same, and upon the same foundation
and pains: and whereas the other has alleged the example of the Gentiles,
this fellow has made him a shield of all the places which the Gnostics, 1.
Tim. 4.
Montanists, Marcionites, and Manichies did abuse against marriage, that is, of
the doctrine of devils, and of the spirits of error, aforesaid by the Apostle.

But this law was not received and embraced all at one time, The proceeding of
the executing thereof.
as may plainly be seen by the Provincial Councels that insued, as being
troubled with the renewing and further establishing of the same from time to
time, with the addition of some one article or other: but by little and little,
by large distances of time betwixt point and point, and in the revolution of
diverse ages: the Popes continually gaining and incroaching, sometime by the
example of some one Province set against another, and sometimes by the power of
great Princes, standing in need of their authority. Tertullian had rough hewed
the same in Afric by his writings. Conc. Carth. 2. c. 2.
Then Syricius caused a council to be held at Carthage, where he caused this
decree to be propounded by Faustine Bishop of Potentia, in the Marquesdome of
Ancona: Whereupon it was pronounced: That they which did handle the
sacraments, should keep themselves chaste, and abstain from their own
wives: as though chastity were not properly so called in regard of marriage.
And that it might the smoothlier pass, they add: To the end that we may
observe that which the Apostles have taught: and which antiquity has observed.
But Gratian was ashamed of this reason, and therefore to cover this lie, he
added this word Exemplo, that which they have taught by their example; his
conscience accusing him, and telling him that the word which they had taught
was contray thereunto. Great. D. 84 Cum in praeter D. 82. C. Plurimos. Conc l.
Carthag. 5. c. 3. D. 84. C. Cum de quorundam. Pelag. 28. c. de Svracus. and ibi
Gratian.
And their Gloss says upon the word Antiquity, that this antiquity cannot be
derived or fetched from any elder time, then the time of Synecius: that is, that
it was a very new and late thing. For it is granted, that this second Council
of Carthage was held in his time; and in the fifth, (held within a while after
under Pope Anastasius;) the Canon is renewed, but in more mild terms, grounded
upon the former decrees, or such as were merely their own (for there are
diverse readings of the matter) and not upon the Apostles. But Pope Pelagius
about the year 550. does tell us more boldly the intent and scope of this
decree in the cause of a Bb. of Siracuse in Sicily, as namely that, The
principal cause should be to avoid the spending of the goods of ecclesiastical
persons, in the maintaining and advancing of their wife, children, or kins
folk, etc. Where Gratian adds: And therefore such authority does not let,
but that a man which shall be chosen Bb. may take a wife and have children, it
being pronided that he take very good heed, as did this Bb. of Siracuse, that
he do not lauishly spend and consame them. And whereas none can be chosen, but
such a one as is either priest or Deacon, Leo. 1. D. 31. in ep. ad episc.
Maurit. Hilar.
they may lawfully take upon them the married estate. Leo the first says: Let
them not put away their wives, but let them abstain from them: Again, he
commands the Bbs. of Mauritania to deprive of their charges such as have had
many wives. And Hilarious the second would have them deprived, who had married
widows, or any other then maids, and yet amidst all these inhibitions we see
that marriage continued. In a word, Sidon. Apollinar. in ep. ad Aquil. Euag l.
1. c. 15.
that great and worthy person Sidonius Apollinaris Bishop of Auernia was
married, and had children after he was Bishop. And Synesius Platonicus refused
to be Bb. of Damascus, if he might not be suffered to lie with his lawful
wife: Protesting and openly affirming that he would pray oftentimes unto God,
to give him children: and it was granted him. And at this time, that is about
the year 600. Olympiodorus writ: Olympiod. in Eccleslast. 3. cap.
There is a time when we may keep company with our wives, to avoid the
temptations of the enemie^^ and there is a time when we are not to come near
them, as when we are to power out our prayers before God.

Let us peruse and ouerlooke the Provinces and countries abroad, The
resistances made against the receruing of this Decree. In France.
to see and observe the difficulties which did every where break out, when the
execution of this writ and Decree should be put in practice. In France we
see it renewed after some importunity used in procuring and furthering of the
same in the councels of Agatha, Aurange, Aruernia, Orleance, Tours, Mascon,
Auxerre, etc. And yet it is certain that the first Council of Tours did
mittigate the punishment, contenting it self not to promote to any higher
degree, those which were married after they had taken orders. And by the second
Council of Tours held under king Cherebert, Council. 2. C. 13 14.2 c. etc.
almost 160. years after the decree, it appears that the Bbs, Priests, and
Deacons were as yet married, and that their wives were called, Women bishops,
women priests, and women Deacons, which lived with the^, only they were
forbidden to lie with the^, and were punished when they were taken doing
otherwise. The same appears by the council of Auxerre, held after the year
600. Council. Altisiod. c. 21.22.
by which it was forbidden to sleep in the same bed with them, and to mingle
themselves in sin; as also their wives to marry again: a hard commission to
the Archpriestes, to watch betwixt the husband and the wife. We have said that
Sidonius Apollinaris, Bishop of Auernia was married, Soluian. Epise. Massi^. l.
^. de prouid. Dei.
and had children being a Bishop. But let us hear Saluian the Bishop of
Marselles upon this matter, at such time as Pope Gelasius would have bound
the Church of France with the same bands: You think it (says he) a goodly
conversion: alluding (as it may seem) unto the Canon, A labe and scelere.
which says, that the married priest must not be received unto the priesthood,
if he have not promised, At his conversion to abstain from pollution and
wicked dishonestie: for so they called the married estate: When as they abstain
from their wives, but not from other men's goods: when as they profess
continency of body, but let loose the reins in most dissolute manner to all
incontinencie of the soul: a new and strange manner doubtless of conversion:
they do not the things which are lawful, nor make any conscience of that which
is unlawful: they abstain from marriage, but not from rapine and stealth. What
do thou O foolish and fond persuasion? God has forbidden sins and not
marriage: you do every thing quite contrary. This is not a conversion or
turning to goodness, but a turning from all goodness. You that are reported to
have left the honest company of marriage, do you at the least abstain from
dishonesty, yea at the least do you abstain from monstrous dishonestie? Now he
writ this against the priests of Rome and Italy in his time, not dissembling or
hiding the matter, how that from that time Sodomitrie became public and common
in Rome.

In a word, about the year 800. Zachary writing to Pipin, and sending him the
decrees, which he intended should be observed in France, in the 37. Canon, he
recommendeth the abstaining of Bbs. Priests, and Deacons, from their wives.
And one Claudius Bb. of Auxerre being countenanced and beloved of Charles the
Great, declaimed boldly against the abuses of the Church of Rome, and amongst
others, against that of forced continency. And Sigibert tells us, that the
Emperor Lothairus toward the year 855. great resistance being made against
this law, did also oppose himself thereto: D. 32 C. de illo Clerico.
as also about the year 860. one Odo Bb. of Vie^na permitted Aluericus a
Subdeacon to be married: whereupon Pope Nicholas was offended. And very near to
the year 1100. Gebwiler.
Lambertus Schafnaburgensis, and Gebwiler a German writer, although a
Romanist, witnesses that 24. Bbs. as well Germans as Frenchmen, with the
whole clergy of their diocesses, were married, and defended their marriages
constantly. The secular sword in the end was drawn out against marriage, even
that sword which Innocent the first had threatened against the same a long time;
as that what the authority of the canons could not effect, that same should
forcible violence persuade. And in the mean time it is not to be forgotten,
that at the very time when Gregory the 3. ordained in France, that no man
should marie any woman that had been wife to any Elder, Liber Pontificalis.
Bonifac. in ep. ad Pechelin. and Nothelin. Idem ad Zachariam. tom. 2. Council.
Naucler. gener. 25. In Spain. Hieronym. ad Oceanum. Sectator libidinum, and
praeceptor vitioru^. Council. Elibert. 1. c. 33.
Deacon, Monk, or witness at the baptizing of any of his children, etc.
alleging to the Frenchmen, that to do any of these was an enormous sin, that
then notwithstanding Boniface in the right and behalf of the Germains, says,
that he has not yet acknowledged or conceived of it so to be. This same
Gregory permitted against the express word of God, a man to marry his own
aunt, the wife of his uncle, and to forsake his own wife, because of her
barrennes, or sickness, following that which is written of the Pharisees: Which
strain a Gnat, and swallow a Cammell.

In Spain it seems usual by Carterius a Bb. who was twice married, and yet
not blamed for the same by S. Jerome, neither yet accounted to have
transgressed the Apostles precept: as also the resistance which was made
against forced singlenes by the choleric mood of Syricius: What will these
loose livers (says he) say unto me, or else these masters of vices? Thus
speaks he of the married priests of Spain: and the Bb. of Arragon tells him,
that he is not able to prove that by them Likewise the 33. Canon of the
Council of Elebert, is so contrived and laid down, as that it cannot well be
said, whether it condemn or approve a single life, because of the ambiguity
and doubtfulne, which is in these words: Placuit in totu^ prohibere, abstinere
se a coniugibus, etc. And yet notwithstanding in the first Council of Toledo,
held under Syricius, Patronus the Bb. began there, saying: That he purposes to
stand fast unto all that which shall be found to have been ordained in the
council of Nice. In so much as that marriage (to speak properly) is not
forbidden there: but by a consequence falsely gathered from the conclusion and
latter end which was left in the Decree of Nice, for them which should marry
after orders, they exclude from all further and greater promotion, such as
after the said orders, shall have had children by their wives. Council. Tolet.
1. c. 1.2.3.4.5.
But the Councels of Girond, Seuil and Toledo, which followed, did make the case
and condition to be worse, even to the arming of the secular power against it:
and yet about the year 600. Isidore the younger, Isidor. de vita Cleric.
utters this speech, namely: That clearkes must either live chastely, or else
at the least content themselves with one only marriage.

Neither let us think that it went otherwise in Italy, In Italy. D. 56. Plat
and Volat.
as the diverse Popes begotten of Priests in marriage, may sufficiently
confirm unto us: Boniface the first, son of Iucundus the Priest: Felix the
third son of Felix the Priest: Gelasius the first, son of Valerius the
Bishop: Agapet the first, son of Gordian the Priest: Syluerius the son of
Hormisda the Bishop: Deus-dedit, the son of Steven the Subdeacon: Theodore
the son of Theodore the Bishop: Adrian the second, the son of Tolarus
the Bishop, etc. all of them borne betwixt the years 400. and 900. and more,
legitimate notwithstanding, although they were borne after the taking of
Orders: Because (says Gratian) that before the prohibition was received,
Gratian. C. Cenomanuensem D. 56. and in Palea Oluis. D. 28. C. de Syracus.
vrbis. D. 31. c. 2.
such marriages were lawful, and are as yet in the Eastern Church.

In Sicilia likewise we read in the Decree, that those of the City of
Siracusa, having chosen a Bishop who had both wife and children. Pope
Pelagius delaied the well accepting of him, but in the end by their
importunity was constrained to yield unto them. And as Gregory about the
year 600. went about to forbid the Subdeacons of Sicilia the use of their
wives, contrary to the custom which had continued amongst them till then;
they did so stifflie stand in the cause, as that he was constrained to let
them alone as they were, with this charge, that from that time after there
should not any be received to the Orders of the Church, but such as had
promised in express terms their abstaining from marriage. In like manner
Lambertus Schafnaburgensis a learned Chronicler, who writ the Chronicles of
Hirtsfeld, witnesses that in his time, which was after the year 1000. there
were many that had wives in France and in Italy. But Calixtus the second
held a Council at Rome of 300. Bishops, for the establishing and making
authentike of the Decree of abstine^ce from marriage, about the year 1123 and
how mightily Sodomitrie increased thereby, it was reported in two Councels
held at Rome successively; Synon. To. c. 11
Let the Clearkes that shall be found defiled, do penance in Monasteries; and
those which are found to retain and keep their wives, let them be deprived of
their offices and benefices: but such of the Laity, as shall be found attainted
of Sodomitrie, let them be excommunicate: a proper proportion of the
punishments, whether you consider the persons or the crimes.

In Bulgarie a part of the Realm of Hungary, In Bulgarie. D. 28. C. Con.
sulendnm. vbi Nicol. 2d. Consulta. Bulgar.
the ecclesiastical persons continued married in the year 800. This is
manifest by the question which they make to Pope Nicholas the first, which was
to know whether they should retain and maintain, or else reject and cast off
a married Priest: whereunto the answer is, that such a Priest is very blame
worthy: whereas S. Paul would have said, unblameable, the husband of one
only woman, etc. notwithstanding, that he may be tolerated, as Judas was by
our Lord amongst his Disciples. Guntherus and Thetgaudus their Bishops, did
oppose themselves therein very stoutly, as they in like manner did against
the Legates of Adrian the second his successor, Syluester, Leopard and
Dominicke, who went about to alter and change al their service into Latin,
bringing to that effect their Latin priests with them, for to establish them
amongst them: whereupon it followed, that they, joining themselves to the
Church of Constantinople, were excommunicate by the Pope, as the most execrable
and accursed men of all the world: the very name also of Bulgaria became so
abominable, that until this day it is derived of the most abominable vice
that is stirring in the world.

Germany for the great severity and strictnes whereto it was given, In
Germany, Hillar. in Ep. ad Epis. Germ. Ambros. ad Reginam Frid gildam.
Hieronym. ad Simone^ and Fridelum.
being more unfit to admit any entrance for the practices of Rome, was not
assaied or assailed with this abuse and detestable mischief till of later
time, and being assailed, did resist and hold out a longer time then any other
nation, before they would yield thereunto. It had received the faith in the
time of the Apostles, as we read in Ireneus; it had stood and continued in
the same according to their first institution and trayning up; as S. Hillarie,
S. Ambrose, and S. Jerome do testify unto us in certain of their Epistles.
About the year 730. the Bishop of Rome sent thither one Vinofridus,
otherwise called Boniface, to establish his ceremonies there; for which purpose
he bound himself by an oath to Pope Gregory the second in express words,
(and this is the cause why he was called the Apostle of Germany, and not for
that he did establish the Christian faith there). Now when he came into
Germany, he found there one Geholibus, otherwise called Gerbilio, Bb. of
Mentz, married, and being the son of Gerard, one that was Bishop before him
in the same place, and afterward we read of one Paschal, Auent. l. 3. P.
294. Gasper. Nedio. in Eccles. hist. Nichol. 1. in Ep. ad Radul. Episc. Argent.
Auent. l. 5. p. 574.
Bishop of the City of Coire, the head and chiefest City of the Country,
called Rhetia, whose wife was called Antistita, or Episcopa Curiensis. And Pope
Nicholas the first, about the year 865. inioyning penance to a Priest, that
he should not offer for the space of seven years, did close it up with this
conclusion; And yet notwithstanding, let him not be separated from his lawful
wife, least he should fall into the pit of fornication. And about the year
1080. under Pope Gregory the seventh, Auentine makes mention; that all the
Priests were married, and had children: that their wives were called
Presbyterissae, who also were found engraven in the foundations which they
made in their Temples and Monasteries: which thing Gebioiler above alleged,
did not dissemble or conceal. But now behold how the Pope does get and
gain foot after foot upon the Germans. Greg 2. ^d Bonifac. Ep. 2.
Gregory the second durst not command Boniface, that upon his ariual and
coming thither, he should wholly take away marriage: but contenteth himself
to inioyne him that he should not admit to the taking of any cure or charge,
Auent. p. 290.
such as had been twice married. Gregory the third commands likewise:
That they should either live chastely, Zachar. in Ep. ad Bonifac.
or else that they should take unto them wives: a thing that cannot by any
means be lawfully denied them, etc. Pope Zachary proceeds further, and
answers Boniface to the things wherein he craved counsel and direction:
That after Orders given he forbid them to marry, but and if they be married,
that then they should live and keep comparie with their wives. But in the
Synod which he caused to be held in the time of Charlemaine, described and
set forth by Auentinus, there is nothing determined or enacted concerning that
matter, notwithstanding that there were diverse articles drawn to bridle the
dissolutenes and loosenes of Priests: a sign and token that Boniface saw not
things as yet to fall fit, and marriage amongst Priests did still continue,
Council. Mogunt. c. 10.
and was celebrated every day. And that which we read in the Council of
Mentz, held about the year 813. That Clearkes do keep for ever an
inviolable chastity in their bodies, is, as it has been very well noted, a
place drawn from the rule of Isidore his Clearkes, fraudulently mangled by
these compilers and gatherers together of things, D. 23. C. his igitur.
who do conceal and keep back the words that follow, Aut certe vnius
matrimonti vinculo faderentur, that is, or let them be once married: and yet
they are not ashamed to allege Isidore therein. And indeed it is so set down
in the laws of Charles the Great, Car. l. 7. c. 384 ex Regul. Cleric.
and in Gratian his decree also. The maine battle happened in the time of Pope
Nicholas the first, about the year 800. betwixt him and S. Vlricke, Bishop
of Ausbourg, whose Epistle we have. The matter was, for that Odo Bishop of
Vienna, having permitted a Subdeacon named Aluericke to be married, Pope
Nicholas took occasion to make this Decree; That it should never be permitted,
that any Clearkes should be married, D. 32. C. de illo Clerico.
except the Readers of the lessons and the Song-men: and for that also the
said Nicholas the first, went about to press the execution thereof in the
highest degree, and that every where, even in Germany. And certainly this
Epistle deserves to be thoroughly read, Vlrich. Episc. August. ad Nicol. 1.
both for the zeal and doctrine of this Vlrich: but we will only touch the
principal points: Reading (says he) thy decrees upon the continency and
single life enjoined the Clearkes, I was taken with great fear and sadness both
at once; with fear, because the sentence of a man's Pastor, be it just or
unjust, is to be feared; and withal I feared, least they who hardly obey just
and upright sentences, should trample and tread under their feet, the unjust
and wrongful, their Pastor going about to lay upon them an unsupportable
charge and commandment: with heavy pensiuenes, or rather with compassion:
for how can the members fare well, when the head is so grievously diseased? for
what more grievous malady, what more to be pitied of the whole Church, then
to be out of the way of holy discretion? Wherein you are not lightly
overtaken, in going about to compel and imperiously to force them to lead a
single life, whom you ought with all gentleness to exhort: when against the
institution of the Gospel, and that which is spoken by the holy Ghost, you
will notwithstanding that your private decrees be executed. Of many, (says
he) I will tell you of some: God in the old law permitted the marriage of
Priests: and it is not read that he forbad the same afterward at any time: in
the Gospel there is mention made of Eunuchs, who gelded themselves for the
kingdom of heaven: but every man says, our Lord cannot learn this manner of
speech. The Apostle says, as concerning virgins, I have no commandment from
the Lord, I advise, etc. And you ought further to consider that all men are not
fit to receive this counsel: And whereas they say, that this place concerns
the Laity only, they lie like hypocrites, in going about to wring the tender
teates of the scripture; they have sucked blood in stead of milk. That which
the Apostle says: Let every man have his wife, has not I assure you any
exception to be taken against it, in respect of any man, except it be of
such as have vowed chastity, whereunto they are not to be constrained. But
the Apostle says: It behooves that the Bishop should be unblameable, the
husband of one only wife: and he says the same also of Deacons. And to the
end that they may not say, that this is meant of the church, he adds: he
that cannot guide and govern his house well, etc. Again, you know very well,
that by the decrees of Pope Siluester, it is said, that the wives of Deacons
must be blessed by the Priest. (And this by the way is to be noted, that this
Decree of Syluesters, has been raced out of the Decretall and Councels).
There he alleges Isidore in the rule of Clearkes, and that entire and
whole, not maimed and mangled as in the Council of Mentz, the Canon of
Gangres, the story of Paphnutius, etc. And whereas they allege furthermore,
That without chastity, no man shall see God: he answers, Truth, but
chastity consists not only in the flower of virginity, but also in the
bond and knot of marriage. And whereas they hold forth S. Gregory as a strong
bulwark for their defense; I cannot but laugh at (says he) their rashness,
and I pity their ignorance: for he earnestly repented himself of this
dangerous heresy. Thereupon also he takes occasion to make mention, how that
S. Gregory having sent to fish his pond, there were brought unto him more then
six thousand heads of young children, which drew deep sighs from the bottom
of his soul, caused him to confess that this was the just fruit of his
forced single life; and to fly from his Decree, to the good advise and
counsel of the Apostle: It is better to marry then to burn: and he added
thereunto, it is better to marry then to give occasion of death. He passes on
forward to adulteries, incestes and buggeries, wherewith this Decree which was
made in his time, made the earth to stink: and further shows, that it was
grown to a conclusion amongst men, that it was better secretly to defile
themselves with whoredom with many, then in a good conscience to live
openly, and in the sight of men with one lawful wife etc. And that in a
word, to forbid marriage unto ecclesiastical persons, is a plague, a
Pharisaicall doctrine, a perverse sect, a dangerous heresy, and intolerable
offense, and scandal to the whole Church, the fulfilling of that which was
threatened by S. Paul: That there should rise a people, that should give ear
to spirits of error, etc. forbidding marriage. And there upon adiureth him to
leave off and forsake it, even as he loves the spouse of Christ, and desires
the vndefilednes of the same, and that he would take this reproof in good part,
and remember himself, that though a Bishop be more then a Priest, yet S.
Augustine may be less, and come behind S. Jerome, that is, may be taught by
one of less account and dignity. For otherwise he fears that his Holiness by
this private decree (for so he calls it) will be found to oppose and set
himself against the old and new Testament, etc. That which is here further to
be noted for the proceeding and growth of this abuse, is, that there were
certain Bishops that being unmarried despised others, and to those he says:
Presume not, neither be proud of your gifts, judge not another man's servant,
beware that under this fair cloak of continency, there lie not hid many
infamous delights and pleasures. As also that in his time, they obtained and
got their wills, rather by the frank and voluntary accord of men, then by the
swaye and force of any law: and that the Clearkes whom they admitted, did
promise by word of mouth, or by the giving of them their hand, that they would
continue to live a single life. From which S. Vlrich freeth himself, as
putting in a caution, That there be no necessity and constraint to be urged.
Now this Vlrich was a great personage of the house of the Conties of Riburg and
Dillingen in Sueuia, and afterward canonized for the holiness of his life. But
to the end that no man may think that this Epistle was made by some other to
pleasure and gratify any body, although the style it self do sufficiently
resolve all such doubt: Pope Pius the second in his Germany alleges it, and
recites the argument thereof: again, it has been seen in famous Libraries,
before the controversies of this time. And Bertold Priest of Constance,
Berthold in appendice. ad Herman. cont. act. Chronic.
who writ in the year 1079. alleges it in these words: Gregory held a
Synod at Rome, wherein he condemned the Epistle of S. Vlrich, unto Pope
Nicholas the first, concerning the marriage of Priests, as also the chapter in
Paphnutius, entreating of the same matter. But the effect fell out to be, that
until the time of Pope Gregory the seventh, that is, 200. years after, the
forced single life was not admitted and allowed in Germany: insomuch as that
the Canons of the Bishopric of Auspurge were married, yea and the Monks
themselves of the famous Abbye of Fulda, about the year 950. Bruschius.
in the time of the Abbot Hadamarius: whereupon it holds and continues as
yet in many Nunries in Germany and in the Low Countries, that the inferior
Nuns do take unto them husbands, when they find an honest man, but not the
Abbess or chief of the Sisters.

The former reasons being found too weak to give head and entrance unto the
forced single life. New reasons for the establishing of the forced single life.
Pet. Damian. in Ep ad Petr. Lateranensem. Anselm. in Ep. ad Heb. 7.
After the year 1000. the doctrine of Transubstantiation (as one deceit does
further and help forward an other) as it grew strong and of authority, did
furnish them with new store: Even as (say they) our Lord would be conceived in
the womb of a virgin: so would he be received at the Altar with impolluted
and virgins hands. And from hence Petrus Damianus and Anselmus do conclude
that Bishops, Priests, and Deacons, cannot in any wise be married; and that
this sacrament cannot be administered by married persons. And what shall then
become (and what can our adversaries annswere in this point) of so many holy
Bishops and Priests, that were married? who have administered the same in
that estate? and to all those faithful people which have received the same
sacrament at their hands? shall the sacrament have been unto them in all
nations, and for so many ages, an abomination, and notorious sacrilege?

As therefore their reasons seemed to grow stronger, so likewise they added
more force unto their Canons, and fiercenes to the execution of the same. Leo
the ninth a German by nation, held a Synod at Mentz, the Emperor being
there present, to ratify the execution of his Decree, Nicetas de coniugio
Sacerdotum.
with 40. other Bbs. but therein he mended his matter nothing at all: for at
that time one Nicetas surnamed Pectoratus, a Grecian Abbot, but resident and
ruling in the West Church, made head against him saying: That that was not the
doctrine of the Apostles, neither yet any of their Traditions: and that if it
had been any of the Apostles their Traditions, that then it had behooved Pope
Agatho to have alleged it in the sixth general Council, where this Edict was
so solemnly discoursed and debated, and sentence given against the forced
single life: and notwithstanding he rested satisfied in the same, (as we shall
see hereafter in further process) as knowing in his conscience that these were
base begotten Traditions, devised and surmised Canons, proceeding from the
spirit of error, Humber. cont. Nicetam.
spoken of before by the Apostle, etc. And Pope Nicholas the second who
succeeded Leo, caused an answer to be shaped by one Cardinal Humberte,
Bishop of Sylua Candida, who in this his answer cast in his teeth, that to
maintain the marriage of Priests, is the heresy of the Nicolaitanes, and he
goes about to prove it out of Epiphanius, devising a place that is not there
to be found, neither any thing coming near unto it, whereas we have
showed indeed out of the very same Epiphanius, that Nicholas began the error
of single life, superstitiously deuorcing himself from his wife: he did also
corrupt and deprave the Can on of the Apostles: That a Bb. Priest or Deacon,
should not forsake and leave his wife under the color of religion, adding
thereto these words: as concerning to make provision for her food and
apparel and not otherwise. And in the end he grows to presume, that by his
sole authority he may cut the throat of Nicetas his reasons, the same Pope
Nicholas did likewise command Petrus Damianus Bb. of Hostia to answer
Nicetas, whose book pincht him at the heart, and that so much the more, because
that Auxentius Bb. of Millaine did hold with Nicetas his opinion. And then it
was that Petrus Damianus found out this new reason: That our Lord conceived of
a virgin, could not be received or handled but with chaste and virgins hands,
etc.

But Gregory the seventh called Hildebrand, about the year 1074. (the whole
service of the Church being almost turned at that time to a only hearing or
seeing of Mass, by reason of the ignorance which had seized upon all Christian
people,) in the end frames and squareth out a Decree, by which he forbids
al under pain of excommunication to hear Mass of such as were married, or to
pay them any Tenthes, Vincent l. 26. c 146.
and he caused the same to pass in a Synod at Rome: By a new example (says
Vincentius) and by a preiudicate unadvisedness, contrary to the Decrees and
sentences of the holy Fathers, etc. And this Decree seemed to carry the
execution of the same always about it, insomuch as that the people which could
not live without Masses, tied their priests to abstain from marriage, except
they would be willing to loose their Tenthes, which were due unto them. But
here it was that the great conflictes and contentions began in Germany: for
Hildebrand commanded all Bishops that they should cause his Decree to be
obeyed in these points: Epist. Hildebr. ad Constantiens. Naucl. 1. 2. p. 140.
Auent. p 603. Cran^ius in Metropol.
That the married Clearkes should forsake their wives: that the unmarried
should not take any: that none should be admitted to the Priesthood, who had
not bound himself to lead a single life: that the Masses of the married were
as an infectious plague unto them, etc. whereas we have showed in the Epistle
of S. Vlrich, that this vow was free even in his time. But Otho Bishop of
Constance, and Rathold Bishop of Strausbourg, did allege the scriptures
against him, as also the ancient custom of the Germane Church, against whom
he bestirreth himself to cause them of their Diocese to rise up in a
mutiny, as appears by his letters to the^ of Constance. And not contented
therewith, he summoneth Princes and Princesses, Ep. Gregor. ad Constantiens.
Clearks and Laity, to put to their helping hand: he forbids them all
manner of conversation, and all manner of speech with married Priests, upon
pain of the most extreme censures, Auent. 564. Fasciculus rerum sciendar.
impress. Colon 1553.
and upon pain to be accounted heretics of the sect of the Nicolaitans, etc.
absolueth the subjects from the rule and government of their Princes, the
Diocesians and Parishioners from the obedience of their Bishops and Curates,
he apprehends and lays hold upon the Emperor Henry the fourth his own
person. And as his predecessors in the matter of Images had made their market
by driving their Emperors out of the East, and out of Italy: so this man
prevailed by controversy, and plucked the Empire from Germany, or at the least
did so loppe and clip it, as that it retained not so much as the shadow of his
ancient Monarchy. This controversy notwithstanding being debated in diverse
Synodes, at Millaine, Lamb. Schasnaburgens. and Nauclerus.
at Mentz, and at Erphord, supported by the Archbishop of Mentz, and
furthered to the uttermost by the Pope, was notwithstanding gainsayed both by
all the Bbs. as also by all the Clergy, opposing and setting against the Pope
his Canons, the plain and evident textes of scripture, as the Chroniclers
themselves of the same time do declare, and had no other end, save that the
Archbishop did well see and perceive that the whole Clergy of Germany was
resolved rather to forsake their charges, the^ their wives, and which is more,
took upon himself, to become the executioner of so notorious a tyranny in
his own proper person, letting pass all further conference with the Pope about
the matter.

In the mean time in the year 1076. there was a Council held at Worms,
Auentinus.
where were present all the Bishops both of Germany and of France, and
therein Gregory the seventh is condemned and deposed by the common consent of
them all, Adulberon the Bb. of Wirtzbourg, and Herman the Bb. of Mets, only
excepted. Amongst other causes this was noted for one; He separateth husbands
from their wives: he prefers whores and strumpets to lawful wives:
fornications, adulteries, and incests to lawful marriages: he stirs up the
common people against the ecclesiastical persons: and the ecclesiastical
persons against the common people, Sabellie.
etc. And this Decree was signed by the Bb. of Mentz, (who was chief President
in the same,) as also by the Bishops of Treues, of Vtrecht, of Mets, of
Luques, of Verdune, Thoul, Spire, Halberstat, Strasbourg, Basile, Constance,
Wirtz bourg, Bamberg, Ratisbona, Brichsen, Eichstat, Munster, Hildescheim,
Mind, Osnabourg, Naumbourg, Padeburne, Brandenbourg, Lausanna, and Vienna
upon Roan: as also subscribed shortly after by the Bishops of Italy,
assembled in the Synod of Pauie. Whereupon Pope Gregory enraged more and
more, stirred up the Monks against the Priests, the subjects against the
princes, Auent. p. 564.
and the Princes against the Emperor. Never was the silly flock of Christ,
says Auentinus, afflicted with so cruel a sedition, as was this which sprung
of the forbidding of the Priests to marry. All divine and humane things were
turned topsie turuie, even to the pilling and spoiling of the Temples, to the
trampling and treading in the mire of the hosts that were consecrate by
married Priests. If any Bbs. would not admit them Priests without the vow,
the people that had elected and chosen them, did not let to cause them to
exercise their charges, to administer the sacraments, etc. The Priests on the
other side did openly preach and avouch, that Hildebrand was that Antichrist,
set in Babylon, in the Temple of God, advancing himself even above God
himself, etc. That he did invent fables, falsified the histories of every
years actions and accidents, depraved and misconstred the scriptures, turning
them by his expositions to what best pleased him, etc. and all this to bring in
a novelty, a pestilent thing, yea a heresy. In the end Auentinus says;
Auent. 573.
How that many more delighting themselves to abuse many women, then to use one
lawful wife, had given over themselves to the same madness with the Pope. About
the year 1080. the Bbs. of Italy, Germany, and France, to meet with and
remedy this mischief, Nauclerus.
did assemble at Brixen in Bauaeria, where Pope Hildebrand was deposed the
second time, as a Church-robber and heretic: Nauclerus says, that one of the
causes was, The law of forced abstinence from marriage, and the diuorcements,
that in like manner he had violently made. Auent. l. 5.
Auentine says, that the Council uses these words: Suauis homo, This sweet
fellow denies that Priests lawfully married can hallow the host, and yet
receives for that business whoremongers, adulterers, and incestuous persons.
The said Hildebrand dyed an exile at Salernum, whom the Germans called
Hellebrand, a firebrand of hell, for having kindled and set on fire all
Germany, by his execrable life, and particularly by his devilish magic and
incantations. Who so is desirous to know further of this matter, Cardin. Benno
in vita Greg. 7. Ponta in his Chronology. Urban. 2. D. 32
may read Cardinal Benno, who lived at that time: and therefore one of their
own Doctors living in this age has well and deservedly written of him, vir
Pontificatu dignus, etc.

And yet the spirit of error and deceipte does not give over. For Vrbane the
second, about the year 1090. returned to the breathing out of his
excommunications, and freeing of subjects from their allegiance to their
Emperors, and serves himself with this Decree, to trouble Christendom, and
more specially Germany, whereupon Chroniclers give him to name Turbanus. And
this speech is particularly given out of him; That he let not straight to
deprive the Clearkes of their offices and benefices, if they were married:
Because that the^ benefices had gotten the places and room of offices. Again,
That he did ordain that their wives should become slaves unto the prince or
Lord whose subjects they were. These good Fathers exceeding one another, in
making impiety and tyranny every day more and more precious: Paschall the
second goes on forward about the year 1105. for he armeth the Emperor which
was Henry the fifth, against Henry the fourth his father, not knowing how to
accomplish a wicked and sacrilegious purpose, otherwise then by a heinous
murderer, and having engaged him deeply in the matter by reason of this
enormous fact, he causes him to ordain in the Parliament and Synod held at
Northausen, in the time of his fathers life: That this Decree should be looked
to and seen executed by the secular power of the Empire. And always under the
counterfeite and sottish color of the heresy of the Nicolaitans, whereof
themselves were rather guilty and culpable. And this was executed by Henry
the fifth, and the Princes of Germany, about the year 1120. in the time of
Calixtus the second his successor, and therefore some do attribute this Decree
to him in particular. And for the working of some more credit and authority
thereunto, some allege him by the name of Calixtus the first. Calixt. 2. D. 27
This man enlarged and added more unto it, for it was not meet that he should
do less then all his Predecessors: That it was forbidden Bishops, Priests,
Deacons and Monks, to have either concubines or lawful wives: matching
marriage, the work and institution of God, with the keeping of Concubines, the
suggestion and devise of the Devil: And that if any were married, they should
be separated and put a sunder: and this is the cause why the verse says; O
bone Calixte, nunc omnis Clerus odit te,
Quondam Presbyteri poterant vxoribus vti, etc.


And Polydore Virgil writes, that about the year 1100. marriage was taken
from ecclesiastical persons in the Western Church, Polydor. l. 5.
as shall appear true hereafter in other nations. Now our good Fathers of
Trent have not forgotten to note down in their Index Expurgatorius, that these
words Coniugium quando Sacerdotib. Occidentalib. interdictum, should be raced
out, and others which we shall set down hereafter. Index expurg. page 195.


CHAP. X. The further proceeding and growth of abstinence from Marriage, and the
full and peaceable establishing of the same until our time.
THis thing will further verify it self by the sequel of other nations. In
England.
Some hold that the Gospel came into England in the year 170. so that they
heard not of abstaining from marriage, till such time as Augustine the Monk
was sent unto them from S. Gregory to establish the Roman ceremonies there.
The beginning there was, with the preaching of the praises of chastity, and
after by the planting of Monks of the Order of S. Benet, and in the end, as
other inventions of Rome were laid for a foundation, they assaied to bring in
this single life. Brithwoldus Bb. of London began about the year 714. assisted
by the authority of Beda, the Monks banding and opposing themselves against
the Priests, the hypocrisy of the one against the loosenes, which the people
knew well to be in the other: but for this time without prevailing or profiting
in their enterprise. Otho Archb. of Canterbury, about the year 950. declared
marriage of Priests to be heretical: but he was convinced mightily by the
authority of the scriptures, and of the ancient Church, so that his attempt
took no better effect then his Predecessors. On the contrary, Elserus Prince
of Marsh took upon him the defense of the married Priests against the Monks,
who had driven them out of their Churches, and set them in again by force.
Polyd. and Malmesburiens.
Dunstan a man much spoken of in stories for the Art Magic, does reprehend
and take him up for the same very sharply, goes to Pope John the 13. at
Rome, and there offers him his service, (a president and example much
commended in the stories of that time) brings back with him the Archb. of
Canterbury his Palliu^, for to succeed Otho: as also thunderboltes newly
forged and sharpened; causes a Council to be held at Winchester. And yet
notwithstanding, (the cause being debated and decided by the scriptures) he was
overcome, notwithstanding all the sophistry that Etheluold the Monk, whom he
had brought from Scotland, could bring out of his budget to help him withal.
Whereupon he presently bethinketh himself of other sleights and courses, and so
it was fained, that the Angel Gabriel had brought a certain schedule, which
condemned the marriage of priests. And S. Paul says unto us; Although it should
be an angel from heaven, etc. Polyd. l. 6 and M. Imsburiens
And further in the heat of the disputation causes a voice to be heard from
behind a crucifixe; These men do not well which maintain the marriage of
Priests. The people being astonished upon the coming of the same, the priests
replied courageously and said, that the voice of God could not be contrary
to his own word. And a Bb. of Scotland named Fathbodus, amongst others (being
called thither by Elfred the K. as one recommended for his great godliness and
learning) makes all the faction and partakers of Dunstan to be ashamed and at
their wits end. Ranulph. l. 6. c. 11. Capgranius. Polyd l. 6.
In which extremity he has recourse, either to his magic, (as some writers
of that time do affirm) or else to some other devilish practice, and says: I
am now too old for to dispute, but much more for to study: and yet you shall
not carry it away on this sort. And by and by after having caused his
adversaries to be called into a hall, it shrunk under them, and overwhelmed
the greatest part: he only having provided for his own safety, stood
still upright, possessed his Archbishopricke in peace, and established the
Monks of Saint Bennet, in stead of the Priests, which were called Canons
Regulars. This was continued by king Canutus, about the year 1020. in the
Church of Cambridge: and by K. Edward in that of Oxford, etc.

And yet for all this, priests did not cease to take them wives in England:
whether it were (as some say) that king William took a certain tribute for to
permit them, or that the liberty thereof could not be taken from them in so
general a contradiction and gainsaying at one blow. Anselm. ad ad Arnulph.
The truth hereof appears by Anselmus the Archbishop of Canterbury his
letters, unto Prior Arnulph, which acknowledge that under the former king, and
Lanfranke the Archbishop his predecessor, they had both Churches and wives
together. Anselme then returning from Lions out of exile, held a Council at
London, about the year 1100. wherein after many solemn protestations, he
forbids the Priests to marie. A few years being ouerpassed, there grew a
general complaint throghout the whole realm, that of abstaining from marriage,
they were come to fall to adulteries and incestes, and from them to Sodomitrie,
and that it spreads by the infection and contagion thereof, from the Clergy
to the Laity, and gets whole Countries even to the public committing of
the same. Anselme thereupon made notable ordinances for the repressing of the
same, in a Synod held for the purpose in the Church of S. Paul in London: he
excommunicateth them which were convicted of Sodomitrie, until such time as
they shall be thought worthy by reason of their confession and penance to be
absolved, and the like to be done with the^ who shall be furtherers unto them in
the committing of this crime: he ordains, that such as are religious, shall
not be advanced unto higher order: (becoming by this his over mild and soft
correction, no less faulty then the offenders themselves). On the contrary,
he excommunicateth the Priests, who shall have been found talking with their
wives, without two or three witnesses, not contenting himself with having
deprived them of their offices and benefices, etc. In the end the mischief
continuing, he goes being perplexed in his mind, for a remidy unto Rome:
whereupon the Pope in stead of having recourse to that which God has ordained,
sent one John of Creme a Cardinal, into England, with letters to the Clergy
of England, that he should be received with all due reverence, as the Vicar of
S. Peter, and the like also to David, K. of Scotland, then keeping his Court at
Roxbourg, who caused the profession of a single and unmarried life to become
much more authentike, that is, caused the plant of Sodomie to propagate and
multiply far more plentifully, in a Synod held at London. Ranulph. and Roger.
Cestiens. and John Treuisa in Chronic.
And histories make mention, that the same night that he caused it to be
published, he was taken with a whore in London: whereupon it followed, that his
decree loosing authority, K. Henry who then reigned, did license the Priests
to be married and take their wives again, paying unto him a certain sum of
money by the way of tribute, until such time as Pope Innocent the 3. about the
year 1138. sent Albert Bb. of Hostia, into England, who held a Synod at
Westminster, and there made a full establishment of abstaining from marriage,
save that for a certain time it was tolerated (what a stinking and loathsome
pranke of impiety?) that they which forsook their wives, should keep the^ as
Concubines. And it was at this time that these verses were made in England:
Prisciani regula penitus cassatur,
Sacerdos per hic and haec olim declinatur, etc.


And as for Ireland, it appears plainly that unto the coming of the
Archbishop Malachie, that is, unto the year 1150. In Ireland. Symeo^
Dnne^^nensis. Balaeus centur. 14.
Priests inioyed their married wives without any interruption or molestation,
whereby we have this confirmed unto us, as with an everlasting witness, that
is, and such other their stuff is not out of that heap of good seed, which
was first sown by the householder and farmer himself, but of those tares,
which the enemy rising by night did sow thereupon. For Malachias sent thither
by the Pope, called The marriage of Priests a perverted privilege, a wicked
custom, an execrable succession, and a mischievous and adulterous generation,
etc. Beruard. in vit Malach.
And S. Bernarde in the life of Malachie says, that unto his time the
Bishops there were married: likewise that in the metropolitan City of
Armaghe, before Archbishop Celsus, who lived at the same time when he lived,
there were eight married persons of good learning, who that they might not fall
into the snares and trappes of vowed and forced continency, had no purpose to
send for their bulls to Rome: and that this Malachie did first bring forced
continency into that land. Whereupon we read that Pope Adrian an Englishman,
commanded K. Henry the first to oppress and beat down the Irish as
heretics, that is to say, as Nicolaitans: Because (says he) they suffer and
maintain their Priests to be married: and this was about the year 1150.

At this time or near there about, In Polonia. Martin Cromerus. in Polonic. l
7.
fell the establishment of forced continency in the Northern provinces. In
Polonia, about the year 1190. two hundred years and more after they had
received the Christian faith, Celestine the 3. sent Petrus Diaconus, Cardinal
of Capua, who accordingly did his best endeavor, and after some further time,
Henry Archb. of Gnesna, in the time of Honorius the 3. who having called a
Synod there, took an oath of the Clergy, to obey the Legate his ordinances,
upon pain of being deprived of their offices and benefices. In Bohemia, the
same Cardinal about the year 1196. being come thither to the same end, In
Bohemia.
failed not to be well beaten and knocked, the Prelates and Priests consenting
together and conspiring the same. In Denmark, Clement the 3. excommunicated
the Danes, Saxo. l. 15. In Den mark. In Sueu land.
because they maintained their Priests to be married. In Sueueland and Gothland,
Cardinal Gulielmus sent by Innocent the 3. about the year 1200. assembled a
Synod at Schoening, where he took from the priests their lawful wives
which they had married publicly, Johan. Magnus l. 9. c. 15. Goth. histo. and
l. 3. de Pontificib. Vpsalensib. in vit. Iarlerit. Execrable and cursed
speeenes given out against marriage. Heb. 13.
and before the whole congregation, and that by the assistance and aid of
Ericius the K. his power, and the Duke Brigere, but not without a great
commotion and hurly burly, throughout the whole realm. And thus you see by
this time the law of forced continency established throughout all the Western
Church.

Likewise it is of the same time, that the spirit of error thinking to mount
and raise it self on high by the hypocrisy of the Monks, and favor of the
Popes, began to speak more shamelesly against marriage. Innocent the 2. that
he might yield a reason for the forced continency of Priests, says: It is not
meet that Priests, which are the Lords servants should serve at bed and in
the works of uncleanness: as if he should speak in despite of S. Paul, who
calls all the faithful the Temples of God, and marriage the bed of
cleannes, and the pure and undefiled bed. Alexander the third said; Alexand. 3.
extrauag. de cleric. coniug. 1. Timoth. 3.
It is not possible to be at leisure to attend the service of God, and carnal
pleasures together: setting out holy marriage by this name. What shall become
then of S. Paul, who could not find, but that the government of a private
family, and of a public assembly, that is, the government of a man's own
private house, D. 81. C. Ministr.
and of the house of God might be matched together in one man? Lucius the 3.
says: Those which are married, are unworthy to administer the sacraments,
imo indigni qui vrceum ad altar suggerant, yea unworthy to carry the water
pot to the Altar. What shall be done now with so many holy Bbs. and holy married
priests, who have in their own persons ferued at the Altar, in all nations and
throughout all ages? And yet notwithstanding after all this, Council. Late.
ranense. c. 14.
Innocent the third in the Council of Lateran, about the year 1200. having
promised to repress and take away the filthy vice of Sodomitrie in the
Clearkes, which the Decrees before alleged, had spread and multiplied
throughout the world concludes: Let the Clearks, Regionis, alias Religionis.
which according to the custom of their country have not forsaken and put
away their wives, if they be taken in fornication, be the more grievously
punished: inasmuch (says he) as they may use lawful marriage: an evident
sign that, notwithstanding all their thundering and terrible Decrees, there
were found in many places that continued their married estate: and an argument
likewise, that they did not hold them prohibited and forbidden, Ipsoiure;
seeing that after so many Councels, Pope Innocent still calls them legitime
and lawful.

Now we have hitherto seen sufficiently, The fruits of the Popish sole life.
that this forced continency was never instituted of God, but devised not so
much by man, as by the Devil himself: and the fruits thereof, if we should
stand to reckon them up, will show, that God did never plant this plant in his
Church. For our Lord said: By the fruits we know the trees: and as truly
are the doctrines of men tried by the fruits which they bring forth. This law
sprung and took his beginning from the Gentiles and the Priests of (...)
^^^tiles. Arnob. l. 8.
Arnobius says; Where do these Priests more willingly commit their
who^^^omes and fornications, then in their own Temples? then in the midst of
their Altars? where do they contriue their bawderie? where do they bethink
themselves of their adulteries, but there? Assuredly, whoredom is ofter lodged
in the little Chambers of the Keepers, then in the very brothel-houses. And the
same is to be said of this pretended continency. Nicholas the Deacon upon an
ambitious superstition renounced and cast off his wife: and he had no sooner
done it, but we may learn by Epiphanius into what uncleanness he fell. The
Heretics called Gnostici, would likewise have their Levites to lead this
single life: and the same Epiphanius reports that presently thereuppon
buggerie set in foot and took place. Iren and Epiph.
But Syricius his decree is no sooner made (and indeed how can it be
otherwise, there being such a mighty multitude of men to exercise their
mischievous villainies and loosenes of life, Saluian. l. 5. de provident.
more then ordinary?) but we hear Saluian Bishop of Marseillis, crying: Ye
who forsake honest Marriage, at the least abstain and keep your selves from
villainous wickedness, if not for altogether (says he) for it might be too
hard, yet at the least from that which is abominable and monstrous. S.
Gregory, says S. Vlrich, upon the report of 6000. childrens heads found in
his fishpond, being all confounded, fell a crying, being driven thereunto by
the remorse of conscience, striking his heart, and said; I have sinned, it is
better to marry then to burn. Saint Vlrich Bishop of Ausbourg, who vexed
and tormented himself thereat, says: This people which say, that the chaste
marriages of Clearkes are abominable unto them, are not afraid of whoredoms,
adulteries, incestes, buggeries, and other vitiouse practices, yea, to speak
in a word, of nothing of all that which the scriptures call the abominations
of the Chananites. In England we have seen how far this cursed law
prevailed, and what grief and trouble it put Anselme the Archbishop unto,
himself being the brocher and procurer of the same. As also in Germany, where
Auentine reports, that under the shadow of sanctimonie and holiness, All
sorts of incestes were committed without the sparing of any degree. Bernard
in Sermon. de conuers. ad Clericos. c. 29.
And what can be said more then S. Bernarde has said, who tormented and
vexed, yea who killed himself with crying, (it is shameful to speak, and yet
more shameful to co^ceale:) That the devil has strewed the ashes of Sodom
upon the very body of the church: (for so he calls the clergy) That the
number is marvelous great, but which is more, exceeding shameless, not caring
to cover and conceal themselves: That they have consented to forsake the
lawful remedy, Marriage, to take their swinge and liberty to the committing
of all manner of villainy, covering it under the veil of continency. But how
much better (says he) had it been for them to marry, then to burn? To be
brief, Mantuan says, notwithstanding that he was a gray Friar: Sanstus ager
scurris, venerabilis ara Cinaedis,
Seruit, honorandae diuum Ganymedibus aedes.


And to the end that the vice (as reason requires) may the more plainly
appear: let us repair to the mother of fornications: There we shall see the
Cardinals carrying the curtisans about with them in their Coaches, and the
Pope taking ordinary tribute and yearly sums of money of them, and to keep
a stews, (I loath and abhorte to speak of the worst) himself. There we shall
find Aretines, not in painted shapes, but in their lively persons, John de
Casa, Archb. of Beneuento, Deane of the Apostolic Chamber and the Popes
Nuncio, Ioh. a Casa. excus. venet. apud T^^anu^. Nauum.
writing the praises of buggery in Italian verse, and causing the same to be
imprinted at Venice.

But I could heartily wish that this law were left indifferent, or that it were
not at all, seeing that it has a contremaund, and that from the great and
mighty God, who knows better both our infirmities, and the remedies thereof,
then we our selves. But if that which is said in the Decree, ought ever to
take place; That a Positive law given and ordamed for edification, should be
abolished and repealed, when it turns to the desiruetion of any: then let us
willingly look down into our consciences, and it cannot possibly be denied,
but that it ought to be put in practice in this point? for it cannot be
excused, seeing the law was no sooner published, but the vice and villainy did
also manifest it self and break out into open sight, and not only make it
self to be seen, but to be complained on of every man, yea to be written
against of every man. Let us cease to speak of the braules and broiles of many
ages, about the publishing of this Decree: calling only to mind, how that in
the time of Calixtus the 2. (yea even when he was in his full authority,
reigning and ruling every where,) there were many great personages, which
ceased not to summon the Pope by their writings, and as it were to set affixes
upon his gates, showing the deeds and works that it brought forth, that so
all manner of excuse might be cut off, that otherwise might have been made for
him unto the posterity following? Thomas of Aquin, Thom. in su^m^, quae
incipit, Commiserationes Domini. c. 165. Anno 1270. Durand. de modo celebr.
conc. Anno 1320. Anno 1430. Reformationis articuli Sigismundi editi Argentinae.
Anno 1520. Aene. Svlu. in Act. Basil. l. 2. Quamplurimos.
advises the ecclesiastical person to make his infirmity known unto his
Confessor, if he cannot contain and subdue the lust of the flesh, and
afterward to marie secretly without the priuitie of the Bb. Durand disputes
the case by many reasons: That a general Council should be held for the
restoring of the Priests unto their former liberty of marrying. Marsilius of
Padua in his book called Defensorpacis, at the same time: That it might without
breach of piety be permitted unto them. Danta and Petrarcha in like manner: To
the matching of marriage with virginity: but the latter of them more
sharply, as one that had been solicited to have prostituted his sister to
Pope Benedict. Against the time of the Council of Basil, Sigismunde the
Emperor caused certain articles concerning things to be reformed, to be
made ready, of which this was one: The Decree of Calixtus the second, has
wrought more mischief in the church then good, it were better therefore and
more for the souls health, to permit Priests their honest marriages, after
the example of the Eastern church, etc. Aeneas Syluius, which was after Pope
Pius the second, says: It may be it would prove ill done, if many Priests
were married: for so it would come to pass, that many of them might save their
souls in a married Priesthood, which in an vumaried are condemned. And he
reports that it was alleged in the Council of Basil: Wherefore do our
Doctors use all this disputation, whether a married man chosen to be Pope, be
not bound to give unto his wife all due benevolence, but that because a married
man may be received and taken into that place? For was there never any Popes
married? Aen. Syl. in Ep. 307.
was not Saint Peter himself? And in his Epistle unto John Freund, who asked
his counsel upon the same, he says; It had been more meet and convenient
that thou had thought upon this matter before thy taking of Orders: but
seeing thou have proceeded so far, know now, that it is better for thee to
marry then to burn. But as for the present, seeing the Pope will not give
thee any dispensation, being settled and thoroughly resolved to continue the
strict and severe course which he has begun: thou must stay, till some
other do inioye the Apostolic See, whom thou may find more tractable and
easy to be won. Ad Panorm. O Cum olim de Cleric. coning.
The authority of Panormus, first an Abbot, and afterward an Archbishop,
was great in the Council of Basil, which propounded a question: If the Church
could not make a statute, that the Clearkes might be married? And he
answered that it could: and his reasons are: Because abstinencie is not any
branch of Gods law: neither yet any part of the substance of Orders: and
that otherwise the Grecians should sin: Yea, (says he) I am persuaded, that
in respect of the salvation of souls it ought to be made, and so much the
rather, because that we see that there has followed upon it a clean
contrary effect to that which was pretended: for now they let not, the
greatest part to pollute themselves with unlawful copulation, whereas their
lying with their own wives, according to the Council of Nice is chastity.
And would it might please God (says he) that there might be a course taken
with all those positive laws, that are so multiplied, as that there are not
many living, whom they have not caused to corrupt their ways. And many other
Canonistes were of the same judgment after Panormus; Stephan. Aufrer. and
Francis^n decisionib.
saying, that this Decree served for no other thing, but to intrappe weak
souls in the snares of sin: and that they had good hope, that the Church
would discharge the Clergy thereof, for their salvation. And thereuppon it
went as it were in a Proverb, mentioned by Platina, and Sabellicus, which
attribute it unto Pius the second: Marriage was suppressed and put down for
certain reasons, it must be restored upon more weighty and necessary
considerations. Polydor. l 6. Index Expurg. page 2 c 3. Erasm. de laud. matrim.
Idem in 1. Timoth. 3. Index Expurg. p. 249. 255. Item 210.211.227 Mantuan. l.
1. Fastor. de Hilatio. Stan. Orich. de. lege Syricii, ad Iul. 3. Oricho. Episc.
Russiens. de Celibatu.
Polydore Virgil, after he has alleged some reasons and authorities,
concludes that it should be restored. The Council of Trent ordained that that
should be raced out, and so in like manner of Munster. Erasmus also in his
book of marriage did give advise, that it might not only be allowed unto
Priests, but unto Monks also for to matrie; For (says he) let them extol
their single and unmarried life as much as they please, there is no life more
holy then a married life chastely observed. Again, he notes; that this
single condition of life, was not so much as known by his name in the most
ancient Fathers. But the foresaid Council has decreede, that this whole
treatise, and all other places wherein he speaks of the same, should be
defaced and left out. And we need not to doubt, but that they will do the
same by those verses of Mantuan in the life of S. Hillarie, Bishop of
Potiers, who was married. To be short, Stanislaus Orichonius a Bishop of
Russia, put up a petition to Pope Julius the third, in the year 1551. to
the end that it might be permitted him to be married; showing unto him the
iniuriousnes of Syricius his law, as being contrary to the whole law of God,
alleging unto him further, that Pope Paul the second, had condemned it
secretly amongst his friends, hardly disgesting it, that a daughter of his,
which by Gods law he knew to be lawfully given unto him, should be
accounted for a bastard, and that in such sort, as that he was resolved to
have revoked it, if death had not prevented him; and reproching him with the
children of Paul the third, worthy (says he) of a loyal marriage; and not
sparing to tell him of his own dissolute loosenes. And Lindanus, who elsewhere
defends the most gross abuses in Popery, does yield in this point, and
concludes with Paphnutius. And in the Council of Trent the greatest part of
the Ambassadors for the princes, do require the liberty of marriage: as
likewise the Emperor Ferdinand by his articles, how entirely affected soever
he stood unto the Church of Rome, alleging the pollutions and uncleanness,
that already insued thereuppon, and the great inconveniences that were yet to
come: and do we not justly then marvel at shamelesnes it self, as also at
the mother of fornications, why, Turrian. l. 2. de Dogmatic. Character.
notwithstanding all these warning peales, she still persisteth so busily to
bestirre herself for the hatching of whoredoms? For the Council of Trent does
pronounce them accursed, which say, that those of the Clergy may lawfully be
married: and likewise executes the same with like rigor even to this day in
every place, where their power and authority may extend. And as for the
Jesuits they are not ashamed since then to teach, that continency is of the
essence of the Priesthood, and that the Pope may as well murder or rob a man
without sinning, as dispense with a Priest in the matter of marriage and not
sin: thereby condemning all the western and Eastern Churches in all ages.

In the East Church this doctrine was likewise assailed, Of the East Church.
and we have heretofore seen how far Epiphanius his opinion went: but it
never came so far as to be made a law, but rather gave an occasion of a law
to the contrary. Doubtless these two Churches, before the division of the
Empire, or rather before the distraction and renting away of that of the West,
remaining as yet undivided by the faction of the Popes, it could hardly be,
that the evil which had infected the one, should not likewise fasten it self
upon the other. And therefore we read, Justinian in auth. de ^^nttissima cor.
9. and col. 6. and 9.
that Justinian ordained and made a law about the year 530. that there should
not be any Clearkes made which had had concubines, or bastardes: but either
such as had never been married, or else such as had been and were not; or such
as yet were with a lawful wife. And hitherto he was in a good way, and went
not besides the word of God: And the same no widow, neither yet divorced or put
away. And this also rise of the doubtful interpretation of the place. But
afterward he goes further: In Auth. Qu^modo Op^^ter, Council. 6. Occumen.
Constantin in Trullo. D. 32. C. Quoniam. (...). Familiaritatem. Cohabitatione.
Let such as amongst the married do abstain from their wines, he preforred.
But the East Church about the year 680. to stay the further course of that
stream, decided the controversy in the sixth general Council, held at the
palace of Justinian the second, called Trulla, there being assembled to the
number of 227 Bishops. For in the thirteenth canon, recorded by Gratian, we
read these words: In as much as we have known, that it is ordained in the
Canon of the order of Rome, that such as should be ordained priests and
Deacons, should declare that they would abstain from the keeping of company
with their wives; we following the ancient canon of the Apostles special care
and diligence, and the constitutions of the fathers, do decree that loyal and
faithful marriages take place from this time forward, and that the knot of
conjunction of priests with their wives be not dissolved, as also that they
shall not be deprived of having familiarity with them, in due time. Wherefore
whosoever shall be found worthy to be ordained Subdeacon, Deacon, or Priest,
shall not be drawn back, by reason of his company keeping with his loyal wife,
neither bound in his ordaining to promise to abstain from having due
familiarity with her. In like manner it behooves them which serve at the Altar,
at the time of the offering of holy things, to be continent in all things,
etc. And therefore, If any man presume contrary to the authority of the
Apostolical Canons, to bereave the abouenamed persons of the inioying of their
lawful wives, let him be deposed: and as for those who under the color of
religion do cast off their wives, let them be excommunicated: and if after the
same they continue obstinate, let them be deposed. Where is to be noted, that
these fathers opposed against the Canon of Rome the Canons of the Apostles, and
the decrees of the Fathers. But in as much as this Canon did torment them as if
they had been cast into some scorching furnace, D. 16. C. Habeo.
they have taken upon them to maintain (notwithstanding their champion
Gratian be against them) that it was not made and decreed for one of the Canons
in the sixth Council, making the world believe, that this Council was held at
two several times: and that at the first time they did not make any Canons:
but at the second only the fathers begun therewith, saying: That after the
manner of other general councels going before, it behooued them to ordain and
make some. And Peter the Bishop mentioned by Gratian, says unto the Bishop of
Nicomedia, that he had a book containing 102. And Nicaetas Studensis cites
this same for the thirteenth. Nilus likewise Archbishop of Thessalonica, save
that he leaves out this part of it: Likewise it behooves them that serve at
the Altar, etc. because it seems not to hang well together with that which
goes before. But we have thsi Canon all whole in Photius his Canon law, and in
such terms as do give much light to that of Gratian, and being further
expounded by Gentian Heruet, and Perion: in so much as that it has not stood
them in any stead to have cut it out of the volumes of the Councels. And that
we may not make any more repetitions thereof, we will only observe, that in
stead of this clause: Likewise it behooves them, etc. there is set down in the
Greek Canon: Sed vicis suae tempore abstinebunt: That they should abstain from
their wives, when their course was to do service. Again, the words are much
more proper and forcible throughout the whole tenor of the Greek text, then
they are in the Latin translation: whether it came, that Gratian in favor of
the Roman Church did of purpose weaken the same: or of the insufficiency of
one tongue at all times to express an other. And it is furthermore not to be
forgotten, that Pope Agatho was presented in this Council by George of
Constantinople, and Theophanes of Antioch: which thing Nicaetas being assured
of, did not let to object the same against Cardinal Humbert, who writ against
him by the commandment of the Pope, and in particular of this matter.
Whereupon ensued that which is ordinarily happening in contentions: namely for
peace sake, to remitte and lose somewhat both of the one side and the other,
that so they may accord in a middle opinion. For the third Canon debarreth such
as have been twice married from taking of orders: the twelfth does except from
the general liberty of ecclesiastical persons, the Bishops: (and some make
the reason there of to be, that the goods of the Church might not be wasted
and spent: and yet this not to be understood, save only of those who should
marry after they were called to the Bishopric: for the sixth does
excommunicate such Bishop whosoever, as under the color of religion should
forsake his wife: as also the sixth does counsel them who would be employed in
any ecclesiastical function, to take a wife before hand; esteeming it not so
convenient to do it afterward: and according to this law, it is to be seen
practiced in Greece at this day. But in deed the most certain course is to
cleave fast unto the law of the Lord, and the Apostles Canon: for after that we
begin to make the decree of God to be arbitrarie, it is not possible for us to
keep within any measure. And again, all the Churches professing the name of
Christ, those excepted which are under the government of the Bishop of Rome,
have retained their married Priests, as the A byssines, Syrians, Armenians,
Russians, Muscouites, etc. And that in so much (says Aluares) as that amongst
the Abyssines the Canons and Priests have wives and children: amongst the
Greeks and Muscouites, says the Baron of Herbestein, according to the
Council of the Canon of Constantinople, it is oftentimes seen, that Priests
and Deacons are oftentimes married and called to their charges in one and the
same day: to the end, that amongst so many other marks of Antichrist, which
do so fitly and properly paint out the Church of Rome, as also amongst so many
lively representations of the spirit of error working by hypocrisy, it has
yet over and above this one peculiar and special from all other Churches:
namely, the forbidding of marriage, forespoken by the Apostle, and entitled by
the spirit of God, by the express name, Of the doctrine of Devils.

Thus far then have we already discoursed of, The sum of the second book.
and examined the dependances and circumstances of the ancient divine service,
and of the Mass, which has intruded it self into the place thereof in the
Church of Rome: examining what manner of ones they were first instituted in the
Church of God; and after what manner they were observed by antiquity, what new
inventions and deprauations have ensued thereupon, and at what times, as also
by what ways and paths. We have seen the Church now shrowding her self
into some pit or cave of the earth: and afterward to have seated and
assembled her self in fair and comely Temples, and that such temples as have
neither altars nor images: then we have seen altars usurping the places of
the tables for the holy Supper, and after some long tract of time, employed
about the offering up of a pretended sacrifice: and we have seen how images
being admitted for remembrances, at length grew to be worshipped and adored.
And in the end both the one and the other to have so increased and prospered,
as that they have brought the true altar Christ unto nothing, to the offending
of the Jews and to the scorn and reproach of the Turks, through the madness of
silly miserable Christians. We have seen the vessels of the Church changed,
from decency and comeliness, to great charge and costlines; from costlines,
to be honored; from honoring, to adoration. In like manner the apparel and
habites of the priests, from common ones into peculiar and special ones; from
indifferent ones, to certain and unchangeable ones; from simple ones, by
degrees into comely ones, yea into a ceremony, into holiness, and into
necessity: the whole service in the vulgar tongue, such as was understood of all,
even unto the infants; common both to priests and people in all the Churches
of Christendom; afterward by the corruptnes, partly of languages, and partly
of men, to become unknown, not understood of all the people, no not by those
which were of best understanding: to the bringing of men thereby to dispute
against the scriptures, against the fathers, against reason, and against common
sense; how that it should be both more profitable and holy for the same to
continue so. We have seen the Bbs. and Ministers of the Church, ordained to
preach and to administer the sacraments, and afterward in succession of time,
both the servants and their service banished and driven quite out of place, and
the bright burning lamp of Gods word altogether quenched in the Church, the
whole service turned to a Mass, and all the charge and office of the Priests,
to the saying of Masses, and that for the most part with their hearts and ears
at home, when their tongues are pronouncing the same. And in the end that they
might be thought and seem rather then be holy in deed, from married ones
they become unmarried, and promising abstinence from marriage for ever. And by
what degrees? Surely, virginity and chastity in marriage having been praised as
a well matching pair at the first, and as the singular gifts of God, and
recommended both the one and the other unto the church, were afterward (in
steed of this seemly and loving yoking together acording to the Apostle)
opposed and set the one against the other: and the praise of the one was never
thought sufficient without the dispraise and disgrace of the other: whereupon it
followed that the Bbs. and ecclesiastical persons who first were married, began
to put more holiness in an unmarried estate: and so in things that were free and
indifferent, men have not let to place, both difference and the prerogative of
excellency, and thereupon exhortations to ecclesiastical persons to embrace
abstinence from marriage, then to bind them to it with fair speeches: and
after to compel them thereto by law, and to force it upon them by severe
punishments and penalties, and in the end, by the depriving of them of their
Offices and Benefices, and by shamefullie disgrading of them. Whereupon so much
uncleanness ensued, as that the world stinketh thereof, as whereby the name of
a Churchman is evil spoken of, all over the world.

Now it follows, that we come to the third part, which enters into the
handling of the doctrine of the holy Supper, and consequently into the doctrine
of the Mass.

And here I desire the Reader to be yet both more attentive and more fervently
affected: that so he may be the better able to judge, both where the abuse is
crept in, as also where the true use is retained, as also where prophanenes
has entered, and where the holy Ministry and true mystery is kept and
observed.

The end of the second Book.
The Third Book, WHEREIN IS ENTREATED OF THE SACRIFICE OF JESUS CHRIST: and of
the pretended sacrifice of the Mass.
CHAP. I. That the propitiatory sacrifice of Jesus Christ is not reiterated in
the holy Supper: and in what sense the old Church did use this phrase and
manner of speech.
THe Lord our God having vouchsafed through his infinite mercy to choose unto
himself before all worlds, a people from amongst men, which we call the
Church: (which he has by the same grace continued against all the changes and
mutations which have happened thereunto: and amidst all the broiles and
confusions falling out in the world) was purposed to bind and tie the same unto
himself by certain holy and consecrated ceremonies, full of instruction and
efficacy: by which it is continually advertised of the duty which it owes
unto God, and of the grace of God toward it: even that grace of God, wherein
it pleased him, according to the purpose of his good pleasure, to give himself
to his Church, namely to his faithful: and that duty of man, which in the
acknowledging of this grace, he is bound to offer and consecrate himself
wholly unto God, and that so much the more, because he could not find any
thing in his own nature, that could merit even the least thing that possibly
could or should allure and draw on this grace: nothing, yea on the contrary,
not any thing but that which ought to provoke the wrath and curse of God upon
him. But for as much as the justice of God, and the sin of man were (as it
were) two extremes, there was requisite a Mediator to join them together: and
that for the same cause he should hold of the said two extremes, that is, that
he should be God and man: this is that Jesus Christ our Lord, begotten from
everlasting, before all time, borne notwithstanding and given in his due time.
And therefore in this Mediator, all the holy ceremonies of the Church of God,
do take their root and foundation; whether they be those which are ordained
for to offer up our holy service unto God in: (for if our works be not
considered in the perfection of this Mediator, the natural imperfections
cleaving thereunto, will cast them out of his presence, and cause them to be
taken for trespasses and offenses; so far will it be off, that they should
merit and deserve grace:) or those which are ordained to assure us of the
grace of God: for where is the conscience, which being informed and roused up,
be it never so little by the law of the most mighty, yea if it have never so
small touch and remorce of it self, that can promise or persuade it self of
the grace of God, how good, and merciful soever he conceive it to be? yea,
which on the contrary does not tremble and quake before his just anger, or
does not thereby condemn it self, save that it pleases this Mediator to
take it by the hand, and to lead it before the judge, not so much to beg or
crave any thing for it, as to seal up unto and graft in it his grace? to say
unto it in full assurance and confidence: Father this is one of them which thou
have given me, by the merit of my obedience; or rather one of those whom I
purchased with mine own blood. Now of them I will not lose one, take them unto
thy grace: Ioh. 17.
it is for them Father that I pray and entreat thee: Keep them in thy name,
let them be one as we are, let my joy be fulfilled in them, etc.

Now these holy ceremonies are of two sorts: such as are offered by man to God,
Sacrifice and Sacraments.
are properly called sacrifices: and those which are given by God to man,
sacraments. In so much as that to speak properly, we may say: that in the
sacrifices, man (as much as he could) was admonished to renounce himself, and
to give himself unto God: in the Sacraments he was advertised and assured,
that God putting off his justice to cloth himself with mercy, did vouchsafe
to give himself unto him: the people in their sacrifices, and every faithful
man making protestation to endeavor themselves to become the people and children
of God: God in the Sacraments bearing witness unto them, that he vouchsafed to
be their God in Jesus Christ, according to his free promises, as also their
father. To be short, a sacrifice is an act or work, by which we acknowledge,
in the knowledge of the true God, the whole homage which we owe unto him, and
the faults which in our infirmity we commit therein. A sacrament is a holy
ceremony instituted of God, in which the faithful are confirmed, by signs
exhibiting that which they represent, of the grace of God promised unto the
faithful in the covenant which it has pleased him to make with them. Now on
Gods behalf the covenant halteth not; he is faithful, far more ready to
offer himself, and to deliver himself to us, with all his good things, then
we are to hold out our hands to receive them. But on our behalf all our
actions are maimed, this fleshly heart, given to the flesh, cleaving fast to it
self, cannot offer it self to him, of or by it self, he must violently draw
and pull it unto him, when he will have it. And there remains nothing in us
of all that which we owe unto God, besides the manifesting and declaring of our
knowing of it, and the testifying of the sorrow and grief which we have, for
that we are not able to render him the same; as also to acknowledge in our
sacrifices, that all our good things, that all our prosperity and good
success are of God alone, of his blessing and of his favor, and that all that
which he can receive of us in stead of recompense, are nothing else then our
new trespasses; that is, in stead of his bountifulnes our ingratitude, and of
his benefits, our misdeedes; Psalm. 16. and 19.
in saying with David, (a man notwithstanding according to Gods own heart:) My
soul, thou have said unto the Lord, thou art my Lord, my goodness reaches
not unto thee. And again: Who knows O Lord the faults and errors of his
life? O cleanse me from my secret sins. And this was the cause why the old
Church had two principal sorts of sacrifices: peace offerings, by which all
and every one did protest, according to the measure of increase which they
inioyed, that all that whatsoever they had was of God: and the propitiatory
sacrifices, by the which they did testify all and every one, that in stead of
so many good things which they did receive, they could not render unto God any
thing but uncleanness and transgressions, which by the blood of beasts shed
therein, they testified and declared to be worthy of death: and by the
ordinary reiterating of the killing of so many innocent beasts, they did give
to understand, that they could not be forgiven or pardoned, but in the blood of
that immaculate lamb, and of the true, only, eternal and perpetual
propitiatory sacrifice of the Church, Jesus Christ our Lord.

And notwithstanding it is here to be noted, That the holy Supper may be
considered both as a sacrifice and a sacrament.
that although it has been already showed, that there is a difference betwixt
a sacrifice and a Sacrament, that yet there are some ceremonies in the Church,
which may be considered in diverse respects, both as sacrifices and
sacraments. The Paschall lamb in the Church of the Jews, is taken for a
Sacrament, and that in as much as it is given of God, for a certain sign of
salvation promised unto the Church, and to every faithful member in the same:
as also in that, that this blood of the lamb, wherewith the door posts are
sprinkled, does represent unto us the blood of Jesus Christ, which sprinkleth
our souls, and remove far from us and our Christian families, the destroying
Angel: and therefore it is said: This blood shall be for a sign upon your
houses, that so when as I shall see it, I may pass over. And yet
notwithstanding it may be taken for a sacrifice of thanksgiving, in as much as
it is commanded to be continued for ever, for a remembrance and thanksgiving
for the preservation of the first borne of Israel, out of the midst of all the
sorrow and grief which they suffered in Egypt: as also it is a sign of the
preservation of the elect of God in the Church, from out of the midst of the
condemnation of this perverse and wicked world. And therefore it is said: This
day shall be a memorial unto you, you shall keep the same holy in your
generations, etc. As also in some sort for a propitiatory Sacrifice, in that
it was a figure of the true and only propitiatory Sacrifice offered by the
Son of God our high Priest, for our sins to God his father upon the altar
of the Cross, according to the Evangelist his exposition: You shall not break
a bone of him. And the Apostle Saint Paul: Our Passover, that is, Jesus
Christ slain or crucified. The same may be said of the holy Supper of our
Lord: It is instituted for a Sacrament of the new Testament, in as much as it
is the real receiving and communicating of the body and blood of Christ,
truly God, and truly man, delivered to be put to death upon the Cross for
our sins, raised again for our justification, given in the use of the holy
Supper according to his own institution, for the nourishing of our souls unto
eternal life. And therefore it is said: Take, eat, this is my body, which is
given for you. And yet it cease not, considered in some sort, to be in
manner of a sacrifice, in as much as this is a remembrance of this
propitiatory sacrifice of our Lord on the Cross, according to that which is
said: Do this in remembrance of me: show forth the Lords death unto his
coming: In such sort, that as the lamb was after a certain manner a
propitiatory Sacrifice, in that it did prefigure him: so the holy Supper in
like manner, in as much as it brings him unto our remembrances, in that it
represents him unto us before the eyes of our faith. And yet furthermore of
this remembrance, there proceeds an other sacrifice, even the true sacrifice
of praise and thanksgiving, which the Church has called by the name of
Eucharist. That is, that when we call to mind, that God has so loved the
world, or rather the Church, hated of the world, as that he has given his
dearly beloved Son, the eternal and everliving, for the mortal; the just
for the unjust; to the ignominious and reproachful death of the Cross, to
redeem them from their sins: we adore the bowelles of his mercies: we are
lifted up with a holy rauishment, even into the heavens far from our our
selves: we utter our cries in a certain feruencie of faith, from all in
general, saying: praised be thou O Lord, for that thy grace has appeared in
the world: for that it has superabounded in love, for the saving of sinners:
and afterward let us say with Saint Paul, being humbled in our infirmities,
but imboldened in his grace, to the appropriating and particular applying of
this benefit unto our selves: Even the sinners Lord, whereof I am the chief,
I, a blasphemer, a persecutor, and oppressor, etc. And this faith applies this
sacrifice unto our selves, it makes it several and peculiar unto every one of
us, it makes us then to say with confidence: No more, He that eats the flesh
and drinks the blood of Christ has eternal life: No more, I say: God so
loved the world, as that he has sent his son, etc. For what good does this
serve us unto, but to increase our sorrow and grief: if we be not the
parties our selves? But more boldly with the Apostle: I am crucified with
Christ, I live, and yet not I, now, but Christ in me: Galath. 2.20.
in that I live in the flesh, I live in the faith of the Son of God, who has
loved me, and who has given himself for me, etc. Thus in remembering this
sacrifice, the shameful death of the Lord, we acknowledge our selves lost in
our selves: yea utterly lost, seeing that for to save mankind, it was requisite
that the Son of God should be made man, and expose himself to the reuilinges
and slanderous speeches of men. And this knowledge begets in us an
acknowledgement of the free mercy of God, which has given us his only
begotten Son, yea who has given us himself in his Son. How can we then do
less then offer up, then sacrifice our selves to him? To offer up unto him, as
says the Apostle, Romans 12.1.
Our bodies a living sacrifine, holy, acceptable, a reasonable service? In such
sort, as that in the holy Supper we communicate really and effectually, in the
body and blood of Jesus Christ, even to the sucking of life and nourishment to
our souls from the same: and this is that which proceeds from it as a
Sacrament. We celebrate likewise his death, from whom as out of a fountain
we draw life, and that the rather, because this his death is our life: in as
much as we have the propitiation for our sins in his blood: and the
celebrating of the remembrance of this propitiatory sacrifice, although
somewhat improperly may be called a Sacrifice. Seeing that consequently upon
the deep meditation of this high mystery and unspeakable benefit received by
the faithful, and adored of the Angels, we enter into a serious thanksgiving,
in which we resolve to renounce and forsake our selves, that so we may offer up
our selves the more freely unto God, ceasing from thenceforth to fashion our
selves any more according to this present world, seeking rather to transform
and change our selves, by the renewing of our understanding, etc. And here we
have another sacrifice, even a sacrifice of peace, in as much as there is a
peace concluded betwixt God and the faithful man; a sacrifice of praise, in as
much as all increase and prosperity, are given unto us by God, and God in this
peace. Finally, a sacrificing of our selves in the offering up of our thankful
hearts, and resolving therewithal to live and die in him, and unto him, who
has given himself for us, who has vouchsafed to offer up his body, and to
shed his blood for to purchase us life, who gives us them in ordinary bread
and wine, to nourish our souls unto eternal life, Amen.

And it is not for any other consideration, Wherefore the old writers did use
this word Sacrifice.
that the old writers do sometimes call the holy Supper a sacrifice, a
Sacrifice of remembrance and thanksgiving of the faithful. And if our
adversaries do keep themselves within these bounds, we shall not need to
reason and dispute about words, neither yet refuse or reject the word
Sacrifice. But and if that they tell us, that the Mass is a sacrifice
propitiatory for the quick and the dead; we tell them, that we would have
them to answer us, whether they ground it upon the holy Supper, or else
borrowe the institution thereof from else where. If from else where, then we
boldly avouch unto them, that there is no title of the Mass in all the holy
scripture, neither of any thing belonging thereto, neither yet in the works of
any of the ancient writers: and this we have already proved, and shall be
able further to prove most plentifully, if any thing be wanting therein. But
if they fetch and derive it from the holy Supper, then we avouch and say unto
them, that it is no propitiatory sacrifice: that the Lord did never ordain it
for any such end: that the Apostles did never so teach it: neither yet that
the fathers did so understand it. And this is the matter that we are to
handle and entreat of in this Chapter.

In the mean time we will note and observe by the way, that these words
Sacrifice and Sacrament, do not always keep the proper limits and bounds:
but that sometimes they run in their general signification, and are taken
either for all holy offices, or for all the signs used in the Church to
signify any thing. August. l. 19. contr. Faust. c. 14. In Psalm. 141. Psalm. 65.
de peccat. meritis. Bernard. de caena Dom.
And to the end that the doubt of this general using of this word Sacrament,
may not trouble us: it appears in certain old writers, that they have given
this name to the sign of the Cross, to all the ceremonies of baptism: to the
bread given to those that were catechized, which we call the hallowed bread,
to the washing of feet practiced upon the Apostles, etc. which nevertheless
do show unto us at large in their treatises, that howsoever they abuse the
word, yet they do not let, as need requires, to take and understand it in the
right use and signification. And as for the word Sacrifice, the Grammarians
likewise say, (...), the priesthood, that is the care or administration of holy
things. And this is the cause that every consecrated action has been called
by this name: likewise it has purposely been used to signify the divine
service, because that the Jews and the Gentiles did use it so, Romans 15. Phil.
2. Orig. ad Romans l. 10. Chrysostom. ad Romans hom. 29 Epiph. haeres. 79. Angust. de
ciuit. Det. l. 10. c. 6 Tertul in Apolog. Idem ad Scapul. Iren. l. 4. contr.
haeres. c. 34. Psalm. 50.69. Ecclesiastic. 35 Ad. Heb. c. 13. August. epist.
120. ad Honorat. Eusebius. de Demonstr. l. 1. c. 10. Tertul. c. 4. contr. Marcio^.
Philip. 4. Hebr. 3. Iren. l. 4. c. 32. and 34. Cypr. sermon. 1. de cleemos.
August. ep. 122 Psalm. 51. Ecclesiastic. 35. Romans 12.2.
who placed all their services in Sacrifices. Thus we see that Saint Paul
called all the ministry of the Gospel, a Sacrifice. And Origin says: This
is a very work of the Priesthood, (...), to preach the Gospel. Chrysostom:
My Priesthood, or sacrificing office is to preach the Gospel. Epiphanius
speaking of them which were chosen in the thirteenth of the Acts, says: They
did sacrifice the Gospel. And in the same sense Saint Augustine likewise has
said: We call a sacrifice every work, that has relation unto God, being done
to the end that we may cleave and stick unto him in a holy society. As
Tertullian speaking of prayers: I offer unto him the fattest sacrifice that I
am able, even prayer, which he has commanded, proceeding from a chaste body,
from a harmless soul, from a holy spirit, etc. Ireneus: Our altar is in
heaven, whither our prayers and offeringes are directed. And the praises of God
and giving of thanks are called by the name of Sacrifices in the Psalms.
Whereupon Saint Augustine says: We give thanks to the Lord our God which is
the great Sacrament, in the sacrifice of the New Testament, etc. And Eusebius:
We sacrifice and burn the memory of this great sacrifice, etc. rendering
thanks to the God of our salvation, etc. And Tertullian: The Samaritane
intended to offer a true sacrifice, even the sacrifice of praise and
thanksgiving, in the true temple, and to the true sacrificer Jesus Christ,
etc. The offeringes likewise which are made in the Christian assemblies, for
the relief of the poor, have had this name given them in Saint Paul: A smell
of a sweet savor: a sacrifice acceptable unto God: offeringes wherewith he
is well pleased. In Ireneus; We offer unto God the first fruits of his gifts,
feeding the hungry, and clothing the naked, etc. In Saint Cyprian where he
reprocheth a rich widow: Come thou to the Lords banquet without a sacrifice?
And Saint Augustine which calls the alms of certain matrons, sacrifices;
the table of the Temple whereupon they were laid, an Altar: and to be
brief, a broken and contrite heart is a sacrifice unto God, Psalm 51. so is
charity toward a man's neighbor: and the vows which we make of
consecrating and dedicating of our lives unto the Lord, Romans 12. And why then
should any man make it strange, that the old writers have called the holy
Supper, a Sacrifice: seeing that all these actions do meet together in it,
namely a holy office, a remembrance of the sacrifice of Christ upon the
Cross, the reading and preaching of his word, fervent prayers, a serious and
deep meditation of sin, and of the grace of God both together, the
contrition of heart, the vow of sacrificing from thence forward, soul and body
unto God, and the opening of the bowelles of compassion toward the brethren:
all of them such actions, as every one whereof by it self is called both in
the holy scriptures, as also in the fathers, Oblations and Sacrifices: and how
much more then that, which does comprise them all in it self alone?

But that we may not contend about words, let us come to the question, which
is: If the Mass be a propitiatory Sacrifice: and also, if the holy Supper in
his purity, were instituted for the same end, if our Lord Jesus be there
sacrificed a new, really and in very deed, for a propitiation of our sins,
that is to say, for the sins of the quick and the dead, by the Ministers or
Priests, which things we deny, and our adversaries affirm.

The scripture tells us; That there are no propitiatory sacrifices in the new
Testament, besides that of Jesus Christ himself.
That the lamb was slain before the foundation of the world: And this lamb
is the eternal Son of God, whose sacrifice cannot choose but be almighty,
all-sufficient, and absolutely perfect, in respect of the desired end, namely,
the salvation of men. And therefore for the salvation of man, we have no need,
neither of reiterating any sacrifice, neither of any other new and never before
offered Sacrifice whatsoever: on the contrary all the Sacrifices of the law,
in their imperfections, do lead us to the perfection of this same: in their
being often reiterated they show us their insufficiency and weakness to be
cut off and ended, in the strength and efficacy of this only one. Whereupon
it comes, that in the new Testament, we hear not any more of Sacrifices or
Sacrificing Priests: Of Sacrificing Priests, save where as it is taught to
be the name and office of all and every Christian. You are (says Saint
Peter) a royal priesthood, a holy priesthood, a holy people, 1. Pet. 2.
Apocal. 1.
etc. And Saint John: Christ has made us kings and priests unto God his
father: to offer (says the Gloss) acceptable sacrifices unto God by him. Of
sacrifices also in like manner, save that we render continual thanks unto
God for this great sacrifice, by the consecrating of whatsoever is in us: To
offer unto God (says the Apostle) spiritual sacrifices, which may be
acceptable unto him in Jesus Christ: 1. Pet. 2. Romans 2.
even our selves a living sacrifice, which is our reasonable serving, etc.
Likewise in the holy Supper, from whence they would derive the Mass, there is
no work of sacrifice for sin. The sacrifice of Jesus Christ was accomplished
upon the Cross, where he was slain for us; and not in the holy Supper: but
the remembrance of that sacrifice offered upon the Cross, is renewed in the
Supper, according to the institution of the Lord, until his coming, that is,
without the being of any other sacrifices for sin that partition wall; and to
the utter cutting off of all expectation, or further looking after of either
his offering up again, by the hands of the Jews; or else any daily
sacrificing of him, by any action of the priests.

The Apostle says: The law which had a shadow of good things to come, That the
sacrifice of Christ cannot be re^terated. Heb. 8.9.10.
and not the express form of things, by the sacrifices which were offered
every year, could never sanctify those which approached thereunto, etc. What
does the Apostle conclude out of this proposition? He sets the law against
the Gospel; the priests of the same, against our sovereign priest Jesus
Christ; their sacrifices repeated and oftentimes renewed, against his sacrifice
which has no need to be renewed; their weakness and disabilitie to sanctify,
against the holiness and effectual sanctifying power which was in his. And
afterward he concludes: He takes away the former, for to establish the
latter: the sacrifices of the law, for to establish this only Sacrifice. Now
how could this conclusion be good, if this sacrifice were again to be
reiterated? And that not yearly, as under the law, but daily: yea hourly, nay
which is yet more, every moment, and in every moment of a thousand thousand
times? Whereupon it is said: the sacrifices of the law are abolished, in the
sacrifice of Jesus Christ: but it is not said, that he himself cannot be
sacrificed again: let us hear the Apostle; Heb. 9. v. 12.24
Christ being come to be our high priest of good things to come, etc. not by
the blood of goats, or of calves, but by his own blood, is entered once into
the holy places, having obtained an everlasting redemption. Is entered (says
he) into the holy places, even into heaven, that now he may appear for us
before the face of God: but not to the end to offer up himself oftentimes, in
such sort, as the high Priest, who enters into the holy places every year,
with other blood: for then it should have behooved him to have suffered
oftentimes since the foundation of the world: But now in the fullness of
time, he has appeared once, for the putting away of sin, by the sacrificing
of himself. And as it is appointed for all men to die once, and after that
follows judgment: even so likewise Christ having been offered once, for to
take away the sins of many, will appear the second time without sin, to
those which attend unto salvation. Where we are to observe, that the Apostle
goes over it sundry times: That Christ has offered himself once. Where is
now their pretended reiterating? seeing that, by his one only oblation he
has purchased everlasting redemption: that is, has wholly accomplished and
fulfilled the work of the redemption of the Church, and that sufficiently (as
the schoolmen speak) for the whole world; but effectually for his elect
only. And therefore what need is there of a new propitiation? That he did
appear in heaven before the father, that is, to bestow by his intercession,
the efficacy of this sacrifice upon his faithful ones: himself making the
application of his own sacrifice: That by this only appearing, this only
sacrifice once offered, he has abolished sin: I say not the sins of some
few, but sin, that is, destroyed the kingdom of sin it self: in such
sort, as that every other propitiatory sacrifice is from henceforth
unprofitable, even unto his second appearing: that is, unto the end and
consummation of the world. And no man is here to say, that in deed he has
offered himself once, but that others are to offer him hereafter: for in that
he has showed the sufficiency of this sacrifice, he has annihilated and
disanulled in one word, Heb. 10.
all others whatsoever: Others (says he) which are not reiterated, but because
of their imperfectnesse: in as much as it is impossible that the blood of
Bulls and Goats, though they should be a thousand times reiterated, should
take away sins. For which cause (says he) there is a yearly remembrance of
sins reiterated: whereas our Lord by one only oblation, has consecrated for
ever those which are sanctified. Whereupon it follows, that where blood is
of sufficient effectualnesse, there is no need of any reiteration. Now we are
of judgment, that this effectualnesse is absolute and perfect in the precious
blood of our Lord, that so we may stay and content our selves with this only
Sacrifice. And as by the sufficiency thereof, being opposed and set against
the insufficiency of all others, the reiterating thereof is excluded; so by
the perfectness of the Priest, opposed and set against the imperfectness of
those before him, all others are excluded, and we tied unto one only, and him
resident and sitting in the heavens, at the right hand of the father, in whose
sacrifice as all sacrifices have an end: so in his person every priesthood is
both fully finished and accomplished; One priest according to the order of
Melchisedech, without father, without mother, without stock or kindred,
without beginning of days, and without end of life: that is, which has not
had any such like predecessors: neither yet shall have any such like successors
in the line and tribe of Leui: an everlasting priest, and therefore one only:
and therefore also, not succeeded of any other sacrificing Priests, and much
less of any other priests which should be employed in the sacrificing of
him: For (says he) the cause why there were many priests, was because they
were mortal; because that death would not let them endure. But this priest
abides for ever, and God has witnessed the same of him by an oath: and
therefore he has an everlasting and eternal priesthood in himself and in
the Church. A priest which is able to be both the Sacrificer and Sacrifice,
together and at once: a holy Priest, which has no need to offer daily, both
for his own sins, and for the sins of the people: and such a one is Jesus
Christ the son of the eternal God, and God himself. A Sacrifice also
perfect and sufficient: which thing cannot possibly be found in the blood of
all the creatures that are living, no not in the offering up of all men, and
the whole world therewithal: and such a one again is Jesus Christ, God and
man, but man without sin, separated and set apart from sinners: the lamb
without spotte: Hebr. 7.
Who (says the Apostle) offered himself once for the sins of the people,
ordained by the word of the oath, to be consecrated for ever: always living,
that so he might always be our intercessor: always mighty and powerful,
that so he might perfectly save those, which draw near unto God by him: that
is to say, continually offering up the prayers of his brethren, sanctified and
authorized by his own, continually applying the merit of the sacrifice of his
obedience, by his intercession; Hebr. 10.
by this sacrifice; by this oblation, of which it is said: That by one only
oblation he has perfected for ever, them which are sanctified: that he was
once offered to abolish the sins of many: that by the offering of his body
once made, we are sanctified: that by his own blood he is entered into the
holy places, having obtained an everlasting redemption: that having offered up
this only sacrifice for sins, he sits for ever at the right hand of God
his father. And in all this there is likewise as little to be replied: that
Christ is no more offered after a bloody manner; but by a certain kind of
sacrifice without blood. For besides, that this distinction has no warrant in
all the scripture, the Apostle, as if he had forseene the same, cutteth it off
in a word: for not being contented to have gone over it oftentimes, how that
we have propitiation for our sins in the blood of our Lord Jesus Christ once
shed: that all manner of other blood is void and destitute of this effectual
power, etc. To the end that we might place our propitiation in this his only
blood, he yet further gives us these general rules: That it behooves, that
the death of this Priest should be wrought for the ransom of transgressors:
that whereas there is forgiveness of sins, (that is to say, after this
ransom paid) there is not any more offering for sin: that as concerning the
rest, there is no purifying or cleansing, no remission without blood.
Whereupon it follows, that there is no more oblation for sin, other then
that of our Lord, no more propitiation, save that in his blood: and therefore
not any more by that pretended sacrifice of theirs without blood. But if they
reply: that if this bloodlesse sacrifice of theirs be not propitiatory, yet
it helps us to make application, and to take hold of the true propitiation.
We answer, never a deal: for we are all Priests in this behalf, all
anointed by the spirit of Christ, to represent and daily offer up unto God,
the sacrifice of his only Son, in the feruencie of our prayers, made in a
lively faith, to the end that it might please him, upon the view of the same,
to forgive us our offenses. He himself likewise (as says the Apostle) is
sitting near unto his father, to make intercession for us, to make way of
entrance for our requests, to apply unto us his faithful ones, the merit of
his obedience, the benefit of his death, and the efficacy of his sacrifice;
supplying the defectes of our petitions, by his intercession; the infirmities
of our faith, and the imperfections of our obedience, by the faithfulness of
the covenant made in his blood, and by the perfect obedience performed by him
upon the Cross.

CHAP. II. An answer to the objections of the adversaries, which they pretend
to gather out of the holy scriptures, for a Sacrifice.
NOw therefore what is there that our adversaries can object against this
doctrine grounded upon the anology of the whole body of the holy scriptures,
both of the old and new Testament, and that by so manifold, plain, and
express places? They tell us, that the sacrifices of the law have in such
sort shadowed out the sacrifice of our Lord upon the Cross, as that
nevertheless they have not utterly bereft us of all manner of Sacrifice: and
that in very deed the Sacrifice of the Mass, is prefigured and foretold in
the old Testament, and that such a one as they use to celebrate at this day,
sacrificing the body and blood of our Lord under the kinds of bread and wine
upon their altars. But let us see upon what ground. In Genesis the 14. it is
said: Melchisedech king of Salem brought, Genes. 14. Melchisedech.
or caused wine and bread to be brought: and he was the priest of the high God.
They cannot deny, but that this is not the true text in that place: and yet
notwithstanding they gather with a full hand this conclusion: Christ is a
Priest according to the order of Melchisedech; and he brought bread and wine;
therefore Jesus Christ has sacrificed bread and wine, and under bread and wine
his body and his blood: and the priests do the same daily according to his
example. Let us agree in the grammatical and literal sense, and the whole
controversy in divinity, will be altogether void and ended. The Hebrew word
which is used there, is never used in the scriptures, about the matter of
sacrifice: and cannot be better expressed, then by that which we say in French:
To draw forth, set forth, or to cause to be brought, or to bring forth. In this
sense we read the same word for the drawing forth of a sword, Ezech. 21. and
the drawing forth of the winds, Psalm the 135. And lice brought forth, Exodus
8. and water from the rock, Cypr. in epist. ad Cecil. Chrysostom. in hom. 35. in
c. 14. Genes.
Numbers 30. in which places and infinite others, the holy Ghost has used the
same word. The Chaldie Paraphrast says: He brought, or caused to be brought:
The Greek, (...): The Latin, Protulit. Cyprian, and Chrysostom in like
manner. Josephus says: He entertained him as a guest, Joseph. l. 1. c, 18.
Ambros. ad Hebr. c. 7. Cardin. Caiet. in Genes. c. 14
and suffered not him or any of his followers to want any thing. Saint Ambrose
also: Protulit in refectionem. And Cardinal Hugo seems to hold himself
satisfied with the same sense, affirming that the Hebrew Doctors had so
expounded it. The vulgar translation, Proferens panem and vinum. And Cardinal
Caietan in like manner: Here is not any thing written of any sacrifice or
oblation, Sed de prolatione seu extractione; but of bringing forth, or causing
of bread and wine to be brought (as Josephus says) for the refreshing of the
conquerors. And thus also Erasmus and Sigonius do take it, for which they are
reproved of Posseuinus the Jesuit. Possenin. Bibliothec. Select. l. 4. c. 14.
But the Apostle decideth the whole matter, who tells us, that Melchisedech
came before Abraham, and blessed him. He speaks not of the bread and wine, he
finds not any such profound mystery there: he concealeth it, as accessarie
and privy to that which went before it: and he proceeds to the mentioning of
the blessing, without making of any other stay or delay. Now if the proof of a
Sacrifice do lie in this word, and that this word by the consent of all
interpretors, contains not so much as any shadow of a Sacrifice in it: what
need we then to seek to proceed or wade any further, to fish out long
discourses, the fountain fathered upon the word, being already dried up and
stopped? Grant it, (say they) but yet he brings forth bread. But now let
them not go about to be ignorant of that which they know, namely, that the
Hebrews under the name of bread do comprehend all manner of food and
sustenance, which likewise the Septuagintes have translated in this place,
(...), loaves or meats, in the plural number, to show that they were to be
distributed unto the troops, and not (...), a bread to be sacrificed. They
reply, that there is added, For he was the Priest of the high God, and yet
false, and that more then all the rest: for the Hebrew says, But he was, or
and he was: and not as they would have it, for he was: whereupon it is thus
turned into Greek, (...), etc. The Chaldie, Et erat Minister coram Deo. The
conjunction causall not being acknowledged by any but themselves. Caietanus
likewise: And whereas it followth in the vulgar translation: For he was the
Priest, etc. as though this were the cause of the offering, the same is not so
in the Hebrew, vz. Vt causa, sed vt separata clausula, that is, not as a cause,
but as a distinct and separated sentence: so weak and wavering are the
foundations of so great a building. But and if we make any question here of a
sacrifice, then it must likewise be known to who^ Melchisedech did offer his
sacrifice? to Abraham? to a man? this cannot but prove impiety; and an
absurdity also, when the greater is made to sacrifice unto the less. But they
will say, that he sacrificed unto God? And in conscience, can they gather any
one word to show the same? And whether do we read the holy scriptures to
gather from thence the things it speaks not of, or to hear therein that
which it teaches? But which is more, the Apostle to the Hebrews undertakes
the comparing of the Priesthood of Melchisedech, with the priesthood of Jesus
Christ. He handles it throughout all the parts thereof, making them both to
be kings of righteousness and peace: and making them both also to be
permanent and enduring Priests, etc. What could there be of greater weight
and moment, then to say: And he sacrificed bread and wine, Hebr. 6.
in token of the sacrifice which Christ offered in his holy Supper? etc. Hosius
says, and Bellarmine after him; that this mystery was too great for the
Hebrews to conceive. Heb. 6.
But wherefore then had the Apostles said before: Let us leave the word, which
delivers the beginning of Christ, and let us go on unto perfection. etc. And
what could there be more hard then to setre before them a man, without father,
without mother, without beginning, and without ending, etc. And if there had
been any darkness therein, of whom could they have learned the same more
clearly and plainly, then of the Apostle? then of the spirit of God himself?
And to what time, or for what manner of men, will they say, that he did
reserve the knowledge thereof? But let us grant them that he sacrificed to God
bread and wine: this is all that they can gather out of this text with the help
of all their falsifications; Exodus 29. Numb. 28.
and what shall they gain thereby? For first, is this any other thing but that
which the Priests according to the order of Aaron did every day? And wherein
then will the excellency and prerogative, that the Apostle seeks after, be
found? seeing namely, that they hold, that in respect of the matter the
sacrifice offered by Melchisedech, is not any thing more precious the^ the
sacrifices of the Leuits: Veg. de Missa The. 68. fol. 33
and that the death of our Lord was more amply and lively figured out in
these, then in that. And afterward, if it must needs be, that because that
Melchisedech offering bread and wine, became the figure of Christ, and that
Christ may be offered under the kinds of bread and wine; then why not as well
under all the other kinds, which did represent him under the law, being
offered by the Priests according to the Order of Aaron, which in like manner
did figure and shadow him out? And again, if this sacrifice were the figure of
Christ, has he not accomplished the same, as he has done all the rest? And
then what remains there yet behind to be done again therein? to what end
should there need a reiterating of that which is perfect? and when he
himself has given this testimony, Consummatum est, who shall gainsay and
deny the same, seeing that he came to fulfill them all? But let us say on;
They compare Christ to Melchisedech, Melchisedech his offering to the Eucharist;
now betwixt the Offerer and the offering there is always a proportion to be
kept. As therefore there is not any Priest. that can assume and challenge to
himself, to inioye and hold the Priesthood of Christ according to the Order
of Melchisedech: so in like manner it cannot possibly be, that any should
be found to whom it might be attributed to offer the Eucharist: and if
Melchisedech, did offer bread and wine, then it was the substance thereof, and
not the accidents or qualities, whereas notwithstanding in the Mass, there is
nothing offered but the accidents: why therefore do they allege
Melchisedech, if they will hold themselves unto the figure? And wherefore
likewise do they hold Transubstantiation in the Mass? In a word, though they
should be able to prove this same to be a sacrifice, yet could they never
prove it but a sacrifice of thanksgiving, or peace-offring, and not a
sacrifice propitiatory: for it is said, that Melchisedech said unto Abraham:
Blessed be the Lord, who has given thine enemies into thy hand, etc. words
all of them consisting of Thanksgiving, and contain nothing in them of any
sacrifice for sin, neither therefore the Mass of any propitiatory
sacrifice, if this be a figure thereof. Against all this which we have said,
they object certain places out of the old Writers. But what will they say, if
they be showed the contrary, if all those likewise which speak of offering,
say, that Melchisedech offered bread and wine to Abraham; to whom he that
blessed him had no regard or purpose to offer up any sacrifice. Clemens
Alexandrinus: Melchisedech gave sanctified bread and wine for food and
sustenance, as a figure of the Eucharist. Mark, He gave, that is, to Abraham,
and not he offered: and the word, food or refreshment that follows, proves
it sufficiently. S. Augustine: He came before Abraham, protulit, he caused
bread and wine to be brought, S. August. in quaest. ex vtroque test 109.
Ambros. l. 4 de Sacram. c. 3. Tertul. aduer. Iud. Chrysostom. in Psalm. 110. Epiph
haeres. 55. Damas. l. 4. c. 14. Thom. D. 8. l. 4 Primas. c. 7. in Ep. ad Haebr.
Cass^odor. in Psalm. 109. Hieronym. in Matthew. c. 26 l. 4 August. de ciuit. Dei.
l. 17. c. 17.
he offered them unto him, and blessed him. S. Ambrose, Abraham returning a
victorious conqueror, Melchisedech came before him, and offered bread and wine
unto him. Tertullian, Melchisedech being uncircumcised offers unto Abraham
being circumcised, and coming from the battle, bread and wine. Chrysostom
says: According to the Order of Melchisedech, because of the sacraments:
seeing that he offered to Abraham bread and wine. Epiphanius, proposuit ipsi,
he set before him. To be short, Damascene says: He entertained Abraham with
bread and wine. And Lumbarde is very clear, Obtulit Abrahae, he offered or
set before Abraham. And as for those few which they allege unto us, as having
said that he offered unto God, as Primasius Cassiodorus, and a few others,
stumbling at the naughty and corrupt translation of the text, they cannot yet
deny, but that even these do make the comparison to stand, not with the
pretended sacrifice of the Mass, but with the Eucharist, with the holy
supper: so far are they off from having ever dreamed of a propitiatory
sacrifice. For as for all the rest, they have not spoken any otherwise. S.
Jerome says: Melchisedech had prefigured the sacrament of the body and blood,
in the bread and wine which he offered. S. Augustine, Offertur sub sacerdote
Christo, quod protulit Melchisedec, etc. The same is offered under Christ the
Priest, which Melchisedech brought forth. Where is to be noted the difference
that he makes betwixt Obtulit and Protulit, Saint Ambrose speaking of the
bread and wine of the holy supper: We have known the figure and shadow of
these sacraments, since the time of Abraham. And so likewise have others. But
Lombarde thus: The Priests take the cup with wine, and the dish with the
hosts, to the end that they may know, that they receive power to offer unto
God sacrifices of atonement and reconciliation: and this order descends from
the sons of Aaron. And why now do they object unto us Melchisedech? Seeing
also it is most certain, that we are to hold our selves bound by due and
sound dealing, not to allegorize so lightly upon these or those places,
especially against a clear and evident doctrine, such as we have proved this
to be, out of the Epistle unto the Hebrews. Idem contra lib. Petil. c. 16. D.
9.
S. Augustine says to like purpose: Let no man allege unto me the things
that are spoken darkly or figuratiuelie: faith must be builded upon that
which is clear, and not subject unto diverse interpretations. And in an other
place he says: The things which you allege against me, are mystical,
hidden, and figurative, but I desire that you would allege that which needs
no interpretation, etc. And this may serve for whatsoever shall follow
hereafter. And indeed it is not to be concealed, that there are some which do
so far delight and sport themselves with this place, as that they let not to
say, that Melchisedech was either an Angel, or the holy Ghost, or the Son of
God himself. Hieronym. ad Euagr. August. in quaest. vet. and Nou. test q. 209.
The Pass^ouer
And in these opinions we find Origin, Didymus, and S. Augustine in a certain
place to be: so dangerous a thing it is to speak without Scripture, and to
go about to find that in it, which is not there to be found.

Now follows the Paschall lamb, They will have it to be a figure of Christ,
sacrificed either in the supper, or upon the Altar of the Mass. We also say
and affirm, that it is truly and indeed the figure of Christ, and of Christ
crucified, but upon the Altar of the Cross. John 1. 1. Pet. 2. Apocalypse 5.
1. Cor. 5.
The scripture speaks thus; The Lamb was slain, did bear the sins of the
world in his body upon the tree, has purchased us unto God by his blood,
etc. that is to say, the true Lamb, in stead of the figurative. S. Paul:
Christ our Passover has been sacrificed: he says not, must be sacrificed
hereafter from day to day: but on the contrary he says: Let us make our
feast, not with the old leaven, but with the unleavened bread of sincerity
and truth. John 19. Exodus 12. Nom. 9.
The conclusion according to their meaning seemed to follow of it self: Let us
sacrifice him then daily upon the Altar. But S. John in more plain and
evident manner says: To the end that the scripture might be accomplished,
that not one of his bones shall be broken. And this was fulfilled upon the
Cross, not at the Table, as likewise it should not be upon the Altar of our
adversaries: though the Canon I Berengarius, were believed, which will that he
should be broken and bruised with teeth, as every man knows. The Paschall
Lamb then is not properly the figure of Christ eaten in the holy supper, but
of Christ crucified: although that in the holy Supper there be celebrated the
salvation which we reap by his death, as in the feast of the Passover, there
is celebrated and remembered the deliverance out of Egypt. Let us admit that the
paschall Lamb was a figure of the Eucharist: what will follow thereupon? That
as the Lamb (say they) was sacrificed upon the Table, so Christ should be
upon the Altar. But rather let us say: The Paschall Lamb to speak exactlie,
had never granted it the room of a sacrifice: It had not the throat cut by the
Priests, neither yet upon the Altar. And again they say, when they define a
sacrifice, that it is meet that Ab electo Ministro offerat ur, that it should
be offered by the Minister chosen for the purpose, etc. But in this action the
Master of the family performed that duty, and besprinkled with the blood
thereof the posts of his house, and his family did eat it. And that this is
the truth, the Jews, wise, and well seen in the law, did not sacrifice out of
Jerusalem, and yet notwithstanding, they did continue evermore in all their
remouinges from place to place, August. Retract. l. 8. c. 10. and de Genes.
allegor. l. 1. Exodus 8.
out of Jerusalem to eat the Paschall Lamb. And Moses likewise puts a
manifest distinction therein: for when Pharao permitted him to sacrifice in
Egypt, he answers, that it is not ^^wfull, and yet it was lawful for him
to eat the Passover there. But let us likewise grant that it was a sacrifice,
it shall then be requisite for the accomplishing of the figure, that Christ
should be sacrificed a new. But the Apostle did not understand it so when he
said: Our Passover is sacrificed, etc. It shall be requisite that his blood
should be shed: for otherwise how should a sacrifice made with the shedding
of blood, become a figure of their pretended sacrifice, made without blood?
Again, it shall be forbidden them to keep or reserve any thing of the
Eucharist; for so did the law ordain concerning the Passover. Jesus Christ
likewise (a thing that cannot be uttered without blasphemy) shall either have
left this ceremony of the law unaccomplished, or else but slightly and
unprofitably accomplished. Now in these their perplexities and cases of doubt,
they have no manner of refuge but to the Fathers: but let us see upon what good
grounds or reasons. The Fathers (say they) have spoken of the Lamb, as the
figure of the Eucharist: well, let it be so. Charles the Great compares the
sacrifice of the Lamb with the sacrifice of the Cross. Cent. 8. page 63 64.
Iren. aduers. haer. l. 4.
But what agreement is there betwixt the Eucharist and the Mass? A
thanksgiving, and a propitiatory sacrifice? But let us say, they have spoken
of the Lamb, for to be a figure of Christ, yea of Christ crucified: whereupon
Ireneus says: Christus passus adimpleuit Pascha, Christ in suffering, did
fulfill the Passover, etc. And again of the Passover, as a figure of the
supper, inasmuch as the supper consists partly of a thanksgiving for the
salvation of our souls, received by Jesus Christ, as the Passover likewise in
part does consist of a thanksgiving, for the deliverance of the people out of
Egypt: and so by consequent have made a comparison not of the sacrifice, but of
the eating, which was performed both in the one and in the other. Chrysostom
says: Chrysostom. in 1. Corinthians. 13.
The jews did celebrate the Passover: but they know not the unspeakable
mysteries contained under these shadows: That the Son of God having clothed
himself with human flesh, was to be slain, and to set at liberty the
whole world: That he should give his blood to be drunk both to the Grecians
and Barbarians: That he should open the heavens to all men: That he should
advance and lift up this flesh unto heaven, and set it at the right hand of
the Father, etc. Idem hom. 14. in Johan.
And in an other place: The figure says, Take a Lamb according to your
families, and sacrifice, etc. Christ gives no such thing in charge, but he is
become himself the sacrifice, offering himself unto God his Father: whereby
you may see how the figure was given by Moses, and the working Truth by Jesus
Christ. Tertul. Cont. Marc. l. 4.
So then the question in this place is of Jesus Christ crucified. Tertullian
(and yet they blush not to cite him): Our Lord having declared, that he was
desirous to eat his Passover, (for it was an indignity for the Lord to
desire anet thing but his own) gave and distributed it unto his Disciples, and
made it his body, saying, This is my body, that is to say, the figure or
representation of my body. So then the matter of regard and note in this
place, is not any sacrificing but eating, Hieronim. in in c. 26. Matthew. 1.4.
but distributing to be eaten, and not his body, but the figure of his body.
S. Jerome: Our Passover is sacrificed, he says not, provided that we
sacrifice it again, but provided that we eat it with the unleavened bread of
sincerity and truth. S. Bernarde, The Lamb has been slain from the
beginning of the world: Mors eius profuit antequam fuit, his death was
auailable before that it was: yea, This Lamb, (says Peter of Clugnye,
Sacrificed upon the Cross. S. Thomas says: And therefore let us banquet and
make a feast, Thom. in 1. Cor. c. 5. John 6.
feeding upon Jesus Christ, and that not only sacramentally, according to
that which is in S. John: If you eat the flesh of the Son of man, etc. but
also spirituallie, in imoying his wisdom. Anselmus: By the sacrificing of the
Passover, the Israelites were delivered out of Egypt, and by the sacrifice of
Christ, the christian people are delivered from the power of the Devil. Nicol.
de Lyra. Exodus c. 12.
But Nicolas de Lyra speaks more plainly, saying: All whatsoever Moses has
written, has relation to Christ: and therefore in the sacrificing of the Lamb,
there is a double sense, the one is the estate of the people coming out of
Egypt, and this is the literal and first sense: the other is the foreshewing,
or shadowing out of Christ, who was to be crucified, and this is the first in
intention, though it be the last in acco^plishment. And this Lyranus goes on
with this comparison throughout all the parts thereof: And so also does Petrus
Alphonsus, but more particularly, and both these were converted from the Jews
unto Christ. But yet what avails all this that has been said of the figure
of the Paschall Lamb, for the Sacrifice of the Mass?

Esaye says: I will bring them into my holy mountain, Esaias 56.61.66.
their whole burnt offeringes shall please me upon my Altar. Again, I will
take of them for Priests and Levites: And you shall be called the Priests of
God. Behold here (say they) Sacrificing Priests: behold also the ordaining of
Sacrifices: for these prophesies have relation to the new Testament, and
therefore to a propitiatory Sacrifice, for the quick and the dead: and
therefore to the Mass. How many Syllogismes had there need to be brought in,
before that we shall come to make this conclusion? But rather they should
learn to acknowledge and confess, that it is the custom and manner of the
Prophets, to speak of the service of the new Testament, in the terms and
phrases of the old: for else we should be put to build Jerusalem again,
as also the Temple and the Altar, etc. Or rather, they should be forced to
pull down all their Temples and Altars for to make them up into one. Esaias 60.
And to this end we see that Esaias says in an other place: All the sheep of
Cedar shall be assembled thither, all the sheep of Nebaioth shall ascend
upon mine Altar according to my good pleasure. S. Paul likewise speaking of
the Gospel in the phrases of the old Testament, saying: I sacrifice the
Gospel, I sacrifice the Gentiles unto God, etc. And S. John describing the
reestablishment of the Church of Christ, speaks of Jerusalem, the Temple, the
Altar, and Censers. etc. All which things being abolished in Christ, he
allegoricallie makes allusion unto in the Church of Christ. But shall we
look a little further into these Priests and Levites? S. Peter tells us:
You are a chosen generation, a royal Priesthood: And S. John, 1. Pet. 2.
Apocalypse. 1.
He has made us all Priests unto God his Father, etc. All those which
worship God in Christ. Esaye likewise in the verse going before, does
expound himself sufficiently, saying: The sons of strangers shall be your
vine-dressers and husbandmen: but you shall be Priests etc. putting a maine
difference betwixt the Gentiles and the Christians, by opposing the one to the
other. And if you ask what Sacrifices? Saint Paul will tell us: The
sacrifices of your souls, a living sacrifice, your reasonable service: And
Spiritual sacrifices: will S. Peter say, Acceptable to God by Jesus Christ.
The Sacrifices likewise of our Savior Christ upon the Cross, which every
true Christian offers to God for the remission of his sins, which the great
and Soueraign high Priest of the new Testament by his intercession, applies
unto all those which call upon God in the power and merit of this Sacrifice.
Cyp. de vnct. Chrysmat. Orig. in leuit. homil. 9. August. in Romanchoatae
exposit. Hieronym in Psalm 51. Idem in Es. y. 61. Haimo Halberstat. in Isay.
Daniel 11.31.
Whereupon S. Cyprian says unto us: That all Christians do offer unto God a
daily sacrifice, being ordained of God priests of holiness. And Origin, All
such as are anointed with the holy unction, that is, with the spirit of
Christ are made priests. As also S. Peter says to the whole Church; You are
a royal Priesthood, etc. And S. Augustine: Every man offers to God for his
sins, the whole burnte offering of the passion of our Lord. S. Jerome says,
Thou will accept of the sacrifice, either when thou thy self do offer thy
self to thy father for us, or when thou receiuest of us thanksgiving and
praises. But especially in this place, I will take Priests and Leuits from
amongst them, to the end (says he) that they may preach salvation unto others.
And thus do all the Ancients conceive and write of this place.

But there must be in Christian Churches a special and ordinary kind of
Sacrifice (say they) of an other sort then all these, for Daniell says: After
the time that Judge Sacrificium, the continual sacrifice shall be taken away,
and that there shall be set up the abomination of desolation, 1290. days,
etc. Wherefore this must be the Mass. But before all other things it is to
be noted here, that the word Sacrifice is not there at all, and therefore that
which is left unexpressed, may be as well supplied by this word Service, as
Sacrifice. As indeed S. Jerome says: Ablato Detcultu, the worship and service
of God being taken away. Whereby we may plainly see that their Mass has his
foundation most uncertain. But that Daniell means the abolishing of the
legal Sacrifice, appears by Daniell himself, and that in the eleventh
Chapter, The sanctuary which is the fortress and strong hold, shall be
defiled: the sacrifice or continual service and worship shall be taken
away, and in stead thereof, there shall be set up abomination, which shall
cause the desolation thereof. Which place is expounded by all the old Writers,
partly of the desolation made in the Jewish Church by Antiochus, and partly of
the rooting out of the whole priesthood of the Jews, accomplished in the over
throw and utter ruin of Jerusalem: whereunto our Lord the true expounder of
the law and the Prophets, has referred this place in these words, saying:
When you shall see the abomination of the desolation which is spoken of by
Daniell the Prophet, set in the holy place, (let him that reads, take heed
thereto,) Matthew. 24. Orig. in Mat. tract. 29.
let them then which are in Judea, fly into the mountains, etc. Origin says:
Daniel does signify and note out unto us the seauentie years, after the
coming of our Lord: for this week does confirm and ratify the Testament,
etc. And in the midst thereof the sacrifice of the Altar was taken away, even
in the 35. year, and so was accomplished that which had been written, in the
midst of the week, etc. Then also was the abomination of the desolation,
etc. when they saw Jerusalem besiedged, etc. Chrysostom says: The custom of
the Jews was to offer a sacrifice unto God evening and morning, and every
day, and they called this sacrifice (...), a continual action: now Antiochus
at his coming took away the same. And therefore they have not as yet found
the Mass here. If they oppose and bring in S. Jerome against us, referring
this place to be understood of Antichrist, then let them continue and hold
themselves to his manner of speaking: From the time (says he) (...) of this
continual action, which we have translated Judge Sacrificium, Theodor. in
Daniel. Chrysostom. in Ep. ad Romans hom. 29. Origin ad Romans l. 10. Turrian. tract.
2. c de Miss. Ve^a de Miss. These. 46.
when Antichrist having taken possession of the world, shall have forbidden the
service of God, Dei cultum: and thus Theodoret, Ecclesiasticum cultum. S.
Chrysostom says: My priesthood consists in fishing, in preaching the
Gospel, this is the sacrifice that I offer. Origin also in like manner: This is
a work and duty belonging to the priesthood, (...), to publish and preach
the Gospel. But how in the end will they reconcile these contradictories? I
am (says Jesus Christ) with you unto the end of the world, that is to say,
says Turrian, in the mystery of the Mass: And yet notwithstanding, Vega
says, yea Turrian himself in an other place upon Daniel: Gabriel that cannot
lie, says that Antichrist shall abolish and put down the continual
sacrifice: and what other thing is that (says he) but the very Mass?

A Monk of Ausbourg labored to find out the Mass in an other place of
Daniel: The Angels (says he) offered the son of man to the Ancient of
days, etc. to offer, Dan 7.13.
is taken in this place to sacrifice. If then the Angels do offer him to God,
why should not the Priests do it as well? So then you cannot choose but find
the Angels themselves in the Prophecy of Daniel to have said Mass. What a
heap of fooleries wrapped up in one? And who shall be able to undertake the
sifting out of them all? Here in this place the Prophet makes mention, how the
Father gives all power, rule and judgment unto the Son, that the Angels do
serve him, that they bring him into the presence of the Father. What place is
there, but that the Mass will be found in it, if it be met withal here?
They do stiffly pitch themselves upon the word, Obtulerunt: The Hebrewe
says, They caused to approach: The Greek in like manner, Hieronim. in Daniel
c 7. Chrysostom. t. 5. hom. Quod Christus Deus.
(...). S. Jerome: This must be understood according to the saying of the
Apostle: That he who thought it no robbery to be equal with God, did make
himself of no account, etc. And S. Chrysostom; All people do service unto
him, all principalities are offered up to him: both of them drawing an
argument, not for the Mass which they knew not, but against Arrius: or and if
they will hold themselves to their interlineall Gloss: Obtulerunt in Cruce,
upon the Cross, not in the Mass: and moreover it is from this only place so
fitly alleged, that they defend these words of the Canon: Iube haec
perferri permanus sancti Angeli tui, Command these things to be carried by
the hands of thine holy Angel, to be offered upon thine high Altar, before
the face of thy Majesty, etc.

Malachie says: Malachie. c. 1.
Every where there is offered and sacrificed a pure and undefiled offering in
my name, because that my name is great amongst the people: This therefore must
needs be the Mass. What will they say then unto their Arrius Montanus, of
whom they make so great account, who expounds the same of the Sacrifices of
the Gentiles? But the text indeed is thus: In every place incense is offered
unto my name, and a clean offering etc. and so has the Greek translated it:
The Chaldie Paraphrast in like manner: Your prayer shall be unto me as a
clean sacrifice, etc. But the Prophet his purpose is to oppose and set the
Gentiles against the Jews, the Leuiticall Sacrifices, which they had defiled,
to the purity of the service which shall be at the coming of Christ, not of one
people, but amongst all manner and sorts of people. If incense be taken
according to the bare letter, will they say, that incense and the Mass are
both one? will they bring us back again to the Jewish ceremonies? or rather
to the ceremonies of the Gentiles? but if it be taken figuratively, who shall
better interpret the figure then David: My prayer comes unto thee O Lord as
incense? Then S. John, There was offered up unto him, (says he) much incense,
to the end that he might offer up the prayers of all the Saints upon the
golden Altar, which is before the throne. Again, The smoke of incense rise
up from the prayers of the Saints; the golden viols were full of perfume,
which were the prayers of the Saints, etc. Let us add, that they are of
judgment, that incense carries not with it any propitiation. Genebrard. in
Lithurg. Dion^s.
And if this word Oblation or Offering be taken literallie, can they deny
that Minha, the word which the Prophet uses here, does not signify in the
whole book of Leuiticus any other thing then the offeringes of fruits and
other things without life, peace-offeringes and sacrifices of praise and
thanksgiving? And what analogy or correspondencie can it then have with a
sacrifice for sin? And if it be thus, what shall follow then, but that in the
Mass there is nothing offered but bread? and for a thanksgiving? But and if
it be taken figuratiuelie, what better interpreter can there be found then
the spirit of God, and that in the new Testament, which speaks not to us
but of spiritual sacrifices, of the preaching of the word, of thanksgiving,
and of the consecrating of our selves, Tertul. a duer. Marcion. l. 4. and
aduers^ud.
etc? Tertullian says, expounding this place: In every place shall be offered a
pure sacrifice, that is to say, (says he) a simple and single hearted
prayer, from a pure conscience. Again, He adds (says he) speaking of
spiritual sacrifices, and in every place there shall be offered in my name
pure and undefiled sacrifices. Aduers. Marcion. l 3.
Again, Bring unto God, O ye nations of the Gentiles, because that
undoubtedly the preaching of the Apostles was to pass throughout the whole
world. Again, Every where there shall be offered pure sacrifices unto my name.
And what manner of ones? Hieronym. in 1. Malach.
Gloriae scilicet relatio, the yielding of glory, blessing, praises, and
hymns: and not a word of the Mass. S. Jerome upon this place: Let the Jews
know that they are not to offer any more goats and bulls, but incense, the
prayers of the Saints: and that not in any one province of Judea, as in the
only City of Jerusalem, but throughout the whole world, a clean
sacrifice, as is to be seen in the ceremonies of Christians. And again, The
sound of the Apostles is gone throughout all the ends of the world: Idem in
Esa. c. 52.
Every where there is sacrifice offered to God. And herein is accomplished the
word of the Prophet, namely, in that, that God is purelie preached, and
purelie called upon in every place. And Chrysostom after the same manner.
Chrysostom. t. 2. hom. 16. ex varus in Matthew. Eusebius l. 1. Demonst. Euang. c. 6.
and 10.
Eusebius in expounding this place: We sacrifice therefore and burn the
memorial of this great sacrifice, according to the mysteries which have been
taught us, yielding thanks to God for our salvation, offering unto him
religious hymns, and holy prayers. We sacrifice unto the high God the
sacrifice of praise, a sacrifice full of sweet smell. We sacrifice the same
after a new fashion, according to the new Testament, a pure offering and
sacrifice. But in all this what matter is there concerning propitiation?
Theodoret does expound it of the abolishing of the legal sacrifices, Theod.
in Malach. c. 1.
and of the serving of God in spirit and truth, as our Lord himself avouched
in the speech which he made unto the Samaritanish woman: and thus does the
greatest number take and expound it. But here they reply upon us, all this is
old: is there no question of any thing that is new? this may be answered in
a word: That the Prophet says, A pure offering: and not a new offering. But
let us grant unto them this word new: Ireneus will answer them: Iren. l. 4.
c. 34. Chrysostom. cont. Iud. l. 3.
Oblationes hic, Oblationes tillic, There are sacrifices, and here are
sacrifices, sacrifices in Israel, sacrifices in the Christian church, the kind
and manner is only changed, inasmuch as then they were offered by servants
and bondslaues, but now by freemen: or rather to speak more fitly, by sons
and children. Chrysostom in like manner says: A new sacrifice, because it
proceeds from new hope, because it is no more offered by fire and smoke, but
by the grace and spirit of God. But say they, there are certain Doctors that
have understood it of the Eucharist, and we say unto them again on the other
side, that there are other some which have understood it otherwise, as we have
caused it apparantlie enough to be seen heretofore. But we contend not in
this place about the Eucharist, but about the sacrifice of the Mass, not about
a sacrifice of praise, but a sacrifice propitiatory. And therefore let us not
abuse the Fathers under the color of this word, seeing there is not any one
to be found, Iren. l. 4. c. 32.
that has so much as once thought upon it. Ireneus says: Christ giving advice
and counsel unto his Disciples, to offer unto God the first fruits of his
creatures, not as of any necessity in God, but that they might not be
unthankful and unfruitful, took that which by creation is bread, and gave
thanks, saying: This is my body etc. teaching that the sacrament of the new
Testament is new. And he adds thereto: Which the Church taking from the
Apostles, offers throughout the whole world unto God, the first fruits of
his gifts, to him that gives whatsoever food and nourishment we have. That
is to say, because that the ancient Christians were wont to offer of their
fruits unto God, as we have seen heretofore, by many places out of the same
Ireneus: and from out of them, they took the bread and the wine, which were
distributed in the holy Supper, the remainder being given to the poor, or
converted to the necessary uses of the Church. The question then that rises
hence, is of the sacrifice of thanksgiving, and not of a propitiatory
sacrifice: of the sacrifice of fruits and things without life, and not of the
real sacrificing of our Lord Jesus Christ: of a solemn thanksgiving for good
things received: and not of any atonement or appeasing of Gods wrath for
sins committed. And indeed Ireneus says in an other place; Every where
incense and pure sacrifices are offered to my name. S. John in the Apocalypse,
has called the prayers of the Saints, the offerings of incense. And again, In
as much, (says he) as the Church offers in simplicity and singlenes of
heart, their offering unto God is by good right, reputed a pure and undefiled
sacrifice, as S. Paul says to the Philippians: I was filled, having received
that which you sent me by Epaphroditus, etc. Now this was nothing else but a
contribution made by them of their goods: and therefore Ireneus adds: For it
behooves, that we offer up our sacrifices to God, and that we be found such
as will acknowledge and become thankful for all things that we receive. And
this offering is yet further declared and made plain in that which follows;
We offer unto him, not because he stands in need, but that we may be
thankful to him for his gifts, and so by this means sanctifying the
creature. For as God has not need of any thing that proceeds from us: so
have we need to offer unto him, according to that which Solomon says: He
that has pity upon the poor, gives upon usury unto God, etc. Now in all
this place which they make such a shield and buckler of, let them point us out
any one word concerning a propitiatory sacrifice, yea which concerns not on
the contrary a sacrifice of praise, of thanksgiving, and of charity, inasmuch
as that which is given unto God, is given unto the use of our neighbor, and
that which is given to our neighbor, Just. Martyr. aduers. Tryphon.
is sacrificed to God. Justinius Martyr says; We are truly made the
Priests of the Lord, according to that which he witnesses himself: because
that throughout the whole world, there are offered unto him pure and acceptable
sacrifices. In which place he generally opposes the Christians to the Jews,
according to this place of S. John: Who has made us kings, and Priests, etc.
But (say they) he adds, that these are the sacrifices of bread and wine,
that is to say, of the Eucharist. Admit it so, provided that they did not
cloak or dissemble that which follows: To render and give (says he)
thanks unto God, as well for that he has created the world, and all that is
contained therein, for the favor and loving affection sake which he bears
unto man, as principally, for that he has delivered us from all the malice
whereunto we stood subject, and has slain with a perfect slaughter, the
principalities and powers, which did opprese us by him, who of his own accord
and free will, has given himself to suffer. But because that Langus has not
expounded this place after their manner, Index expurg. page 75. Chrysostom in
Psalm. 109.
it is ordained and determined by the Council of Trent that he should be
raced. Chrysostom says, The Church that follows the steps of Christ,
whither soever he goes, is not excluded from any place: for it has his
Altars every where, and his doctrine also every where. In which speeches he
makes doctrine to be a part of these sacrifices, whereof Malachie speaks,
according to that which he says in an other place: My Sacrifice is the
preaching of the Gospel, etc. he adds, See and be hold how well he has
described the mystical Table, the sacrifice without blood, etc. That is the
holy Supper. But afterward, This is then (says he) the chief and
principal sacrifice that I have spoken of before, even this mystical and
spiritual gift, whereof Saint Paul speaks: Be ye followers of God, as
well-beloved children: and walk in love, even as he has loved you, and given
himself for you unto God, for a sacrifice and offering of a sweet smell and
savor: and this sacrifice he calls, The gift of salvation: namely, because
thereby we renew the memory of Jesus Christ sacrificed and crucified for us:
binding us in the bonds of charity by his own example, toward our
brethren, which are his members, and so we are made one with him in the
receiving of this holy mystery, that is sacrificed and crucified in him, and
with him, in his death and passion, inasmuch as he has suffered for us, and
not for himself: that so also we might rise unto glory with him. Saint
Augustine alleges this place against the Jews: August de Ciuit. Dei. l. 18.
c. 35.
This sacrifice (says he) is that which is offered throughout the whole
world, by the Priesthood of Christ, according to the Order of Melchisedech,
the Jews could not deny it, and therefore why do they wait or look for an
other Christ, etc. But we still stand in doubt, whether this be a sacrifice
of praise, or of propitiation, except that he can likewise rid us of this
scruple. The church (says he) sacrifices to God, in the body of Christ the
sacrifice of praise, seeing that the God of Gods having spoken, has called the
earth from the Sunne-rising, unto the setting thereof. For this church is the
spiritual Israel, distinguished from the carnal Israel, which served God in
the shadows of sacrifices, in which was signified and set forth this singular
sacrifice, which Israel now offers according to the spirit, etc. Out of the
house of this Israel he has not taken any calves: for in it are sacrificed
and offered unto God the sacrifice of praise. In every place says he
afterward, incense is offered unto my name: And Saint John expoundech it in
the Apocalypse, the prayers of the Saints.

Thus now you may behold and see what it is that these men allege for
themselves out of the old Testament, namely, figures, allegories, and
general speeches, as also the Doctors upon these places, by which they would
make men believe, that wheresoever they have used this word Sacrifice, they
meante and understood it of their Mass. And yet the Latins themselves four
hundred years after our Savior Christ, had not so much as heard of the name.
That they have acknowledged and taught their propitiatory sacrifice for the
quick and the dead, and yet they do not acknowledge any sacrifice for
sins, but in the propitiation which we have in the blood of Christ, neither
yet any Sacrifice in the holy Supper, save only that therein we do
celebrate the memory of this great Sacrifice, and offer up praise and
thanksgiving unto God for so great a benefit: there we sacrifice and offer
up our selves to his service a living sacrifice, and consecrate our selves
for our brethren, the members of Christ, and of one and the same body with us,
in true charity, in the beholding of the Creator and Redeemer, and the gifts
which we have received from him. And now it follows that we make trial, if
they have any better ground for this their pretended sacrifice in the new
Testament, wherein there remains not any more question of shadows and
figures, and wherein if it be nothing but a silly slight representation, if
it be nothing but an intricate and infolded thing, if it be not altogether
plain and clear, assuredly, we may be bold to say, and that without any
doubt, that it is but an human invention, yea and therefore that it is not
there to be found at all.

CHAP. III. That the pretended propitiatory sacrifice of the Mass has no
foundation in the new Testament.
Our adversaries say, Our Lord said to the woman of Samaria: The hour is
come, that you shall not worship the Father any more, John. 4.
either in this mountain or in Jerusalem: but the true worshippers shall
worship in spirit and truth. And what prove they from thence? To adore (say
they) is to sacrifice: but if they said, that it were to serve God, they said
somewhat to the purpose. But yet what follows of this? Certainly, that the
serving of God shall not be any more tied to one place, but spread all over
the world, according to the saying of Malachie. And as assuredly, that in
stead of the more carnal manner of service, wherewith he was served under the
law, he shall hereafter be spirituallie served: and in a word, that after
the material sacrifices, as say the Fathers, the spiritual sacrifices shall
succeed. Saint Augustine says: Do thou seek for any holy place? August.
in Johan. t. 15.
make thy self in thine inward parts, a Temple unto God: for the Temple of
God is holy, and that are you. Would thou pray in a Temple? Pray within thy
self, etc. changing all this outward and material service into an inward
and spiritual. Cyrill: Cyrill in Joan. l. 2. c. 93.
He signifies and sets forth the time of his coming, which changes the
figures of the law into truth, the shadows into a spiritual service
according to the doctrine of the Gospel, etc. And Origin in like manner:
Chrysostom aduers. Iud. hom. 2.
Chrysostom says: That is, there shall be no more Sacrifices, nor
Priesthood, neither yet kingdom in Judea, that so they may be wayned from
the received custom of the necessity of worshipping in one certain place,
and to bring them to a kind of service, that is more spiritual and full of
Majesty. Idem de cruce and de spiritu hom. 3. and in hom. veniet hora, etc.
In like manner expounding this place in an Homily for the purpose, he could
not find any Sacrifice but that of prayer grounded upon the doctrine of
verity, neither any word tending that way. Cardinal Caietan in the same
sense: In spirit, that is to say, not in the Mountain, not at Jerusalem, not
in any one certain place, nor with a temporal service, but with an inward
and spiritual, etc. And in faith, that is in knowledge, etc. Ferus likewise,
In spirit, in as much as they shall have received the spirit of adoption,
crying in him, Abba, Father. In truth, in as much as they shall call upon him
in his Son, which is Truth it self. Offering (says he) afterward, no
more any quick or live creatures, but their own bodies in Sacrifice, a holy
oblation, and offering: and not the Sacrifice of the Mass. But how will they
possibly now frame themselves to make their conclusions from this place? God
shall be adored and served in spirit, no more in one place but every where,
no more in the sacrificing of beasts, but in the sacrificing of our selves.
Therefore the Mass is a sacrifice propitiatory for the sins of men,
therefore the Mass must be said every where, etc.

But they come nearer unto the point, and give an instance from the institution
of the holy supper: and this is also our proper part and possession. It is
said: Luke 22. 1. Cor. 11.
Do this in remembrance of me: and to do in the scripture, signifies
sometimes to sacrifice. Therefore the matter here in hand must needs be a
sacrifice. And our Lord had taken the bread and the cup, and had said: This is
my body, This is my blood, therefore he did sacrifice under the kinds of
bread and wine, his body and his blood unto God his Father: and by virtue of
these words iuioyneth all succeeding Priests to do the like: a world of
errors, cauillations, and false surmises in a very few words. And the long
time since they were confuted and overthrown, in all these their arguments,
might have bin sufficient to have caused them to cease from the using of the^
any more: Facere in Latin signifies to sacrifice: but by an abridging of the
language, to do some holy thing: but that this is more usual in the
writings and works of Poets, then of Orators, and that seldom, not often,
and only then, when the matter in question does manifestly appear to be about
a sacrifice: (as I say) may evidently be seen, and needs not to be gessed
at. And here therefore we stand upon the quite contrary: As that the Greek
word (...), is never used to sacrifice, as far off is fair in the French
tongue: but the Evangelists and Apostles writ in Greek. So that the
controversy here is about an ordinary or common, and not any picked or
unwonted phrase: the contention is not evidently and manifestly of a
sacrifice: for it is so far from apparatiues as that the sharpest sighted
Fathers did know nothing thereof. And further the Hebrew word Asa, (and how much
more the Greek) does never signify to sacrifice, but when a sacrifice or
oblation does follow it: as facere haedum agnu^, etc. or facere haedo agno,
etc. to offer a kyd, a lamb, etc. their interlineall Gloss is not acquainted
with this subtle shift. Hoc facite, that is, says it: At often as you shall eat
this bread, and drink this cup, show forth the death of the Lord until his
coming. But let us admit that it is so; Hoc facite, sacrifice this: what shall
we make then of it? To sacrifice the body of Christ? But Christ says; Which
is given for you, and to give, is not to sacrifice. Wherefore it is not the
same action which Christ performed, for a man to sacrifice, if Christ did not
sacrifice. And afterward; Which is given, that is, which is now at this
present instant given, and delivered up to be crucified for us. The old
translation approved by the Council of Trent, has translated it, Dabitur, and
not Datur, referring the same to his suffering upon the Cross, and not to the
holy supper. Chrysostom and Origin: Dabitur, effundetur, which shall be given,
which shall be shed and offered up. And Chrysostom adds the reason, how
that for the comfort of his Disciples, our Lord taught them, that his passion
was the mystery of the salvation of mankind: the Mass also enemy unto it
self in this point, has read it so. Let us say then that these words, Hoc
facite, have relation to the institution of the supper, and that by them we
are enjoined to do the same that he has done, as to bless the bread, to eat
the bread, to bless the cup, and to drink the cup, to distribute them both,
and to receive them both. But as for the matter of sacrifice, there was none
but upon the Cross: The communicating of him and his graces, and the action of
thanks, is ordained and instituted to be practiced at this Table, and upon this
Cross, he has borne our iniquities upon this Cross, he has been broken
for our sins. God forbid (says S. Paul,) that I should ever glory but in
this Cross. If then this be to sacrifice the body, then it is not, hoc
facere, to do that which Christ has done: who took the bread, who
distributed it, who performed not in all this any action of a sacrifice: but
if it be thus: Do that which I have done, then it must not be any work of
sacrificing, here will not be found any sacrifice: and so there must needs
follow as poor and slender Divinity, as the Grammar or sense that went
before, was poor and slender. To be short, if fair in that place, be to
sacrifice, it is said; Do this as often as ye shall drink it, etc. by which
reason it should follow, that the sacrifice has no place, but at such times as
a man does drink. And yet they say, that the Sacrifice and Transubstantiation
do go before. And again, if it were said unto all those which were sitting
at the Table with our Lord, Hoc facite, then the commandment of sacrificing
was general to all: for in like manner unto all in general, even to all the
whole Church of Corinth, S. Paul said, Hoc facite. (...). And the Priests by
this account, shall have as weak a foundation for their places, as the
sacrifice has. But who can better expound this place then S. Paul, Do this
(says he) in remembrance of me? And how? For as often as you shall eat of this
bread, and drink of this cup, you shall show forth the death of the Lord
until his coming. Not by standing and gazing on, in a fond sort, not by the
means of an Interlude or play, neither yet by any such apish fooleries: but by
a serious and earnest, either meditation, or laying open of the horror of our
sins, and of the mercy of God, who has so greatly loved the world, as that
he has vouchsafed to give his Son to the death of the Cross, for us
miserable sinners, to the end that he that belieueth in him, may have eternal
life. And this is the same with that which their Gloss says: Do this in
remembrance of me: For says it, the sacrament ought to be received in the
remembrance of the Lords passion: show forth the Lords death, etc. that is to
say, make your account and set it down for certain, that the suffering and
death of the Lord came through you. For Whosoever (says Oecumenius) shows
forth this death, he displayeth and makes a show of all manner of gifts, and
of all manner of love toward men, yea in a word, Oecum. in 1. Cor. 11.
(says he) of the whole means of our salvation. Let these fellows now draw
near, which have the Fathers so full and so rife in their mouths, but cannot
bring forth so much as any one, who has found the sacrifice of the Mass in
these words, Hoc facite, that has expounded this word, for to sacrifice. And
yet notwithstanding, if there were any place wherein it might be found, who
doubts, yea, or who can deny, but that of all others, that is no place for
to find it in?

A great man of this time, seeing himself thrust out of this place, Genebrard.
has invented this shift, namely to say, that the Apostles did say their
first Mass upon the day of Pentecost. And this he would tug out by the hair,
both out of a place of Deuteronomie, where mention is made of the offering of
new fruits, which then was ordained in the law; as also from the 2. of the
Acts, where these words are: Act. 1.2.
They did persevere in the doctrine of the Apostles, in communicating and
breaking of bread, and in prayers, which we have already sufficiently
refuted. For what agreement is there betwixt any thing therein, and the
sacrifice of the Mass, for the remission of sins? And yet notwithstanding, we
will further take the pains to call to mind, Hugo Card. in Act. c. 2.
what their Gloss says upon this place of the Acts; Of bread, as well common as
consecrated, that is to say, as well ordinary, as sacramental. And Cardinal
Hugo after the same manner. And Lyranus: Partly (says he) because they did
communicate every day: partly also, because they did eat together in common.
And Oecumenius says; This is for to show the simplicity that they used in
living and conuersing together. And the Syrian and Arabic interpreters: They
received the Communion or Eucharist, Vcharisto. And Caietanus: This is to show
the distribution of the meat, as it was practiced from family to family. So
that on every side the standing of the Mass, does still fail and deceive it.

But let us come to other places. It is said Acts 13. (...), Acts 13.
as they sacrificed: Their old translation says: Ministrantibus, as they
were executing their office and Ministry. And the Gloss adds, In good
works every man according to his charge and degree. The Syrian and Arabian: As
they were in prayers: because it is added that they did fast. Chrysostom and
Oecumenius, (...), as they preached. Caietanus, As they preached and
prophesied, that is to say, as they expounded the word. And Cardinal Hugo,
Ministrantibus scilicet praedictis Prophetis. And of him we have spoken else
where. But let us grant them according to their own desire, Sacrificantibus:
let it be said; As they sacrificed. Epiphanius says concerning this place:
These were chosen with Paul and Barnabas, (...), sacrificing the Gospel.
Chrysostom says to the same purpose: Let him sacrifice the Gospel. But where
shall we have a better expositor then S. Paul himself? This grace (says
he) has been given me of God, that I should be (...), a Minister of Jesus
Christ: Let us say a Priest if they will, toward the Gentiles (...),
sacrificing in very forcible terms, the Gospel of God, to the end that the
offering of the Gentiles, (...), might be well accepted of, being sanctified
by the holy Ghost. In which place Theodoret says, The Apostle called hit
preaching (...), a holy Ministry, a holy sacrifice, and a true and sincere
faith, an acceptable offering.

It is said, 1. Cor. 10. You cannot be partakers of the Table of the Lord, 1.
Cor 10.
and of the table of diuelles. Now the Table of diuelles say they, is an Altar:
and that of the Lords is also an Altar: and so an Altar does infer a
sacrifice, and a sacrifice the Mass. So that Amensa, ad Missam, from the table
we find the way to come to the Mass: I fear nothing here but least that these
arguments should be taken for mine own: but this is one of Bellarmine his
arguments in this matter, and such a one too, as he takes to be a goodly one: a
wonder to consider that none of the old writers could perceive this mystery:
yea that their Gloss being so new as it is, could not find any thing in these
words, but our coupling with Christ, which is confirmed and ratified in the
sacrament of the holy supper or Eucharist. And it is no less manifest and
plain, that S. Paul speaks here de Mensa, not de Missa: that he here
forbids all Christians to be at the feasts of the Idolaters, wherein they
gave themselves to sit down and eat, after their sacrifices, the meats
offered to Idols: as the words going before do make it plain and evident: You
cannot drink the cup of the Lord, and the cup of Diuelles. For there is
nothing to testify and witness, that ever the Pagans did use to drink upon
their Altars, but that they used to feast afterward. Whereupon Atheneus
says, that it is called (...), as it were (...), because that they did drink
themselves drunk after their sacrifices. Tertul. de Spect. c. 13.
Tertullian did not take this place in any other sense, for he says: Non
sacrificamus, nec parentamus, sed neque de sacrificio and parentato edimus:
quia non possumus coenam Dei edere, and coenam Daemoniorum. That is to say, we
do not sacrifice unto Idols, neither yet unto our Parents being dead: and as
far off are we from eating of that which is sacrificed, either unto Idols, or
for the dead, which he calls, Idolothyta, and Necrothyta, in the same place:
Because (says he) that we cannot eat the supper (coenam) of God, and the
supper of Diuelles: So that what the Apostle calls mensam, Theodor. in 1.
Cor. 10.
he expresses by the word coenam. Theodoret in like sort: How shall we
communicate in the precious body and blood of our Lord, and afterward at the
Table of Devils, Haimo. in 1. Cor. 10.
by eating the meat which is sacrificed unto Idols? And Haimo, Mensae Domins,
to participate at the Table of the Lord, that is to say, to participate in the
body of the Lord.

In the end they find it, whereas it self can find no place, as namely, in
the Epistle to the Hebrews, which whole Epistle hunteth and chaseth it out of
the whole world: Heb. 13.
We have (says the Apostle) an Altar, whereof they have no power to eat,
which do serve in the Tabernacle. If they had an Altar, then had they a
sacrifice; and what sacrifice, but that of the Mass? But by coming to the
knowledge of the Altar, we shall come to find out the sacrifice: Behold
says S. Paul in an other place: Israel according to the flesh, Those that
eat of sacrifices, are they not partakers of the Altar? This is then that
Israel which is according to the flesh, that is to say, the Jews, which he
opposes and sets against that Israel which is according to the spirit,
that is to say, against Christians, that so he might restrain them from
affecting the rites and service of the Jews. Think not (says he) but that
we have an Altar and a sacrifice, of which, they which serve in the
Tabernacle, that is, they which are given still to subject and make themselves
servants to the ceremonies of the law, have not power or possibility to eat,
namely, says the Apostle, because they disanull the grace of God, and make
the power of the Cross of no effect: for that, If righteousness be by the law,
Christ should be (says he) dead in vain: and this Altar is nothing else
but the Cross of Christ: and this sacrifice is nothing else but Christ
stretched upon the Cross: Who has suffered (says he) without the gates, to
accomplish the figures of those beasts which were sacrificed without the host
for sin, who has shed his own blood, for to sanctify his people. But it
behooves us (says he) if we will be partakers of this Altar, and of this
sacrifice: That we go forth to carry his reproach and shame, that is to say,
that we cast off all manner of things to follow him, that we deny our
selves, bear our Cross after him, and become crucified with him, following
that which is said; If we suffer with him, we shall also reign with him.
Then the Apostle concludes, By him therefore, by the merit of his sacrifice,
We offer unto God continually the sacrifice of praise, that is to say, the
fruit of our lips, praising his name, etc. And indeed their Gloss it self,
has not understood or taken it otherwise: We have an Altar, that is the
Cross, upon which Christ was offered, of which such are not partakers, etc.
According as it is written: If you be circumcised, Christ will not avail you
any thing, because that such as do observe the things of the law, pointed
out by the service of the Tabernacle, have no part in the effectual working of
the passion of Christ. And therefore let us offer by him, etc. that is to say,
a spiritual sacrifice by Christ, which is our high Priest: And not Christ
himself, as our adversaries do pretend: and this sacrifice, that is, (says
Lyranus) alms deeds, for the comforting of the needy, etc. Oecumenius after
the same manner: Oecumen in ep. ad Heb. c. 13.
The Jews will say; How say you that you have an Altar? for what has been
sacrificed or offered upon it? for as concerning Christ, whom thou so often
set before us to have been sacrificed, to have been offered and slain
thereupon for the whole world, he was not sacrificed upon thine altar, but on
the contrary, he suffered without the gates of the city: yea says the
Apostle, and thereupon it is, that I can prove unto thee so much the more
effectually, that we have an Altar: for even amongst us, the bodies of
sacrificed beasts, are not burnt upon Altars, but without the host. Now for
that cause also did he suffer without the gates, to the end that he might
sanctify, not the priests only, but likewise all the people. But and if he
have been the sacrifice for all, why has he not also been the Altar? And a
little after: Wherefore we offer by him as we did of old time by the high
Priest the calves of our lips, namely, prayers, hymns, and supplications unto
God: Not any more (says he) any sacrifices of beasts, but the sacrices,
(...), which are without blood. The Mass will our adversaries say here, for so
they call it, Sacrificium incruentum: But he expounds himself, (...),
sacrifices which are offered by the lips; (...), etc. in prayers, in hymns,
and supplications, etc. confessing the name of the Lord. And how? In as much
(says he) as we give him thanks, for that he died for our sins, etc.
Theoder. ad Hebr. c. 13. Thom. ad Heb. c. 13.
Chrysostom and Theodoret upon this place after the same sort. But Thomas more
clearly then any of them all, saying; This is the Altar, or the Cross of
Christ, whereupon he was offered for us, or else this is Christ himself, in
whom, and by whom, we offer up our prayers. This is the Altar likewise, whereof
mention is made, Apoc. 8. etc. But let them tell me then in their consciences,
Belarm. l. 1. de Sacram. c. 35. and l. 1. de. Miss. c. 14.
if there be in all this any one word of the Mass? And in deed Bellarmine in a
certain place after the manner of other, would feign abuse it, but elsewhere he
says, that he will not press this place, seeing that other good Catholic
writers do understand it of the Altar of the Cross.

In the end they come to breath life into the Mass with that which cannot but
make it breathless, and press it to death, even with this Epistle, Heb. 5. v.
1.
which cease not to go over it again and again in a hundred places: that
our priest has fulfilled whatsoever was needful for our redemption, by the
only sacrifice of the Cross. It is written (say they) Omnis Pontifex sieve
sacerdos, every high priest or other priest taken from amongst men, is
established by men, in things which are done to Godward, to offer sacrifices
and gifts for sins: then it behooves that our priests do offer for sins,
and that in the new Testament. Let us note their good dealing: the text is
(...), every high priest, and not every sacrificer, nor every priest. And in
deed he compares in this place and sets the high priest of the law against
our high Priest Jesus Christ in these words: In like manner also Christ, etc.
He compares him I say in this, that both of them had their calling of God, he
sets down the prerogative, in that the one was a servant, and the other the
Son, of whom it is said: This day have I begotten him. He opposes and
sets him against him, in that he was taken from amongst men from time to
time, but this our high priest under the Gospel is eternal without beginning,
after the manner of Melchisedech. And this is the cause why the interlineall
Gloss says: Omnis Pontifex secundum legem. And Oecumenius: By the comparing of
the priests, that is to say, of Christ, and of the high priest of the law, he
would show the excellency of the new Testament above the old, etc. And Thomas
of Aquin coming after all the old writers, understands this place after the
same manner. What shameless cogging and foisting then is this, to conclude
from the high priest, to every ordinary and inferior priest, and from the
high priest of the law, to the inferior priests of the Church of Rome? And let
it be said here by the way, that which is to be held once for all: that there
is not so much as any one place in all the holy scripture, where the Ministers
of the new Testament are called (...), sacerdotes, priests, or by any other
name of equal sense and signification, (but rather all manner of Christians
are called in certain places by the name of Priests, notwithstanding that
they be qualified with diverse names, as Evangelists, Prophets, Teachers,
Ministers, Pastors and Elders: and that for no other cause doubtless, but
because the holy Ghost purposed to abolish the pedagogie and childish
rudimentes of the law, that so they might not have any place or use under the
Gospel. He would also take away thereby this stumbling stone which Antichrist
has very cunningly cast in the way, having drawn from this word sacrifice,
which is to say, A holy and consecrate kind of duty or service, (a phrase and
term first used by Christians generally, for the whole exercise of devotion)
a Sacrifice properly so called, as they speak; then propitiatory, and
afterward meritorious for the remission of sins, and that not for the living
only, but also for the dead. But they go further: It is thus said at the least
in place elsewhere, that it behooves, that Jesus Christ should have something
to offer: and if any thing then himself, and that every day unto God in heaven
for us. Now without all question the Mass by this account is as far from
this place, as heaven is removed from their Altar. But yet we must look
further into this their deceit and craft. It must needs be, that he have
something to offer, that is to say, that he has offered something: and what
he has offered, Heb. 8.3.
the Apostle tells us in a hundred places: He offered himself once for all,
and for the sins of the world: he has purchased unto us by his blood an
everlasting redemption: by one only offering once offered, he has sanctified
us, and sits at the right hand of God his father. He does not then offer or
sacrifice any such thing unto him every day, as they do falsely allege the
text: but rather He appears before God making intercession for us, praying
and making requests for us by the power and virtue of this sacrifice once
made, etc. The question only betwixt us is, whether these words, (...), ought
to be expounded, Quod offerat, or Quod offerret, that is, that he does daily
offer, or that he has once offered. And the Apostle has decided it without
the help of any others in many places: but let us hear what the old writers
do say thereof. Oecumenius says: Oecumen. in epist. ad Heb. c. 8.
Because it properly belongs to priests to offer gifts and sacrifices, (...),
where our adversaries would understand for the perfecting of the sense this
word (...), It is necessary: we do make the supply with this word (...), and
make the sense, It was necessary: which agrees better with (...), and it is
as much as to say, that it was meet that Christ should also have something to
offer. But that which follows does decide the question: This was the cause
(says he) wherefore he had his own proper flesh, which (...) he has offered.
For it might have been said: If he be a high priest for ever, why is he dead?
wherefore? (...), that he might offer himself a sacrifice, etc. And a little
after: He is therefore dead, that he might offer this sacrifice; but he is
risen from the dead, and ascended into heaven, to possess and keep the same
(...), where it is requisite that he should exercise his priesthood. And how?
Verily (says he) by making intercession to God for us. Ambros. ad Hebr. c. 8.
S. Ambrose says: It is necessary that our savior in the days of his flesh
should have something that he might offer for us, and therefore he took upon him
our flesh, Theodor. ibid. Haimo ibid.
that he might offer the same. And Theodoret; This is the cause why the only
begotten Son of God having taken our nature, did offer it to God for us. Haimo:
He took of us that which he has offered for us, namely, man's flesh, eue^
himself whom he has offered upon the altar of the cross, Hugo ibid. Thom.
ibid.
etc. being himself both the sacrifice and sacrificer. And thus also write
Cardinal Hugo and Thomas: For it behooved that Christ, haberet quod offerret,
might have something that he might offer: he offered himself, etc. all of
them having relation to the thing done, and not to do. Caietan: That is,
himself who is offered, and the Saints which are made such by heavenly grace.
But what need was there of any other expositor then the Apostle himself, when
he sets down how that, he does not offer himself oftentimes. And again:
For by one only oblation he has consecrated for ever those which are
sanctified.

They go forward: Hebr. 9.
The Apostle says: It is necessary that the patterns or figures of heavenly
things should be cleansed by these things, but the heavenly things themselves be
better oblations and sacrifices then these are. He speaks (say they) in the
plural number: wherefore it argues that there are many oblations, many
sacrifices: and those are our Masses. But let us always carry in mind, that
the Apostle has infinite times said: That there is but one sacrifice, that is,
Christ: and that there is but one oblation offered upon the Cross by Christ.
And let us also distinguish, Hostiam seu victimam, from (...), the thing
sacrificed from the oblation: that is to say, from the action of sacrificing.
Now the Apostle uses in this place the word (...), and not (...), of
sacrifice, not of offering, of the thing, not of the action. And what will they
then infer or conclude? that the Christian Church here opposed and set
against the Jewish Church, ought to be cleansed by many sacrifices? will they
dare to be so bold? and that seeing it is such a blasphemy? or by many
offerings of this very same sacrifice? And is not this to come all to one
thing, and directly contrary to so many places of the Apostle? And again, it
is not said in this place, Oblations, but Sacrifices. But say they it is spoken
in the plural number, Sacrifices: but this is because the Apostle had spoken
in the plural number of those of the law, and so in setting down the opposite
part, does retain likewise the plural number: Non quia victimae plures, sed
quia in vna plures, vel potius illae omnes; because that in this only one
sacrifice all others are contained. And in deed to the end they may not find
any starting holes, Thom. ad Heb. c. 9.
we will not give credit unto any others in this point, but unto their own
Doctors. S. Thomas: Hostus in plurali, he says sacrifices in the plural
number: and contrarily he says afterward, that there is but one sacrifice,
even that of Christ, for by one only offering, he has accomplished for ever
all those which are holy and sanctified. Hebr. 10. I answer, that though it
were one in it self, yet it was shadowed out by many sacrifices under the old
law. The interlineall Gloss: Meliores hostiae, better sacrifices: namely,
Christ and all those of the old law, in as much as it was signified by them
all. Hugo the Cardinal: that is, the sacrifice of Christ, Anselm. ad Heb. c.
9. Caietan.
by which all those of the law were signified and sanctified. Anselme: These
better sacrifices are but one, that is, Christ. Caietan: Christ crucified is
here called the better sacrifices, because that virtualiter, that is, in effect
and operation, it has the power of all the rest.

But in the end, they say, the priesthood being translated, it must needs
follow that the law is translated also, Et vicissim: wherefore it must needs
follow, that there must be a priesthood in the new Testament. And who goes
about to deny it them? Hebr. 7.
for otherwise it should fall out, that to have one which lives for ever,
should be to be without a priest? and that to have an everlasting sacrifice,
should be to be without one? And on the other side, are we not (says the
Apostle) all priests, in as much as we have all access to the father through
him, even to offer up unto him through him our sacrifices, even for to offer
unto him himself in our prayers a sacrifice for us? But we deny that there is
in the new Testament any order of people appointed and ordained to sacrifice
him a new, and we on the contrary affirm, that throughout the whole
scriptures there is not one word spoken of any such, as likewise there is not
of the reiterating of the sacrifice of Christ; neither have any of the fathers
interpreted it as our adversaries do at this day. We affirm also, that in all
the holy scripture, speaking of the Ministers of the Church of Christ, they are
never entitled priests, in whatsoever language that a man shall take them. And
that if the same holy scriptures of the new Testament do make any mention of
sacrifices, that they entitle and call them presently, for the preventing and
taking away of error; sacrifices of the preaching of the Gospel; sacrifices
of praise and thanksgiving, spiritual sacrifices, the calves of our lips, the
works of charity, etc. offered partly by the Ministers of the holy Gospel, who
hold their particular place and rank in the Church, to dispense unto us the
word of God and sacraments, to show forth unto us our destruction in our own
nature, our condemnation by the law, our grace and favor purchased in the
death of our Lord, the greatness by consequent of our sin, and of the mercy of
God in the greatness of this remedy: whereupon there follows in us a love
toward God, a hatred toward our selves, etc. Partly likewise by all the
Christians in whom this love brings forth spiritual sacrifices: peace
offeringes, in as much as we have by this means peace with God: sacrifices of
thanksgiving, for that we give him thanks in every kind of service, whether of
the heart, the mouth, or hands, for so great a benefit received of his mere
mercy: and let us also say propitiatory, in some sort by a great deal better
right then in the Mass, in as much as we confess unto him our sins with a
contrite and humble heart, entreating him that the blood of our Lord Jesus
Christ his only Son may procure us favor and mercy, by the true and only
propitiation purchased by the same, Amen.

CHAP. IIII. That the old fathers have not acknowledged any other propitiatory
sacrifice, then that only one made upon the Cross.
THus you cannot deny (say they) that the old fathers have called the Mass a
Sacrifice: yes we have flatly denied them the whole, and plainly proved, that
the old fathers did not so much as know it by name. But they reply: at the
least they do unfold unto us, the celebrating of the sacrament of the
Eucharist, or holy Supper of the Lord. And surely upon good cause and warrant,
seeing it is a holy and consecrate action, and that the spiritual sacrifices
of our hearts are thereby sacrificed to God, unto repentance, as also seeing
that the incense of our prayers, and the calves of our lips, and the Gospel,
the word of God, as says S. Paul, is therein sacrificed, seeing that our
bowels, tanquam per viscerationem, do therein open, enlarge and spread abroad,
and distribute themselves, by our alms deeds unto our neighbors, seeing
likewise that the death of Jesus Christ is therein declared the only sacrifice
of the Cross; and that by the express commandment of the sacrificer. And
thus, and no otherwise have they all understood it. But we deny, that ever
they said any thing of it, as a sacrifice properly so called of the new
offering up of the Son of God, to God by the priest, of his body and of his
blood, upon an altar for our sins. Neither must they here go about to abuse
us with a distinction of Sacrificium cruentum aut incruentum, of a bloody or
unbloody sacrifice. For this distinction will not be received or admitted of
against the universal propositions of the scripture, which tell us: that where
remission and forgiveness of sins is purchased, there needs no more
sacrifice or offering. Again, that there is no remission purchased, where
there is no shedding of blood. But so it is, that we have forgiveness in the
blood of Christ, much more then an oblation. But so it is, that in their
pretended sacrifice there is no shedding of blood: and therefore much less
pardon and forgiveness, or any effectual grace, that may procure us Gods
favor. But yet it is further to be considered, that the old fathers did never
name (...), bloodlesse or unbloody sacrifices, to make distinction thereby,
betwixt the sacrifice of the cross, and the sacrament or pretended sacrifice
of the altar; but rather to set down a difference betwixt the sacrifices of
the law, and the sacrifices of Christians. Whereupon Oecumenius says, Oecumen.
ad Heb. c. 12.
(...), that is to say, Sacrifices without blood: those (says he) of the
lips, as prayers, hymns and supplications unto God by Jesus Christ, etc. And
others after the same manner, which we shall see far better by tracing them
from age to age.

Clemens Alexandrinus next succeeding the time of the Apostles says: Clem. l.
3. Paedag. c. 2. and in strom.
We sacrifice not unto God, and that upon good consideration: for he has no
need of any thing, but has given all things unto us: and therefore we do
glorify him, who was sacrificed for us, in sacrificing and offering up of our
selves. Again, God would be honored, though he have no need of any thing: and
therefore do we honor him with our prayers: and this is the best and most
holy sacrifice, when we send them up into his presence, in justice etc. Our
Altar then is the congregation of such as are attentive in prayers, and have
all of them one common spirit, and one common voice, etc. Again: Our Altar,
that is, one holy soul, our perfume and incense, even our prayers. So that he
does not acknowledge or make any mention of a Sacrament properly so called,
when he says: We do not sacrifice, he acknowledges another manner of
fashion: namely, the prayers of the faithful, the sacrificing of themselves
unto God, etc. And yet herein he is not behind with speaking honorably of the
Eucharist: For (says he) this is that special good grace, whereof those are
partakers, which communicate therein in faith, and are sanctified both in body
and soul.

Ireneus; we have seen heretofore how he speaks, Iren. l. 4. c. 34.
and yet you may perceive him to deal more plainly: We must (says he) offer
up a sacrifice to God, and in all things be found to acknowledge our creator,
by a pure and upright opinion and judgment: by faith without hypocrisy, by
certain hope, by fervent love, offering unto him the first fruits of his
creatures. And this is that pure oblation, which the Church only does offer
unto the creator, offering unto him of his creatures, with thanksgiving.
Therefore (says he) he would have us to be continually offering our oblations
upon the altar. And what Altar? This also he teaches, saying: There is an
altar in heaven, thither our prayers and sacrifices are directed: and in the
temple, according to that which Saint John has said in the Apocalips: and the
temple of God was open and the tabernacle: For behold (says he) the tabernacle
of God, where he will dwell with men. Here then is no sacrifice but that of
man unto God, in the acknowledgement of his benefits, by continual prayers, as
also of the first fruits of the goods, which he gives him, and that by
communicating them charitablie with his brethren.

Justinius Martyr speaks highly and honorably in commendation of the Lords
Supper, he describes and sets out unto us the holy ceremony wholly and
entirely: Justin. Martyr in Tryphon.
and yet not a word of the propitiatory sacrifice in all that he says. But on
the contrary, he says: I dare be bold to affirm, that there are no other
sacrifices that are perfect and acceptable unto God, then the supplications and
thanksgiving of good people, and Christians have learned, that they are not to
offer any other, etc. Again, Idem in exposit fidei. Tertul. aduers. Iud.
We sacrifice unto God without ceasing the sacrifice of praise, sincere
prayers, and of the sweet savor of good works, etc. We have heard heretofore
what Tertullian has said upon the first Chapter of Malachie, but yet behold
what he says further: It behooved that Christ should be made a sacrifice for
all the Gentiles, who was led as a sheep to the slaughter. Behold here the
only sacrifice. Idem aduers. Marc. l. 4. and ad Scapul.
Again: The prophecies of the law did signify that man otherwise a sinner,
presently after that he was cleansed by the word of God, did offer an
oblation in the Temple, that is, prayer and thanksgiving in the Church and
congregation of the faithful by Jesus Christ the catholic, that is, the
universal Priest of the father. Behold now and see here an universal and
only priest, by whom we offer unto God our sacrifices and our prayers. And
therefore he says: We must not sacrifice unto God any thing but that which
is spiritual: for it is written, a contrite heart is a sacrifice unto God. And
a sacrifice to God is the sacrifice of praise, etc. Again: Thy faith has
saved thee: because (says he) that it has apprehended and taken for granted,
that it must offer his sacrifice unto the Almighty, even thanksgiving in the
true temple, and by his true high priest Jesus Christ, etc. And again, We
sacrifice for the health and prosperity of the Emperor, Idem in Apolog.
but unto our God and to his Son, and that according to his commandment,
Pura prece, by a pure and sincere prayer, etc. Cypr. sermon. 1. de cleemosyn.
Saint Cyprian could not learn any other lesson of this his Master:
whatsoever some would make him to believe. For he says: Rich Lady, come you
in Dominicum, to the Lords banquet without a sacrifice, there to take of the
sacrifice which some poor person has offered? etc. Here sacrifice is
understood alms, or offering, because that of the fruits which were given by
the faithful, there was so much taken as might make a sufficient quantity to
distribute in the celebrating of the holy supper amongst the faithful. They
object unto us his Epistle unto Cecilius, Idem. l. 2. cp. ^.
wherein he says: Who is the priest of the high God, by any greater privilege
and prerogative then our Lord Jesus Christ, who has offered sacrifice unto God
his father, and has also offered the same that Melchisedec did offer, that is
to say, bread and wine, his body and his blood. Let us observe, that here he
compares Jesus Christ with Melchisedec; Melchisedec the priest of the highest,
says the Apostle: but Jesus Christ is preferred, for he offered himself unto
God in sacrifice: and Melchisedec offered but bread and wine unto Abraham, but
our Lord offered his body and his blood for the faithful. Otherwise this text,
contrary to the nature of the author, should have no force or power in it. But
let us hear him expounding himself in this same Epistle, wherein he says; In
as much as we make mention of the passion and death of Christ in all our
sacrifices (for it is the death and passion of Christ which we offer) we are
not to attempt, do or offer any thing, but as he in giving us an example has
done before us. For the scripture says: As often as ye shall eat this bread,
etc. you shall declare and show forth the death of the Lord until his coming.
Then we offer not Jesus Christ, but we offer his death and passion, we offer
him already slain upon the cross; that is, we celebrate the remembrance of
his death and passion; we offer it unto God as the means of the remission of
our sins. And he gives a reason thereof in another place, saying: Because the
sacrifice which the well-beloved Son of God has offered upon the cross, is so
acceptable and well pleasing unto the father, as that his oblation is as
effectual at this day in the presence of his, as it was the very same day
that the blood and water issued out of his side.

Origin says: The blood of Christ is so precious, as that he suffered alone
for the redemption of all. Origin in cp. ad Romans and in hom. 2. in Cant.
What need then has the Church of any other sacrifice? And as for the whole
burnt offerings of Christians, Those are their prayers and supplications unto
God, etc. But yet there is more behind. For when Celsus had objected unto him:
you have neither sacrifice nor altars: he answers not any otherwise, but; we
have the sacrifice of the Altar, etc. Or else, Our temples are the spirits of
good people, who breath out a sweet smelling incense, Idem. l. 8. contra Celsum.
the vows and prayers of a good and pure conscience. To the like objection
made in the time of Arnobius and Minutius Felix, by one Cecilius a Pagan, there
was shaped the like answer. This was about the year 300. And as for the place
of Tertullian, Tertul. de paenit. c. 9.
Aris adgeniculari, etc. without troubling our selves therewith any further:
Pamelius (as we have alleged before) has corrected it by the copy in the
Vatican: and has very excellently showed, that it cannot so stand, but that it
must be read, Caris Dei adgeniculari, etc. in so much, as that we may from
hence conclude very strongly clean against our adversaries. They say, there
were altars in the Primitive Church: and therefore Sacrifices; and therefore
the Mass. Wherefore we, with the consent of all antiquity, for the space of
300. years, do reply and cross them, saying: there were no altars in the
Churches of the Christians, neither yet sacrifices, neither yet Masses. And if
we should repeat that which has been said before of altars, our proof would
extend it self to a far longer time.

Athenagoras in his Apology for the Christians, Athenagor. in apol. pro
Christianis.
has the very same objection to confute, and freely undertakes to prove,
that the sacrifice that God demands of us is, that we should be careful to
know him, and to acknowledge all the goodness that we do receive at his hands.
But what have I to do (says he) to trouble my self with thinking upon and
remembering of sacrifices and burnt offeringes, wherewith God has nothing to
do? God who requires (says he) that men should offer unto him (...), a
sacrifice without blood, a reasonable soul, etc. His answer had been more
ready: We sacrifice Christ daily, etc. And let us mark by the way that he
calls it, a sacrifice without blood: not to put any distinction or difference
betwixt that of the Cross, and that of the altar, but to distinguish betwixt
the sacrifices of the Jews, and of the Paganes, which were material and
bloody, and the spiritual sacrifices of the Christians.

Lanctantius: Lanctan. l. 6. c. 26.
Two things (says he) must be offered, gifts and sacrifices unto God; and
they must be offered without bodily substance: for the gift, the integrity and
uprightness of the soul; for the sacrifice, praises and hymns, etc. who so
does this, sacrifices unto God, so often as he does a good work, etc. And
therefore upon the Altar of God which is great in deed, and which is placed in
the heart of man, so that it cannot be defiled with blood, it behooves us to
set patience, faith, innocence, chastity, etc. There is not any other holy
service then this same. This man as yet knew nothing what this pretended
Sacrifice meant, and as little of Altars.

Eusebius has been cited heretofore in the expounding of the place of
Malachie; We sacrifice therefore (says he) and burn (he answers the
Paganes.) Eusebius. de Demonstra. l. 1. c. 6 and. 10.
And what? sometimes the memory of this great sacrifice, celebrating the
mysteries which our God has given us, and rendering unto him thanks for our
salvation, as also offering to him religious hymns and prayers: Idem. l. 3. c.
4. and l 4. c. 5.
sometimes we consecrate our selves all wholly unto him and his high priest or
sacrificer, which is, to Christ, dedicating, I say, our selves, bodies and
souls unto this word: where we have to observe, that he reckeneth up the
sacrifice of Christians, as the memory of the passion of our Lord,
thanksgiving, prayers, praises, and offering up of our selves, etc. but of
the sacrifice without blood, which they pretend, whether it be in the Supper
or in the Mass, not one word.

Now about this time was the first general Council of Nyce held, Can. Nicaen
wherein we have a Canon, all save some little part thereof drawn out of the
Vatican library, the title whereof is, (...), of the holy table. The words
are: We do not rest and content our selves with the bread ministered unto us
here below, or yet in the cup, but lifting up the understanding of our
minds, we think by faith, that the Lamb of God taking away the sins of
the world lies in this Table, (...), sacrificed by the Priests without being
slain, etc. Where we observe agreeing with the doctrine going before, that
there is insinuated a certain secret opposition betwixt the holy table, and
the Altars of the law: of the Lamb which takes away the sins of the
world, and the Sacrifices of the law which were nothing but figures and
shadows of the Sacrifice which was there offered, to this which is but renewed
by being called to mind, and of the bodily presence and visible substance of
the one, to the eating and receiving of the other by faith. And this appears
more evidently by that which follows, which calls us clean back from all
thinking of a sacrifice to the receiving and communicating of a sacrament, that
is; That we truly and verily receiving his precious body and blood, believe
these things to be the infallible signs of our resurrection. And this is the
cause why we take not much, but a little, that so we may know, that it is not
to fill us full unto bodily nourishment, but to further and feed the work of
our sanctification. For if he had rested in the sacrifice, would that have
followed which he says: And that notwithstanding our being present at this
sacrifice, we have the resurrection and the life, etc. Athanas. orat. 3. cont.
Arrian.
Whereupon also Athanasius of the same time says: The oblation or sacrifice of
the Lord once offered did accomplish all things, and remains fast and sure
throughout all times. Aaron had his successors, but the Lord, sine transitione
and successione, without any succession or change from one to another holds
the priesthood for ever.

Saint Basil: Those which were wont to be consecrated of the seed of Aaron,
are excluded, Basil. in 1. c. Esa.
to the end, that there might come in their room a priest according to the
order of Melchisedec: and not the sacrificing priests of the Church of Rome.
There is no more any question (says he) of the continual sacrifice, neither
yet of these so often reiterated and renewed sacrifices, etc. For there is but
one sacrifice, that is, Christ, and the mortification of the Saints, which is
become famous and renowned for their confessing of him. There is but one
besprinkling and cleansing with water, and that is the washing of the new
birth: there is but one purgation for sin, that is, his blood, shed for the
salvation of the world. To what end (says the Lord) serves so many
sacrifices? he requires but one, rejecting all whatsoever else, that is, that
every man do reconcile and offer himself to God, appearing before him a
living sacrifice, by a reasonable serving of him, and offering unto God the
sacrifice of praise, etc. Again, Now in the end and latter age of the world,
one only sacrifice is approved, once offerred for an oblation for sin. For
the Lamb of God has taken away the sin of the world, offering himself an
oblation and sacrifice, of a smell of a sweet savor, etc. Idem in psalm. 115.
And in another place: I will therefore sacrifice my soul unto thy praise O
Lord, as it were upon some Altar: I will offer unto thee the sacrifice of
praise, which is more worth then an infinite number of others, etc.

Gregorius Nazianzenus: This great sacrifice, Gregor. Nazianz. in Pasch. orat.
2.
which in his first nature could not be sacrificed, is mingled with all the
sacrifices of the law: That same I say, which is the purgation not of one
part of the world, nor forsome certain time, but of the whole world, and for
ever. And thus we are admonished not to seek for any other: But (says he) we
offer unto God upon his celestial Altar, together with Angels the Sacrifice of
praise: let us pass through the first veil, and draw near unto the second:
let us sacrifice to God at all times. And he adds: For the chief and
principal point of wisdom is a good and honest life, purged and made clean
before God, even that God which is most pure, and requires no other sacrifice
at our hands, but this pureness which the scripture commonly calls a
contrite and broken heart, the sacrifice of praise, a new creature in Christ,
etc.

Eusebius Emissenus says: Eusebius. Emissen. de caen. Dom.
Seeing that our Lord was to convey up into the heaven, beyond the reach of
our pearcing sight, this his humane body, which he had taken upon him, it was
needful, that upon this day he should consecrate for us the Sacrament of his
body and of his blood, that so what had once been offered up for the price
of our redemption, might be honored in a mystery for ever, to the end, that
as redemption has his ordinary course for the salvation of men, without any
wearisomnesse: so also the everlasting oblation and perpetual sacrifice of
this redemption might live and continue fresh in our memory: and that this one
true and perfect sacrifice, that is to say Christ, might continually be
present in grace, which we must judge of by faith, and not by outward
appearance, by the inward affection, and not by the outward sight. Where we
are to note, that he says Sacrament, not Sacrifice; and that he opposes the
remembrance of the oblation, to the oblation it self: the powerful course and
continuance of redemption, to redemption it self once wrought, the presence of
grace to the real presence, and the body of Christ lifted up to heaven, to the
Sacrament of the same left remaining in the Supper.

Epiphanius: Epiphanius cont. Marcion. haere. 42. and 35.
Have you offered me sacrifice (says the Lord) forty years in the
wilderness? etc. To the end that they might learn, that God by the coming of
his Christ, has taken away all manner of use of sacrifices: and that in
respect of one sacrifice which has perfected and accomplished all the other
sacrifices that went before: The sacrifice and oblation is Christ, for Christ
our Passover has been slain, etc. Again, Melchisedec offered to Abraham
bread and wine, Christ having taken man's nature, offered the priesthood it
self unto the father, that so he might become our priest after the order of
Melchisedec, which has no succession: for he abides and continues for ever,
offering sacrifices and gifts for us. And first he offered himself to undo
and loosen the sacrifices of the old Testament: he becoming the oblation,
sacrifice, priest, and altar, etc. Not appointing any longer the successions of
this priesthood unto any tribe or stock. What then? It may be making them able
to succeed by the calling of priests. Nay rather he says: Giving them freely
to be saved, according to that righteousness which is by the holy Ghost. And
this is spoken generally for all Christians. Then let our adversaries note and
observe here by this place, how ill fauouredly they allege the sacrifice of
Melchisedec, the Paschall lamb, etc. to be accomplished and perfected in the
pretended sacrifice of the Supper, seeing that upon the cross of Christ, as
says Epiphanius, both these and all others going before are made perfect and
fulfilled.

Chrysostom: Christ is not crucified every day, for he has undergone but
one sacrificing, Chrysostom. aduers Iud. at 4. Idem in Ioha. hom. 17. et. ad Heb.
hom. 13.
but once only to be offered for our sins, but by that once he does
continually purge and cleanse us. Again, If Christ be perfect, then he never
sins and lives ever, wherefore then should he offer many sacrifices for
us? etc. There is but one sacrifice, one only has purged us: besides this,
there is nothing but fire and devouring hell. Wherefore the Apostle does
thoroughly view and behold the same on every side, always saying, one priest,
one sacrifice, least that any man thinking that there were more, might grow the
more secure and void of all suspicion of being deceived. And in another place;
In the heavens we have Sacrarium, a holy and consecrated place: in heaven we
have a priest; in heaven an oblation, where is also our sacrifice. Id^m hom. de
cruce and spirit. 3.
Let us then offer such sacrifices as may find place of receipt in this holy
and consecrated place: not any more sheep or oxen: these things are come to
an end: but our reasonable service. And what reasonable service? The things
that are offered by the soul, and according to the spirit, John. 4.
because that God is a spirit: and those that worship him, must worship him in
spirit and truth, etc. How far does this differ from the interpretation
which Bellarmine does give unto us upon this place? That is, spiritual
things, and such as savor nothing of the body; as, gentleness, patience,
temperance, mercifulness, etc. Thus thou see the sacrifices which are past
away and gone, as also the others succeeding them, and coming in their rooms,
then let us offer these. Those are of our goods, but these are of our virtues:
those are without us, but these are within us, etc. Again, Christ was the
sacrifice and the Priest, the offerer and oblation. The Altar, that was the
Cross, not under any roof, other then the whole cope of heaven, that so all
the putrefaction and infection of the air might be purged away. Behold here
the one only priest and propitiatory sacrifice of the Church. But the
particular and special Sacrifice of every Christian, as also Sacrificer, to
offer up the same sacrifice unto God, is every particular person in his place,
as he teaches us, saying: What is then thine Altar? surely thy spiritual
understanding. And what is thy spiritual sacrifice? All thy good works. And
what is thy Temple? A pure heart wherein God takes pleasure to dwell, etc.
What then? Idem in Mat. hom. 83. Hom. 26. in ep. ad Heb. hom. 17.
And says he nothing of the Eucharist in that place? Yes very excellently;
If Christ be not dead (says he) whereof should this sacrifice be a sign or
seal? Again: We offer but in remembrance of his death. And again, That
which God did long ago for the salvation of the Jews, in bringing of his
benefits to their remembrance by many feasts and solemn meetinges, the same
does he now, but more abundantly in us, by this kind of sacrifice stirring
us up to a continual thanksgiving for his benefits toward us. Where
briefly we have thus much to note, that there is not any sacrifice but one
that does really purge and cleanse us, that is, the blood of Christ: the
Eucharist, in as much as it is a sacrifice, is a pledge, a recording and a
remembrance. Hom. 7. ad Hebr.
Some object and allege against us these words: We offer the same Sacrifice
now a days that we offered then: for it wastes not in offering. Not an
other Sacrifice, as the high priest did, but the same. But let us listen a
while unto that which follows: Or rather (says he) we record and call to
mind this Sacrifice.

Cyrill handles this matter at large. Julian reproached the Christians, Cyril.
10. cont. Julian.
because they had no more Sacrifices: Nay (says he) we have far better then
yours; or then those of the law: For we offer unto God the spiritual
sacrifices of virtues, as Faith, Hope, Charity, etc. spiritual praises. And
to this purpose he alleges Saint Paul: Offer up your bodies unto God a
living sacrifice, etc. God (says he) has commanded the lamb but for a
figure of Christ; but for to show that this was a transitory sacrifice, he
commanded them to eat it in have: a great odds and difference in respect of
that which our adversaries themselves would infer: That the sacrifice of the
Paschall lamb must be daily and still continued in the real sacrifice of the
true lamb that is in the Mass. Idem in ep. ad Hebr. hom. 11.
In another place: Art thou ignorant, how that the whole priesthood is given
to the whole Church of God to all the faithful people? Give ear unto Saint
Peter, who speaking of the faithful says: you are a chosen generation, a
royal priesthood, etc. Thou have therefore the priesthood, because thou art
a priestly nation: and therefore also thou must offer unto God the sacrifice of
praise, the Sacrifice of prayers, the sacrifice of mercy, the sacrifice of
chastity, the srcrifice of righteousness, the sacrifice of holiness, etc.
Again, Our true high priest Jesus Christ is then as yet standing upright, Idem
in Leuit. l. 9.
and will fill his hands with small brayed incense. He pondereth and wayeth
what every Church under the Sun does offer, how well it bestows and
imployeth her perfume: how skillful she is in braying of the same, that is to
say, how every one of us does frame his actions, how we do spiritually
search and wade into the secreate deapthes and wholesome streams of the holy
scriptures. Where likewise he may seem to allude to the place of the prophet
Malachie, but in a far other sense then that of our adversaries. To be short,
he says: Christ is called a high Priest, sacrificing unto God, and besides
him, there is not any one to whom we do attribute either the name or the effect
of priesthood: for he was made the mediator betwixt God and men: he has
sacrificed for us, and not for himself, and that even his own body. All
which arguments are grounded upon the qualities requisite in a priest of the
new Testament, but such as men cannot attain unto. He calls the Eucharist
very many times (...), a sacrifice without blood; Idem in Ioban. l. 5. c. 7.
and ad Reginas de recta fide.
but in the same sense that the former, by comparing of it with them of the
law. Upon S. John, S. Paul (says he) to the Hebrews, would not take away the
second, nor the third remission of sins, but rather the secondoblation,
because that Christ has been offered once, and cannot be any more offered,
etc.

The Latin fathers did not understand it otherwise. Saint Ambrose says: In
Christ the oblation or sacrifice has been once offered, powerful and mighty
unto life eternal. Again, The Lord commanded the Angel to spare the people,
and to offer the sacrifice of David: For at that time there were sacrifices for
sins, the same are now the sacrifices of repentance. Ambros. in ep. ad Heb.
c. 10. Idem ad Theod. ep. 28. Idem in ep. ad Romans c 12. Idem ibid.
Again: The Elders did kill the sacrifice, to signify, that men because of
sin were subject to death: And now that men, by the gift of God are purified
and delivered from the second death, they must offer a living sacrifice, to the
end it may be unto them a sign of eternal life. For the case stands not
now, as when bodies were slain and sacrificed for bodies: now there is not any
more question of killing of bodies, but of the vices of the bodies. Again: Is
there not a celestial altar, our faith? whereupon we daily offer our prayers?
Let us draw near (says he in another place) with a true heart, and a fulness of
faith: let us draw near in faith, and in a spiritual service, from a sincere
heart: for in all these there is nothing visible, neither the priest, nor the
sacrifice, nor the altar, etc. In our spirits we receive spiritual things,
etc. Idem in institut. virgin. c. 2.
In another place: We sacrifice unto God the sacrifice of praise, whereupon the
Apostle says, I pray you before all things, to make prayers, supplications,
requests and thanksgiving, etc. Now this is one of the places from whence our
adversaries would gather their Mass, their propitiatory sacrifice: and see
how he expounds it of the sacrifice of praise. Idem epist. 28. and lib. de
fuga sent. c. 8.
Again, A simple prayer is a sacrifice: the good sacrifice, that is wisdom,
the good oblation, that is faith, and every other virtue, etc. And of all this
going before we conclude most evidently: that he acknowledged no sacrifice for
sin, save the blood of Christ once shed, nor any sacrifices amongst
Christians, but repentance, mortification, and calling upon the name of God in
faith, etc. But some will say unto us, he speaks now and then of the holy
Supper in the terms of a sacrifice. But in this case I could wish such to
hearken how he expounds himself: he speaks to the matter of the only
oblation of Christ, and says: What then? do not we offer every day? (for the
Supper was then administered ordinarily:) We offer (says he) but in making a
memorial of his death, and there is but one oblation, but one sacrifice, not
many. One and not many (says he) how? because that it has been once offered
in the most holy place, and this sacrifice is the pattern of that other, etc.
That which we do is in remembrance of that which has been done. For he says
unto us, do this in remembrance of me, etc. We offer not, as the Priest did
another sacrifice: but every day the same, or rather we sacrifice the
memorial of this sacrifice. Thus say we (says he) to day is the
resurrection of the Lord, that is to say, to day we call to mind the
resurrection of the Lord, etc.

And Saint Jerome understood as little as the rest in this point, namely, that
there should remain a service to be performed of Christians, Hieronim. in
Esa. c. 1.
which properly was called a sacrifice: Shall I eat (says the Lord) the
flesh of bulls? etc. Psalm ^^. After having rejected and cast away (says
he) the ceremonies of the old law, he passes to the purity of the Gospel:
and shows what he desires in stead of them: Offer unto me the sacrifice of
praise, Idem in psalm. 26.
etc. Again, I will offer in his Tabernacle the sacrifice of joy and
gladness, that is to say, of full and perfect joy: that is to say, I will
joyfully declare, that he did vnder-go a base and low estate for us, that is
to say, that he did humble himself to advance and exalt us: For God takes
pleasure in such sacrifices of rejoicing and joyful declaring of their
gladness: for this is the sacrifice of preaching. And in another place: Idem
in psalm. 49. and 50.
The old sacrifices are past, he requires his sacrifice in good works and
manners, a fat burnt offering: That is, that God may be praised by man whom he
has created, whom he has redeemed, and to whom he has promised the
kingdom of heaven. Again, By this place the Jews do know and understand,
that their sacrifices are ceased. And what then shall men have hereafter to
offer? hearken to that which he adds: The humbled heart and the contrite
heart is a sacrifice unto the Lord, etc. Idem. ad Damas.
Yea but he says in another place: Our Savior is the calfe, of whose flesh
we are daily fed, and with whose blood we all have our thirst quenched. This
banquet is solemnized every day; every day the father receives his son;
every day Christ is slain and sacrificed. This is a large speech, but he
adds yet one word more: Immolatur credentibus, out of question not
sacrificed by the Priest, but sacrificed (says he) by the faithful. In so
much, as this sacrifice is daily fresh, always present, and in Gods sight,
daily applied, apprehended and taken hold upon with great efficacy of the
faithful: as being such, Idem in Psalm. 97. August quest. euangel. l. 1.
as conceive and find their life to lie and consist in his death; and the
appeasing of Gods wrath for their sins to rest in his blood. This is it
which he says in a word elsewhere: Every day Christ is crucified unto us.
S. Augustine yet more distinctly: Christ is then properly slain for any one,
when he believes him to be slain for his sins.

Saint Augustine far exceeds and surpasses all: This true God and high
priest, Idem de fide ad Petrum Diacon. c. 2.
(says he) which has once entered for us into the sanctuary, not with the
blood of goats, but with his own blood, etc. Even this is he, who in
himself alone has accomplished all that which he knew to be needful for the
work of our redemption: himself being both the Priest and the sacrifice:
himself being both God, and the Temple: Per quem. Quo. In quo. Idem de Trinit.
l. 4. c. 41. and 14.
the Priest by whom we are reconciled: the Temple, in which we are
reconciled; God, to whom we are reconciled: and notwithstanding the alone
priest, sacrifice, and Temple, and all this God, in the form and shape of a
servant. Again, Christ by his death, which is the only true sacrifice offered
for us, has purged, abolished, and utterly quenched the heat of whatsoever
sin that was in us, whereby the principalities and powers had power to seize
upon us by due desert, and to hold us, that so they might take vengeance on us
for the same, and by this release has called us: us I say predestined unto a
new life, he has called us, Nos praedestinatos vocauit, vocatos iustificat
it, iustificatos glorificauit.
he has justified us, he has sanctified us, he has glorified us, etc. And
how that to the end it may be so, in every sacrifice there are four things
to be considered: To whom it is to be offered, by whom, what, and wherefore:
He himself the only and true mediator, reconciling us to God by the sacrifice
of peace, continues and abides one with him, to whom he offered, has
performed that in himself alone, which was to be accomplished for them for
whom he offered; he alone was both the party that offered, and that which he
offered. Again, Where there is a sacrifice, there is an abolishment of sins,
interemptio peccatorum: there also is wrought re conciliation with God: the
altar of this sacrifice is very new, even the height of the Cross (alluding
ab Altari ad altitudinem, from the Altar to the height) himself was the
sacrifice and the Priest, and the cross was his Altar, etc. What then? Idem in
psalm. 94.
does there remain no more sacrifices for Christians? Offer (says the
Psalmist) unto God the sacrifice of praise: the old sacrifices are changed, God
requires now of his servants the sacrifice of praise. We set a sacrifice upon
the altar when we praise God: and if thou seek the Priest, he is higher then
the heavens, making intercession for thee, having first died the death here
upon earth for thee. Have I any sacrifice to offer (says he elsewhere?) Idem
de ciuit. Dei. l. 10. c. 4. and 6.
I will return home into my self, there I shall find what to slay and
sacrifice: there I cannot fail to find cause, to offer the sacrifice of
praise. The man dedicate and consecrate to the name of God, dying in the world
to live unto God is a true sacrifice. The whole Church, that ransomed city,
that congregation and society of the Saints is an universal sacrifice, which
is offered unto God: which is offered unto him by this great Priest, Idem de
Temp.
which offered himself in his passion for us, to the end that we might be the
body to so glorious a head, etc. But rather (says he) there are two Altars
in us, the body, and the heart, and God requires of us a double sacrifice,
that we should have our bodies chaste, and our hearts pure, etc. What then?
The holy Supper, the Eucharist, is not it a sacrifice unto him? yes, but
properly two manner of ways: The one, Idem de ciuit. Dei. l. 10. c. 6.
in as much as this is a consecrate and hallowed action, by the which
Christians are linked and knit together according to the definition which he
gives of a Sacrifice, saying: Every work performed to the end that we may
cleave unto God in a holy fellowship, and referred to him that is our chief
felicity, is a true sacrifice. The other in as much as therein is renewed the
remembrance of the death of Christ, Idem contr. aduers. leg. and prophet. l. 1.
c. 18.
and a solemn thanksgiving for the benefits proceeding from the same. And
therefore he says: The sacrifice of praise shall honor me, Psalm. 50. But
where is this sacrifice better set forth then in thanksgiving? And for what do
we rather give thanks then for the grace and favor which we have received and
is purchased for us by Jesus Christ? Idem aduers. Faustum. l. 20. c. 21.
which the faithful practice in the sacrifice of the Church, etc. Again: The
sacrifice of praise shall glorify me. How? Before the coming of Christ, the
flesh and blood of this sacrifice was promised by the sacrifices of
resemblance: In the passion of Christ, they are given in truth after his
ascension, Idem de fide ad Petrum. c. 19.
they are celebrated by the Sacrament of the remembering of him. Again, The
only word of God being made flesh, has offered himself to God for us in
sacrifice, and for a smell of a sweet savor. Lo here the real sacrifice of
the Church: To whom (says he) with the father and the holy Ghost, the whole
universal Church cease not to offer in faith and charity, the sacrifice of
bread and wine. For the figure of the flesh of Christ, which he was to offer
for us, was shadowed out in the carnal sacrifices: but in this sacrifice,
thanksgiving, Idem ep. 23.
and the renewing of the remembrance of the flesh of Christ, which was offered
for our sins. And in another place there is an objection made: Jesus Christ
has he not been once offered in himself? and notwithstanding, behold how
that in the sacrifice he is daily, not only in the days of the celebration of
the feast of the Passover, but upon all other days sacrificed and offered up
by the people. Note how it is said, by the people, and not by God, as S. Jerome
said before, by the faithful. It is answered: And yet (says he) he lies not
which when he is asked, shall answer, that he is truly sacrificed: for if the
sacraments had not any resemblance with the things whereof they are sacraments,
they should not be sacraments at all, etc. So (says he) let us say: we
celebrate the feast of the Passover to morrow, to day the Lord rose again,
etc. And no man finds fault with our sayings, although these things were
ended many years since, seeing that by the courses of times, we come again,
and again to the like days and seasons, etc. But he acknowledges but one
real sacrificing or offering up of him: for he says elsewhere: That which
David offered to God, to the end that it might please him to spare the people,
was a shadow of that which was to come, by which it was signified, that by one
sacrifice, of which that was but a figure, the lives of the people should
spirituallie be spared. And that one is Jesus Christ, Idem de ciuit. Dei. l.
10. c. 5.
who was offered up and given for our sins, and is risen again for our
justification: whereupon also the Apostle says unto us: Pascha nostrum
immolatus est Christus: Christ our true Passover was slain and sacrificed,
etc. And this is that which he says elsewhere in one word: That which every
man calls a sacrifice, that same is the sign of the true sacrifice.

Now all of them use these words, Altars, Sacrifices, and these verbes to
Offer, to Sacrifice, for the considerations hereafter set down: for these
manners of speaking did run very smoothly and pleasantly amongst
Christians in those days, coming either newly from amongst the Jews or else
the Gentiles, whose principal service consisted in sacrifices, and yet
notwithstanding, they put thereunto continually, if we give good heed
thereto, such corrections as are necessary. Whereby we may judge, if they had
but a little foreseen, in what diverse sorts they are now abused, the
Sacrament being drawn by little and little to a Sacrifice: and then the word
Sacrifice drawn from his Metaphorical sense, to a simple and proper sense,
and from a sacrifice of thanksgiving, to a sacrifice propitiatory, what
restrainte and limits they would have closed them in withal.

CHAP. V. How and by what Degrees the sacrament of the holy Supper was turned
into a propitiatory sacrifice.
SOme there are which ask how this did happen unto the Church? Truly not all
at once. For we see in every days success, that when Sun is set, there is
a twilight, before that darkness it self do come to hide and cover all
things. So after that those great lights of the church, which took their
brightness from the true light of the Gospel, had run their course, yet there
remained some glimses of that their brightness a long time after,
notwithstanding that they were smothered and stifled with the palpable fogs of
blind superstition, and although they were violently forced by a contrary
se^ce, to do the thing they were never ordained for. And this we see in Beda,
Beda in Leui. c. 1.
the grand Disciple of S. Augustine, who says: Christ is offered for us, both
the Priest and Sacrifice together, and has eaten and destroyed our sins,
inasmuch as he is our Priest, according to the order of Melchisedech: and in
like manner the true Ministers of the Church, do eat the sins of the people,
by attributing unto them the remission of their sins in the Church, wherein
sins are forgiven. If he had been of the same opinion with our adversaries,
he should have concluded: And therefore the true Priests do eat the sins
of the people, when they say the Mass for them, etc. Again, We are commanded
to celebrate the feast of the Passover every day: Our adversaries would say
here: To say the Mass every day. But he, Idem in Exodus
that is as much as to say, Let us daily go from evil to good, and from good
to better, and let us consecrate our first borne unto God, even our good
works, seeing he has overcome the Devils for our sakes. Again, The high
Priest entered into the forepart of the Tabernacle every day, for to sacrifice.
And this is to put us in mind to offer daily unto God, the sacrifices of
praise of humility, and of a contrite spirit, etc. Thus turning even the
propitiatory Sacrifices of the law, into the Sacrifices of praise, those which
were offered by the hand and ministry of the Priest, to those which were
offered by every Christian. Albinus says the same, as also Charles the
great. And as for the Sacrament of the Eucharist: The sacrament of the body
and blood of Jesus Christ (says Charles the great) was given us, thereby to
renew the memory of his passion and our salvation. And this was about the year
eight hundred.

Bertram in the time of Charles the bald, about the year 900. Bertram. de
corpore and san^uine Domini Heb. 7.
Our Lord has done this at once, even in offering up himself, (that is to
say, sacrificing himself for us:) For he was once offered for the sins of
the people; and this oblation notwithstanding is daily celebrated by the
faithful, but in a mystery; to the end, that what our Lord Jesus has
accomplished in offering himself once, might be handled every day by the
celebrating of the mysteries, of the renewing of the memory of his passion.
Where it is to be noted, how he opposes the mystical receiving to the real
receiving: and the daily renewing of the remembrance, to the once offering of
the sacrifice. Again, He has (says he) left us an example, which is daily
offered by the faithful, in the mystery of his body and of his blood:
namely, that whosoever will draw near unto him, may know, that he must have
part in his sufferinges, the image and representation whereof is exhibited in
the holy mysteries: that is to say, in the breaking of bread, the renewing of
the memory of his body broken, in the pouring out of the wine, the shedding
of his blood for us.

Haimo says: To speak morally, Haimo in c. 5 Ose. and in c. 2 Abac. and
Malach. 1.
the sacrifices of the Lord are the praises uttered by the belieuers, the
penance of sinners, the tears of the humble suitors; whereof it is written: The
sacrifice of God is a contrite spirit, etc. Again, Prayer is a special
sacrifice to be offered to God: and so is alms also, etc. Remig in Psalm. 55.


Remigius: If we will sacrifice to God, let us not seek out of our selves for
that which we are about to offer unto him: we have in our selves the incense
of praise, and the sacrifice of faith: only let all that which we offer be
kindled, made the more fervent and coupled with charity. Again, Idem in Psalm.
95.
There are not any sacrifices that avail without faith: for there is no place
for a true sacrifice out of the Church, etc. These men howbeit great and
renowned for knowledge at this time, do call the sacrament of the holy supper,
as also the Mass, such as it was then celebrated, a sacrifice: but doubtless
with the same mind, and in the same sense that Rabanus one of the same time
with them did use it, Rabanus de Institu. Cleric. l. 1. c. 32.
Sacrificium (says he) quasisacrum factum: a sacrifice, as if a man would
say, a holy and consecrate work, or action which is consecrated by a
mystical prayer in the remembrance of the passion and suffering of our Lord,
etc. Which self same thing Paschasius calls otherwise: The passion of Christ
in a mystery, Pasc. de corp. and Sang. Domini. Theophil. in Johan. c. 8.
the calling to mind of the passion of the Lord on the Altar, etc.

Theophilact about the year 1000. The medicines which are effectual and
forcible do heal even at the first time being administered: but those which
need to be taken again and again, do argue their weakness sufficiently,
even by that only note: even so it fares betwixt the Legal sacrifices, and
the sacrifices of Christ. But here rises a question, whether that we also do
offer sacrifices and oblations without shedding of blood? unto which we
answer affirmatiuelie, but it is in that we renew the memory of the death
of the Lord: and yet in the mean time it is but one sacrifice not many,
because is has been offered but only once: we offer then daily himself,
or rather the remembrance of this oblation, by which he did offer himself,
etc. In place else where, he gives us these general rules: Where there is
remission of sins, there needs not any more sacrifices: but Christ has
offered a sacrifice, serving and standing sufficient for ever: and therefore
we have no need of any other second sacrifice, etc.

Anselmus in like manner: Ansel. in Ep. ad. Heb. c. 10
Howbeit we offer sacrifices every day, yet it is no other then the recording
and renewing of the memory of the death of Christ, and thereby we offer but one
sacrifice, not many, for he was only once offered, etc. Again, All that we
do is but the renewing of the remembrance of his death. Again, Our Lordsaide,
Take, eat, and sacrifice, offer unto God. And S. Paul to the same end: That
the Saints were perfected by one only oblation. And this has come to pass
within this thousand years: so hard and difficult a thing it is, to bring the
learned to speak the language of the Mass, though the abuse and mischief be
already brought in. And indeed we shall see hereafter, that it does not
speak it, it self.

But now since the year five hundred until this time, it has ouerrunne great
and large Dominions, and yet by certain degrees, and by the concurring of
diverse causes. During the fervent and devout zeal of the Christian Church,
the holy supper was celebrated every Lords day, Carol. Mag. l, 7. c. 138.182
167.
yea in some Churches every day, and the number of Communicantes was
ordinarily very great: whereby we have seen herefofore, that in populous
Churches and congregations, there have been distributed at one time, diverse
great loaves, and diverse great cups of wine. This zeal together with the
time, grew lukewarm. whereupon we see that S. Ambrose and S. Chrysostom are
greatly grieved to see: That it was their duty to attend at the Lords Table,
and that no man hasted to come thereto, etc. Insomuch also as that exhortations
many and diverse being used to draw the people thereunto, but profiting
nothing, there were diverse Canons made to bind and enforce the people
thereunto, as also civil laws, Let all the faithful communicate and stay
the Mass, without any more bidding, L. 2. c. 45.
yea, at the least, let them not fail to communicate on the Lords day, etc.
But whether it were the obstinacy or carelesnes of the Pastors, or both, that
were the cause, these Canons profited little. In the end there was a law
made: That such Lay people as did not communicate at the least every feast of
the Nativity, Easter, Whitsontide, Add. 3.38.
should be held for infidels: and ratified afterward in the Acts and Statutes
set forth by Charles the great: thus the Table of the Supper stood solitary,
and as a rejected and forlorn thing for the most part, at least in respect of
the Laity. The ecclesiastical persons continued their communicating for some
time, and so there still remained a certain form of Communion or Eucharist.
But shortly after loosenes laid hold upon them also, as it had done before
of others. Whereupon we see that the Church is constrained to make Canons; That
at the least three or four should always communicate with the Priests: The
printes whereof are as yet in the Abbye of Clugny, where the Deacon and
Subdeacon do receive the Communion, as yet unto this day, together with the
Priests. But afterward these three were shufled up into one, this one was
he, that rung the bell, whom they called the Sexten. Camp nariu^.
And this coldness did still so increase, that Charles the great is constrained
to make a law, L. 5. c. 93. and l. 6. c. 118. Add. 2. c 7.
by which the Priest after he has consecrated, is bound to communicate,
because that even he himself did oftentimes abstain: and there are many
old Canons to that purpose. Thus the use of the Communion was lost by degrees,
this Communion (I say) wherein Christians were admonished, and put in mind of
practicing true charity, by the substance of the bread which consisted of
many corns, wrought up into one loaf; seeing thy be many members of one
body, living under one head, even Jesus Christ our Lord, and so
proportionablie, the sacraments themselves fell into a consumption, as
namely, the bread from many loaves to one, and from a great one to a little
one, no bigger then would serve being divided, only for three persons: and in
the end as we now see, to bread no bigger then a penie. And the wine
consequently, so as it might fit the other, from great vessels unto little
pots, such as serve at the Mass, from many cups to one, from a great one to a
little one. And it is notwithstanding to be noted, that this abuse had his
abode only in the Church of Rome; all other Churches, as those amongst the
Abissines, Armenians, Syrians, Grecians, Muscouites, etc. having retained, and
retayning the Communion, as yet unto this day. Now it fell out also that the
people no longer communicating in the holy supper, became negligent in other
parts of their accustomed service, and particularly, in that of bringing of
offeringes, which consisted according to the Canons in bread and wine, from
which was taken what was necessary to be employed in the Communion: for those
offerings ceasing it was a cause that the Communion also ceased. Carol. l.
1.5.94. and 152.
And indeed we see that this law is oftentimes renewed by Charles the Great,
namely, That the people should be warned to communicate, and bring their
offeringes every Lords day. For that the one did cease to be, because of
the other, and thereupon also the requesting of the one was with the more
honesty, by reason of the other. Wherefore to cherish them up both in
devotion, as also in liberality, they were given to understand, that the Mass
did not only benefit and serve them, by their communicating in the Sacrament
in it, but that the principal point of comfort unto them thereby, was yet
behind; namely, the sacrifice, in the merit whereof they had part, inasmuch
only as that they were present thereat: provided evermore, that they for
their parts brought their sacrifices, that is to say, their offeringes with
them. There was also a continued course of offering unto them the consecrated
bread, which they called (...), as if any man would say, one gift for an
other, the better to entertain their contentation, and this they distributed
after it was consecrated by a prayer, whereas before it had been given them
for common bread. In the laws of Charles the great, it is enjoined; That they
should make the people to understand, how many ways the Mass does profit
them, as well in respect of themselves, as of their friends either dead or
living: and this they call Vim Missae, the force and efficacy of the Mass,
and together therewithal to make them the better to understand the efficacy
of Memento; wherein (says he) prayer is made for the Souls, as well of them
which offer, as of those, which belong unto them: assuredly, because that
otherwise the Mass would be forsaken and cast off. Where it is likewise
further to be noted, that it was not then said in the Canon: For whom we
offer unto thee, but which offer unto thee: the Priests having afterward taken
to themselves this prerogative of offering, to the debarring and shutting out
of all others, for having any dealing in the same, whereas it was the work of
the people at the first properly which did offer. From that time forward
also, the office of the Priest in the Latin Church was brought to have his
Mass book much altered and corrected, that so he might sing the Mass. And
thereupon also was the bread of the Sacrament called singing bread: and the
exercise of a Christian restrained to the hearing only of the Mass, or else,
as they say in Italy, to the seeing of it: things unheard of, and mere
strangers in the Primitive Church, a long time after Gregory the first,
although that a great part of the abuses may be attributed unto him, inasmuch
as he established the new service, framed and set forth by one named
Scholasticus, who applied the old service to a new use, the old prayers to the
abuses and corruption of the time.

Now for the fortifying of this pretended sacrifice, many things do
concur. The word Sacrifice used in the Church, after the manner of the old
law, to signify the gifts which were offered to God by the people, as it
has been proved heretofore, for these offeringes were commonly called
oblations and sacrifices, and this is confirmed by Pope Gelasius his ordinance:
That the sacrifices which shall be offered by the people at the Mass, shall be
distributed into four parts, that is, for the Bishop, for the Clergy, for
the poor, and for the maintaining of the Church. Charles the Great calls
them Oblations. These offeringes were after the Jewish manner, consecrated by
one, or more prayers, which as yet are continued to be read in diverse
Lithurgies, and in the Romish Mass also, which (as we have seen) are wrested
by a most pernicious paralogisme, namely, from the sacrifice, which was given
for a name to those offeringes that were offered unto God, to their pretended
sacrifice, which the Priest consecrateth Ab oblatis inquam ad oblatam: and by
consequent, from a sacrifice of fruits offered to God by the people, to the
sacrifice of the Son of God our Lord, whom the Priest presumes to sacrifice
unto him upon this Altar. We need not any other proof of this matter, then
the prayers used in the Mass: We pray thee (says the Canon) that thou will
accept of and bless these gifts, these oblations and holy sacrifices. Again,
We recommend unto thee, those who offer them unto thee, or (as it is read at
this day) For whom we offer unto thee, this sacrifice of praise. Again, That
thou would vouchsafe to regard and look down upon them with a mild and
merciful countenance, and accept of the^, as thou vouchsafedst to accept of
the offerings of just Abell, thy chosen child, etc. Again, Command the^ to be
laid upon thine holy Altar, by the hands of thine Angel. For in their
conscience, can all these prayers be conceived by any Christian, for the
sacrifice of our Lord Jesus Christ, which their Priests pretend to offer? For
in them we have sacrifices, always in the plural number, where it is never
qualified or entitled by any other name, then the sacrifice of praise, where
God should be prayed unto, to vouchsafe to look down upon his well-beloved
Son with a favorable eye; being one with him, and he in whom he is well
pleased? That he would vouchsafe to accept of him, as of the offeringes of
just Abell; of him, in whom alone all the Fathers have been accepted: without
whose righteousness, the righteousness of Abell should be pollution and filthy
uncleanness: to command that he should be laid upon the Altar by the hands
of an Angel, being the eternal sacrifice, the everlasting oblation, and who
found (as Job says,) uncleanness in the very Angels. And indeed this is
manifestly appearing in the Lithurgie, Liturg. Clem.
which they attribute unto Clement, wherein there is an express prayer, Pro
dono oblato, for the oblation offered: but in these terms, That it would
please our good God to receive it upon his Altar, by the intercession of his
Christ, for a smell of a sweet savor, etc. In other Greek Lithurgies also,
whose desert we have heretofore examined, wherein there are clear and evident
prayers, (...), that is, for the oblations offered and brought; framed like
unto those above, where they are called a spiritual sacrifice of praise,
offered without blood-shedde, etc.

The name of Sacrifice now shufled and closely conveyed into the Christian
Church, which at the first received the same from the Jews, helped it not a
little to pass from the action of thanksgiving, to a propitiatory sacrifice;
and from an action of remembrance, to a real offering and oblation, being
joined with that ignorance, which reigned after barbarism in those ages: as
also with that, which was ordinary amongst the people, and which in stead of
being dispelled, and driven away by the bright light of the Bishops, was on
the contrary more ouercast and darkened. For it is openly acknowledged and
confessed, as a thing most plain and apparent in the sight of such as know
any thing in history, that the Bishops of that time, besides the public
and ordinary ignorance, were altogether given to the minding of worldly
matters, which the laws of Charlemaine by name do confirm and prove unto us:
Let them abstain from worldly affairs, from the Court, from the wars, from
hunting, hawking, plays, gaming, etc. And hereto you may also add the
corruption of speeches, which was in those times by the mixture of many nations
together: for of vulgar ones, they became mere barbarous, and of such as were
familiarlie spoken, such as were not understood: a great aid, opportunity and
advantage for Satan to sow his tares: for who would not otherwise have
rejected this realitie of the sacrifice, when in every corner of the field,
there was heard in their service, Sursum Corda, (...), lift up your hearts on
hie: and when their current speech and common talk was but of one Altar, and
one celestial sacrifice: when in their entrance into the celebration of the
sacrament, it was said unto the people: Show ye forth the death of the Son of
man, and confess his resurrection, until his coming?

But there were two doctrines especially, which springing up in those ages,
Transubstantiation and Purgatory concuning and conspiring together, establish
this sacrifice.
and prospering and growing together at that time, and that by equal degrees,
did advance and set aloft this pretended sacrifice. The one,
Transubstantiation: for after such time as it was taught that the bread and the
wine were changed: that they were reallie the body and blood of our Lord; then
what honor was too great to give unto this sacrifice? Who can then doubt that
it should be propitiatory for the sins of all that were living? this
sacrifice offered in the Mass, being the same in flesh and blood, which was
hanged upon the Cross, for the sins of the world? The other was that of
Purgatory: for if we have (said they) both our friends departing and passing
out of this world, to abide the scorching flames of Purgatory, and that our
own sins also must be purged there, then let us provide a remedy, let us
go to this Mass, which is so sovereign and full of salvation, let us lay
good foundations, and power out largely for our selves and our parents, let
us leave grounds and goods with charge of having the same said after us. And
hereto belong the laws above mentioned to be made in the time of Charles the
Great, and then every day things grew from ill to worse.

The ignorance then of the age, the coldness of the people in devotion, the
covetousness of the Priests, the carelesnes of the Bishops, and the
barbarousnes of the speech of men, begot, fostered and maintained this abuse in
the Church: which having once taken root and grown up to strength, could
not be beaten down again but by the spirit of God, which thing also many
men of good spirits, did perceive very well. Arnoldus de villa noua, one of
the great men of that time, About the year 1200.
held in his positions; That the sacrifice of the Mass, was a manifest abuse,
and a plain starting aside from the pure doctrine of Christ. The Waldenses and
Albigenses in France; That Masses whether they were for the living, or for the
dead, were directly against the institution of the Lord. And these resistances
and contradictions did so assault the maintainers of this abuse, as that all
Christendom was in an uproar, and not without fruit: for the spreading of
them throughout all the nations of the west Church, proved a good seed sown by
God, to cause the truth to spring up there again in his time: but what shall
we say, if their greatest and grauest Doctors carried away notwithstanding
with the stream, do likewise speak against their doctrine?

Peter Lumbard says, the Master of the sentences, Distinct. 12. l. 4. De
Consec. D. 2. Can.
handles this question about the year 1150. saying: It is demanded of some,
if that which the Priest does, be properly called a sacrifice and oblation,
and if Christ be sacrificed every day, or whether he was only once offered?
Whereunto this short answer may be shaped: That that which is consecrated and
offered by the Priest, is called a sacrifice and oblation, because it is the
renewing of the memory and representation of the true sacrifice, and of the
holy oblation made upon the Altar of the Cross. And this he proves by many
places out of S. Augustine, and of S. Ambrose, etc. Note here, how well he
agreede with the Council of Trent, which pronounces, If any man say, that the
very and proper body of Christ is not offered in the Mass, let him be
accursed.

The Schoolmen which came after him, have been so bold as to rob the Cross
of Christ, to hang the Jewels, even the power thereof about the neck of their
Mass, so that sometimes they break out into these speeches: That the body of
our Lord was offered for original sin, but that he is continually offered
by them upon the Altar for actual sins. A cursed blasphemy, by which the
Cross of Christ is made of none effect, by which there is less attributed
unto it, then unto the Table of their Altar: directly also against the
express Scripture, which says, comparing the fall of Adam with the benefit
of Christ his death; That the fault was through one offense unto condemnation,
but the gift is of many offenses unto justification. Again, after he had
spoken of all manner of sinners: And such (says S. Paul) were you, but you
have been washed, you have been sanctified, but you have been justified by
the name of Jesus Christ, Romans 5. 1. John 3.8.
etc. And to be brief, That the Son of God has appeared, to destroy the
works of the Devil, etc. But so the case stands as that Thomas their chief
Champio^, Thom. in Ep. ad Heb. 6.
does again in an other place agree with himself, saying; Christ was wounded
for our iniquities, Esa 53. and that not oftentimes, but only once, 1. Pet. 3
Christ has died once for our sins, and his only oblation suffices to dry
up the fountain of the sins of all mankind. Idem in su^ma part. 3. q. 83.
And as concerning the sacrament: It is but the representation (says he) of
the passion of our Lord: for S. Augustine says: as often as we celebrate the
Passover, is Christ slain every time? yea rather this is but a yearly
renewing of the memory of that which was done otherwise, thereby setting before
us such notable and famous monumentes thereof, as if by them we were brought
to the very beholding of his hanging upon the Cross. Idem part. 13.3. q. 73.
art. 6.
And elsewhere; It behooved that evermore there should remain some
representation of the passion of our Lord: In the old Testament, this
principal sacrament was the Paschall Lamb: Whereupon the Apostle says:
Christ our Paschall Lamb was offered. And in place thereof has succeeded in
the new Testament the Eucharist, which is a memorial of his passion past and
suffered, as the other was a prefigurer and foreshewer of his passion to come.

Petrus Alphonsus at the same time, Petr. Alph. l. 2. Ep.
did not acknowledge either the Eucharist, or the Mass, for any other thing
then a sacrifice of praise: and this was at that time one of the questions
disputed by the Albigenses, and Petrus Brutis, who was burnt alive at Tholosa,
where he taught publikelie, that it was not propitiatory. All these sacrifices
(says he) which were offered under the law, were nothing but signs of this
great sacrifice, Idem in Dialog. tit. 12.
which was to destroy sin. But since the coming of Christ, we use not any
other sacrifice, but that of bread and wine, which he has ordained, and is
like unto that which. Moses in the law called (...) a sacrifice of praise, etc.
For therein we praise God for the benefit which he has bestowed upon us,
saving us by his only Son, etc.

Alexander Hales holds many assertions, that cannot agree with the Mass
saying: Jesus Christ has offered a double sacrifice, a spiritual and
corporal: the spiritual, that is, a sacrifice of devotion, and love toward
mankind, which he has offered in spirit: the Corporal, the sacrifice of the
death, which he underwent upon the Cross, which is represented in the
sacrament. Mark (represented) The spiritual prefigured by the incense and
perfume, which was made upon the inner Altar: the corporal, which he offered
in his flesh, two ways, that is to say, sensibly upon the Cross, and
insensibly upon the Altar: (observe and mark again insensibly,) That sensible
sort being shadowed out by the sacrifiees of beasts, but the insensible by the
sacrificing of things that are incensible, as fruits, bread, and wine, both
the one and the other upon the utter Altar. The one of them to speak as he
speaks, propitiatory: for such were the sacrifices wherein beasts were
offered, with the shedding of their blood for sin, figuring out that
sacrifice offered by Jesus Christ: the other Eucharisticall only: for such
properly were those of fruits, and such like things. Again: The sacrifices
of the law were signs both of the true sacrifice of Christ, Circumferimus.
as also of the spiritual sacrifices, which we shall have to offer unto God:
That for the purging away of all our sins, as well original as actual: and
these to have relation to the mortification of our flesh, inasmuch as we carry
about with us Jesus Christ in our bodies, to the end that his life may be
manifested in us.

Lyranus handles the matter more clearelie: Lyranus in ep. ad Heb. c. 10.
That which cleanses and wipeth away sin, must needs be heavenly and
spiritual: and that which is such, has perpetual efficacy, and by
consequent ought not, neither indeed can be reiterated: and this that we say
of the oblation of Christ, is because of the Godhead, being united and
conjoined with the manhood: for it being once offered ought not to be
reiterated, and yet is sufficient to deface and blot out all the sins that are
already, or hereafter to be committed. You will say, and yet behold the
sacrament of the Altar is every day offered up in the church, etc. But the
answer hereto is, that this is no reiterating of the sacrifice, but an
ordinary remembering and calling to mind, of the only sacrifice, offered upon
the Cross, whereupon it is said in Mat. 26. Do this in remembrance of me, etc.

Now many such good people enflamed with a true zeal, had stayed the course
of this mischievous monster: but their own infirmity and weakness did
incumber and hinder them: tyranous rule and government astonished them, and the
multitude carried them away. For on the contrary, to this error once so far
admitted of the multitude, there is added an other heap of more then good
measure: Gab. Biel. lect. 26.
That it is clean an other thing to be present at the Mass, then to
communicate in the holy supper: That the Mass, ex opere operato, by the work
wrought, that is to say, by being only present, without receiving any thing,
or yet bringing any good motion thereunto, does apply unto every such person
present all the merits of Christ. Who could not now love the Mass better then
the holy supper, which requires a serious examination and trial of the
conscience, that offers life, but represents to the unworthy receiver the
dreadful horror of tormenting hell? Again, That the Mass has a most
special, a most great and an indefferent or middle power and efficacy: a most
special in respect of the Priest, seeing that by it he meriteth eternal
life: a most general in respect of the Church, and all the members thereof,
without any exception: and a mean or middle, in respect of him or them that
cause the same to be said, etc. Of the sacrament of the holy supper, the
institution of the Son of God, of all the sacraments together, yea or of the
very death of Jesus Christ: is there any one of them, that has written so
high terms of commendation? But seeing that it has such efficacy and virtue
in it, to what end is it so often reiterated, or multiplied so many ways,
seeing that the often administering and taking of a medicine, as they say
themselves, is a mark and note of the weakness of the same? But this question
is not yet thoroughly decided amongst them, as those that have too eager a
stomach to loose their fat morsels. They dare not say, that it is for any
want of sufficiency in the sacrifice: neither will they say, that the virtue
and efficacy thereof may be so far stretched and extended, as the
sufficiency thereof would bear. Some say that none but Jesus Christ does
know, how far it concerns every man: Others that he bestows the power
and virtue of the Mass, according to the determination and application of the
Priest that sacrifices it. Gab. Biel. lect. 26.
And thereuppon Gabriel Biel is set in a chafe, saying: I pray you, such as
waver in this sort, and do not so much as give, but sell such uncertainties
in the Church, and that in so serious and weighty a matter, can we otherwise
call them, then most pernicious and dangerous Impostors and deceivers?

Now as all truth does agree and hang together, That the doctrine of the Mass
is against it self.
so we may see in this doctrine the figure of falshoode, and broad stamp of a
shameful lie, which (as his nature is) is given to destroy and overthrow it
self. Sometimes they say, that Christ has offered his body unto God in the
supper, for the Apostles, and that in the Mass, the promises of the new
Testament, even those of the remission of sins, are applied, and that thereby
it becomes propitiatory; yea, ex opere operato. Other sometimes they say,
that this sacrifice does not work sufficiently and immediately, Bellarm. l.
2. de Missa. c. 4.2. Idem l. 1. c. 2.
and that it is not properly ordained of God, the instrument to justify, as
Baptism, and Absolution are: but that it serves only to obtain the gift
of penance, by which the sinner would draw near unto the sacrament, and be
justified by it. Again, sometime, that the Mass carries with it the
remission of sins, in as much as Christ has sacrificed his body and his blood
for the remission of the sins of his Apostles, and that in the same hour,
wherein he celebrated the supper with them, and commanded them to continue
the same, and therefore it is propitiatory, yea, says Caietanus, infinitely
meritorious and satisfactorie. Sometimes they conclude, that to take it well
and rightly, Idem l. 2 de Misla. c. 2. and 4.
it is not so, but only impetratorie; for, say they, Christ a mortal man,
might merit and satisfy, and this is the cause why his sacrifice is truly
propitiatory, as well as meritorious and satisfactorie; but Christ immortal,
cannot any more merit or satisfy: so neither can his sacrifice be
meritorious nor satisfactorie, but only is called so, inasmuch as he
obtains remission for us, whether it be of the punishment or of the fault,
or otherwise Grace to do well, and to merit etc. and thereuppon we say: If
that of Christ's in the supper be propitiatory, and yours but impetratorie,
or auailable to obtain favor by entreaty, that then your sacrifice is not
the same with Christ's: but and if this be that of Christ's, then you utter
open blasphemy; because you should make that of Christ's not to be
propitiatory. Let us yet go further, we have by this account less to do
with your Mass; for shall he be excluded from obtaining being immortal,
which has power being mortal, to merit and satisfy by the offering of
himself a sacrifice? And again, this contrariety is suited with an other:
That the sacrifice of the Cross is by consequent, more excellent then that of
the Mass, as says Vega, and Bellarmine also; Veg. These. 8 and 124. de Missa.
Bellarm. l. 1. de Missa. c. 6.
That the sacrifice of the Mass, non est perfectum, neque absolutum, neque
redemptionis perse consummatiuum, etc. And how then can it be as they would
have it, Idem subiecto, and numero? And what will become of that which they say
else where, namely, that it is, Vere propitiatorium pro peccatis: and certain
Schoolmen: Caietan. tract. 2. de cele. r. Miss. c. 2. q. 1. Bellarm. l. 2. d^
Miss. c. 4.
That that of the Cross does not wash away any other then original sin and
that of the Altar actual sins? Again, If the Mass (as says Caietan) be
of infinite value and worth, because it is the power of Jesus Christ in
himself; and by consequent, his infinite effect, as of the passion of Christ,
what shall become then of Bellarmine, who says that the virtue and operation
of the sacrifice of the Mass is infinite? That otherwise (as he says) so
many Masses should be unprofitable, as likewise for one and the same effect,
etc. Some say unto them, what then? Jesus Christ, in respect of you, is he
not reallie sacrificed in the one and in the other? and in that his body is
glorified, should that diminish and detract any thing from the price and worth
of this sacrifice? Idem l. 2. c. 24. and 27.
But here they are worse entangled then before: for sometimes Bellarmine says:
If there be not in the Mass, a true and real slaying of Christ, that then
there is not a true and real sacrifice: for a true sacrifice, which consists
in killing, requires of necessity to have it real and indeed. Sometimes
when this sacrifice is offered of things without life, as bread and wine,
there is no need of killing, Veg. These. 12 l 8. De Missa
but only of eating, etc. And of these contrary opinions, there do also rise
contrary corollaries. Of some, as says Vega, That Christ dies mystically, and
in figure upon the Altar: but is offered upon the same alive: Of Others, That
Christ is as truly slain and killed in the sacrament of the Eucharist, as he
is truly existing and being in the sacrament, and is offered in the same,
either dead, or as it were dead. Again, sometimes they say, that the sacrament
is truly and really offered, when the bread and wine are consecrated by the
words, Gulielm. Alanus de Sacrif. Miss. l. 2. c. 9.
and not before: sometimes, that it is offered really, at such time as the
bread and wine are set upon the Altar, and before the words of consecration. If
the first be true, then the offering of the kinds, and the offering of the
thing it self, are offered at several times, and so the bond of relation is
broken. If the second, what follows then, but that they sacrifice nothing but
bread and wine? For what other thing are they else according to their judgment
before the words of consecration? Now of this contradiction follows an other:
Of some, which say, that the sacrifice is properly accomplished by the
oblation; Vega. These. 107. Turrian tract. 2. c. 22. Bellard. 1. de Miss. c. 27.
Biel. lect. 81.
of others, by the eating of the same by the priest. And Vega and Bellarmine
are at controversy one with an other. To be short, if they square, and
differ about the point, de opere operantis: neither can they better agree in
that, de opere operato, by what means the benefit of this operation is
applied to those that are present: whereas the common opinion adiudgeth
according to Biel, that the only being present at the consecration and
oblation, makes a man capable of salvation, without any looking for of a
spiritual life, as requisite thereunto. And at the Council of Trent, he may
seem to hold on this side. The Cardinal Caietan on the contrary, Anno 1518.
who did his endeavor at Ausbourg, to cause Luther to retract this proposition:
That faith was necessary for the receiving of the sacrament, comes so far,
namely to say, That it is a common received error, that this sactifice, Ex
opere operato, Caiet. in quod. libel. de vsu Spirit q. 3.
should have a certain kind of merit, or be able to make application of
some certain kind of satisfaction unto this or that person, etc. Doctrines as
newly come out of the minte, as the words themselves, which are such, as none
of them that have written twelve, yea thirteen hundred years after Christ,
did ever hear of. And thus you see that these do nothing at all agree
together amongst themselves, howsoever they would make men believe, that they
are all as one, either in the matter, or in the form of this pretended
sacrifice, neither yet about his effect or end, no nor in the substance, or
circumstances thereof. Wherefore how far more commend able had it been for
them, and nearer to the purpose, to have kept themselves to the institution of
Christ, in the alone propitiatory sacrifice, accomplished on the Cross, for
the declaration and remembrance, which is to be used, according to the
institution of the Lord in the holy supper.

And furthermore it is certain, that as by the grace of God, the light began
to rise and spring again in the Church, notwithstanding the terror and torment
of the fire, which was kindled and blown up against it in all nations: so
the Doctors of Papistrie grew ashamed of this doctrine. Whereupon we see,
that Sidonius, Faber, Zwifaltensis and others, who writ in the time of
Luther; did content themselves to call it the Sacrifice of remembrance:
although under these words they do not lay out the efficacy thereof so
fully and largely as they might. But behold the Council of Trent assembled
and called together, not to reform the Church of Rome, as the Christian
Princes had hope they would: but rather to authorize and establish, even the
most ill favored and deformed things that were therein, for so they provided
and brought to pass therein: If any man hold and maintain, (says it) that
the Mass is not a true and proper sacrifice: but rather a sacrifice of
representation and praise, and not propitiatory for the living and the dead:
for sins, punishments, satisfactions, and all other necessities, let him be
accursed. Cursing thereby in a few words the whole Scripture, and all the
old Church. And Pope Pius the fourth, (in whose time it was held) thrust into
the oath, which Bishops were to take this Article, in express words: I
believe that there is offered unto God in the Mass, Onuph. in vita Pii. 4.
a true, proper, and propitiatory Sacrifice, for the quick and the dead, etc.

But what? And is there such abomination in the Mass? Let us make a plain
and simple rehearsal of the principal errors therein, without any making of
them more heinous and grievous, then they are indeed. The first, This
pretended Sacrifice has no institution or warrant in the word of God: but
has it on the contrary, directly against it. What audacious boldenes was
this in man, to dare to invent of his own brain a sacrifice by which God
might be appeased and made at one with us? And what other thing is it but an
(...), a Service devised of our own carnal and corrupt sense, and by
consequent, condemned of God, who has said unto us: In vain do you
worship me according to the Traditions of men, etc. The second, This
Sacrifice is a clear and evident wresting and corrupting of the holy Supper,
and of the use thereof, whereby of a Sacrament ordained of God to assure us of
his good grace in Jesus Christ, there is framed a Sacrifice, whereby we
pretend to merit the same, yea and that not he only which does offer the
same, but those also that do but stand by and behold the same, and that by
their mere presence, though they have never a good thought or motion within
them. What is this then but to abolish the holy Supper of the Lord, under the
color of offering of it? And who is he that will any longer care to come to
the Lords Supper, in the straight examining of his conscience, if by the
only hearing of a Mass, he may be assured of eternal life? And again,
what presumption, to dare thus to transform the Will and Testament of the
Son of God, made and set down in his holy Supper: a thing not to be
endured in the Will and Testament of any mean or base person? The third, The
Mass is derogatorie to the only Sacrifice of the Son of God, made upon
the Cross, and that not only by putting it self in place thereof, but also
by advancing, and setting forth of the power and efficacy thereof far above
the other. It is said, There is but one oblation: the Son of God given for
the sins of the world: this oblation the Mass will needs be, and yet
renewed and reiterated every hour. Whereas there is pardon and remission of
sins, (says the Apostle) there is no more any oblation to be offered. And
what should follow of this continual and ordinary repeating of this
Sacrifice,, but that as yet there is no remission? And that the sacrifice of
Christ, is either unprofitable or imperfect? And who doubts but that this is
the same which the Apostle called the frustrating and making of the Cross of
Christ of no effect? and what more would he have made of it, if he had
heard the rest of their blasphemies: as that the sacrifice of the Cross has
not purged and done away any but original sin: but that the Mass has
taken away actual sins, etc. and by consequent to become fellowe-worker
with the same. What can this be termed but to declare the Sacrifice of Christ
insufficient, to renounce the power, as also the benefit thereof both together?
The fourth, The Mass takes away as much as lies in it, the only
Priesthood of Jesus Christ, whereof no other creature is capable: for seeing
it was requisite that the Priest should be eternal, and the sacrifice
infinite; follows it not that one and the same was to be both the Priest and
the Sacrifice? And what other then but the Son of God, offering up himself
once to God by the holy Ghost: and always by his infinite merit, making
intercession for the infinite multitude of our sins, unto the infinite
justice and mercy of God? And what a blasphemy is it then to say, that any
man, yea or that any creature is able to perform the same? And these are the
abominations which we find in the Mass, as they make it the pretended
sacrifice of the body and blood of Jesus Christ, propitiatory for the quick
and the dead: for such a one our adversaries do teach it to be: the rest
rising of the deprauing and corrupt wresting of the sacrament shall be spoken
of hereafter. And now we are to go about the finding out of the original,
and first beginning, as also of the growth and proceeding of this applying of
the benefit thereof to the dead, derived and fetched, as one error from an
other, from the opinion or rather imagination of Purgatory.

CHAP. VI. That Purgatory the foundation of Masses for the dead, is not at
all: and first that it was not known in the Church of Israel, or under the
old Testament.
ONe of the great employments of the Mass, That Purgatory should have had
place in the church of the Jews, if there be any such thing.
is about the dead: and such dead, as are not in Paradise: for such have no
need of any, neither yet for such as are in hell, for they all agree that it
would not any whit avail them, but rather for a certain number whom they
pretend to be in a certain third place, which they call Purgatory, wherein they
are to purge and make satisfaction for their sins, of which when they went out
of this world, they were not acquitted and cleansed, and for the purging
whereof there is no other help, but that which may be procured and supplied
by a number of Masses. Surely man was a sinner and mortal from the beginning
of the world, yea, man I say, was subject to dye in sin, being indebted by
sin, and by consequent to incur this penalty of Purgatory: God likewise
from all eternity, both just and merciful, just in having appointed this
punishment for sin from the first creation of mankind: and merciful, as
having taught him from the beginning, the means of mitigating and remedying
the same. Which doctrine proves Purgatory to be no new fiction (if so be
it may have place,) but to have been ever since the foundation of the world.
Now if it be of this antiquity, then it will be found mentioned and spoken
of; and that in plain terms in the old church: and the remedy also of this
fire, cannot but be revealed by God, and practiced amongst his people. And so
much the more, in that the mercifulnes of God in Jesus Christ, less shining in
the first times and ages of the world (the only satisfaction for our sins,
being covered under the vailes of the law,) made by all likelyhoode, the remedy
of Purgatory to be the more haunted and practiced under the old Testament, as
being at that time most needful and necessary. Here our adversaries make us
this answer: whence comes it then, that in all the writings of Moses and
the Prophets, there is nothing spoken of it? that amongst so many
threatninges, which are made against the transgressors of the law, this should
not be so much as once touched? That amongst so many sacrifices ordained for
voluntary, and willingly committed sins, as also for sins committed
unwillingly, and of ignorance: as likewise, that in the midst of so many
expiatorie, and purging sacrifices, for all manner of pollutions, whether they
came of sickness, infirmity, sin, or of the defiling coming by touching of
the dead, etc. there should not be found any thing appointed for sins after
death, not any sacrifice, not any offering? And yet notwithstanding they died
every day: and how deeply engaged in sin? There is likewise nothing found
to be practiced in the Church, in the behalf of the dead, whereupon a man
has not any ground either from literal or figurative interpretation, to prove
this Purgatory. The Patriarchs did bury their wives and children: they were
careful of buying sepulchers, of mourning, and of conueying of their bones
from one place to an other. Where was their piety (if it may be termed
piety) to pray for the dead? David wept for Jonathan, his very true and
trusty friend: and Solomon for David his predecessor and Father. If these did
practice no such thing, what may we conjecture thereof more? But and if they
did practice such a thing, then whereby shall it become apparent unto us by
any one word? And that notwithstanding, that David have made so many prayers
upon so many occasions, and those both of joy and also of mourning; and so
many kings of Israel and Judah, have been honorably buried: as also so
many Prophets left unto us behind them, their open protestations against
impieties and ungodliness, and in the commendation of piety and godliness,
every one in his time: none of them reco^mending this devotion unto us for
piety, or accusing of impiety those that have omitted and neglected it, yea
no one of them authorizing the same, either by precept or example? And it
avails not to say, That there was not in the Church of the Jews any
sacrifice for the dead, because that (according to the doctrine of the Church
of Rome) Paradise was not opened to the Fathers, unto the death of our Lord.
For would not this have been a refreshment and comfort unto them, to have
been translated from Purgatory, into the limbs: from a place of dolor and
pain, and that such as they describe it to be, into a place of rest? And
again, what appearance is there, that they should have remained there without
remedy, for the space of some three or four thousand years? what
inequality had there been in such punishment, in respect of that which is
inflicted at this day, when as they come forth now from day to day, whether
it be through the absolute authority of the Pope, by his Indulgences, or by
the diligence of their kinsfolks, not neglecting to contribute and bestow
these suffrages upon them? In conclusion if there be any such thing, it is
as old as the creation, and that more clearelie appearing under the old
Testament, then under the new: and if it be under the old, then it ought to
have had sacrifices for the dead: and that a great deal more requisite at
that time, then under the new: but and if the law had no such sacrifices,
neither then was there (as it follows by consequent) any Purgatory; neither
indeed is there at this day. Now therefore let us see if the old Testament
say any thing of it, yea if it speak of it in plain terms, as the
importance of the thing does require: if (I say) in such sort, as it is said
to agree and stand with the justice and mercy of God, the instruction of the
Church, and the rest and consolation of poor distressed souls.

Now it is most certain, That Purgatory cannot be found in the old
Testament Deutr. 30. Psalm. 34. and 116 Esaias 57.
that the old Testament, traceth out unto us, only two ways: Blessing or
cursing, Salvation or Condemnation, the death of the Saints, as precious
before the Lord, or the death of the wicked condemned of him, as also the
very remembrance of them. And theruppon it is, that without leaving any thing
coniecturall unto us betwixt those two, the Prophet says: The just man
dies, and departs hence in peace, lying himself down to rest in his bed. In
peace, that is to say, to speak after the manner of the Hebrews, in all
prosperity, very far from the pretended horrible pains of Purgatory. But
yet let us hear them speak, to see what they can allege, and let us withal
bear it continually in mind, that our adversaries do make it an Article of
their faith: and so by consequent the law of the ancient Fathers ought here
to take place: as that of Saint Jerome: That upon obscure, doubtful, dark,
and allegorical places of the Scripture, we ought not to ground any point
of doctrine. That of Saint Augustine; That in the controversy of religion,
dark and figurative places must be set aside, and those only held, which
are clear of themselves: And that of the Schoolmen likewise: That
allegorical Divinity does not prove, etc.

It is said in Leuiticus 12. Leuiticus 12.
(we will take the places in order,) She shall not touch any holy thing,
neither enter into the sanctuary, until that the days of her purgation be
accomplished: Luke. 2.
He speaks of her that is delivered of her first borne, according to the
law, practiced likewise by the holy virgin, as we read in Saint Luke: and
the literal sense is so clear, as that we need not seek any allegory
therein. The Gloss says, She shall not come within the Court of the
sanctuary: And in like manner Cardinal Hugo. Hugo Cardinal in Leuit. c. 12.
What is there now in this place, that will afforde us a Purgatory? or that the
sanctuary is Paradise, whereinto none can enter, till after they be delivered
out of Purgatory? If this be said generally of all, what shall become of
the exception concerning Martyrs, who do not pass the same? and if the
allegory be good in the words, Sanctuary and Purgation, how will they be
able to make it to serve in the distinction that follows, of her that had
brought forth a son or a daughter? and how in the number of days, of the one
or of the other? But the point is, that they have neither Greek, nor Hebrew
Paraphrast, neither Jewish, nor yet Christian Commentary, which ever could
find out Purgatory by this text. Origin, who has made an express Homily
upon this verse, notwithstanding he be greatly delighted in allegorizing,
Orig. hom. 9. in Leuit. Ieronym in Ezech. c. 49.47. Theod. in Leuit. c. 12.
could not perceive any such matter therein. And as far off was Saint
Jerome, expounding the same in his Commentary upon Ezechiel. Theodoret
likewise, who handles this question: Wherefore there is appointed a double
time for the purging of her that has brought forth a daughter, in respect of
her which has brought forth a son. Caietan says very well: From all these
laws this instruction and point of piety, Caietan in Leuit. c. 12. 1. Sam.
2.6.
may very well be drawn: That we were borne from our mothers womb subject
to sin, etc.

In the first of Samuel, Hanna says in her song: The Lord is he which
destroys and raises to life, which throws down into the grave, and
raises up again from thence, which gives poverty and riches, which
humbles and exalts. And because that this word (...) does signify a grave
and hell, they will have it to signify hell in that place, and notwithstanding
that it may be understood for Purgatory. But this place is expounded by it
self: for these words, Which throws down to the grave, and brings back
again, are no other thing, but according to the manner of the Hebrews, the
expositors of the former: which kills and brings to life again: as in the
verse following; which humbles and exalts, is contained the exposition of
the words going before, Who makes poor, and fills with riches, etc. Psalm.
30. Psalm. 71.
But David himself without any other will expound it unto us: The Lord has
lift up my soul out of the grave, or out of hell. And in another place: Thou
have showed me manifold troubles, but afterward thou turnedst unto me, and have
quickened me, and brought me from the depth of the earth. But this did no man
ever understand to be meant of purgatory: and the Chaldie Paraphrast, whom
they allege, is against them. God (says he) carries to the grave and
brings back again, Ad vitam saeculi, to the life of this world: that is to
say, to the life present, as appears by this word, Rursus. And Lyranus says:
There is not hell in Hebrew, but the pit, that is to say, the grave. And that
it is his purpose to declare, how that he oftentimes gives life unto them,
whom men are given to judge past recovery, as it was with Ezechias. But if we
should allegorize, their Gloss says: He brings the obstinate Jews to
hell, in as much as he suffers them to be led into the condemnation thereof:
He brings back from thence the Gentiles, who did deserve it in calling them
back from idolatry. Tertullian makes this kind of argument: Tertul. l. de
resurre and. carn. and 28. Contr. Marcion. l. 4. c. 34. Cyril. Catech. 6 de
Monarch. Dei. Sophron. in sermon. de Natiuit Dom. August. de ciuit. Dei. l.
17.6.4.
That seeing it is the flesh properly which is mortified, that is to say, which
suffers death, that it follows likewise, that it shall be quickened:
namely, by the resurrection. And again against Marcion: That one and the same
Christ has in his power the sentence of eternal death, as also of eternal
life. Cyrillus Hierosolymitanus reasons after the same manner against Manes.
Sophronius Bishop of Constantinople proves the greatness of our redeemer, who
has turned the curse by Adam into a blessing, his death into life, and his
fall into a rising again. But S. Augustine stands more amply upon it, and in
better sort, saying: The Lord kills and quickneth again, etc. and this is
nothing else but that which he repeateth again when he says: He brings to
the gates of hell, and brings back again: He kills (says he) according
to that which the Apostle says: If you be dead with Christ, seek the things
which are above, etc. For you are dead, etc. And afterward he adds: And our
life is hid with Christ: behold how he kills them holesomely: behold how he
reuiueth and quickneth them again. But he brings them likewise (says he)
to hell, and brings them back again. Without doubt (says he) this was
accomplished in our head, in whom our life is hid. For he that has not spared
his own Son, has slain him for us: and in that he has raised him up
again, he has also quickened him, brought him to hell, and back again,
according to that which has been said: Thou will not leave my soul in hell:
and of his poverty we are made rich, etc. By their account it should follow,
holding the exposition of Saint Augustine, that our Lord had been in
purgatory. Saint Gregory, God slays and brings back again to life:
Gregor. in 1. Reg. c. 1.
and behold (says he) the order, in as much as he brings to hell, and
brings back again. For in respect of God to bring down to the gates of
hell, that is to strike amassed the hearts of sinners with the apprehension of
eternal torments, and to bring them back from thence, that is, to relieve
their astonished hearts, sorrowing and bewailing their faults by the hope of
eternal life, etc. And yet every one knows if he favor purgatory or no.
Hugo the Cardinal: This is a metaphorical speech; He brings Phenenna, even
into extreme affliction, taking her children from her: he brings again
Hanna, making her fruitful when she was barren. And so (says he) by hell in
many places is understood great affliction. Caietan. in l. 1. Reg. c. 2.
Cardinal Caietan in like manner, In Hebrew (says he) it is: He brings
down into the pit, and causes to rise up again. And for that he uses a
verb of the Preter-tense, and not of the future: I am constrained by the name
of pit, to understand in this place neither hell nor grave, but rather a
prison. For from the creation, unto the time of Hanna, there was not any that
rise out of hell, none that rise again from the dead: but God has often
caused many free and innocent persons to be put in prison, and has brought
many out from thence again.

In the last of the first of Samuel, it is said: That the valiant men of
Israel, 1. Sam. the last Chapt. ver. the last. 2. Sam. 1.12.
after the overthrow of Saul, did bury the body of Saul, and of his
children, burned them in Iabes, took their bones and buried them, and fasted
seven days. And in the 2. Sam. 1.12. that David mourned, wept and fasted. And
thereupon Bellarmine reasons thus: He fasted, therefore he prayed: therefore
he believed there was a purgatory. Whereas he should rather reason to the
contrary: for that the prophet in the reckoning up of so many circumstances,
of burnt bodies, of bones gathered together and buried, of weeping, mourning,
fasting, etc. does to the wondering of men, say never a word of this pretended
prayer, which yet had been the principal and substance. His cloak to cover
the matter withal, 2. Reg. 12.
is for that in another place it is said, that David fasted and prayed for the
son, which he had by Bersheba. Then let him call to mind withal, how that
after the child was once dead, he ceased both to fast, and also by consequent
to pray for him. But the history is clear of it self: Namely, that David and
the people acknowledging in this overthrow the wrath of God upon Israel, they
humbled themselves before him, as may plainly be read in the words as they
are there expressly set down. They fasted, says he, because of Saul and
Jonathan his son, and of the Lords people, and of the house of Israel,
because they had fallen by the sword. And further then thus Josephus observes
not any thing in this story, save that we have also to note therein the whole
complaint and moan that David made for the death of Saul and Jonathan, in most
lamentable speeches, but yet such, as whereout there cannot any tittle of
prayer for the dead be gathered, neither yet any thing for purgatory.

It is said in the Psalm 37. Psalm. 37.
O Lord reprove me not in thy fury, neither chasten me in thine anger. That is
to say, says Bellarmine; Chastise me not in hell, neither yet in purgatory.
And this sense he would feign gather out of S. Augustine, in such manner, as that
fury should have relation unto hell, and anger unto purgatory. And now give
ear and hearken to the weakness of his interpretation. August. in psalm. 6. and
38.
For where S. Augustine has put it down to be read, fury, following the
Septuagints: S. Jerome skillful in the Hebrew (which S. Augustine was not) has
put it down, anger, and in the place of anger, fury. Origin could not
bethink himself how to make any such matter when he says: Orig. in Ezech.
Numb. 1.
That this fury is a kind of discipline, by which God traineth his to the
things concerning the health of their souls, having too lewdly contemned his
word. And yet he is one of them whom they take ordinarily to be one of their
warrants for purgatory. August. in psalm. 6. and 38.
And thus behold in Saint Augustine a hell, and a purgatory that do change
places. But they should have noted, that S. Augustine himself says, that
these are two words put for one thing (...) and (...), and that the copies do
vary, the one putting Ira in the first place, and the others Furor. Again,
they should not have concealed and kept close, how that S. Augustine speaks
by name of the day of judgment, and not of the departure out of this life. In
the day of judgment (says he) they that have not the foundation, that is to
say, Christ, are reproved, and those which have built thereupon, timber, hair,
and straw, are corrected and amended. This his asseueration rising from an old
opinion, that all the world should at that time be purged by fire, as we shall
see hereafter: a thing then very far off from the pretended purgatory, seeing
it should end then, whereas this pretended one takes his beginning at the
departure of men out of this life. Again, this interpretation could not but be
very ambiguous and doubtful in S. Hieronym. in psalm. 6. and 37. Theod. in psalm.
6. and 37.
Augustine, who never spoke but very doubtfully of purgatory. S. Jerome has
not found it in that place, but holds opinion, that those two words express
but one thing. Neither yet Theodoret: Correct me (says he) as a father, and
not as a judge: as a physician, and not as an executioner: not in revenging my
sin, but in moderating the rigor of thy justice. S. Basil likewise; This is
as though one should say to a physician: Cure me not by fire, or by any
cauterie, but by some more mild and gentle remedy. Chasten me not like unto
the Egyptians, by evil Angels, but with thy saving word. Likewise, reserve me
not unto the day of thine ire, and of the revelation of thy just judgment, but
rather deal mercifully with me, and correct me before the day of my departure
hence, Bernard. in Cant. sermon. 70.
(which thing is to be noted.) And so (says he) befell it unto David, etc. S.
Bernard: Reprove me not O Lord, in thy fury, as thou did the angels which
revolted and fell away from thee in heaven, but correct me in thine ire, as the
man in paradise, that is (says he) still remembering thee of thy mercy.
Lyranus in short wise thus: Reprove me not in the rigor of thy justice, but
chastise me according to the mildness of thy mercy. And as for the word
Fury, he is of mind, that it is an alluding unto the words in the 2. of
Samuel: 2. Sam. 24.
And the fury and fierce wrath of the Lord, continued to wax hot against the
house of Israel: wherefore David was moved to say unto Ioab: go and number
Israel and Judah, etc. reproving Cassiodorus: who of the litterall sense resting
in David, made an allegorical, and referred it to Job: as if this Psalm had
been made by David, for to represent and set out the affliction of Job, and
not because of the remorce and sense of his own transgression, clean
contrary to the opinion and judgment of all the old writers, either Jews or
Christians. Caietanus of our time says in like manner; Chastise me as a
father, and not in the heat of thy displeasure, etc. a hard case, that amongst
so many Doctors, wherewith they brave out their assertions, there is not so
much as one to be found on their side in deed.

David in a psalm complains himself, that God had grievously afflicted him,
Psalm. 39.
but that notwithstanding he held his peace, because he knew it to be his hand:
When thou rebukest, says he, any man for his iniquity, thou consumest his
excellency, like a moth: or according to others, Thou meltest him, or causest
him to dry, like unto a cobwebbe. Of this word melt, or dry, they conclude a
fire, Hieronym in psalm 39.
and this fire they will needs have to be purgatory: whereas in the mean
time S. Jerome does translate it: Thou wastest and consumest his most precious
things, as does a moth. Now here is never a word either of fire or of the
soul. And the Chaldie paraphrast: thou meltest away his body like a snaile.
Now he finds not here any torment inflicted upon the soul. Orig. hom. 11, in
psalm. 38.
And yet notwithstanding they make Origin their buckler in this conflict, whom
all old writers have condemned, for turning the scriptures from their natural
sense by his allegories. But I appeal unto their own consciences, whether
this place make any thing for purgatory? And why do they not rather hold
themselves to S. August. S. Jerome, and Theodoret, who do not acknowledge any
other thing in that place, but David his humiliatio^ for his sins, being cast
under the mighty hand of God? The gloss says, Thou have instructed my soul in
infirmity and humility, that so it might not presume through any strength or
pride: and he compares it to a spiders web, because there is nothing more
rotten then it. Saint Jerome: Hieronym. in psalm. 38.
The soul melts when the concupiscences of the flesh are repressed and
snubd, when sin is so worn away, as the thread which has not any substance
left in it, either to make it hard or thick. S. August. ibid.
Augustine: Thou have dried it up, through the insatiable thirst it has after
virtue and knowledge, thou have caused the iniquity thereof to be pressed and
wrung out of my heart, Theodor. ibid.
as are the entrails of a spider. Theodoret: In pressing and rubbing upon the
most hidden and secret corners of my exulcerated parts and inward sores, thou
have healed me, like a good physician, rather then with great pain and grief.
Halmo: This falls out, when as man by Gods chastisements and corrections
being upon him, does humble himself and turn unto God. Lyranus: Thou have
made my life vile and abominable unto me. Caietan: The moth fretteth through
and destroys the thing whereof she is bred: and so we are pierced and fret
away, through our own concupiscences and desires. And thus he refers this
to the punishment of all mankind in the person of Adam. Of all the translations
they have made choice of that which is furthest from the sense of the text, and
of so many expositions that which is furthest from the purpose: and yet they
can come by nothing for their purgatory.

In the Psalm 49. God will redeem my soul out of the hand of the grave, or
out of hell, Psalm. 49.16.
(for the word signifies both the one and the other) when he shall take me
unto himself. The shot is by their reckning, he will deliver me from
purgatory: whereas they should have noted, that in the verse going before, it
is spoken of the men of this world: That death shall feed upon them in the
grave, and that the upright men shall have dominion and rule over them, etc.
Where the self same word is used. If the men of this world be not threatened
with any greater punishment then purgatory, then what privilege or preferment
have David and others, the workers of righteousness, in whose persons he
speaks more then they? If it do signify hell in the one verse, and in the
other purgatory, then let them show us some reason of such diverse construing of
it, that so we may admit it. The Chaldee Paraphrast: God will deliver my soul
from hell, because he will teach me his law: and will take me to be partaker
with him of the life to come. But what will they then say to all the old
fathers? S. Jerome says: God being made man, made himself of no reputation,
even to death, that thereby he might repair the ruins of mankind: that is it
which he would say, Cum acceperit me. S. Augustine: God will redeem and
deliver my soul, shall it be out of prison, from oppression, from the waves of
the sea? etc. Nay rather (says he) from hell, and this is that redemption
which he has showed and set forth in himself. Chrysostom. t. 1. de Dauidicis
Cant.
What we have seen in the bead, the same shall we find in the members: he
descended into hell, and ascended up into heaven, etc. Chrysostom: And that
there is a freeing from eternal death, he teaches thee it in these words:
God has delivered my soul out of the power of hell, etc. Theodoret deals
more plainly: This certifieth and assures us, that God does give counsel and
consolation to the poor which are oppressed of the mighty. Haimo: Out of the
power of hell, that is to say, out of the power of the devil, when he shall
have taken me, Caictan. in psalm. 49. Psalm. 66.11. and 12.
that is to say, put upon him my humanity: and so Cardinal Hugo. Caietan in
like manner: He will deliver my life from the power of hell when he shall draw
me from out of this life into eternal, into Abraham's bosom, etc. In the
Psalm 66. We were, says David, entered into fire and water, Et eduxisti nos in
refrigerium, and thou have brought us forth into a place where we find
relief. Otherwise, (...), into a plentiful and fruitful place. Yet once
again here is purgatory, and that with an imagination, that it works upon
men by casting them out of an extreme heat, into an extreme cold, etc. From
the fansying and good liking of an allusion in Origin, Orig. hom. 25. in Numer.
who yet medleth not any thing at all with this text: which besides, even with
the bare reading is easily refuted, seeing therein he speaks simply of diverse
crosses and adversities, out of which God had extraordinarily delivered David.
The old writers have understood it clean otherwise then they. The Paraphrast:
Thou have made the oppressor to go over my head: Thou have condemned us to the
rage of the flaming furnace and devouring water, and afterward have set us at
liberty: herein alluding very strongly unto the servitude of the people of
Israel in the land of Egypt. Lyranus: Through the fire made to burn brickes;
through the water, which we carried to temper the matter, and make it fit for
the form. And if we may lawfully moralize, S. Augustine says: Through
adversity and prosperity, through the scorching heat of tribulation, and the
filthy puddle and stinking waters of noisome corruption, that which seems
the least (says he) being no less to be feared the^ the other. Hugo in psalm.
65. Hieronym. in psalm. 65.
And Hugo the Cardinal follows his collection and interpretation. S. Jerome:
Thus have the Martyrs passed and come ad refrigerium, to Christ who is their
true relief and rest by the cross, by stripes, by fire, by water, and diverse
punishments: and by them they have become acceptable and well pleasing
sacrifices, Hillar ibid. Chrysostom. t. 2. in c. 4. Mat. no. 5. Theod. in psalm.
66. Haimo in psalm. 66. Bernard. de transitu S. Malachiae.
etc. And S. Hilarie writes thereupon after the same manner. Chrisost. and
Theodoret do deal somewhat more simply and plainly, and take it to be
understood of the ordinary afflictions of the faithful. Haimo: Of Martyrs that
have passed through fire and water, of travelers that have endured the heat
and cold, and yet give not over their journey. Saint Bernard: Such as die in
the Lord, fellow citizens with the Saints, and are of the household of God, do
sing in their psalms of thanksgiving: we have passed by fire and by water,
etc. meaning that the hard measure of adversity has not been able to break
their course, by causing them to faint, neither the soft bed of prosperity
make them to become slack and cold through delicacie, etc, and he speaks by
name of the blessed death of S. Malachie, Archbishop of Ireland, Cassiodorus:
Because a vessel (says he) well hardened and baked in the fire does hold water
better. Another says: As S. Laurence passed through fire, S. Clement and
others through water. And let this be set as a brand upon our adversaries, that
they always take hold of the expositions that are least received, and of all
others the worst: Caiet. in psalm. 66.
I could have wished, that they would at the least have satisfied themselves in
Caietanus his exposition, saying: He comprehends under these words of fire
and water, in brief, all the tribulations of Israel from their coming out of
Egypt unto Jordan, that is, we have endured all manner of miseries, and in the
end thou have made us to come ad irriguam, to a well watered soil, that is to
say, into the land of promise.

Neither does it avail them, Amb. in psalm. 118. sermon. 3.
that Bellarmine to dasle the eyes of the world, does here allege S.
Ambrose. For this baptism of fire whereof he speaks, setting the same at the
entrance of Paradise (allegorizing upon the Cherubin that kept the passage in)
is but an appendance and limme of that ancient opinion, that the world in that
day (when the end and consummation thereof comes) and all the creatures
therein, even men; and of them the most holy and sanctified, should be purged
by fire: and not in that space of time which shall be betwixt their death and
resurrection. It appears by these words, This baptism says he, shall be
after the end and consummation of the world when he shall send his Angels to
separate the good from the evil: Then shall the fiery furnace feed upon
iniquity, and burn it up, to the end that the just may shine in the kingdom
of God, as the Son in the kingdom of his father. And in deed says he, if
that Peter and John be there, they shall have their part in that baptism. Now
in deed the truth is, that Bellarmine does not hold or mean, that the Apostles
have passed, or at any time must pass the fire of purgatory.

In the Psalm 107. They cried unto the Lord in their distresses, Psalm. 107. v.
13.
and he delivered them from their necessities, from darkness, and from the
shadow of death. Thus wheresoever they read darkness, the grave, fire, or the
shadow of death, there always purgatory must be summoned to appear. This
text is clear and plain, wherein David makes a long catalogue or repetition
of all the perils whereunto the life of man is subject, and the deliverances
that God gives unto them that call upon him, although they should be within
two fingers breadth of death. But they will not believe us. Lyranus therefore
tells them: They were stricken with remorce and sorrow in their afflictions,
and called upon God who delivered them. And these words, from the shadow of
death, August. Hieron. Theodor, in psalm, 106.
he expounds them by the psalm 23. the danger of death. As Caietan simply
understands the same of the inconveniences of the prison. S. Jerome did not
acknowledge any such like thing to be contained therein: but let it pass, as
he declares by that which goes before, Et eduxit eos in viam rectam. Neither
yet S. Augustine, who understands it of the difficulties, lets, and
impediments that the regenerate find, when they should go about to do good, and
that after such time as God has opened their knowledge, Prosp. in psalm. 107.
Haim. in psalm.
and enlightened their understanding, except himself do work in them. And
thus does Prosper Aquitanicus also take it. Neither Theodoret, who
understands it of the darkness of ignorance, and of the servitude of sin.
Haimo: In darkness, that is, in ignorance, out of which no man can free
himself, in the shadow of death, that is to say, in the villainous and loose
course of life which leads unto death. And Hugo the Cardinal takes it in the
same sense: Darkness, that is of ignorance: the shadow of death, that is, faults
and transgressions: bound, that is, the punishment, etc. Some others thus: Of
such as are inwrapped in heresy, and are reclaimed by wholesome instruction.
But and if they will cleave to the plain literal sense, it is said: There was
no man to help them. Where were then become the Masses and Suffrages? Again,
he speaks of such as had been rebellious unto the word of God, which had
despised the counsel of the most high: a mortal sin, and one of the most
heinous ones that can be. Now purgatory by their own speech, is not but for
venial ones. And yet furthermore, if we will credit the expositions of the
old writers, David was but a simple fellow, and knew nothing in the matter of
purgatory.

In the book of the Preacher: Ecclesiast. 4.14
There is such a one (says Solomon) which comes out of prison for to reign:
that is to say, according to their understanding, out of purgatory to go into
the kingdom of heaven. In this whole book he discourses of the courses,
alterations and changes of things happening in man's life: and that which
follows in the same verse, does overthrow their mistaking: And in like manner
says he, there is such a man, as of a king becomes poor. Now this should
fall out contrary to their own doctrine: that those which are once glorified,
do never fall away. If this be not sufficient, yet Hugo the Cardinal will help
and afford us some aid: This is says he, Christ, who from the prison of
Pilate, the grave and his hands, is gone up to receive his kingdom. Lyranus
alleges for an example of the one, Joseph taken out of prison to govern
Egypt, and Sedechias pulled down from his throne of Majesty to to be cast
into the dungeon, for the other.

I am ashamed to stand upon the refuting of these fooleries, Esaias 4.
and yet notwithstanding we must go through to the end of them. In Esaias: When
the Lord shall have washed away the filthiness of the daughters of Sion, and
wiped the blood of Jerusalem from out of the midst of her, by the spirit of
judgment and of zeal. This judgment and zeal are purgatory. Let them read
that which goes before, and that which follows, they shall perceive that the
prophet speaks of the desolation of Jerusalem, and of the restoring of the
same in Jesus Christ. But the Paraphrast says: By the word of judgment, and
by the word of consummation. He felt no smell of fire. And the Gloss: In the
spirit of judgment, the lightest and least sins, and in the spirit of zeal,
the more grievous, both the one and the other by penance. Now the truth is
clear, how that purgatory is not penance, as also, that it is not ordained
for sins, but for punishment: but and if it be, as some would have it, for
sins, yet it is but for petty and slight sins. Ireneus says, It is the
word alone that washes away the filthiness of the daughters of Sion, that
washed the feet of his disciples, and which sanctifies their whole bodies.
Clemens Alexandrinus: It is the good spiritual washing which cleanses the
soul, Hieronym. in Esa 4.
whereof the Prophet speaks: The Lord has washed away the filthiness of Sion,
etc. S. Jerome expounding this place, says in like sort: That which is but
lightly foul will be washed clean; but that which is deeply stained and
defiled by being burnt in the fire. And this is that which John Baptist said:
He will baptize you with the holy Ghost and with fire: for man can give but
water, but God fire and the holy Ghost, which washes away filthiness, and
purges away the deadly and heinous sins. Chrysostom: Chrysostom. in Matthew. hom.
5. c. 4. Cyril. in Esa. c. 4.
For men are baptized with fire by temptations that are present, according to
that in Esaias. In the spirit of feruencie and zeal, etc. Cyrill in like manner:
In the spirit (says he) of judgment, that is to say, by a just sentence,
according as our Savior says. Now is the judgment of this world: for he
fights with the world and Satan, justifying us by faith, etc. And also in
the spirit of zeal, by the grace of baptism, which is not begotten in us
without the spirit, etc. For we are not baptized with bare water, but with the
holy Ghost, with this divine and intellectual fire, which wastes in us the
uncleanness of our vicious nature, and melts and burns all the spots of
sin, Haimo ibid.
etc. Haimo: The same holy Ghost is called the spirit of judgment, and the
spirit of zeal and feruencie: of judgment, because that in baptism Satan is
judged, and as it were condemned, when his power over man is taken away from
him: of zeal, because he inflameth the hearts of men with love toward their
creator, scouring away the canker of sin, whereof it is said, God is a
consuming fire, he will baptize us with the holy Ghost and with fire, etc. And
Hugo the Cardinal in like manner. And thus you may see by these ancient
fathers, how they have made a purgatory of the holy Ghost, and of the
temptations and trials happening in this life, the pains of purgatory which
cannot be, except in the other. And Lyranus: In the spirit of judgment; for
our Lord has satisfied for the Church by the way of justice: in the spirit of
zeal, because he has performed it in a great measure of charity and love.
And yet this is one of the textes whereby Bellarmine labors to make his
cause so strong. And here we are not to forget his unsound and unfaithful
dealing: for that which S. Augustine has spoken expressly, De nouissimo
iudicio, of the last judgment: wherein (says he) the daughters of Syon shall
be refined: grant it (says he) in as much as they shall be separated from the
wicked, as the pure gold from his dross in the furnace: admit it also in this
respect, for that all creatures shall as then pass through the fire: and
likewise all manner of souls, according to the opinion of that time: this he
turns and wresteth to help for the building of his purgatory, which they
pretend to take place and seize upon men, at the time of their departure out of
this life. And we are to request the reader to mark the deceit he works upon
the place.

Peter, Abbot of Clugni, abuses either ignorantly or impudently another place,
Esaias 8. Esa 8.19.
Shall the people require a sign and vision of their God for the quick and
for the dead? For so he alleges it, whereas the text says: Shall not a
people inquire at their God? shall they run for the living to the dead?
reproving such as did run to south sayers, and sending them back, as is said
afterward, to the law and to the testimony, etc. In deed the Septuagints have
translated it, Shall they inquire of the dead concerning the living? that is to
say, concerning the business and affairs of the living. And the Chaldie
paraphrast: Every man (says he) inquireth and asks counsel of his
idolles: so the living take counsel of the dead. And Origin likewise: You to
whom God has given his law, will you go to inquire of the Devils, which are in
very deed dead? Hieronym, in Esa. c. 8.
And Saint Jerome upon Esaias says: As the infidels do ask counsel at their
false Gods: so the faithful ought to run to the true God, and to the law,
and to the Prophets, inspired by him, etc. Lyranus says as he says. Saint
Cyrill: Cyril. in Esa. l. 5. orat. 5.
Would you ask counsel (says the Lord) of the dead for the living? you
which are alive, is there any reason that you should inquire of the dead, of
the bodies which lie in the graves, or of the souls, which it may be are in
hell? Nay rather (says he) you which are quickened by the lively word of God,
will you go unto sorcerers and Magicians, which are dead in their souls? Now
the argument of Peter of Clugni was thus framed: There are visions of the dead,
and therefore a Purgatory: but it is grounded, as we have seen, upon an
unsound Grammar, or rather upon the corrupting and deprauing of the old
expositor, wherein, as some note, there was as in S. Jerome, Pro viuis a
mortuis, and not ac mortuis? And this is the more likely, in as much as for the
most part he applies himself to the Greek text. And in deed Cardinal Hugo
said, Amortuis, of the dead for the living, that is to say, to ask counsel of
images, which are like unto dead men, which is a ridiculous and foolish thing.

Esaias 9. Wickedness (says the Prophet) shall burn like a fire: Esa. 9.17.
It shall devour the briars and the thorns, and shall be kindled in the
thick places of the forest, etc. This is one of Bellarmine his
maister-pillars. There the Prophet threatens the people of Israel; From the
head unto the tail, the boughs and the stumpe, the Magistrate and the false
prophet: These are his words. And after that he has denounced the anger of
God to fall upon the Magistrates, and upon the men in authority, he adds:
That it shall not stay there, but that it shall set on fire and devour the
common sort: which he compares to bushes of thorns, or to a thick grown
underwood. And it is made plain by the words following: And the people shall
be as fuel, or a bait for the fire: no man shall have pity upon his
companion to spare him, etc: What agreement is there betwixt this and
purgatory: save that wheresoever there is fire, there purgatory also must
needs be found? This is the same that S. Jerome says: God will not take
pity, Hieronym. in Esa. l. 4. c. 10.
either upon small or great amongst this people: neither of the fatherless,
nor of the widow: neither of any other person, etc. For every mouth has spoken
folly, etc. And S. Cyrill says: He understands the common people, which he
calls iniquity, and not unjust, to show the grieuousnes of their
wickedness. It shall burn therefore, that is to say, it shall be fire unto it
self, as it fell out (says he) by reason of their factions in the siege of
Jerusalem by Vespasian and Titus, etc. And after this manner do Haimo and
Procopius take it. Lyranus says: Haim. in Esa. c. 9.
The impiety of the people of Israel provoked the wrath of God, and pulled it
swiftly upon them like a burning fire, to consume them even unto the briars
and thorns, that is to say, the smallest and vilest amongst the people. And
Cardinal Hugo draws it to an allegory: The wicked (says he) shall be set
on fire with an everlasting fire: for those whom the fire of transgression
has devoured and swallowed up, those shall be devoured and swallowed up of the
fire of hell, etc. understanding it of eternal damnation.

As cold is that which follows, Esaias 54. I have hid my favor and my
countenance from thee for a while, in the moment of mine indignation: But I
have had compassion of thee in everlasting mercy. Here God speaks unto the
Church, as unto his spouse, rejected and forsaken for her sins, in his just
displeasure, but received again into grace in his mercy. Which he said
before in the former verse: I have forsaken thee for a small time, but I will
gather thee together in great compassion and mercy. Now they will have this
moment of indignation to be Purgatory, and the everlasting mercy to be
paradise. In stead whereof it does manifestly and plainly appear, that he
speaks of the scattering and dispearsing of Israel, gathered together again
in the redemption purchased by Jesus Christ: yea, greatly augmented and
multiplied by the calling of the Gentiles. And this is it that the Gloss says,
I have hid my face from thee for thine idolatry: but I have gathered thee
together again, etc. in redeeming thee. Lyranus otherwise: Because (says he)
that the tribulations of this present life (not of purgatory) are not to be
compared with the glory that is to come. And thus Cardinal Hugo: I have given
thee over into thine enemies hands; but my mercy in freeing thee from them
again shall be greater then mine anger has been in rejecting of thee. And
mystically, for a little, that is in respect of the temptations of this world,
which are nothing in respect of the glory to come. In everlasting mercy, that
is, in respect of my purpose to unite and couple thee unto my self in my
glory, etc. But the verse following cutteth off all the controversy: This
(says he) shall be unto me as the days of Noe: for I have sworn that the
waters of Noe shall not any more ouerspreade the face of the earth: as likewise
that I will not be any more wroth with thee. Here (says Iustine) he
compares the redemption of mankind to that which was in the days of Noe, etc.
If this be not enough, Hieronym in Esa. c 54. Cyrill. l. 5. orat. 2. in Esa.
Haim. in Esa. c. 54.
Saint Jerome interprets it of the multiplying of the Church by the calling
of the Gentiles. Saint Cyrill of the Gentilles forsaken for a little, but
espoused for ever, etc. Haimo upon Esaias takes it in the same sense. Which
saying S. Jerome lays in balance to weigh against the Jews, who would have
this prophecy to belong to themselves alone. But of all these there is not one
that has taken the smallest or least sent of Purgatory from this place.

Jeremy the first: What see thou Jeremy? J see a pot boiling, and the
forepart thereof is toward the North. Ierem. 1.13.
This pot signifies Purgatory. The vision is expounded in the verse
following: The plague shall break out from the coast of the North, over all
the inhabitants of this country. So then this pot is Jerusalem, the fire
that makes it hot is the king of Babylon. And thus Saint Jerome and
Theodoret do expound it. Hieronym. in Ierem. Theodor. ibid. August ad fratres
in Eremo, sermon 12. Gregor. l. 33. c. 27 in Iub. l. 18. Moral.
But if a man be disposed to make an Allegory of it, Saint Augustine says:
This pot is pride, which the Devil blows up, wherein boil and sees all
the Princes and Pastors of darkness: as those which only count precious and
like of these temporary goods, honors and riches, covet the chief seats in
sinagogues, and cause themselves to be called Rabbi in the market places etc.
Saint Gregory: This pot is the heart of man boiling with the fiery affections
of the flesh etc. the North, that is, the Devil, which blows up the same. So
that neither can this maister-builder of purgatory find any foundation to
settle the same upon in this place. No more then Cardinal Hugo could, Hugo
Card. in Ierem. c 1. Orig. hom 11. in psalm 38. Ezech. 11.3. and 7.
who likewise in a mystical sense, takes the pot for the Church, or else for
the sinner assailed with the temptations of the Devil. And as for Origin, he
has no fellow or partaker with him in his allegory. But Ezechiell does
expound it most clearly: This is the caldron, and we are the flesh: that is
to say, Jerusalem set on fire by the Babilonians, and the people thereof
consumed in the same, because of the murders by all manner of calamities: and
in the end of all this, forced out of the same, and led into exile.

Michea the 7. Mich. 7.8.
Rejoice not, neither yet comfort thy self in me, O thou which art mine
enemy: if I be fallen, I will raise up my self again: if I have laiue in
darkness, the Lord will enlighten me: I will bear his wrath, because that I
have sinned against him: he shall draw me forth into light, and I shall see
his justice. Here again darkness must needs signify Purgatory, and light
Paradise, etc. But it is most clear and evident, that these words proceed
from the Church of God, speaking unto Babylon, and other nations of the
Heathens, that they should not glad and rejoice themselves at her miseries,
because God will reestablish her again. So said Esaias, 9. The people that lay
in the shadow of death, a light is risen unto them. Saint Matthew which has
cited the same, said not; This people is gone out of Purgatory into Paradise,
but rather out of the darkness of ignorance into the knowledge of salvation,
from out of the way of sinners into the way of righteousness in this life. The
Gloss says: Insult not upon me Babylon, because I sit in darkness, that
is to say, in captivity, for God will have pity on me and deliver me.
Lyranus in like manner: Rejoice not at the ruin of Judah: I am fallen,
Hieronim. and Theodor. in Mich. 7.
but I shall be delivered by Cyrus, who shall wrecke the judgment and wrath of
God upon thee. Saint Jerome adds thereunto, that the moral sense may be,
that God would not the death of a sinner, but that he should be converted
and live: that God by his punishments leads men unto amendment of life, etc.
That this is a like speech to that of Esaias 9. The people that lay, etc.
Theodoret also: I shall budde and put forth again, being relieved by the care
and assistance of the name of God, he will enlighten me in my darkness, he
will deliver me from them which have made war against me: he has
condemned me justly, but I expect and wait for his just judgment and upright
sentence, in respect of manifold wrongs which they have done unto me, and in
respect of manifold rightes which they have detained and kept back from me.
Cardinal Hugo in like manner: In darkness, that is, in the captivity of the
Medes and Persians: And for the mystical sense: This is Jerusalem or the
penitent soul which says: If I be fallen through sin, I shall rise up
again by penance, and after the darkness of heaviness, sorrow and sin, I
shall see the light of joy and righteousness, etc. Namely, Jesus Christ, who
was made unto me wisdom and righteousness, etc. Now I would have them to
answer from their consciences, if these interpretations be not more worth
then the moral of their own Gloss, besides which they have not any thing to
allege: I will bear the wrath of God, that is to say, here, or in
Purgatory. For as for that which Bellarmine takes out of Saint Jerome upon
Esaias: namely, that this place was wont to be alleged for Purgatory: it had
been his part to have put in therewithal, that it was by them who thought
that the pains of hell it self were purgatories, and should have their end:
where also he knows him to speak of Origin: But (says he) these are
things that we are to let rest, as known unto God alone. And therefore if
he obstinately and stiffly stand out, and maintain that Saint Jerome did
understand it otherwise: yet let him give ear unto his own good counsel, and
for ever hereafter cease to say any thing of Purgatory.

Zachary 9. It is said: Zacha. 9.11.
By the blood of thy covenant thou have delivered thy prisoners out of the
lake, wherein there was no water. The proper sense is: Because of the blood of
thy covenant I will let thy prisoners out of the pit, etc. And in deed the
Chaldie Paraphrast has read it so in plain and evident sort. But let us
approve and like of theirs. Now the Prophet speaks there of the spiritual
deliverance by the Messiah, as it appears throughout the whole Chapter,
handling the same by way of allusion unto the deliverance whereby they were
brought out of Babylon: and by comparing the lowest dungeon where men lie with
irons on their feet, to the puddle and filthy mudpitte of the slavish
thraldom of sin.

But let us hear the fathers: Saint Augustine, August. de ciuit. Dei. l. 18.
c. 35. Hieronym. in Zachar. c 9.
by the lake understands the deep dryness of man's misery, where there is
no current of righteousness, but a caske of cursed iniquity. And he cites
Psalm 40. to that end. He has pulled me out of the mire and puddle of
misery. Saint Jerome understands it, Of the everlasting pains and
punishment from which Jesus Christ has delivered us by his blood. And although
he allege the opinion of some, that the Prophet speaks of those which
should rise again with our Lord, yet he stands not upon that. Theodoret;
Those whom thou have redeemed with thy precious blood, thou have sent with
these saving testamentes, to publish liberty unto all. And this lake (says
he) whether a man understand it of eternal death, or of idolatry, he shall not
err or wander far out of the way; or otherwise if it be meant of the
captivity of the Chaldeans, in respect of the limitation of the time: and so
the Gloss takes it. Cardinal Hugo after the letter, understands it of
Christ: Hugo ibid.
redeeming the faithful by his blood: mystically, Of the fathers bought and
brought by him out of the Limbs; but not out of Purgatory: because say some:
That in the Limbs there is the water of consolation, but not in Purgatory,
etc. And by this means the chiefest and best learned both of old and new
writers are on our side. But what will they say against the Evangelist Saint
Mathewe, who alleges this whole place for the coming of Christ, and the
redemption of the Church by his blood? etc.

Malachie 3. Malachie 3.
Behold, says the Lord, I send my messenger, etc. And who can endure the day
of his coming? He is as one that refineth and tries gold, and as the fullers
soap: he shall sit as one that refineth and purifieth silver, he shall cleanse
the sons of Leui, etc. This place is alleged by all the Evangelists of the
coming of Christ, being forerunned by John Baptist in his first coming, etc.
and their exposition should content us, for the understanding of these words of
the power and efficacy of the ministry of the Gospel, for the purging and
putting away of sin. The Gloss says: He will refine them, namely his elect,
by diverse temptations: he will purge the sons of Leui, that is to say, his
Apostles. But our adversaries would not have any purgatory for them. August. de
ciuit. Dei, l. 20. c. 25.
What then? They would hold themselves unto S. Augustine his sense, who
notwithstanding understands this place of the day of judgment. It appears
(says he) by this place, that in the day of judgment, there shall some only
suffer Purgatorias poenas, certain punishments to purge them. But what is there
in these words that agrees with their pretended purgatory, the practice and
efficacy whereof is working daily without any waiting or staying for this
judgment? And so likewise S. Ambrose. Chrysostom alleges it for a proof,
that our Lord will come in the day of judgment in fire. Chrysostom. t. 5. hom.
Quod Christus Deus.
S. Jerome understands the purgation to be accomplished in this world so
well, as that he says: That those of Leui, after they have been purged as
gold in the furnace, they will offer unto God just and upright sacrifices.
Theodor in hunc locum Zachar 9.
Theodoret more near unto the text says, The Prophet does set before us in
this place, the Lord as it were a workman, scouring and wiping away the
filthiness of our sins, and delivering our souls from this venom as it were by
a fire. Mark this word As: then the speeches here used do not deal with the
fire of that material purgatory. And in deed he sets down S. Cyp. l. 3.
testim. aduers. Iud. c. 57. Cyrill. in Esa. l. 1. c. 4. orat. 3.
Barnabas as one of this number. S. Cyprian likewise: The Lord has reformed
and amended me, not giving me over unto death, according to that which is
written in Malachie, etc. For (says he) God amendeth and preserves his
faithful. S. Cyrill expounds it of the operation of the holy Ghost in the
regnerating and sanctifying of the faithful, and according to the same,
expounds the place of Esaias 4. When the Lord shall wash the daughters of Sion,
etc. But yet and if we mark the text: Behold the Lord (says he) quasi ignis,
as a fire. This then cannot be purgatory: but God which makes this purging,
and not properly a fire: but as a fire, he means doubtless the fire of the
spirit of Christ, which purifieth our souls by his doctrine. And so S. Jerome
has expounded it. Hugo in Esa. c. 4. and in Malac. c. 3.
Cardinal Hugo in like manner says: He will purge sins by the fire of his
passion, or of his spirit. And by this means we conclude, that there is no
place throughout all the canonical books of the old Testament, from which may
be gathered or proved this their purgatory, or any of the prayers or Masses
for the dead, neither yet according to the exposition of the fathers, and that
the most worthy and renowned amongst them, any such torment as is given to
them. And this is freely acknowledged by Perion the Monk, and thereof there is
as yet some jar and disagreement remaining amongst those of the Church of
Rome; namely, whether there were any purgatory in the time of the old
Testament, or not. There remain the book of Tobiah, and the second of the
Machabees, both Apocrypha, which we are to examine, howbeit that we could
answer them in a word; that all doctrines that have no other ground and
approbation but in the Apocrypha books, must needs themselves be Apocrypha.

Tobiah says: Tob. c. 4. v. 18.
Cast thy bread liberally upon the graves of the just, but give nothing unto
the wicked. The Israelites had been amongst the Gentiles, and so had Tobiah
also, now the Gentiles were wont to make feasts at the funeralles of their
near kinsmen: Vnde parentare, et parentatum. The Jews that they might not
seem to be behind the Gentiles in honoring of their parents, distributed
victualles unto the poor. In like manner (says Saint Jerome) they carried
victualles to such as were sorrowful and pensive, and which wept about the
graves of their dead: which he gathers out of the 31. of the Proverbs. And
Cardinal Hugo: He speaks here of some fashion not known unto us: or rather
for the comforting of the kinsfolks, he commanded feasts to be made after
the burial, etc. This is all that can be gathered out of this place.

That of the Machabees may seem to minister unto them some better matter for
their purpose. This is (says he) a oly cogitation to pray for the dead, 2.
Micab. 12.
to the end that they may be delivered from their sins, etc. First it is
pity, that this doctrine of their pretended fire, whereof they make so great
accounts, and for the defense whereof they have kindled so many fires
throughout Christendom, should have no other foundation then one only place,
and that out of the Apocripha books: and that the rather in as much as they
have been acknowledged such, by all antiquity, and by the most ancient
Doctors and Councels: witness S. Cyprian, S. Jerome, S. Augustine, S.
Gregory, etc. The primitive Church governed by the holy Ghost, Cypr. in
Symbol. Hieronym, in lib. Sapient. August. contr, Gaudentium. Gregor. l. 8.
Moralium.
has not judged the books of the Machabees to be such without cause: if
afterward they have been permitted to be read in the Church: it was as S.
Augustine tells us, For the example sake of virtue, and not for the grounding
of any doctrines upon them. Saint Jerome says: They are read for the
instruction of the people, and not to authorize any doctrine, etc. S. Gregory
likewise: They are not produced or alleged for to testify or confirm any
thing as canonical, but only for edification. There are whole volumes to this
effect. And when as the Church has not touched or had any dealing with the
reports and narrations contained in the second book; partly, as not agreeing
upon the same matters with that of the first, and partly for their being
detected and convinced of falsehood, by the whole story of the ancient gestes
of the Jews: as in that matter of the hidden fire of the Arc, etc. which
Nehemiah and Esdras would not have concealed, etc. We cannot but have them
suspected, as also it fared with Pope Gelasius, who would not admit of the
first, etc. yea the Author himself gives sentence of condemnation against
himself, as craving pardon if he have written amiss. The holy Ghost who has
inspired and enlightened the authors of the canonical scriptures, would never
have written so.

In the second book it is certain, that from the time of the Machabees, 2.
Machab. 4.7.12.
the Jews by means of the familiarity that they had with the Grecians, began
mightily to incline to Paganism. Now we will show hereafter, that this
doctrine is taken from the Paganes: and it appears so to be by Jason, who in
favor of Antiochus, provided an university of paganism in Jerusalem: by
other priests, who turned the sacrifices of the law into the manner of usage
that was amongst the Paganes, 2. Machab. 3.13.
sacrificing for the idolatrous kings, for the Lacedaemonians, for the health of
Heliodorus, a pillar and spoiler of the temple: and also by their suffering of
the Paganes contrary to the law, to offer therein, as namely unto Antiochus
Eupator, the Emperor Augustus, etc. Philo de legatione ad Caium.
By the history of Razias, who laid violent hands upon himself, that so he
might not fall into the enemies hands: the opinion of al Paganes: and yet
commended by this author of the second book of Machabees. But after all this
let us come to the story, which is the same with that which is mentioned in
the 1. book and 5. chap. Joseph the son of Zachary, and Azarias, priests, 1.
Match. 5.57
in the emulation which the prowess and valiantness of Judah, had stirred up
in the^ contrary to his inhibition made an enterprise against Iamnia: but
Gorgias coming out against them, discomfited them, so that there remained
2000. upon the place. And Israel had received a sore overthrow: Because (says
he) that he had not obeyed Judah, and that they were not of those whom God had
stirred up for the deliverance of Israel; that is to say, because they had no
calling to do it. There the first book stays without speaking of any
sacrifice or prayer for the dead. The second book goes further: Judah says
it, having beaten Gorgias, came to carry away the bodies, (...), of his
countrymen, which had been slain before for to bury them; who found under
the garments of every one of them which had been slain, things sacrificed to
idols. Every man judged them worthily punished, and gave glory unto God,
praying him that he would blot out this sin; or rather as it is in the best
copies, that they might not be quite raced out, that is to say, that they
might not be utterly rooted out for this sin. But Judah did openly make
known unto the people this notable judgment, to the end they might beware and
keep themselves from sin etc. he makes a collection of twelve thousand
groates: or rather according to the Greek, of two thousand, which he sends
into Jerusalem, for to offer in sacrifices, for the sin. For the sin
simply, that is to say, of the people, to the end that it might not be as that
of Achan, namely, imputed to all in general: and not for the sins of the
dead: Biblia impressa madatu Council. Trident. ^ub. Sixth. 5. and Clem. 8.
Missal. in anniuersariis defunctorum and triginta. Missale reformatum Pii. 5.
as our adversaries have corruptly and falsely turned the same in certain of
their Bibles, and those imprinted by the authority of the Council of Trent:
and as they read it as yet unto this day in their Mass books. Hitherto,
according to the law, Joshua 7. Deuteronomie, 21. That which follows goes
further: that is, that it pretends also, that the oblation of these groates
did serve for the purging away and blotting out of the provocation of that
sin committed by the dead. But now we are to see how far this may make for
purgatory. It appears that Judah ought not to believe or do this, either by
reason of the law, or in respect of any example of the fathers, or yet by
reason of any custom received in the church: for it is not spoken of in all
the scripture. And in deed, the Author himself giving his judgment thereon,
shows sufficiently, that he does it by way of a particular discourse, (...),
dealing very honestly and ciuillie (says he) in discoursing upon the
resurrection. And it is likewise as apparent, that it was not in any
consideration of Purgatory: but rather (says he) of the last resurrection. In
so much as that the intention and drift of this prayer properly was, that this
sin might not be imputed unto them in the day of the judgment of the Lord,
which shall be at the general resurrection: a prayer which conueieth not
either good or evil unto the dead: no more then that of Paul for Onesiphorus,
when he was alive: 2. Tim. 1. Ingolstadienses.
The Lord give him to find mercy with the Lord in that day. For as for that
which certain Jesuits say, that he speaks of the mystical resurrection
from sin and not of the actual, there needs no more but the reading of the
text to refute them. It appears likewise by our adversaries their doctrine,
that this prayer and sacrifice could not be, to draw them out of Purgatory. For
the sin according to their own distinction was mortal, being idolatry,
which is treason against the Majesty of God, and that in the highest degree.
Now purgatory is not for mortal sins. Again, God say they, does never
punish one and the same thing twice. But it was says the Author, for this
sin that they had been slain, and that every man did judge it so:
wherefore they were not to have inflicted upon them any more temporal
punishment, that is to say, any purgatory. Again, purgatory, say they, does
not satisfy for the fault, but for the punishment: and notwithstanding Judas
does there offer a sacrifice for sin, which was never offered in the law, for
the punishment only, but for the fault: wherefore it follows, that in that
his action he had no mind of purgatory, so much as to think once thereof, so
far was he from the thing. For the Author adds: He considered that those
which were dead in a true godly sort, could not fail to find grace and favor:
which is says he (by a parenthesis) a sound and wholesome thought. And so it
is in the Greek text, far differing from that which they pretend: namely, that
all less or more, may be supposed to stand in need to be freed from
purgatory. But say they, yet he praid for the dead: let it be so. How beit we
shall see by and by, that it is but an evil argument to go about to prove
purgatory because of such prayers. And on the contrary we have reason to
believe, seeing that according to the doctrine of the Church of Rome it self,
this place cannot stand with purgatory, that this sacrifice has no other end,
as may appear by the text, but to pray unto God, that in the last resurrection
he would be favorable unto the^. But there is more in the matter: Judas did it,
say they, therefore it is well done. That we deny. How many actions do we read
of in the scriptures of famous men, which notwithstanding are not to be
imitated? In the church of God, men live by his laws, and not by our own
examples: neither do we see in deed, since the time of the Machabees, unto the
coming of Christ, that this example was ever followed in the Church. The
mourning also and lamentation made for Lazarus is contrary hereunto. Ioh. 11.
And as concerning that the author of this book does approve it, so he did
the fact of Razias, who murdered himself. And this is the cause why S.
Augustine says to the Donatistes, which would have made it a good
consequent: That these books ought to be read soberlie: and the same liberty
have we to answer our adversaries after the same sort, in a different and
diverse cause, but about the same author. To be short, this second book of
the Machabees does approve prayer for the dead: but to bring them to be
allowed by the Church it is requisite, that they should first be allowed of by
the word: and all this notwithstanding, as we have seen, does not make any
thing for Purgatory. Insomuch as that of so many textes, alleged out of the
old Testament, we have seen them by the confession of Perion, to have not so
much as one left them besides this same, as being put besides all hold and
proof in the Canonical, and tied to one only Apocrypha text; and that such
a one as is the most Apocrypha of all the rest: and yet even that cannot stand
and match with Purgatory. Whereupon we conclude here: That Purgatory has
not any one foundation or ground in all the old Testament, not any one in
all the Church of Israel, where notwithstanding, it seemed to have been most
necessary and requisite. Wherefore there is no cause why we should marvel,
if many of the Church of Rome have liked it better to say and hold: That there
was no Purgatory in the time of the Jewish Church.

CHAP. VII. That Purgatory has no foundation in the new Testament.
IT may be that this Purgatory so famous in the church of Rome, will have some
better foundation and proof in the new Testament: seeing that they have made
it an Article of faith: and seeing that such great buildinges, and so many
foundations are laid thereupon: Which thing we have now to examine and try,
by taking a proof of all the places, which they allege for the same.

In S. Matthew, 3. S. John Baptist says: Mat. 3.
I baptize you with water unto amendment of life, but he that comes after
me, is stronger then I, etc. He shall baptize you with the holy Ghost and
with fire. He has his fan in his hand, and will make clean his floor, and
gather his corn into his garner: but he will burn the chafe with
unquenchable fire. Of these two fires mentioned in this place: which of them
will they choose to make a Purgatory of? That which shall never be quenched,
hangs not for their mowing: seeing they hold that by the virtue of holy
water and Masses, theirs may be quenched: It must needs then be that fire,
wherewith Jesus Christ baptizeth. Acts 15.
And what sense shall we then make of this, that he baptizeth us with the
holy Ghost and with Purgatory? Here we see, water is evidently opposed and
set against fire, and the outward washing to the inward purifying. But our
Lord without our further seeking of any other expounder, makes it clear
enough elsewhere, saying, John has baptized you with water: but you shall be
baptized with the holy Ghost within these few days. And behold the
accomplishment thereof in the Acts, 2. Acts. 2.
And the tongues (says he) were seen upon them cloven like fire, which did
sit upon every one of them, and they were all filled with the holy Ghost. Then
it follows that the baptizing with the holy Ghost, and the baptising with
fire, is all one. And that is the cause why S. Mark contenteth himself to
say: Mark. 1.7.
He will baptize you with the holy Ghost: The word fire adding nothing which
was not contained in the former, but only to express and set out the
effectual power thereof. Hieronym. in Matthew. 3.
Saint Jerome upon this place: And it is, because that the holy Ghost is a
fire, Acts 1. Or it is because that in this world we are baptized with the
holy Ghost, and in the world to come with fire, 1. Cor. 3. And thus our
adversaries having chosen the second, (as they always choose the worst,) they
will needs have it to signify Purgatory: whereas he speaks as all the
old writers do of the last judgment. S. Basil against Eunomius; He
baptizeth with the holy Ghost, Basil Contra Eunomium. li. 5. Chrisost. c. 3.
and in oper. imper. Euch. in quest. in Nou. Testa.
those whom he sanctifies, he sends them which are unworthy into the
fire, delivering them over to that evil one, being themselves Diuelles.
Chrysostom; He baptizeth the faithful with water, and the Infidels with fire:
and in an other place, he does understand it of temptations. Theophilact
expounds it better; He will ouerflow us with the graces of the holy Ghost.
Eucherius says: Because that sin is burnt up in us by the holy Ghost,
whereby there is given unto us sanctification, whereby charity is kindled in
us, etc. Lyranus: He says fire, because that oftentimes in the Primitive
Church, Caietan in Math.
it appeared in visible form, as upon the Apostles, etc. Caietanus: Where it
must be understood of the holy Ghost, the beginning of regeneration in every
one; or else of tribulations, whereunto the professing of Christ is subject.
Ferus likewise: By how much the spirit is more pure then the body, Ferus in
Math.
and fire more active then water; by so much is his Baptism more excellent
then mine, etc. The sense then is: He will translate and transform us by his
holy spirit, and ravish us with heavenly things by the fire. And these are
their best and most famous Expositors for this time, of all which not so much
as one has found Purgatory in that place. Let us reason after a better
manner. The Baptism of fire (say they) is Purgatory, and none Baptiseth with
this fire, but Jesus Christ; no not, Saint John Baptist^ himself: No man
therefore can purge us but Jesus Christ: he alone, and not any other is our
Purgatory.

In S. Matthew. Math. 5.15. Luke 12.52.
5. Agree betimes with thine enemy, whiles thou art in the way with him, least
he deliver thee to the judge, and the Judge to the Sergeant, and so thou be
cast into prison: Verily I say unto thee, that thou shall not come forth
thence, before thou have paid the uttermost farthing. This prison they will
have to be Purgatory. Now the literal sense is very clear, and agreed upon
amongst all; where our Lord exhorts the faithful to agree with their
brethren with all speed, setting before them the mischief and evil that
happens or dinaril^, by being obstinately given to go to the law. And this
is Chrysostom his Exposition in these words: Chrysostom. in Math. hom. 16
Hieronim. in in Math. li. 1.
It seems unto me, says he, that he speaks of ordinary and accustomed
jurisdictions and prisons, etc. And S. Jerome likewise: The sense and meaning
is manifest, namely, that our Lord exhorts us to have peace with all men in
this world, etc. And yet there are some, says he, which expound it either of
the flesh and soul; Hillar. in Mat.
or of the soul and spirit: which cannot be maintained. And the same says
Saint Hil^ arie, and others also, who by the adversary, understand the Devil:
As if, says he, our Lord had purposed and decreed with himself in this place
to command us to be (...), very watchful and well advised, that the Devil
do not seduce and deceive us, etc. But this is too absurd. August. de Salut.
document. cap. 64. Idem de Doct. Christ. l. 3, c. 10
And the same says S. Chrysostom. S. Augustine is of the number of those that
expound it of the flesh and the spirit; condemned here by Saint Jerome, and
sent back to compare his dealings with his own Law, which is that a man
should not hunt after or affect a figurative sense, in that which easily
affords a literal. And yet it makes nothing for them, seeing he refers
the same in plain words unto the last judgment. But and if we must needs
fall to allegorize, yet let us learn to do it, as our Lord himself, who
says: If you forgive not men their sins, your father will not forgive you
yours. But on the contrary he will handle you like to him in the parable,
whom he delivered to the executioners, until such time as he had paid the
whole debt; that is to say, for ever: for he had utterly disabled himself
before, for paying of it. Orig. hom. 35. in Luc.
But yet let us hear the Doctors speak. Origin says: They will exact thy
debt and look for it at thy hands, by labors and works, by pains and
punishments, etc. But he speaks after his manner, properly of hell, and not
of Purgatory. For Origin as we shall see hereafter, did not acknowledge any
other pains or punishment for the Devils themselves, then Purgatory. Saint
Ambrose distinguishes betwixt S. Matthew and Saint Luke; Ambros. in Luc. c. 1^.
in the one understanding by the adversary, the Law, in the other, Sin, or
the conscience, and in both, God by the Magistrate, Christ by the Judge, and
the Angels by the Executioners. But to cut off Purgatory, he puts off the
execution unto the end of the world, applying himself in this point to the
opinion of Origin. Then here is no Purgatory of the Papists as yet to be
found. Tertullian says: Tertull l. de anima.
That first and chiefly we must take this text in his simple sense: that is to
say, that if we will, we need not make any Allegory of it. And afterward he
says, The heathen man, he is the adversary; with him we walk and have to do
in the common affairs of this life: but we should go out of the world, if it
were not lawful to converse and have any dealing with them. Let us then
requite them, with the goodness of the spirit: Let us love our enemies says
Christ: Let us pray for them that curse us: least that being provoked by any
injuries, he draw us before his Judge, and the Judge deliver us into prison.
Idem de Resurroct. Carn. c. 42.
And this Allegory swarueth not far from the sense of the text. But elsewhere
he uses some that are further fetchte, calling the way our discipline; and
this reconciliation, the entertaining of our covenant and bargain with the
Devil; that we should not take any thing of his, but renounce his pomp, and
all his Angels. But still he speaks of hell: Ne inferos, says he,
expertatur. In a word, this prison is taken of some for the place, wherein the
Magistrate shuts up malefactors, and thus Chrysostom: of others for hell,
and thus S. Augustine, Hieronym. in Lamen. Ierem.
Tertullian, as also S. Jerome, who expounds it of eternal punishment. Now
who is he that dare build an Article of Faith upon such contrariety of
Allegories? Who would not rather content himself and cleave to the letter?
Assuredly, their own proper Gloss says: In prison, that is to say in
darkness, that is to say in hell: And Donec, until that, etc. that is to say,
for ever. And he expounds it by an other, Donec, Psalm. 110. Hugo Card. in
Luc. cap. 12. August. de 8. quaest. ad Lulcit.
Until I have made thine enemies thy footstool, etc. And Lyranus, Cardinal
Hugo, and Beda in like manner. As also Saint Augustine ad Dulcitium, in
treating of Purgatory, makes conscience to apply this place for the proving
thereof, and confesses that this Donec is of the same nature with that in the
Psalm 110. But Theophylact deals better, who not being ignorant, that this
place was haled and pulled to and fro, by diverse Allegories, leads us, as it
were by the hand to the simple sense thereof: That we should not go to Law,
that we shouldrather suffer injury, that so we may not be let or hindered
from holy matters. And Cardinal Caietan after the same manner. But Ferus a
Doctor of theirs, after all the rest, deals better then all the rest: Ferus
in Mat.
Diverse men have written diversely of this adversary, but in the litterall
sense they do not agree. But in a word, the sense of Christ is, that in
outward things, it is better, to yield to unjust and unequal conditions with
his adversary, then to go to Law: because in Suits there is much loss of
time: we must be subject to the infirmities and faults reigning in Lawyers; to
labor and plie the Judges; and after all this when we are come before them,
yet we stand in doubt of the event, yea and we have not any power to dispose,
and determine of it then, though we would; but the greatest point and most
worthy of consideration is, that we loose the tranquillity and peace of mind,
as also that love and peace which we should have with our neighbors, etc. But
let us admit of their Allegory, and understand the Devil to be the
adversary; God the judge; and the prison, to be Purgatory. Is it possible
says S. Jerome, that Christ should command us, to fall to an agreement with
the Devil? And likewise to be watchful and wary of him? For he uses the
word (...). Yea and shall not become debtors to the Devil to satisfy his
demands? When as the whole Scripture does bind us to make satisfaction to God.
And what shall the death of Christ have auailed us, by this Allegory; if we
stand answerable for every farthing, either to God or to the Devil?

Out of the same Chapter, they allege an other place: Matthew. 5.2^.
It has been said to them of old, or by them of old: Thou shall not kill, and
he that shall kill, shall be punished by judgment: But I say unto you, that
whosoever is angry with his brother without a cause, shall be guilty of
judgment: And who so shall have said unto him Racha; shall be guilty of a
Counsel: And he that shall say unto him fool; shall be punished with hell
fire. This last degree say they, is punished in hell: and therefore the two
former must be punished in Purgatory. The sense of the text is clear, that
our Lord, (to correct the false gloses of the Scribes, who bounded the breach
of the Law, within the compass of outward actions) does labor throughout the
whole Chapter to bring them back to the inward motions and affections, showing
unto them, that the faults which they judged slight, as to be angry with
their brother; to give cross and reproachful speeches, etc. do come before
the sovereign Justice of God; which he signifies by the name of (...),
Judgment and Consistory, terms that are usual, about the setting forth of
human prerogatives and Jurisdictions. Who is he then that does wish us to
understand these words of a Purgatory? But further how can it stand and agree
with their rules? Seeing that mortal sins as they call them, have no door
open to enter in there? But so it is that he that hates his brother, says our
Lord, is a manslayer. Again in Purgatory there is no meddling with the fault,
but with the punishment. Now in this place the question is of the fault. And
again their Purgatory is a place of executing of a judgment or sentence; but
in these speeches is contained nothing but the judgment or sentence? Again,
Purgatory is but one place, and here be two named: So that we are first to
know of them, which they will choose, and then what they will understand by the
other? But S. Jerome, Saint Chrysostom, Theophylact, and all the Fathers,
which have expounded this place in whole Homelies, had never any thought
coming into their minds of finding Purgatory here. Lyranus also, who would
moralize the same, says: Our Lord made here three degrees of anger in the
heart: Whosoever (says he) is angry: and a twofold in the mouth, when it
proceeds to a confused and over whelmed plight in offering of injuries; such
as men are in when they fall to railing and calling of their brother Racha: or
else, in a formal injury, as he that says unto him, fool, etc. and these
three degrees have their punishments: Judgment, when men are conuented before
the seat of judgment: A Council, when it comes to many men's voices, to
determine and give sentence, etc. And therefore the Gloss says: Reus est
iudicio, that is to say, Dignus accusatione, worthy to be accused: Reus
consilio, that is to say, worthy to have sentence pronounced against him by
the general consent of the Judges, Dignus consensu iudicum, de danda sententia
in eum, etc. And Caietan comes very near unto the same. But what makes all
this for Purgatory? Yea which is more, though some have understood it of
punishment after this life, as Augustine; yet never any man of Purgatory.

In S. Math. 12.31.
Matthew 12. Whosoever shall have spoken against the holy Ghost, it shall not
be forgiven him, either in this world or in the world to come. Then there are
sins which are pardoned in the other world: and therefore this is in
Purgatory, etc. This text cannot be better understood, then by the other
Evangelists, and by S. Matthew himself. Saint Mark says: He shall never be
forgiven. Whereupon S. Augustine says: Saint Mark has said the same in other
words: Mark. 3.28. Luke 12.10.
S. Luke. It shall not be forgiven him: S. Matthew in the verse going before,
It shall not be forgiven. And if any man be desirous or inquisitiue, yet to
know some further meaning then this: Not in this world; where God judges the
sins of his Church, by the ministry and order established in the same: nor
in the world to come, when as he will sit himself in person to judge them:
and this is all, that can rightly be drawn out of this place. And indeed the
old writers are of one accord, Damasc. de Orthod. fid. li. 2. ca. 1.
holding that these words, The world to come, do either signify everlasting
punishment or everlasting blessedness, and must be taken and understood of
that which follows after the resurrection and not before. Afterward they
offend against their own general rules: for their Schoolmen say, that there
is no forgiveness of sins, but in this world; how so ever satisfaction for
sin is made, according to their doctrine, in the world to come. But the
question here, is of the remission of sins, and not of their temporal
punishment. And it is not to be stood upon or said, that small and venial
sins are forgiven there: for the comparison is made here of the sin against
the holy Ghost, with other the most grievous sins that are. And again, how
can that prove a good reason or Argument, which is taken from a particular
negative, to an universal affirmative? The sin against the holy Ghost is not
forgiven in this world, nor in that to come: therefore the temporal
punishments of all manner of sins not paid and discharged here, shall be
exacted and paid in the world to come, A than. in tract. Omnis blasph.
Hieronym. and H^ar. in Math.
that is to say in Purgatory? But Bellarmine does here freely confess that
there is no good Art or Logic in this conclusion. But it is certain that the
old writers did not understand this place thus. S. Athanasius has made a
special treatise upon this verse, and made no mention of Purgatory. And S.
Jerome, and S. Hillarie also expounding this very place, have done as little.
Ambros. de paenit. li 2. c. 4. and de spir. 5. c. ^ August. de Ciuit. Dei. l.
21. c. 24. Gregor. l. 4. Dial. c. 39.
Neither has S. Ambrose done any more though he have touched it in two places.
S. Augustine has begun, and S. Gregory has followed him. But if S.
Augustine had thought this place so strong, he would not have written so
doubtfully of Purgatory in other places: and which more is, he understands
it of the day of the resurrection; and not of that space of time which is
betwixt death and the resurrection, according to the opinion which was held
then: That is, that at the resurrection, the souls bespotted and stained with
sins, should be purified with a kind of fire, as it shall be seen hereafter.
And in deed The world to come, as says Damascene, signifies eternal life or
eternal punishment. Damasc. de Orth. fid. l. 2. ca. 1. Chrysostom. in Math. ca.
12. hom. 43.
But after all, how far a sunder do these propositions stand? There are
sins which are forgiven in the world to come, and there are flames of fire in
the world to come, which exact the temporal punishments of sins remitted in
this world. Chrysostom therefore says better: Some men shall be punished both
in this world, and in the world to come, as those of Sodom: others in this
world only, as the Incestuous of Corinth: others in the world to come only,
as the wicked rich man: others neither here, nor in the world to come, as the
Prophets and Apostles. And as concerning the sin against the holy Ghost, it
shall be punished both in this world and in the world to come, etc. And
Thcophilact does trace him word for word. Cardinal Hugo says: In aeternum,
for ever: And makes a comparison betwixt it, and the sin of the Devil. Let
us add also their own writer Ferus, who contenteth himself in a long
Commentary, to use these words without any other thing: In saying less, he
understands more; namely, that this sin shall not only bepunished in the
life to come, but even in this life: and accordingly gives examples thereof.

Of the history of the wicked rich man, th^^ cannot make their market, Luke
16.23.
Abraham says: That this gulf is so great, that there is no passage from the
one to the other. Now they will have it, that men after satisfaction made, do
pass out of Purgatory into Paradise. Again, the message which he would have
sent unto his brethren, shows that he died without repentance, that he
beggeth a little water to cool himself withal, argues that he is in a
place void of all comfort and consolation. And also it has always been
taken and expounded for Hell by all the old writers. But yet they fall to work
upon the words contained in the same Chapter: Luke 16.9.
Make you friends of the unrighteous Mammon, to the end that when you
shallwant, they may receive you into everlasting tabernacles. In so much as
that here Bellarmine, takes upon him to cry victory on their side, because
that Peter Martyr has past this place without answer. Our Lord warns us, by
the example of the unjust Steward, to make us friends of our riches, to the
end, that as he did make him friends, that did receive him when he was out of
office and credit, so likewise we should do the same by our Alms, that so
when we shall be called from our stewardship (for we are no better then
Stewards) they may receive us into everlasting Tabernacles. And this is
according to that which is said in an other place: That even a cup of cold
water given in the name of Christ, is not without his reward. These friends,
they are the poor, but together therewithal honest and virtuous: These
Tabernacles are eternal life: These friends, they themselves do understand,
that they are to die before us; and there is not any one of the Fathers, that
have expounded it otherwise, this is very far from staying behind, to help
us with their suffrages. Or that it rests for them to gather us to heaven:
and therefore also far enough off, from being able to draw us out of
Purgatory. But and if we must allegorize; to whom shall we cleave and stick?
Tertullian says, Tertull. de fuga in persecut.
that our Lord exhorted the Jews, who had not played the good Stewards, with
the goods that God had committed unto them, to make them friends therewithal:
De Mammonae hominibus, with the men of Mammon, (that is) of the Gentiles, says
he, by raising them from the debt of sin, that so grace wasting, they should
receive them into the Christian faith. S. Augustine and S. Ambrose do
understand it: Ambros. in Luc. August. de Ciuit. Dei. l. 21. cap. 27.
That we must give unto the Saints in this world, that they maey pray for us
in the other. Who doubts of their charity, who live with him that is
charity it self; or that they do desire the kingdom of God, and the
salvation of the elect and chosen? But what is there of all this that has been
said, Hieronim. ad Algas. quaest. 6
that agrees with Purgatory? As for S. Jerome, who handles this question of
purpose in writing unto Algasia, after that he has examined all the words in
particular, he alleges likewise a certain Allegory of Theophilus Bb. of
Antiochia, who of this steward, makes S. Paul, begetting and winning
Christians, with the learning which he had got under the Law, that they might
receive him into their houses, etc. that is to say, into heaven. And in the end
he comes to this point: That we must make us friends of our goods, and
those, not of all sorts of poor, but such as may receive us into heaven, that
is, such as are honest and godly; to the end, that having given them a little,
we may receive much, and giving to an other, may enjoy the things that are
ours; sowing blessedly and bountifully, Chrysostom. in Ep. ad Hebr. Bernard in de
clam. Ecce nos rellquimus omnia.
that we may also reap blessedly and bountifully, etc. Chrysostom also, who
touches this place sundry times, does likewise expound it at large upon the
Epistle to the Hebrews, but draws no other doctrine from it. And as for
Purgatory, not a word of it. Neither yet Saint Bernard, Cardinal Hugo,
Cardinal Caietan, nor Ferus himself.

Bellarmine says: Remember me O Lord when thou come into thy kingdom: this
good man (says he) had never spoken this, Luke 23.
if he had not believed, that sins were forgiven after this life. But yet
what makes this to Purgatory? Seeing it cannot stand with the doctrine of the
Schoolmen, who affirm that Purgatory is for such, as whose sins are
already remitted? But Bellarmine does except the small and petty sins. But
in this place the question is of the greatest. And of whom would he desire to
be better assured in that respect, then of the good thief himself? Who says:
Remember me when thou come into thy kingdom: Or of our Savior himself,
who answers him: To day thou art not in Purgatory, but in Paradise with me.
And is he able to name any one of the Fathers, even of the latest, who has
gathered this doctrine hence?

In the Acts 2. Acts. 2.24.
Whom God has raised again, having unloosed the pains of hell, or of death;
because it was impossible that he should be held of it. From hence Bellarmine
frames this conclusion; Christ after his death could not suffer pains,
therefore this place is not to be understood of his pains, but of those of
the Fathers: and not of those which were in Hell, for out of Hell there is no
redemption: Neither of those in the Lymbes; for they suffered not: it remains
then, that it must needs be spoken of those that were in Purgatory. The
truth is that this text may be read two manner of ways, in the most part of
the Copies there is (...), not (...), the pains of death, not of hell.
Epiphan. in anchorat. and in anacephal.
And if Epiphanius, whom Bellarmine alleges, have read (...) in one place,
in an other he has read (...). Now this being so, he will never be able to
find his Purgatory in this hell. Let us grant them (...): the word signifies
both the Grave and Hell: but without all doubt, in this place the Grave: for it
is alleged, for the resurrection of our Lord, together with the place of
David; alleged by Saint Peter: Thou will not leave my soul in Grave. And
whereas he says, that it cannot be understood of Christ, for that he endured
no pains after his death; I answer that it cannot be understood but of him,
because it was said, that it was not possible for him to be held either of
death, or of the Grave: which cannot be said of the Fathers, which cannot be
spoken, but of our Savior, God and man: Seeing also that which follows: For
David says of him, I saw the Lord alwates, etc. But David never said this of
any of the Fathers. So that to deliver our selves from the doubt and
difficulty, that is in the word (...), which may receive a good Exposition;
we fall into such a sense and signification, as cannot by any means be raised
or drawn from it. And as concerning that we say, that the pains of death are
unloosed; not only in that our Savior is risen again; but also in as much as
in his resurrection, the rule and dominion of death is destroyed and laid
waste.

And here it is not lightly to be passed over, (...)
which has been observed by the most learned, that the Hebrew words which
signify pains and bands, do not any thing differ, Psalm. 18.6. 2. Sam. 22.6.
but in one small prick. And this might very well be referred to that which
Saint Luke says (...), having loosed: and made an allusion to these words of
David: The snares of Hell, or of the Grave, have compassed me about. Where the
Septuagints have translated (...), the pains of childbirth. And the
Paraphrast goes not far from them: and it may be that one and the same word,
without any let by reason of scruple caused through the pricks, does signify
them both. And this might very well come to pass, through the custom they had
to bind the bodies of their dead, according whereunto we read in the story of
Lazarus: Whereupon our Savior says unto his Apostles, Unloose him, etc. And it
is not to be forgotten, that never a one of the Fathers has found out
Purgatory in this place, neither yet any of the late writers. Caiet. in Act.
c. 2. Fcrus and Hofmester in Act. c. 2.
Caietanus expounds it of the penalties (for such a word he uses) which the
Soul of Christ suffered, being separate from the body. Ferus understands it,
of Christ his loosing of the pains of death for the faithful; in so much as
that he which belieueth in him, tastes not of death, but is already past from
death to life. Hofmester, by these pains of death or Hell, all the sufferings
that Christ has endured for us, etc. According to that place of the Psalm:
The pains of death have compassed me, and the dangers of Hell have enwrapped
me, etc. And these are the most noted and best esteemed Expositors amongst them.

Now comes their maine argument: No man, says Saint Paul, 1. Cor. 3.
can lay any other foundation, then that which is laid, which is Jesus Christ.
But if any man build upon this foundation, Gold, Silver, etc. The work of
every man shall be manifest; for the day will declare it, because it shall be
disclosed by fire, and the fire will prove what every man's work is, etc. But
he shall be saved, as concerning himself, as it were by fire. This last fire
they will have to be Purgatory, by which we are to be saved. Here let us
call to mind again, that which has been so often spoken of: That Symbolicke
Divinity, or that Divinity which is delivered in Similitudes does not prove:
that there is no disputation or argument to be held from Metaphors; that no
Article of doctrine is established, by dark and obscure places: For these be
the Maxims of the old writers, whereunto we do willingly subscribe. Now the
case so stands, as that all this text consists of Metaphors; as, foundation
frame, building, Gold, Silver, etc. Wood, hay, straw, etc. August. de fide
and opcrib. c. 15. and 16. Idem in quaest. ad Dulcit. q. 1.
that it is likewise obscure and difficult. In so much as that S. Augustine does
account it amongst those, whereof Saint Peter speaks, saying: In the Epistles
of Saint Paul, there are certain things that are hard to be understood, etc.
And after that he has given his advice and judgment: I desire (says he) to
hear the wise and learned upon this place, etc. This is to make way, that we
may come to this: that upon a doubtful and dark Exposition, we ought not to
ground any certain doctrine, much less an Article of our Christian faith.
Idem de fide and oper. c. 16. Ambros. in 1. Cor. 3. Hieronym. in. l. 2. in Ioh.
Thom. in 1. Cor. c. 3. Chrysostom. in 1. Cor. c. 3. Ambros. in 1. Cor. 3.
Heronym. in Esaias. c. 5. Haim. in 1. Cor. 3. Greg. li. 4. dial. c. 39. August.
l. de fid. and oper. c. 16. Greg. l. 4. dial. c. 39.
This also is the thing that has begot so many and so diverse interpretations,
almost upon every word. For by builders, some understand all Christians, as S.
Augustine, S. Chrysostom, Theodoret, etc. Other some, the Doctors and Pastors;
as S. Ambrose, Saint Jerome, Thomas and others. Again, some by the word
foundation, do understand true doctrine; by Gold, Silver, etc. good works; by
wood, hay, etc. mortal sins, as Chrysostom, Theophilact, etc. Others, the
preaching of faith, whereupon every man builds his expositions, some of them
being Orthodox, and according to sound doctrine, and other some heretical, as
S. Ambrose, S. Jerome, Haimo, etc. Others, the good works of one part, and the
venial sins on the other, as S. Gregory. Others, the good and evil
hearers, as Theophilact, Oecumenius, etc. Again, by the day S. Augustine, and
Saint Gregory understand this present life, or the time of tribulation, which
causes the good to be known from the wicked: others and those in greater
number, the day of judgment: and yet differing herein, that some will have it
to be the great day of the Lord, as Theodoret, Theophilact, Haimo, Anselme,
etc. The others, that judgment which passes upon every person, so soon as he
is dead; as Caietanus and many of this time. Again, this fire which shall try
the work of every man, by some is taken for tribulations, as S. Augustine and
S. Gregory, and by others for everlasting fire: By some, for the consuming of
the whole world by fire: By other, for Purgatory, and by others for the fire
of the just judgment of God, etc. who examineth and tries, say they, but
punishes not. And in this opinion may S. Ambros. in Psalm 118. August. in
Enchirid. ad Laurent. c. 68.
Ambrose seem to be. And finally, by this fire whereof it is said: But be
shall be saved as it were by fire. Some understand the tribulations of this
life, as Saint Augustine, and S. Gregory; S. Augustine by name, who says,
that this place dark and obscure in it self, must be expounded by diverse
others that are clear and plain, in which, fire does signify the trial of
tribulation. Others, the everlasting fire, as Chrysostom and Theophilact; and
certain also, Purgatory: and amongst them, some after the manner and fashion
of the Church of Rome, others after a certain particular opinion, such namely
as was then common. Which was, that in the very moment of the universal
Judgment, every one without exception should be tried and proved by fire. By
these so variable and differing conjectures, every one may judge with what
face our adversaries can take this place, and the interpretations thereof, for
the foundation of their Purgatory: Seeing also that Bellarmine (a thing worth
the noting) is constrained by reason of the absurdities, that he meets
withal therein, to leave and forsake all; and to refute them, every one for
this or that inconvenience that would ensue, that so he may lay some one
particular and special sense, and that such as may be sound.

Now we cannot better come out of this Labyrinth, then by the course of the
text. Saint Paul therefore having spoken before, of the Doctors and Pastors
that do teach in the Church, and continuing his discourse says: That the
foundation of Religion is Christ, that is to say, the remission and
forgiveness of sin in him: That if those Doctors and Pastors do build upon
this foundation, matter conformable and correspondent unto the same, that is to
say, sound and sincere doctrines and instructions, that then when they come to
trial, they will be able to bear out and undergo the same: whereas on the
contrary, vain and frivolous doctrines, will vanish and turn to nothing as
does the smoke in the air. The sound and sincere ones he compares to Gold,
Silver, and precious stones, matters able to endure the fire: but the corrupt
and vain ones, to wood, hay, or straw, all of them being matter which do not
bear or endure the fire, yea which on the contrary, do serve for nothing
more then to set it on flame and kindle it. Comparisons used elsewhere in the
Scriptures, Psalm. 29. and 119 Prou. 8. and 16
and to the same sense. The commandments of God (says David) are more to be
desired then Gold, Silver or precious stones. The fruit of wisdom is better
then Gold, Silver, or any Iewel-house. In the Psalms and Proverbs the vain
opinions of men, of which notwithstanding they make great account, are compared
to hay, that passes and withers away; Esaias. c. 40. Esaias. 1. and 58 Tertul.
aduers. Matc. l. 5. Dignam aut indignam doctrinam.
and opposed unto the word of God, which indureth for ever. Esaias 40. does
compare them to stubble and dry wood, Esaias 1. and 58. And thus Tertullian,
Saint Jerome, and Saint Ambrose do interpret it: Bellarmine also does not
turn it into any other sense. The Apostle says: Every man's works shall be
discovered and made manifest, for the day will declare what it is. The day,
that is to say, the light, opposed and set against darkness, such darkness,
as under the cloak whereof, the most corrupt Marchandises are covered and
shrouded: the light, which makes them known to be such as they are; Ioh. 5.
according to that which is said: Who so works truly and justly, let him
come to the light, that so his works may be made manifest. Again, That which
makes all things manifest, Ephesians. 4.5.
that is the light. And indeed it is not said here: The day of the Lord, but
the day. And Saint Gregory and Saint Augustine do understand it of this
present life. And this day (says he) shall declare the work unto every one,
because it shall be manifested by fire; for the fire shall try the works of
every man, etc. Assuredly no material fire, but a fire fitted and
proportioned according to these matters: for it behooves, that the Allegory
should hang together. Now the matters or substances are spiritual, as true, or
false; sound and durable, or else vain doctrines. This fire then must be
spiritual, that is, the effectual power of the word of God, and of his
spirit, using to accompany the same, which pearceth even into the most secret
joints and parts: before which in shorter or longer time, all false doctrines
and humane traditions, not builded upon the foundation which Christ has laid,
will be made unable to stand. An usual Metaphor in the Scripture: The words
of the Lord are as silver refined in the fire: Psalm. 19. Malach. 3. Leuit. 1.3.
Am^ros. in Psalm. 118. Ser, 13.
God will purge the Sons of Leui as Gold: you are tried like Gold in the
fire, etc. And so Saint Ambrose has understood it, expounding these words:
Ignitum eloquium tuum, etc. Let come (says he) the word of God, let it enter
into the Church; let it become a consuming fire, let it burn the hay and the
straw, and whatsoever is therein that is not holy and consecrate unto the
Lord; let it melt this leaden Mass of iniquity, etc. Again, This fire, it is
the word of Christ, a good fire which heateth and burns not any thing, save
sin. By this fire built upon the good foundation, this Gold of the Apostles
was tried by this fire, the Silver of works or of manners is examined and
proved by this fire, these goodly buildings of beautiful Jewels and precious
stones, haeue their glass and goodly show given unto them; but the hay and
the straw are consumed. Wherefore this fire refineth and makes clean the
spirit, but consumes and wastes error, etc. And note, that this is he that
did interpret unto us this place heretofore, to be understood of Doctors and
doctrines: and in the same he still persisteth and continues, understanding
by Gold; doctrines, and by Silver, works; in that of sound or vain doctrines,
proceed good or evil works. Hieronim. in Daniel c. 7. In Esaias. c. 66.
Saint Jerome in like manner: God (says he) is called a consuming fire, for
to devour all that which is vicious in us, as hay, wood, stubble, etc. And I
suppose that this is that fire, that did sit upon the tongues of the Apostles.
And it is generally to be noted, that not one of the old Fathers has
understood it of their Purgatory. And what is it that will ensue of the trial
made by this fire? that if the doctrines that shall be proved therein do
abide the hammer; then he which shall have builded upon that good foundation,
shall receive his reward: but and if they burn or fly away in smoke; he
shall loose his time and labor, and yet notwithstanding in as much as he has
built upon the good foundation, and has not defiled nor overthrown it, he
shall be saved; but, (...), as it were by fire, that is to say, as one that
escapes the fire. He that escapes out of the fire, thinks himself to have
performed very much, in having saved himself all bare and naked. For he
accompteth his life for a pray, how much so ever he loose otherwise. And this
is the true signification of the word (...), as it is also of sauuer in our
tongue, Acts. 2.
(...): Save your selves from this froward generation, that is, Eripite vos. As
also these words, (...), but so, as it were by fire, are held for a proverb,
Cicer. de consol. Zachar. 3. Amos. 4. (...)
which we shall not fail to meet withal in all languages, amongst good
Authors: In Latin, Tanquam ex incendio effugere, vel euadere: In Hebrew, (...)
as if a man should say in Greek, (...), a brand saved out of the fire. And
these Particles (...), that is to say, Sic autem quasi do sufficiently show
us, that he does not speak of any sire here in this place, but of a power like
unto fire; and namely that fire, whereof he spoke in the verse going before.
For why shall it in that place signify unto Bellarmine, the severe judgment
of God, examining and making trial of works and doctrines, and in this place,
a material fire of Purgatory, which burns not works or doctrines, whereof
the question is, but the souls of men? And in deed S. Augustine and S.
Gregory have taken both these two fires for one; that is to say, tribulations:
Chrysostom and Theophilact for one; that is, the everlasting fire: and many of
the late writers, for one, namely, Purgatory. The distinction came not to be
known, until such time as it was espied, that the former word could not be
avouched in this signification, and therefore they have restrained it to this
latter. Now we say that this comes to pass in many good Doctors and
Teachers, who have built and brocht many frivolous doctrines of a good
intention, upon this foundation of Christian faith, and cease not,
notwithstanding to be happy by the mercies of God, because they have retained
and held it fast, especially at the time of the approaching of the pangs of
their death: as is recorded of many in writing, and which do now joy and
rejoice in heaven, to see them burnt, and devoured, yea even this pretended
fire also, by the effectual power of the word of God, whom they see and well
perceive to be glorified, in the destruction of their works.

Now whosoever he is that shall read this text without prejudice, will easily
rest satisfied with this interpretation. And in deed that of Bellarmines (for
it does not agree with any of the old writers) cannot free it self from many
inconveniences. We are very near at agreement with him, concerning that which
is to be understood by the foundation, builders, and that which is diversely
built thereupon. But we still differ and cannot agree about the day of fire
which tries and proves the doctrines, nor yet upon the fire, from which the
Teachers do escape and save themselves: he confuteth the opinion of
Caietanus, who understands it to be the day of every particular man's
judgment, that is to say, his last day, or deaths day: And for mine own part
I agree with him therein, as holding it absurd, without bringing any further
witness for the same. But he would understand by the same the latter
judgment, presupposing still, that it is that day of the Lord. Now the Apostle
says, that day simply. He says also, that in that day it shall be
manifested, which side has the truth, by the proof and trial which shall be
made; and that before such, as it concerns to know the same. This then shall
be in this present life, as S. Augustine, and S. Gregory do understand it.
Thus far we both are agreed upon the fire which proves the doctrines; namely,
that it is not any material fire, (contrary to that which they affirm, that
would have it the fire of Purgatory;) but the effectual working of the
Justice and severity of God, in the day of judgment: whereas we understand it
with S. Ambrose, of the word of God, accompanied with his holy spirit,
exercising his authority and power in the Church: And this we hold to be so
much the more agreeable, because the trial is by nature to go before the
sentence of judgment; as also for that this trial is made for the instruction
of the Church, by manifesting and making known, on what side the truth
stands: and therefore in this life, and therefore also before the judgment.
But nevertheless, Bellarmine in all this portion of Scripture hitherto has
not found out Purgatory. About the fire from which the Teachers do save
themselves, we do especially square and disagree, for therein he finds his
Purgatory, but we say unto him, that there is no appearance that from one verse
to an other, this fire should suffer such an alteration and change in his
nature, as of a spiritual, to become material, and of a powerful work of
the judgment of God, to become a real and substantial flame. That these
words, (...), do note out unto us a mere metaphorical fire. That seeing as
he himself says, the question here is of the day of judgment; that therefore
here is no more to do with Purgatory: that seeing the fire of judgment has
already consumed and eaten up the wood, hay, and straw, that there is not
left behind any manner of thing to be burned in this; no not the Author
himself, seeing that he must by this judgment, go presently to life or to
death eternal. For as concerning that Bellarmine says; he shall be saved, but
so as it were by fire, that is to say, he shall be saved, provided always that
he must first have passed and gone through the fire: This is the begging of the
matter in question, and this is to set down for granted, the thing that is in
controversy.

In the end he comes to seek his defense from the old writers: who how
contrary they are one to an other, we have already seen, and it will not
stand him in any service. Chrysostom understands by this latter fire, the
eternal fire; and to be saved, to be as much as not to be consumed in the said
fire. Saint Augustine and Saint Gregory, the tribulations of this life.
Theodoret and Oecumenius, they setting of the universal world on fire, which
shall be accomplished in the day of the last judgment. And as concerning the
place which Saint Thomas alleges out of Theodoret upon this Epistle, it is
not to be found either in the Greek or Latin Copy: but he affirms very
well, that the Teacher shall be saved from the fire of the last judgment,
which shall go before the face of the Judge: Which (says he) will not burn
the just, Alcuinus de Trinit l. 3. c. 21 Orig. hom 3. in Psalm. 26.
but make them shine more clear and bright. Alcuinus and the ordinary Gloss,
do iumpe together with the former sense. Origin understands it of
Purgatory, but it is a Purgatory of his own devise, in that he makes it not
to be till after the last judgment, and through which both Saint Peter and
Saint Paul are to pass, holding that none can be free from the same but Christ
himself, no not the Devils, for by it he holds that they shall be purged.
Ambros. in Psalm.
And Saint Ambrose holding the same from and with him, speaks after the same
sort: and yet notwithstanding he adds thereunto, how that the evil Teachers
shall be for a certain time, after the last judgment in Hell, and yet in the
end they shall be saved: To the end (says he) that it may yet turn to some
profit to have believed in Christ. But what proves all this for our
Purgatory? And what will themselves say of Gregory, Gregor. l. 4. Dial. c. 39.
who durst not deal or meddle with the expounding of the place: If any man
(says he) think good to understand it of the fire of that Purgation which is
to come, it is meet that he should thoroughly weigh and consider of the same,
etc. Cardinal Hugo likewise does object the same doubts about the same, that
Saint Augustine does upon Purgatory, and so keeps himself, to the taking of
it for the fire of tribulation, and the loss of temporal things. And in deed
Erasmus of our time, has declared in his Commentaries, that this place
affords not any thing, that may belong either to Purgatory, or to the
venial sins, Index Expurg.
as they pretend. For which his plain dealing they have commanded the place to
be raced and blotted out.

In the 1. Corinthians 15. The Apostle speaking of the resurrection, says: 1.
Cor. 15 29.
Else what shall they do which are baptized for the dead, (...), if the dead
rise not again? To be baptized say they for the dead, that is to afflict
themselves for them, that is to do all such things, as may seem to serve for
the satisfying and purging of their sins. Wherefore they are yet in some
place, where they may be relieved and succored, Therefore in Purgatory. Now
this is nothing else, but to make themselves continual breakers of that Rule
which says: That a man ought not to reason or gather any arguments from the
places which are dark and doubtful. Now they dare not deny, that there is
any place in all the new Testament more obscure even for the litterall sense
then this. And notwithstanding they will presuppose and set down any
Exposition thereof, after their own fantasies; whereas all the Divines that
were for the space of fifteen hundred years were to seek therein. And hardly
are there as yet any found that can satisfy themselves therein. For, one says
that the Apostle speaks of them, who seeing some die without Baptism, caused
others that were alive to be baptized for them; so well assured they were of
the resurrection. Epiphan. ad. ucrs. haeres. l. 1. tom. 2. Haimo in Ep. ad Cor.
c 5. August. de Ciuit. Dei. l. 20. ca. 9. Chrysostom. and Ambr. in 1. Cor. c. 15.
Cypr. l. 4. Ep. 7 Tertull. de Resurr. carn. Chrysostom. in 1. Cor. c. 15. and in
1. Cor. hom. 23
Epiphanius recites this opinion. And Saint Ambrose understands it after the
same manner: and after him Haimo says: And yet such a custom, as the Apostle
only alleges without approving it; and that only to shame the Corinthians
with their incredulity and unbelief. And the ordinary Gloss does note the
same. An other says that this is to be understood of such as were bedridden, or
sick in their beds, and could not arise, or such as were baptized, lying upon
their death bed, or in extreme peril of their life. An other, of those which
were dead and after baptized; to show that Baptism was not only a sign of
the resurrection of the body, but also of the soul. And thus Tertullian may
seem to understand it in his Book of the Resurrection. Chrysostom refers
it to the words of Baptism, saying: If there be no resurrection, then all that
we do in Baptism, is but a play: Namely, because in it is contained the
figure, and resemblance both of death, and of the resurrection together. And
Theodoret after the same manner, that he which is baptized, is buried with the
Lord: In vain (says he) if the body be not to rise again with him. And
Saint Thomas, is not far off from the taking of it in the same sense. In a
word, there are some which refer it to the custom of celebrating of
Baptismes in Church-yardes; wherein the ordinary exercises of the first
Christians were wont to be kept. Out of which of these old and ancient
Expositions is it, that they collect and gather this Purgatory? Or by which of
the old writers do they approve their own, these men are they whom I ask,
which make such account of the Fathers, which think them all to be on their
side. So that it will suffice us only to deny their interpretation: Namely,
that to be baptized, is to be afflicted, is to pray for the dead, and in
stead thereof, we will hold and affirm that to be baptized, in the text of
the Gospel which they pretend, is to die for the name of Christ, and to suffer
Martyrdom. Chrysostom upon these words: Luke 12. Mark. 10. Chrysostom. in Math.
hom. 66
You may, says the Lord, be baptized with the Baptism, wherewith I am
baptized, etc. Here (says he) I promise you many good things; you shall
purchase the Crown of Martyrdom, and by a violent death, you shall depart out
of this life, as I myself, etc. The ordinary Gloss: He speaks here of the
Baptism of his passion. And yet notwithstanding this is the place from whence
they would draw their Exposition. What shameless and impudent dealing is
this, to expound, to be baptized, to signify to be afflicted; and that to be
afflicted, should signify to pray for the dead, and that for those dead which
are in Purgatory. Let them tell me, if this manner of reasoning can be used
in any good School without shame? But yet after all, to what end had it been
for Saint Paul to have attempted the proving of the resurrection of bodies, by
the souls tormented in Purgatory? And what would his argument have been in
the end? And why at the least did they not hold themselves, either to Cardinal
Hugo, who says, Pro mortuis, that is to say, for their sins, although very
darkly: or yet for the better, Caietan. in 1. Cor. c. 15.
to the Exposition of Cardinal Caietan: For (says he) in that that they
which are baptized are dipped into the water; it is to be understood, that they
are dead unto the world: And whereas they profess to die unto the same, that
so they may enter into newness of life, they represent the resurrection of the
dead.

The Apostle says to the Philippians: Philip. 2.10.
To the end that every knee may bow, of those which are in heaven and in
earth, and under the earth. These last are they which live in Purgatory: for
the Devils say they do not worship. The sense is clear: That our Lord having
humbled and abased himself to the taking of the form not of man only, but
even of a servant; God has lifted him up on high, and given him a name about
all names, these are the words going before, that is to say, an absolute power
and Sovereignty over all creatures, acccording to that which he says himself
elsewhere: All power is given unto me in heaven and in earth. And in the
Apocalips he adds thereto: Math. 28. Apocal. 5.
The creatures which are in the Sea, etc. Now the question is not here of an
adoration, but of a subjection; not of the confessing or acknowledging of a
Father, but of a Judge, Hebr. 1.
according to that which is said: And he has made him Judge of all things.
They make a great matter of the bowing of the knee, and that is it which
galleth them most. S. Paul to the Romans alleges Esaias: I live (says the
Lord) that every knee shall bow before me, Romans 14. Esaias. 45.13.
and every tongue shall give praise unto God. There was greater show, why it
should be understood of worshipping and adoration; and yet he expounds it of
the judicial throne of Christ, Tertull. ca 17 and 1. de Trinit. Thom in Ep. ad
Philip. c. 2.
and of his last judgment. And indeed Tertullian understands it of
subjection and not of adoration. The ordinary Gloss says here: As well the
Angels as men, and the Devil. Thomas likewise: The Angels willingly and
freely, the Devils will they, nill they: That is (says he) according to that
which S. James says, that even the Devils themselves do tremble. Romans 9.
S. Ambrose interprets it by this place of the Epistle to the Romans: Which
is God, blessed above all things, etc. For (says he) there is nothing in the
world, but heavenly, earthly or infernal things: and refers it to the
authority that Christ holds of the Father, Chrysostom. ad Philip. c. 2. Haimo
and Caict. in Ep. ad Philip.
etc. Chrysostom to the glory of Christ, under which, both men and Angels,
and Devils do bow and stoop; even all both just and righteous, as also the
sinners and rebellious. And Haimo, Hugo, and Caietan after the same manner. And
in deed Bellarmine dare not urge this place, neither yet that of the Apocalips;
but confesses that they prove not the matter. Neither has it been alleged
by any, certain Monks only of this time and age excepted, who make up their
Purgatory, of whatsoever comes to their hands, even as frantic men, who
sansie every thing that is said unto them. For how was it possible for the old
writers to find it here under the earth, when as Saint Gregory sought it in
hot waters, in bathes, and in the shadows of trees? When Alcuinus seated it
in the air betwixt heaven and earth? When the certain place where it was, was
uncertain unto them, until the time of Beda, to whom I know not what spirit
did reveal it to be under the earth?

In the first of S. Peter, Christ (says he) has suffered once for sins, 1
Pet 3.18.
etc. being mortified in the flesh, but quickened by the spirit, by the which he
also went and preached to the spirits that were in prison. This prison say
they, is Purgatory. Let them read that which follows, and then they will
unsay it again: Having been disobedient in times past, when as the patience
of God did once attend and wait in the days of Noe, etc. The question then is
about matters happening in the days of Noe: Now they are not yet resolved that
there was any Purgatory in the time of the old Testament: And in deed they
have evermore expounded this place of the limbs, so that by building their
Purgatory upon this place, they have broken down the partition wall. Again,
the Gospel is preached, to be heard, understood and received in faith. And
they themselves do affirm that faith is not begotten, or to be come by in
Purgatory: To what end or use then should this preaching serve in Purgatory?
Again, to the unbelieving and disobedient, for whom according to their own
doctrine, purgatory was never builded? Now in deed the true sense and meaning
is, that the spirit of Christ at all times has called men to repentance, yea
even in the days of Noe, those rebellious persons who abused the patience and
long suffering of God, and who notwithstanding, standing out disobedient unto
the same, are therefore holden captives in prison, that is to say, in eternal
punishment. And the Greek article leads us hereunto, (...), as also the word
(...) prison, when the question is of spirits, is ordinarily taken for here.
In the Apocalypse, Satan shall be let loose from his prison: and elsewhere, Apoc.
20. 2. Pet. 2. Jude 1.
The Devils are tied up in chains of darkness, in everlasting bonds, etc.
But seeing they will not accept of our expositions: yet at the least I would
have them to stand to the fathers. Clement Alexandrine says, Clem. l. 6
that Christ and the Apostles did preach the Gospel unto the damned; but this
he takes out of certain Apocrypha writings, attributed unto Saint Peter,
and S. Paul, who had corruptly understood this place. In ep. ad Epict.
Athanasius says, that during the time that the body was in the grave, (...)
the word, went to preach to the spirits that were in hell: that is to say,
says Damascene, Damasc. l. 3. de Orthod. fid. c 6.
Not for to convert them to the faith, but to convince them of their unbelief;
this preaching being no other thing but a manifesting of his deity unto the
infernal powers, by the descending of Christ into hell. S. Augustine ad
Euodium, handles this very place, August. ad Euod. epist. 99.
and turns it into all the ways that it may be taken and understood, that
so he might come by the true sense, and yet has not remembered Purgatory in
any one small word: in the end he concludes thus; That to the end that he may
avoid the inconveniences, that follow other expositions, it must be
understood not of any going down into hell, but of the operation and powerful
working of his deity, which he exercised from the beginning of the world: that
is to say, that he preached unto them, which lived here below, imprisoned in
this mortal body by the spirit of his divine nature, sometimes by inward and
secret inspirations, and sometimes by outward admonitions, proceeding from the
mouth of the just. And thus it is to be seen, how that for Purgatory he
understands this present life. Thom. 3. p. ^. 62. art. 2.
And Thomas does likewise approve the same, handling this question of purpose.
To be short, Cardinal Hugo says: In carcere, in the prison of sin and
unbelief, etc. And their Gloss: Of the darkness of infidelity, or of
carnal desires, etc. And Lyranus: Bound and chained with the common custom of
sin. And as concerning the whole place, they understand it, Of the preaching
of Noe, which he practiced amongst the infidels of his time, Heb. 13.
to draw them to repentance, by the spirit of Christ: for says he, Christ is
yesterday and to day the same, and for ever and ever: what makes all this then
for Purgatory?

In the first of S. John: If any man see his brother sin a sin that is not
to death, 1. John 5.16.
let him ask of God, and he will gine him life: to all them I say, which do
not sin unto death. There is a sin unto death, I do not say that thou
should pray for it etc. From hence they infer, those which sin unto
death, Are those that persist in infidelity, says Saint Augustine, even unto
death: and for such we ought not to pray, either whiles they live, August. de
cor. and great. c. 12.
or when they are dead. For such then as have showed some repentance, or which
have sinned venially, we must pray both whiles they live, and when they be
dead. But how can this be gathered out of this text? wherein the Apostle
speaks directly of them with whom we live, Idem in Enchir. ad Laurent. c. 82.
Idem de scrm. Domini. in Monte. Tertul. l. de pudicitia.
and whose works we see, of the dead, not so much as one word. They allege
unto us S. Augustine, who expounds it of perpetual impenitencie: let them
not then dissemble, how that in another place he expounds it of certain
kinds of sins, as also does Tertullian. Neither would I have them to
conceal it, how that the most part of the old writers do dissent from Saint
Augustine, as Saint Jerome, Athanasius, Chrysostom, Saint Basil, Saint
Ambrose, etc. all which though they understand by this sin unto death, the
sin against the holy Ghost, yet therewithal they understand, that this is
not a final impenitencie, which is not discerned but at the time of death: but
an obstinate sin which is committed in the life time, and in the course of
the same. Saint Matthew says: That this sin is not pardoned either in this
world or in the world to come. In this world, that is to say, in this life: and
in this sense our adversaries do allege it against us; but they do not
remember themselves of any thing else. The Apostle to the Hebrews says: It is
impossible that such persons should be renewed by repentance. Hebr. 6.
Then they may be impenitent, yea sin unto death before death. But what
manner of conclusion will there follow hereof in the end? We must not pray for
such as sin unto death, therefore we must pray for the dead, which sin
not unto death? Again, we must pray, to the end that life may be given
them, that is to say, to the end that their sins may be pardoned. Now is it
not a point of their doctrine, that sins do not come in purgatory, but that
there is only the punishment of sins? but and if any sins, yet none but
those that are slight ones? But in their conclusion they except not any sin,
save that which is unto death. To be short, to such as well consider the text,
it will appear that they are so far off from reasoning according to it, as
that in deed they reason directly to the contrary. And furthermore not one of
the old writers, neither yet of the new, does allege it to this purpose;
although the greatest part do handle and expound the same, and that to another
end.

Now these are all the places of the new Testament, from which they go about to
prove their purgatory: places that are obscure and hard and diversely
interpreted by the Doctors, but either in a far other sense then our
adversaries take them: or else mystically and metaphorically for the most part,
and therefore not to be alleged in any controversy of divinity, no more
then in any other: for controversies cannot be discussed by textes in
controversy. And this is the reason why the good man Perion said: That in all
the canonical scripture he knew not any place, either proving purgatory,
Roffensis.
or prayer for the dead. And the Bishop of Rochester: That of a truth there is
not any place for the proving of the same, except it be some such as is very
intricate. And Petrus a Soto after him: That there is not any clear evidence
and testimony in the scripture for Purgatory: but that many other thing:
ought to be believed, which are not contained therein. To what end therefore
serves all this shameless dealing, thus to tumble and toss the scripture
vpside down, thus to rack and torment all the textes one after another,
seeing they know in their consciences, that the scripture knows not any
purgatory? But for certain, that text which knows not to agree any whit
with their exposition, does know well enough to admit and receive ours: It
does not know theirs, Mark. 16.
being always for the proof of that third pretended place: for it says, Who
so shall believe and be baptized, shall be saved: but he that shall not have
believed, shall be condemned, John. 3
etc. Again, God has sent his only Son into the world, to the end, that
he that shall believe in him might not perish, but have everlasting life: He
that belieueth in him is not judged, but he that belieueth not in him is
already judged, etc. Again, He that belieueth in him which has sent me, has
eternal life, he comes not into judgment, he is already past from death
t^olife. And so passed the thief into Paradise the same hour. Again, Blessed
are they that die in the Lord; Romans 4.
for from that time says the spirit, they rest from their labors; blessed are
they whose sins are forgiven. But according to their own sayings, the sins
of those which are in their Purgatory, are they not remitted, and are they not
dead in the Lord? And yet what time must they endure in the burning and flaming
fire of this purgatory? And thus says Saint Paul: That there is no
condemnation to them that are in Jesus Christ. And thus said our Lord to that
man: Let the dead bury the dead: who would not have hindered him from
performing any work of charity. And S. Paul again: Take no care for those
which sleep. All these places of scripture cannot stand with Purgatory. But
they have very well known ours, even Christ the eternal Son of God, who by
himself has wrought the purging away of our sins, Apocal. 14. Heb 1. Hebr.
9. Tit. 2. Ephesians. 5. 1. John 1.
whose blood cleanses our consciences from the works of death: who has given
himself, for to purge a people peculiar to himself, to cleanse a Church for
himself by the washing of water in the word: who purges and cleanses us by
his blood from all sin. In so much as that through that confidence, which we
have in this our so sufficient Purgatory, we are able to say, without fearing
any other: I desire to be loosed and to depart from hence, and to be with
Christ. Because likewise that we know, that if the tabernacle of this our
house of earth be dissolved, Philip. 1.2. Cor. 5.
we shall have abuilding with God, and that not such a building as is made with
hands, but eternally abiding in the heavens. And that not after some
intermission of time, but presently and forthwith, hodie inquam, to day: even
from the hour in which he shall call us out of this world, because that we
believe in him. And therefore also we have already attained life, yea we are
already passed from death to life.

CHAP. VIII. That neither the Primitive Church, nor the fathers of the same,
for the space of many ages, did ever acknowledge the Purgatory of the Church
of Rome.
But say they, if we should go to it but according to man's reason, would not it
give sentence with us, that so many persons as die so quickly, have need of
this manner of purging, their souls departing impure and unclean out of this
world, and so unfit to be received into heaven with that their pollution?
Whereunto we answer them, that the bar and judgment seat that is directed
by humane reason has no place in the Church: that in that skill of the law
which professes the defense and maintenance of Christianity, it is a shame to
speak without testimony and authority out of the word, and that a great
deal more, then to speak in the civil law, without law: But how much more
shame is it then, when a man undertakes to speak for Christianity, and
holds a course contrary to the scriptures. And this we have learned from the
ancient writers. Tertullian: Let us reverence the fullness of the scriptures,
if we will not undergo the woe ordained for such as add unto them. Basil:
This is to fall away from the faith, either to cast away and cut off any part
of that which is written, or to add any thing that is not. Chrysostom; The
thoughts of the hearers halt when they have a doctrine delivered them without
any scripture. S. Augustine: Let us see if this be taught in the law or
prophets, or in the Gospel or Epistles. Gerson in like manner: Let us suspect
all manner of revelations, if they be not confirmed by the law and the
Prophets. But these ancient fathers here alleged have also believed
Purgatory. Let us admit that it is so, (as it is not in deed) yet we answer
as we have done before: that we do not allow of the old fathers, as lawgiuers
in the Church: For there is but one law maker (says the Apostle) even Jesus
Christ: and themselves took it as an injury offered unto them to be so
reputed: only they accounted of themselves as expounders of the law ordained by
our Lord, and of the scriptures which he has left us. And this is the greatest
honor that can be given them in the Church: and in this respect and
consideration we honor their books, we weigh and ponder their expositions;
where they are found to differ one from another, we endeavor our selves to make
our choice of the best, even those which come nearest unto the analogy and
proportion of faith. If we do otherwise, if we admit of them as authors of
doctrines, and not interpretors, we shall be in danger to be as we said,
Anabaptists with Saint Cyprian; Montanistes with Tertullian, Chiliastes with
Ireneus, etc. In stead that we are to abide and continue Christians with
Christ, whose voice the sheep hear: who alone has the woraes of eternal
life. Now we have heretofore cited all the Doctors, to the interpreting of the
places, produced and alleged by our adversaries for purgatory, who could not
see it there where they did find it; who for the most part have in the said
places found the contrary: and yet we will proceed on further, as namely to
show, that the ancient fathers have affirmed such Maxims, as wherewith the
Romish Purgatory cannot stand: As that when they have at any time spoken of
it, they do it not affirmatively, but doubtfully, and not as of an article of
religion, but as of a fantasy or opinion that may be propounded and received
for arbitrarie: that for the most part what they have said, cannot agree with
that which we are in controversy about at this day. And finally, that if they
had believed it for a necessary article, they had collected and gathered from
thence, as from a principle of faith, such corollaries and consequences as we
see at this day: which never came to light, till a long time after, and one
long after another, and that by the succession of many ages. And to the end
that this may more clearly be seen, let us call to mind, at our entrance into
the same, what purgatory it is whereof we speak, as namely of a certain
third place, whither the souls of the faithful, dead in the faith of Christ,
go at the time of their departure out of this life, there to be tormented with
fire, before they be received into the place of bliss: yea and that so long,
as until by the prayers and suffrages of those that are living there be
satisfaction made for the temporal punishments due for the same: and that all
the spots of uncleanness be purged and cleansed away: that is, for that
(say they unto us) by faith in Christ, we have remission of the fault and
sin only, and not of the eternal punishment due to the same, which by the
favor and power of the keys is changed from being eternal and made
temporal, and for that we must of necessity satisfy this temporal
punishment either in this life, or in the life to come by our selves, or by
some others, etc.

And now behold the Maxims of the ancient fathers contrary to Purgatory. The
propositions held by the old writers contrary to purgatory. Basil. reg. bren.
inter 10. and 13. Ambr. in Luc. l. 10. c. 22.
The first: that God by Jesus Christ does wholly and altogether deface and blot
out both the sin and the punishment. S. Basil: Thesoule wallowing in the
mire of sin, how can it approach or come near unto God? verily by constantly
and steadfastly believing, that the purging and cleansing of his sins is
accomplished by the blood of Jesus Christ in the multitude of the mercies of
God, according to that which he himself has spoken; If your sins were as
red as skarlet, they shall be made as white as the wool. Saint Ambrose: We
embrace and take hold on Christ, that so he may say unto us, be not afraid of
the sins of this world, neither of the floodes of afflictions which vex and
besiege the body, J am the remission of sins, etc. Saint Augustine: August.
de verb. Dom. ser. 37. and 31. Idem de Trini. l. 4 c. 2.
Christ in taking upon him the punishment and not the fault, has blotted out
and utterly defaced both the fault and punishment due to the same. Again, We
live not in this world without sin, but we shall go out of this world
without sin. Again, What shall we pray for in this life? verily that we
may find remission and forgiveness in the world to come. What profits this
pardon and forgiveness? it wipeth not away the stain. He that acknowledges a
wrinkle, labors to smooth and make it plain: And where then are our
wrinkles stretched out and smoothed? etc. verily upon the cross of Christ, for
upon this cross he has shed his blood: and this is that whereby the Church
is cleansed from all spots and wrinkles, as a thing very clean and bright,
etc. Again; There is but one purging of the unjust, the blood of that just one
and the humbling of God. Chrysostom. in 1. Cor. hom. 18.
Saint Chrysostom in many places: That God punishes not his faithful
children, either upon any pleasure that he takes therein, neither upon any
creditor-like rigor, which he exercises upon us. In that he chastises us
(says he) it is rather for the admonishing of us, then for the condemning of
us; for the curing of us, then for the correcting of us; for the amending of
us, then for the punishing of us. The Apostle (says he) says not, 1. Cor.
11.31
if we punish and afflict our selves, if we take punishment of our selves, but
if we judge our selves, that is to say, if only we will acknowledge our
sins, we shall not be judged. Chrisost. in Genes. hom. 44.
Again, I do require (says the Lord) but one thing, which is, that men would
confess their sins, and that they would abstain from committing them any
more, and then I will not lay any more punishment upon them for their sins.
And in another place: Idem in ^roem. in Isa.
I will not (says he) that thou should say unto me, I have sinned, how may
I be freed from so many sins? Thou can not procure the means: but thy Lord
is able, who will in such sort blot out thy sins, as that there shall not
remain any mark or print thereof, for otherwise then it is wont to fall out
in the body: for in the body after the healing of a wound there remains a
scarre, God be pardons the sin, God remitteth and forgiueth the punishment,
God gives righteousness therewithal, he makes also the sinner equal with him
that has not sinned, etc. S. Jerome: Hieronym. in Esa. c. 66. Idem in Daniel.
c 7. and in psalm. 31.
God is called a consuming fire, to the end he way consume all the vices that
are in us, our hay, our wood, our stubble: I think that it was that fire that
did sit upon the tongs of the Apostles. Again, Blessed are they whose
iniquities are forgiven, and whose sins are covered: because says he, that
that which is hidden is not seen: and that which is not seen is not imputed;
and that which is not imputed is not punished, etc. The schoolmen affirm the
like. Lombard says: Lombard. 3. D. 19.
If we look upon and behold with a right faith, him that was hanged upon the
tree for us, we are set free from the bonds of the Devil: we are delivered
from sin and Satan in such sort as that after this life there is not any thing
to be found in us to be punished: for our Lord by his death, by this only true
sacrifice has put out and extinguished all those sins that were in us, whereby
the Devil had power to hold and lay hands upon us to punish us. Whereupon also
Scotus says: Scot. in l. sent. D. 15. Glos in c. 1. de poenit. D.
No man can satisfy for sins, save in the power and virtue of the passion of
Christ. And the Gloss of the Decree: Sins are not forgiven, either for the
contrition of the heart, neither yet for the confession of the mouth, but by the
grace of God. And yet the contrition of the heart is a sign that the sins are
remitted, and the outward satisfaction a sign of the contrition of the heart:
for grace goes before contrition, etc. Now let our adversaries agree and
reconcile these Maxims here set down with those of purgatory, whose
foundation they will have to be a necessity of satisfaction, the forgiveness
of the sin, but not of the punishment, and an insufficiency of that purgation
which the blood of Christ has made, etc.

The second, and it affords as little favor to the adversary as the first.
Just Mart. in quaest. and ^espons. q. 10.
Justin Martyr. The history of Lazarus and the rich man goes through stitch
with this doctrine: namely, that after the separation of the soul and the
body, men cannot possibly receive any succor or relief by any manner of
careful providence whatsoever. The same: Quaest. 75.
After that the souls are separated from their bodies, there is presently a
distinction made betwixt the good and the evil, the one to be conueighed into
Paradise, and the other into hell, etc. Justin in Tryphon. Cypr. contr Demetr.
tract.
Again in his Tryphon: This is a sentence of Christ, In quibus vos
deprehendero, in ijsdem vos iudicabo. And S. Cyprian expounds it: Such (says
he) as God finds thee when he calls thee out of this world unto himself,
for such a one will he judge thee. Again, We exhort you to make satisfaction,
whiles you have any of these worldly things left you, etc. Again, After that a
man is departed hence, there remains no more place for repentance, there is
not any further use of satisfaction: thereupon follows either the loss of
life or the saving of it, etc. Thou although thou be upon thy departure, upon
the laying down of this life, pray unto God for the pardoning of thy sins,
confess them to him in faith; he pardons those which confess; he lets
loose such as believe that they may be saved; and from the path of death men
pass into the place of immortality. What a cold comfort had it been unto
them if he had said: Athanas. in variis quaest. quae cius utulo seruntur. q. 19.
Men making an end of this their walk, do pass into the torments of
Purgatory? Athanasius: The souls departed hence, it is a profound question
and hidden from us, to show whither they go, and in what condition they are:
for never did God permit it unto any man to return and make report of these
matters: only we learn from the scriptures, that the souls of sinners go
down under the earth, into such place, as wherein they neither see the light,
nor the manner of the lives of men: but that those of the just and righteous
since the death of Christ went into Paradise, which our Lord has set open, not
for the thief only, but for all the souls of the Saints. Basil. in Moral.
reg. 1. c. 2. and 5. Gregor. Nazianz in laudem Caesar.
Saint Basil: The time whiles men live here is the time of repentance: for so
soon as we be gone hence, the time of doing well is cut off and taken from
us. Gregory Nazianzene: The words of the wise lead me to believe, that every
soul that is excellent and beloved of God, so soon as it is departed hence
being loosed out of the body, receives an vnspeak eable delight and pleasure
of the lively feeling of that felicity, which is appointed for it, and
betaketh it self with a joyful flight to the Lord. How agrees this joy with
grief and pain? this flight to God with purgatory? Ambros. de Bono mortis.
S. Ambrose: David labored to attain to the blessed communion of the saints,
craving by reason of the filthiness cleaving unto us in this worldly
pilgrimage, that his sins might be forgiven him before his departure out of
this life: for he has not obtained remission of his sins here, shall never
come by it there: It will not be there at all, because that such a one shall
not possibly attain unto eternal life, seeing that eternal life is the
remission of sins. Idem ibid.
And therefore (he says) forgive me, to the end I may be comforted before I go
hence and be no more. Again, When the day shalk^ come (says he) let us go on
without fear, directly to the company of the Saints: for we shall go to our
fathers, to them which have instructed us in the faith; to that end, that when
our works do fail us, our faith might sustain and succor us, August. ad
Maced. cp. 54.
and our inheritance defend us, etc. The Maxims of S. Augustine in like manner
are: After this life every man shall have that which he has purchased unto
himself: In this life there is place for repentance for such as endeavor
themselves thereto: Idem de temp. sermon. 66.
Here the mercy of God does help; but out of this life it serves to no use,
etc. In such case as thy last day finds thee, in such case shall the last day
of the world take hold upon thee. For as a man dies in the one, Idem de
verb. Apost. ser. 18.
so shall he be judged in the other. There are two places of abode, the one
in eternal fire, the other in an everlasting kingdom. The one (says he in
another place) for the faithful, Idem in psalm. 32. Idem de peccat. meritis. l.
1, c, 2, 8. Idem in l. qui ei adscribitur de vanitate saeculi. Chrysostom. de
Lazaro, hom. 2 Idem in Genes. hom 5. and 3. de paenit Hiero. in 13. q. 2. c. in
praesent.
which is the kingdom of heaven: the other for the Apostates and unfaithful in
hell: of any third we know nothing at all, neither yet do we find any thing
thereof in the scriptures. Again, There is no third or middle place for any
man: so that he which is not with Christ, can not possibly be any where else
but with the Deuilles. Again, Know this, that so soon as the soul is
separated from the body, either it is placed in paradise for his good works,
or else for his sins cast headlong into hell, in Tartara inferni: and
therefore choose you to which of these you will stand, etc. Chrysostom: So
long as we live here upon earth we promise to our selves goodly things
through hope, but so soon as we are deceased, there is no more time of
repenting us, neither yet of washing away of our sins. For (says he in
another place) he that has not washed himself clean from his sins in this
life shall not after it find any comfort or consolation: for here is the time
of wrestling and fighting; there of triumphing and receiving of gifts. S.
Jerome: So long as we are in this world we may receive aid and succor one of
another, either by prayer or good counsel: but when as we shall once come
before the throne of Christ, neither can Job, Daniel, nor Noe pray for us, but
every man shall bear his own burden. But our fathers of Trent have caused the
same to be razed in the Table. Index expurg. 1^0. Hieronym. ad Ga. c. 6.
Again, upon this place of the Galathians: Let us do good whiles it is time,
etc. Here (says he) is the last time of sowing, let us make speed, that we may
have sown all our fields, etc. Again, upon the Epitaph of Paula: All this
which returns to the Lord is accounted amongst his family: That which we make
account of to be lost, that is it which is placed in heaven: for in that that
Paula has dwelt in this body, she has been absent from the Lord, as it were
for so much time as one journey or voyage would require, Peregrinabatur a
Domino, etc. Again he says: Id m^de obitu ^lesillae ad Paulam.
After that Blessilla was returned to her maker, discharged of the burden of
this life, and advanced again to her old possession and inheritance, from which
she had discontinued, etc. Again. Let us weep for the dead, but for him that
is gone to hell, not for them who are accompanied with hosts of Angels; not
those to whom Christ himself comes before, etc. Epiphanius in the same
sense: Epiphan. (...). l, 2, tom. 1.
In the world to come after that man is dead, there is no succor, no place for
fasting, calling to repentance, or of making any vain ostentation of alms
deeds, etc. For as after the mowing down of the corn the grain adds
nothing to his grosnesse, neither yet is subject to be corrupted with the wind,
etc. So likewise all succor and help either by fasting, penance, etc. after
death is clean gone and vanished. For Lazarus comes not from where he was to
the rich man, nor the rich man to Lazarus: Abraham casts not his spoils and
booty to the poor man to enrich him: (...). I^de apud Tertullianum ad Scamina
producete, ad Marter. c 3, and apud Ambr. l. 1. de Offic.
neither yet does the rich man any more receive the thing which he requesteth:
how importunate soever he were with courteous and bountiful Abraham: For the
garners are sealed up, the time accomplished, the battle finished, the
champions their places void and empty, and the garlandes distributed. Such as
have fought are at rest, they which have not excelled are gone: those which
have not striuen and fought are not any more: such as have been overcome are
cast out: all things are fully consumate and finished. Let our adversaries
here again reconcile these Maxims and their purgatory; two places and not one
more, with a third: the immediate inioying of the heavenly life, with their
dark and dolorous abode in Purgatory, the unprofitableness of all manner of
satisfactions after this life, with their Masses, Suffrages, and other
pretended satisfactions.

Some will say unto us: yea but it is received into the Christian Churches;
From whence purgatory came, and in what sense this word is used of the old
writers. Plato de Anima and in Gorgia. Eusebius. l. 1. de prepar. Euang. c. vlt.
and l. 12. Arnob. l. 2. contr. Gentes.
yea it reigns there: yea it triumphs there. And how then, or from whence
came it, or entered it thereinto, seeing it is not of Christ? By what door, or
rather through what windows, seeing that it did never enter by the scriptures?
verily we have declared heretofore: As namely, that they that were converted to
Christ, whether from Iudaisme or from Paganism, did bring with them either
their ceremonies, or their opinions: and this happened in this article, as in
others: For Plato who lived about 400. years before the coming of Christ,
has this piece of doctrine so entire and whole, as that it may seem to be
nothing else then his words translated. For he makes, and that by the report
of Eusebius himself, in his book of the soul, three degrees of men: some
that have lived well and virtuously, whom they conceived to have their abode in
the Elisian fields, as accompting them for most pure places and heavenly
habitations: Those whom he calls (...), past hope of amendment, whom he
places in Tartaro, in hell, from whence they can never come out, and those
which have committed sins, but (...), such as are curable and venial, whom
he casts into burning floods, there to accomplish and make perfect their
repentance, to the end they may be purged therein, and after their purgation
receive absolution. And in deed he uses these words (...), to purge and
absolve. Yet notwithstanding note, that Eusebius who compares the opinions of
Philosophers with the doctrines of Christians, does not make any mention
therein, but only of two conditions of men after death; namely, of the saved
or of the damned. A plain and clear testimony, that the Church in his time
did acknowledge no other but these two. Virgill describes it at large in the
sixth book of his Aeneidos: Aliis sub gurgite vasto

Infectum eluitur scelus aut exuritur igni: Virgil. l. 6. Aencid.
Where he may seem to have expressed the two verbes before mentioned, (...).
And, Donec longa dies perfecto temporis orb,
Concretam exemit labem, etc.


Wherefore S. Augustine needed not to be abashed, when he said: August. de
ciuit. Dei, l. 21. c. 13. and 17.
That Purgatory was one of Platoes doctrines. As also, That the dead may be
relieved by the suffrages and sacrifices of the living: in so much as that the
souls which are destitute thereof are still delaied and caused in lingering manner
to lie languishing in torments: Homer. Odyss. 12. Virg. l. 6. Aenei. Alcor.
Azo. 10.
as we read of the soul of Elpenor in Homer, and of Palinurus in Virgill,
etc. In like manner the Jesuits do not let to confess, that purgatory is sound
there. And we do further give them to understand, that it is all whole to be
had in the Turks Alcoran, if that of the Paganes do not content them. The
Jews as we have seen, learned the same of the pagans, upon their falling away
from their manner of worship and religion: and yet not so, as that it prevailed
with them to get a place in their Church: for in the time of our Lord there
appeared no marks, or notes of any such thing, but rather the contrary. Paul.
Fagius in Deuteronomy. c. 14. Anton Margarita de superstitionibus Iudaic.
The books of remembrance which they use at this day, and wherein they name
three times a year those which are dead in the year, praying to God that he
would place them in his paradise with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, etc. are come
since the^. And this is made most apparent by their order: for the extreme and
deadly sick was demanded if he did not persevere to hold fast and believe the
13. Articles of their faith, amongst the which the eleventh is of the glory to
come, and of eternal death: the twelfth of their faith and belief in the
Messiah, for want whereof they say the law is unprofitable: the thirteenth of
the vivification or resurrection of the dead: of Purgatory not a word,
neither yet of the Suffrages by which they should be freed out of the same.
There happens one to die, whereupon we come to see all their ceremonies,
even to the least. Their nearest kinsfolks do rent their garments: they eat
not for that day in the house, but without: they eat not any flesh, neither
drink any wine except it be upon their Sabbath: They neither wash nor anoint
themselves for the space of seven days: They lie upon the ground, and refrain
the company of their wives: They follow the body barefooted: They light a
lamp for the space of seven whole nights, setting it on the house flower,
persuaded thereto through a sottish and fantastical conceit, that the soul
comes during the same time for to seek the body, etc. And this is all that
humane superstition had till then invented, the most part thereof being
contrary to the pure word of the eternal God, forbidding them in express
words not to torment themselves for their dead. And as for their prayer, if
you observe the terms thereof, it will appear to come nearer the nature of a
wish, then of a prayer: Let his soul rest, let his sleep be in peace, let
the gates of paradise be opened unto him by the Comforter that is to come,
etc. And what is there in all this that is common with Purgatory? And in deed
their Capitula patrum, do not make mention of any more then two places. But
amongst Christians, the first seeds of this doctrine are contained in the
books declared to be Apocripha by the Primitive Church, and so by consequent
the doctrine also is Apocrypha, because it has no other foundation besides
them. A certain man named Hermas in his visions asks an old woman, if after
the casting of certain stones, there remain any more penance to be done, she
answered, that they could not come to a certain tower, but that they should be
put into a lower room where they are tormented until they have accomplished
the days of their sins. A book of the Acts of Saint Andrew prays unto
God for an old Pandor, and says unto him; Iren. l. 5.
We obtain much mercy of him for the dead, and why should we fail for this
man which is alive? But the doctrine of the Church is to be read in Ireneus:
The priests (says he) the disciples of the Apostles say, that those which are
translated from hence are conueighed into paradise, which is prepared for just
men, and such as have the spirit: whither Saint Paul was ravished, and where
he heard words that cannot be uttered, and that they abide and continue there
unto the end of the world. Index expurgator. p. 71. Just. Martyr in resp ad
quaest. Orthod. q. 7.
And therefore upon good ground does Erasmus show, that he spoke as one that
knew not purgatory. And this observation the fathers of Trent have caused to be
raced. And Justin Martyr also, After (says he) the departure of this body,
there is presently made a separation of the just and unjust; for they are
carried into places worthy of them: that is to say, the souls of the just into
Paradise, where they enjoy the company of Angels, and Archangels, as also the
sight of our Savior Jesus Christ; but those of the unjust and wicked into the
infernal places, etc. They will allege against us Clemens Alexandrinus and
Origin: Clem. Alex. l. 6
The one whereof labors to prove by the supposed Apocryphes of S. Peter and
S. Paul, that the Saints living in the time of the old Testament were saved
by the law of Moses, and the Grecians by Philosophy: That Christ and his
Apostles did preach the Gospel in hell, Origin his purgatory. Orig. hom. 8. in
Leuit. Hom 25. in Numer. Hom. 6. in Exodus in ep. ad Romans c. 11. In psalm. 36.
hom. 3. In Hierem. Bellarm l. 2. de purgat. c. 8. 8. septim. Synod. 5. c. 11.
Synod. 7. ex prato spiritualt. Johan. Diacon. in vir. B. Greg. l. 2. c 45.
thereby to convert the damned: and that both in this world, as also in that
to come, yea even in hell there may be use and place granted for repentance,
etc. And the other building upon this his masters bad foundation, a great
deal worse: As, that all men how holy soever, are to pass this Purgatory,
every one according to his proportion, S. Peter. S. Paul, etc. the one to be
purged by fire, and the other by water, more or less, etc. And again, that the
most wicked, the most miscreants, yea the Deuilles themselves are purged, are
amended, yea and saved by the same. Now I desire to know of them if they will
approve this Purgatory of Origin? And if they do not approve it, that then
they would not object it any more unto us, neither yet any of those places
which have relation thereunto: seeing also that Bellarmine entreating of
Purgatory, does acknowledge that the fifth general Synod condemned and cursed
Origin no less then Arrius and Nestorius: furthermore that the seventh general
Council makes mention of a revelation wherein he was seen in hell amongst
others the Arch-heretickes. And the same is likewise confirmed by Johan.
Diaconus in the life of Gregory. But it is worth the noting, how that Origin
had not as yet learned, that these punishments were mittigated and lightened by
suffrages: for there is not found any manner of print or note of any such thing
in all his purgatory. These pollutions and sins go for no better then matter
for the fire and torments, without any hope of release or ransom. And still as
these fantasies continued and abode with some curious spirits, they were
condemned in the fifth general Council by the East Church, The Apology of the
Grecians presented by Michael Bishop of Ephesus. Vincent. Lyrinensis. Lactan.
de diuino praemio. c. 21.
and even in that which concerns their false foundation: namely, that Christ
has purchased the remission of sins, but not of the punishment. And this
appears to be so by the Apology given by the Greeks in the Council of
Basil.

These fantastical dreams of Origin notwithstanding, by reason of the
reputation of his learning did leave their impressions in the Latin Church:
whereupon Vincentius Lirinensis had just cause to say: That Origin his
knowledge and zeal was a great temptation to the Christian Church. Lactantius
says: That men are not judged presently after their death, but that they are
kept in a common prison until the day of judgment, in which they are to be
tried by fire. This place is ill alleged by our adversaries: for they do not
place together the good and the bad, the faithful and unfaithful, at the time
of their departing out of this life: neither do they hold that purgatory
sleeps without doing any thing, unto the day of judgment: for they will have
it occupied about the dead from the day of their death. Again it is apparent,
that in the time of Lactantius, the doctrine of the Church was clean
contrary: For Eusebius, as we have said, comparing the opinion of the
Platonistes therewith, makes but two estates and conditions after this life:
whereas they made three. But let it be for the making of the comparison the
more full, that he did not altogether forget the third.

But they allege unto us, Saint Ambrose, Saint Hillarie, Saint Jerome, etc.
The purgatory spoken of by certain of the old fathers is not the same with
that of the Church of I^ome. Ambr. in psalm. 118. and in psalm. 36. and 2. ad
Timoth. 2.
Then let us see if we shall be able to find such evidence, as may make us
acknowledge this their purgatory in them. Verily, there is no man that can be
ignorant how greatly Saint Ambrose did esteem of Origin, when as the most part
of his expositions are translated word for word from him. And thereupon
likewise his opinion touching Purgatory, does nothing differ, and therefore
also no less worthy to be condemned then his: All men (says he) which are,
have been, or shall be, the one only Christ excepted, shall be purged by
fire: The sons of Leui, Ezechiel, Daniel, etc. if they be not consumed, yet
at the least they shall be fired: if they be not drowned, yet they shall be
wette and dipped in the water: for so was John the Evangelist himself, whom the
Lord loved so much: so was Saint Peter, which received the keys of heaven:
There is not any one but Christ only which does not smell of this fire, who is
the righteousness of God not having any sin: so that in him there is nothing
found for this fire to consume or burn. And this he amplifieth by two
several Allegories: the one taken from the glittering sword which was set at
the entrance into Paradise: the other from the people of Israel, which went
through the red sea, etc. He adds hereto, that this trial and proof by fire
shall be made in the day of judgment, by the universal burning of the world,
which shall universally purge all men, but every one according to his nature:
even as the fire does melt the lead otherwise then it does the gold, etc. S.
Hillarie no less addicted to Origin, Hilar. in comment in psalm. 118.
holds the same opinion, and proceeds yet further, saying: If the virgin
Marie, the virgin of God must also undergo the sentence of this judgment; (of
this fire he spoke before, through which we must all pass,) who is he that
dare desire to be judged of God? And in another place he says: Idem Canon in
Mat. 3. Hieronym. Amos 3. ex Amo. 7.14. Ezech. 46.
It remains that those which are baptized with the holy Ghost be made
perfect, that is to say, accomplished and fully refined by the fire of the last
judgment, etc. Saint Jerome likewise is infected with the like opinions by
continual reading of Origin: He will call (says he) the fire unto judgment,
and behold it comes at his summons, and first of all deuoureth the depth,
that is to say, all sorts of sins, wood, baye, and stubble: and afterward it
eats at once the part and portion, that is to say, it comes to the Saints
which the Lord has made choice of, to belong to him, etc. Again, Hieronym.
in vlt. cap. Esa.
Every creature is unclean and must be purged by the fire of God for the
Sabbath day, wherein he shall have eternal rest. Likewise he means, that
even wicked Christians shall be so purged by this fire, as that in the end
they shall prove and try the clemency of God: And he alleges Origin
thereupon, concealing in the mean time the rest of his opinion, for that it
finally extended unto the Devils. But what helps all this for the proving of
the purgatory whereof we speak: which is made for the faithful penitents,
and not for them which die in their sin: for to fulfill the punishment, Sixth.
Senens. l. 5
and not to cleanse or wipe away the fault where sins have no entrance, much
less merits: where the wicked have no place, much less the Saints, much
less also the Apostles, and much less the holy virgin: which takes his
beginning so soon as death has made an end, and is employed about his office
every day without ceasing, and without attending the day of judgment? And
notwithstanding they are not ashamed to allege unto us these places which
themselves condemn in their books, That it was a disputable doctrine.
and which to be short cannot make any thing for them, or against us.

Yea and that furthermore this was but an opinion wherein men were let alone
and left to range according to the pregnancie of their wit and capacity, and
not any doctrine received and admitted into the Church; it appears clearly:
for Saint Augustine does not feign or dissemble the gainsaying and disallowing
of it, neither yet the public confutation thereof in his books, and that not
only without all check or dislike, August de Genes contr. Manich l. 2. c. 10
In Psalm. 37.
but with much praise, and to the good liking of men for the same. In a
certain place he suffered it to escape according to the opinion then current:
As, that after this life such as have not husbanded their ground well are in
danger either of the fire of purgation, or of eternal fire: notwithstanding
that he uses these words: Videri apparere, that it seems to be apparent:
and that these purgatory punishments according to his own judgment, De
ciuit. Dei, l. c. 10.25. De ciuit Dei, l. 21. c. 13. l. Cor. 3.
are reserved unto the last judgment. But in the book of the City of God,
he reckeneth up all the opinions of Origin and others depending on him, who
carried themselves in his time in the Church, as those who had founded
themselves upon the merciful clemency and fatherly mildness of God
misexpounded, and confuteth them all, bringing them back from their pretended
likelihood of truth, unto the truth it self, and from their conceited
fantasy, to the infallible scriptures: Thou will (says he) that the wicked
Christians may in the end be saved by these pains of purgatory, because that
God is merciful: it must then also follow, that the Devils may also be saved,
that so he may be so much the more merciful: for it is said equally and
indifferently to the one and the other: 2. Cor 3.
Go into everlasting fire, etc. If thou demandest the cause, this it is, (and
then the which there is none more just, neither yet more holy) namely, that the
scripture which deceives not, has said so. Some have abused the place of the
1. Corinthians. 3. for Purgatory: but he shows that this fire cannot be
understood of hell: because that so it should become common both to the good
and evil: but rather of tribulations and afflictions, August. de ciuit. Dei.
l. 21. c. 16. and seq. Dicuntur.
which are the exercises by which God makes clean his flower in this world:
that after this judgment also contrary to Origin, there is not any pains of
purgatory. And as concerning those punishments and pains, which men might
imagine to happen betwixt both, he says: If in this distance of time, which
is betwixt the death of the body and the day of judgment, men say, that the
souls of the deceased do suffer some such fire, Secularia venialia. August.
de fide operibus. Quantum arbitror. Idem in Enchirid. c. 69. Idem in quaest. ad
Dulcitium.
and that whether it be there only: or whether it be here and not there, or
whether it be here and there both, they find a fire of transitory
tribulation, burning the venial things of this world: I find no fault with
them for such their assertion, because it may be that it is true. And in
another place he says: This exposition (as I suppose) does not wander far
from the way of truth. Again, That some such thing may be after this life, it
is not incredible. Again, writing to Dulcitius, after he had handled the
question: We have written these things but in such forte, as that we would
not have any canonical authority given unto them. Whereby we see in the
first place, that he condemns Origin, Saint Ambrose, and Hillarie, their
purgatory, etc. Secondly, that what he says of that space betwixt death and
the day of judgment, he speaks doubtfully, and (as it were)
interrogatiuelie affirming. And thirdly; That by the same he does not
understand any material fire of the same nature with Hellfire, as our
adversaries do; but a fire of tribulation or temptation, such as may fall out
and happen in this life. And it is not to be omitted how that the good fathers
of Trent did not forget to cause to be raced out, many good places of Viues,
Index Expurg page 38.39. August. de tempore, sermon. 66. De verb. Apostol. sermon.
18. In ep. 80. ad Hesich. Hypognosticon. l. 5. Hieronym. in Ecclesiast.
Olympiod. in Proverb. c. 11.
entreating of this matter in his commentaries upon Augustines book of the
City of God. But in another place we have showed that he has made but two
places of abode: as in heaven, or in hell: and that he shuts out all manner
of purgation after this life: and that he cutteth it off quite and clean: As
concerning the third place, we know not any thing at all thereof, we find not
any thing at all thereof in the scriptures. And what shall we say if S. Jerome
speak no less resolutely? Jn what place soever (says he) the tree falls,
there it lies, be it toward the South, or be it toward the North: In like
manner look in what place death does take thee, in the same thou abidest for
ever, be it that thy last day do find thee cruel and unappeasable, or
otherwise courteous and merciful. And Olympiodorus does clear him upon the
same place: In whatsoever place, whether light or dark, a man is surprised and
seized upon by death, be he following after vice, or be he following after
virtue, he continues in the same state and condition, and in the same degree
for ever. For either he rests in the light of everlasting happiness, with the
just and righteous men, and Christ our Lord; or else he is tormented in darkness
with the unrighteous, and the Devil which is their prince. They object unto
us, that Saint Jerome says in his commentaries upon the Proverbs: That souls
are delivered out of purgatory by Masses. But they should rather be ashamed:
seeing that the word Mass is not found, no not so much as once only in all
Saint Jerome. Seeing also that this book cannot be his, because it cites S.
Gregory, who lived more then a hundred and fifty years after. And in deed
this book is found written by hand under the name of Beda: and there is
neither the time, nor the style, that are repugnant to the same. And the same
is well allowed of by Marianus Victorius, Bishop of Amerin, who caused them to
be imprinted amongst the works of S. Jerome under the name of Beda. And as for
Chrysostom, he erst while expounded unto us the place of the Epistle to the
Corinthians of hell, and not of Purgatory. And Mark Bishop of Ephesus in his
Apology which he presented for the Greek Churches in the Council of Basil,
avouches that he never thought of purgatory. In like manner we have seen
here before, that he has razed the foundations there of, partly by
establishing the full remission of sins in Christ, and partly in acknowledging
but two places or ways to be gone after this life.

But some object unto us, After what sort and manner the ancient fathers did use
^o speak of a third place.
that certain of the old fathers have acknowledged a third place, diverse both
from that of glory, and the other of eternal condemnation. Neither do I
deny it: but they must as freely acknowledge in what manner, for it has been
a question in ancient time, whether at the time of departing out of this life
the faithful were received into their fullest glory, and the unfaithful cast
into the extremity of their misery: or else whether they were reserved in
certain places till after the resurrection: that is, the faithful in a place
of rest, where they began to taste their joys: and the unbelievers in a place
of misery, where they also began to feel their misery. But these places were
never imagined to put any distinction and difference betwixt faithful and
faithful, but betwixt the faithful and unfaithful. Again they never meant,
that the faithful were there in any torment but in rest, not in any heat of
burning fire, but in a place of refreshment, which likewise they called by the
name of Refrigerium. And this place wherein they abode waiting and expecting
the day of judgment, they called Abraham's bosom, the sweet rest under the
Altar, the Paradise; alluding unto the place of S. Luke, 16.23. and that of S.
John in the Apocalips, 6. And the place to be possessed by them after
judgment, they called The celestial bosom, the Altar from on high, the
celestial haven, etc.

And it is to be taken in this sense which Ireneus says: Iren. l. 5. aduers.
haeres.
That the souls of the disciples of our Lord, for which he has fully
accomplished the mysteries of redemption, do go into an invisible place,
appointed for them of God, and there shall attend the resurrection. And that
which Justinius Martyr demands by way of question, Just. Mart. l. quaest. 76.
q.
namely, what it profited the thief to enter into Paradise, seeing there is no
crowning of any til after the resurrection? and answers: Eeuen thus much
(says he) in that he was vouchsafed the company of the blessed, Tertul. l. 3.
c. 14 l. 4. aduer. Marcion. c. 34. In Apol. c. 47. de anim. c. 7.9. 55.56. vlt.
de resur. carn. 17. de iudicio Dom. c. 11. Idem de Anima passim. Nouat. de
Trinit. c. 1. Orig. hom. 7. in Leuit. l. (...).
waiting for the day of reward and recompense, etc. That which Tertullian
teaches in infinite places: That the bosom of Abraham is a place of eternity
to those that are dead in his faith; if not heavenly, yet at the least higher
then hell, which gives rest and refreshment unto the souls of the righteous,
until the accomplishment and perfecting of all things in the resurrection:
that heaven is not open to any so long as the earth is entire and whole: Terra
adbuc salua, ne dixerim clausa: And that together with the consummation of the
world, the kingdom of heaven should be opened: That in these low places, all
the souls have, betwixt here and there, the one sort their punishments; the
other their comfortable refreshmentes, etc. That Origene says: That Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob, the Prophets, and Apostles, have not yet received their
joys: that they there wait and attend us, that so they and we may receive
them all together, soiourning in the mean time (says he) as in a place of
study, or instruction, in a school of souls, where they are taught in all
such things as they had not seen here below, but as in riddles and figures.
Ambr. l 2. c. 2. de Cain and Abel. Idem de bono mortis. c. 10. Chrisost. hom.
39. n. 1. Cor. and 24. Idem in hom. 28 ad Heo. and hom 7. Idem hom. ad Pop.
Antioch. 33. and in Mat. 53. and in Genes. 40. Lactan. l. 7. c. 21. instit.
Victor in Apocal. c. 6. Theod. in ep. ad Hebr. c. 11. Hom 34. auth. oper.
imperf. in Mat. Areth. in Apocal c. 6. Bernar. in loc. c 6, Apoc. sermon. 4 in
sestum ommu^. Sanctoru^. Oecum. ad Heb. c. 11. Theoph. ad Heb. Euthym. in Luc.
c. 23. August. l. 1, c. 14. retract. In Psalm. 36. In Genes. l. 12, c. 9. In
Enchirid. c. 108. Chrysostom. hom. 69. ad Pop. Antioch. Idem ad Romans hom. 33.
Idem ad Philip. hom. 4. Occan, in oper. 93. dierum. Adrian. 6. l. 4. sent. in
fine, q. de Sacram. confirm.
Saint Ambrose who treads in his steps: That the day of judgment is like
unto that of wrastlers, in as much as that in one day, the vanquished are
ashamed, and the vanquishers receive the garland and price: and that betwixt
here and there the souls are in their places of receipt, waiting for the
fulness of time. Saint Augustine: That after this life we are not in the place
where the Saints shall be, when it shall be said to them; Come ye blessed,
etc. But rather there where Lazarus was, whom the rich man saw in rest, etc.
Chrysostom, That those which suffered for Christ before us, although they went
before us in the combat, shall not any whit prevent us in the wearing of the
crown: That the crown is set upon all men's heads at once, and not at
several times, and that after the resurrection: That betwixt here and there,
that is, betwixt death and the judgment, souls are reserved in a place which
is ordinarily called Abraham's bosom, and sometimes (...), the porch of the
Saints wherein they are in rest, expecting the fullness of their glory. And
in reading of Lactantius, Victorinus Martyr, Theodoret, the Author of the
imperfect work upon Matthew, Arethas, Theophilact, Oecumenius, Euthimius, and
Saint Bernard also, who bare a greater stroke therein then any other man, you
shall find them to have been of the same opinion. But what makes all this for
purgatory? but only that it may serve to dasle the eyes of men? For that this
was an opinion at that time held as indifferent in the Church, it does
appear, in that that Saint Augustine handling the same in his books of
retractations, leaves it undecided: whereas Chrysostom in many places
speaks to the contrary, cutting all off in a word, As, that the righteous
shall see God face to face, and not any more by faith, etc. That death coupleth
us with the company that is with Christ, where the Cherubines glorify God,
where the Seraphins fly, where we shall see Saint Paul, etc. In so much as
that it was pronounced heretical, and that by the name of the heresy of the
Armenians by Innocent the third, Benedict the eleventh, and by the decree of
the Council held at Florence, where it was said, that the souls of the saints
at their departure out of this life, did enjoy the presence of God:
Notwithstanding that Pope John the 22. had made a Decree in favor of that
doctrine: namely, that the University of Paris should be restrained from
admitting any to proceed Doctor. or in any other degree of divinity, which did
not take an oath, that souls did not see God before the day of judgment. And
this is verified by Gulielmus Occan in his book entitled: Opus nonaginta
trium dieru^. And Pope Adrian the 6. upon the 4. book of Sentences, both which
do condemn it. And thus as hitherto they have not any third place, where the
souls are purged in the time betwixt death and the day of judgment. For that
of Origin, S. Ambr. and S. Hillary helps the^ not a dodkin: that of
Augustines refuteth this of theirs, and being well looked on, appears to be a
fire of tribulation, a spiritual, but not a material fire, and moreover such
a one as is very doubtful and mere arbitrarie. Likewise these pretended
receptacles of Souls, are not places of anguish and torment, but of rest and
ioyfulnesse; not of making satisfaction, but of contentation to be received, by
the attending and waiting for of the glory to come, in like manner they are
condemned of heresy by themselves. And therefore it remains, that if they
will needs have it to have been at this time, which is five hundred years
after Christ; that yet they go and find it amongst the Gentiles. And great in
deed is the antiquity of that; for it was before the coming of Christ many
ages: and yet notwithstanding it is very young and a mere Nouice in the
Church of Christ; because it is without Christ, and out of the Church.

CHAP. IX. Wherein the objections of the adversaries, whereby they go about to
prove their Purgatory out of the old Fathers, are fully answered.
THey say, you cannot deny, Of the satisfactions used amongst them of the old
Church.
but that the Primitive Church did impose great satisfactions upon them which
had failed in the profession of the name of Christ. How then could they make
the same, but in Purgatory, when they were dead and had left them undone? But
we rather argue quite contrary. As that, if the ancient Church, which
imposed these Satisfactions upon them, that so they might let them go to God
in peace, did as ordinarily give them absolution; then it cannot but certainly
prove, that it had not learned any thing of this Purgatory. But the truth is,
that in the times of those great and continual persecutions, which the
Christians suffered for the space of three hundred years, only some little
respite and rest given unto them, many did renounce and belie the profession of
the faith of Christ, (who before in the calm and peaceable times had given
their names thereunto,) becoming ready to return to Idolatry, as the times
changed and altered. Now against this leuitie and in constancy the ancient
Church did not think any punishments that could be inflicted, to be too hard
or sharp; by means whereof it thought to find out the sincerity or
hypocrisy of the penitents, as also their lively, or otherwise dull and dead
sense and feeling that they had for their sin. Wherefore the end and scope of
this course was to bring them to sackcloth and ashes; and to suffer them to
pass many days, in making humble petitions, to be reconciled to the Church,
who either had sacrificed, or burnt incense to Idols; or who had given the
Gospels and holy Books to be burned, and who were therefore called
Sacrificati, Thurificantes, Traditores, Libellatici, etc. yea and which is yet
more, to the end they might add more careful heed to such as should offer,
to enter themselves into the number of the Church: there were some that would
not receive Lapsos paenitentes, any more then once to the taking of penance
after baptism. And Nouatus proceeded yet further, and denied it them
altogether, for the which he was condemned of the Church, which also thereupon,
Cypr. l. 4. Ep. 2
from that time forward began to mitigate these punishments. What then? And now
if they died before the time, were they not bound by the Church? And how then
did they satisfy these punishments? Idem. l. 3. Ep. 8 Sermon. 5. de Lapsis.
Verily the order was good, that before they had fully made such satisfaction,
they were not to be received to absolution, or to have any communion with the
Church. But as duly was it observed on the other side, that if they were in
danger of death, before the time of such accomplishment, that then
notwithstanding they were received into the peace, absolution and communion of
the same. Assuredly not with any purpose or intent that they should ever have
gone into Purgatory, for they never thought of it: But to the end says S.
Cyprian, that dying, they might go to the Lord in peace. Idem. l. 3 Ep. 17. l
4 Ep 4. Eusebius. l. 6. c. 34
To the end says Dionysius, That their sin being blotted out, they may
depart (...), in good hope out of this life. But here withal they joined (say
they) this condition, that if they should recover their health again, that
then they should fulfill this satisfaction: but that otherwise they should have
any thing to accomplish in the world to come, not a word. Contrariwise S.
Cyprian shows a reason of this absolution in these words, saying: Quoniam
exomologesis apud in feros nec esse, nec fieri potest: Seeing there neither is,
nor can be any public confession or acknowledgment amongst the dead. That is
to say, as we have learned to expound it of Tertullian, that these Acts of
Canonical satisfaction cannot be accomplished after this life. Bellarmine and
others before him object unto us a place out of S. Cyprian in this same
Epistle; Cypr. l. 4. Ep. 4.
but to no end or purpose: Aliud (inquit) est ad veniam stare, etc. It is one
thing to stand for pardon and forgiveness, and an other to come to glory; one
thing to be sent to prison, not to come out thence till the vitermost farthing
be paid, and an other thing, to receive incontinently the reward of faith and
virtue; one thing to be corrected and purged a long time by fire, for sins,
with the enduring of great torments, and an other to have all his sins
purged, by one only passion and suffering, etc. Which words at the first blush
might seem to make mightily for the^: but let us read the whole Epistle:
there he speaks of such satisfactions, as are made in the Church during this
life: but not a word of any that should be made after the same. It was said
unto him: If you offer the peace of the Church unto penitents, there will not
be any more confessors, there will not be any more Martyrs; (for this was the
glory of our fathers.) But says he there will contin ually remain a great
difference betwixt the one and the other. Lapsi, says he, such as are fallen,
stand to ask pardon: they are as it were in prison, until such time as they
have exactly satisfied the Church: they are as it were refined by fire, through
the long grief which they endure by their penance: in a word, they suffer
much, before they obtain the peace of the Church; and in this peace, peace
with God and that which follows. On the contrary the Martyrs and confessors
abiding in peace with God, do not pass through all these sorrows and
griefs, they pass speedily into glory, they receive the reward of their
constancy, all their sins are swallowed up in their suffering of death, etc.
He adds likewise that they have this advantage in the judgment of God, that
they appear and present themselves in the same, assured of the crown; whereas
others are in suspense, as those that expect and depend upon the sentence of
the judge.

And yet they object, Prayers for the dead.
you cannot say, but that the Church has believed Purgatory, seeing it has
prayed for the dead. Neither do we deny, but that this custom is ancient
enough: but on the contrary we say, how that the Church never prayed for the
dead, under the old Testament: not Joseph for Jacob, who was notwithstanding
very careful for the embalming and burying of him: 2 Kings 18.
nor David for Absalom, whose death so much grudged and moved his tender and
fatherly affections; nor for the child which he begot of Bersabe, but on the
contrary after that he knew him dead, he gave over his fasting and prayer.
And as for Machabeus, if any man object him unto us, we answer that he was
the first and the last in that action. The Church then before and under the
Law, near hand for the space of four thousand years knew not any Purgatory.
And further we affirm, that our Lord has not left any thing, any word or
mention of the same unto his Apostles, but on the contrary, that he has left
the dead to bury the dead. Act. 9. and 9.
S. Paul says unto us: Be not careful and pensive for them which are a
sleep. Amongst so many arguments to prove the resurrection, that is not once
touched amongst them, 1. These. 4.
which yet would have made for the purpose. Likewise we see them wash the
bodies of the dead, and bury them carefully, and to comfort one an other in
the midst of their mourning, in the hope of the resurrection: but as for
praying for them, they say nothing of it. Wherefore the Church of Christ from
the beginning, has not known Purgatory. How came they then into the Church?
Verily even through the conduite, that brought in Purgatory; the invention of
men, and the imitation of the Gentiles, who being but slenderly and
superficially instructed of the state of the soul after death, rent and
launced themselves over the dead, made feasts upon their graves, as though
thereby they would have recovered them and brought them again to life, and
sacrificed to the infernal Gods for their shadows and likenesses, this humane
affection and carnal love haunted them so, as that it wrought prayers out of
them, yea even to the time of death and after also. But these courses of
afflicting themselves, in such extreme manner were forbidden the people of
God, as being better instructed and taught in the holy word of God; and these
humane affections also bounded within the limits of his Law. And this is the
cause that kept them from falling away so lightly, to the imitation of the
Gentiles. From the Gentiles, this opinion was slily and smoothly conueighed
into the Apocripha books of one Clement, Abdias Babilonius, Hermas, and such
like; and as it was no strange thing to those who were drawn from their
Paganism, so was it nothing vnplausible to them, to retain the same: the
Pastors admitting it for indifferent, and nothing looking to the consequence,
and that which might fall out in the end, did let it alone by sufferance.
Whereas if they had seen how far Satan has undermined thereby the merit
of Christ, the foundation of salvation; they would undoubtedly have resisted
and gaine-saied the same according to the necessity of the cause, and kept
themselves to the rule of the Apostle, repeated by S. Augustine, who says:
Gala. 1.
If any man whatsoever, upon any thing concerning conversation or manners, do
utter and offer unto us for certain and necessary doctrine, or for an Article
of faith, August. contr. Petil. Tertull. de Coron milit. and li 2. ad vxor.
Arnob. l. 2.
the thing which goes beyond the Scriptures of the Law and the Gospel, let
him be accursed. In Tertullian first of all we have: Oblationes pro defunctis;
and in like manner, Oblationem pro sponsa, from the same root; this is about
two hundred and fifty years after our Lord. The Paganes had accustomed to
offer, when they were dead, as also when their kinsfolks or friends departed
and left them: now the Christians seeing the same, and being ashamed to be
behind in humanity and natural affection, do in like manner offer, but so,
as that they appoint their oblations to be employed to better uses, as to the
feeding of the poor; following the counsel mentioned in Tobiah: Set thy
bread upon the Grave, etc. The Pagans had their yearly birth feasts; the
Christians celebrated the day of their true second birth or regeneration, of
the Martyrdom, confession, and death of their brethren in Christ. And Beatus
Rhenanus notes very well in this place: Index expurg. p. 82.
From hence sprung the original of the yearly remembrances and feasts: Where
the Fathers of Trent have caused Antiquity to be put in place of the
original. Likewise Tertullian says that this is a doctrine, neither grounded
in the Scriptures, nor yet upon any Apostolical tradition, but only grown up
by custom. Si legem (says he) expostules Scripturarum, nulla legis tibi
traditio pretendetur: but Obseruationem consuetudo roborauit: There is no
Scripture (says he) that can here be pretended, but custom has given force
and strength to observation. And this custom taken and raised from the good
intents of some faithful persons, and not from the Apostles: For (says he)
do thou not think, that it is lawful for every faithful person to
conceive and set down for a Law what he thinks to be agreeable unto God,
convenient for discipline, or furthering unto salvation, etc. And by the like
proposition entered the heresy of Montanus both into his head, and after into
the Church. And to be short, he sets this custom in the rank of many
others which he reckons up there: As, to dip the child thrice in Baptism, to
take a taste of Milk and Honey before hand, which they called Infantation, to
offer for birth days, not to kneel or bow down upon the Lords days, etc.
All which are long since abolished out of the Church of Christ, and so also
should this give place by virtue of the same abolishment, as made of the same
stuff, and so also by consequent their Purgatory.

In S. Cyprian, who follows him close at the heel, Cypr. Ep. 9. l. 1 and Ep.
5. l. 4.
we have Sportulas and Sportulantes. Thus they called that which was given for
the relief of the poor, either by commandment, or in remembrance of the
dead; in stead of the feast which the Gentiles accustomed to prepare and bring
out to set upon the grave. And this was continued by certain Christians in
the time of S. Augustine, not without great offense taken thereat, and this he
complains of, as likewise, August. Ep. 64
that he cannot remedy or redress it but by force. Such is the tyranny that
custom practices upon men. And of these offerings, or rather testamentarie
Legacies, the Canon speaks: C. Qui Oblationes. xiii. q. 2.
Such as deny the Church the offerings of the dead, ought to be held as
murderers of the poor, in as much as they rob them of their food and
nourishment, etc. Now these feasts made for the poor, were qualified with the
name of sacrifices and oblations, as it may be seen in many places of
Tertuilian, Tertull. de monog. and de cor. milit. August. Ep. 64 and de Ciuit.
Dei l. 8. c. 27. Chrysostom. de Martyr.
S. Augustine and Chrysostom. But what makes all this either for Masses for
the dead, or else for Purgatory? And what will this prove to, on the
contrary side, if we show that they which offered these oblations and prayers;
or to speak more fitly these memorials and remembrances in the service of the
Church; did the same for such persons as they believed to be already in rest
and everlasting felicity; so far off were they from presupposing them to be
in Purgatory? Tertullian says, that the wife offers for the husband, and
the husband for the wife, Annuis diebus dormitionis eius, etc. From year to
year upon the day of his death: And this is done in their dwelling house, with
their kinsfolks, as their own mouths confess. And what has this that is
common with the Priest his pretended sacrifice? He says also that they do
crave the one for the other, betwixt the time of death and the resurrection,
refrigerium; and consortium in the same, that is to say: That it would please
God to give rest unto the fore deceased; Tertull. l. 4. cont. Marcion and l. de
Anima
and to both, to meet in the resurrection. Who knows not that Tertullian
calls, Refrigerium, the place of refreshment, the bosom of Abraham, the
place of the righteous where they abide, waiting the day of the resurrection,
Wherein (says he) they are from their death, unto the final end and
consummation of all things: And so by consequent, that this their practice is
nothing else but a continuing of this natural affection, which cannot be
stayed; and which according to the measure and quantity, wherein it calls
them to mind, whom it loves, can not but lay open and show forth it self by
making vows, for the procuring of their prosperity, and will not suffer it
self to be persuaded thereof, howsoever in deed it be, neither in a manner
would have it so, to the end it may not lack matter to do them good, wherein
possibly it can? And then, what argreement is there betwixt this refreshment
and the fire of Purgatory; betwixt Abraham's bosom, from whence the rich man
craved to be cooled and refre^^ed by Lazarus; and this fire, nothing differing
(say they) from that fire wherein the rich man burned, as concerning the
fervent and tormenting heat thereof, Cypr. l. 1. Ep. 9.
but only in durablenesse? S. Cyprian seems to speak rawly: To offer (says
he) for the dead, to celebrate a sacrifice, Pro dormitione little, for their
falling a sleep. l. 3. Ep. 14. and 6
But he expounds himself, when he calls these oblations, Liueries and
contributions; these sacrifices, memorials and remembrances of the dead in the
prayers of the Church. And in deed these oblations, these legacies, these
sacrifices, are celebrated for the Martyrs, in ripping up and renewing of their
glorious death, and their constant suffering. If this were any thing tending
unto propitiation, how could it fit with that sentence of S. Augustine: August.
de verb. A post. Sermon. 17. Innoc. C. cum Marth. de celebrat. Miss. l. 4. Ep. 5.
Who so prays for a Martyr, does offer him injury? Which Pope Innocent the
third applies unto all Saints. Thus S. Cyprian says unto us: We offer
sacrifices; speaking of Celerinus his kindred, all which almost was honored
with the crown of Martyrdom; whom notwithstanding he affirms to be
crowned in heaven. And on the contrary he will not have any mention made at
the Altar, that is to say, in the public prayers, Pro dormitione, for the rest
of a certain man named Victor; because he had, contrary to the received
Discipline and government, caused a Priest to be charged with the keeping of a
child in his nonage. Whereby we see that these prayers and commemorations, were
but to put us in mind of the virtuous lives of the Saints, and not for the
making of any fatisfaction for sins. And this is that which Rhenanus says:
B. Rhenanus. in l. ad Martyr.
Sacrificia pro Martyribus offerri, sic accipiendum, ni fallor, vt pro eis,
idem valeat, quod commemoratione little, etc. The same which Cyprian says, to
offer sacrifices for the Martyrs, that is to say, for the renewing of their
memories; in at much as the calling to mind of their death and suffering, did
offer matter of offering oblations. And therefore these were rather
gratulatorie and joyful prayers, as by the which thanks was given to God, for
that he had showed such favor unto the Martyr; and thereupon they prayed unto
him with one consent and voice, that he would continue to show the like unto
his faithful servants that are alive: that so the Church may sing, Gaudeamus
in Domino, etc. Let us rejoice, and be glad in the Lord, etc.

In this sense has the greatest part of the ancient Fathers prayed, Dionysi.
de Ecclesi. Hierat. c. 7.
and that will be the more clearly understood by themselves. S. Denis speaks
not of Oblations, neither yet of yearly feasts: but how that they kiss the
dead, and pour Oil upon his head. These diverse fashions taken from the
customs of diverse Countries, do show the indifferency. The prayer follows:
That it might please God to pardon him his sins, and to place him in the
light and region of the living, in the place; from which grief, sadness and
sighing are banished and utterly excluded, etc. Was this because he doubted?
No, for on the contrary he makes but two ranks, and so consequently but two
places of abode after this life: one for the profane, who die and depart out
of this life desperate and without all hope, in as much as they go hence unto
misery; and an other for the Saints, who have lived well, who in their death
do show themselves (...), full of good hope; and dying do require of God
pardon for their sins. These men (says he) depart out of this life full of
joy, perceiving themselves now to be come to the end of all their fights and
conflicts, and drawing nearer unto the crown of glory: They possess in hope
(...), a rest conformable to that of Christ's. Prayers do call them blessed,
and offer thanks unto him who has given them the victory: The high Priest
prayseth God, who has overthrown the rule and sovereignty of death: The
Ministers read in the assembly, in the Scriptures, the promises of the
resurrection, to the end they may serve for an exhortation, to stir up those
that are living to the like virtues, they recite them in the end amongst the
Saints, in the commemoration which is made in the Church, as those that are
already partakers of the same glory with them, etc. Is it possible that a man
should believe them, that all this is spoken of a Soul in Purgatory; or of
any of whom the least doubt that is, may be made? Origin: We do not celebrate
(says he) the birth day, Orig. l. 3. in Job.
for that it is an entrance into pain and grief, and manifold temptations:
but the day of death, as the day of the laying down and ending of all grief,
etc. And this is the cause why we use the renewing of the memory of the Saints,
and of our kins folks dying in the faith, as well to rejoice our selves for
their ease, as for to become humble suitors for a holy finishing and knitting up
of our end in faith. Note well and observe the end of griefs, ease and rest,
the giving of thanks for their rest and ease, etc. Again: We celebrate the
memory of the dead, feasting Religious persons, together with the Priests,
the faithful with the Clergy, feeding the poor, the fatherless and the
widows, to the end that our feast may be for a memorial of the rest of the
Souls that are deceased, whose memory we solemnize therein. Note here also,
The distributing of alms, the memorial of their rest, etc. Then this cannot
be a sacrifice, to purchase unto them ease or rest: and yet notwithstanding
this is that which first brought in Purgatory; but such a one, as is not able
to stand with these propitiations, seeing that it takes no hold, but at the
hour of judgment. So unsound and unsure it is to reason either from
Purgatory, to the making of prayers for the dead, or from these to go about
to prove their Purgatory. Greg. Nazian. hom. 7.
Gregory Nazianzene in his seventh Homily: O thou which art the Lord of life
and of death (says he) receive Caesarius; for we commit and commend him now
unto that course and order, by which thou gouernest the world, whereunto
likewise we recommend, as laid up with thee, both our own Souls, and theirs
which have gone before us. Now he had said before: That he did already enjoy
salvation, that his soul received the fruit, etc.

S. Ambrose comes in with these words: Blessed (says he) are you both,
Ambros. de Obitu Valent.
(he speaks of the Emperor Valentinian and his brother;) If my prayers
(says he) be any thing worth, for there shall not one pass from me, wherein I
will not have an honorable remembrance of you: Omnibus vos oblationibus
frequent abo: I will make mention of you in all my offerings, that is to say,
in all my services. Again, speaking of Theodosius: Grant rest O Lord (says
he) to Theodosious thy servant, let his soul enter into the place, Ambros. de
Obitu Theod.
where there is not any sense or feeling of the sting of death. I love this
man, and will not give over the following of him, into the land of the living,
I will not leave him, until my tears and my prayers have brought him into the
place, whither his merits do call him: Namely into the mountain of the Lord,
where there is everlasting life, without any sighing, heaviness, or grief,
etc. And do you tell us still that they were in Purgatory? Yea rather (says
he of Valentinian in the same place, we believe and that by the testimony of
Angels, that he is ascended and gone up into heaven, washed from the
defilements of sin, that his faith has washed him, etc. that he inioyeth
the joys of eternal life. Yea and this he says of that Valentinian who was
as yet but learning the principles of Religon, that is to say, as yet
unbaptized; in which case Purgatory was meetest to have had place. And in like
manner of Theodosius: He is delivered from this doubtful fight and warfare, he
inioyeth an everlasting light, eternal tranquillity, etc. He is glorified
amongst the company of Saints; there he embraces Gratian, he beholds in the
kingdom of Christ the temple of Christ, etc. And he speaks, says he, full
assuredly and confidently: For as much as they are dead in the faith of Christ,
seeing the Lord was made sin, to the end that he might take away the sin of
the world, to the end that we might be all in him the righteousness of God,
no more (says he) the slaves of sin, but sealed up for the reward of
righteousness. In like manner his prayers could not possibly be understood of
his Purgatory, in as much, (as we have seen) as he gave it no place, until
the day of judgment. With the same intent and mind S. Augustine prayed for his
mother, saying: I pray thee O Lord for her sins, hear me by the medicine of
his wounds, which was hanged upon the Cross, and sits at thy right hand,
making intercession for us: Pardon her and enter not into judgment with her.
And I do verily believe that thou have done this which I have prayed thee for,
but approve O Lord and hear witness with Voluntariaoris mei, the free
offerings of my mouth, Epiphan. cont. Aerium l. 3. t. 1 haeres. 75.
etc. This argument was more thoroughly canuased and hotly dealt in about the
year 500. in the time of Epiphanius, who concealeth not or hides the same
from us, but sets down the very same words: That this is no commandment
of the father; but an instruction and lesson taught by the mother, that is to
say, by the Church. Aerius found himself offended at these prayers for the
dead, which passed measure. He put forth this question: Wherefore are the
names of the deceased repeated and recited after their death? And to what end
do prayers serve for those that are taken out of this life? If it be to the
end that they may not suffer for their sins, etc. Here verily were a place
to answer him, that there is a Purgatory: That those that are departed hence,
without having satisfied for their sins, are relieved by such suffrages, etc.
But on the contrary what does Epiphanius presuppose and set down for the
foundation of the matter in question? Verily, even the quite contrary: That
such as the living pray for, are, and live, in the presence of the Lord, and
that by these prayers, such as are as yet traveling this worldly pilgrimage,
do witness their hope. S. Chrysostom has spoken of these prayers for the
dead, with greater advantage then any others: For that which Tertullian has
called Custom, Epiphanius a Decree, or Tradition of the Fathers; he has
called an Apostolical Tradition. But he is confuted in one word by S. Jerome,
and S. Gregory; who says that the Apostles used no other prayer in the
celebration of service, then the Lords prayer. But yet for all that shall we
think that he prayed for souls in Purgatory, when as he believed not any
such thing? Nay verily, but rather for them which are with Christ: Chrysostom.
hom. 3, ad Philip. Idem hom. 4. ad Hebr.
They are (says he) with their king, not any more beholding him as in a
mirror, no longer loking up unto him by the eyes of faith; but face to face.
For else what should be the meaning of these flaming Lamps, but that we bear
these glorious Champions company home to their houses, after their combat
finished and accomplished? As also what should be the meaning of these Hymns;
but that we glorify God and give him thanks for that he has crowned the
deceased? That he has set him at liberty from all grief and anguish, and
that he keeps him now even with himself? These then are all of them nothing
else but actions of joy and rejoicing. And if thou mark what thou singest at
that time, it is Conuertere anima mea in requiem tuam: Fly O my soul into thy
rest; for the Lord has dealt graciously with thee. And again, I will not fear
the evil and wicked persons, because that thou art with me, etc. Idem hom. 70
ad Antioch. in Math. hom. 32 in Ioh. 61.
In an other place: The faithful dying (says he) shall take his flight up into
the habitation of the Angels, so that he shall not be to be found, even at the
time of his funeral. And in deed the Liturgies which they object so much unto
us, should so much the more confirm them in this point. That of Saint Basil:
Remember those O Lord which sleep in hope of the resurrection. Would he in
their conscience call Purgatory a sleep? And when he prays for the living,
he says: For their salvation, for the remission of their sins. But for the
dead: For their rest and ease of their soul, in a clear and light place,
far and free from weeping and wayling, etc. And thus Chrysostom. The office
of Millaine attributed to Saint Ambrose: For them (says it) which have gone
before us with the ensign of faith, and which sleep the sleep of peace, etc.
And that which they attribute unto Saint James in the same sense: For all such
as have embraced the true faith from Abell; for the Patriarchs, Apostles,
Prophets, Martyrs, as also for the Virgin Marie, whom he calls the mother
of God, most holy, and pure, etc. And which amongst them is he that would say
that she is in Purgatory? But after all, Saint Jerome in the place before
alleged, cutteth off all quite and clean: That out of this world we receive
no help, aid or comfort, either by the counsels or prayers, one of another.
And this is cited to the same end and purpose in the Decree. And what shall we
say of the Mass used at this day, Hierony. apud. Great. c 20. in praesenti. 13.
q 2.
which on the contrary prays not for the delivery of souls out of
Purgatory: but out of Hell, from the dark lake, from the jaws of the Lion,
and from eternal pains? And that not for the time present; but in respect of
the judgment to come; as likewise that that which is read of the memory of
those which sleep the sleep of peace, and which rest in Christ, is not to be
read in the old Mass books of Rome, which are written with hand, but added
only after that the Mass has been applied to the use of the dead. So hard a
thing it is and always has been, to uphold and maintain a lie against the
truth.

They reply: And what then was the end of praying for the dead? In what sense
they prayed for the dead. Orig. l. 3. in Job
We cannot better sound the reason of this, then by the line of the Fathers
themselves which did practice it. Origin alleges two reasons: We celebrate
(says he) the memory of their rest, partly, to rejoice for that they are
placed in Refrigerio, at their ease: partly for to pray unto God, that he would
give us, even us that are still living, a good end by faith etc. This then is
properly for the instruction of the living, and not for the comfort of the
dead. Saint Denis: Wherefore (says he) does the Minister pray unto God, that
he will pardon the dead, Dionys. c. 7. Eccles. Hierar.
and place him in the region of the living? For seeing that every man is there
handled, according to his life: and that he has now ended the same; what can
such prayers prevail and help him? Here was to be answered according to
the doctrine received and taught by the Church of Rome: That this was to free
him out of the pains of Purgatory. But in deed what is his answer? That the
prayers of good and virtuous men, do never fail of their fruit: That God
renders to the faithful according to their works; but in such sort
notwithstanding, as that he blotteth out their spots and imperfections, for his
mercy sake, (then it is not by the rigor and severity of Purgatory:) That
although the promises of God made unto the faithful, be already effected and
fulfilled, that yet the Minister does crave the same of God, for three reasons.
First, to show himself desirous, according to Christian unity, that gifts and
good things might be bestowed upon others, even as he would wish or desire
them for himself. Secondly, to confirm and assure the hearts of such as are
present, of the performance of those good things, which God promises in the
Scriptures to those that fall a sleep, that is to say, die in him. And
thirdly, to declare unto them the judgment of God, according to the charge
which is given him from God, to bind and to loose, in admitting and receiving
of some, and rejecting of other some by his testimony, as if he conveyed and
carried them (...), by this his prayer out of this life, into that blessed and
happy estate; for this prayer was wont of old time to be said, at the laying
of them into the earth. S. Ambrose gives us other reasons: Grief and sorrow
(says he) is oftentimes the comfort of the grieuing. And in good affections
there is likewise a certain pleasure in weeping: but we content and satisfy
our selves in some manner, by speaking of him whom we have lost, etc. What
other thing could he say of such as he witnessed to be dead in Christ, and by
consequent living, and reigning with him? Nilus de Purgatorio. Chrysostom. hom 4.
ad Hebr. and hom. 70. ad Antioch. hom. 22. in Act. hom 33. in Math.
Saint Chrysostom makes two orders of the dead: the one dying in a true
faith; and the other not so: and he finds it good to pray both for the one
and for the other, but for the one, at the Altar: but not so, for the other:
And these prayers (says he) are not, (...) any fained thing or counterfaite
Pageant, but full of efficacy. Let us see what manner of efficacy. Is it a
Purgatory or purging efficacy? Nay not so, for the Grecians say, that he
never believed it: Neither yet the Greek Churches. But (says he) thou
call the Priests and the Singers, to the end they may comfort thee, and
honor the deceased. Idem hom. 3. ad Philip. hom 69. ad Antioc. hom. 41. ad
Corinth. 61. in Ioh. 21. in Act. Greg. contr. l. 4 Dialog. c. 44. Bonauentur.
in 4. Sen. 46. D Epiphan. haeres. 75. Idem aduers. Acrium.
We come and discourse like Philosophers of the resurrection, instructing all
such as have not as yet been overtaken by the death of their kinsfolks, to
bear out the same stoutly and undauntedly, when it shall happen unto them. But
if one press him further: These prayers, and alms (says he) serve for them
that are saved, as an increase of their glory; and for the damned, to the
mittigating of their pain, (...), yea (in a certain place) to the working of
a full deliverance. Now I would know if Saint Gregory, the Schoolmen or our
adversaries do approve this? Epiphanius does what he can against Aerius to
rid him out of doubt, and to leare his entangled mind: and the doctrine of
Purgatory had been a fit reply and for his purpose, to have fully satisfied
Aerius, who did so press and urge him. For (said he) if these pruiers profit a
wicked man, that he shall not undergo the punishment deserved after death; is
there any evil and wicked thing that a man will let to do, either against God
or man, being assured that he shall not fail to have certain prayers offered
for him after his death? But Epiphanius says rather: The end and scope of
these prayers is not that; but first, that those that are living, may be
admonished that those that depart hence well, are not dead but live with the
Lord, that is to say, Paul ad Cor. 2.3.5. Nazianz. in hom. de Caesario, quem
vocat primitias. (...)
rest confirmed in the resurrection: Secondly, that they which pray for their
brethren, reap this consolation, that they are away from them, as it were for
the time of a journey, (...); but (following that which Saint Paul says, and
Nazianzene has learned of him) to soiourne with the Lord. For they that
expound this pilgrimage of Purgatory, cannot shift themselves from the words
that go before: That the Church does pray for them by name which are already
received up to be with Christ. Thirdly, They pray also (says he) for the
Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, Martyrs, etc. To the end that thereby, the
faith full might daily learn to make difference, betwixt Christ a man, and all
other men, because he possesses eternal joy of himself, but al other by him,
how just and righteous so ever they be. And to conclude withal, upon the
inconvenience and absurdity that Aerius did allege: Epiphan. cont. Acrium,
l. 3. c. 1 haeres. 75.
What should this prove to be, if thereby all faults and offenses were
abolished? He answers him: That we must not think notwithstanding, that
(...), the total sum of crimes is blotted out: without any further
declaring, how far this abolishment does stretch. Our adversaries do here
take upon them to guess what he would say: That small sins and not great
and heinous crimes are there blotted out: and we tell them, that the Schoolmen
will not allow it them: And we also do think that it is more seemly to rest
and stay our selves, where he has rested, seeing he would not say any more,
but conceal the rest. And in deed Cassander in his advise to the Emperor
Maximilian, Cassand. in consult. c. de iterat. Missae.
though holding parties with our adversaries, does freely confess: That until
this day it was never agreed upon in the old Church after what manner these
prayers did profit those which were dead, neither yet what was the state and
condition of the Souls for which they prayed: but that it was a mere
testimony of charity toward the deceased, and a profession of that Article
of the faith concerning the immortality of the soul, and of that also of the
resurrection to come.

Saint Augustine remains, who seems to them to be more favorable then all
the rest: and behold the reasons that he yields. He prays for his mother,
though presupposing her to be already in heaven: Prayer then for the dead,
being used in the same sense that he uses it, does not presuppose any
Purgatory. Of the calling to memory and rehersall of the dead which was made
at the Altar, that is to say, August. de Ciuit. Dci. l. c. 9.
in the service of the Church, he delivers this as an occasion: That it was
to show the Communion that even the dead have in the Church, who cease not to
be members of the same, though they reign already with Christ, and be absent
from this life. Again, that the friends of the deceased, may receive this
consolation, that they which are asleep in Christ, how infirm and weak so
ever, are not excluded and shut out from his kingdom, but received into eternal
happiness, because of the Son of God made a sacrifice for us, whom they have
participated in the Eucharist. But as he was urged and drawn by the strife
and contention of the time (for there was then much to do about this Article,)
whereas all the former have made but two orders of the deceased, August. de cura
pro mortuis ad Paul. Nol. c. 1.4.18. Ad Dulcit. q 2. De Ciuit. Dei, l. 21. c.
13. and 14 Idem de verb, Domini, Sermon. 32.
he has made three: The good (says he) who have nothing to do but to make
prayers and supplications; and these are they whom by name they daily used so
to pray for. The wicked, for whom no prayers or supplications could serve, if
it be not, it may be (says he) for the damned, for the diminishing and
lessening of their punishment. And Chrysostom said also that they did ease
their pains. And the middlemost or those betwist the other two, who have need
and accordingly aid and succor there by; whether it be (says he) that God
may not deal with them according to their sins, or that their souls may be
purged before the day of judgment, by temporal punishment, that so they may
not fall into the eternal. Finally, the prayers which are made for the good,
are thankesgiuings for the wicked, such as whereby the living may be comforted,
and for those which are betwixt both, such as are propitiatory. Now this is
the first man that has set open this way and passage contrary to all ancient
writers, and more then four hundred years after our Savior Christ; there
having not been any man before time that had so much as read any thing of
prayer for the dead, or of a third place which they call Purgatory: and this
Purgatory notwithstanding whereof he says elsewhere in other places: That there
is some appearance, that it is: That it may be that there is one: That no part
of the Scripture speaks of it: That there is not any at all. Doubtful
therefore are these prayers and oblations, even for the middle order of the
deceased, as is also his Purgatory: Or rather none at all absolutely, as
neither his Purgatory; seeing that by his confession, there is none in the
Scriptures.

What do we gather out of all this discourse? Verily, first: That these
prayers have no foundation or ground either in the old or new Testament.
Secondly, that they are proceeded partly from humane affections; and partly
from the imitation of the Pagans. Thirdly, that the old Fathers used them for
those whom they believed already to enjoy eternal life; as the Apostles,
Prophets, Martyrs, the holy Virgin, etc. Or we may say better, according to
the manner wherein they prayed in the Council of Trent, for the Souls of the
Popes, Paul the third, and Julius the third. For those which live and die in a
most holy manner, can they possibly according to their own doctrine abide so
long in Purgatory? Fourthly, that it was then in regard of their souls, a
holy desire, and to be taken in like sense, as when we say, live O Christ, live
O God, etc. whom we know to reign eternally: In regard of their bodies a
prayer unto God, that it would please him to glorify them in the resurrection,
etc. Fifthly, that they were made rather in consideration of the living, then of
the dead, to ease them of their grief, and confirm them in their faith:
instructions that may be taken at a better hand and warrant from the Apostle:
Torment not your selves about them which are a sleep, etc. Sixthly, that they
made them not upon any consideration of Purgatory; seeing that amongst so many
reasons of so many Doctors, living in diverse ages and places, not any one
before Saint Augustine, has alleged Purgatory. Seventhly, that these
observations and reasons so diverse and manifold do witness unto us, that it
was at that time held as an indifferent doctrine; as also how that the greater
sort do call it a Custom, a Decree, an Institution, etc. Eighthly, that Saint
Augustine himself, who alone, after many other better reasons, alleges
Purgatory, cannot make any good proof of the same; seeing he himself does
not cover or conceal what doubt he was in whether there were a Purgatory or
not. Likewise he delivers contrary assertions, whereby there is great
appearance and likelihood, that he did not revoke or unsay any thing, but so
far as he was won, and ouerswayed by the headstrong conceit of men,
seming in the light of nature, to know that which they had never heard or
seen. Finally, that the prayers for the dead, which have no foundation in the
world, ought not to have any more authority in the Church, then Baptism for
the dead, practiced say the ancients, but not approved from the time of the
Apostles; or the Eucharist given into the mouth of the dead; the one and the
other proceeding from the same natural affections, and yet both the one and
the other abolished, and banished out of the Church.

Now it is not to be forgotten, that that which was to be seen very weak and
feeble in S. Augustine, for to strengthen this new building withal, has been
since that time, underpropped by counterfeit and fained writings, by men
willing that way to employ their uttermost endeavor thus laboring by untruth
to establish a lie; and man's device and invention, by notorious and heinous
crimes. And to that end, some have attributed unto him the Books, August. de
ver. and falls. paenit. c. 71.
De vera and falsa paenitentia; made in deed by Monks, though they be
commonly cited in his name, where he says: Let him that deferreth to convert
and turn too long, pass through the fire of Purgatory, which is more
painful and grievous, then all the punishment that man can endure in this
life. A Sermon also of the day of the dead, or of the remembrance of all the
deceased; where they have made him speak in the same terms and manner of
speech. A book notwithstanding wherein the Author himself alleged S.
Augustine: as also the feast, not being as yet received into the Church in his
time; but instituted by Odilo Abbot of Clugni more then 500. years after. And
yet which is more, there are some that have devised an Epistle written from S.
Cyril, Bb. of Jerusalem, to S. Augustine, for to confirm him in the opinion of
Purgatory: Cyril I say, whose life S. Jerome did write whiles he lived;
writing to S. Augustine of the miracles of Saint Jerome after his death: In
which Epistle there is mention made: How that S. Jerome appeared unto a
certain man named Eusebius, and commanded him to cast his sack over three
dead bodies which should presently thereupon rise, thereby confounding the
heresy, which denied Purgatory: That these three men thus raised again, made
their abode amongst men for the space of twenty days, declared how that S.
Jerome had been the means of their seeing of Hell and Purgatory: That all
whatsoever misery all the men in this world had endured from Adam unto that
time, did not come any thing near unto the pains and punishment, that is
therein, etc. And that had not Saint Jerome come in the mean time, they had
been near to have received the sentence of condemnation, for not having
believed it, etc. Thus we may see (a thing then which nothing is more natural)
the doctrine of lies maintained and nourished by a lie it self.

CHAP. X. What prosperous proceeding Purgatory attained unto in the Church of
Rome, and by what degrees.
IN the end, after that our adversaries cannot all this while make choice of
any one of the Fathers, to whose opinion they may trust and hold themselves in
this matter of Purgatory; (for we freely permit and allow them their choice
out of them all) notwithstanding that we have run through the space of those
five hundred years next after our Lord, Purgatory affirmed and avouched by
Gregory. Anno. 600. Deuteronomy. 18.11. Esaias. 8.19. August. de cura pro mortuis
gerend. Upon what foundation he builds his doctrine. Gregor. Magn. in Dialog.
they are constrained to have recourse to Gregory Bb. of Rome, living about
the year 600, even unto that Gregory, which of the custom of the Gentiles,
made a Law in the Church of Christ; of Origin his curiosities, a necessary
devotion; of the speculations of the old Fathers who had gone before him, a
grounded principle and firm Maxim; and of S. Augustines doubt, an affirmative
doctrine: but grounded also altogether upon other raasons, then had been
alleged by the former, as revelations, apparitions of spirits, and others
such like delusions, directly contrary to that which is said in the Law: Who
so goes to ask counsel of the dead, is an abomination unto the Lord: as
also against the Maxim which S. Augustine is so careful for to prove: That the
souls of the dead intermeddle not with the affairs of those that are alive.
The doctrine then of S. Gregory, in brief is: That as at the break of the day
and in a brown color, the dark is mingled with the light (and is called the
twylight,) so the nearer we come to the day of judgment, so much the more
inter-course and community shall there be betwixt spirits and men. What
solid or sound stuff can he pick out of this foundation; seeing he
presupposes and sets down the end of the world to be as then? And this is
the cause why (says he) that men do attain (speaking of his own time,) to
know the estate and condition of Souls, a thing less known to such as went
before. Of Paschasius his soul, he learneth how that it endured his
Purgatory, amidst the scaldings of hot waters, because that in a certain
schism falling out amongst the Popes, he took part with Laurence and not with
Symmachus. And thereupon he infers that good souls which halt and come
short, be it never so little, in the works of righteousness, are detained and
kept back for a like proportion of time from the inioying of heaven. From the
soul of a certain Lord, how that it served at the bathes to pull off the hose
and shoes of all such as came to them; until the time that a certain Priest,
to whom it made it self known, had offered two loaves, such as had been
accustomed to be offered for it. As also from the soul of a Monk who died,
having in store the sum of three Crowns, how, when there was a holy day kept
in his name, it received the Communion in Purgatory, etc. He infers, that
when the trespasses are not unpardonable, there is means to procure a remedy
and help for the same, by the offering of a sacrifice, etc. And his Dialogues
are full of such frivolous tales: Howsoever that Schoolmen do not admit into
Purgatory, any faults or sins how slight so ever, but the pains and
punishment only, he concludes notwithstanding, that there is no way to be
followed, but to do well, so long as we are here, without trusting to that
which may be done afterward. But what manner of (...), what steadfastnes of
faith is there in all this? Or rather what has it but it may give us to
believe, that these were spirits of deceit, watchful and painful in their
craft and occupation, even in persuading the world to that which might deceive
them? Tertullian says: Tertull. de Anima c. 5.7.
These apparitions are but the mockeries and deceits of the evil spirit, who
carries himself privily under the shapes of living men, or masked and
disguised after the manner of men deceased, etc. God has sufficiently declared
unto us, in the parable of the poor and rich man, that Hell is not open for
any to come forth, etc. no not to win credit to Moses and the Prophets,
etc. To be short, all manner of representation or apparition of souls that is
without body, is nothing else but a delusion, nothing else but witchcraft.
Chrysostom after the same manner: Chrysostom. hom 29. in Math. and hom. 13. Idem
de Lazaro hom. 4.
The possessed with Devils will cry sometimes unto thee and say; I am the
soul of such a one, but will thou believe it? No, not so (says he) for this
speech comes of the fraud and deceit of the Devil. It is not the soul of
any dead person that speaks so, but it is the Devil that counterfeiteth, the
deepelier to deceive and abuse the people. For of a certainty the soul
separated from the body, goes not up and down wandering in these lower regions:
the souls of the righteous are in the hand of God; those of the sinners after
this life, are quickly by force carried away: The history of Lazarus and the
rich man does prove the same unto us. And again: Would thousee that the
doctrine of the Scriptures and of the Prophets, is of an other manner of
weight, then that of the dead which rise again: consider and know, that
whosoever the dead party may be, yet he is a servant; but as for the
Scriptures, it is the Lord which speaks in them. And therefore though a dead
man reuine and live again, though an Angel come down from heaven, yet let us
principally believe the Scriptures: For the Author of them is as well the Lord
of the dead as of the living, of men and of Angels. And therefore what the
Scriptures teach us most clearly, let us not go about to learn of the dead,
etc. And there is an Article in the ancient Synodes: That such visions, under
the color of souls, are of the Devil. But what then may we think that
Tertullian or Chrysostom would have said to Gregory? Verily, that these
visions had been of the Devil: Verily, and his Purgatory also, a doctrine of
Devils. And again some have doubted of these Dialogues, that they were not
his, because that in the rest of his books he seems to be more grave: And
Sabinian his next successor, caused so many of them to be burnt, as he could.
But some on the contrary, have sought by all the ways they can, to make them
to be believed, for the procuring of the greater authority to Purgatory. And
by name, Anno. 730.
Gregory the third caused them to be published throughout all Christendom,
to the same end. Damascen, Damascen confirms it.
if a man will lend his ear unto them, has not smally advanced this
building, but always with the self same Arguments; for in a certain prayer
which they attribute unto him, S. Steven by his prayers, saves Falcouilla a
Pagan, deceased in Idolatry. God also made the head of a certain Priest that
was dead, and a Gentile borne (for such a one does Durandus describe him to
be) to speak to Macarius, and declare to him, the consolations that they in
Purgatory receive by the suffrages of the living. Again, at the prayer of
Gregory, passing through Traian his Country, God delivered Traian out of
hell, etc. But I marvel that they are not ashamed of these fables; or why at
the least they set them not in better order? Seeing that out of hell there is
no redemption? Seeing also that, according to their doctrines, the Gentiles
cannot be in Purgatory? But it seems that this pretended Damascen, is
ashamed of himself when he concludes saying, that he speaks not any thing
that he means to stand unto; and that what he says, is but by way of
discourse: but such is his discourse, as that they make a Creed of it. And yet
it is not credible that this was his prayer; seeing that in his Books de
Orthodoxa fide, in which it is his drift to comprise the Christian faith, he
makes no mention of Purgatory. Anno. 750.
Now this fell out about the year, 750.

From this time forward the opinion of the sacrifice, The growth of Purgatory,
through the opinion of a sacrifice.
as also that of Purgatory began mutually and wittingly to lend their hands,
the one to the other: ignorance grows grosser and grosser and that sensibly
and to the sight of the eye, throughout all Christendom, and in this
darkness, the spirit of darkness, dispatcheth and bestirreth himself about
his business. Once to look into the Scriptures, was by no means to be heard
of; but to hearken after miracles, was the whole employment of the mind. One
man had seen the souls tormented upon the Gridyron, an other upon a Spit;
this man had seen them burning in the fire, that man had espied them dipped in
the Ice one was hung up to be dried in the chimney smoke; an other to underlay
the washing rain distilling and dryuing down a Gutter; one living, but in a
trance, an other returning again after death. Further more, this man had
discovered one of the Gulfs in Ireland, an other that in Sicilia; and a third
that in Pozzuolo, the one by the conduct and guidance of an Angel, the other
by revelation from the Devil. And all the books of those times are full of
such fooleries: other instructions then these, there was not any current
amongst the people, namely the Legends, the Lombardicke history, and such
like. In a word, whereas the Fathers had practiced the remembrance of the dead
(as we have seen) for the comfort and consolation of the living, they begin to
turn all to the contrary: For those said, that they were in Abraham's bosom,
in a place of blessed and happy rest, these said they were in extreme
torments nothing differing from those of hell, etc. And in stead that those knew
how to teach them to die in an assurance of eternal life, these took the way
to make them apprehend and conceive of death, as of the door opening to an
unavoidable fire, if they redeem not themselves from thence by suffrages: for
now there was no more leaning unto the mercy of God; God was become a rigorous
and merciless tyrant and tormentor, neither was any thing to be looked for
from the satisfaction of our Lord, for he had paid no debt but what was
answerable for the mere faults and transgressions: the infinite merit of his
passion, was become unable to satisfy for our demerits, his pains and
punishment for ours. But, Aut satis faciendum in hac vita (say they) or Satis
patiendum in altera: Either a man must provide to make satisfaction in this
life, by doing sufficiently well, or in the other by suffering sufficiently
evil: So that this is nothing else but to say, let the suffrages of those that
live after us, ransom and redeem us from our pains. And thereupon a man must
cause great store of Masses to be said for the dead: for them also men must
found yearly feasts, Obits, Chapels, or Monasteries. And the ordinary clause
of these foundations is: Anno. 800. Anno. 1000. Anton. l. 15. c. 15. Violater.
l. 2. Lombar. hist. l. 8. Polyd. l. 6. c. 9.
We give, bequeath, etc. such or such a thing, for the salvation or redemption
of our souls, of the souls of our predecessors and successors, etc. And these
fashions of doing and speaking began since the year 800. Toward the year
1000. there was a vision set out to be known of the people: How that a man
guided by an Angel had seen a number of Souls diversely handled and
entreated, some lying upon Gold, some upon Chafe or straw, some in abundance,
some in want and penury; according as they were helped there by the suffrages
of their friends, or otherwise neglected and finding no body to care for them.
Whereupon sprung a devotion of ordaining, that upon some certain day in the
year there should be general prayers made for all souls: And that is it
which is called, Dies omnium animarum, the day of the dead; attributed by the
most to Odilo the fourth Abbot of Clugni, persuaded by the flames of the
mountain Etna in Sicilia, of the certainty of the torments of Purgatory: But
by other some to Boniface the fourth, a little after the time of Gregory the
great, after the fashion and imitation of a certain feast of the Romans
celebrated yearly in the month of February for the souls of the deceased;
that is, to purchase rest for them by sacrifices, night prayers, wax candles,
Plutarch. in Romulo. Anton. ut. 13. S. I. Histor. Lombard. leg. 157. Polyd. l.
6. c. 9. Canones Reform. a Card. Camp. propositi. Not generally and all at
once. Synod. Tolet. 3 Epist. Bonif. ad Gregor. 3. and Gregor. 3. ad Bonifac.
and torches light up amongst all the people, etc. And thereupon it comes,
that Plutarch calls the month of February (...), purgative, or purgatory.
Now in the mean time it is not to be forgotten, that in the council of Lion
1244. it was not received, having rooted it self no where else but within the
Monasteries of the order of Clugni: as also that in the year 1524. Cardinal
Campegius propounding certain Canons of reformation, was ashamed thereof, and
so omitted in the twentieth Canon, to which he reserved the number of feasts
to speak any word of this feast which is at this day grown so famous and
solemn a thing.

Here notwithstanding we have two things to observe: The one is, that these
superstitions were not received all at one blow in so large a measure. For in
the third Synod of Toledo it is ordained: That the dead shall be conueighed to
the grave with singing of Psalms only in hope of the resurrection. This was
about the year 650. And even at the same time when Boniface Archbishop of
Mentz, was sent by Pope Gregory the third to reform the Churches of Germany
after his fashion. He found not any of these offeringes for the dead in the
country, but he brought them in there by the commandment of this Gregory.
And this was about the year 800. Carol. Mag. l. 1 c. 83.
And Charles the great to repress these beginninges, thought good to limit the
same: to the end that they might not run on to the ruin and undoing of
inheritours and other children, that were then but young: in like manner he
ordained to what use the oblations that were offered should serve, namely two
thirds to be given to the poor, and one third to the Clergy. Innocent. 3. in
Extrauag. de Presbyt. non baptizato.
The decree of Innocent the third is not slightly here to be passed over, of a
priest unbaptized and yet dying in the faith of Christ, whom he affirms,
Caeleste gaudium incunctanter adeptum, to have obtained eternal life without
delay or stay: ordaining notwithstanding, that prayers and sacrifices should be
offered up for him. Where we will note two things: The first, that the way to
heaven by purgatory, was not in his judgment necessary: seeing that an
unbaptized priest had nothing to do there. The second: That the prayers for the
dead do not presuppose a purgatory: seeing he ordained them for one whom he
believed and affirmed to be already in Paradise. And it is not to be stood
upon here, that Panormitan says, that he had obtained it, Spe, non re; in
hope but not in deed. Bellarm. l. 1. de eccles. Triumph. c. 1. and 2
For Bellarmine himself alleges this place against those which denied, that
the faithful departed did enjoy the sight of God before the day of judgment.
Let us add hereunto, that in all the vigiles of the dead, there is not a word
mentioned of purgatory, nor yet of the fire or pains from which the dead are
to be released by the diligence and carfulness of those that are alive: but
rather there is speech laying out the miseries of this life, the mercifulness
of God, repentance and reconciliation with him whiles we are here by Jesus
Christ: the blessed life, and the resurrection of the dead, etc. All of them
lessons of consolation for such as are living, who were accustomed after the
death of their kinsfolks, to call the Ministers of the Church unto their
houses, to spend the night with them in these holy meditations: Playing the
Philosophers (says Chrysostom.) according to the word of God: whereupon they
were called vigils, whereas they are so called now a days, though they fall to
be kept at high noone.

The other is, Resistances.
that these superstitions likewise were not received without contestation, for
after the sharp contentions which were in the Church in the time of S.
Augustine which wrought this effect, that Purgatory was left indifferent:
About the year 1200.
as time grew on; God (who never leaves himself without testimony unto the
face of the world, that so he might make it inexcusable) raised up some to
withstand the same in diverse places, and at diverse times. In the East, the fifth
general Council which quenched and quite put out the fire of Purgatory in
the East Church, and that almost at the same time that Gregory did blow it up
in the Latin, and that after so sure a manner, as that it was never able to
recover either heat or light since then in those Churches. Nilus de purg.
And this appears by the Apology put up by the Greeks in the Council of
Basil, and by a treatise of purgatory, made by Nilus Archb. of Thessalonica.
And in the West Churches the disputation held by Claudius Archbishop of Turin,
in the time of Jews the Gentle, against the superstitions of the Church of
Rome, and particularly against this same, Anno 900.
about the year 900. The lectures and public sermons of Peter de Bruits, and
Henry his successor at Tholosa, who taught for the space of thirty year
throughout all Languedoc and Guienne: That Christ was not sacrificed a new
upon the Altar in the Mass: That this oblation was not offered for the
salvation of souls: That the Masses, prayers, and other works of the living
for the dead, were unprofitable, foolish, Petr Cluniacens. l. 1.
and impious. And these things we should not know how to come by, to have
understanding of the same, but that Peter Abbot of Clugni reports the same
unto us, who no doubt forgot not to darken and ouershadow their doctrine so
much as lay in him. And it is to be noted, that this Peter was in the end
burned alive: and notwithstanding Henry continued alive and took his place.
Anno 1100.
This was about the year 1100. The books of Arnoldus Villanouanus, a Spaniard
by nation, excellently learned in the languages, Hebrew, Greek, Latin and
Arabicke, a great Philosopher and Divine, in which there is set down amongst
diverse others this general Proposition: That we must not either make
satisfaction or offer any sacrifice for the dead. This was about the year
1200. Anno 1200.
At the same time the Waldenses in France taught: That the true and only
purgatory was in this life, in the precious blood of Jesus Christ, and not
elsewhere: That the Masses were sacriledges and not sacrifices, which rob and
steal away the honor due unto the merit of our Savior, etc. who after they
had maintained their doctrine in many Synodes in Languedoc and Guyenne, as
appears by the very histories of the adversaries, were in the end oppressed
and borne down by force of arms: the Christian forces levied against the
Turks and Sarasins, being set on work to do this feat. And notwithstanding
they were not so wholly extinguished, but that their ashes sown by the
providence of God throughout all Europe, did afterward stifle and choke these
abuses of our age throughout the better part of Christendom.

Now when the field might seem to be wholly left wast and empty for the
Devil, he contented not himself to walk the broad and high way. An exceeding
great increase. Questions of Purgatory.
And thereupon taking purgatory for granted they begun to reason in the
schools: Whether the suffrages made for many together have as much efficacy,
as when they are made for one alone: Or else being made for one alone, whether
they be of force for all those that are in purgatory. A certain Praepositiuus
answered affirmatively: For (said he) it is like a candle which gives light
unto many: and as a lecture which teaches many, and that without doing of any
wrong or injury unto one by helping of another. The schoolmen then and the
Monks foreseeing that the whole trade and traffic of Masses was lost and
gone, if this resolution took place, do consequently muster and band
themselves together with all their might against the same: They dispute and
argue, that the suffrages are specially of force for them for whom they are
made, and not otherwise: That of two condemned to be either of them a hundred
years in purgatory, the one by multitude of suffrages may come forth the
first day: and the other for lack of them shall there endure and finish his
appointed term. Magist senten. l 4. D. 45. Bernardin. in Rosario. Albert.
Magn. de Off. Miss. c. 15. t. 3. K.
And the same thing is taught by the Master of the sentences. And thereupon
their Monks cry aloude and say: That then it is a worthy thing to have them
that shall succeed in the inheritance very devout, and such as will come off
readily and liberally for the ransomes of their deceased kinsfolks, etc. And
that then the Condition of the rich is a great deal better then the condition
of the poor in Purgatory, etc. a point of divinity unknown unto all former
ages, and far off from that of our Saviors. O how hard and difficult a thing
it is for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of heaven!

Another question follows, whether the suffrages made for the dead, Other
questions.
by men which have committed mortal and deadly sins can help them. And
herein many were moved to believe that they could not. Where it is to be
noted, that the laity were wont until now to make these suffrages by prayers,
beads, rosaries, etc. And for this inconvenience they found a very safe
conueyance: namely, that all men are sinners; that Nemo sine crimine viuit,
etc. And that therefore it was the surest course that these suffrages should be
made by the mouth and ministry of the priests, who although they were
sinners, yea and that heinous sinners as the rest of other men yet they were
not considered and accounted of as the lay men, according to their private
demerites, but as advocates and dealers for the Church, according to the desert
of the universal Church. And again upon this resolution great advantage does
rise unto the Priests, viz. a notable multiplying of Masses for the dead.
Neither is there in all this any let, but that the Canonistes may set the
wethercockes upon the highest pinacles of this building, brought to his present
hugeness by another invention, which is, that there are in hell certain that
are not extreme wicked ones, whose pains and torments may be mittigated and
much eased by such suffrages: and this in the end has brought them beyond any
limitable point. And for the confirmation thereof, they would gather it out of
a place in Augustine his Enchiridion heretofore alleged: but they cannot
agree with the schoolmen. The fire of purgatory blown and stirred together by
the Mendicant friars.
Now the Mendicant Friars, as soon as they were once received, did husband this
doctrine more thriftily then all the rest, drawing all men, even against their
wills to the devotions of their order. The Gray friars, to the end that they
might have men devoted to them, begin to preach, that S. Francis descended once
every year into purgatory to free and set at liberty such as did affect his
order: The Iacobines after the manner that is used at Portsale, proclaim how
that S. Dominicke performs this work every month: The Carmelite, or white
friars, that the virgin Marie, for whose sake they look to be accounted and
held for famous and renowned, did the same every Saturday. The Augustines
contradicted all the other, showing by the scriptures against S. Augustine
himself: That who so belieueth in Christ comes not into judgment, but
passes readily from death to life, according to that which the Lord had said
to the thief: To day thou shall be with me in Paradise. Thus were Christian
souls distracted and drawn into uncertainties, by these varieties, not
knowing any longer to whom they ought to acknowledge as due the work of their
salvation. And amongst all the opinions then broached, none but that which was
true in deed was held for heresy. So deeply had deceitful error rooted it
self, and so largely had it ouerspread the world, being borne up by the
authority and power of man. Dominc.
And yet Friar Dominick a Soto durst say within the memory of this age: That it
is not credible, seeing that purgatory is not for any but the faithful, that
God should leave his friends so long a time in the fire: and that he thinks
that there is not any one that abides there twenty years. A great crack in
the groundworke and yearly funeral feasts of the Church of Rome. Bellarm. de
purgat. l. 2. c. 9.
But Bellarmine with as much speed as may be, buckleth himself to the
repairing thereof, by goodly and glorious revelations: Nay (says he) it
appears plainly by such and such, that such a thing there has been these
hundred, two hundred, five hundred, yea these nine hundred years. And such a
thing there will be even unto the day of judgment.

Now the Churches of France and Germany have propounded within these 200.
years many articles to the Popes, which they called Grauamina, wherein they
complained themselves grievously of these abuses, which notwithstanding they
have not regarded to make any redress therein, in as much as the lands and
liuinges of the Clergy rests principally upon this protended fire; a fire
as we have a little seen without any ground or foundation either from the
scriptures or in the ancient Church. In so much as that the Monks began to
preach in the beginning of the age wherein we live: That the souls which were
there did leap at the sound of the money when it was cast into the basen for
them: That there was no so grievous or heinous a crime, no so great
abomination, no so heavy or rigorous punishment, from which men were not
acquit and freede thereby, etc. Against these enormities many great persons
have been moved to ring the popes such round and loud peales, as that they
have thereby been almost shaked besides both seat and sea; and thereupon it
is, that every one of them has not ceased, neither does as yet, to labor and
do his uttermost endeavor by a thousand wiles, and as many shifts to nestle
and settle himself both sure and fast, without retracting or departing from
any thing of all that whereof he is become seized and possessed. So far is it
off, that he should grow ashamed of any of his iugling tricks and cosenages
how open soever they be laid, The doctrine of purgatory, the mark of
Antichrist.
to the sight and view of the world. In this point also he bears a special
mark and note of Antichrist: namely, in the stealing away of the merit of our
redemption, so much as in him lies, from Jesus Christ our Lord: Howbeit that
the Churches of the Abyssines, Armenians, Muscouites, and Grecians, do not
acknowledge this Purgatory. For whereas they would make us believe, that the
Greek Church does avouch and allow of the same in a Council held at Florence,
in the time of Pope Eugenius, Anno 1439.
when as the Emperor Paleologus pressed of the Turk, came for succor and aid
to the Princes of the West: it is all in vain, false and nothing worth, seeing
that the Bishop of Ephesus principal deputed, did protest and openly disclaim
the same, before the whole Council assembled: and for that the Greek Churches
disauowed that which had been done by the others, whom they affirmed to be
manifestly won by the Pope, as in deed part of them did continue and abide
with him. And thus we have no Purgatory, and by consequent no Masses or
sacrifices for the dead: Purgatory in his fall drawing the Mass after it into
an unavoidable overthrow, according to our adversaries their own doctrine. But
it is now high time to pass to some other matter.

CHAP. XI. That the inuocating of Saints has no ground in the holy Scriptures
of the old Testament.
IT may seem to the purpose, that together with the considering of the Mass
in the nature and quality of a sacrifice; we should consequently examine, that
which it teaches us of the Saints deceased, and enjoying eternal life,
inasmuch as they are there inuocated and prayed unto, in as much as they are
acknowledged there to be intercessors unto God: in that their merits and
sufferings, are presented and set before him for a satisfaction for our faults:
and likewise because that this pretended sacrifice is made in their names, etc.
For after that we have handled that which they pretend that we have to
perform for the dead: what can better follow then to take a view and
consideration of that which they understand and hold, that the Saints deceased
do for those that are alive? Now this is a clear and evident doctrine
throughout the whole scriptures of the old and new Testament: That God alone
will be inuocated and prayed unto, prayed unto through one only Jesus Christ
his well-beloved: and in the virtue and power of his only sacrifice accomplished
upon the tree of the cross. If this doctrine stand, all the Masses which are
made in honor of the Saints for the living, do fall to the ground: even as
likewise in quenching and putting out of purgatory, all those are extinct and
made nothing worth, which are performed and practiced by the careful diligence
of the living for the dead.

God only will be prayed unto, God alone will be prayed unto Psalm. 50. Esaias.
42.8.
for he has said it: and whom shall we believe concerning that which is his
will besides himself: Call upon me in thine adversity: J will deliver thee,
and thou shall glorify me, etc. I am the Lord (says he) I will not give my
glory unto another. There is not (say the Prophets) salvation in any other but
in him, Esa. 45. Osce. 13 4. 2. Paral. 20. Ezech. 14.
There is no God that can save but he, etc. When we know what to do, there
remains nothing for us but to have recourse unto him, for we have no other
aid or succor but him, etc. And therefore David in so many his prayers, in so
manifold and diverse his matters and affairs betaketh not himself to any, save
only him: His refuge (says he) and his force, Psalm. 46.13.14 3.36.6. etc.
his protector, and his defender, his peace and his war, his counsel and his
army: Because (says he) that power is of him, and of him also is mercy: that
is to say, the desire, and the ability: the authority to command, and the
practice of the commandment. Again, because that his Majesty descends
mercifully in his bountiful kindness for to hear us, and grant our petitions,
and to do us good, etc. And S. Paul strikes the matter dead at one blow: How
(says he) shall they call upon him on whom they do not believe? But do we
only believe in God, the father, the Son, and the holy Ghost? then must we
only pray unto him, as well as only believe in him, that is as well as put
our trust and affiance in him: with what boldness then (for it cannot be any
point of humility) shall we dare to give unto Saints that which appeartaineth
unto God: even that homage, which he has required of us his creatures, and
which he has manifestly reserved to himself alone?

And as he will be prayed unto alone, so he will have it to be by one only:
And by one only.
The father by the Son God and man, mediator betwixt God and men, the high
and only priest betwixt the justice of the eternal father, and the sins of
his people. And we know him, for the father has anointed him for the only
and one alone priest; has made him as such a one to sit in the throne of his
majesty, to entreat and sue for us, has said unto him, Thou art my son, to
day have I begotten thee, Heb. 8.
in whom I am well pleased, etc. The Son also; No man comes to the father
but by me: whatsoever you shall ask of my father in my name, I tell you
verily he will give it you: And I will do it to the end that the father may be
glorified in the Son, etc. Therefore, Mat. 12.
Come unto me all ye that be oppressed and trodden down, and I will ease you.
And the holy Ghost in like manner by the mouth of the Apostles: There is but
one God, 1. Timoth 2.
and one mediator of God and men Jesus Christ our Lord. If any man have
sinned, we have an Advocate with the father, 1. Ioh. 1. Hebr. 7.
Jesus Christ the righteous: In believing on him we have liberty and access
unto the father in all confidence: Access I say in all confidence unto the
throne of grace, to obtain mercy and find grace, etc. And it is his will and
pleasure, For this Bishop, Heb. 4.
this high priest is such a one as is touched with the sense and feeling of our
infirmities, has been tempted as we in all things, sin excepted. And he is
of power and ability: Hebr 4. and 8.
For he is set at the right hand of the throne of the majesty of God, mighty
to save them which come near unto God by him, everliving for to make
intercession for them with him. After these so express commandementes, Romans 8.
what excuse remains for us, that we should betake and commend our selves to
the Creator, by the creature? The creature whatsoever or whosoever it be that
cannot move him, living here below, save only to wrath, otherwise then in that
he has been vouchsafed grace in Jesus Christ: and who likewise when he is
exalted and taken up into heaven, acknowledging no glory due to him, save in
that that God is glorified, cannot but take it an injury dove unto him when
any thing is attributed unto him, and cannot but be ready to say as the
Angel said unto S. John: Apocal. 19. and 22.
Beware and look well to thy self, I am thy fellow servant: pointing also out
unto us, with John Baptist, the greatest that ever was borne amongst the sons
of men: and saying, Behold the lamb of God that takes away the sins of the
world: the propitiation for our sins is only in his blood: turn and betake
your selves to him.

And moreover our God will be prayed unto in his only begotten, In that grace
and favor purchased through that sacrifice of the Cross.
in the virtue and power of his one only sacrifice made upon the Cross: for
as much as it is he only that may and has power to be both the sacrifice and
the sacrificer together: all the sacrifices, washings, and purifying of the
law, having relation to no other but this of his, which was without spot or
blemish: all their blood to his blood, and all their deaths, to that one death
and passion of his: who likewise alone could, as being God and man, suffer and
overcome, cast down himself into the center of the earth, and raise up
himself again far above the heavens, be a curse and a blessing: and finally
laid prostrate by death, and raised up to life all at once. And therefore is it
said by the Prophet Esaias 53. Esa. 53.
He has offered his soul an oblation for sin. The good will and pleasure of
the Lord shall prosper and prevail in his hand: He was pierced for our
misdeedes: Esa. 63.
He has taken upon him our iniquities, etc. Again, He alone has trod upon
all our enemies in his wrath: No one of the people has helped him: he was
alone, to tread the wine press, Heb. 10. Hebr. 9. 2. Ioh. 1.
etc. And he did it says the Apostle: When in the fullness of time he
abolished sin, by the offering up of himself; He was made a propitiation for
our sins: He has sanctified us by the oblation of his body, once offered,
and has consecrated for ever those whom he has sanctified. Which thing all
the blood of all the Saints, from righteous Abell unto the last Martyr, could
never have accomplished: No not though it had been but for the sins of one
only man: no not for the least sin of that man: not although this blood had
risen to the hugeness of a great floode: seeing there is no remission but in
the blood of the Son of God: and to seek it any where else, is to shed his
blood again, Act 4.12.
is to hold the same shed in vain: and this is to be guilty of it. For S.
Peter says: There is no salvation in any other: There is not any other name
given unto men by which they may be saved. That the fathers of the old
Testament never sought for help or succor by prayer, but at the hands of the
one only God. Eckius in Enchird.


And therefore we see proportionablie to this doctrine, that the fathers of the
old Testament did never offer up or direct their prayers unto any but to one
God alone. And this our adversaries subscribe unto: for so also was it held for
a point of sound divinity amongst them, that seeking of help at God by prayer
was a part of his service and worship due unto himself alone. They say, that
this was for fear that the people, who otherwise were ready and apt enough of
themselves thereunto, should turn aside unto idolatry: but this is to guess
and not to answer. But at the least they confess, that this is the way to
slip into idolatry. The rest say, That the fathers prayed not unto the
Patriarchs and Prophets, because they were as yet in the Limbs: But this is a
thing to be disputed and debated by us, if here were any place. But at the
least there were Angels, and those oftentimes conuersing and keeping company
with men, and having therewithal the charge of countries and nations: Henoch
and Elias also had been rapt and carried alive up into heaven, and the latter
of them in the sight of Elizeus. And yet notwithstanding we do not read that
any people or particular man in so many ages did ever pray unto any Angel, or
made choice of any to make intercession to God for him. No more then ever Noe
or his Sons did to Enoch, or Eliseus to Elias: the sons to the father, or
the disciples to their master: albeit (as we know) Eliseus were zealously
affected to Elias: My father, the chariot and horsemen of Israel. In the new
Testament God alone is prayed unto.


In the new Testament likewise as little; notwithstanding that they hold, That
the fathers by the descending of Christ into hell, were delivered out of the
limbs, and carried up into heaven. Fit matter for the children of Abraham,
the father of the faithful, to fly unto him, to call upon him for aid and
succor, and so of the rest. Notwithstanding also that many of the Apostles and
disciples suffered presently after for our Lord, as James, Steven, etc. during
the life time of Saint Peter, Saint Paul, and Saint John. Matter sufficient to
serve that it should not be kept close from us, that besides Jesus Christ we
have them for our advocates with God: and for intercessors by virtue of their
sufferinges and merits. And the same may be said of the holy virgin, whom
Saint John ouerliued many years, the advocate at this day (if we will believe
them) of the Church of Rome: who at the least should have been excepted from
these general rules. And here again they say, that the Apostles feared that
this might be held for arrogancy in them. And why on the behalf of the
Saints of the old Testament, and of the holy virgin? Again, That they stood
in doubt least the Gentiles should return again to their idols. But that there
might not so many duties of devotion be lost and let slip, could they not make
some manner of dispatch or dispensation? could they not devise some way to cure
and remedy the same? And would they that these babish excuses should pass for
current reasons with us, and that against so express textes of the scripture?

What then say they, do you make no more account of the saints, of those which
have suffered here on earth for the name of Christ, and which now are ascended
triumphantly with him up on high, etc? The honor that is due unto the Saints.
1. Cor. 12. Gal. 2. 2 Cor. 3. Act 9. and 14. Tim. 4.
Yes verily we honor them more then our adversaries: for we praise and honor
the Lord in his saints, glorifying his name for the singular graces which he
has bestowed upon the^ for the edifying of his Church, acknowledging the
meruailes that he has wrought by his power in the weakness of their
ministry, having chosen them, base and vile that they were, for instruments
of his power of his wisdom, and of his goodness, to carry his name amongst
the people, having assisted them in their travels, delivered them from infinite
tribulations: and in the end of their course, crowned them with glory. And
afterward we praise and magnify themselves, in the gifts which it has
pleased God to distribute unto them of his grace and favor: and specially that
he has showed them this favor to use them for the setting forth of his
glory: Math 25. Heb. 3.
for that having well employed their talentes given them of the Lord they are
entered into his joy: for that they have been faithful in the house, so that
they have not loved or spared their own lives, Apocal. 12.
even unto the death: whereby they have received of his liberal mercy the
white garment, etc. And from thence we are led along to a third honor, that
is, to set them before us as patterns of our life, to pray to God to vouchsafe
us the favor that we may follow their virtuous steps, their holiness,
their humility, zeal and constancy: following the exhortation of the
Apostles: Be ye followers of me, Romans 15. Hebr. 12.
as you have us for a pats terne and example. And in another place: Be ye not
slothful, but followers of them which by faith and patience have received the
inheritance of the promises. After this fashion say I, honor we the Saints,
praising God in them, praising them in God, and conforming our selves unto the^
by his grace. And all this according to the precepts and examples which we have
in the scriptures wherein their lives and their deaths have been set out unto
us to those ends: whereas our adversaries have made them ridiculous by their
devised and feigned legendes, and still do make the name of Christ in stead of
being glorified, to be blasphemed by these their fooleries which they deliver
to the poor people for their principal instructions: whereas for five hundred
years after our Lord they were condemned to be false, Gratian. D. 15. ex
Gelasio.
and by the Bishops of Rome themselves rejected as things invented by such men
as were either heretics or infidels, suborned thereunto by the malice of the
Devil himself to discredit the name and faith of Jesus Christ.

But rather we deny with the scriptures, that we ought either to fly unto
them for succor, or else worship them: For these services are due unto God
alone: and to take them as intercessors betwixt God and us, is not belonging to
them, it is the office of our only Mediator Jesus Christ our Lord: Neither yet
ought we to make any employment of their merits, or works of supererrogation,
either to appease the wrath of God, or to supply our unworthiness, or else the
passion of our Lord: for this were to annihilate, and make of no effect his
perfect sacrifice. And this is that which we have to condemn in the Mass in
this place: wherein the Priest contrary to that which has been told us so
often, namely, that God is the only searcher of hearts, does confess his
sins to the Angels, to the virgin Marie, to the Saints and Saintesses,
and prays them to be intercessors for him unto God: wherein he prays God
to pardon his sins, not by the merit of Christ, nor by his blood, but by the
merit of all the Saints, and specially, Of those whose relickes are under the
Altar, etc. And wherein the sacrifice, as they pretend of Christ, is offered to
God in the honor of the virgin Marie, and of the men saints, and women
saints, etc. And these things we affirm to be directly against the word of
God, against the analogy of faith, and against the unity of the ancient
Church. Now let us consequently hear if our adversaries have any thing to say
to the contrary.

In Genesis 41. Jacob blessing the children of Joseph, utters these words:
Genesis 18.15.16.
The God that fed me ever since I was unto this day: the Angel which has
been my protection from all evil bless these children: And my name and the
name of my fathers Abraham and Isaac be called upon (or cried loud upon) by
them, etc. Out of this place they gather, that the Angels and Saints ought to
be called upon and prayed unto. But as concerning the Angel whereof he
speaks, it appears that it was no created spirit: for then Jacob would not
have ranked him and made him equal with God: neither had he prayed unto him,
or done other like things, and used the very same terms which are belonging
to the Lord: This Angel then is he of whom the Prophet Malachie speaks:
Malach. 3.
the Angel of the covenant, the Son of God himself, the Mediator of the old
and new covenant, in the beholding of whom the Patriarchs found grace with the
Lord: Eoxd. 10.19.13 21 and 14.24.
That Angel which is sometimes by Moses in Exodus called an Angel, sometimes
Jehovah, and that in like terms of speech, and alluding unto these; that is
then when there is any speech of the conduct and guiding of Jacob, that is to
say, of the people of Israel, of his Church. And thus have the old writers
spoken. Tertul. de Trinit. c. 15.
Tertullian expounding this place, says: As he has not doubted or made any
scruple in calling Christ an Angel: so let no man be afraid or stick to call
him God, seeing he understands here, that in the blessing of his children
he is God, and called upon, and likewise an Angel. But and if that any
heretic, should obstinately set himself against the truth, that here is
properly spoken of an Angel; in this let him be convinced by the force and
power of the truth, etc. Saint Hillarie alleges it in the same sense upon
Psalm 123. Hilar. in psalm. 123. Chrisost. in Genes. c. 48.
That we ought to owe and ascribe all our graces, prosperity and deliverances
unto the one only God. And after the same manner Chrysostom. And as for that
which is said of the name of Abraham being called upon by his children, it is a
common and accustomed speech of the Hebrews, used when they will speak of
those men or women which are ingrafted into a family: Esaias, 4.
as in Esaias, seven women desire of one man, that his name may be called upon
by them; that is to say, that they may be called by his name, or held for his,
etc. And in this place is plainly delivered the adopting of the two sons of
Joseph, which Jacob reputeth and holds to be by place and right as capable
of inheritance in the parting of the land as his own sons: as in deed they
drew lots for two. But and if they believe not us, yet let them at the least
believe their own writers. Cardinal Hugo says: To the end they might have
tribes, as the sons of Jacob had. And in the same sense he expounds this
word, Esaias 4. Lyranus, Et inuocetur, etc. quia vocati sunt; because they are
called the adopted sons of Jacob, and are become heads of two tribes, after
the manner of his own children. The annotation also of their Fonseca upon
Caietan: This is a phrase of speech familiarly used of the Hebrews, that the
name of this man is called upon by that man, when their meaning is, that that
man is called by this man's name. And thereupon he alleges the fourth of
Esaias, and Daniel 9. Let them also remember themselves of their own doctrine;
How that the fathers were in the Limbs, that in the Limbs they did not see
God, neither by consequent know the affairs of men: whereupon it follows by
their own sayings, that they could not be called upon. And yet notwithstanding
Bellarmine in the time of the clear light of learning, is not ashamed to
allege this place.

Eliphaz says to Job: Job 5.
Call now and see if there be any that will answer thee, and turn thy self
unto some one of the Saints, etc. Which place other expositors do read with
an interrogatiue point. And the sum of the text is; That no man when he is
chastised of God, can say that it is any wrong or injustice, seeing he has
found, as has been said before, matter of reprehension even in his Angels.
And how much more (says he) in them which dwell in these houses of clay? etc.
And thereupon he adds: Cast thine eyes round about, and see if thou can
find any amongst the most holy, who has been punished causeless. But and if
they will have it, that by Saints the Angels are understood: besides that it
stands not with the scope and purpose of the text, it is as quickly denied as
affirmed: and such figures do not prove or conclude any thing. But and if they
simply take it to be understood of the Saint, then so much the less:
seeing that they in the Limbs could neither hear norse, according to their
own doctrine. And certainly, S. Jerome if he be the author of those
commentaries, was not advised of this doctrine, notwithstanding that he three
handle this verse by name. In the Psalms (says Cocleus) it is said: Psalm. 32.
Pro hac orab ad te omnis sanctus. The Hebrew says: For this shall every holy
man pray unto thee, etc. The Chaldie: For this shall every good man pray unto
thee in time convenient: that is, Because thou art ready to forgive them which
confess their faults. And so S. Paul her self does expound it, Romans 4.
But in every place where they find the name Saint, there they will find
invocation or intercession of the Saints. August. Hieronym. and Theodor. in
Psalm. 32.
But without any longer staying upon the matter, Sant Augustine entreating upon
this place says, Every holy man shall pray unto thee because of impiety, and
for the remission of sins, because thou f^^giuest them, and otherwise no holy
man would pray unto thee. And when? In due and conenient time: when the new
Testament shall be come, when the grace of Christ shall be manifeted, when in
the fulness of time God shall have sent his Son to redeem them which were
under the law, etc. And this is spoken (says he) of all Christians, of Saint
Paul himself, who being pricked with the sting of the law cries unto God,
wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from the body of this death?
Saint Jerome says: The Saints do pray in this life for the remission of
their sins, and seeing the most holy are not exempted: now is the convenient
time for to obtain. Theodoret in like manner: I will not pray unto thee alone
for mine impiety: but all those that shall have the knowledge of thee shall
make the same prayers unto thee: Seeing (says he) that under the new
Testament, Haimo in Psalm. 32. Bernard. sermon. 73. in Cant.
the faithful by sea and by land shall praise God by the singing of the
Psalms of David, etc. Haimo, The remission of iniquity is good: and for the
obtaining thereof, every holy man will pray unto thee in a time convenient,
that is to say, in this life, in which alone prayer can obtain the same. Saint
Bernard: For this (says he) etc. Seeing (says he) that the Saints have need
to pray to God for their own sins to be saved by his mercy, they being
nothing able to trust and lean to their own righteousness, etc. And again:
Pro hac orabit O misericors, etc. Idem in ep. ad Henric. Senens. Archiep.
Every Saint whosoever (says he) shall pray unto thee O most merciful
father, for his iniquity: becoming a humble suter for the sense and feeling
of his sin and misery: and yet notwithstanding a Saint, for that he
consents not unto it, in that be delights and takes pleasure in the law,
according to the inward man, etc. And Cardinal Hugo says, For all the Saints
and holy men have need to pray unto God for the remission of their own sins,
etc. And in a couenient time, that is to say, in this present life: according
to that which is said, labor whiles it is day, etc. Far enough off then from
the exposition of our adversaries; That the saints deceased do pray for us.
And Lyranus follows Saint Jerome, Cardinal Caietanus and Arias Montanus
translate it: Super hac, not Pro hac, that is, says Caietanus: That every
Saint shall pray unto God for to obtain the blessed favor of his divine
righteousness, etc. Here is no question then of praying for another in an
other life.

And as little proof is there to be gathered out of Psalm 121. Psalm. 121.
I have lifted (says David) mine eyes toward the mountains from whence
succor shall come unto me, etc. By the hills they will understand the Saints:
This is a figure. And by these hills some understood the scriptures, as Saint
Augustine: others the heavens, as Euthymius: some the Saints, as Ca^siodorus.
Of such sorts of speaking there follows no good argument. But let us take
them in whatsoever sense they will. If it be to the Saints, they were
according to their own doctrine in the Limbs: and therefore in vain: and for
that purpose they had more need to have cast down, then to have lifted up
their eyes. But they should at the least have considered, what follows: My
succor comes from the Lord who has made heaven and earth. And then not from
all or any of these creatures, be they never so high and eminent. And this is
that which Saint Augustine says: No man can understand by these mountains
great personages; August. in psalm. 121.
And amongst men who was more great then John Baptist, of whom the Lord says:
amongst those that are borne of women, etc. Thou see then this great
mountain to shine: but hear his confession, We have, says he, all received
of his fulness, It is then from him of whom they have received, that we must
look for our succor, and not from these mountains: from Christ the Son of
the most high and sovereign father, etc. And if thou lift not up thine eyes
by the scripture thou shall not be admonished and taught how to be
enlightened of him. Saint Jerome: have lifted mine eyes, Hieronym. in psalm. 121.
the eyes of my spirit unto the top of the books: that is of the la^ and
the Prophets, from whence I see coming unto me my Lord, my aid and my
help, that is, Christ: and so Saint Augustine upon S. John does expound it of
the scriptures. I an other place Saint Jerome joins these two places together
to the same end: August. tract. 1 in Johan. Hieronym. in Esa. c. 52, l. 14.
I ^^ue lifted mine eyes unto the hills: and I have lifted mine eyes unto thee
which dwell in the ^^auens: opposing and setting them against the ordinary
intention and drift of the ^^euill, who would curb and keep in our souls
under the slavery of these inferior p^wers. Theodoret: Being compassed and set
about with calamities, say the captives of Ba^lon, Theod. in psalm. 120.
we have cast our eyes on every side, but we know that there is no help of man
that can do (...) good: we rest in the good pleasure and will of God, etc.
Saint Bernard likewise speaking of Christ persecuted in the Church, and in his
members, says: Who is he that without tears can see the tears of Christ,
Bernard. in ep. ad Simonem Abbatem. S. Nicol.
lifting his eyes from the deep pit of mire and elay, unto the mountains
from whence help and succor is to come unto him, etc. And surely then not from
the Saints, for they know themselves to stand in need to be helped of
Christ; but rather says he, From the Lord which has made heaven and earth.
Caietan also most fitly, and for the purpose says: This is here as a dialogue
betwixt the people and the Prophet; shall I here stand and wait for my help
from the mountains? from the princes and potentates of the earth? nay rather
from the Lord, etc.

In the Psalm 134. it is said: Iudicabit Dominus populum suum, and in seruis
suis deprecabitur. Psalm. 134.14.
Of a bad and naughty Grammar construction, they make a bad piece of
divinity: He shall be prayed unto (say they) in his servants. But the Hebrew
says: He shall repent himself, or he shall be appeased toward his
servants. And so have Caietanus, Pagnin, and Arias Montanus their interpretors
translated the same: And the Chaldie Paraphrast in like manner, that is, That
God according to his mercy will be appeased toward to his people. At the
least they should have kept themselves unto their Gloss, which from a badde
translation has notwithstanding gathered a good doctrine: Deprecabilis (says
it) efficietur seruis suis exaudiendo, seruis suis placabilis fiet: he will
be entreated at the prayers of his servants: and in the same manner Haimo.
But let us hear the fathers. Haimo in psalm. 134.
Saint Augustine has read it: Et in seruis suis adorabitur: and expounds
this place of the casting off of the Jews, and calling of the Gentiles, coming
into the Church on every side. Saint Jerome: Consolabitur: and gathers the
former sense thereof also: That the Lord shall be comforted in the
incredulity of the Jews, and in the faith and belief of the Gentiles. But
Theodoret comes more near unto the purpose and scope of the Prophet: For
(says he) Thou O Lord seeing us assailed by enemies wilt not cast us off,
neither will thou chasten us according to our sins. And thus likewise
Caietanus.

But say they, does not intercession presuppose invocation? Now the fathers of
the old Testament have caused the names of the Patriarchs to step in to
help their prayers. If intercession presuppose innocation. Genes. 32. Exodus
32. Deutr. 9. Psalm. 131. Exodus 6.5. and 32.13. Leuit. 26.42. Dan. 3. Deuteronomy.
8.26.34 1. Kings, 8. Psalm. 89.
Jacob said: The God of my father Abraham and Isaac deliver me, etc. Moses:
Call to mind thy servants, Abraham, Isaac and Jacob. Call to mind thy servant
David and his afflictions, etc. But assuredly, they do plainly enough expound
themselves in the same places: To whom (says Moses) thou have sworn by
thine own self, I will multiply their seed and give unto them this land.
And Solomon: Perform unto thy servant David that which thou have said: the
covenant that thou have assured and confirmed unto him, etc. And the Lord
himself: I have remembered my covenant made with your fathers: and not your
fathers, not their merits: to wit, they all alleging to God, and God unto
them the whole cause and reason of the graces and deliverances that they craved
at his hand, or that he performed unto them, to be the free promise which he
vouchsafed to make to the Patriarchs, to David, to his people, etc. and not
their merits: which as we shall see hereafter, are none at all at Gods hand.
And this is the same which the Gloss says in the like places: Firmiter
promisisti, non licet mutari: Thou have infalliblie promised, and it is not
lawful for thee to revoke or change thy promise. But whereas they go about to
derive and find the original of intercession, these places cannot serve for an
example. For by their own coafessions those that were in the limbs could not
be intercessors. And that we may not need to be still repeating the same
thing, let this which has been said, serve and be understood of all such
like places.

In Job 33. Job. 33.23.
Elihu after he had showed by how diverse sorts and ways God chastises men
for their amendment, he adds these words, according to the old translation:
If there be an Angel speaking for him, one of a thousand to declare of the
equity of this man: Then will he have mercy upon him and say, deliver him,
for I have found wherefore to be reconciled unto him, etc. Thereupon they
infer, that Angels do make intercession for us. But according to the Hebrew,
the truth of the word translated Angel, is ambiguous, and may be taken for a
messenger: and seems also presently after, that it ought to be understood for
a prophet or interpreter of the will of God: as in the book of Judges, 2.
Chap. And that because of the word which follows (...), (...)
that is to say, an Interpreter. And he says not for him, but with him, (...)
let him make God acquainted with the uprightness of the man: but unto man his
duty: that is according to this sense, That when God afflicts us, it comes
well to pass for us to have, be it an Angel, or be it a Prophet, that may
cause us to understand, that it is for our sins, and may exhort us to
repentance and newness of life, to the end that God may deal mercifully with
us. Which thing Elihu also may seem to speak of purpose concerning himself
and his companions; to the end that Job may take in good part their
admonitions, and make his profit of them. But in as much as they be more
freely given to believe the old writers, S. Jerome alleges for an example of
this place, Esaias praying unto God for Ezechias when he was sick. For as
concerning his commentaries upon Job, men are of opinion that they are not his.
And S. Gregory expounds it of the Angel of the great Council, Jesus Christ,
the Mediator, God and man like unto us, in consideration of who^ God became
favorable unto men. Where it is to be noted, that in stead of Millibus, both
the one and the other has read it Similibus, which could not be of S. Ieromes
doing, who understood the Hebrew tongue, and was sufficient to trip and find out
the weakness of their exposition. The Gloss says: This Angel it is Christ that
speaks unto the father for us, showing himself to him to be like unto us, in
one only thing of a thousand, that is in his humanity. And his speech, that is
to show himself a man unto God, besides whom there is not one which is found
just, Hugo in Ioh. c. 33. 2. Sam. 14.
and which being without sin may make intercessto for sinners, etc: and
Cardinal Hugo expounds it after the same manner.

Absalom, say they, reconciled unto his father David, might not yet come to see
his face, but by the means and intercession of Ioab: wherefore we must have a
Ioab a saint of authority in heaven to draw near unto God for us. And what
saint will they have of more authority then the Son himself, Ephesians. 5. Romans 5.
seeing by faith in him we have access unto the father, and to his throne of
grace with all assurance and boldness. Adonias also to obtain Abisaeg to wife of
Solomon, commends his suit to Bathseba Salomons mother, saying with himself,
he cannot deny her any thing. And so now must we unto the virgin Marie, etc.
But where find they that our Lord has divided and given away any part of his
royal dignity with her? And let them not run or rather rush any further
forward in their Allegory: for Solomon refused to make any grant, and was
also moved to wrath and indignation, and that so far, as that it cost his
brother Adonias his life. But in these things how far more sure is it for to
hold our selves to Christ? Heb. 7. Romans 8.
Whosaueth (says the Apostle) those which come unto God by him which makes
intercession for us, and that so effectually, as that none shall have whereof to
accuse, much less to condemn us. Jeremy: Though Moses and Samuel stood
before me, Jeremy. 15.1.
yet should not my affection be moved toward this people. Now in deed they
might have better a great deal drawn the contrary consequence. But the sum
is, that God has forbidden Jeremy to pray for the people, as having resolved
to lay his rods upon them, their wickedness being grown to the height. And
thus S. Jerome expounds it: And to the end (says Theodoret) that he might
not trke at it, as though it were done by reason of him: Though says he, these
two were in thy room and place, yet should they not any more move or pretaile
with me. Hieronym. in Ietem. c. 15. l. 3 and in Ezech. l, 5. c. 20. Theodor. in
Ierem. Gregor. l. 9. c. 9. Chrysostom. ad These. 1. c. 1. hom. 1 ^zech. 14.
These two, says Saint Jerome and Gregory, Who sundry times had been
intercessors betwixt the wrath of God and the sin of his people: yea and
betwixt God and his open enemies, Pharao, Saul, etc. at such times as his
judgments were ripe and ready to fall upon them. And Hugo and the Gloss in
like manner, adding moreover these words; This is the true and proper sense of
this place. And in deed Chrysostom. gathers a clean contrary conclusion out of
this place: That we are not to trust or lean unto the prayers of Saints, but
rather to finish and make sure our salvation with fear and trembling, etc. In
Ezechie^ there is the like place; If these three men, Noe, Daniel, and Ioab,
were in the midst of the City, they should in their righteousness escape with
their own lives, etc. but as for the land it shall surely become desolate and
lie wast. He speaks then as though they were still living in the world, and
every one of them in his former state and condition. And so in Jeremy of
Moses and Samuel, as also Saint Jerome, Chrysostom, and Thomas of Aquine do
expound the same upon Jeremy: and upon Ezechiel Theodoret in these words:
Though these three persons, Noe, Daniel, and Job, were found altogether in the
midst of them, etc. that is, that God speaks according to the state wherein
Moses and Samuel were in this life. Otherwise if they will urge it, as
understood of the other: then I would have them once again to remember and
think upon their Limb.

Of the same nature is that which follows in Ezechiel: Ezech. 22.
I have sought a man (says the Lord) that should make up the hedge, and stand
in the gappe against me for this land, to the end I might not destroy it; but J
have not found him: that is, as it is said of David, a man according to mine
own heart, which might stand betwixt mine anger and this people: as Abraham
for Sodom, and Moses for Israel. Saint Jerome: I have searched for a man
amongst them, which could resist and withstand mine anger, as Moses, Aaron and
Samuel. Note by the way these words, from amongst them. And yet Theodoret
deals more plainly, who expounds it by the place of Jeremy above
expounded, c. 5. Look about you in your places, and see if there be any that
executes judgment, and seeks after faith, etc. and I will be favorable
unto him, that is to say, (says he) amongst your princes, your priests, etc.
But what is there in all this that has any thing to do with the invocation of
Saints deceased.

For want of matter and proof in the Canonical scriptures, 2. Macha. c. 15.
they run in the end unto the Apocrypha books: Onias and Jeremy, says
Judas Machabeus, appeared unto him in a dream, praying for the estate of the
people of the Jews: And seeing that they prayed, they may be prayed unto:
notwithstanding they see, that in this hard distress of theirs the Israelites
did no such thing. And as for the strength of this argument we shall better
examine the same elsewhere: but the story is; That Judas to encourage his
soldiers, being upon the point of entering into a great fight, acquainted them
with this vision that had appeared unto him. But either it was a real action,
or a likeness and representation only. If it were real and in deed, where is
then their Limbs become? For they all agree, that in the Limbs they can make
no intercession, neither be inuocated. If representative or figurative, then
let them hear the exposition of their own Doctors, Gloss. in 2. Machab. c. 15.
That in Onias is represented the order of the priesthood: and in Ieremias the
Prophetical order: and in the one and the other Jesus Christ the high priest
and Prophet, of whom Moses has said: I will raise up unto you a Prophet like
unto me: of whom S. John likewise says; If we have sinned, we have an
advocate with God, Jesus Christ the righteous, and he is the propitiation for
our sins.

Baruch, Baruch. 3.14.
3. It is said: Lord hear now the prayer of the dead of Israel, and of their
children which have sinned before thee. Now it is to be known whether this word
dead be taken for such as were dead in deed, or else for a people brought unto
such an extremity as did threaten death unto them every moment. Now the verse
going before seems to make for the latter: For (it says) we perish and are
destroyed for ever. But let us take it according to their own sense. Lyranus
gives them the repulse and overthrow: He speaks (says he) of the prayers
which the Patriarchs and the Prophets had made whiles they lived, for the good
estate of their posterity. And their opinion also of the Limbs does debar
them of the benefit of the place in their own sense.

But what agreement has this prayer and intercession of the living Saints with
that of the dead? Those being commanded, with promise to be heard; these not
mentioned in the Scripture, but subject unto that great Woe so oftentimes
repeated: Woe to them which add thereunto. Saint Paul prays for them that
were in the same Ship: he prays also the Romans to pray for him. But did
he allow them to call upon, or to pray for aid unto him; or did he himself
invoke the Romans. And therefore if we from these mutual prayers of the
faithful that are living, rise up to the invocation of the Saints that are
dead, what shall let us then, but that from the invocation of the dead, we
shall descend by consequent to the inuocating and adoring of those that be
alive, to make vows and offer up our oblations unto them, to erect and build
Churches and Altars in honor of them; to burn sacrifices and incense unto
them, and finally to revive the whole Mass of Paganism, for them which are as
yet upon earth, as we have already done for them which are in heaven? And
thus much for that which they can say, as well for the invocation, as for the
intercession of the old Testament.

CHAP. XII. That the invocation of Saints has not any foundation in the holy
Scriptures of the new Testament
IN the new Testament they allege, that S. Paul ordained, 1. Tim. 2. Romans 15.
Collos. 4.
that intercession should be made in the Church for all men; that he prays the
Romans and Colossians to pray for him; that he hoped to be offered in the
prayers of the Saints: that S. James says; Pray ye one for an other, to the
end that ye may be saved, etc. What are all these places, but the prayers of
the Saints living, and not of the Saints deceased? whereupon there is not any
thing further to be inferred, then what concerns the duty of charity
amongst the living, and from which there will not any old writer be found to
gather the inuocating of Saints which are in heaven?

But we see that the rich man in the other life, Luke 16.
prays Abraham that his punishment may be mitigated: and why not as well here
below? What manner of argument is this; concluding that what is done in Hell, may
be done here on earth? And that what the damned do, the same also may the
faithful do? And what Divinity is this, borrowed from the damned; from the
damned, feeling in themselves the vnappeasible wrath and anger of God, as not
being able to comprehend him otherwise then as an angry judge; for us which
have access unto his throne by Christ, which is both the Porter and the gate;
which are led unto the throne of his grace, by the hand of his Son? And what
wilful blindness is it to oppose unto the clear light of the Scriptures,
outward darkness; to the intercession of our Lord full of power and efficacy,
a parabolicall prayer of a wicked rich man, repelled and cast off by Abraham,
for the impertinencie thereof?

And no less impertinent, and far from the purpose are those places
elsewhere, Math. 27.47.
as that of the cry of our Lord upon the Cross, Eli, Eli, my God, my God,
etc. The soldiers had thought that he had called for Elias: Let us see (say
they) if he will come: This was then say they, a familiar thing to call upon
the Saints. But I should be ashamed to confute it, if they had any shame to
allege it. For what is this? To learn the faith of the Church of Pilats
soldiers; the faith of Israel, at the hands of the Gentiles which are in
garrison in Jerusalem, which have heard speech amongst the Jews of one Elias,
that should come at that time; which were trained up in Paganism, to pray
unto as many Gods as they could dream of or devise; to hold for Gods all
those, from whom they expected any good, or feared any evil? Which, by reason
of the ignorance of the tongue, did suppose that our Lord called for Elias? S.
Jerome upon this place: I think that they were the Roman Soldiers, who
understood not the property of the Hebrew tongue, and thereupon did think
that he had inuocated, or called Elias. But if we understand and take them to
have been Jews; then it was nothing but their ordinary practice, to speak
reprochfully of the Lord, accusing him of weakness and infirmity, and thereby
driven to pray unto Elias. And the Gloss and Caietanus have understood it of
the Romans and of the Gentiles.

In S. John 5. Thank not (says our Lord unto the Pharisees) that I am to
accuse you unto my father: John. 5.45.
Moses in whom you have your hope, he it is that will accuse you. Thereupon
they conclude; that it was a doctrine amongst the Jews, that Moses took the
matter upon him before God, whether it were to accuse or defend them. And
still they forget, that this duty, could not be exercised in the Limbs.
Whereas the text is plain enough to those that have any eyes. Moses, that is
to say, the law and doctrine of Moses does accuse us, is the sentence of
condemnation against us, when we infringe and break it, when we reject and
cast of that which it offers us: and particularly it condemns the
Pharisees, for that they deny Christ promised in the law. Moses on the
contrary, that is to say, this same doctrine does justify us, works with
us unto salvation, when we embrace Christ, at whom it altogether aims:
according to that which is said afterward: If you believe Moses, you will also
believe me, for it is written of me. John. 5.39.
And the Pharisees hoped in him, that is to say, in this doctrine: according to
that which he said in former times: Search the Scriptures, for you think to
have eternal life by them etc. And in the same sense Abraham answered the
rich man: They have Moses and the Prophets. Not Moses in the flesh, not
Moses in the soul; but Moses (as likewise the Prophets) in the doctrine.
What should then the question of the intercession of Moses do here? Origin: To
believe Moses, that is to say, the writings and works of Moses. Orig in Ep.
ad Fom l. 4 c. 4. Basil. de Spir, Sanct c. 14. Cirill. in Ioh. l 3. c. 8.
And by consequent to be accused by Moses, that is to say, by the law given by
the Ministers of Moses. S. Basil: It is the custom of the Scripture, to
understand under the name of Moses the Law, as when it is said, they have
Moses and the Prophets. Cyril more clearly entreating upon this place: When as
(says he) all others did hold their peace, the Lord said, that Moses law
alone, did suffice to condemn the incredulity of the Jews. Cardinal Hugo:
Moses, that is to say, the Scripture or Law given by Moses. Caietanus goes
yet further: Caiet in Ioh. c. 5.
The Jews are accused by Moses for that his writings, declare them worthy of
punishment, in not believing in Jesus: the Jews also are said to hope in
Moses, because they generally hoped in the promises contained in the said
writings, but they acknowledged not the fulfilling of the same Jesus.

In the 2. Peter 1.15. I am (says he) shortly to go out of this my
Tabernacle, as our Lord himself has declared unto me: 2. Pet. 1.15.
but I will do my endeavor that after my departure also, you may continually
call to mind these things; that is, piety, charity, brotherly love, etc. Here
they affirm, that this shall be by his intercession in heaven: But we, that
this shall be by his diligence, in instructing them well, before that he go
out of this world, that is, as he has said in the former verses: By
continually bringing it to their remembrance. And the text is very clear and
plain for the same, for he does not say: Dabo operam post obitum meum vt
possitis, but, Vt possitis post obitum meum; (...), and not, (...), that is to
say, I will have care that after my death, you may remember your selves, and
not, I will have care after ^y death, etc. That which follows teaches it:
For we have not taught you the power and coming of our Lord in the
deceitfulness of fables, etc. The Gloss says: Jnterim dum venio, dabo operam,
etc. As long as I live I will give order; or, I will do my endeavor, etc. And
as for the alleging of Oecumenius, saying that certain would collect hereof
by the figure called Hyperbaton, that is to say, a long draught of words, the
intercession of Saints; it had been their duty in like manner, for the
discharge of a good conscience to have added, that which follows: That others
which handle the same more simply, do understand it thus: That whereas he so
carefully labors to imprint this doctrine in them, it is not for that he
doubts them to be egnorant, but to the end that they might abide the more
firm after his death. Caiet. 2. Pet. 1.
At the least they should have held themselves to Caietanus: I will give order,
that is in my life time, that you may have after my death, books which may put
you in remembrance of this doctrine.

In the Apocalips, 5. Apocal. 1.8.
the four beasts and the four and twenty Elders have harps in their hands,
and Viols of gold full of perfumes: Which are (says S. John) the prayers of
the Saints: therefore they must be employed as intercessors for us. Now it is
not called in question, whether they pray or praise God, or no: but, if they
make intercession to God for the things, which we particularly and by name,
pray unto them for; and again, if we may and ought to employ them for
intercessors with God for us. And this cannot be gathered out of this place:
but rather that they praise God and pray unto him. And this prayer, without any
further gessing of it does follow in the next verse: Thou art worthy to take
the book and to open the Seals thereof, etc. for thou have bought and
purchased us to God by thy blood, out of every tribe and language, etc. And
then, not to employ their merits with God for us, in stead of that of the
Lamb: but rather to acknowledge the blood of the Lamb; employed for
themselves. And that makes yet less for them, Apocal. 8.3.
which they further allege out of the fore part of the eight Chapter, where
the Angel stands before the Altar, with a Censor of gold; wherein there were
many perfumes given unto him, either to offer up with the prayers of all the
Saints; or rather according to the Greek, to add it to the prayers of the
Saints, upon the Altar of gold which is before the throne. For this Angel
(says their Gloss) is Christ himself, offering unto God his father, the
petitions of the faithful, which are acceptable and well pleasing to him, for
his sake. S. Ambros. Aug. Primas. and Andraeas Caes. in Apocal.
Ambrose expounds this whole place of the teachers of the Church, every man
in his age: That Christ opens then the book, when by his holy spirit, he
manifests unto them the sense of the Scriptures: that they fall down before
the Lamb, when they are raised to the meditation of his mysteries; and by
consequent are humbled in themselves: that these odors are their prayers,
whereof the Psalmist speaks: Let my prayer ascend up unto thee, as the
perfume of incense, etc. And upon the eight Chapter, he takes Christ for the
Angel, Ambros. in Apocal. c 8.
the Church for the Altar, etc. and makes many sorts of incensings and prayers
of the Saints: For (says he) the faithful pray, when they ask forgiveness
of their sins: when they give alms; when they forgive their neighbors; when
they observe and keep the commandments of God, etc. August. Primas. Andr.
Caesar. Thom. Aquin. in Apoc. c. 5. l. 8
And not a word of the prayers of the Saints that are dead for us, or of us
praying to them. And as little in S. Augustine, Primasius, Andreas Bb. of
Caesarea, Thomas Aquinas, and all the rest. And these are in sum, all the
places that I know, whereby they would prove and allow, the intercession of
Saints.

If this were not, that we have to add thereto the blasphemy of the
Archbishop Antonine: Let us draw near, says the Apostle unto the Hebrews,
unto the throne of grace, etc. That is to say of the Virgin Marie which is the
throne of Christ, wherein he has rested: to the end we may obtain mercy,
and find grace for the obtaining of help in due time, etc. Which is manifestly
spoken of Jesus Christ our Bishop. And therefore it is no marvel though
Eckius do freely and boldly say: That the holy Ghost, Eckius in Ench
has not appointed or ordained by the express Scriptures, the invocation of
Saints, either in the old or new Testament. And Petrus a Soto: That it is not
manifestly taught there; but only insinuated, and the Jesuits themselves,
that it is not clearly given us there, but as in a mystery, and by a certain
consequence. And on the contrary a great marvel, that a doctrine amongst
them of such moment, should not be contained in the holy Scriptures, but by
the way of a lame and pretended consequence. As in deed the Council of Trent
has not found it in the Scripture, but in ancient use and custom, in the
consent of the Fathers, and in the Decrees of the Councels. Which we will
examine hereafter.

A third point remains; That the morite of the Saints, has no ground in the
Scripture.
that they are as weakly and slenderly grounded in the Mass, for the offering
up of the merits and passions of the Saints unto God, for the satisfying of
their sins, in stead of the infinite merit, of that one only sacrifice,
that the Son of God has offered upon the Cross: whether we consider the
sufficiency of that only one, or the insufficiency of all the rest, how many
and whatsoever they be. The sufficiency, for it is the Son of God, eternal
and infinite; the sacrificer and the sacrifice, whose sacrifice has by
consequent, an infinite and eternal efficacy; as the Apostle does largely
handle the same in the Epistle to the Hebrews. The insufficiency of al other,
because that they are the works of the creatures, and by consequent finite and
imperfect: and of men, and by consequent subject to sin and sinners, and
those the most, who presume not to be at all: according to that which is said
unto us in S. John: Jf we say (he puts himself in the number) that we have
no sin we deceive our selves, and the truth is not in us. That then, that all
the Saints have not been condemned; it was in the mercy of God by Jesus
Christ, the holy Virgin her self, whom he has vouchsafed to regard in her
base and low estate; being so much the more bound, by how much the more she
has received, and so much the further off from meriting, by how much the more
it has pleased him the Almighty and sovereign Lord (if it be lawful so to
speak) to merit at her hands. That they are reigning in heaven, a botomlesse
depth of his goodness, an inheritance of the children, and not any pledge or
badge of servants, in as much as in his well-beloved son it has pleased him,
according to the riches of his grace, of unprofitable and perverse servants to
adopt them Sons, yea, coheires with his Christ: according to that which is said
in so many places: Ephesians. 2.
You are saved by grace, by faith in Christ, and not of your selves: For this
is the gift of God, not by works, to the end that no man may boast. Again, We
are justified by grace, that we may be his heirs, Tit. 3.
in hope of eternal life. And of grace: For we are all conceived in original
sins. And all the water of humane merits, cannot wash them away; though they
should amount unto the measure of a mighty flood: it must of necessity be
the work of the blood of Christ, washed likewise by that blood, yet the
remnants of that natural corruption, do continually abide and dwell with us;
that so we may acknowledge his grace in our infirmity: whereas our first
father lost the same by a pretended incorruption and impossibility for his
nature to sin. And therefore we have to say with David: If thou enter into
judgment with thy servant who may abide it? With Solomon: Psalm. 143.
Ecclesiast. 6. Job. 15.
There is not a righteous man upon the earth that does good, nay, which does
not sin. With Job: The heavens are not pure in his sight, no not the Angels:
how much less man, unprofitable and abheminable; which drinks iniquity like
water? Whereupon it follows likewise, that if God should have given unto man,
even him that is the holiest of all the rest, a thousand Paradises, (if it
could be done) for an inheritance, yet so graceless he is, as that he should
not be able to keep one of them, without his grace, for quickly would he
loose them, by reason of his sins and transgressions, the rigor and
severity of his justice taking the balance once in hand. And how should he
purchase it then by his own power? And yet further how should he leave a
remainder, to be husbanded for others? Some say, if they have lost them by
their falls, as Saint Peter by having denied Christ, and S. Paul by
persecuting of his Church; yet they have recovered them, by the confession and
Martyrdom, which they have made and suffered for his name, and that so
abundantly, as that they have left an overplus. But O horrible blasphemy. 1.
Cor. l. 30.
S. Paul and S. Peter say not so: They do not glory in any thing, but in the
Cross of Christ, but in his sufferings, but in his stripes, not in their own
righteousness, not in their own holiness, but in him which was unto them
from God, wisdom, righteousness, sanctification, redemption, etc. So far
off are they from being of that mind, that in respect of them, he has suffered
in vain. Likewise the blood of the creature, has no part in making of the
recompense or paime^t, with or in stead of the blood of the Son of God, of
the Creator of the world, to whom, as he is the Creator, we are already
indebted, even to the sum of our lives; to whom, as a just judge we stand
bound for our sins, in the sum of a thousand deaths. And therefore, as unto
our redeemer and that in the price of his blood: Our redeemer, not to ransom
us, but for to crown us; not to draw us from evil, but to draw us to all
goodness; not to deliver us from the tyranny of hell, but to cause us to
reign and triumph eternally with him. Here let us enter into our own
consciences, how shall our blood and life be able to ascend up thither? And
therefore the Apostle said; All accounts cast, the sufferings of this present
world, Romans 8.18.
are not able to counteruaile the glory that is to come, and which is to be
revealed in us.

But in the mean time they are not ashamed, to oppose unto so clear a
doctrine so plainly handled by all the Apostles, by Saint Paul in all his
Epistles, a place of Saint Paul himself: I rejoice (says he) now in my
sufferings for you, Coloss. 1.24.
and fulfill the rest of the afflictions of Christ in my flesh, for his body
which is the Church. Whereupon it follows, say they, that men by their
afflictions, and sufferings, may satisfy for the sins of others. And we will
observe by the way, that it is in Greek (...): Tertul. aduers. Marcion. l. ^.
c. 19. Timo. ^.15.
which Tertullian and S. Ambrose translate with us, Reliqua, the rest; and not
that which lacks. But here again, what will they dare to say unto us? That
S. Paul by his afflictions, has satisfied for himself? Not so: For it is a
sure thing (says he) that Jesus Christ is come into the world to save sinners,
whereof I am the chiefest. Again, To show in me the chiefest, all manner of
clemency, for an example to them, which shall believe in him unto eternal
life, etc. I do (says he) the ill I would not, but the good that I would,
that I do not. Philip. 3.6.
Notwithstanding that I find not my self guilty of any thing, yet know I that
I am not justified thereby. Howbeit, that according to the righteousness which
is in the Law, J am unreprovable, yet I have accounted all this to be loss
unto me: I have accounted it as dung for the love of Christ; that is, to be
found in him, not according to mine own righteousness, which is of the Law,
1. Cor. 2.2.
but according to that which is of the faith of Christ. And of Christ, says he
elsewhere crucified. What has he in these speeches, that may savor of
pharisaicall righteousness? That does hold any thing of the doctrine of our
Masters, concerning supererogation? Again, the words of the place it self are
repugnant thereunto: For it says, In my sufferings for you, in mine
afflictions for the body of Christ, which is the Church. What then? Shall he
have satisfied for an other? For the temporal punishments of the Colossians?
For the Church of Christ? And how should he possbly do it for an other, when
he finds not himself able and sufficient to pay his own debt? And that not
in the way or words of Christian modesty or humility, but in good sooth and
earnest? Philip. 3. 1. Cor. 15.^.
Who have whereupon to boast (says he) in the flesh, more then any other;
circumcised the eight day, of the race of Israel, of the Tribe of Benjamin an
Hebrew, borne of the Hebrews, a Pharisie in Religion; upright according to the
Law: and after all this, called of Christ to be an Apostle, and yet
notwithstanding as one borne out of time, and notwithstanding an unprofitable
servant? And how then for the Colossians? Reconciled on the contrary (says
he) in the body of the flesh of Christ, by his death, Coloss. 1. and 2.
when they were enemies and strangers, redeemed by his blood, for the
remission of their sins, quickened by his grace, when they were dead in their
iniquities, by the blotting out of the Obligation of eternal death, which was
between them, fastening it with him unto his Cross. But how in the end for the
body of Christ, which is the Church? Which God (says he in an other place)
has purchased unto himself by his own blood: reconciling to himself the world
in Christ, Acts. 20.28. 2. Cor. 5.
in not imputing unto it her sins: making the Church one body whereof he is
the head; gathering and joining together into this body unto God, many nations
by his Cross, etc. If they say, that the sufferings of S. Paul do supply the
want of that of Christ's: but dare they say it? And what shall that be I pray you
that shall fulfill and become a sufficient supply of that which of it self is
infinite? Shall man become the supply to the Son of God? Ephesians. 2.
Falsehood and untruth, unto verity; sin unto justice; man's infirmity, unto
the power and might of God unto salvation? etc. Nay verily not so, S. Paul did
never think of that: but says he, I am a Minister of this Gospel, by which
you are reconciled unto God. And notwithstanding that I must suffer much in my
ministry for you; yet I rejoice nevertheless in my sufferings, Philip. 2.
partly because that I suffer for the name of Christ. As he says in an other
place: If it be requisite that I be offered up a sprinkling upon the sacrifice;
I rejoice together with you, etc. Partly because he himself suffers in me,
who vouchsafes to allow our afflictions, as his own, for that we are his
members. And therefore he says in an other place: Ambros. in Epist. ad Colo.
As the sufferings of Christ abound in us so likewise our consolation by
Christ, etc. And this is it likewise which the old writers have delivered upon
this place, altogether otherwise then our late writers. Saint Ambrose: He
confesses, (says he) that he reloyceth in his sufferings, because he sees
the belieuers profiting in faith, etc And these sufferings (says he) he says
that they are Christ's, Hieronym. in Ep ad Colos. Chrysostom. in Ep. ad Coloss. c.
1. and in 2. ad Cor c. 1. ho. 1.
because it is his doctrine which they persecute. And S. Jerome by the
sufferings of Christ, understands the sufferings for Christ, etc.
Chrysostom: The Apostle (says he) seems to have spoken something
arrogantly, but it is nothing else, but an exceeding great measure of good will
that he bears toward Christ. That which I suffer, says he to the
Collossians, J suffer it for him: and therefore it is not to me that you owe
any thanks, but unto himself. Theodoret: Because that he suffers for the
preaching of the Gospel unto the Gentiles, Occumen. ex Photio.
procuring their life by the same, etc. Oecumenius: All that we suffer (says
he) is (...), a rest or remnant, far differing from the sufferings of Christ.
For how should it possibly be matched and fulfilled? A master his suffering
for his servant, by a servant his suffering for his master? What equality is
there therein? Or any thing near thereunto: He who is without sin, suffering
for sinners? And those (...), obstinately set against him? How will it be made
up by a sinful people, suffering for their benefactor, and the same without
sin, etc? Far differing from the arrogancy of our adversaries; who will that
S. Paul did merit by his sufferings, and that both for himself and an other,
and for the Church also, etc.

It is sufficient therefore, that hitherto we plainly and clearly see; that
invocation, intercession, and the employment of the merits of the Saints which
are with God, have not any foundation in the Scriptures. Whereby for certain
we get as much advantage at the least, Ioh. 4.
against our adversaries, as the Jews against the Samaritans: That we worship
that which we know, even God who has vouchsafed to manifest himself unto us
in his word: They worship that which they know not; namely the Saints, for the
inuocating of whom, there is not any thing delivered or declared unto us in
the same.

But they will derive and fetch it from certain places, The consutation of
certain places wrongfully applied.
as consequently following upon the same; and these are now to be examined of
us. For say they, those which live here pray unto God one for an other, and do
use the prayers one of an other unto God; wherefore should such as live in
heaven above, less perform the same for such as are living here below; and
those below, make less use of such as are abiding on high? The odds and
difference betwixt the one and the other do furnish us with store of answers.
And first; we have an express commandment, to pray one for an other here
below, and a promise accompanying the commandment, and so consequently a
blessing, when these our prayers are made in faith. Which falls out
contrary, in the matters of piety and service of God, exercised without any
foundation in his word; for so it falls out to be an uncertain work: and
therefore without faith, and therefore also sin, and by consequent,
displeasing unto God. Secondly, we believe that the Saints in heaven are
inflamed with charity toward the Church, neither do doubt of their hearty
desire of the good of the same, as unto the body, for the glory of God, and
to every particular, as they are members of the same, for their salvation. And
to proceed thus far, is not beyond the bonds of piety, so that a man learn
to stay himself there. But we deny that they either see our necessities, or
hear our suits and complaints: affirming that this should make them like unto
God, the only searcher of hearts; and our adversaries themselves dare not say
it. They answer that they see our thoughts, not as they are in our spirits,
but in God. And we answer them, that this is a devised fantasy without any
foundation: and that the created spirit does not pearce or enter into the
spirit not created, but on the contrary, that if it were otherwise, that then
the Angels should know all things in God, as well the things to come, as those
that are present, seeing that with him every thing is present: Now there are
many things unknown unto them; for the mystery of our salvation was hid from
them before: and now at this day, they are still ignorant when the day of
judgment shall be, Luke 15.
etc. But they say, that the Angels rejoice in heaven at the conversion of
sinners, etc. And therefore they are able to know it, and we do not deny it.
But by means that it is their office and duty, to be employed and set on
work of God for to serve the faithful, whereupon the Apostle calls them
(...), Hebr. 1. P^al. 34. Psalm. 91. Act. 13.
ministering spirits, to whom God commits, says the Psalmist, the care of
his servants: He makes them to pitch their tents round about them, etc. But
there is no such thing said of the Saints: no not of David himself, who after
he had served in his generation, by the will of God, was laid up with his
fathers. And again, that prayer, which is of such importance unto Christians,
must not be grounded upon the subtle devises of man's brain, but upon the
soliditie and soundnes of the word of God. For certainly, God can reveal what
it pleases him, either unto the living or unto the dead. But we are not to
make a common rule of his miracles; neither any commandment of his
revelations unknown unto us: from his power says Tertullian, the Divine does
never reason to his will, but rather from his will unto his power: and that by
a more forcible reason, seeing the holy Scripture does teach us the contrary.
2. King. 22.20.
God says unto Josias: I go about to gather thee unto thy forefathers, and
thine eyes shall not see the evils which I will bring upon this place. The
people of Israel says also in Esaias: Thou art our father, Esaias, 63.16. August.
de cura pro mortuis gerenda c. 13.
notwithstanding that Abraham know us not, etc. And from these two places Saint
Augustine gathers, that the Saints know nothing of all the matters that
happen unto men, in these words: The dead and deceased do not meddle with the
affairs of those that are living, neither to know, nor yet to help or further
them: They are in rest, and as for the troubles and turmoyles of them that are
living, they do not disquiet them. God promises to Josias, that he should die
before, to the end that his eyes might not see the evils: the spirits then of
the deceased are in aplace, where they see not what is done in this life, etc.
Add thereunto, that the greater part of the other fathers, as we have seen
before, have taught: that the Saints at their departure out of this life, do
not enjoy the sight of God, but are in a place of rest expecting and waiting
for the resurrection, that so they may receive the fullness of their glory.
Now those which held this opinion, could not approve the reason which our
Adversaries allege for the invocation of Saints, that is, that their souls
and spirits do see every thing in God: nor by consequent this invocation, if
so be it do depend and follow thereupon. Saint Paul says, Romans 8.26.
He that sounds the heart, does know the affection of the spirit. Solomon
upon the subject and matter of prayer, how in our afflictions we must have
recourse unto God: 1. King. 8.
For (says he) thou alone know the hearts of all the Sons of men. This
reason should have no force, if these two general propositions were not true
together: That man is not to pray to any but him that knows all things: And
that God is he alone which knows all things.

But where the word of God fails them, they forge humane reasons, A
confutation of their human reasons.
and those a great deal more unmeet to be admitted in Divinity; as that
which entreats of God; then those of the Civil Law, to be admitted in
Physic; or on the contrary, because also that, that in having an infinite
subject, which is not known, otherwise then as it pleases him to vouchsafe to
reveal himself, is infinitely and beyond all proportion, exceeding all
others. In the Courts of great Princes, say they, there is not any man that
goes directly to the King: he has need to make way for the same, by the
favor and mediation of some great Lord, who is employed near about his
person. And not without cause say we, because that the Prince is sometimes
disdainful, and sometimes shunneth, and seeks to avoid occasions of
businesses.

But in God which is altogether infinite, what place or reason can this reason
have: whose power and wisdom cannot be ouercharged with the managing of the
whole universal world; whose goodness reaches and extends most liberally
and freely, even unto the least and smallest things: nay rather, who stands
more ready and willing, assaith the Psalmist, more near unto the afflicted
heart, and more ready continually to hear us, then we are to call upon him,
infinitely more ready to bow and stoop unto us in his bountiful kindness,
then we are to arise and lift up our selves unto him in our prayers? Nay,
says he, O frail and vain man that thou art, measure not me according to the
shalownes of thy capacity: Esaias 55.
For my thoughts are not your thoughts, neither my ways your ways, they are
as much surpassing and ouerreaching yours as the heavens do the earth: And his
thoughts are manifested unto us from himself; that he alone will be called
upon: and that, if there be any question made of an intercessour, he has
ordained his one only Son: and therefore they are to understand that to
speak after the manner of the Court, it is a high displeasing of the king, that
any should be sued unto besides himself. Now in deed this was the reason that
the Gentiles used against the Christians in the time of S. Ambrose: for their
doctrine and reasons for the defense thereof, August. de Ciuit. Dei. l. 8.
are both taken from one head and spring. And S. Augustine says, that the
Scholars of Plato taught, that there were Gods, intercessors betwixt the high
and sovereign God, and the requests of men, that conveyed the same unto him;
God being most worthy to have the hearing of such matters; Ambro. in Ep. a ^
Romans c. 1. tom. 5.
but we most unworthy to come near unto his Majesty. But what answer does
S. Ambrose make them? When (says he) they are ashamed of having neglected God,
they are accustomed to use a certain pitiful excuse, saying, that they had
access unto God by these Gods, as by the Lords or Earls about the Court.
Subjects have access vto the king. But I beseech you, is there any man so
foolish, and so rechlesse of his own preservation, as that he will give that
honor unto any such Earl, which is due unto the King, seeing that to entreat
such a man only, is a point of treason? And these men, shall not they think
themselves guilty of having transgressed, who give to the creature the honor
due to God alone, and which forsake him, to adore and pray unto their
companions, with service as though besides that, there were nothing reserved
for God? For verily, in that men make way to have access to Kings by Tribunes
or Earls, it is because the King is a man, and knows not to whom to trust
in matters concerning the Commonwealth. But to make God ready and favorably
inclined unto him, from whom nothing is hid, who knows what every man
wants and wishes, a man needs no other supporter or mediator, then a
devout spirit: for in what place soever he would speak with him, he is ready
there to give him an answer. Origin likewise has answered the very same to
Celsus, Orig. aduers. Cell. l. 8. Chrysostom. in Math. hom, 2.
in and about the same matter: from whom Saint Ambrose does willingly borrow,
and that word for word, not failing any thing at all. And Chrysostom, who is
nothing behind in speaking for the practice of Christians, shows us, that we
may by as good right, use the same answer against our adversaries. Tell me
woman, speaking of the Cananite: Who has made thee so bold, (wicked and
sinful wretch that thou art) to approach and come so near unto the Lord? I
know (says she) what I have to do. See the wisdom of the woman: she
prays not unto James, she beseeches not John, neither does she turn her
self to Peter, no, she betaketh not her self to all the whole company of
the Apostles, she seeks not for any Mediator: she goes right forward unto
the fountain. And wherefore? Of a certainty says he in the very same
Homely: Because that he understands in what place so ever thou art, in what
place so ever thou call upon him: Thou need not any, either porter or
mediator, neither yet any one of the family to bring thee in: thou need not,
but only to say, Lord have mercy upon me, etc. And again, When we have any
matter to obtain at man's hand, we seek the favor and help of Vshers.
Chrysostom. de paenit. hom. 4.
To whom then will thou have recourse? To Abraham? He will not hear thee. But
he only is to be prayed unto, which can blot out the hand writing of
condemnation that is against thee, and quench the burning, etc.

But say they, God does better accept of those prayers that are made unto him
in humility: and does not this appear more fully and manifestly in them that
seek to have access unto him by the Saints, then in those that dare be so
bold, as to go directly to him? But in deed the greatest point of humility
is obedience, which the Lord loves better then sacrifice: And this is also
man's humility, to confess himself lost in himself, and in all the nature of
man: and contrarily, pride to seek in himself, or in any other man
whatsoever, that which cannot be found but in God only. By this note of proof
and trial did the Lord himself judge the Pharisie to be proud, namely in
alleging men's works: and the Publicane humble, who durst not lift up his
eyes unto heaven, and yet notwithstanding said confidently: God be merciful
unto me a sinner: and this man he justified, but not the other: For whosoever
(says he) does exalt himself, shall be brought low; and he that humbles
himself shall be exalted. And this therefore is humility in our prayers, to
renounce and forsake al our own natures, and to betake and lift up our selves
to God. And beware thou blaspheme not hereafter the manner of some: that Christ
is more rigorous and more hard; but the Saints more mild and favorable: Nay
says he, to all the Saints: Hebr. 2. Hebr. 4.
Learn of me that I am meek and humble of heart. And the Apostle says: He
was made like in all things unto his brethren, to the end that he might be a
high Priest, merciful and faithful in things belonging to God. Tempted (says
he) to the end that he might succor such as do fall into temptation, subject
unto all our infirmities, sin excepted, to the end he might know how to have
compassion. And therefore he says, Come unto me all you that are laden, that
is to say, you which feel your burden, even the heavy load of your sins,
etc. And therefore also says the Apostle: Let us approach with boldness unto the
throne of grace, etc. And no cause is there why his being lifted up in
Majesty, should either make thee ashamed, or cause thee to be cast off, and to
take the repulse. For in that he is exalted, it is to draw thee unto him, and
after him: that he is at the right hand of the Father, says the Apostle, Romans
8.
it is to make intercession for thee: that he sits upon the throne of
Majesty, it is for to make thee to reign. The objection, that new honors use
to make men to be hardly drawn to easiness or familiarity (what gross and
frivolous toys) cannot be alleged against this party; for to speak
properly, he has not received any increase, nothing more then his own is
grown due or come unto him: from before all eternity he is glorious, yea and
by that same glory, which he inioyed eternally with the father: Father (says
he) glorify me with thine own self, with the glory which I have had with
thee, before the world was made. And that such a glory as did not hinder him,
Ioh. 17.5. Philip. 2.
from making him self of no reputation, nor from taking the shape of a
servant, nor from humbling him self for our salvation, even to the death of
the Cross: a glory likewise for certain, that cannot hinder him from
granting the things necessary for our infirmities, neither yet from inclining
his ears in most bountiful manner unto our requests, that so he may carry
and faithfully report them to the Father: For, for that cause has he humbled
himself, even to be like unto us: To the end (says the Apostle) that he
might be merciful and faithful, in that which is to be done with God for us.

CHAP. XIII. That the invocation of Saints was not taught in the Primitive
Church: and of the growth and proceeding thereof.
HOw then did this doctrine enter into the Church of Christ, and how came it to
be made a law? Verily, even as all other humane inventions, by many steps, and
by tract of time after many ages. Day by day error was increased, whiles men
pleased themselves in their inventions: whereas knowledge should have abounded,
if they had kept themselves to the word of Christ. Many ages passed and were
expired, without any invocation of Saints: seeing it slipped in amongst the
multitude of Gentiles, in such manner as that no man regarded the same to mark
and observe it in the beginning: and it has caused some to wonder exceedingly,
how it should already be come to have a party so throghly won unto it amongst
the people, by the blunt and blind aid of the overtaken with forestalled
embracing of Paganism; seeing the most sincere and uncorrupted Doctors, did
their whole endeavor to drive it out. But this shall be made to appear more
clearly in the handling of the manner of the growth and proceeding thereof;
howbeit for the better understanding of the same, we must here set before our
eyes, how they practice this article at this day, in the Church of Rome; in
Invocation, Adoration, Pilgrimages, Temples, Altars, Sacrifices, and in all the
rest of the duties, services and honors, that belong unto God, and are not to
be given unto any other, and how they would gladly cover and color the same
under the shadow of some Apostrophe or Prosopopie framed and applied unto some
Saint; or of some Panegyricke, devised in the honor of some Martyr, or from
some private opinion, left free and indifferent, not of the Church only, but
of every Christian.

As for the holy Scriptures, we have seen that it has no foundation in them:
on the contrary, that part or portion therein which speaks so honorably of
the Saints whether living or dead; of Angels likewise and of their ministry
which they perform, for our salvation comes short, Romans 1.
when once we go beyond our bounds and limits. They have (says S. Paul
speaking of the Gentiles) honored and served the creature, (...), more then
the Creator, and therefore God has given them over to their brutish
affections, etc. And when as men do go beyond their compass, be it never so
little, in that the honor due unto man for Similitie sake, may not proceed by
little and little unto that which is due to God only, the Saints and Angels
do use to restrain them, and pluck them back, yea even before they be come
so far as they lawfully might: S. Act. 10.26. Act. 14.15. Apocal. 19.22.
Peter says to Cornelius, who fell down at his feet: Rise up for I am a man;
and the Angel unto S. John, too well instructed and taught of the Son of God
to worship any creature: Refrain thy self and do not so, for I am thy fellow
servant, and one of thy brethren, which have the testimony of Jesus. And the
Disciples of the Apostles, and their first successors had not forgot these
admonitions.

It would be too long and tedious a thing here to recite all those places of
the first Fathers, proving the invocation of one only God, by one only Jesus
Christ: besides that in the prayers of the Christian Church, Clement. strom. l.
7. Just Martyr. Apol. 2. Tertull. in Apol.
whereof we have the patterns in Clemens Alexandrinus, Justinius Martyr,
Tertullian, etc. God is only called upon through his Son; without any
mention at al made therein, either of Angels or of Saints. Again, the
ordinary disputations that these of the first age had with the Gentiles, were
upon this point, for that they called upon the Gods and others, who for their
excellency in virtue were held for half Gods; tearming it by the name of
Idolatry. Whereas the subject or matter it self did carry the^ on rather to
say unto them, that it was much better for them to give this honor unto Saints
and Angels, as our patrons and advocates unto God in heaven: and yet not a word
thereof. On the contrary, Polycarpus the Disciple of S. Eusebius. l 4 c. 15
John, in his last prayer which he made unto God, being now fastened to the
stake to be burned alive, calls upon God fervently, and calls him: The God
of Angels, the God of all the righteous that live before his face. This was
enough, and the rather being in that his perplexity and distress, to have put
him in mind of these patrons if he had so reputed them: but he remembers not,
neither yet makes mention of any but one Bishop and mediator Jesus Christ.
Irene. l. 2. c. 58.
And Ireneus the Disciple of this Polycarpus says: Those which are the true
Disciples of Christ, receiving grace from him, accomplish and fulfill in his
name, the benefits which they do unto others, according as every man has
received the gift from him. From him they have power over devils; from him the
knowledge of foretelling things to come, as also their visions and prophesies,
as well as the gifts of healing, etc. In all this there is not a word of having
these gifts, either of Saints or Angels: but on the contrary, this doctrine
was then noted, to be the doctrine of heretics, as of the Basilidians and
Ophites, etc. Who prayed unto Angels in their works and that by set forms of
prayer, Idem. l. 1. c. 23. and 35.
which Ireneus rehearses: O tu Angele ab, a, te, or, opere tuo, etc. And these
had likewise their pretended Saints, Judas, Cain, etc. Against whom Ireneus
does not oppose either Abell or S. Peter, but only Jesus Christ our Lord. But
in the Epistle of the Church of Smyrna, Idem in Ep. ad S^^y^nens. apud Eusebius.
l. 4. c. 15.
we have this whole question handled: the Martyrs were much honored in the
Church; and they deeply condemned that did not honor them, and not without
cause, being vessels chosen of God to seal and assure by their testimony, the
resurrection of the Lord. But how far did this honor extend? They were buried
with great regard; and there is made yearly a rehersall of their martyrdom,
upon a certain day: the day of their death is celebrated and solemnized by
the name of the day of their nativity; in stead of the Paynims their
Genethliacks, or birth-daies: the Church comes together into the common place
of burial, there to pray unto God; that by the sight of their bones, they may
be stirred up to the like constancy: for at that time they had not yet any
Churches. Now in respect of any of all this, may they justly be said to have
either worshipped or prayed unto them? Nay rather says this Epistle: The Jews
and the Gentiles came to intrcate the governor, that the body of Polycarpus
might not be delivered to the Christians, least they should honor it in stead
of Christ. But how does the Church defend it self? They are abused through
ignorance, (says it) for we can never forsake Christ, who has suffered for
the salvation of all them, which are to be saved in the whole world; neither
can we ever (...), colere, honor any other. And note how it uses the word,
which co^prehendeth the service, which was accustomed according to godliness, to
be given unto Christ; that is to say, the serving of him in calling upon him,
and seeking of our salvation in him. But some said unto them; so greatly do you
honor your Martyrs. Yea (says the Church of Smyrna) but we worship Christ as
the true and natural Son of God, and we love the Martyrs as his Disciples
and followers: and not without good cause, for the incomparable love which they
have borne to their king and Schoolmaster, we our selves greatly longing and
earnestly desiring to become their companions and School fellows, etc.
Finally, We celebrate the nativity, that is to say, the day of the death and
Martyrdom of Polycarpus, (...), in remembrance of them that have finished the
combat before us, (...), and for the preparing and exercising of them which are
to come thereto, that is to say, to stir up such as are present, to the like
constancy for the name of Christ. Who gives us the grace, (say they and not
the Martyrs) to be partakers of the like crown, Tertull. in Apol.
etc. And this Epistle was written about the year, 160. Tertullian says: J
pray not to any but him of whom I know that I may obtain, because it is he
only which does and gives all things, and I am one that have need to beg and
crave, his servant, to honor him alone, and to offer unto him, the best and
fattest sacrifice, as he has commanded, even a prayer and supplication which
proceeds from a chaste body, an innocent soul, and a holy spirit, etc. And in
the book of the Trinity he yields a reason why he prays unto him alone:
It is not proper or pertinent to any but God to know our secrets: but Christ
knows the secrets of our hearts. It belongs not to any but God to forgive
sins, but Christ forgiueth sins. Reasoning from his all-seeing knowledge, and
from his Almighty power, to prove his Deity and Godhead, and from the Godhead
to the service of invocation. Again: Else, how should a man be sought and sued
unto in our prayers, as our mediator, seeing that the inuocating of one only
man, is without any power or efficacy to salvation: seeing also it is said;
cursed is that confidence, that is put in man, etc.

To that above said, they oppose and bring a place of Ireneus, Objections;
where there is comparison made betwixt Eve and the Virgin Marie. As Eve
(says he) was seduced by the words of an Angel, that is a wicked Angel, to
run from God by transgressing of his word: so the Virgin Marie received
joyful tidings, by the word of an Angel, that is a good Angel, to hear God
by obeying unto his word. And as the first was seduced, and drawn away to
run and fly from God: so the second was persuaded to obey him; to the end
that of the Virgin Eve, the Virgin Mary fieret aduocata, might become say
they, the advocate. Here says Belarmine, what can be more clear? Yea rather
say we unto him, what can be more obscure? That the Virgin Marie should be Eve
her advocate with God, being borne 4000. years after Eve, and received
likewise a long time after her into heaven? when as likewise we shall have
regard to their opinion of the Limbs? But in deed that which goes before, as
also that which follows, shows clearly that Ireneus had no other drift,
but to oppose the good that came to mankind by the means and ministry of
Marie, to the malady and mischief wherewith the same became infected, by that
transgression of Eve. And as for the word Advocate, some are of judgment, that
Ireneus was translated out of Greek into Latin: for we have great pieces of
him as yet in Greek, and further it cannot possibly be, that ever any Latin
writer would have written in such a style. 2. Cor. 7. and passim, Ioh. 16
And in other places also, he is very absurdly translated by his interpreter.
Now the case so stands, that in the Greek, one and the same word does
signify both an advocate and a comforter, that is, (...), and one and the same
Verb to comfort and to exhort; as is often and commonly to be seen in the
Scriptures. So in S. John, that which is translated in the Gospel, Comforter,
according to the old translation, speaking of the holy Ghost, the comforter of
our souls, is interpreted Advocate in the Epistle of S. John, 1. Ioh. 2.11.
Tertul. de Trinit. c. 29.
speaking of Christ the mediator. Likewise Tertullian, where he speaks of
the holy Ghost, translateth it Aduocatum: so indifferently has it been taken
either for the one or for the other. And so the sense is as if Ireneus should
say, that as Eve was the ruin and overthrow of mankind, so the Virgin Marie
was for his comfort and consolation, yea and that amongst the rest unto Eve her
self which had sinned, in as much as God had chosen this vessel to bear and
bring forth the comfort of mankind, from the first man, even to the last.

They abuse in a higher degree of unfaithful dealing a place in Justinius
Martyr. Justin. Martyr. Apol 2.
The Gentiles reproach the Christians, saying that they were Atheists, that is
to say, without God. The Christians answer: Yea without Gods, whom you take to
be Gods, but not without the true God. For as concerning him we worship him,
that is the father and the Son, which is of him, (who is come and has taught
us these things, and all the host of good Angels that follow him) and the
prophetical spirit: that is to say, we worship the father, the son and the
holy Ghost. Now these words, which yet are not found in many copies, must upon
evident and apparent necessity be read with a Parenthesis: for there he
alludeth to that, Ephesians. 3.10.
which S. Paul says to the Ephesians, That the mystery of our Redemption,
which was hid from all time in God, was manifested unto principalities and
powers in heavenly places, etc. Otherwise what should this mean: We worship
the father, the Son, the Angels, and the holy Ghost? And the holy Ghost
himself after the Angels? And by this means, to save the Saints, they make no
conscience to blaspheme the holy Ghost. But in the mean time this is the Monk
Perion his translation: and from thence this error has been dispersed into
many books in these days.

Origin comes, About the year, 260. Hieronym. ad Pammach. and Ocean.
Epiphan. t. 2. l. 1. haeres. 63.
having a bold spirit. Whom I love (says S. Jerome) as he is a translator,
but not as he is an author of strange opinions, for his spirit and
ingeniousnesse, but not for his faith, because his writings are venomous,
without any warrant of Scriptures, and offering violence unto the same, etc.
And of this judgment is the whole Church. After this then to whom may he not
justly be suspected? For as heretofore he laid the foundations of Purgatory,
upon the opinions of the Platonists: so from the same he gathers the first
stone, whereupon afterward was laid the invocation of Saints. The Platonists
said, that the upper and higher things must be joined with the inferior and
lower by a middle coming betwixt both; God with men by Angels, that is, by
their mediation and coming betwixt. But Christians must not lend their ears
to this, as those that have a far deeper secret and mystery revealed unto
them, having given them his Son, God and man, and joined together in one
person, for the salvation of mankind, that which was far removed and set
asunder by our sins, so that the Platonists could not comprehend or conceive
the same. Notwithstanding we see that man's inventions do commonly please us
better, then the revelations of God, and flesh and blood does more freely and
willingly embrace them; because it smells and finds something of it own
therein. Eusebius. ^e preparat. Euang. l. 12. and 13. August. de Ciuit. Dei. l 8.
c. 14.18.20, 22 23.25.26.
Now the sum thereof was, that betwixt the greatness of God and the
infirmity of man, there were two orders of Mediators; the blessed spirits or
the separated intelligences; and the souls of the blessed, (we call them in
our Christian language, Angels and Saints:) That these Angels offer up men's
suites and petitions to God, in reporting them unto him, and obtaining a grant
thereof, by their intercession, etc. That for this cause, we must pray unto
and honor them; partly, as Advocates; partly, as more excellent in their
merits then men: And that such also do the same, who for their merits, (being
men whiles they were here upon earth) have been exalted and extolled as Gods
in heaven; such a one was Aesculapius, who wrought the same effects in heaven
by his Divinity, which he wrought here below by his Art: such a one also was
Hermes which succored and conserved, generally all those, who directed their
prayers unto him, etc. Who is he that cannot behold and clearly perceive the
opinions of the Church of Rome in these points of Paganism? Now they did not
all enter with a full sea into the Christian Church: but for certain it is,
that the Gentiles which were received into the same, being seasoned with this
doctrine, could not be so little cherished and vpheld either by being winckt
at, or otherwise by the sufferance of the Pastors, but that they by and by
took great footing, and that in a small time.

What is it then that Origin says? Origin hom. 3 in Cant.
The Saints (says he) which are departed out of this life, bearing still their
wonted love and charitable affections to such as remain behind in the world:
if any man say that they are careful for their salvation, and that they help
them with their prayers and intercessions toward God: he does not run into
any inconvenience: for it is written in the book of the Machabees: This same
is Jeremy the prophet of God that prays daily for the people, etc. Mark:
There is no inconvenience in it. And further, some are of opinion, and those
also of the learned, that these Homelies upon the Canticles were made by some
latin writer, and not by Origin. Upon Iosue: Ego sic arbitror; I am mightily
drawn to be persuaded, that all the fathers which have fallen asleep before
us, do still in part bear some portion of the combat with us, and do help
us with their prayers: and thus much I have heard said of some of our old
masters. Upon the book of Numbers he grows more hot: for says he, Quis
enim dubitat, who doubts but that they help us with their prayers, and
confirm us by their examples? etc. Where it is to be considered, how that he
speaks doubtfully of this opinion, and that he which had the scriptures at
his fingers ends, if he had had in store ever a place to have confirmed and
settled it upon, he would never have had recourse to an Apocrypha place of the
second book of Machabees, neither to the report of his old masters. But yet
moreover it appears by Origin himself, that this was but a discourse of his:
and not the faith of his time: If (says he) the Saints that have left this
body, and are with Christ, do any thing for us after the manner of Angels,
that take charge of our safety: let it be accounted amongst the secrets that
are hidden and kept close by God, and are not to be intermedled withal by any
writer; that is to say in a word, inter Apocrypha: for (...), or (...) in
Greek does not signify any other thing.

But of this private discourse of this pretended secret mystery, that the
Saints pray for the faithful, gathers he this consequent: it is meet and
convenient therefore, that Christians do pray unto them. And did the Church of
his time the same? Nay but clean contrary. Celsus a Pagan obiecteth unto him,
That it cannot be displeasing to the high God, that men should make vows and
supplications unto the Gods, as unto his loving friends, which help men
forward in the things which they pray unto him for etc. He answers him, that
he acknowledges no such Gods, but rather the holy Angels, the servants of God,
and the blessed ones whom he vouchsafes to call his friends. And the drift
of the disputation required, that if he had believed any such thing, that he
should have added: To whom God is well pleased, that men should make their
vows and prayers, and not to your Gods. But what says he? We offer, says he
(and speaks no more there as he was Origin, but as a Syndicke of the Church
of his time) in all humility our vows unto God, who sits as chief Judge
and governor over all, by his one only Son Jesus Christ, in whom we put up
our supplications, in as much as he is the propitiation for our sins, and
that as a high priest, he offers our prayers unto God, etc. For God (says
he afterward) must alone be worshipped, and the word his one only Son and
first borne of every creature, must be alone prayed unto, as the head and
chief, to the end that he may commend unto God our prayers which shall be come
unto him, etc. But if we desire, says he furthermore, that the company of
Angels should help us in procuring his further favor and ready inclination
to do us good, (and here should he take his opportunity to counsel us to pray
unto them) let us know that the Angels will love and affect those whom they
shall know to love God, to serve him, and heartily to call upon him, even as
they themselves do pray unto, and worship him, etc. For is it not better
(adds he) to commit ones self, and to trust to God, which rules over all
things, which brings this doctrine unto us by Jesus Christ, and to ask of
him such assistance and protection as may be ministered unto us, both from
Saints and Angels? etc. But if Celsus or rather our adversaries taught by
Celsus, should reply upon him: But does it not well to have friends in the
Court? And why then also should it not do as well to have friends with God in
paradise? etc. Verily (says he) although this life be full of examples, how
to win the great and mighty, and afterward by them the kings themselves: yet
notwithstanding we have but one God to pacify and appease, and he is pacified
with godliness and virtue. And as the shadow does follow the moving of the
body: so in like manner do all the inferiors attend and wait upon him which
is the superior. For who so has God his friend, has also by consequent all
those friendly to him, that are Gods friends, whether they be Saints or
Angels, which without being prayed unto, do pray with him, and for him, and
assist him every manner of way that they are able, etc.

And herewithall as when the Canonical scriptures do fail them, they are
accustomed to have recourse unto the Apocrypha: so likewise the true books of
Origin, not contenting or satisfying them, they betake themselves to such as
are falsely attributed unto him. Origin (say they) prayed unto the Saints: You
Saints of God (says he) I pray you that you would prostrate your selves before
the seat of Gods mercy, for me a miserable wretch. But herewithall I could
have wished them not to have concealed, how that this book called the
lamentations, Gelas. Decret. 15.
or penitential work of Origin, are declared by pope Gelasius to be
counterfeit and fained. Upon Job likewise they say, that he says, O Saint Job
pray for us miserable sinners, to the end that the mercy of God may deliver us,
etc. But it were to be wished that they had the shame to blush, for fathering
this shameful thing upon Origin, for attributing to him this whole book,
which is not his in the least tittle thereof, being stained with Arrianisme,
and that in such deep and horrible manner, as that it calls the holy
Trinity, a sect, an heresy, and infidelity, the three persons the three
horns of the Devil. And in deed it was attributed to the Bishop of the
Arrians, called Maximinus, against whom S. Augustine has written. And let them
remember also that he speaks therein of the Manichies, of Lucian the Martyr,
and of the heretics Homousioi, all which rose and sprung up a long time after
him; which is also confessed by themselves: as likewise the Homilies of the
said author, in diuersos. Let them also learn of S. Origin, that he would have
his works read, as the works of a man, and not of an Angel: Consider and take
good advise (says he) that so thou may be able to judge if that which we say
may be made to agree with the scripture: I suspect it, it is my conjecture, but
try and see if it may be so, etc. But so it is, that he has only said this
and nothing further: namely, that it is credible, that the saints retaining as
yet their charitable and loving affections, do heartily desire all manner of good
unto men. And now let us see how far he was off from looking to enter into
Paradise by the merits of the Saints? Origin. hom. 17. in Luc.
What think we then (says he) that all the Apostles were offended in our
Lord, and that not so much as his mother was exempted? Yea, says he, if she
had not been offended at the death of our Lord, Jesus had not been dead for
her sins. But if all have sinned, and stand in need of the grace of God, and
are justified and set at liberty by his grace, verily Mary her self for a
time was offended: And it is the same which Simeon prophesies, when he says:
Behold a sword shall pearce through thy soul, even thine who know thy self
to have brought forth a child without the company of man: yea even thee who
have heard of Gabriel: The holy Ghost shall come upon thee, and the power of
the highest shall ouershadow thee: shall the sword of in fidelity wound with
doubtfulnesse and uncertainty, as with a prick, for that diverse thoughts
shall distract and tear thee in pieces, when thou shall see him crucified and
put to death, whom thou have heard called the Son of God?

Saint Cyprian passes on a little further, Cypr. l. 1. ep. 1. a^ Cornel.
and yet not to a flat invocation or calling upon Saints deceased: but rather
to the stirring of us up to pray unto them whiles they be alive, that they
would remember us when they be in heaven. And it is in this sense that he
says: Let us be mindful one of another; let us pray one for another every
where: And those of which shall first be called away hence, let them continue
their amity and love without ceasing in the presence of God: let their prayers
never cease for their brethren and sisters, craving in their behalf the
manifold mercies of the father. That is, Saint Cyprian extending and
stretching the care that the Saints deceased should have, not unto the Church
in general only, but by a continuance of holy affection unto them whom they
had loved in Christ here upon earth. And this although it have no example in
the scripture, yet it is far off from our adversaries their doctrine: for he
prays to the living, and not to the dead. Now the controversy or question
betwixt us is not, if they pray, and to what end: but if we ought to pray unto
them at all, I know well what they have to allege out of the sermon of the
star, and the wisemen of the East: As that the infantes slain by Herod are
made Senators in Paradise, and obtain grace for them which do not merit it,
etc. But they are not ignorant, that this sermon has by themselves been
always numbered amongst the devised and feigned ones. As likewise that which
they bring out of the book of S. Cyprian his penitentnes; How that he had
been a Magician, and that by the help of the Devils he would have assailed
the chastity of a maid: and that she calling upon Jesus Christ her husband,
and afterward the virgin Marie, was delivered: and thereupon also S. Cyprian
converted. But with what face? seeing S. Jerome tells us, that S. Cyprian was
a Rhetorician, and won unto Christ, Hieronym. in epist. ad Paul. and in
Comment. in Ionam. c. 3. Cyp l. 2. ep. 2. Gelas. D. 15. c. Sancta Romans
partly by the familiarity he had with Caecilius, whereupon he was surnamed
the Cecilian: and partly by the reading of the Prophet Jonas. And seeing that
S. Cyprian in setting down his own conversion, says not a word of all this:
And as little is that which comes to light by Pontianus his Deacon, who has
written his life. But which is more, seeing that Pope Gelasius at the very
same time, when the invocation of Saints had rooted it self very deeply, did
pronounce and affirm unto them, that this book was Apocrypha. And yet they
are still abusing the common people with the name of the fathers. For as
concerning the sermon of Gregory Nazianzene, Marulla has very well observed,
that he has made Cyprian of Damascus, and Cyprian the Carthaginian all one;
whereas the first suffered in the time of Valerian, and the second under
Dioclesian: And it has been noted by many others before and after him.

We are now in this place to bring in Dionysius the pretended Areopagite: for
he cannot be so ancient, (as we have proved) as they would make him: Dionvs.
eccles. Hierarch. c. 3.
and this we say and affirm by the way, that we need not doubt, that the
miracles which God wrought upon the establishment of the Church, at the
sepulchers of the Martyrs, made many to look down and to fix their eyes
upon the Martyrs, whereas they ought to have lifted them up, and to have
caused them to look upon God alone: and that so much the more because it was
called and accounted to be the honoring of God in his Saints, as also for
that it seemed to be an instigation and pricking of men forward to suffer for
the name of Christ. Whereunto also you may add as another cause the want of a
Paul or Barnabas at the corner of every field, to repress these disordered
and unruly devotions of the people; Acts 14.
and to cause them to leave the creature, to betake themselves to the living
God. But so it is, that this Denis rehearsing the causes for which he made
mention of the Saints in the service, speaks not but of those that follow:
To the end (says he) that those that live may learn by these examples to live
and die well in God: and that they might be admonished and taught, that those
that die in him, do live out of this life in a better: That God has them in
his remembrance according to that which is said: God knows those that are
his: The death of the Saints is precious before God: That they are also one
with Christ by an indissoluble union and bond that can not be broken: which
are the causes (says he) that this mention or rehearsal is made at the time
of the celebrating of the Sacrament, the Sacrament of the conjunction and union
of Christ and his members: That is, to show unto us, that those that be not
the greatest part in this world that yet they cease not to be a part of the
Church.

The contention raised about the Arrians, was a cause that for a certain time
men did speak without fault. The Christians reasoned: Christ is truly God,
for we are all agreed to pray unto him: but we pray not unto, neither call
upon any but God. This argument had been of no force, if the Church at that
time had used the invocation of Saints, for the reply had been very ready:
But tell me how many Saints do you pray unto, Hillar. in psalm. 129.
which you know to be no Gods? And although S. Hillarie do play the
Philosopher as others before him, upon the mediation of Angels, the
protection of the Patriarchs and Apostles, etc. yet he reserueth invocation for
Christ alone: Idem in Psalm. 123.
Because (says he) that he belieueth that he is very God; that he is present
by his nature when he is faithfully called upon: and for that he is present
with him that belieueth in him, etc. Idem. c. 27. in Matthew. Athanas. orat. 2.
cont. Arrian. Idem de incarnat. verb.
But in regard of the Saints, The virgins (says he) do answer, that they
cannot give any oil: because it behooves every one to buy for themselves, and
that none do expect and trust to be helped by the merits and works of
another, etc. Athanasius in like manner: The Saints (says he) do not crave
any help of the creatures: but they cry and call unto Christ in their
necessities; He is not therefore a creature, he is very God. Again, If thou
worship (says he) Christ as he is man, because the word dwells in him, then
worship the Saints, because that God has a little house, or dwelling place in
them, etc. which thing he proves to be absurd. What force should such a
reason have had if the sermon entitled of the virgin, the mother of God were
his, wherein he prays unto her for succor, by the names of Lady, Mistress,
Queen, etc. But the learned know, that the greatest part of the third and
fourth Tome of Athanasius are suspected of untruth: as Nannius likewise has
confessed, being public professor in the university of Louaine, and he that
did translate them. And this is one special mark thereof, for that the word
(...) was not received into the Church in Athanasius his time, howsoever it be
out of doubt that they had the doctrine.

And now we be come to the time of the first Nicene Council: Anno 350.
the word of invocation of the Saints having never been heard of in the church
of all that time: which by this means had been without this doctrine more
then 4000. years, as likewise near hand 400. Tertull. aduer. Praxeam.
years after the incarnation of Christ; a manifest sign and token that it was
never his, but that it came from the Devil, according to the rule which
Tertullian gives us, to try the doctrines of the church: That that which is
the ancientest is the truest, and that what is come in since then, is false and
counterfeit. Or else according to Lyrinensis his rule, That which always has
been, and every where, and amongst all men. The first notwithstanding that
brought it in might be led thereunto by a good intention; and those which
suffered it might happily not see to what abuse it was likely to come, the
quality and nature of superstition being such, as the Physicians deliver the
Hectike fever to consist of, which is in the beginning very hard to be known
or discerned, but easy to be cured: whereas in progress and tract of time it
becomes very hard to cure, and very easy to be known.

The prayers of the Saints deceased for the living, were the particular
opinions of Origin and Cyprian, The bringing in of this abuse, by a Rhetorica.
l figure.
founded upon a likelihood, and fostered in the solitary celles and cloisters
of Monks, until such time as they brought forth the offering up of prayers
from the living unto those that were dead. And breaking out of the cabins of
the Monasteries, they began to perch in the pulpit, upon that great
increase of the Church that followed the empire of Constantine, and his
successors; and yet all this while carried more like unto a Rhetorical figure
or flourish, then any article or grave point of Divinity, and delivered in
their Panegyrickes. And Saint Basil and Nazianzene, Anno 370.
who brought the Monks out of Egypt and Syria into Greece, were the promoters
and furtherers thereof, being the most famous Orators of that age: an age
verily wherein the Church grew and prospered greatly for honor and wealth, by
reason of the protection of the Empire: but therewithal growing heavy and
laden with the errors of Paganism slipping into it, together with the
multitudes of the Gentiles: the Church in the mean while being busied in
beating down the heresies raised about the trinity, they being the^ in their
chief strength: The quickest sighted, conceiving that they had gained no small
matter, when they had turned the Gentiles from their Gods to Angels, Basil. in
Gord. Mart. and de Martyr Manante.
and from their half Gods to the Saints of the Christians, and from the
serving of the one, to the loving and imitating of the other. Saint Basil
therefore speaking of the Martyr Gordius, celebrateth his feast, rehearses his
life, and exhorts the people to follow him: and all this according to the
order of the Church. But in the prayer that he made of the Martyr Manans, he
went beyond the bounds of the order and observation of the Church, and falls
into the superstition of the common people: Call to your remembrances (says
he) how often you have seen him in a dream, and how often he has ministered help
unto you in your prayers, and in your iourneyes, etc. This passes the limits
both of the scriptures, as also the decrees and ordinances of the Church: and
it had been better that he had kept himself to the rule which he himself
elsewhere does give unto us: As, That to depart from the scriptures is to fall
away from the faith. But yet our adversaries not contented with this, will make
him say more then he would. He says in the Panegyricke of the 40. Martyrs: He
that is in affliction goes unto these 40. and he that is in joy runs unto
them, etc. the wife praying for her husband, and the mother for her children,
etc. that is to say, thus did the common people practice. Bellarmine gives our
adversaries more advantage: Let him that is afflicted go unto them, etc. as
though he would prescribe and appoint them to do it. And hitherto have the
Panegyrikes brought us.

Nazianzene against Julian: Hear all ye people, tribes, tongues, and ages;
that is, Nazianz. in orat. 1. in Julian.
all ye which are alive at this day, or shall be borne hereafter: Hearken O ye
hosts of heaven and companies of Angels: hear likewise O thou soul of the
great Constantine, if thou have any sense in thee, and you O ye souls of the
rest of the Christian Emperors. (...)
Again upon the passover: O thou great and sacred Passover (says he) the
purgation of the whole world, I am purposed to speak unto thee as if thou
had a soul, etc. Idem in orat. Sanct. Pasch.
Who sees not that this is the very same which the Rhetoricians call
Apostrophe? For and if this were a formal and orderly invocation, would he
have applied the same so confusedly to every thing both living and not living?
as well to the wicked as to the good and godly? to things without life, as well
as to things having life, to the living as well as to the dead? And as for the
dead, would he have prayed unto them in such uncertain and wavering sort, and
with so little faith? (...), the very fashion and manner of speaking used by
the Pagans: If you have as yet (says he) any sense or feeling in you. In orat.
de Basil.
And yet in certain other places he waxes more fervent and hot: And in his
Panegyricall oration which he made of S. Basil, so far as to say that he is in
heaven, and that he sacrifices and prays for the people: yea so far, as to
say unto him: Behold and look down from heaven upon us, repress and pluck
out the prick of this flesh by thy prayers, etc. Idem in orat. de Athanas. and
Cypr.
And likewise in that of Athanasius: Direct this people, guide and furnish them
in this combat and spiritual warfare. And in that of S. Cyprian after the same
manner.

But that we may more clearly see, that this was a private opinion which the
Pastors held rather in respect of the peoples devotion, Idem in epitaph. patris.
then the people from the instruction of the Pastors, let us always observe
these words, (...) as I think, (...), as I persuade my self, (...), if it may
be spoken without arrogancy, etc. Again, (...), if they have any sense or
feeling left them, I am constrained to speak unto them as though they were
present and heard: I advise and counsel you to behold and look upon him, as
if you saw him, and he you. And yet more plainly in the funerals of his sister
Gorgia, Idem in suner. Gorgon.
after many such flourishes he checketh and represseth himself: If thou have
any care or regard (says he) of these honors, if this honor be bestowed by
God upon holy souls in recompense: if they discern, understand, and approve
these things: understand and know also our purpose and speech, etc. All of
them being phrases of speech that are full of doubting, and by consequent a
prayer without faith: whereas in matters as certain as the Articles of our
faith, the Church is accustomed to say: Fidelis sermo, firmissime tene, and
nulla tenus dubites; This is a true and trusty speech, a doubtless faith. And
who so desires to see further, how far they were carried with the stream of
their Rhetoric, let him read the Monodie of Nazianzene, upon the life of S.
Basil: for there he makes a comparison with Adam, Henoch, Noe, Abraham,
Isaac Jacob, Joseph, Moses, Aaron, Iosue, David, Solomon, and Elias: even to
the preferring of him alone both before every one of them in particular, and
all of them in general: but unto S. John Baptist and the Apostles in these
words: That he was sent an Apostle to reestablish faith in the world. A charge
and burden (says he) so much the more difficult and weighty, by how much to
settle a thing again, is ordinarily more laborious and painful, then to work
it new. And let this one taste of the feruencie of their speech serve as an
admonition, with wisdom and discretion to read the like.

But let us hear what was said at the same time, The opinion of the churchmen,
and not of the common people. Theod. in ep. ad Colos. 2.18.
not by any particular person, but by the general voice of the Church
assembled in a Synod at Laodicea upon this matter: and that not in any
Rhetorical figure; but in a well scanned Canon, and that set down in plain
terms. Theodoret expounding these words of the Epistle to the Colossians:
Through humility and worshipping of Angels, they (says he) which defended the
law, persuaded them to serve Angels; alleging unto them, that the law was
given by them. And this vice continued a long time in Phrygia and Pisidia: In
so much as that the Synod assembled at Laodicea, the chief city of Phrygia,
did forbid them by an express law; Ne colerent Angelos, to worship Angels.
And as yet there are to be seen the Chapels of S. Michael, amongst their
bordering neighbors. Now this their counsel was covered with the cloak of
humility: for they alleged that the God of the universal world is invisible,
incomprehensible, and not to be approached: and therefore of necessity man is
constrained to use them to the procuring of Gods favor. And this is it which
S. Paul calls through humility and worshipping of Angels. And he adds,
practicing or intruding himself into matters: which he has not seen: that
is to say, using his own conceits. And in the third Chapter: S. Paul
commands, that they give thanks to God the Father by Christ, and not by his
Angels: But the Synod of Laodicea following this law, labored to cure this
old disease, and therefore ordained that they should not pray unto Angels,
Niceph. l. 7. c. 50.^
neither yet cast off Christ. And of these Chapels of S. Michael, Nicephorus
speaks also according to his time. Now what is it that they can say to so
clear a testimony? Verily the wrangling and overthwart spirit given to cross
and gainesay, Tom. 1. Council. Laodic. c. 35.
is never to seek. In the Councels which are come to our hands, the Canon is
laid down in these terms: Non oportet ecclesiam Dei relinquere and abire,
at^ Angelos nominare, (alias angulos) and congregationes facere, quae
interdictae noscuntur. Si quis igitur, etc. that it to say, if you read
Angelos, Angels; We must not forsake and leave the Church, and go away and
nominate, and call upon the Angels, and gather unlawful and forbidden
asemblies. And therefore if any man be found worshipping according to this
hidden and secret idolatry, let him be accursed, because he has cast off our
Lord Jesus Christ the Son of GOd, and given up himself unto idolatry. But
and if you read it, Angulos: that is to say, Corners or angles, you must not
withdraw your selves into corners, etc. And yet notwithstanding there is no man
that does but once look upon this Canon, but he may perceive that some have
had a delight to corrupt it. But by conferring of it with Theodoret, it is made
clear and plain: That is, that the question is not, De angulis, but de
Angelis, not of certain angles, but of Angels. For how should it be to the
purpose to be an idolater, to be accursed for serving God in some corner:
seeing also that it is said, When thou art disposed to pray, betake thy self
into thy private closet, etc. Neither does the Synod forbid to name Angels,
for what offense were it to name them? But of (...), that is to say, to call
upon them, they have made (...), that is to say, to name them. For why should
that be accounted to cast off the Son of God, and to give over himself to
idolatry? The Breuiarie of Fulgentius and Ferrandus says: Vt nullus ad
Angelos congregationem faciat. And that of Cresconius intituleth this Canon: De
his qui Angelos colebant, that is to say, Of them which do any manner of
worship unto the Angels. And this the Greek Canon calls (...), To do the
service used of the Church in honor of them. And thus they think themselves to
have avoided the places which are against them.

Epiphanius and Chrysostom principal Bishops of the East Church, do yet yield
us a clearer testimony how they believed in their time concerning this article.
Epiphanius I say, who upon occasion of certain women in Thracia and Scythia,
which offered a cake to the virgin Marie, which he calls (...), found cause
to reprove and convince not only that particular abuse, but all others of the
like quality, which were then suffered in the church under the shadow of
devotion, and under the cloak of certain famous persons: And he goes so
far (what would he have said of these times) as to condemn them of heresy:
Let the Saints be honored, Epiph. cont. Antidicomarionitas, contr. haecresp
and aduer. Hyndianes.
(says he) and their rest glorious, but we may not honor them more then is
meet and convenient, but we must honor the Lord for them. And to the end we
may not doubt what he means by honoring: Of the saints themselves (says he)
we learn what honor is due unto God, and what unto them: but we may not give
them the honors after their death, which living they themselves did give unto
God: for fear (says he) that veritas abeat in errore^, the truth be turned
and changed into error: that is, for as much as that which is performed duly
unto God, can not choose but be misplaced and unduly bestowed when it is
performed unto creatures. Now these honors, such as is adoration, as also
invocation, are parts of that which he calls Latria. For so he expresses his
meaning to be by the examples which he mentions of them in Jeremy, that
honor the hoasts and Queen of heaven: of Noe giving thanks for his
deliverance, by a sacrifice; of Jacob, craving aid of the Lord in his
necessity, in pouring the oil upon the stone, etc. And whereas the abuse did
grow more plausible, by reason of the name of the virgin Marie: There are some
(says he) which do not honor her sufficiently; and there are some that
glorify her too much. The Devil under the color of doing good enters into
the spirits of men; deifieth the nature of man, to cause the^ to worship the
dead, etc. But although the body of Marie were holy: yet notwithstanding it
was not God: she was a virgin to be honored and reverenced, but not to be
adored and worshipped: she her self falling down and worshipping him, that
was borne of her according to the flesh: whereupon he says unto her, What have
I to do with thee O woman? for fear that any man admiring too much her
excellency, might fall into heresy. These are the reasons he uses in all
this disputation. In the first place; It is not spoken of in the scriptures:
Where is (says he) the scripture? where is the Prophet that has spoken it?
And for the second, Romans 1.
It is an old error which must not rule over us, to forsake the living, and to
worship that which he has made: according to that which is written: They have
worshipped the creature more then the Creator, etc. And therefore neither
Helias, nor S. John, nor Thecla, nor Marie. For if it be denied the Angels, why
should it be granted to the daughter of Hanna, that is to say, Mary? And
afterward also whole pages to the like purpose: Let Jeremy says he, hold in
these silly and simple women, that they may not trouble the whole world, that
they may not have any more to say, we honor the Queen of heaven, etc. What
other thing should he hear at this day in the devotions of the Church of Rome?
Then he concludes: And this we have written for their sakes that are desirous
to attain the truth of the scriptures: But and if there be any man that
likes better to hear the contrary, (for this superstition did not want
Monks to support it,) he that hears, let him hear, and he that is
disobedient, let him be disobedient, etc.

Chrysostom may seem to have taken to task the pulling down and subversion
of this abuse: he takes such pains by all manner of means, to undermine the
very foundations thereof. He saw that the people were more inclined to receive
help from the suffrages of another, then to amend their own lives: Therefore
he impugneth this opinion Nay, (says he) We are a great deal more assured
and certified, Chrysostom. hom, 5. in Matthew.
by our own suffrages, the^ by the suffrages of an other: neither does God so
soon grant our salvation at the prayers of another as at our own. For by that
means was he moved to pity the Cananitish woman: by that means also he gave
the harlot to believe: thus also did the thief obtain paradise, there being
neither advocate nor mediator to move him to any of these by intercession. But,
Idem. hom. 12. in Matthew.
Thou say I have no good works, I cannot trust to my good life: hereupon it
is, that we are to betake our selves to his mercy: the calm and quiet haven
of sinners, where judgment cease, and wherein consists unspeakable safety,
according to the example of the Cananitish woman, who neither went to James nor
John, nor Peter, etc. But in stead of all these, she embraced as her dearest
companion, unfeigned and hearty repentance, and it was also unto her as her
advocate, going on her behalf directly unto the sovereign head and fountain.
And wherefore said she is he come down to take humane flesh upon him. and why
is he made man, but that I may speak unto him? In another place, Idem hom. de
prof. Euang.
Will thou see (says he) what more we do for our selves by our own praters,
then by those of an other^? when the Apostles pray for the Cananitish woman,
they are repelled: I am not sent but to the lost sheep of Israel, etc. But
when she pleads her own cause by prayer, how great a sinner soever she
were, even then it was that she obtained grace: even then it was that the Lord
did grant her petition. Yea, but the scripture commands us to pray one for
another: Other men's prayers therefore are not unprofitable. Admit it, yet it
must be by the Saints that are alive, and not by them that are dead. And of
this intercession of the Saints it is that he speaks, and not of that of the
Church of Rome: When we offer (says he) altogether unto God, Idem. hom. 44 in
Genes. 1. Idem. hom. 5. in Mat. Idem. hom. in 1. ad These. Genes. 18. Ierem.
7.16.11.14.
that which comes from our selves, and the intercession of the Saints is
joined therewith, it does greatly profit us. For (says he in another place)
the prayers and supplications of the Saints are of great force and power on our
behalf, and therefore let us not neglect them, but rather let us pray them to
pray for us, and to lend us their helping hand. But what Saints? even those
that are living: and we know them by the examples and patterns that he gives
us of them: As of Abraham making intercession for Lot: and of Jeremy, whom God
forbids to pray for the people: and many other. Where in the mean time we
have to observe and note the faithful and good dealing of the Doctors of the
Church of Rome, who allege the same of the Saints deceased, and not of the
faithful living, which are in all the scipture commonly called Saints.

As concerning the Saints deceased, he sometimes speaks of them according to
the common opinion, Idem in Basil. Martyr.
especially in his Panegyricks: That the magnanimity and undaunted boldness
of the Martyrs is a terror unto the tyrants, the devils, and the Prince of
the devils: That they pray to God with confidence, as soldiers are wont to show
their wounds unto their Prince: Idem in Iuuent. and Maxim.
That if S. Paul have loved men here below, he has also in heaven, a more
fervent love toward them; but that this never reaches either to praying unto
Saints, or unto Martyrs: on the contrary, in all his prayers, we do not
hear of any other but only God. But have they not purchased Paradise by their
sufferings and merits, and not for themselves only, but for those also that
call upon them? Not so, for they are far off from that. On the contrary,
says he, God alone is without sin: Idem hom. 40. in Genes. and 49. Idem in
hom. 45. in Mat. Idem hom. 20 in Johan.
and to the end that he might be without sin, he permitted Abraham to sin
by infidelity, Moises by ingratitude, the virgin likewise the mother of
Christ in his passion by doubting: Animum matris gladius dubitationis
pertransijt, etc. The sword (said he) of doubting or diffidencie pierced her
soul. Likewise says he, Sometimes by ambition, by vanity, and by the
forgetting of the divinity of the Son, etc. As if of purpose he would prevent
or repress the abuse which sprung up then, and grew stronger afterward by the
invention and industry of the Monks about the infinite merits of the holy
Virgin.

What have they to oppose and set against this? The Liturgy of Chrysostom?
but we have heretofore avouched for a certain truth, that it was compiled and
made more then 500. years after him. An homely of the nativity of S. Peter
and S. Paul, wherein they make him say: Peter and Paul pray for us without
ceasing; for you have promised so to do. And where? You Paul, when you said,
Venite mecum, and bonis ne deficiamur: and you Peter, Studebo post meum obitum,
etc. But the best learned have been ashamed to give it place amongst his
works. Idem in hom. post reditum ab exilio.
But do they make no conscience to make him to allege the scripture so
falsely? In that which he made returning from exile: I have invited and bid you
to supper (says he) with the Apostles: let us come to Timothy, to Andrew,
etc. Therefore he teaches them say they, to have recourse unto saints.
Whereas he rather discourses in that place, to what persecutions the saints
are subject, and sends them to consider the examples of those above named, to
the end that they might not be strange or unacquainted with any thing that they
should find. Idem hom. 5. in Mat.
Neither is that worthy better to be trusted, which they allege out of the
fifth homely upon S. Matthew: That which we say is not to be denied, that we
ought not to pray unto the Saints. For his words are: And we say well; not
that we deny, that the Saints ought to pray for sinners: that is, as we have
before showed, the saints alive. And likewise all this homely makes for the
contrary. And in deed Bellarmine has been ashamed to allege the places
above named, holding himself to one only in the threescore and sixth homely
unto the people of Antioch. The Emperor (for so they make him to say) is there
himself with his purple, to beseech the Saints to make intercession unto God
for him. He prays unto a maker of tabernacles, and a fisher, as his
protectors. But it is to be noted, that the same words are read in a sermon
attributed unto S. Augustine, De Sancto Paulo: and the Canon Garet does
allege them of one Theodoret Daphnoipatus of far latter time. So little
certainty is there, whether it be S. Augustines or S. Chrysostomes, being also
directly contrary to the whole body and scope of their doctrine. And thus we
see how Epiphanius and Chrysostom do agree together in this truth,
notwithstanding the sharp contentions, which were in other places betwixt them.

Cyrill Patriarch of Alexandria follows them near by, both for the time and
doctrine. His Maxims are: None comes to the father but by Christ: The Son
was made the door and the way to reconcile men unto the father, and he himself
does distribute and give grace together with him, etc. He is the Mediator, the
high Priest, the Comforter, that is to say, the Advocate. John 2. He gives
entrance and access for our prayers unto the father. He gives us free
liberty and boldness with him, etc. Yea (says he) in as much as God grants
the prayers of such as do worship him, (that is to say, of such as call upon
him:) for with whom does it agree better to grant unto holy men their earnest
requests, then with him who alone is naturally and truly God? But as
concerning the Saints, as much honor as you will; but without all manner of
adoration and worship, without any inuocating of them, which are the chief and
principal part: although that in his time the private superstitions of men had
prevailed even so far. Iulianus the Emperor reprocheth him, you Christians
ye worship a man: Yea, Cyril. ad Reg. de rect. fid.
(says he) but such a man as we acknowledge and confess to be both man and
God together. But at the least the Martyrs: Nay not so (says he) as that we
hold them for Gods: we do not adore or worship them: we praise their
constancy, in having hated their lines for the truth, etc. And he tells us
wherein this honor consists: In a remembrance (says he) which withers not,
even of their excellent and exceeding fortitude. He forgets not in the mean
time to describe how many ways the Greeks honored their Gods, even betaking
themselves unto them, as protectors and gardiantes of such as were alive. And
this was the place, and here the opportunity for him to have said; And what you
do vnseasonablie and without any proof of duty unto them, the same do we
duly and of required duty unto our Saints: Cultores.
but he is flat to the contrary; But we (says he) do not any thing at
all. Not therefore as the Grecians, the proper worshippers of men, who without
consideration have attributed the glory of God to whom they please, etc. For
the scripture (says he) does not preach unto, or teach us any more Gods then
one: neither have we any custom to worship any other besides him. And the
Saints (says he in another place) have also obtained the gift of God by his
grace, Idem in Thesaur. l. 4. c. 2.
and the mutual prayers of others: but they cannot imparte it unto others at
their pleasures: whereas the Son, as the fountain of holiness, does
sanctify his disciples by his own power: Receive, says he, the holy Ghost,
etc. The Conclusion of Cyrill, in the end, after all this disputation, is:
Therefore we must pray in the name of the Savior, if we will be heard of the
father. And notwithstanding some are grown to that impudency, contrary to
the opinion of all ancient writers, as to impute and ascribe unto him a little
book imprinted in times past in Paris. The liturgy and hours of the virgin
Marie. As for Theodoret, we have seen heretofore what he said unto us of the
Council of Laodicea: and yet further we must not forget what he says unto us
of the words of Saint Paul to Timothy: One Mediator of God and men, etc.
Theod. 1. Tim. c. 2.
If (says he) as says Arrius and Eunomius, the Son be not partaker of the
substance of the Father, how shall he be an intercessor, etc. And therefore the
Saints by the same account, no Gods, no intercessors.

CHAP. XIIII. Of the continuance of the pureness of doctrine concerning
Invocation, and of the growth and proceeding of the corruption of the same in
the Latin Church.
LEt us here again return to the rest of this doctrine in the West Church,
proceeding where we left to speak of the same. S. Hillarie took up his
standing at this point; That notwithstanding that the Angels and the Saints do
continue their charity toward us, that yet we must call upon one only God
by Christ, it being expected that he should be alone, and only one which
knows, and can do all things. And now let us a little look over S. Ambrose,
S. Augustine, and Saint Jerome in the Latin Church, and examine their
opinions: the first of them answering within a little, the time of Basil and
Nazianzene: the other two the time of Epiphanius and Chrysostom in the Greek
Church.

S. Ambros. in sunere fratris Satyr.
Ambrose verily in like manner as S. Basil, wants no store of Rhetorike,
such as the time afforded. In the funeralles of his brother Satyrus he is
vehement: Well (says he) go thou first into this common house, and that which
now is more desired and wished for of me then any other thing: make ready
there for us our bed chamber, leave me not to languish and mourn any long
time after thee; Call upon me if I be too slow, and help me to make more have,
Ambr. in Luc. l. 10.
etc. And in another place: From whence shall I cause thee to come, Peter, that
thou may tell me what thou did think when as thine eyes distilled tears?
shall it be from heaven where thou art in the company of Angels; or else from
the grave? etc. Who will not acknowledge in these words the Rhetorical
Apostrophes so familiarly used of Orators? In his book of widows, he is
carried away a great deal further in a Declamation: When (says he) Peter his
mother in law had a fever, Andrew and Peter prayed unto the Lord for her: And
thou O widow, have so many neighbors that pray for thee: the Apostles, the
Martyrs and the Angels: therefore thou must pray unto them, for they can pray
for our sins, seeing that they are washed from theirs by their own blood,
seeing also that they are beholders of our actions. Again, Is she less fit to
pray because of her sin, or less fit for to ask and obtain? let her use
the benefit and help of others which do pray, etc. Who is he that may not
justly be offended with these lofty and hyperbolicall speeches, with this
exceeding riot and lavish laying out of such high mounted speeches, directly
contrary to the doctrine of Christ and his Apostles? Of Christ, who calls
the repentant unto himself, they being so much the more fit to come unto him,
by how much the heavier they feel themselves laden with the burden of their
sins; Come unto me (says he) all you that labor and are heavy laden, etc.
Of the Apostles, who teach us, that the sins of the Apostles themselves were
washed away in the blood of Christ. As also against the doctrine of his dearly
beloved Origin: That the virgin Marie has need to be washed, to be sanctified,
and to have a part in the redemption purchased by this blood. But now let us
hear him like some still brook, or little river gliding smoothly along some
plain channel, all his heat of Rhetoric laid aside, and expounding the
scriptures according to their bare meaning and sense: and that verily in a far
other sense. The Gentiles said to him (as we have seen before;) It is needful
to have access unto kings by the mediation of great personages: so we must
look to approach unto the high God by inferior and petty Gods: and so say our
adversaries by the saints. And what answer does he make them upon the Romans?
Ambr. in epist. ad Romans c. 1.
But says he, and that in many words: With God thou need not any other
intercessor then a devout spirit: It is high treason against him to make way to
come to him by his creatures: whereas in deed it is good for kings, who know
not whom to trust in their common wealth: but not in respect of God who knows
all things, Id^^ de Iscac. and Antma.
who understands the value and worth of every man, etc. But would thou
have a Mediator? look upon him whom he gives unto thee: Jesus Christ himself
(says he) is our mouth by which we speak unto God; our eye by which we see
the father: our right hand by the which we offer unto the father; and if that
he make not intercession for us, neither we nor any of the saints have any
part or portion in God. And elsewhere; Idem l. 3. de Spir. Sanct. c. 12
We must not worship (says he) any thing but God, as the scripture says:
Thou shall worship one only God: The holy Ghost likewise must be worshipped,
seeing that we worship him who after the flesh is borne of the holy Ghost. But
no man must draw or apply this to the virgin Marie, she was the temple of
God, but not the God of the temple, etc. And if any man reply and say that he
speaks of adoration, and not of prayer, he overthrows the question: for in
vain is it to pray, where we put not our affiance. But (says he) the
Almighty power of Christ was declared and manifested; in that we know that it
is he alone in whom we must have our affiance, etc. Coloss. 1.
In so much that if any man think that he ought to frame his devotion, either
to some one of the Angels, or else to some one of the superior powers; be it
known unto him that he is in an error: for he that humbles and casts down
himself before the subjects, is altogether out of the way: he cleaves not
fast unto the head; he is without a head, Truncus est.
etc. And this is according to the scope of the place in the Colossians,
expounded heretofore by Theodoret, and of the Canon of the Council of Laodicea.

In the time of S. Jerome this invocation did insinuate it self more and more
amongst the people: in so much as that it was come to an open offense and
controversy. And this is proved by the disputation betwixt Saint Jerome and
Vigilantius: Hieronym. contr. Vigilant.
whether it were that on the one side Vigilantius did not speak honorably
enough of the Martyrs: or that Saint Jerome does wrongfully so charge him:
proceeding here as in other places, from wholesome admonition and reproof, to
hot and distempered choler, (a man for that cause certainly unworthy to be
admitted into any disputation concerning religion:) But of all Vigilantius his
Theses, (because his books are not to be come by) we are only made
acquainted with so much as Saint Jerome makes mention of. It is manifest
likewise, that the Church of France did not allow of this superstition; in as
much as that French Bishop, of whom Saint Jerome speaks unto Ripacius, a
holy and reverent man, did hold the opinion of Vigilantius: according to that
which Ireneus says; That the French men and Germans held and kept so fast
what they had first received of the Apostolic faith, as that they shut their
ears unto whatsoever departed and swarued from the same. Vigilantius says by
the report of Saint Jerome; That we must not worship or adore the Martyrs, nor
the deceased Saints. And who can deny that which he says of worship and
adoration? But for the honor due and of right to be given in the remembering
of the Martyrs and Saints, by the acknowledging of the gifts of God in them,
and the imitation of their constancy; who is he that would contend or strive
against it? But you say that in this honor invocation is included: which thing
Vigilantius denied. Let them show us then in all this disputation, how hot
soever S. Jerome be, any one word of the invocation of saints or of Martyrs? or
any one proof or allegation that he makes for the same, either out of the
scriptures, or the fathers, the Councels or the Liturgies Greek or Latin?
Howsoever notwithstanding the case so stands, as that he could not be
ignorant of that goodly Mass of S. James at Jerusalem, if so be it were at
that time, for to have proved thereby the intercession of the virgin Marie and
of the Saints. For as concerning that which he says: If any man come to pray
ad memorias Martyrum: it is well known, that that was for no other thing but
to point the place, where had been accustomed for a long time the meetinges of
the Christian assemblies, to stir up thereby those which were present to the
like constancy.

Origin was the first that said, though doubtfully, and ambiguously; That the
blessed souls do pray in the other world for the Church. Upon this stone men
have labored by degrees to found and settle this invocation. Vigilantius does
take occasion by this foundation, and denies it, adding, that here we ought to
pray one for another: and that there is not any place for this action elsewhere.
S. Jerome strives for this proposition of Origens, as for an article of faith;
Vigilant. gainsaith it, as contrary unto faith: but of them passing beyond
their bounds, seeing that this proposition, if a man stay there and go no
further, is indifferently to be borne with of the Church. But S. Jerome
gathers thereupon this conclusion. The Saints pray unto God in heaven for
the Church: therefore the Church here upon earth must not only pray unto God,
but unto the Saints also.

Superstition said: But wherefore shall we not pray unto them, seeing that they
pray for us? For is there not appearance, that they join their prayers unto
ours, when we pray unto them at their graves? etc. Vigilantius answers; No,
for they do not meddle any more with humane affairs: So far is it off that
their souls should keep about these graves. Apocal. 14.
S. Jerome thereupon cries out: Will thou chain up the Apostles? wilt thon
make a law for God to keep? Do they not follow the lamb wheresoever he goes?
etc. But the question is not here of the power of God, but of the nature which
he has given for a law, to all things. Tertullian had said unto him: That it
was no good divinity, Chrysostom. hom. 20. in Mat. Idem de Lazat. and Diuite.
August. de cu ra pro mort. ^erend. Idem de G. Virg c. 27. Hieronym. in Epitaph.
Nepotian.
To reason from the power of God to his will, or to the effect. And S.
Chrysosostome, That the souls separated from the bodies have not their abode
in these regions: That the souls of the just are in the hand of God. And S.
Augustine had proved it unto him by scripture, That they are not any more
dealers in the things of this world. That in the same place: To follow the
Lamb is to follow the footsteps of Christ. Not (says he) in respect that he
is the Son of God, by whom all things were made: but the son of man, who
has showed us in himself what we ought to do. But S. Jerome, does he say the
same unto us, that they of the Church of Rome say: That they know all things
in the seeing of God? Then they read in God, that which is in our hearts, in
our thoughts, etc. No but clean contrary. In the Epitaph of Nepotian: All
whatsoever I can say to him seems to me to be no more then a dumb show,
because that he hears not. Again: Let us not weary our selves with speaking
to him, with whom we cannot speak any more. But he cease not to use his
Rhetorical figures, his Apostrophes as the others do: in the Epitaph of Paula
whom he had so entirely loved, and in his speech of the death of Blessilla;
wherein he speaks unto them, and causes them to make answer; the dead and
deceased daughter to comfort her mournful and sorrowing mother, etc. But in
his Commentaries his choler and languishing mind is laid aside: Idem in Ezech.
l. 4. c. 14. tom. 5
If we be to put our confidence in any, let us trust in the one only God: For
cursed is the man that puts his confidence in man, though they were Saints,
yea and though they were Prophets. We must not trust in Principibus
ecclesiarum, in those which are the chief and principal of the Churches, who
how upright and righteous soever they be, shall not deliver any but their own
souls, not so much as the souls of their own children. And to the end we
may not conceive him to have spoken of any but such as were living, writing
upon the Epistle to the Galathians, upon these words; Euerte man shall bear his
own burden: Idem in ep. ad Galat. l. 2. c. 6.
see what he says unto us, We learn though somewhat darkly, by this little
sentence a new doctrine, which is hid and secret, that so long as we are in
this present world we may be helped by the prayers and counsels one of another:
but when as we shall be come before the judgment seat of Christ, neither Job,
nor Daniel, nor Noe can pray for any man, but every one shall bear his own
burden, etc. Which may seem to be a retractation of that which he had stiffly
maintained against Vigilantius. For out of this text are gathered two
propositions together: Gra. C^in praesenti 13. q. 2. Hieronym. de Assumpt.
Mariae virg. tom. 4
that is, That the prayers of the living serve not to any use for the dead,
neither the prayers of the dead for the living: and this place is inserted into
the Decree. Of the virgin Mary likewise he says: Thou have worshipped God a
child with the wise men: The virgin Marie has no other honor but when he is
by good right and for just cause honored, who has vouchsafed to be begotten
and borne of her, etc.

S. Augustine takes great pains against the abuses of his time, and does
oftentimes complain of the presumptuousnes and preiudicate opinions that had
taken so deep root in men: but yet he strives so much as his natural modesty
will well agree and stand withal against the stream of superstitions. August.
ep. ad lanuar. um.
It is great pity (says he) to see how presumptuousnes does eurey where
ouerflow, that is to say, preiudicate opinions, threatening the oppression of
the truth it self: I see many things that I dare not so freely reprove, for
avoiding of giving of offense to some persons, whereof some are holy, and other
some troublesome and contentious. As if he should say, that the good devotion
and holy intention of some may crave pardon for their error, whereas the same
is supported by pride and insolency in others. Again, to the end he may
manifest his judgment unto us, that so we may discern the sincernesse of his
opinion: It is one thing (says he) which we teach, and an other thing which
we maintain and support: one thing which we are commanded to teach, Idem
contr. Faust.
and an other thing which we are taught to amend, and constrained
notwithstanding to tolerate, until that we have amended it. Now these rules
should serve to clear our sight in distinguishing of his doctrine. But more
particularly it seems that he would point out unto us with his finger this
abuse here in question, when he says: Many things, Idem de Ciuit. Dei, l. 10.
c. 4.
which are properly belonging to the service of God, have been usurped and
transferred to serve to set out the honor of men, either by too much
humbleness of mind, or else by the pestilent botch of flattery: but yet in
such sort a that they have evermore been taken but for men; but why do we
say, that we must worship then, that we must honor them: add never so little
more to it, and then say also we must adore them. So far as that the Council
of Carthage (where he was present,) for the repressing of the multitude of
Altars, that were builded under the color of Martyrs and their apparitions,
ordained very well, that those where the Martyrs had not been buried, should
be pulled down, but it was with this clause: Council. Carthag. 5. c. 14.
If there be no danger toinsue, by any uproar or insurrection of the people:
So far had the rage of Idolatry prevailed, that it began to shake the Councels
with fear.

To come therefore unto the point, August. Ep. 121. ad Probam viduam.
let us see the Maxims and general rules which he gives for to direct us in
the way of praying well: Whosoever (says he) says in his prayer, any thing
that is not contained in the prayer of the Gospel, that is to say, in the
Lords prayer, either he prays carnally, or else unlawfully. Psalm. 24.
Wherefore we must pray unto one only God; for thereis no mention made of
Saints. But David said: I have lifted up mine eyes unto the hills. And Origin
and S. Hillarie did differ and vary thereupon; understanding it sometimes for
the Prophetical books, and sometimes for the Angels, whose ministry God
uses, for the safety of his children. On the contrary you will say that he
has undertaken the rooting up of that. August. l. de Pasto.
Look then (says he) that thy hope be not in the hills and mountains: for
David says, my help is of the Lord, who has made heaven and carth. And
think not for all this that thou do injury unto those holy hills: for these
are the hills themselves, which sing of him unto thee. S. Paul, which is one of
these hills, and which cries unto thee; I understand that there are schisms
amongst you, I am of Paul, and J of Apollos, and J of Cephas, and I of Christ:
lift up thine eyes unto this mountain, hear what it will say unto thee and
there stay thee. Was Paul crucified for you? So, when thou shall have lift up
thine eyes unto the mountains from whence thy help is to come, that is to
say, toward the writers of the holy Scriptures; hear them attentively, which
cry unto thee from the depth of their bones, from the bottomes and innermost
parts of their marrow; O Lord, who is like unto thee? etc. To the end, that
without all fear of doing injury unto these bills, thou do freely say, My
help is of God which has made heaven and earth. And then fear not that they
should or would do thee any harm: Nay, they do love thee so much the more,
nay they will become the more favorable unto thee: if on the contrary thou
put thy trust in them; thou make them heavy and sad. An Angel that has
showed unto a man marvelous great and divine things, is worshipped and adored
of this man: from this hill, whether he lifted his eyes, he calls him back
unto God; far be it from thee says he, that thou should ever do it,
worship God and adore him: for J am thy fellow servant, and one of thy
brethren, etc. And in an other place: When thou shall find a holy man, Idem in
Psalm. 95.96. Colere.
aseruant of God, and that thou would worship or adore him for God, he will
stay and keep thee from doing it: for he will not be unto thee in stead of
God, but rather with thee under God. And thus did Paul and Barnabas, etc. And
fear not (says he) least thou should grieve them, if thou do not honor
them: for it is their whole and hearty desire, that the one only God be
worshipped, that he alone be served and adored. Thus do all the Saints and
Angels desire and wish; they seek the glory of this one only God, whom they
love: they study not any other thing, but to increase our love and Zeal, and
to draw us as by force to serve him, to call upon him, Ad eius oration. nem.
and to look up unto and behold him. And note these words to call upon him,
for he makes it a part of adoration. They are as much moved to anger, when
they are honored as the devils are, when they are not honored, for they preach
God unto men, and not themselves: and so are the Angels, that is to say,
messengers,) the Devils on the contrary seek their own glory. They answer,
We do not worship the Devils but the Angels, the powers and Officers of the
great God. I would to God that you did serve them, for so you should soon
learn of themselves, not to worship them. Will you hear an Angel for your
teacher, who sought nothing but the glory of his God: Arise, says he, what
do thou? I am thy fellow servant, etc. When as therefore thou go about to
worship them, then it is that the good Angel is displeased with thee, etc. And
in an other place; That which the greatest of the Angels does worship, Colere.
Idem de Vera relig. c. 55. tom. 10.
the same is that which is to be worshipped of the most base and meanest of
all men: for, because of failing toworship it, the nature of men is become the
last and worst. For the Angels are not become either wise and understanding, or
true and just by any other then man: but even from one and the same wisdom,
and from that one and the same immutable verity. Even the truth and wisdom
of God, of the same substance with the Father, which has thought good to take
upon him the nature of man, to teach us thereby, that man has no other to
worship and adore, then him which is adored and worshipped by every creature
indewed with understanding and reason. Seruitute.
And le^ us know and believe that the good Angels are also of the same mind,
that we should worship with them, one and the same God: and therefore we do
honor them with brotherly love, but not with divine worship or service,
neither do we build any Churches unto them: and that because that Religon does
bind and restrain us to the one only Almighty God, etc. And thus you may see
one of the foundations of Invocation irrecouerably undermined by this, that we
are not to adore any but the one only God, that the Angels and Saints take it
for offered injury, when we do otherwise. That Invocation has an interest in
Adoration, as apart thereof, etc.

And now behold here an other: Idem in Psalm. 29.
That there is not any mediator but one only: that this one only God will
not be called upon and prayed unto, but by this mediator. If thou consider
(says he) the Divinity of our Lord Jesus Christ, we find not in it, either
matter, place, or affection for prayer: For, in the beginning was the word,
etc. But hearken to that which follows after: The word became flesh; thou
have herein a Majesty whereunto to pray, and an humanity, that prays for
thee. For this was spoken by the Apostle, and that after the resurrection: Who
sits, says he, at the right hand of God, and makes intercession for us.
In as much as he has vouchsafed to be a mediator, betwixt God and men. And
what is this God? The Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost. And what are men?
Sinners, wicked and ungodly, mortal. Betwixt this Trinity, and the iniquity
and infirmity of men, was a mediator made, even a man. But it may be that
this man is not placed and ordained al alone, for the executing of this charge
and office; Non est quo eas nisi ad me. Non est qua cas nisi per me In Johan.
tract. 22. Idem de Relig. Sermon. 55. tract. 10. Praeteripsum. Idem in Psalm. 109.
but hear yet further: Behold what thy Savior says unto thee: Thou have not
whether else to go besides me, thou have not whereby to go thither, but by
me. Walk by Christ, and so thou come to God, thou go by him, thou go
to him. Seek not whereby thou may come to him, otherwise then by him. He was
made the way, by which thou have to come. I say not unto thee, seek the way:
he, that is the way, is come unto thee, arise and walk; walk by good manners,
walk on foot: Whosoever runs out of this way, the more he runs, the
more he wa^dreth, because that he draws the more backward out of his way. And
for as much as prayer is the mean, by which man approaches unto God, he
explaneth himself the more carfully: There is not (says he) any righteous
prayer, but by Christ. Again that prayer, that is not made by Christ, is sin.
Let his prayer (says he) be turned into sin. And wherefore? Because it was not
made by the mediator of God and men, Jesus Christ the man. What then? the
Saints Martyrs, Apostls, and angels, cannot they be mediators, cannot they be
our advocates? Let us hear him. Idem^ontra Parmen. l. 2. c. 8
S. John says not (says he) you have an Advocate, as seperating himself from
amongst sinners, as though forsooth he had had no more need of the
propitiation which is made by the Mediator, sitting at the right hand of the
father, and making intercession for us, for then he had spoken arrogantly and
falsely. And if he had said; you have me for a mediator with the father, I
obtain pardon for your sin (as Parmenian who set the Bishop in the place of
the mediator betwixt the people and God) it had been yet worse. Exoro.
Who would have taken him for an Apostle of Christ? Yea, who would not on the
contrary have taken him for Antichrist? To the end therefore that Christians
may keep the unity of the spirit in all their prayers, let the^ be assuredly
persuaded of one only mediator. For Christians do recommend one an other in
their prayers: but he alone is the true mediator which makes intercession for
all, and for whom no man prays. So Paul though a principal member under the
head, but yet notwithstanding a member, recommendeth himself to the prayers of
the faithful: he makes not himself any mediator betwixt the people and God;
but he prays that all the members of the body of Christ would pray for him,
etc. For if Paul were a mediator, then all his fellow Apostles should be so
likewise: Non constaret ei ratio. Idem in 1. Ep. Ioh.
And if that there should be any mediator, then Paul himself should miss in
his account, when as he says: one God, one mediator of God and of men, etc.
In an other place: We have an advocate, etc. Behold and mark John, (the same
that drank upon the Lords breast, etc.) He says not, you have, but we have:
and he says not, you have me for an advocate, but you have Christ. And he
chused rather (said he) to put himself in the number of the sinners, that he
might have Christ an advocate, then to set himself down for the advocate in
the place of Christ, and to be found condemned amongst the proud and arrogant.
He that has held this, has not spotted himself with heresy, has not fallen
into schism. For hence it is that schisms arise, when men say, we are just
and righteous; we sanctify the unclean, we justify the wicked, we pray, we
obtain, etc. And the Saints then (says he) do they not pray for us? And the
Bishops do not they pray for the people? Read but the Scriptures and you shall
see, that the Bishops do recommend themselves unto the people. The Apostle
says, praying always for us: the Apostle for the people, the people for the
Apostle: you for us; we for you: all the members one for another, the head for
all, etc. And then the Saints living, and not the dead: for here were the
place to speak of it, if he had believed otherwise. Not the Angels themselves:
Idem l. 10. con fess. c. 42.
For (says he in an other place,) How shall I find one that may reconcile me
unto thee? must I go unto the Angels? But with what prayers? With what
Sacraments? Many indeuoring to return unto thee, and not being able of
themselves, have, as I understand, assaied this way, and have been deceived by
vain illusions, as they deserved, etc. But the true mediator has appeared
betwixt mortal men, being grievous sinners, and the immortal just one, even
Jesus Christ, man, etc. In him is my hope, he makes intercession with thee
for us. Otherwise I should fly, and hide my self from before thy presence,
but thou have stayed and kept me back, saying: Therefore is Jesus Christ dead
for sinners, etc. Behold therefore Lord, I cast my whole care upon thee, and I
shall live.

And now after that he has laid these Maxims, behold how cunningly he
indeuoreth to stop and turn the course of the presumptions of his time. It was
now grown to an inueterate opinion: that the Church triumphant, or already
gathered into heaven, had care of the militant, or that which was warfaring
here upon earth, he stands not obstinate and wilful, as Vigilantius,
against it on the contrary: Idem de praedest. sanct. c 14 Idem confess. l. 9.
A great company (says he) do wish us in heaven, being already assured of
their own salvation, but yet standing in some doubt of ours. Again: Now
Nebridius is in Abraham's bosom: he greedily powers down full draughts of
wisdom, and yet I cannot be persuaded, that he drinks himself so deeply
and deadly drunk therewith, as that he forgets us: seeing that thou O
Lord, who give him to drink, vouchsafest to have us in remembrance, etc. In
a certain place he cannot contain himself from desiring and wishing that S.
Cyprian would pray for him. Behold (says he) S. Cyprian disburdened of this
body, Idem contr. Donatist. l. 5. c. 1.
who sees the truth more clearly: let him help us with his prayers in this
our frail and mortal flesh, as in a dark and gloomie cloud, to the end that
by the grace of God we may follow him, etc. This is a wish and not a set prayer
or purposed invocation: on the contrary, after having discoursed upon the
question: Whether the Martyrs do intermeddle in humane affairs, Idem de cura
pro mort. agend. 10. and 13
and if they appear in dreams and visions, etc. and the same argued and
disputed every manner of way, he protests that, The thing passes his
understanding, that he is not able to reach so high, etc. And notwithstanding
sets down his opinion according to the Scriptures: Let every man (says
he) take that which I shall say, as it pleases him, if the souls of the dead
should be found dealers in the affairs of them that are living, my good mother
would not leave me or forsake me any one night: but certainly that which the
holy Psalm does sound out so shrilly is true: My father and my mother forsook
me. And if our parents have no care over us: what other amongst the dead, are
there that either know what we do, or what we suffer? Esaias says, Thou art
our father, for Abraham has not known us, Jsraell is ignorant of us. If then
these great Patriarchs were ignorant of that which befell this people, sprung
and risen out of their loins, how shall the dead have any dealing in the
affairs of the living to help and further them? And how shall we say, that
it was provided that such as are departed out of this world, 2. King. 22. 2.
Paralip. 32.
before that the evils which followed their transgressions, (he speaks of
Josias,) should fall, to the end that they might not be grieved at the sight
thereof? And the conclusion is: The spirits therefore of the deceased are in a
place, where they see not what is done, or what accidents fall out in the life
of man. August. de cura pro mort. c. 13.14.15.16.
And upon the objection of the wicked rich man, He had as much care and
consideration of the living, as we have of the dead: we know not what the dead
do, neither did he regard whether the living did sink or swim. Now if you
take away this knowledge from the dead, what shall become of the prayers made
unto them by the living?

In the mean time, Miracles at the Sepulchers of the Martyrs.
the common people say, we see miracles at the graves of the Martyrs. But, to
the end that they might not conclude or gather thereupon any invocation or
praying unto them, as holding such a good favor to come from them, he leads
them to the consideration of other causes. It is God (says he) that does
this thing by himself, in this wonderful manner, so that, although he be
eternal, yet it is he that works these temporal things: and he brings
them to pass either by his Ministers, or else, the same which he does by his
Ministers, he effects likewise sometime by the spirits of his Martyrs, as
though they were done by men still dwelling in their bodies: or else he
brings all these things to pass by his Angels, the Martyrs obtaining by
earnest suit that the same may be done, though they be no Actors in the same:
or finally by some incomprehensible manner, past the reach of mortal men, but
yet such as may undoubtedly confirm us in the resurrection unto eternal life.
Who sees not in the reckoning up of ^o diverse causes, that he would pull them
from one; and in that he concludes that the cause is incomprehensible, that
he would break off both their manner of reasoning, and the consequences which
they gather thereon? But in the Maxim which he sets down in an other
place, that he would draw them from the Martyrs unto God, August. de Ciuit.
Dei, l. 10. c. 12.
when he says: That all the miracles which are done, whether it be by Angels,
or any other manner, do not recommend unto us any other Religion, devotion or
worship then that of the one only God, in whom alone consists the blessed
and eternal life.

But to what end and wherefore then was it that they prayed and worshipped,
(which they call also by the name of sacrificing, Ad memorias Martyru^, at the
Sepulchers of the Martyrs? Verily we have said, that before that Christians had
Churches, and during the times of the persecutions of the Church, they met with
one consent in their burying places, for the cherishing of their zeal, by the
example of the Martyrs: and this custom was still retained for a long time
after. But was that which they called sacrificing to the Martyrs, the action of
invocation, or praying unto them? God forbid. Idem de Ciuit. Dei, l. 22. c. 10.
We build says S. Augustine, no Churches unto our Martyrs, as unto Gods, but
for memorials, as unto men that are dead, whose souls live with God. Neither
do we prepare any Altars, to sacrifice upon, unto our Martyrs: but we offer a
sacrifice, unto the one only God, both our God and the God of the Martyrs, in
which sacrifice the Martyrs are named in order, (for the number is read, ex
diptychis) as men of God, which have overcome the world in confessing of him,
but they are not prayed unto by the Minister which says service: for he
sacrifices to God and not to them, notwithstanding that he do it, In memoria
little, (non in memoriam) in the place of their Graves or Sepulchers, and not
for their Sepulcher or Grave. Where it is to be noted, that he plainly
opposes unto their particular devotions, Precem Canonicam, the form of prayer
used in the Church. An evident testimony, that in the service of his time, the
Commemoration of the Saints, had not as yet proceeded unto invocation: and by
consequent ought to cause us to suspect a place alleged of our Adversaries,
out of Cyrill the Bishop of Jerusalem his instructions concerning the
interpretation of mysteries, Gesner. in Bib lioth. August. de Ciuit. Dei l. 8.
c. 27.
wherein are these words: When we offer the sacrifice, we make mention of the
Saints which are deceased before us, to the end that God by their prayers may
receive our prayers, etc. And indeed these books are found in Greek, written
by hand, in some Libraries, under the name of one John, who lived not till many
years after. In an other place Saint Augustine: We honor the memortes of the
Martyrs, as well to be thankful to the true God, in these solemn
Assemblies, for their victories, as for to be exhorted thereby, by the renewing
of their memories, to imitate them in praying unto the same God for our aid
and succor. And by this means, ad Sepulchrum aut memoriam Petri supplicare,
Idem Ep. 42.
is not to pray unto Saint Peter, but to pray unto God, in remembering our
selves of the place, of the Martyrdom of Peter, and that it would please him
to give us the like constancle, that he gave unto his Apostle Peter. And this
is the cause, why in the time of Saint Augustine, in the third Council of
Carthage, and in the Mileuitaine there were Canons made of purpose, forbidding
that any thing should be rashly changed in the prayers of the Church: Council.
Carthag. 3. c. 23.
but observe and mark notwithstanding what followed. The former says: When a
man is at the Altar, let his prayer be directed evermore unto the father: and
to whatsoever prayers a man betaketh himself, let him not use them, before he
have first conferred, with the best instructed of his brethren. The latter:
Council Mileuit c. 12.
That no prayers, petitions, or Masses, (that is to say Collects) Prefaces or
recommendations, be made in the Church, except they have been approved in the
Council, for fear (says it) that there be mixed something amongst them, that
is contrary to the soundness of faith, either by ignorance, or else by
unadvisedness. And S. Augustine by name did sit in this Council. August. Ep.
43.44.


The Gentiles objected unto the Christians, and a certain man named
Madaurensis unto S. Augustine: And well, What do you less then we? We call
upon the powers of God under many names; we make our supplications unto them
after diverse sorts: Piis precibus adoramus, We adore and worship them by our
holy prayers, (for it is to be noted, that invocation always in the old
writers is taken for a part of Adoration: And wherein are the Christians behind
the Pagans, when in stead of Jupiter, Juno, Minerua and Venus, habent and
colunt, they have and worship the Martyrs of Afric, as Mygdor, Sananes,
Naupsion, and Lucitas, etc. But does S. Augustine confess it? On the
contrary, Nullum eoli mortuorum.
how does he take it in the matter of honor? Be it known unto you (says he)
that no Christian Catholic does worship or adore any of the dead: that nothing
is worshipped with the worship of the Deity, that has been created of God,
but the only God, that has created all things. To Faustus the Manichee in
like manner: You have (said he) changed the Idols into Martyrs, Quos votis
similibus colitis: which you worship with like vows. Where the word of Vows
is taken as in the Greek, for Prayers. And the Gentiles knew well enough to
say, (...)
that they did not worship their Idols as Gods, but as mediators unto God.
Nay, says he: We honor the Martyrs, with the honor of love and fellowship,
August. contr. Faust. l. 20. c. 22.
as we shall do to the people that are good and virtuous here in this world;
save that we perform that we do to them with greater devotion, as being
already become conquerours. But with that manner of worship, which is called
(...), it is not for any to be worshipped, but the one only God: and because
that oblations and Sacrifices belong unto him alone, we teach that neither they
nor any other such thing can be given to Martyr or Angel. Let our
Adversaries, who are continually saying of Masses, their pretended sacrificings
of the Son of God, in honor of the Saints and Angels, wash their hands of
this place. Let them answer us also how they may pray unto them; seeing that
they cannot sacrifice unto them: and that because that prayers are the
sacrifices of Christians, as we have showed at large both by the Scriptures,
as also by all the old Fathers: and themselves cannot deny it. Idem de Vera
religione.
But how much better should they do if they would conclude with S. Augustine:
Non sit nobis Religio, cultus mortuorum: Let us not make a Religion of the
worshipping of the dead. The honor that is to be given to them, consists in
imitating of them, and not in a devout adoring of them. If they lived godly,
they do nothing affect any such honor, but their desire is, that we should
honor the one only God: and so do likewise the Angels.

Now it is sufficiently apparent by that which goes before, what S. Augustine
his opinion was concerning this Article: and we need not doubt, but that if he
had had but a little the upper hand and advantage against the stream of the
time, he would have made it seen. In the mean time as false doctrine cannot
stand but by falsehood, Sermon. 2. de Annunt. and Assumpt.
our Adversaries have mingled with Saint Augustine, certain Homelies of
Fulberts, Bishop of Charters, who lived not till almost six hundred years
after S. Augustine, wherein he says: Sancta Maria, succurre miseris, etc.
Sentiant omnes tuum leuamen, etc. The Chanon Garet has dealt more faithfully,
for he alleges them under the name of Fulbert. And after the same manner
they allege the books of Meditations, which they know likewise not to be
his, etc. But S. Augustine did never think to win heaven by any other
means, then the merit of the only Christ: for his Maxim is universal:
August. ad Hieronym. de natura and origi. animarum. Idem in quaest. veter. and
Nou. test. q 73.
That there is not any one soul, in all mankind (thus he writ unto S. Jerome)
for the deliverance whereof, the Mediator of God and men, Jesus Christ the man,
is not requisite and necessary. Not so much as the Virgin Marie excepted:
seeing that he says after many of the fathers going before: That the Virgin,
in whom was wrought the mystery of the incarnation of Christ, did doubt as
much in the death of our Savior Christ, as she was confirmed by his
resurrection.

What do we get by this discourse? Verily that unto the time of S. Chrysostom
and S. Augustine, that is to say, near hand fine hundred years after the
death of our Lord, there was no Invocation of Saints in the Christian Church,
nor any mention of the same in the service of the Church: that it was practiced
only by the particular devotions of some few, which they had learned for the
most part out of the School of the Gentiles, and that there were great
personages at those times, that labored to repress them, by the opposing and
setting of the pure doctrine against them, as we have seen by their
disputations. And if that they did speak so, at such time as those miracles,
which it pleased God to work for the confirmation of the faith, and the
approving of his Martyrs, were most fresh and new, what would they have said of
that which we see at this day, when we pray not unto God, as then, in the
burying places of the Martyrs; but unto the Martyrs themselves: yea and to all
the sorts of pretended Saints; both directly, and as the authors of good
things, and without any mention made of God, and in their images? And whereas
they scrape together here and there some places, that seem to make for them,
some of them being true, but ill translated, some manifestly fained and
devised; and some drawn from Rhetoric, to make proofs and reasons in
Divinity, what other thing may they seem to be hereby, but Spiders, which out
of most wholesome herbs do suck poison, whereas the Bees do gather
sweetness out of the most bitter?

And here withal let us not forget to observe and note, that at this time, and
many ages after, it was indifferent in the Church: whether the faithful
departing out of this world, were by and by gathered unto God, and inioyed his
presence: or else, that they continued expecting the day of the resurrection,
in the bosom of Abraham in a place of most blessed rest, from thence to be
received into heaven all together. Which is more, Ireneus, Iustine, Tertullian,
Origin, Saint Ambrose, Saint Augustine, Saint Chrysostom, Bernard. Sermon. 4. in
sest. omnium Sanct. Idem Sermon. 3.
Theodoret, etc. yea Saint Barnard no less then all the rest, do incline to
believe rather, that they are reserved unto the resurrection, without the
inioying of the presence of God. Now the case so stands, that the Invocation
of Saints, is grounded upon intercession; and their intercession upon the sight
and presence of God, according to our Adversaries their own doctrine.
Whereupon it follows, that the Invocation of Saints could not have any ground
to grow upon in the Church all this time; neither yet shall hereafter in any
sure or certain sort, according to Saint Barnard his judgment, who lived not
above three hundred years since: seeing he stood more upon this opinion then
any other; the Invocation of Saints being such as could not match with this
doctrine.

CHAP. XV. Of the growth and proceeding of the corruption of Invocation, both
in the Greek and Latin Churches.
NOw when these great lights of the Church, S. Jerome, S. Augustine, S.
Chrysostom, Epiphanius and such like were put out, there is no cause why we
should marvel, if the Prince of darkness, The proceeding of the abuse in the
Greek church
did thrive and prosper mightily in a short time, as also by the assistance of
the ignorance, which was brought into Europe at such time as the barbarous
nations did ouerrunne and swarm in the same. In the East Church they had been
drencht with the Apostrophes of Basil, Nazianzene, Ephrem and others: but the
Invocation of Saints was not yet entered into their service, only they had
received the Commemoration of them, the prints and footesteps whereof remain
to be seen in these words: In Liturg. Iacobo, Basilio, Chrysostom. attribut.
In calling to our minds the holy Virgin, Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles,
Martyrs, etc. We recommend them and our selves and our whole life, unto God,
etc. Speeches so far from bearing any inuocating of them, as that they
comprehend and include them in the same recommendation, as also in the same
work of the grace of God, with our selves, following that opinion which they
had current amongst them, that they were not as yet received into perfect
bliss. Likewise we have a Church rule in S. Basil, Basil. in asceti. c. 40.
free from the fiery heat of his boiling Rehetoricke: When (says he) the
Christians come to the Sepulchers of the Martyrs, or into the adjoining places,
it must be looked unto, that it be to no other end, but to pray, Idem hom. 19
and to be stirred up to the imitating of their constancy by the recording
and calling of them to mind. For (says he in an other place) by the calling to
mind of their good deeds, there arises profit unto us, as of the using of an
excellent parfume, a good smell. Anno. 500. Niceph. l. 15. c 18.
But now one Petrus Gnapheus Bishop of Antioch, ordains, that in all public
prayers in his Church, (and note that his Patriarchall prerogative extended
very far) the inuocating of the Virgin Marie should be used. And this
Peter was a most pernicious heretic, condemned in the fifth general Council
held at Constantinople, for the heresy of the Theopaschites, whereof he was
the Author, teaching that God himself, even as he was God, was crucified, and
did suffer upon the Cross. The mischief, whose nature is never to be idle,
went forward with speed: The second Council of Nice, about the year eight
hundred, establishing the worshipping of Images, ordained the Invocation of
Saints. And it is likewise much about the same time, that Euagrius the Monk,
brought in the King of Persia, praying unto Saint Sergius in these words: That
he and Syra his love did hope in his power and believe in him. Damascen about
the year eight hundred, prays himself unto the Virgin Marie: I shall
(says he) be saved by hoping in thee: and having thee for my defense, J will
not fear any thing: In thy Almighty help, I shall put mine enemies to
flight: thou art the salvation of mankind, open us the door of mercy, etc.
And thus the purity and sincerity of Religion, was carried away down the
water, by the stream of superstition, there being never any other Epiphanius
or Chrysostom to set his shoulder to, for the supporting of the same. And yet
notwithstanding in the inquisitions of Emericke, he quoteth amongst the errors
of the Grecians which they hold: That we must not pray unto the Saints, neither
yet unto the Virgin Marie, but one only Christ the mediator: That to offer
oblations unto them, is to sacrifice unto the devil, etc. Which he should have
said of certain nations of the East church, whether this abuse was not as yet
come.

But in the West Church according to the special privilege thereof, The
manner of the growth of this abuse in the Latin Church. Cyrill. l. 6. contr.
Iul.
it grew yet worse: for to the Rhetoric of vain declaimors, was joined the
loose licentiousness of Poets. One Prudentius an elegant Poet, but an ill
Divine applies to the Saints, that which profane nations had wont to apply
to their Gods, following the saying of Cyrill, Patriarch of Alexandria: That
this yearly setting forth of the Martyrs their praises, Theodoret. l. 8. de
Martyr Council. Aftic. c. 28.
was after the manner of that which the Grecians had ordained for them, which
were dead in the battle of Marathon. As also Theodoret, and the Council of
Afrike cease not to lay open and to show, that all their solemnities which they
observed therein, did spring from Paganism. He says therefore of the Virgin
Marie: Seruat salutem virgo Quiritium; She continues and conserueth the
safety of the Romans and of the Saints. Poscunt, litantur, iudicant; They are
required, sacrificed unto, and made acquainted with the evils that haunt and
hang about men, and no man returns frustrate of his expectation, etc. Pontius
Paulinus in like manner, speaking of Saint Faelix, Petat omne, quod audet: Let
him ask by so good an Advocate, whatsoever he dare: by his good merits, he
exceeds and goes far beyond our misdeedes, etc. And mark the man's good
Divinity: That the Epistles of Saint Paul applied to diseases, do heal them.
Fortunatus speaking of Saint Martin: Dulcis adorande and mihi pectore, voce
colende, whom I must worship, whom I must honor, both with heart and voice.
Again, Inter me and Dominum, Mediator adesto benign: Hieronym. ad Ripa, Pres
bit. Idem contr. Vigil.
Be thou a Mediator betwixt God and me. Directly against Saint Jerome: That we
must not colere, neque adorare, Worship nor adore the Cherubins, nor Seraphins,
Angels, Archangels, nor any name that is named, least we should worship the
creature and not the Creator. And what sottish and senseless fellow is this,
says he likewise against Vigilantius, Which never has worshipped the
Martyrs, nor any of their relickes, etc. And what have they left now either for
God or Jesus Christ? And who sees not that they played (if we may so speak)
the opinions of the common people in verse? And what may we think that
Epiphanius, Chrysostom, and Saint Augustine, would have judged hereof? etc.
The Monks come after and turn the same into prose, namely, Maximus, Gregor.
Magn. l. 12. Ep. 22.
Leo, Euthymius, Fulgentius, and Gregory, and that so far as to say: We hope
in God his power and might, and in the help of Saint Peter, etc. And yet
notwithstanding there was not any thing of all this, that was practiced
otherwise then in private prayers, and this may appear to be true, by the
eldest Collects gathered out of the most ancient Liturgies, in these words:
Grant us grace to be inflamed with the examples of such and such Saints, in
such sort as our hearts are rejoiced and delighted with their virtues, to utter
their Faith with our tongues, to express their lives in our manners, and to
profit in the example of their constaneie, etc. Speaking of the Martyrs and
Saints in general: particularly in the remembrance of Saint Laurence: As thou
have given unto him, to overcome the flames of the torments, so give unto us to
overcome the heat of our vices. Of Saint Steven, Let us learn to love our
enemies, as he has prayed for them that persecuted him. Of S. John Baptist: As
thou make his birth day honorable unto us, so grant unto thy people, the
grace of spiritual joys, and direct the spirits of all thy faithful
servants into, and in the way of eternal life, by thy Christ. Of the Apostles
Saint Peter and Saint Paul: Grant to thy Church to follow in all things their
instructions, by whose ministry it has taken his beginning, by Jesus Christ
our Lord, etc. All them being prayers, directed to God the Father by his Son,
tending to the obtaining of grace to imitate and follow them: not any one of
them directed unto them, nor from them, not any one of them for to attain to
any grace, by their grace.

But now behold comes Gregory to the Bishoppricke of the Sea of Rome,
Gregory takes them out of private prayers, and mingleth them amongst the
public. Gregory changes Commemoration into Invocation.
who casts all the forms of the service used in the Church into new moulds,
as the public prayers, the Letanies, yea and the Mass also. He finds the
people all ready tilled and husbanded fit for the receiving of such seed;
thoroughly prepared by their customs taken from Paganism, and by the
instructing of the Monks, to approve this change and alteration. He then
turned the Commemoration of the Saints in the Mass, into Invocation, and put
by name into the Letanie, Sancta Maria ora pro nobis, Saint Marie pray for us:
he ordained and caused the Mass to be celebrated upon the bodies of S. Peter
and S. Paul, and finally opens the Sluice to all manner of superstitions,
which thereupon flowed in at once, and that with a full stream: whereas the
Fathers that were before him, had taken great pains to turn them away and
keep them back.

This before delivered, appears true, by the Liturgies which they allege
themselves: Of S. James, where the Priest confesses himself to none but God,
and craucth pardon of him by his Son. Of S. Clement, wherein one only God is
prayed unto, by one only Jesus Christ, without any mention at all made
therein, either of praying to the Virgin Marie, or to the Saints. Of that
which was under S. Augustine, by the allegation which he made himself, that
the Martyrs are mentioned therein, but not prayed unto: and that of S. Ambrose,
could not be any other at that time, seeing he was before S. Augustine,
August. de Ciuit. l. 22. c. 10.
and thereby likewise it appears that it was corrupted afterward. Likewise,
he that shall well consider the Communicants of the Roman Liturgy, will
confess that the clause which is in the end, Quorum meritis and precibus
concedas, Unto whose prayers may it please thee to grant, etc. is a prayer
translated thither, not having been from the beginning belonging thereunto.
For having said: In communicating and worshipping the memorial of the holy
Virgin, of such men Saints, and women Saints, etc. it followed that the Priest
said some thing, and he cut it off al too short, leaving the sentence imperfect
and hanging in suspense, for this cause and consideration, that he might make
an end with a prayer which he linked thereunto, and it is attributed by some to
Pope Siricius, and by others to Gregory. Of the Letanie, altogether after the
like manner: for it was a general prayer, which was made into Articles, for
all the necessities of the body of the Church, and of the members thereof, yea
for the estate of the world, etc. And at the end of every Article, the Clergy
and the people were wont to answer, (...), Lord have mercy upon us; a thing as
yet practiced in the reformed Churches of England. And in all the Liturgies
above named, all these Articles are craved of one only God by Jesus Christ.
Likewise that of Clement the Pope, Pro superna pace Deum oremus, pro salute
animarum nostrarum, pro prosperitate sanctarum ecclesiarum, pro clero and
populo, pro magistratibus totius mundi, Let us pray for the peace that is on
high, for the salvation of our souls, for the prosperity of the holy
Churches, for the Clergy, for the Cominaltie, for the Princes of the world,
etc. And to every Article that the Deacon pronounced, the people and the
Clergy answered: Lord have mercy upon us. But for as much as the third
Council of Carthage had said, that all prayers should be directed and made to
God; those who had resolved to thrust in the Invocation of Saints, began
indirectly: O Lord, hear us by the intercession of the Virgin; Lord, do thou
prepare and guide our ways and paths by the prayers of thy Saints, etc. But
Gregory proceeds further, even to a direct prayer; Saint Mary, pray for vt,
etc. And to the end that this might find a more gracious intertainment and
welcome, it was said, that there were some that had heard the Angels in the
celebration of a certain solemn Letanie, crying: Regina coeli laetare;
Rejoice thou Queen of heaven, etc. Gregor. l. 12. Comment. in Job. c. 13.
As also to establish this doctrine upon a more durable and firm foundation,
Gregory labored to race and blot out as much as he could that which had gone
before. For S. Augustine had said and proved by the Scriptures, that the Saints
did not intermeddle with humane affairs. Gregory to the contrary; Those that
see (says he) the charity and tender love of Almighty God, it is not
possible, that they should be ignorant of any thing. And this fell about the
year 600. Toward the year 680. the sixth general Council was held at
Constantinople, wherein was condemned the heresy of the Monothelits. They cite
against us out of this Council these words: After the worshipping of the one
only God, let men pray unto the Saints, to become intercessors unto his
Majesty. The East and West Churches were already become corrupt enough, even
in their being come to that state. But when we bring that Council against them
in an other instance, then they have learned to say, that there were no Canons
made in it, and that those nine which stand in the Tomes of the Councels are
fained. Damasc. l. 4. de Oithod. fid.
Damascen about the year 800. mult plied and enlarged this opinion, and that so
far as that he taught that we ought to adore and worship the holy Virgin,
calling her the Queen of al creatures, and the Saints the friends of God, to
the erecting of Churches unto the^, directly against S. Augustine; and Beda his
fellow in time did the same. For how could it be that the Saints should be
less pri^ed; when as the second Council of Nice, had ordained at the same
time, that their Images should be worshipped? But behold at the same time,
Claudius, B. The doctrine of Invocation of Sainth, opposed.
first of Auxer, and afterward of Turin; (the same with Adalbert the Scot,
reestablished the university of Paris in the time of Charles the great) did
oppose himself thereunto: Return he) you that are so blind unto the light,
Claudius Taurinens. aduers. Theod. Abba.
which inlightneth every man that comes into the world, to that light that
shines in darkness, and so, as that the darkness cannot comprehend or put it
out. What is the meaning of this, though Noe and Daniell, and Job, were in the
midst of you; but to the end, that no man should trust either to the merit, or
to the intercession of the Saints? Because that if we have not the faith, the
truth and the righteousness that they had, we cannot please God. Hear then O
you which are so foolish, amongst the people, which run to Rome, which seek
at Rome the intercession of the Apostle, hear I say, that which S. Augustine
has so often pronounced against you? etc. But Jonas Bishop of Orleance,
answered him after his death; neither in deed have we any part almost of the
writings of this Claudius of Turin, more then is by him alleged. But so it
is, that it was not grown to any worse condition, either with Charles the
great, nor with the Emperor Jews the Gentle, his Son, neither yet with the
French Church of his time. A manifest testimony thereof appears, in that the
holding of the contrary to the Invocation of Saints was not accounted heresy.
Synod. Paris. sub Lothar.
And in deed this Synod of Paris which we have alleged here above, having
to prove that Images, Non sunt colendae, neque adorandae, ought not to be
worshipped or adored, proved by the Ancient Fathers, that the Angels and
Saints, are not to be worshipped or adored. Now Invocation is a principal of
the true Adoration, of the true worship. In like manner the Letanie was not
then come to the point, that it is now, but comprehended and contained more of
the calling to remembrance, then of the inuocating of the Saints: For there is
a Letanie to be read in an old book in the Abbey of Corbee upon Weser in
Germany, which is of the year 900. or there about, as it seems, by the
mention which it makes of the Emperor Arnulph; and of Pope Steven, Bauo Abbas
Corbiensis, sub Arnulph. apud Krantzium in Metto. l. 2. c. 10
that should be the seventh. Wherein the Deacon contenteth himself with the
naming of the Saints: and the people and the Clergy in stead of answering,
Ora, or Orate pro nobis, that is to say, Pray thou, or Pray ye for us, does
answer throughout, Exaudi Christ, Hear us O Christ; O thou the redeemer of
the World, help them, etc. For example the Deacon said; Arnulpho regi vita and
victoria, God give life and victory to Arnulph the king: The people answers,
O Savior of the world, aid and assist him. Afterward the Deacon names, The
holy mother of God, S. Michael, S. Gabriel, S. Raphael, and S. John: The people
answers O Christ hear them, Anno. 1000.
etc. In the year 1000, whereas it had been accustomed to denounce their
Excommunications in the Church, in the power and authority of the Father, the
Son, and the holy Ghost, they began to mingle therewithal the Virgin Marie
and the Saints. And this is apparent by the Council of Rhemes, C. 12. By the
authority (says he) of the Almighty God, Council. Rhemens. c. 12.
etc. and by the mediation of the Virgin Mary, etc. We Excommunicate, curse
and condemn, etc. In Germany notwithstanding this form was not as yet
received; as is to be seen in that which Barnard Bishop of Halberstat
pronounces against the Emperor Otho, neither yet in the other agends of the
same age and time. But afterward, all the Saints were put into it, and so it
passes for the common and ordinary form. The absoluing likewise of
penitents, by the loosing key as they call it, Anno. 1100. Anselm. in lib. de
excellent. Virg Mar.
was conceived and uttered in these terms, to wards the year 1000. The
passion of our Lord Jesus Christ, the merits of the blessed Virgin of S.
Peter, of S. Paul, and of all the Saints, and furthermore, whatsoever good thou
shall do, or whatsoever ill thou shall suffer, work and procure the remission
of thy sins. About the year 1100, Anselme reasoned strongly, in a treatise
made of purpose of the excellency of the Virgin Mary: Christ (says the
Apostle) is the power and wisdom of God, in him are all the treasures of
wisdom and knowledge: but Christ is in Mary, therefore all the treasures,
etc. are in Marie. And by the same argument may be concluded the very same of
all the faithful, for he is said to dwell in the belieuers. In the mean
time, it is from hence, that he gathers all these goodly consequences: Quod
Domina, quod Mediatrix, quod Saluatrix: That she is the Lady of heaven and
earth, in the right of a mother, Queen of Angels, the repairer of mankind, and
by consequent the Mother, as God is the Creator, and by consequent the Father.
And it was at this time also that Hermanus Contractus, Conte of Vringhe^ in
Germany, did make the Salve Regina, which notwithstanding was not received
into the church of Rome, Anno. 1250.
til about 150. years after, in the time of Pope Gregory the ninth.

But would we see in the mean time a memorable example, The Inuocating of God
alone by Jesus Christ, retained in the co^forting of the sick and near unto
death. Anselm. in Epist. manuscript.
showing that these abuses came not in all at a blow; how this Invocation of
the Saints insinuated and crept into the Mass, was not as yet grown to the
corrupting of that consolation which men had, that were in the extremity of
death, and how God mercifully sparing his people, after all these impieties,
reserved and kept untouched their consolation in their salvation, by one only
Jesus Christ, to be soundly taught and delivered unto them, at the hour of
their death? It is found in the Epistles of this Anselme, that there was a
form of comforting the sick, which I have thought worthy to be set down
here even whole and entire such as it was. Do thou rejoice and cheer up thy
self (says the Priest to the sick party) that thou die in the faith of
Christ? The answer, yea. Do thou confess that thou have lived so wickedly
as that nothing is due to thy deserts, but everlasting punishment? A. yea. Art
thou heartily sorry and grieved for the same? A. yea. Do thou believe that
our Lord Jesus Christ died for thee? A. yea. Do thou give him thanks for
the same? A. yea. Do thou believe that thou can not be saved but by his
death? A. yea. Wherefore then, whiles thou possessest thy soul, repose thy
whole salvation in this his only death, put not thy trust and confidence in any
other thing, trust and commit thy self wholly to this death; cover thy self
with it only; with it only wrap thy self all over. And if the Lord God would
judge thee, say unto him, Lord, I set the death of Jesus Christ our Lord,
betwixt thee and my demerits: I offer and tender unto thee his merits, in
stead of that which ought to be in me, and is not. If he yet further reply
upon thee, saying that he is angry with thee, say unto him, Lord, I set the
death of our Lord Jesus Christ, betwixt me and thine anger. And this being
ended, let the sick party say three times; Lord, I commend my spirit into thy
hands.

Of the same vein is the difference which we observe between the life,
Bernard. in paruis Ser. 23. Idem Sermon. 15. Psalm. 91.
and the extreme sickness of S. Barnard. He says very excellently well
sometimes: He that will come, let him come after me; let him come by me, let
him come to me. After me says the Lord, for I am the truth: by me, for I am
the way: unto me, for I am the life, etc. Again: I will deliver him, because
he has trusted in me: Not (says he) in Sentinels or Nightwatches, not in
man, not in any Angel; but in me, expecting good from none, but me only. For
preservation and deliverance must not only be of me, but from me. And of the
Virgin Marie he says: Idem Ep. 174.
She has no need of false and counterfeit honor, being, as she is in the
midst and vpheaped measure of true and sound honor: It is not to honor her,
but to take her honor from her: The feast of the Conception was never well
instituted, etc. But it is as true that in other places he helps forward and
sets up this abuse, even so far as to say: Thou have O man a sure access
to God, where the Mother is before the Son, the Son before the Father, the
Mother showing unto the Son, her bosom and her breasts, the Son showing to
his Father, his fide and his wounds. Upon the point of death notwithstanding,
seeing himself drawn before the judgment seat of God, and Satan before him
his accuser, he remembers not any thing but the wounds of the Son; he has
quite forgotten the bosom of the mother. Gothfrid. in vita Berr ard. l. 5.
I confess (says he) that I am not worthy by my merits to obtain the
kingdom of heaven, but my Lord does hold it by a double title, both as his
inheritance from his Father, and as his purchase, by the price and merit of
his death and passion: he will content himself with the one, and bestow the
other upon me: And so by virtue of this gift, I give it to my self, I am not
confounded. As likewise he has said very excellently in an other place: I
seek my salve, in the wounds and stripes of my Lord, my merits in the mercies
of my God. The Breuiarie of Premonster
And likewise we read furthermorein the Breuiarie of the order of Premonster,
which was instituted in his time, these Latin rimes, in the Liturgy upon all
Saints day.

Adiuuent nos little merita,
Quos propria impediunt scelera?
Excuset eorum intercessio,
Quos propria accusat actio?
At tu qui eis tribuisti
Caele stis palmam triumphi,
Nobis veniam ne deneges peccati.
Shall we (says he) be helped by their merits which are hindered by their
own grievous crimes? Excused by their intercession, who are accused of their
own actions and works? But thou O Lord, which have given them the ensign of
celestial triumph, deny not unto us the pardon of our sins, The Valesians
opposing themselves.
etc. But whiles the abuse in the mean time was master of the plain and open
field, there was raised new forces by the Waldenses and Albigenses, which gave
a sharp assault, with great heat incountering the same, even to the drawing
of the matter to such a dispute and parle, as required for an indifferent
hearing of the same, an assembly of many grave and learned men in an open
Council; and not staying there, proceeded even to the filling of a great part
of France so far with the favoring and good liking of their matter, as that til
all manner of fraud and force did join and couple it self together, they could
never be persuaded to abandon and banish it out from amongst them; yea which
more is, to the giving of it such deep root (as the Histories of that time,
as well as the enemies themselves do witness) as that it ouerspread and
flourished in all the nations of Christendom.

Therefore amongst their Articles we read this for one: That there is but one
mediator, and that all inuocating and worshipping of men is but Idolatry. And
the foresaid histories do further add, that the doctrine of the Waldenses was
no new thing, but such as had continued ever since the time of the Apostles, at
the least ever since the time of Pope Syluester the first, that is to say, that
the change being come by succession of time into the Christian Church, they
should have retained the purity of the same amongst them. Histor. Vetus de
Waldensib.
And in deed a certain book of this date, says: That it was for three
respects, more dangerous then any other sect: The first, quia diuturnior,
because (says it) it was of longer time, for some are of judgment, that it
has continued ever since the time of Pope Syluester, some there are likewise
that say ever since the time of the Apostles. The second, because it is more
general, Quia generalior, for there is not almost any Country or nation,
wherein it has not seated it self. The third, because that others by being
blasphemous against God, do make men afraid of them: whereas this has great
appearance, that it proceeds of piety, in as much as the favorers thereof
live justly before men, do easily believe that which concerns God, and the
whole Creed, cleaving fast only to the Church of Rome, etc. And thus spoke
their enemies also: and this being once said, I would have to serve without any
further repetitions.

Now it is not credible, how this abuse holding by open force, the upper hand
of the truth, Lombard. l. 4. d. 55.
did in short time become horrible and fearful. Lombard from hence forth,
does put it down for a sentence, That the Saints make intercession for us, and
that both by their merits, because they fulfill wherein we come short: as also
by their affection, because they join themselves unto our vows. This hitherto
had not been uttered in any sort so hardly to be disgested. And furthermore
from henceforth all the Schoolmen do not only follow and approve what he has
said: but do labor to make it to be valewed still at more and more. As
Alexander Hales, Bonauenture, Thomas, etc. And their reason is, That Vltima
reducuntur in Deum per media, That the extremes cannot come to God but by
means and things of a middle quality. The very same reason that the Platonists
did allege for the intercession of their Gods and Semi-gods. As concerning
the question, whether the Saints do know the affairs of men or no, that also
they take upon them to determine, That they know all things in as perfect sort
as the Angels, in the beholding and seeing of God. The same that S. Gregory had
said as it were by the way. But what will they do with S. Barnard, who
maintains that the Saints are not received to enjoy the presence of God,
until the resurrection? And to Pope John the 22. whom W. Occam says, to have
so resolved him, Thom. Sum. q. 57. art. 5. and 12 art. 8.
as also to have labored to cause him to swear thereunto at Sorbone. And
finally, to S. Thomas who teaches, That the Angels by natural knowledge do
not understand the mysteries of grace; and that by that which they have in the
seeing of God, they do not know any more then it pleases him to reveal unto
them: and that for other matters, they know not either those that are
contingent, neither yet the thoughts of hearts? Being notwithstanding the
ordinary subjects, according to the doctrine of our adversaries, both of the
invocation of men, and of the intercession of Angels. But seeing they have
brought us to speak in their terms, ab extremo, ad supremum, per media,
behold and see the extremities whereunto they lead us. Antoninus Archb. of
Florence, teaches: Anton. part. 3. Sum t. 3. and 12. Idem part. 4. t. 15. 1.
Ioh. 2.
That Saints must be both inuocated and adored of all: that all those upon whom
the Virgin Mary casts her eyes, are necessarily justified and saved: that
Christ is over rough, in as much as he is both advocate and judge together: and
for that God has provided us of an aduocatesse, in who^ there is nothing but
mildnes. So that what is said in S. John: If we have sinned we have an
Advocate, etc. he turns it in plain words to be understood of the Virgin
Mary: Heb. 4.
and that which the Apostle to the Hebrews says unto us of Christ the high
priest, Let us draw near unto the throne of grace, etc. he will have it to be
understood of her: For Marie (says he) is the throne of Christ, Genes. 2.
etc. What shall I say more? The Seraphins (say they) would have retained Marie
as she ascended up to heaven: No (says she) it is not good that man should be
alone: (speaking of the eternal son, sitting at the right hand of the
father) I am given unto him for a help in the work of redemption by suffering
with him: and in the work of glorification, by making intercession, to the
end, that if he should threaten to drown the world, as in the deluge, I may
appear before him as the rainebow, to the end that he may remember him of his
covenant, etc. And when shall we see an end of these blasphemies?

Bernardine in his Mariall goes yet more boldly to work, Bernard. in Marial.
as if it were to make it worse: God (says he) said unto her in her birth; I
have given thee for a light unto the Gentiles, to the end that thou might be
our salvation to the end of the earth, a light for a revelation unto the
Gentiles, etc. The Prophet Esaias, or Simeon did they ever dream of this? Again,
All the graces that distill and drop down from the father and the Son upon us,
are derived and conueighed by the virgin the Mediatres betwixt God and men:
There is no grace comes from heaven but through her hands: All manner of
graces do enter into her, and come forth of her: They are in Christ, Tanqua^ in
capite influente, as in the head which does instill them: and in Marie, Tanqua^
in collo transfundente, as in the channel which does distribute them: she is
the Mediatresse of salvation, conjunction, justification, reconciliation,
intercession, and communication; etc. To be brief, the heavenly father has
given her the half of his kingdom; as was signified in the persons of
Assuerus and Esther; he having retained and kept justice to himself, to bestow
and distribute, but leaving his mercy with her to exercise the same: In so
much as we may appeal a foro iustitiae Dei, from the seat of Gods justice, to
the court of the virgin Mary's mercy.

And what shall we say then of her Letanies, of her Psalter, and of her
hours? Of her hours, wherein she is named, The Queen of mercy, wherein she
has broken the head of the serpent: which was spoken to our first parents, of
the only Son of God; wherein she alone has rooted all heresies out of the
world: where she is called, The repairer and savior of mankind: wherein is
asked of her generally whatsoever can and ought to be asked of the one only
God by Jesus Christ, as utterly denied unto all others: Impetra nobis veniam,
applica nobis gratia^, praepara nobis gloria^, the grant of forgiveness, grace,
and glory, etc. I have trembled and stood all afraid at the consideration of
her Psalter, wherein all that which David has spoken of God, the Father, the
Son, and the holy Ghost, is applied unto her, and that without any manner of
exception, throughout, even from the beginning unto the end, changing only
Dominu^ into Domina, the Lord into the Lady. Blessed is the man that loves
Marie, that fears her, that praises her name, that trusts in her, that
hops in her, etc. The heavens declare thy glory, the earth is thine, Psalm
19.24.31.51.52.53.56, 59.67.71.91.93.94 98.109, 111.131. etc.
and the fulness thereof: thou raignest with God for ever: blessed are they that
cherish thee, for thou will wash away their sins in thy mercies: have pity
upon me O mother of mercy, and according to the tenderness of thy mercies, wash
me from all mine iniquities. Thou wicked spirit why boast est thou thy self?
bow down thy neck under Mary's feet: O Lady break him to pieces with the
power of thy foot: Cast him down into the bottomless pit by thy might: save me
for thy names sake, and deliver me from mine unrighteousness: have pity upon
me for my heart is prepared to receive thy will: Thou have cast us off O Lord
for our sins, and have had pity on us again for the virgin Mary's sake. Let
Mary arise and al her enemies shall be scattered: Lord give thy judgment unto
thy Son, and thy mercy unto the Queen his mother. O Lady salvation and life
are in thy hand, etc. O how kind and good is God unto those that worship his
mother. God is the God of vengeance, but thou art the Queen of mercy: Come
and let us worship the Lady: let us praise the virgin that has saved us, let
us worship her, and let us confess our sins unto her, etc. The Lordraigneth,
Marie sits upon the Cherubins on his right hand. He that dwells under her
wing, is under a good protection, etc. The Lord has said unto my Lady: Sit
mother at my right hand, thou have delighted in goodness and holiness, and
therefore thou shall reign with me. Remember David O Lady, and all those
that call upon thy name. Praise the Lord for he is good, and his mercy is
distributed by Marie, etc. And when should I have done, seeing there are not so
many words in it as blasphemies? They have corrupted and marred after the same
manner the songs of the Prophets, of Simeon, of the holy virgin and the songs
also that are attributed unto Athanasius, and S. Ambrose, which are called by
their first words, Quicunque and Te 'Deum. My heart is rejoiced in my Lady,
because that he that is mighty, has done great things for me, by Marie his
mother, etc. My soul magnifieth my Lady, etc. Let now O Lord the servant of
Marie depart in peace, because mine eyes have seen the salvation of Marie,
which thou have prepared before the face of all people, a light to be revealed
unto the Gentiles, etc. Whosoever will be saved, let him know before all
things, that which he must firmly believe of Marie. Te matrem Dei laudamus,
We praise thee O mother of God, Doctrix.
mother of the divine Majesty, Lady of Angels, the Spouse and mother of the
eternal king, the promised by the Patriarchs, the truth of the Prophets, the
teacher of the Apostles, the mistress of the Evangelists, the Lady of the
world, the Queen of heaven, and therefore save thy people, etc. And as
concerning the Letanie made of purpose for her; she is therein prayed unto by
all these names and many other: so far as that she is therein called, The
true salvation, and the true blessedness, the length of charity, the breadth
of piety, unto whom the Angels obey: she is prayed unto to give all blessings,
as God: as also to preserve the Church, and Christian people. And in these
words, Te rogamus, audi nos, we pray thee to hear us. Of pardoning sins,
Propitia esto, parce nobis Domina, be favorable and gracious unto us, spare
and paraon us O Lady, etc. Of turning and putting away of evils, whether they
concern punishments, or faults: any manner of sins, any manner of
afflictions, Proverb. 8.
yea hell it self, in these words: Libera nos Domina, Deliver us our Lady,
etc. Likewise in certain prose that is sung unto her, she is summoned to
command the Son of God, in the authority of a mother: O pia paupera, pians
scelera, iure matris impera redemptori: Command in the authority of a mother
the Redeemer. To be brief, for an vpheap of all abomination, they have
attributed unto the virgin that which the holy Ghost had said of the eternal
Son of God, of the eternal wisdom; The Lord has possessed me in the
beginning of his ways, Proverb. 8.
before ever he created any thing, I was ordainea everlastingly, etc. And it is
read in this sense in the Romish Missall, upon the day of the Nativity. Leo
10. in ep. 17. Anno 15 4.
And Pope Leo the tenth in his Epistles written by Cardinal Bembo his
Secretary for them, calls her Deam Goddess; a title never heard of in any
of the former ages: thereby to add unto all this mass and huge heap this one
thing which was wanting, vz. the weathercocks. And these are the goodly
doctrines, contained in these goodly books, whereof all manner of Couents were
full: Marialia, Rosaria, Hortulus animae, Promptuarium discipul. etc.

Let us come unto the Saints. Alexander Halez and Bonaduenture have taught:
That they are Mediators of our salvation, that although they be sufficiently
rewarded for their merits, and not any more in case to merit: yet for the
manifold works of Supererogation which they have done, they have purchased so
great a place, as that they have not only merited blessedness and glory for
themselves, but also are able to relieve, and make supply for others: in such
sort, as that they which before were unworthy, are likewise very speedily
made worthy by their intercession. Now what is it that they have builded upon
this foundation? Verily, the very daughter and full representation of all
Paganism: if so be it be not some worse thing. Every nation, town, village,
and family is come to have his Saint: every estate, condition craft, and
di^ease, is become beholden and bound unto one or other. Thereby also they are
come to the canonizing of their Saints, imitating therein the Pagans, and by
so doing as much as lies in them they go about to make Gods of men, and to
deifie them, deifie I say, for they are their own phrases: They canonize them
whom they understand to be worshipped and prayed unto. Anton part. 5. Sum. t
12. c. 8
This is the definition that they make of their Saints. Again: There belong
seven things to a canonized Saint: The first, to be publicly held for a
Saint: The second, to be inuocated in the prayers of the Church: The third, to
have Churches and Altars: The fourth, an office and sacrifice in honor of him:
The fist, a fest iuall day: The sixth, an image with lights, in sign of
glory: The seventh, relikes and shrines. Add also, that they pray unto them
directly by the Lords prayer it self, being directed and framed for God the
Father: And yet they say, that this is not idolatry: That this is nothing else
but Doulia, and thus they think to pay God with their distinctions. But I
could wish them, that they would at the least bethink themselves and call to
mind at the least, that which is said unto them by their Pope Innocentius,
Innocent. l. 5. c. 4. Gulielm. Durand. epist. Mimatens.
That there are two sorts of worship, Latria and Doulia: the former proper
unto God the Creator: the latter for the creatures: but that to the first do
belong Churches, Altars, sacrifices, feasts, and ceremonies, etc. And Durand
has said the same: wherefore by their own reckning, it must needs be
idolatry.

And what shall we say in the end of their Frauncis and Dominicke, Francis.
Anno 1200.
in whose persons they have delighted and pleased themselves to abolish and
utterly extinguish so much as lies in them, both the merit and the name of
Christ? Barthol. de Pisis l. conformit.
Frauncis (say they in their book of Conformities) is a more worthy person
then John Baptist: John was a preacher of repentance; Frauncis both a preacher
and an ordainer of the order of Penitents: John a forerunner of Christ;
Frauncis both a forerunner, and a standerd bearer: John received the word of
repentance of Christ; Frauncis both of Christ, and of the Pope: quod est plus;
which is more: John his father had revelation from God by an Angel, concerning
him even what he should be; but of Frauncis it was declared both to his mother
and his servants by Jesus Christ himself what he should be: John was the
friend of the bridegroom; but Frauncis like unto the bridegroom himself:
John a rare and singular man in sanctimonie, and Frauncis in conformity: John
lifted up and set amongst the Seraphins; Fol. 39.
Frauncis in the same order and manner with John, but set moreover in the place
from which Lucifer was thrown, etc. Again, he is better then all the
Apostles: for they forsook nothing for Christ's sake, save some little ship;
Fol. 66.
but he left and forsook all even to his hosen. The virgin Marie and the
other Saints in heaven go in procession every one in his order; but this man
is lodged within the side of Christ: He comes forth by his wound with the
banner of the cross in his hand, for to conduct and guide them: This man is a
Jesus typicus, a figurative Savior, a crucifixus singularis, a singular
crucified man; who in sight has received the very same wounds that Christ,
and suffered the same pains: This is he that is via vitae, the way of life:
abusing that which our Lord said of himself: I am the way, the truth and the
life. This man is the image of Christ, as Christ is the image of his Father,
etc. And what more? Christus orauit, Franciscus exorauit, Christ did but pray,
but Frauncis prated and obtained. Happy is he that dies in Domino, in Christ:
yea he that dies (say they) in the habit of S. Frauncis, yea if he have but
his hand in the sleene of it, he is happy. Baptism does wash away original
sin: the hood of S. Frauncis much more: as often as you shall resolve to
continue the wearing of it, it is worth as much unto you as a new baptizing:
yea rather it is a new abolishment, not of original sin only, but of all
manner of actual sins. In a word we have seen written over the gates of the
gray friars of Bloys: Quaeretur peccatum illius, and non inuenietur; his sins
shall be sought for, but they shall not be found. The same that the Apostle
has said of one only Christ: and that the Prophet has said of the
abolishment of sins in his blood. Neither can they excuse these matters, in
saying that they are but some particular man's opinions, and not approved of the
whole Church of Rome: For the Popes, Gregory the ninth, Alexander the fourth,
and Nicolas the third, do ordain to be believed of all the faithful, upon
pain of being condemned as heretics, the scars and printes of S. Frauncis.
And Pope Benedict the twelft ordained that the day whereupon he received them,
should be kept holy. And Alexander the fourth in particular, Anton Archiep.
tit. 24. S. 10 Math. Paris Monach. Albanens. in hist. Anglic. in Henric. 3.
does take into the protection of the Church of Rome and his, Montem Aluerniae,
the mountain wherein this thing was said to be done. And here it is not to be
forgotten, that Bonauenture says, that when he was dead, these scarres and
printes were seen and acknowledged by many, in so much as that some of them
put nails into them. And Mathias Paris on the contrary, a Monk that lived at
the time of his death, of a longer standing and more ancient by forty years
then Bonauenture writes in his Chronicle, that there was not any manner of
print to be seen after his death. And yet the man was not to be suspected for
the matter, Dominick.
for he speaks as superstitiously as any of the rest. And have they said any
less of Dominick? Nay rather it belonged to them to incroach daily, and enter
deeper into blasphemy. And so much the more, because of the emulation raised
betwixt these two orders; and because that Dominick, who was the foremost in
time, seemed to come last in reputation and account, Anton. Archicp. in tit.
23. c. 11.
the Archb. Antonine therefore that was of this order, peiseth his miracles,
not against those of S. Frauncis, but against the miracles of our Lord, and
gives them the start and prerogative both for number, and for greatness. Christ
(says he) raised but three from death at all; Dominick at Rome only raised as
many; and 40. near to Tholosa, which were drowned on horseback in the river
Garona, besides infinite others. Christ after his resurrection went in to his
disciples the doors being shut: Dominick whilet yet he bare about this mortal
body, which is much more, went into the temple, the doors being fast. Now by
the way let us note, that this was by their own speech, either by the
propriety of a spiritual and glorified body, or else by an Almighty power.
And thus he goes through all the miracles of our Lord, always preferring and
giving S. Dominick the upper hand. To be short, Christ said after his death:
All power is given to me in heaven and in earth: and verily (says he) this
power was not in a small measure communicated and bestowed upon Dominicke over
all things in heaven, earth or hell, and that even in this life: for he had
Angels to attend upon and serve him, the elements obaied him, and the devils
trembled under him. And this he lays down in many examples. He adds
further, that at Rome there were two images, the one of S. Paul, and the other
of S. Dominick: and that at the feet of the former was written: Per istum itur
ad Christum; by this men go to Christ: and at the feet of the latter: Facilius
itur per istum, but more easily and readily by this man, that is to say, by
Dominicke. That is, says Antonine, Because that the doctrine of Paul and the
Apostles induced and persuaded men to believe: but Dominicks to observe and
keep the councels, Which is a shorter course and cut. And thus you may already
see, that he was more then S. Paul and all the Apostles. But what shall we say
now of that which follows? Quia (says he) Domino nostro similis est,
Dominicus aptissime denominatus est, very fitly and rightly was he called
Dominicke, because he was like Domino, to our Lord. And he was possessiuelie in
possession, that which our Lord was authoritatiuely in authority: for the Lord
said, I am the light of the world; and the Church sings of Dominick, you are
the light of the world. The Prophets bear witness Domino, unto the Lord, and
to Dominicke also. Zachary 11. I have chosen me two rods; the one I have
called Decorem, beauty; that is to say, the order of Saint Dominicke: the
other Funiculum, a cord or band, that is the order of the Gray friars: (thus
they abuse the scripture) Dominus, that is to say, our Lord, was borne on the
bare earth, but the virgin for fear of cold laid him in a manger: Dominicus
from his swathing clothes, abhorring the pamperinges and tender delights of
the world, was found oftentimes by his nurse, lying all naked upon the bare
earth. For our Lord there appeared a star in beauen, in token that he did
lighten the whole world: In the forehead likewise of Dominicke, as he was
baptized the Godmother espied a star, signifying a new light to be borne into
the world, etc. The prayer of our Lord was ever more heard when he would: for
in the garden, that which he asked of a fleshly desire he would not obtain
according to reason: But Dominick never demanded any thing of God which he did
not wholly enjoy according to his own desire. Dominus that is, our Lord loved
us, and washed us from our sins in his blood: Dominicke through a perfection
of charity, took every day three disciplines or corrections from his own
hand, not with a cord, but with an iron chain, even to the causing of his
blood to run down: One for his faults, though they were very small; another
for those that were in Purgatory; and the third for them that lived here in
the world, etc. And thus this Archbishop Antonine draws this comparison
through all the parts of the life of our Lord. In a word our Lord being to
depart out of this world, promises the Comforter unto his disciples: And
Dominick says unto his; Be not grieved, for I will do you more good in the
place whither I go, then I have done here: for there you have me a better
advocate then any other that you can have there, etc. And what shall now become
of that which S. John says unto us: If we have sinned, we have an advocate
even Jesus the righteous? etc. And notwithstanding these blasphemies are
authorized by the Church of Rome, for the good establishment that they have
procured unto the Popes their authority: for Gregory the ninth, canonized
Dominicke in the year 1223. and ordained a festiual day to be kept unto him,
authorized also his rule and order, and bestowed privileges upon the same:
(Now he that writ these things was an Archbishop of Plorence, high accounted
of amongst our adversaries. Albert. Krant. in hist. Saxon. l. 9. c. 7. Abb.
Trithem. in Chronic. Hirsaughtiens.
But in the mean time they are wary enough not to tell us any thing amongst
the rest of their miracles, of that which Krantzius reports unto us: That one
Bernard a Iacobine, Confessor and Chaplen to the Emperor Henry the 7. did
poison him in the host. Whereupon says Trithemius the Abbot, Pope Clement the
fifth enjoined them for a mark of reproach and ignominy, that the Priests of
their order from thence forward should never receive or deliver the communion
but with the left hand. An example for the Popes of these times to ordain, by
the same reason that they should as yet be restrained from the use of their
right hand, in detestation of the murder committed by friar Clement a
Iacobine, upon the person of K. Henry the third. In a word, to come to our
purpose.) Bullae fraternitatum ordinis Francise. and Dominic.
To every one that would join themselves, not with the Covent, but to be of
the fraternity only of S. Francis or S. Dominicke, etc. For to merit the
kingdom of heaven, for to be able to ransom and redeem their own souls,
and the soulet of their friends: (for these are the express terms of the
Bull:) There are Bulls of fraternity given unto the Provinces, by which they
are made capable, as well in life as in death of the merits of the whole
Covent, and of all the friars in the province, purchased by their Masses,
prayers, sermons, fastinges, contemplations, vigiles, abstinences, Cloister
disciplines, devotions, singinges, lessons, labors, etc. About this time also
there was in England one Thomas Becket, who was slain, for having traitorously
attempted to have withdrawn the Clergy from their obedience unto the king.
It was concluded by the full College of Sorbone at Paris, that he was worthy
of eternal death: the Clergy notwithstanding caused him to be canonized, by
Alexander the third. And in derision of the blood of Christ, he was there
prayed unto in these words: Tu per Thomae sanguinem, quem pro te impendit,
Fac nos Christ scandere, quo Thomas ascendit.


That by the grace and favor purchased by the blood of Thomas, he would make
us ascend whither Thomas is ascended, etc. and this was about the year 1220.
And who can then but be ashamed for their sakes, for that as yet in the time of
so great light they are not ashamed themselves? verily it is not to be
concealed or hidden: that there have been some that might seem to have blushed
in their souls, as being able to have taught better things, if they durst.
Alex. Halez. q. 91.
Alexander Halez and Bonauenture likewise after all their wanderings, turn
back again to our Maxims. Alexander: We must not invoke or adore any but
one God only, etc. The Saints ought rather to be reckned, ex part orantiu^,
quam illius qui oratur, as assisting our prayers by their own, and not to be
prayed unto themselves. Bonauent. in l. 3. Sentent. Anno 1360.
Bonaue^ture likewise, We must be wary in our large setting forth, and
commending of the excellency of the mother, that is of the holy virgin; least
we impair and diminish the glory of the Son: and by so doing provoke her to
anger, seeing she delights more to have her son praised and magnified then
her self, she being but a creature, and he the creator. And whereas there were
some that replied upon him, that the honor of the mother returned to the honor
of the Son; But therefore (says he) we ought not to give unto the mother all
that which is due unto the son, etc. And this was much spoken of both in his
time, and in the Covent of S. Francis. Wicklif. apud Thom. Waldens tom. 3. tit.
12. c. 121. and 124.


John Wicklife shortly after went further: for amongst many abuses of the
Church of Rome, he condemned this openly by the scriptures, and maintained the
same with the peril of his life, against all those of the faculty of divinity
in England. His words are: This is and seems to be a sottishness, to leave
the fountain which is more ready to our hands, to seek the troubled brooks,
and those further from us, etc. Again: Who would make I know not what Scurram,
knave (that is the Latin of the time) his Mediator, when he may freely speak
unto the King? And yet notwithstanding his thus writing he ceast not to be
very well entreated of king Edward the third, and after some small time of his
living an exile in Bohemia, to die an old man in his own house, leaving behind
him a number of disciples of every estate and condition in England, Anno 1416.
in whom his doctrine lived after him, until such time as things grew to that
extremity wherein they now stand. We may say the same of John Hus, and Jerome
of Prage, put to death contrary to the promise made them of safe conduct, by
the Council of Constance; wherein the good fathers in stead of being invited
and won to the reformation of the Church, both by the truth of their doctrine,
and the constancy of their faith; did think it better to have them the
heraldes of their condemnation by the just judgment of God, then of their
repentance before men. And further as if they would work a further despite,
they turned in the same Council that goodly hymn which the Christian Church
had made for the holy Ghost to the virgin Marie: and in stead of Veni sancte
spiritus, etc. they made it, Veni matter gratiae, etc. wherein they call her,
the fountain of mercy, the light of the Church, the salvation of those that
call upon her, the Mediatrix betwixt God and men, the port of S. Peter's ship,
the death and destruction of heresies, etc.

But in the mean time, as in this age wherein we live, men begin willingly and
wittingly to cast out this dung and filthiness, with others such like, the
stink whereof grows so strong even unto themselves that have made it, as
that they are constrained to stop their nose, and to endeavor themselves to
cover it as much as lies in them. Viues in August de ciuit. Dei. l. 8. c. vit.
Viues that famous Spaniard had rather to cause them to be detested, then
covered and smoothed over in saying: That he could find no difference betwixt
the opinion that the Christians have of their saints, and that which the
Pagans have of their Gods, when as they give them the same honor that is given
unto God himself. And if there had been any number found of the same zeal
with him at that time, he could have hoped well to have obtained a remedy
against idolatry. But certainly the greater part had rather against their own
consciences of a carnal wisdom run and betake themselves to disguise and
smooth over the matter. Some saying that we ought not to pray unto saints, to
obtain any help of them, or yet any mercy, but only to be assisted by their
prayers to obtain them of God. And this was in one word to ouerturne all
their Hours, Psalters, Letanies, and prayers before alleged, which were
directly made unto the virgin Marie; and that, that she might not only
procure, but give the things prayed for. Wicelius.
Other some more boldly; That we ought not at all to pray unto them,
invocation being an honor due unto God alone: but only Compellare, to
solicit them that they would remember us unto him, as we use to stir up the
living to succor and help us with their prayers. And other some do yet go
further, That this invocation was nothing but a figure of Rhetoric, by which
we were admonished, that the saints deceased, as triumphant members of the
Catholic Church, have care in heaven on the members which are as yet
warfaring here below: after the manner spoken of in the song of the three
children in the furnace: Daniel 3. ex Graeco.
Ye spirits and souls of the righteous, bless ye the Lord, etc. All these
false couers and colorings notwithstanding being evident testimonies, not so
much of an unwillingness to come to reformation, as of a shamefastness to be
overtaken and detected of this spiritual whoredom. Cassander therefore and
Hofmeisterus more freely, if so be they had but practiced it in the Church, as
they believed and held it in their hearts: Cassander verily, who after he had
excused the Church of Rome to Maximilian the Emperor as much as he could even
upon this article, that Orate was as much as, Vtinam oretis, Pray ye, that is,
I wish and desire that you would pray, says notwithstanding; That he makes
not in his own behalf any prayer but unto God by Jesus Christ: and that he
accompteth that the most infallible way. Hofmeister, who after he had gathered
whatsoever he could out of the old writers, August de vis^t^t. infirmotu, si
eius est. l. 1. c. 2.
concludes with these words of Saint Augustine: I shall speak more boldly and
joyfully to my Jesus, then unto any one of the holy spirits of God, etc.

But what do our fathers of Trent say here: after the long looking wherewith
they have made us to look for reformation? Do they allow at the least these
expositions, these mitigations? or do they bring some better of their own?
Neither, but on the contrary they institute and ordain, that we should call
upon the Saints by prayer to help us, Suppliciter, humbly beseeching them
upon our knees: and that we should betake our selves, not to their prayers
only, but to their help and succor, declaring all such as have any other
opinion, to be wicked and impious. And the Catechism made by the authority of
the said Council, says plainly, Christians worship Angels, but not as God is
worshipped: we must pray unto the Saints, in as much as by the grace and merit
purchased by them, God does deal well with us etc. And Cardinal Hosius a man
approved of them; Romans 8.
to such as allege S. Paul; (That we cannot call upon any but him in whom we
believe) answers lustily; That we must also credere in Sanctos, believe in
Saints. What reformation can there be from the^, who after such enormous faults
laid open and discovered by the light of Christendom, do wilfully make
themselves blind, and yet will not have themselves accounted of, as having
failed in any point? And yet furthermore they join thereunto another notorious
pranke of maliciousness: which is, their causing to be raced out in good
books, Index page 8.10.24 25.30.31.36.38.47.49.50.
whatsoever might check or control their proceedings, for so they have
resolved and set it down, as appears by their Index Expurgatorius. As for
examples: The place where S. Augustine distinguishes betwixt the honor due
unto God, and that of Saints, the interpreter has given this note: This, that
is to say, that which is to be reserved to God alone, is now given to all the
Saints; Deleatur, let it be raced and put out. In the Tables of S. Augustine,
S. Chrysostom, and S. Jerome their works, there were many places noted, which
directed us unto such sayings in their works, all speaking against the
invocation of Saints: upon the heads whereof were set, Deleantur. In Erasmus
and Faber Stapulensis, famous and worthy men in their profession: when they
say, Deum solum omnis oration and adoratio decet, Unto God alone belongs all
prayer and worship: is it not written, Torcular calcaui solus, Index page
49.50.55.59.61.255.
I have trodden the wine press alone: All the Saints are nothing, if the
question be once of true worship: all our own works and those of our
fathers, from the beginning of the world are no better, etc. Deleantur. And
Cassander likewise, where he shows how the old father did use the words,
Merit, and to merit: That, When they said, Orate, this was as if they had
said, Vtinam oretis, etc. Deleatur. But what reasons will there satisfy these
men, if they need not any other answer to them, but the racing and utter
blotting of them out? or what witnesses, if there be nothing but away with them
to burning?

CHAP. XVI. That man cannot merit eternal life for himself, much less for
another: where the consideration is first of man's state before regeneration.
Our adversaries, as they say, do pray unto Saints, because they make
intercession for them unto God: but we have already destroyed this foundation.
And they make intercession for them, say they, by the power of their merits,
and that not only for the procuring of them gifts and graces in this life, but
also eternal happiness in that to come. For which cause we have next to show
unto them, (that so we may not leave any thing doubtful:) That no man can
merit with God, not eternal life, or rather not the least grace of this frail
and transitory life, not for any other man, no not for himself. And this we
will deal in according to the three estates of man, Man in his first estate
could not merit. Genes. 1. Ephesians. 4. Colos. 3. Psalm 19.
his integrity or innocence, his fall or transgression, and his regeneration.

Of his integrity it is said: That God had created him, according to his own
image: and S. Paul expounds it to consist, in righteousness, holiness, and
the knoweldge of God, etc. That he had placed him in Paradise, in a place
abounding with all felicity: which David calls, placed in honor. In so much
that he held and had both his being, his graces and his glory, at the good
pleasure of his Creator, of his mere, free, and vndescrued goodness. The
ability to merit might have been great; the good deeds only considered: but
then what ability or power can there be to merit of him, of whom he holds
all, of him, for whom a man can do nothing? Let us admit then, that our first
father had used all these graces perfectly well; that he had possessed them in
such fear (...) awe as he should; yea and that he had fulfilled the law, as
naturally he might, yet had he been able to say after all this (but with the
same pride which cast him down from his high and glorious estate it self
alone) I have deserved that God should yet further give me this; yea, that he
should continue unto me, what he has already given me? If we do not
wrongfully name and call our merit, that pleasure which it pleases God to
take, in adding and bestowing graces upon his, even grace for grace, and glory
for glory, to deserve well of us, if I may so say, and that so exceeding
bountifully and liberally, as that we are not able to merit any thing of him?
So then here is place for that, Job. 41.1.
which God says in Job: Who is it that gave me first, and I will repay him
again? The same also which S. Paul says; What is it that thou have, which
thou have not received? And if thou have received it, 1. Cor. 4.7.
why boastest thou thy self, as if thou had not received it, etc. And the
second Council of Orange, held about the year 450. does conclude in these
words: Man's nature, Council. Arans. c. Can. 19. Man a great deal lesseable
after his fall.
even in his integrity, could not keep his integrity, without the help of
God, etc.

But after he had fallen and corrupted his ways, being the second state that
our first father fell into, we became in far worse and harder case. Man even
in his integrity could not in respect of God merit or deserve any good thing:
but now in the days of his corruption, he cannot choose but merit, yea he
cannot merit any thing but the wrath of God, his curse and eternal death. For
being become sin and transgression, it has corrupted the most noble parts,
both of his humane body and divine soul; making the will to be the slave of
unbridled appetite, understanding of imagination unto all evil, and both of
them faulty and corrupted in themselves, the will estranged from the love of
God; and the understanding from the having of the knowledge of him, both the
one and the other carried from their natural and one only good state, to the
contrary, with all their power and ability, even to will and know that which
is displeasing unto him, and hurtful to themselves. Man now in this estate,
what can he do? what can he but do amiss? And notwithstanding this is the
state of all men in themselves since the fall, no man to be excepted. God
pronounces this general sentence in Genesis; Genel. 6. Job. 14. Psalm. 51.
All the thoughts of the heart of man, are set upon evil continually. The
most holy do most freely confess it: Job, Who can draw any thing that is pure,
from that which is defiled? Not one. David, Behold I was begotten in iniquity,
and my mother has conceived me in sin: and therefore he prays unto God to
create in him a new heart. Ioh. 3.6.
Christ in the Gospel; That which is begotten of flesh is flesh, and that
which is begotten of the spirit is spirit: If a man be not borne again, he
cannot enter into the kingdom of heaven. Romans 7.18. 2. Cor. 3.5. Ephesians. 1.
And Saint Paul expounds it: Because that in the flesh dwells no good:
seeing that the natural man does not comprehend that which is of the spirit
of God: And because, That we are naturally deadin sins, our works then are
both dead and deadly: and to bring us to bring out any other, it cannot be
without the working of a miracle: Ephesians. 2.5. Romans 6.8.
it is requisite that we should be raised again: And it is God only that
must do this. Because, says he moreover, that We are children of wrath: That,
All the desires, and all the understanding also of our flesh, (which we make so
much of) is enmity against God. Prou. 10.
And without exception: For, There is no man (says Solomon) that can say, Romans
5.17. 1. Cor. 15.
My heart is clean: I am without sin. And the Apostle more expressly: All men
have sinned and are dead in Adam. By a man sin entered into the world into all
men, and by sin, death, etc. Yea, into Moses the meekest of all other men:
Thou have set before thy face, Absconditum nostrum, our sin that was hidden
from us. This natural viciousness, which like unto a natural disease is
hidden from us, is less perceived or felt of us. P^ l. 51. Psalm. 116. Romans 7.
and 14. re^^. 23.
And into David, a man according to Gods own heart: Create (says he) in me
a new heart: Because the heart of man is altogether perverted; Ab occultis
meis mundame; Cleanse me from that which is hidden from me. And into S. Paul
an elect vessel of God; The law (says he) is spiritual, and I am carnal,
sold under sin: I see a law in my members, fighting against the law of my
understanding, and leading me captive to the law of sin, which is in my
members. Wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from the body of this
death? etc. Into S. John Baptist, Luke 2.
the greatest amongst them that are borne of women, who says unto our Lord; I
have need to be baptized of thee: that is to say, to be washed, to be
regenerate by thy spirit, etc. And into the holy virgin likewise: for she
acknowledged her low and base estate, she magnified nothing but the only mercy
of God; she placed her self amongst them that being hungry are filled with
good things: she rejoices in God which is her Savior; so far is she off
from disclaiming her part in the salvation promised in Jesus Christ, the
author of the salvation which is in her. And in deed the Apostle to the Hebr.
Hebr. 7.
has not separated or excepted from sin any besides Jesus Christ alone: The
holy virgin likewise was subject to the law of purification ordained in the
Church, a sign of the inward purification which God requires in all our
actions, Romans 11.32.
to the end that this word may abide true: That God has shut up all under
sin; That no man also should think to be excluded from that which follows:
That he has notwithstanding showed mercy unto all: That this, that all the
Saints have been saved, even the virgin Marie her self, comes of his free
grace, of the riches and bountifulness of his great mercies.

Now our adversaries that will not be called Pelagians, How the adversaries do
extenuate original sin.
do agree in outward show unto this corruption of mankind, but when we come to
lay the sore open and naked, they are as it were afraid of taking some harm:
they make the malady as light and little as they can, fearing to be too much
bound unto God, not considering how that for a man to lay open his wounds
before him, is to heal them; to confess our sins freely and franckly to
him, is to have them quit and forgiven: whereas the hiding and covering of them
does make them mortal: to deny, conceal, or smooth them over, is to cast
himself prisoner and captive into hell, and eternal fire, until he have
paid the uttermost farthing. Pighius therefore lets not shamelesly to say,
Albert Pigh. de peccat. orig.
that the punishment of Adam seized upon all his posterity, as one bond man
begets another, but that his sin was not transfused and conueighed into
his children. What is there more contrary unto the whole scripture then this?
Yea how is it possible, that this man should have so little profited in the
knowledge of himself? Andradius a true interpreter of the ambiguities and
doubts arising in the Council of Trent, teaches; That concupiscence is in
nature corrupted, altogether such as it was when nature was in her integrity,
save that in the state of integrity it was repressed by a supernatural gift of
original righteousness, which did repress and keep it under, which God has
taken away in the first man, and so from all other men in him, as a punishment
of his sin: in such sort as that this concupiscence is not sin in men,
because it is not against any law of God: or if it be, that it is the least of
all other sins, in as much as it is only some small disorder in nature. But
how can this fancy agree with Saint Paul? with this law of the members which
makes us servants of sin? Sin, whose wages is no other then eternal
death. But there is some pleasure (in respect of these different opinions) to
hear what the old fathers say handling this question, against the heretics
of their times, as those who are by so much the less to be suspected in this
cause, by how much they have been the more renowned and testified of for their
godliness, and yet have not ceased to acknowledge the infirmities of their
humane nature. Testimonies out of the fathers. Ambr. in epist. ad Rom c. 5.
tom. 5. Idem de vocat. Gent. l. 1. c. 3. tom. 2. Idem in Apol. David. c. 11.
Notet Pighius.


S. Ambrose: It is most plain and manifest, that all have sinned in Adam, as
in the Mass: by him therefore we all become sinners, even as we do all come of
him. He has lost the benefit and privilege by sin, etc. Again, Before we
be borne, we are defiled by contagion: before we enjoy the light, we receive
the loss of our original goodness, in as much as we be conceived in sin, etc.
And if the child that is but one day old be not without sin, much less the
days of the mothers conception. We are all therefore conceived in sin of our
fathers and mothers: we are borne in their trespasses, and even the very infant
bears about it his pollutions. And if thou doubtest from whence this comes
so to pass, he makes it manifest. Hence it is (says he) that we are
mortal; from hence springs not so much the multitude of our miseries, as of
our heinous sins and crimes; our faith to be lost, our hope far removed,
our understanding blinded, and our will captiuated. And what becomes then of
the power and virtues of the not regenerate, of such as continue still and
dwell in the corruption of their nature? Without the worship of the true God
(says he) even that which seems virtue, is vice: without God it is not
possible for any man to please God: And he that pleases not God whom can he
please but the Devil? But to come as near to the quick as may be is there any
remainder of goodness abiding in man, whereby he may relieve and raise up
himself again? Idem Ambros. de vocat. Gent. l. 1. c. 5. Opere suo, opus suum
reparat.
Nay, nay, but on the contrary; No man (says he) is found having any thing in
himself, whereby he may recover his former place and excellency: Man will
never be able to turn back again to God, if God himself do not turn and
convert him. The grace of our Lord by his work, that is to say, by the
operation thereof repaireth his work: The will of man has nothing left of all
the powers thereof, save only a power and ready inchnation to destroy it
self, periculi facilitatem, etc.

Gregorius Nyssenus; Gr^^. Nyss. l. de o^at.
Man forsook and revolted from him, who had made him, and betook himself to
the enemies side, that is to say, to the Devil: whereupon his freedom and
power changed of themselves, and his wicked and ungodly will into a grievous
and dangerous servitude and thraldom unto sin: Then insued the abolishing of
the image and figure of God, which was before imprinted, even from our first
creation in us: Add hereto the loss of the groat. By which the scripture does
teach us, that there is not of all the men that are so much as one to be found
that lives one only day without spot. And this is the cause, why we pray,
forgive us our trespasses: although he were a Moises or a Samuel, seeing that
the same speech of repentance that agreed with Adam, is common to all: to the
end that the Lord may save us by grace, in granting unto us the blotting out
and abolishment of our sins. And we need not for the finding out of the same,
enter into the consideration of nature in general: for every man entering into
his own censcience, may find how needful a thing it is to crave merci^.

Chrysostom: Chrysostom. in Genel. hom. 29. tom. 1.
The first man by the decree of God, by his sin did incur and draw upon
himself the sentence of death, and has past it over and conueighed it to his
whole posterity, etc. The second man is come down from heaven, he alone
abiding without sin, and not owing any thing to death, that so he might be
free amongst the dead, and that death might be condemned in his death. Again,
The nature of this pestilence took his beginning from one body, and has now
spread it self all over into every man. Idem in M^^^. ^om. 33. tom. 2
And if thou demand what manner of plague it is: When sin entered (says he)
then came the downfall of our liberty, for it corrupted the power given us by
nature, it brought in servitude and bondage, etc. Even such a pesti^ence. as
that such as are infected therewith, are not able to do any thing that is
ought worth. ^em ^^^m. 6. (...) and ^^a (...). Fla. (...) de (...) Idem l. de
nature and great. c. 3 de ^id ad Pet^um, c. 23. Idem pa^sim. I^e^ cp. 107. Idem
contr. Iul. Pelag. l 4.
For says he in another place: The heathen though they wrought good works,
yet they wrought them not truly good, because they did them not in any
consideration that they had of God, but for to be reputed, or because that
goodness is good, or for the conseruing of h^mane society, etc.

But Saint Augustine against the Pelagians has handled this matter, and ripped
it up to the bottom, as the thing (says he) wherein consists the sum of
all Christian religion: Hold fast (says he) that every man which is conceived
by the carnal comunction of man and woman together, is borne in original
sin, subject to wickedness and villanic, and subject to death, and by this
nature the child of w^ath, etc. And therefore this nature of man from the time
of his birth has need of a Physician, because it is nothing sound, etc. But
mortally pestered, as is to be seen in the beadroll of evils, which he
attributes unto it; That is, the loss of free will, thraldom by sin,
ignorance and maliciousness, banishment from the kingdom of heaven, and the
decree of eternal death. Whereupon he says; We cannot be relieved, if by
grace we be not borne again in Christ. What then? and what shall become of so
many goodly virtues of the Pagans? Let it never be imagined (says he) that
there can be any true virtue in him that is not just: let it never be imagined
that there is any truly just, if he live not ex fide, by faith. Fabricius his
torments shall be more easy then Catilines, not because he was a good man, but
because he was not so wicked. Without faith it is impossible to please God: but
they have not expressed any faith in their works, neither therefore had they
any in their hearts, etc. The man says he in another place, must first be
changed before his works be changed. Antequam iustificetur impius, quid est
nisi impius? Idem sermon. 12. de verb. Dom. Idem cp. 106.
Before the wicked man be justified, what is he but a wicked and ungodly man,
etc. Can there then be any thing in man, whereby he may help himself to come
unto God, except he be first changed and regenerate by his spirit? And where
becomes then our free will? Hearken: Man (says he) abusing his free will,
Idem in Enchilid. c. 30.
has lost both himself and his free will, for as he which kills himself,
in killing of himself lives no more, nor has any power to raise himself to
life again, having once slain himself: so man in sinning by his free will;
and sin becoming conqueror, has lost his free will: For of whom a man is
overcome, his servant he is: and therefore man cannot be free and at liberty
to work justly, if he be not delivered from the thraldom of sin, and made
the servant of righteousness. But how shall this liberty be purchased and
restored to man again, being sold, given up, and captiuated, etc. if he be
not ransomed by him who has said: If the Son deliver and set you free, you
shall be truly free, that is to say, if he cast you not in a new mould by his
grace, to be new creatures in Christ? Idem de spirit. and liter. tom 3. Tu non
po^u^sti in te, n^si perdere te. Idem ad Bonif. l. 1. c. 3. Idem de fide, ad
Petr. Diaco
etc. And therefore these are his ordinary Maxims: Free will avails us
nothing, neither stands it us in any stead, it has no power at all, except
it be to sin. Thou have nothing resting in thee, but the means of destroying
thy self, neither do thou know to find thy self, except he that made
thee do seek thee up. Yea (says he) if he do not draw thee, that is to
say, if he give thee not to believe in Christ, a power that has no iotte of
free will; a power which is not but from God alone. For he concludes in
another place: Every man is borne in original sinnne by consequent the child
of wrath: and from that wrath no man can be saved but by the faith of the
Mediator: And no man can repent himself here, if God do not inlighten him, if
by his free and undeserved mercy he do not convert and turn him unto him.
Prosp. Aquit. ad Capitul. Vincent.
Prosper Aquitanus, By the wound of original sin the nature of all men was
corrupted and killed in Adam, whence is sprung out the disease of all
concupiscences and lusts, and against the which there is no other remedy but
the death of Christ, etc. Yea (says he) a disease that he would needs have,
and which by him was needful for us. For (says he) to him, not to sin, was
no other thing then not to be willing to sin: Idem de vita contemplat. c. 2.
but it is not enough for us to be willing to live without reprehension, our
will being vicious, and hindered by our feeble and faint possibility: that
which was in him of pleasure and choice, is become to us a necessity, even to
sin. And if you say any thing to him of the works of infidelles, he
answers you in these verses. Idem in epigram. 81. and in l. de ingrat. and
passim.
Per omnes calls errat sapientia mundi,
Et tenebris addit, quae sine luce gerit.


This light which he calls faith when he says in another place: Omne etenim
probitatis opus, nisi semine verae
Exoritur fidei, peccatum est, nique reatum
Vertitur; and stirilis cumulat sibi gloria poenam.


Cyrillus Alexandrinus; He that is become thrall to the servitude and slavery
of sin, although that he have cast himself of his own free will into this
miserable slavery, cannot notwithstanding shake off this yoke when he
pleases, he must seek deliverance in another, that is, in the Son of God.
Let us never make trial of, or attempt any other way for the recovering of our
liberty, for by him alone is granted our full freedom from sin; to the
end that sin may not rule or reign any more in our mortal bodies, and
that in the world to come it may not find any place in us. From whence in two
words, we gather thus much; That in our own nature we are the servants of
sin; That it reigns in us without any gainsay, to the procuring of the
punishments that are after this life, if we be not renewed in Christ. Petr.
Diac. etc. Episc. Orient. ad Fulgen. etc. Episc. Afric. Damnatur mortis paena.


Petrus Diaconus ad Fulgentium: Adam having willingly transgressed the law of
God, is by his just judgment condemned to suffer the punishment of death; and
is all^ holly and through^ut, that is to say, both in body and soul, changed
into worse; and having lost his own freedom, is become a slave to serve the
filthy drudgerie of sin. Thereupon it is, that no man comes into this
world free from the bonds of sin, except he who for the unloosing of these
bonds, was begotten after a new kind of conception, the Mediator of God and
men, Jesus Christ. For what can base and vile man beget, but that which is base
and vile? And therefore as every man is of Adam, ^oret Pighius.
so by Adam every man is the servant of sin, Romans 5. etc. And such deceive
themselves as say, that death but not sin has passed throughout mankind;
when as there is not one of all the sons of men which is delivered from this
damnation and death, but by the grace of the redeemer, etc. without this grace
a man might think and desire humane things; but he could not either think of
or have any will unto the things concerning God. For the first and principal
foundation thereof, is to believe in the Lord of glory crucified. This comes
not from the liberty of our free will, or natural will: for flesh and blood
do not reveal the same, but the heavenly father, to whom he will, drawing him
unto this true liberty, not by a violent necessity, but by a gentle infusing
of his holy spirit, by which we believe and say, that Jesus Christ is the
Lord: which no man can say by the liberty and freedom of his will, but only
by the holy Ghost, etc. This is the same with that which the Bishops of the
East did write unto the Bishops of Afric.

S. Barnard; Bernard. de great. and liber. arb. Libertas a peccato.
In the fall, Adam fell from his not being able to sin, to his not being able
to do any thing but sin, having altogether lost the liberty of taking
advise and counsel, etc. as also that which he had of forbearing to sin. And
this loss happened unto him by the abusing of the liberty of his will, etc.
Being fallen from his will, it is not still remaining free for him, to raise up
himself again by the same. For although at this day be would do it, yet the
case so stands with him, as that it is not in his power not to sin. It must
be Christ that must inspire and indue him with new virtue by his restoration:
that the Lord may transform us into this image; howbeit even then our
perfection comes not in this life, but in the life to come, etc. And he is
full in all his books of such places, which shall hereafter be seen, as better
opportunity serves.

Peter Lombard says: Lomb. l. 2. d. 25
After sin, till there be a restoration by grace, man is overcome and
pressed of concupiscence, and has infirmity to do evil, but he has no
grace to do good: And therefore he can sin, but he cannot cease to sin,
and that damnablie, etc. Again, In that Adam has sinned of free will, and
that sin has overcome him, he has lost his free will. Libertatem inquam a
peccato, the liberty that he had to keep himself from sinning, whereof the
Apostle speaks, whereas the spirit of the Lord is, there is the liberty and
truth of the Gospel: If the Son deliver you not, you cannot be free, etc.
And this liberty consists in being free from sin, for to serve and obey
unto righteousness, etc. which thing they have attained only, and not any
others, whom the Sonue has repaired by grace, etc. And therefore Anselme
said, Anselm. in 14. ad Romans
as Lombard does allege him: The whole life of infidelles is nothing but
sin: For there is no goodness or felicity to be found, where the chief
goodness or felicity is wanting, Thom. in 2. sent. did. 31 32
etc. Thomas likewise lays us down these Maxims: The person of Adam has
infected nature, and nature now infecteth the person: the body infecteth the
soul, not by working upon it, but by receiving from it: for the soul is the
proper subject of original sin. Idem l. 1. d. 41.
Original sin is indifferently in all, and the punishment thereof is
likewise in all: no man can satisfy for it, but God only making himself man.
No man can forsake or shake it off of himself: for from the estate of nature
to the estate of grace no man can pass, either by free will, or by merit, but
per appositionem gratiae, ex mera gratia, by the adding and applying of grace,
etc.

It may be, Not one to be excepted, no not the holy virgin. August. de nupt.
and concupise. Idem de perfect. iustit. Idem contr. Iul. l. 5. c. 9.
that they have excepted some persons from this common and general condition;
at the least the virgin Marie. Let us hear then Saint Augustine: All flesh
that is borne by the carnal copulation of man and woman, is sinful flesh:
That only which was not so begotten is without sin, that is to say, the
humane body of our Lord. Again, Whosoever thinks that there has been any
either man or woman, (for in Latin he comprehends both the sexes) except the
alone Mediator of God and men, to whom the remission of sins is not needful:
he is contrary to the holy scripture, wherein the Apostle says, by a man
sin is entered into the world, etc. Yea (says he in another place) he is an
heretic; For if (as without all doubt it is) the flesh of Christ be not
sinful flesh, but like only to sinful flesh, what remains but that it
only being excepted, all other humane flesh is sinful flesh? etc. Then he
concludes, And who so denies this i^ a detestable heretic. Yea the flesh of
the virgin: For (says he,) It appears that concupiscence which Christ would
not have to bear any stroke at all in his conception, has caused the
propagation of evil into all mankind. For the body of Marie, although that he
did spring from thence, did not notwithstanding transfuse any part of the same
concupiscence into the body of Christ, because she did not conceive thereby.
And it is not here to be objected, which he speaks of in an other place, that
it is not his purpose to speak of the mother of our Lord, when the question is
of sin: Idem de natu. and great. c. 6.
Because she has had greater measure of grace given her to overcome all the
parts and parcels of sin. For in that he says, to overcome, it presupposes
a combat with sin; for the ouercomming whereof she had need of new grace. To
which purpole we alleged Origin heretofore: Whereas, if she had not been
redeemed, justified and sanctified by the blond of Christ, then she had not
been it at all. S. Ambro^e says, Ambr. in Luc. Immaculat^. Partus nouitare.
Idem in Esaias.
Our Lord Jesus is he alone of all those that have been borne of women, which
has not felt the contagion of earthly infection, and that by reason of the new
and extraordinary manner of his conception and generation which was without
spot or touch of sin. Again; Every man is a liar, and no man without sin,
except God alone. It is therefore to be observed, that not one that is of man
and woman, that is to say, of the conjunction of their bodies that is without
sin: Anselm. l. 2. Cur deus hom. c. 16. and in 2. ad Cor. c 5.
as also that he that is without this sin, was also begotten without this
manner of conception, etc. Anselme, I would know (says he) how, of this
sinful lump of this mankind, altogether infected with sin, God should draw
forth a man without sin, Tanquam azymum de fermento; being as much as if a
man should go about to make a Loaf of unleavened bread, out of a lump that is
nothing but leaven. For although that the conception of this man were pure and
undefiled, yet the Virgin out of whose womb he was taken, was conceived in
iniquity, and her mother conceived her in sin; and therefore also borne with
original sin, for she likewise has sinned in Adam, in whose person all
have sinned. Romans 5.12. Whereby we may see the impudency of our adversaries,
who upon the second to the Corinthians where it is said: All are dead in sin,
without the exception of any; as in the place above, they have added: Dempta
virgin Maria, Except the Virgin Marie. And Petrus de Natalibus has been as
impudent, in daring to attribute unto her the feast of the Conception. S.
Barnard speaking of S. John Baptist, Bernard. de excel and sanctir. Joan Bapt.
and Sermon. 75. in. Cantic.
in the Sermon of his holiness: All we which come into the world, do bring
with us a great band of original sin, be only that has not done any sin
is excepted. Again, entreating of the Conception of the holy Virgin: Christ
the man only excepted, that which a certain man humbly confesses of
himself, (that is to say David) respects all men in general; I am conceived
in iniquities, and my mother has conceived me in sin. Yea and he goes
further, even to the kindling and moving of his choler: Idem Ep. 174, ad
fratres Lugdun. Potho Prunien Presbyter. l. 5. de statu Domus Dei.
The virgin Marie which is up heaped with true honors, needs not any false
and counterfetted ones, for that is not to honor, but to dishonor her: The
seast of the Conception ought not to be instituted, it is neither according to
the custom of the Church, nor according to reason, nor yet from any tradition:
there was none but our Lord only that was conceived without sin, wherefore
she will willingly forgo this honor, whereby we either honor a sin, or
falsify and belie a holiness, etc. And Potho about the year 1200. does
speak of the same.

Lombard said: It may be said and believed, Lombard. l. 3. d 3.
according to the attestations and testimonies of the Saints, that the very
flesh of the word, should have in times past been subject to sin, as all the
flesh of the holy Virgin: but that it was kept pure and clean by the
operation of the holy Ghost, in such sort as that it was united and joined to
the word, free from all manner of contagion. And thus you may see the opinion
of the Church unto the year 1200. and more. As for that which may follow
after, what authority, or what credit is it worthy to have? Lombard upon a
good intent began to say: That it was to be believed, that she was purged from
original sin, when she conceived our Lord. Some others would add
thereunto; that she should have been conceived in original sin: but that
she should be borne without sin, having been sanctified in the womb of her
mother. But Occam restrains the matter to this head, Occam. l. 3. sentent. q.
2.
as that she should not be able to sin but venially. Scotus more boldly,
that she should be conceived without original sin: contrary to him are
Thomas, Bonauenture, Gregory de Rimini, etc. And for want of proof out of the
Scripture, they caused the Proteuangile of S. James, an Apocripha book to make
the supply, and for want of the revealed will of God in his word, his
Almightines, and in stead of the truth a likelihood: in so much as that the
Council of Basil determined, Concil-Basil. Sess. Anno. 1439.
that every good Catholic ought to believe that she was conceived without
original sin: and that he ought not to preach or teach to the contrary. In
the end Pope Sixtus the fourth, seeing that the contentions and controversies
would not be appeased, Anno. 1483.
took upon him by his authority to ordain, That the opinions both
affirmative and negative should pass as indifferent, (what became then of the
authority of this Council?) And that without the stain of heresy to be
imputed to either of the sides; Anno. 1466.
because the holy See had not as yet determined the controversy. Showing
notwithstanding that he inclined more unto the affirmative, for that a little
before, he had ordained the Office of the feast of the Conception, and for that
he graced it with as many and as great privileges, as the feast of the
Sacrament: and the Council of Trent rested thereupon.

Now hereby we see, how in a short time abuses grow to an extremity after
that the word of God is once cast behind us, and our own carnal and corrupt
sense set in the throne and Chair of government. But this is our conclusion in
the end, of the consideration of our estate after the fall, and that with the
consent and agreement of all the old Church; that this fall was mortal, both
according to the first and second death: That it corrupted all mankind, in such
sort as that blindness and perverseness seized upon the understanding: Ephe
4.5. Ephe. 2.
according to that which S. Paul says: You have your understanding
ouershadowed with the clouds of darkness, you were also darkness: And
brutishness and concupiscence upon the will, Romans 8.
following that which is said; Doing the will of the flesh, and of their
fantasies, etc. So long as that all their wisdom became enmity against God.
That abiding in the state of nature our condemnation was certain, from which
condition and estate, it is not notwithstanding in the power of nature to
deliver her self, neither yet as it follows by consequent, from eternal
condemnation: in as much as it is not so much a fire, which being blown up,
breeds to such a di^ease, as it is not able to cure us of again, as a heap
of dead ashes, a soul, in respect of spiritual parts, without a soul, that
is to say, which has lost all whatsoever it inioyed of the spiritual life,
and separated from God, which is the life and spirit thereof: and which has
therefore by consequent more need of the powerful hand, and sovereign grace
of the Creator then Lazarus, who had been four days dead; (for at the least
he resisted not) or yet that confused Chaos, before that things were reduced
and set in good order, that is to say, of a new fire, which he kindles, even
whether it will or no, in it; and of a new spirit, which by a new grace, he
sheddeth abroad into our hearts. Whereupon Saint Paul says: When you were dead
in your sins, he has quickened you by Christ. Ephe. 1. Coloss. 2.^3.
Again, You were darkness, but now you are light in the Lord, etc.

And we may see hereupon, how that there is not any one creature able to
recover himself of his fall without a new infusion of the grace of God, and
the same being of his mere grace, that no creature what goodness so ever he
practice after this grace, can boast himself before God, neither yet allege
any merit, either for himself, or for any other, it being no other then that
pretended merit, whereof the Apostle will always be saying unto him, Ephe.
4. and 5.
What have thou that thou have not received? etc. And which likewise is not
able to be an equal match for proportion, much less in comparison for the
reward it challenges, seeing it is of too short a time, to counteruaile eternal
life, and of too shallow and short a measure, in respect of infinite
blessedness: yea though it were the merit of the holy Virgin, and that
conceived or not conceived, (be it as you will) in original sin. For if she
were conceived in original sin, she is freely redeemed, as well as any
other, and regenerate and borne again, of mere grace, as well as any other.
But and if she were not, (which yet the holy Scripture denies,) that was also
of the work and operation of the same grace, and furthermore the greater she
is, the deepelier is she bound unto God, and the further off from merit, as
also from having any occasion to be proud, being on the contrary so much the
more to carry her self in a greater measure of dutifulness and humility, in
respect of so rich and abundant mercies bestowed upon her so freely and
undeservedly, by the high and mighty God. According to that which is said:
Unto whom much is given and committed, Luk 12.24.
of him shall so much the more be required again, etc.

CHAP. XVII. That the Regenerate man cannot merit eternal life either for
himself or for any other.
LEt us come to the condition of the regenerate man, to the state of grace,
Proofs out of the holy Scripture.
as it is called: and let us see if any one standing in that state before God,
can merit of him by his works, either his own salvation, or an other man's.
The Scripture speaks very highly of man's Regeneration: it sets him before
us, as a man new molded and cast by the effectual power and working of the
holy Ghost, in all and every one of his parts and members. Now what better way
to comprehend and conceive the fall and ruin, then by the reedified and
repaired parts. Coloss. 1.3. Acts. 15. Ephe. 1. Coloss. 2.13. Gala. 5. Romans 6.
Coloss. 7. Romans 8.14.
For the spirit of Christ delivers us from the power of darkness: being
dead, as we were in sin, he quickneth and makes us alive: he purges our
hearts by faith: he inlightneth the eyes of our understanding, by the knowledge
of God: He destroys the body of sin: He mortifieth, yea crucifieth the old
man, with all the diseases, concupiscences and affections of the flesh: He
makes us the children of God, and as we are such to cry Abba, that is to say
father. But does it follow of all this, that after Regeneration we are either
clean from all sin, or that we can attain unto it in this world? Such as
do flatter themselves in making their sin small; should therewithal think
that a small thing should repair and make up the breach. But what then will
they say, when as of necessity for the saving of this miserable flesh the word
must be made flesh? When for the delivering of us from the servitude of sin,
he must needs become sin himself, who had never known any sin? Or will
they think that the flesh be it never so wholly and thoroughly regenerate,
will be able to do all things? Or would they fly up with their own wings to
heaven, without Jacobs Ladder, the help of the Lord, or his merit? More
ready as yet by their pride, to loose the benefit of Regeneration, then our
Father was to loose the excellent gifts he had by his Creation, at the
suggestion of the woman. But let us hear how the Scripture speaks: J am
(says S. Paul) crucified with Christ, I live, Gala. 2.16.
no more I, but Christ in me: and the life that I live now in the flesh, I live
by the faith of the Son of God, who has loved me, and who has given
himself for me. What could he have spoken of more excellency? And where is
that regenerate man that can utter any thing more boldly then he has done
this? And yet therewithal hear him coming from the setting forth of the
praises of the grace received by God, to the consideration of his own
infirmity: I see (says he) an other Law in my members, Romans 7.
fighting against the Law of my understanding, and making me captive to the law
of sin, which is in my members, etc. That is to say, I feel concupiscence
the bud of the flesh, etc. And this Law, this concupiscence if thou be in
doubt, do not think that it is good: For, I know (says he) that in me, that
is to say, in my flesh, there dwells no good thing. To will well is ready
with me, but J do not find the means to perform or do it. Nay, this
concupiscence is evil: for he adds thee hereunto; The evil is ready with me
and fast sticking unto me: I do the evil that I would not, even the evil that
I hate, that is to say, which I condemn in my mind: and such evil as is
repugnant unto the Law of God, which cannot be called any thing but sin,
according to that which S. John says, (...), All whatsoever is against the
Law is sin, even to the obeying of my flesh, and not the Law of my God,
which J consent unto, and agree to be good, but unto the Law of sin, which I
condemn and dislike of in my spirit. And again, This sin is sin in such a
manner and degree, as that it forces me to confess that it is sin in deed.
For if the Law had not said: Thou shall not lust, I had not known sin, but
now I know it: And it has such a deep root in me, as that I am constrained
to cry: Miserable man that J am, who shall deliver me from the body of this
death? Yea and it has fruit also which it bears and brings forth in me:
Sin dwells in me, even the sin which begets death, which has no other
wages but death: which also in stead of being brought under by the Law of God,
is lifted up by the nature thereof and armed to rebel against it, taking
occasion from the same to multiply and increase. Romans 8. Gala. 5. Coloss. 3.
Ephe. 4.
It is provoked and enraged like a malign Ulcer against the salve. Thus
speaks S. Paul of this sin, and not as it is in the Infidels, but as it is
in the regenerate; and those not of the weakest sort of the regenerate, but as
it was in himself, concluding generally and every where; that he has need to
spoil, destroy, kill and crucify the same; and that yet notwithstanding all
this, do what he can, 2. Cor. 4.10.
it will not all be vanquished and subdued at one blow. For, Howbeit (says he)
that our outward man be decayed and cast down, yet our inward is renewed every
day. And yet notwithstanding not in any such measure of perfection, as that any
man can vaunt or boast himself, to have wholly put on the one, and put off the
other in this world. For, In this world we shall never grow up together and
become perfect men, Ephe. 4 13.
according to the measure of the perfect stature of Christ: We shall have
evermore need to say: Forgive us our trespasses. And the Apostle himself has
a prick dwelling still in his flesh, for to humble him withal: 1. Cor. 12.7.
because that The grace of God is sufficient for us, his power is perfected in
our weakness.

What is then the privilege, or what is the prerogative of the regenerate?
Great verily, every manner of way: for sin dwells, but reigns not in
them, for that the old man lives yet in them, but cannot kill them, but
himself rather is mortified and slain every day: for that they have an
assurance against the reward of sin; for their sins are forgiven them in
Christ: and therefore blessed, and assured of eternal life. For there is no
condemnation to them which are in Jesus Christ, which walk not after the
flesh, Romans 8.2.
but after the spirit: in as much as the Law of the spirit of life, which is in
Christ Jesus, has freed them from the Law, sin, death, etc.

Saint Augustine entreating upon this question of purpose, Testimonies out of
the Fathers. August. de peccat. merit. and remiss. l. 2. c. 7.
has not said any otherwise. Let us not think (says he) that presently upon
the baptising of any man, that all his old and accustomed infirmities are
wasted and vanished, seeing his renewing or Regeneration, begins at the
remission of all his sins, etc. Otherwise (says he) the Apostle would not
have said, although that the outward man die, the inward is renewed day by day.
But it may be that this concupiscence after Baptism is indifferent either to
covet good or evil: This is it which Iulianus the Pelagian did so vehemently
avouch unto him: Idem l. 6. c. 6. contr. Julian.
Nay (says he) if I had thought so much, I had not said unto thee, that it is
evil and wicked, but that it had hen^: for thou speak as those that would
say, that it should have been sanctified in Baptism. But we say that it is
wicked, and that it cease not so to continue in those that have been
baptized. But says Julian, Reatus eius, his sin is absolved and forgiven.
Not his sin, says S. Augustine (for it is no person:) but rather sin as it
made man originally guilty, is remitted and made void of all such force: As
when any man is absolved of manslaughter, thou say not that the crime of
manslaughter is absolved; but the man from the crime. But it is not it may be
so bad as men report it to be; and that there is a heavier punishment laid
upon it then the fault deserves. Idem contr. eundem l 6. c. 5
Nay, says he again: This is so great a mischief, as that it would hold us
in death, and draw us into the last death, if the bonds thereof were not
unloosed or broken in the general pardon of all our sins, which is sealed
and assured in Baptism. And although that sometimes according to the common
custom, he call sin, Non ipsum concupiscere, sed post concupiscentias ire;
Not the blossom or bud, but the fruit that comes thereof: Romans 7.
yet the saying of S. Paul does always remain out of all doubt; I had not
known lust to have been sin, if the Law had not said: Thou shall not lust,
etc. And in deed S. Augustine proves it to Julian, August. contr. Julian. l.
2.
by all them which have gone before. By S. Ambrose, who calls it iniquity:
Because (says he) it is unrighteous, which the flesh lusts after against the
spirit. Malitiam per conditionem originis.
Again, A delight contrary to the Law of God. By S. Hillarie who calls our
bodies; the matter of vices, and the evils within us, an original malice,
inherent even from our first framing, etc. Whereupon (says he) we do not
retain any thing that is clean, undefiled, or harmless: No not the Apostles
themselves, in whom (says he) after they were washed and sanctified by the
word, there remained as yet a malice, Per conditionem communis originis, By the
condition of the common beginning. Which thing our Lord teaches us, saying:
Idem contr. eundem, l 5. c. 4.5. and l. 2.
If you which yet are evil, etc. And as consequently following of all that
has gone before, S. Augustine teaches; That concupiscence is an evil, not
such a one as men are to suffer and bear by patience, but such a one as those
are which men must bridle and suppress by abstayning from committing of them;
that is to say, an evil of fault and not of punishment: that it is a vice that
must be fought against by virtue, which is remitted and pardoned, but not
finished, not extinguished by Baptism. Idem de pecc. merit. l. 1. c. 3. tract.
in Ioh 4.
Not in such sort (says he) as that it should not be any longer inherent in
man, for the rest of the time that he lives; but to the end that it should not
hurt him after his death: that it is an infirmity that is trodden down by the
Law of God, a grief and wearing disease, that strives against our salvation.
In a word; That it is both a punishment of sin, as also a cause of sin, a
punishment (says he) in as much as it is repaid for the merits of
disobedience, Idem contr. eundem l. 5 c. 3 Aut defuncti. one consentientis, aut
contagione nascentis. Idem in John. 4. Criminibus and querela.
a cause, for that man is either polluted with it in his conception, or else is
drawn to consent to sin, by the default thereof: Yea a very sin it self,
in as much as it is a disobedience, rebelling against the rule and government
of the understanding, a desire against which the good spirit coueteth and
desires, that is to say, the spirit of man, regenerate by the spirit of God.
But in one place after many solemn protestations, he handles the whole
question: The regenerate (says he) are delivered from sin. But how? They are
delivered (says he) in as much as they are both without crime and sorrow: but
this is a liberty only begun and not accomplished, not altogether absolute,
not as yet pure and unspotted, because that I see an other Law in my members,
etc. Again, All our sins and trespasses are blotted out in Baptism, and yet
is it said, that if iniquity be defaced, there remains no infirmity?
Verily, if there were no remnants of it behind, we should live without sin.
If therefore, thou serve with thy flesh, the Law of sin, do that which the
Apostle says, Let not sin reign in our mortal bodies: It is not said, let
it not be there at all, but, let it not reign, because that as long as thou
live, there must of necessity be sin in thy members: but at the least let
it have his kingdom taken away, that so it may not be obeyed in that which
it commands. Yea such a sin as is hated of God, abiding still in the
regenerate, and yet notwithstanding the same, he loves them. For says he,
There is not any one sin that God justifies and aloweth, he hates them all:
but by his grace he causes sin to be consumed in us, in as much as it is
wasted somewhat, and diminished in the lives of such men as profit, but
consumed in the lives of such, as have attained to perfection, that is to say,
after this life. And this he makes plain in an other place by S. Hillarie:
There is not (says he) in this life any purifying and cleansing away of all
sin, Idem l. 2 cont. Iulianum.
and yet he hops to attain humane perfection, that is to say, a nature
perfectly cleansed in the last resurrection. Which thing our Lord, if so be
that our Adversaries would have believed him, has said in one word unto his
Apostles, You are now clean because of my word: And yet he had said: My
father cleanses you, and purges you every day, that so you may bear more
fruit, etc. If then sin do still dwell in the regenerate; and that such
sin, as begets infinite other sins in us, and these sins, death; yea
so many deaths, so many hels do we purchase unto our selves, as we commit
sins: and therefore far off from meriting of life for an other, seeing we
cannot do it for our selves. Neither have we any other exception to allege
against it but this: There is just cause and matter in us to condemn us, yea
and more then enough: but praised be the grace of our God: That we are in
Christ, etc. That there is no condemnation to such as are in him. But if they
say to us, that even as the flesh works sin in us unto condemnation, if
grace do not prevent: even so the regenerate spirit works good works unto
salvation, yea sufficiently, yea abundantly, etc. We answer: That the
beginning and original of good works is altogether of God, whereas the
beginning and original of sin is of our selves, so that in deed damnation
does belong to us, and salvation to God: as also that these good works
proceeding from a heart, not perfectly regenerate, have always a spice of
evil: even of the evil that is in and of us, and that suffices to make them
displeasing unto God, save that he bears with them, through his mercies
exhibited in his Son: the goodness which we cannot make our account and
reckoning of before God, seeing it is his.

It is generally therefore said of all men, (but this word is expressly and
properly appointed and directed to the regenerate, to the end, that in their
misery and misdeeds they may seek and search for the remedy, which God has
prepared for them in Christ;) Eccles. 6. Prou. 10. Job. 15. Psalm. 143.
that all are sinners: There is not a man upon the earth that does good: No man
can say, I am clean from sin: yea even amongst his Saints God cannot find
any that are able to abide the trial: And if we say (says the Apostle) that
we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and there is no truth in us. On the
contrary, it stands us upon continually, To crave pardon, Psalm. 19.
because we are continually even every hour sinning: and pardon, Ab occultis
nostris, From the sins that we neither see nor perceive: We are so seared, in
respect of the sense and feeling of sin. And of all this it follows, that
as God has shut up all under sin; so likewise under condemnation, the same
extending and stretching it self also unto us, if he had not shrouded us under
the protection of his grace. As concerning our good works: Without me (says
the son of God) you can do nothing, no not so much as think a good thought:
John 15.6. 2. Cor. 3.5. Acts. 16.14. Psalm. 119. Philip. 2.13. Iam. 1.17.
but in that you are any thing fitted thereto, it is of God: of God, that
opens our heart, that inclines it unto his laws, and which strengthens it
in his ways; that accomplisheth in us both the will and the work, according
to his own freewill and good pleasure: Of God the father of lights, from whom
every good gift comes, etc. But principally the gift of faith, without which
neither we, neither any thing of ours can please God: Math 16.
the faith I say of the Son of God, Which flesh and blood do not reveal, but
the father that is in heaven. And what should God be bound and indebted to us,
for that which he himself works in us of his mere grace, and for these
pretended good works? Osce. 13.
Nay, let us say rather with the Prophet: Israel thy destruction is of thy
self. And thou must impute and lay it to no other but to thine own self.
But, thy salvation is of me: Thou have not any thing then to reproach or
accuse. But how will the case stand, if these very works, weighed in the
balance of justice, be found to be sins? And so much the rather and more
likely, because that thou do make account of them for holy and sanctified
deeds: as also so much the more cursed and damnable, by how much the more thou
accomptest of them for meritorious. The Son of God said unto his Apostles,
When you have done all that is commanded you, say, we are unprofitable
servants. Luke 17.10.
But how far off are we? And next, what means this, To do that which we
ought. But to do it as we ought, and to that end that it ought to be done,
etc. And who is he, that is able to observe all that, and if it were but in one
only action? And that I may not press them withal, how would he be able to
do it for Gods glory, etc. without making some mixture for his own interest,
as either for his own profit or honor? etc. But as for sin and that which
is evil, what is it that we are not cunning enough in, to do very well: and
on the contrary, where is that good thing, that fadgeth not, and falls out
most ill fauouredly in our hands; and that in diverse respects? So then we must
say with the Propht: All our righteous deeds are as a stained cloth. Our
righteous and best deeds, says he, and not our unrighteousness: for in all
our works how good so ever they seem to be, there do iumpe and meet
together something that is of the spirit, and something that is of the flesh,
as they are more or less strong in us: according to the saying of Saint Paul,
who teaches us not to flatter our selves: When I would do the good; as if he
said; even when I buckle my self about it with all the power within me, Rom 7.
Philip. 3.
Evil is ready with me: to will is present, but I cannot find the means to
do and perform it, etc. And for the proof hereof we need no other proof,
but to consider and look into our selves, and our best actions, as into our
prayers, with what an infinite number of imaginations they are crossed: or into
our zeal, which if it be according to knowledge, yet is it delayed with
coldness, and being more fervent, then commonly it is without knowledge: into
our brotherly love, which is more for a show, then in deed, and more for that
regard we have of men, rather then for the awe of God: into our faith, which
is either little, or else wavering; far less then a grain of Mustard seed,
far off from remoouing of mountains: Finally, into our whole life, which
being examined according to the sum of the Law, of the perfect love of God
and our neighbor; will not afford us so much as one action answerable
thereunto, but rather such as are contrary thereunto, and that every day, yea
every hour. And what shall we find in our words, nay rather in our
thoughts, all which are known unto God, and must undergo the rigor of his
judgment?

Now we have heard the old Fathers, How far concupiscence works in the
regenerate, according to the old Fathers. Tertul. de praescript aduers. haeres.
Probatus aliquis. August. de fid. Orthod. c. 49. Idem ad Inno. Pap. Ep. 95
upon the concupiscence that remains in the regenerate: but it may be, that
we may think, that in some it breaks not out into actual sin, which they
call sin: But let us hear what they say.

Tertullian says: Is it such a marvel, that an approved man should come to
fall? What say you to Saul, whom hatred overthrew: Nay, David a man according
to Gods own heart, by murder and Adultery: Solomon endued with wisdom from
God, drawn by women to Idolatry: because it was reserved to the only Son
of God, to abide without sin.

Saint Augustine; There is neither Saint nor righteous man that is without
sin, and notwithstanding they cease not to be Saints and righteous, because
they have their affections still set upon holiness. And therefore the Saints
are truly declared to be sinners, etc. Again; O death where is thy victory,
where is thy sting? The sting of death is sin. And there have been some men
who have thought, that there might be some men living in this life without
sin, though not from their birth, yet at the least from the time of their
conversion from sin unto righteousness, and so they would understand that
which is said: That Zachar^e and Elizabeth walked in all the ways of the Lord,
Sine querela, unrebukable: But they should have considered that Zachary was a
Priest, and that the Priests were bound by the Law of God, to offer
sacrifice, chiefly for their own sins: And secondly are we not all
convinced of sin, in that we are all commanded to say: Forgive us our
sins, etc. For, says he in an other place: It must content us, that there is
not so much as any one man found in the Church, how excellent, righteous, or
well profited so ever he be, that dare say, that he has not any need to pray
and say this prayer: Forgive us our sins, etc. For this should be as much as
to say that he had no sin, and so by that means deceive himself, not having
any truth in him, although that he lived, Sine querela, without giving of just
cause to any to complain of him. Again; Yea, seeing all the Saints, Ep. 9.
if they should be asked together, if they had any sin, would answer: If we
should say that we have no sin, the truth is not in us, etc. But says he,
Idem de perfect. Iustit. and in Enchirid. c. 33. Idem Sermon. de temp. Dominic.
4. post Oct. Epiphan. Idem in Ep. 54 ad Maced. Idem dc Martyr. Hieronym aduerf.
Pelag.
Although the Apostle do openly confess, that both he and all the Saints are
tied to this necessity of sin, yet he boldly affirms that none of them
are subject to condemnation, when he says: There is then no condemnation unto
them that are in Christ, etc. You will say: But behold the one hundred forty
four thousand in the Apocalips, which never defiled themselves with women,
they are unreprovable, there has not any lie been found in their mouths,
etc. And know thou wherefore? Verily because they have confessed their
sins, for that they became their own accusers, etc. Otherwise the truth had
not been in them, and where truth had not been, lying had been, etc. And
this he said speaking of the Martyrs.

Saint Jerome: The Philosophers, the chief begetters and patrons of
heretics, defiled the purity of the Church by a perverse doctrine, raised by
their being ignorant, how that it was spoken of the frailty of man: Dust and
ashes, whereof art thou proud? Seeing also that the Apostle says: I see an
other Law in my members. Again; I do not the good that I would, but the evil
that I would not, that I do, if he do that which he would not, how can this
stand which is said; That man if he will, may be without sin? And how can he
be that which he will, seeing that the Apostle affirms, that he cannot
accomplish that which he desires? When as therefore J shall think my self to
have attained the end of virtues, Idem ad Rustic.
then I am but in the beginning: for their is no other perfection in men, but
to know themselves imperfect. In an other place: There dwells no good in our
flesh: the spirit wills one thing, the flesh is constrained to do an other.
There is not any man clean from sin, though his life have been but a day long.
The very stars are not pure in Gods sight. And if there be sin in the
firmament, how much more in earth? If in the^ that have no bodily temptation,
how much more in us, compassed about with this frail flesh, who cry with the
Apostle: Miserable man that I am, who shall deliver me from this mortal body?
etc. Idem ad Pelag. and Ep. 9. ad Saluian.
But Saint Paul says: We which are perfect, account that, etc. Then there is
some perfection in this world. Nay rather (says he) to the end that thou
may see, that the perfect perfection of the gifts of God is not here, he
adds straight after; Not because that I have already received, or that I am
perfect. Then he was perfect, through the hope that he had of the glorification
to come: imperfect through the burden of corruption and mortality: perfect
through his waiting for the reward: imperfect through his fainting and being
wearied in the fight: perfect in that he knew that God was able to perform
whatsoever he has promised unto his: imperfect in that God had not as yet
performed to his all that which he has promised them. In a word, imperfect,
thinking upon that which he wanted unto perfection: perfect in that he is not
ashamed to confess his imperfection, and that he might come thither, he
traueleth thitherward like a good traveler, Prosper Aquit. in Psalm. 105. and
142.
etc. Prosper Aquitanus moves a question to this purpose: wherefore the just
are called sinners: for if they be just, how are they sinners? And if sinners,
how are they just? Not one of them (says he) that live in this mortal body,
can say that he is without the contagion of sin: no not those excellent
leaders of the flocks of Christ's sheep, seeing that he has enjoined even
them to say: Idem in Epigra. 46. and in Psalm 129.
Forgive us our trespasses, etc. Not any one of the Saints how well and
commendably so ever he live in this world. But (says he in an other place)
those are called just, because that sin is daily taken away and diminished in
them (that is by the growth and proceeding of regeneration:) but these are
called sinners, because that it increases in them daily (that is, by the
increase of the proceeding of their corruption,) etc. As also we alleged
heretofore out of Saint Chrysostom: That God to show that he is only just, and
all the rest of the just and righteous sinners, suffered even the best and most
approved to fall, etc. as David, Abraham, Peter, etc. In so much as that the
exception would not extend unto the Virgin Marie, Orig. hom. in Luc. 17.
whom sometimes he taxes for her ambition, and sometimes for weakness of
faith, etc. And Origin goes further: If (says he) she had not taken offense
at the passion of the Lord, the Lord has not died for her sins. And, if all
have sinned and stand in need of the grace of God, being justified and redeemed
by his grace, then Marie also, as who for a time was also offended, etc. We
cease here to repeat many other, for that they are before alleged.

Wherefore without exception we are all sinners: but from these sinners,
having sin proceeding and springing from them to the meriting of
condemnation, can there also proceed works meriting life and salvation? Let us
hear them yet further. Origin expounding these words of Saint Paul: To him
that works, the reward is not accounted for grace, but for a debt, etc. But I
(says he) cannot be persuaded that there is any work, that can crave
recompense or reward of God, as a dew debt, etc. And he renders a reason:
Idem in Ep. ad Romans 4.4 August de verb. Apost. Sermon. 31. Idem Ep. 54. ad Maced.
Idem in psalm 142.
For the wages of sin is death, but grace, is eternal life. Saint Augustine:
We are not in this world without sin, but we shall go forth of it without
sin. Again: Who so says that he is without sin, is not in the truth: and
who so says, that in any work that is very well done, he is without sin,
he deceives himself. For, says he: Never did man any good work with that
charity that he might and ought: and therefore every man remains unjust:
now the unjust and unrighteous cannot but sin, in a just and righteous work.
And to be short, says he, Charity is a virtue, whereby we love that which
ought to be beloved: In some greater, in some less; and in some not at all:
and in no man, grown to such perfection, but that it may increase and grow in
him, as long as he lives. And that less measure that any man has, then he
should, even that is a vice: and such a vice as that it causes, that there is
not a just or righteous man on the earth, not one that does good, nay, which
sins not: Such a vice, as that man whiles he lives, cannot be justified
before God: A vice whereof it is said, if we say, that we have no sin, etc. by
reason whereof we are to say, how well so ever we have profited; Forgive us our
sins, etc. Where we see that S. Augustine maintains that the want of charity
continues always here, being of it self sufficient to make insufficient,
that which we take to be the most sufficient of all our works. Idem Ep. 30. ad
Hieronym.
In a word, he clean cutteth off all: Who are they that are blessed? Not those
in whom God finds no sin: for he finds sin in all, etc. Not those
that do good works: for all thy works (says he) are viewed, and found to
be wicked. And if there should be given and rendered to thee according to that
which is due to thy works, without doubt he should condemn thee: for the
reward of sin is death. And what is due unto wicked works, but condemnation?
But they are blessed, whose sins are remitted: God heapeth not upon thee the
punishment that is due, but bestows grace and favor upon thee, which is not
due or deserved.

Saint Ambrose says, I hold it for good and sound, Ambros. de Jacob.
that we are not justified by the works of the Law: then it must follow that
J have nothing, wherefore I should boast my self in my works; but rather in
Christ. J will not glorify or boast my self as though I were just, but
because J am redeemed: because I am disburdened and delivered from sin; but
because that my sins are forgiven me: not because that I have helped my self
therein, or yet any other for me, Quia profui. Idem de vocatione Gent. l. 5. c.
5.
but because I have an advocate with the Father, etc. Again, As there is no
action so wicked, as that it can hinder the gift of grace, so there are no
works so excellent, as that they may challenge as their due recompense, that
which is freely given: For otherwise the redemption of Christ should grow base
and contemptible, and the prerogative of the works of man, should not yield
and humble it self under the mercy of God, if the justification, which is
wrought by his grace, were due unto precedent merits: For so it should not be
any more the gift of one that gives, but the wages of one which labors,
etc. To be brief, man's merits, whether past or to come, are not to make up
any part of the price in this purchase. Saint Jerome says; What uprightness,
Hieronym. in Prou. 20. and in Eccle. c. 7. Gregor. Nyss. l. de orat. Bernard.
Sermon. 50.
what cleanness can there be in the lives of the righteous? The works that
we discharge by the ministry of our bodies, are always mingled with some
error. Again; We are (says Gregorius Nyssenus) taught by the Scripture, that
there is not any one amongst men to be found, which can pass over one day
without spot or stain. But Saint Barnard, though he lived in an age full of
all humane presumptions, did notwithstanding hold fast this purity of
doctrine: If there be (says he) any righteousness in us, it may be upright
and honest, but it can never be pure: If so be that we will not think better
of our selves then we do of our forefathers; all which have confessed no
less truly then humbly; That all our righteousness is as the menstruous
clothes of a woman, etc. For, where shall be that pure righteousness, when
transgression and some default cannot be shut out from it? But it seems to
us, that the just and righteous dealing of men, may be upright and honest, when
it yields not so far unto sin, as to suffer it to reign in the body,
etc. Again; The Lord is he that judges me, Idem de verbo Originis.
for I cannot avoid his righteous sentence: yea, and if I were just, yet would
I not lift up my head, because that all my righteous actions are as a stained
cloth, seeing that before God, no man can be justified, no not one.

CHAP. XVIII. That the Law was given man, to convince him of sin, and to
cause him to look for his salvation in that grace which is by faith in Christ,
according both to the Scriptures and the fathers.
FOr what use then will some say, does the Law of God serve us, The end of the
law according to the holy Scriptures.
if we cannot fulfill the same? Verily, that by it thou may know the
difference that is betwixt the righteousness of God, and that pretended
righteousness of thine own, and that thou may know, that thou art not able
to do it. As certainly also, that thou may be convinced in thy pride,
condemned in thy righteousness, and bound and beholden to his mercies. And all
the Pedagogie thereof, Deuteronomy. 9.
all the discipline and instruction contained in the same, if thou consider it,
is no other thing. Moses says: Say not in thine heart O Israel; This is
because of my righteousness, that God has brought me into this land, it is
not by reason of the uprightness of thy heart, for thou art a stif-necked
people, etc. And then how much less, into the true land? Into the heavenly
Chanaan? The whole service of the Law consists altogether in washings,
altogether in blood, and in killing, which answer fitly to our uncleanness,
sins, crimes, accidents, and happes, yea to our very ignorances, to our
faults known and unknown unto us, and they were renewed Evening and Morning,
and were continued perpetually: and therefore also both an ordinary and
continual charge and accusation of our whole lives, and of all that which is
within us, Psalm.
or that comes out of us. Whereupon David says: If thou markest our
iniquities O Lord, who shall abide it, who shall endure thy stroke? And whereas
he speaks of his righteous works, he says: Thou art the Lord, my goodness
reaches not unto thee. The Prophets likewise do never speak unto us, but of
a circumcised heart, of a new heart, of a heart of flesh; in stead of our
uncircumcised, and stony hearts, to the end that we may know where the disease
holds us, even in our most noble part, and that it lies not in us to reform
the same, that it has need, to be quite framed anew, by the operation of the
Creator himself, by his holy spirit: and in the fountain or spring head, are
all the waters issuing from thence condemned, in the tree all the fruits
thereof. In the original of motion, all our motions; and in the workman all
the works which he has wrought. Whereupon S. Paul also the true interpreter
of the Law, leads us continually, from works unto faith, and from the Law,
to grace. The Law (says he) gives knowledge of sin, Romans 3.
the Law makes it to abound, the Law works wrath, the Law is the ministry
of death: by the works of the Law no man is justified, for no man can fulfill
it. And yet in the mean time, Cursed are they that abide not in all the words
of the same. And what shall we do then? But (says he) the just shall live by
faith: he shall be justified by faith, without the works of the Law, justified
freely, by the grace of God, by the redemption made in Jesus Christ: Romans 4
That grace, which superaboundeth, whereas sin has abounded: That faith,
which applies unto us this grace, which is imputed unto us for righteousness,
in as much as we believe in him, that has raised Christ from the dead, slain
for our sins, and raised for our justification, Romans 11.5.
etc. And, If it be of grace (says the Apostle) then it is no more by works,
otherwise, grace were no more grace, otherwise works were no more works.

And yet in the mean time faith the gift of God; Faith the gift of God.
and grace, that is to say, the remission of sins, the gift also of God: and
the hand to receive the bountiful kindness and free liberality of our God in
Christ, and this free mercy also the gift of God. Faith, Ephesians. 2.8. Romans 5.
for you are saved (says the Apostle) by grace through faith, and that not of
your selves, it is of God. Grace the remission of sins, in like manner: For
(says he also) if by the offense of one many die, much more the grace of God,
and the gift by grace, etc. has abounded on many. Romans 6.
Again, The wages of sin is death. Our adversaries would say: and the wages
of good works is eternal life: Nay, says our Apostle: But the the gift of
God, that is to say, Romans 5
the gift of righteousness, the abundance of grace, is eternal life by Jesus
Christ. And this gift notwithstanding is called an inheritance, the inheritance
of Children, and not the wages of servants. And yet an inheritance, which we
although adopted for children, do loose and forfait every day, as much as in
us lies by our sins, if God every hour, in the obedience of his Son, did
not restore it unto us again, and that of his free gift. Ioh. 1. Romans 8.
For, says Saint John: He has vouchsafed us the honor to be made the
children of God. And, If (says Saint Paul) you be Sons, you are also
heirs, yea fellow heirs with Christ. Such is the pains that the Apostle
takes to weed and destroy out of us this root of Pharisaisme, of pretended
merit, sometimes making us heirs, sometimes Donatories, or rather heirs
Donatories, in as much as it is given unto us to be children, which naturally
we were not. But what child is he that can be endured, or thought worthy to
be maintained, if he say, that he deserves and meriteth at his fathers hands,
and that of his father of whom he holds and inioyeth but this mortal life,
and that rather but as the instrument, then the author thereof?

Some in like manner asked the ancient fathers: The end and scope of the law,
according to the old writers
wherefore serves the law of God, if we cannot perform it? And behold now
what was their answer.

Saint Ambrose: The Law works and causes wrath, Adam fell to offend by
disobedience, and to commit a fault by insolency. But in as much as pride was
the cause of the fall; and the prerogative of innocence, the cause of his
pride, there was just cause given for the making of a Law, which might make him
subject unto God: For without the Law, sin was not known: whereas now there
is no man that can excuse himself by ignorance: Ambros. l. 9. Ep. 71.
wherefore it is made: First, for to take away excuse: Secondly to humble
every man before God, by the sight and knowledge of his sin. Sin did
superabound through the Law, and began to be offensive unto me for to know it,
as being a thing, which by infirmity I could not avoid: for it causes a man
thoroughly to know that, from which no man can keep himself, and which cannot
but hurt him. The Law then is turned vpside down, except that even by the
very increase of sin, it become profitable unto me, by the means of my
having been humbled, etc. In the end, transgression increased by the Law: and
in like manner pride was abated, being the original of transgression; and this
turned me to profit: for as pride devised and found out transgression, even so
transgression has wrought and brought forth grace, etc. Again; Sin has
shut out the natural Law, yea and almost quite abolished it: and therefore
this Law succeeded, to convince us by written testimonies, to shut our mouths,
and to humble the whole world before God: To humble it, for as much as by the
Law we are all cast and convict persons; and for that by the works of the
Law, there is no man justified, that is to say, that by the Law sin is
known, but the offense is not pardoned. It might have seemed then, that the
Law had brought damage and hurt with it, in that it has made us all sinners:
but the Lord coming, has with us given sentence against the sin which we
could not avoid, and has cancelled our bill of debt by his blood, etc. Ep. 73.
The Law therefore (says he) is a Schoolmaster that leads us unto our
Master, which master is Christ.

Saint Augustine: The letter of the Law, which teaches that we ought not to
sin, August. de spirit and liter.
if the quickening spirit do not accompany the same, does kill us: For it has
done more for us to bring us to the knowledge of sin, then to the avoiding of
the same: for every way we stand in need of an absolute righteousness, when
as yet the case so stands, as that there is no man without sin, him only
excepted, which is not only man, but God by his nature, etc. Thus (says he)
the righteousness of God is manifested, but not without the Law: for by the
Law he has showed unto man his infirmity, to the end that returning by
faith, and having recourse unto his mercy, he might be healed, etc. Again;
The unrighteous have a lawful use of the Law, as of a Schoolmaster, for it is
unto them being unrighteous: a just terror, the just do use it also, and yet
are not justified by it, but by the Law of faith. The Law of works is in
Iudaisme, the Law of faith in Christianity, etc. By the Law of works God
says: Do this that I command you: by the Law of faith, we say to God: Give
and enable us to do that which thou commaundest. For that which the Law
commands, is, to make us understand what the Law does. Idem de verb. Apost.
Ser. 13.
What is it then (says he in an other place) lawfully and rightly to use the
Law? It is to learn what our sickness and disease is by the Law: The law is a
Schoolmaster, a guide and governor of children: the Tutor does not give
directions and instructions to the child how to come to him; but to his
Schoolmaster, but to his Master, that is to say, to Christ.

In an other place; Who is that (says he) that can accomplish the Law, Idem l.
9. retract.
so much as in one point besides him, who is the author of all the
commandments of God, that is to say, Christ? For likewise in these
commandments we are to pray thus: Forgive us, etc. Which the Church is to
continue unto the end of the world. But (says he) all the commandments are
said to be fulfilled, when that which is not fulfilled, is pardoned. Thou
say: Idem de perfect. Iustit.
Wherefore then should he have commanded that which could not be fulfilled?
Nay rather (says he) what could he do more for the good of man, then to
command him to walk upright, to the end, that when he should be brought to
confess and acknowledge that he could not, he might have recourse unto the
remedy?

And this is it which he touches in brief, Idem in John. c. 3.
by way of recapitulation in an other place: Seeing that they could not fulfill
the Law by their own power and strength, being become guilty of the Law, they
have craved the help of the deliverer: To be convicted of the Law, Reatus
legis.
wrought spite and maliciousness in the proud: and this spite in the proud,
brought forth confession in the humble: so that now the sick and diseased, do
confess themselves sick and diseased: Let the Physician come (say they) and
heal our diseased and sick people: now the Physician is our Lord, etc. The
Demi-pelagians, and amongst other of them, the Monk Cassianus, put forth this
question to Prosper, that great Divine of France: And what is then the use of
the law? Prosper Aquit. in sentent. 42. and 44. In Epigram. 43. in Psalm. 118.
Verily (says he) that we might seek for grace; even that grace by the which
the Law is fulfilled: The law (says he) which could not be fulfilled, and
that not through it own default, but through ours, and our fault was
necessarily discovered by the Law, that so it might be cured by grace:
Otherwise the Law does rather increase sin, then diminish or cut it off, in
as much as to concupiscence it adds disobedience. And in an other place in
one word; Chrysostom. in Ep. ad Romans hom. 5. and 17. Idem in 1. Tim. hom. 2.
Transmittit. ernard. in Cantic. Sermon. 50.
Jndex peccati, lex est, etc.

Saint Chrysostom says, The Law would justify man, but it cannot, for never
did any man fulfill it: and no man can be justified thereby but in
accomplishing of the same, a thing which is not possible for any man. What does
it then? It straineth it self, it does his duty, to send us to him that is
able to do it, and the same is Jesus Christ, (says he) if thou believe in
him. And this is the same also that Saint Barnard has so excellently said: God
in commanding us impossible things, has not properly made men sinners, but
has made them humble: For in receiving the commandment, and espying the
default, we will cry to heaven, and God will have pity on us: and then also
in that day we shall know, that it is not by the works, that we shall have
done, that we shall be saved, but by his mighty power, etc.

Now these which have so well instructed us in the office and ministration of
the Law, The law leads to faith, and the justice of God to his grace.
cannot possibly fail, by consequent to explain, and lay open unto us the
benefit of grace; leading us from Moses to Christ; from works to faith; and
from death, wherein we stand naturally, even from the time of our conception,
and whereinto also even after the time of our regeneration we run and cast
our selves continually, by our faults and offenses, unto our life and
righteousness which is hid in Christ. We cannot live by the Law, for we cannot
fulfill it: wherefore we must have recourse unto his grace: His grace, that is
to say, the mercy of God freely exhibited in Jesus Christ, who has fulfilled
the Law by his obedience, and which has borne our transgressions upon the
Cross: but for such, as to whom God has given by the same grace, to feel
the sentence of condemnation due in themselves, and assuredly to believe their
salvation in him. And this is the cause why these two points, are ordinarily
conjoined and coupled together, both in the Scriptures and holy Fathers, even
grace and faith, opposed to the Law and works: namely, that grace, that is to
say, that gift which God has bestowed upon us, by the righteousness of his
only begotten Son, yea of his Son, and all that which he possesses, for
the abolishing of our sins; that faith, that is to say, that ability and
power which he gives us by his holy spirit, to receive in humility, and yet
with all assuredness and certainty that incomparable good thing, which he
bestows upon us here below, as a pledge and earnest penny of those, which
he will consequently give us to possess with him in the highest heavens.

Origin expounding these words of the Apostle: Orig. in Ep. ad Romans l 3. c. 3.
Where is thy glorying? it is shut out, etc. He says (says he) that the
justification which is of faith only does suffice, although that the belieuer
have not wrought any work. And for an example we have the thief, for whose
only faith Jesus said unto him: This day thou shall be with me in Paradise,
etc. And so likewise the woman in the Gospel, Luke the seventh. The Pharisie
said, Jf he were a Prophet, he would know what she is: but for her faith
only, Jesus said unto her, Thy sins are forgiven thee, etc. And for this
cause the Apostle does not boast himself of his own righteousness,
chastity, wisdom, etc. But of the Cross of Christ, in the Law of faith,
which is in Jesus Christ, etc.

Saint Ambrose says: Ambros. de Virgin. l. 3.
Christ has not redeemed thee with silver nor gold: have thy silver ready,
thou art not arrested every day though thou be in debt. He has paid his blood
for thee, thou art indebted unto him this blood, for we lay pawned in the hands
of a wicked Creditor: We have been the cause of the bill of our own blame and
guiltiness by our sins: Idem de fide l. 3. c. 3.
we owe for the punishment of the same, our blood, the Lord Jesus is come, he
has paid his blood for us, etc. Again; Our redemption is by the blood of
Christ, our forgiveness and pardon by his power, and our life by his grace.
Idem de bono mort. c. 2. and Ep. 72.73.
Again, Eternal life, that is the forgiveness of sins, and the Lord Jesus
is come to fasten our sufferings to his Cross, to forgive us our sins, to
nail to the cross our obligation; and to wash all the world in his blood.
Otherwise, Idem de Jacob. and beat. vita, l. 1. c. 5. Psalm 118.
(says he) wherefore should the Prophet have said; Have mercy on me, if he
had trusted unto his own righteousness; if there be any thing but mercy,
which delivers from sin? But he that has need of mercy is a sinner: and
therefore what soever good comes to us, let us impute it to the
righteousness of Christ: It is the mercy of the Lord, that remission of
sins is freely and liberally given unto us: Let no man glory or boast
himself, that he has a chaste heart, etc. Again, Idem de fide l. 3. c. 3.
My wisdom, that is to say, the cross of Christ; My redemption the death of
Christ. Again, By the disobedience of one man, many are made sinners: and by
the obedience of one man many are made righteous. Again, God has taken upon
him our flesh, to abolish the curse of our sinful flesh: Idem de fuga saecul.
c. 7. Iudicato.
he was made a curse for us, to the end that the blessing might swallow up
the curse; integrity, sin; grace, the sentence of death; and life, death it
self: for he likewise has undergone death, to fulfill the sentence of death,
and to satisfy the judge, for the curse lying upon sinful flesh, Faith
receives and takes hold of grace. Idem de paenit. l. 2. Ex Syngrapha. Idem in
ep. ad. Romans c. 3. and 4
even to the death, etc. And here behold the poole of grace, the fountain of
life freely set open, who shall put us into the poole? who shall draw for us
out of that fountain? verily, verily, no other helping hand says the Apostle
but faith: yea, Only faith (says Saint Ambrose:) Let us hope and look for
(says he) the pardoning of sins by faith, and not as by debt or merit;
faith will obtain it for us, as by virtue of covenant under writing, (that is
to say) of the promises of God, by the which he has bound himself unto us:
Praesumptio propior est arroganti, quam roganti, etc. Presumption (that is,
that over high couceipt we have of our works) is more incident to such as
arrogate and challenge for their own, eternal life by their deserts: then to
such as acknowledging themselves to have no part therein as of themselves, do
humbly crave the same by prayer, etc. Again, They are justified freely,
because they are justified without doing or working for the same, and because
they give not any thing in exchange for the same, they are justified by faith
alone, by the gift of God, etc. The wicked man, impius, is justified before God
by faith alone, etc. For, Idem devocat. Genesis l. 2. c. 8.
He that dare (says he) preach, that the grace of God is given according to
men's merits, preaches against the catholic faith, etc. Let no man therefore
glory in his works, for no man shall be justified by them: He that is just he
has it of gift. Tertullian calls it Donatiuum: for he is justified by being
washed: It is faith that delivers us by the blood of Christ: Idem ep. 71.
Blessed is he whose sins are remitted, and has his pardon granted, etc.
Again, By the sin of one all have deserved to be condemned, sinning alike:
for in the righteousness of one all shall be justified, credentes, that
believe. If he had taught as our adversaries do, should he not have put
down in stead of his Antithesis or contrary assertion which he brings in;
In meriting alike, Idem ad Romans c. 8.
by working that which is good, as he himself does? etc.

Here it were requisite that we should bring in the whole and entire speeches
of S. Augustine, but we will content our selves with his ordinary maxims;
Death could not be ouercom but by death: Christ has taken upon him to die,
that his unjust and vnderserued death might overcome ours that was just and
deserved; August. sermon. 10^. de temp. Idem sermon. 141 de Temp.
and to the end that he might deliver the guilty justly, being himself slain
for them unjustly. Christ in bearing the punishment being guiltles, has paid
the punishment and satisfied the offense: His resurrection has paid or broken
the bands of our double death: and has in like manner framed and procured our
twofold resurrections, etc. Our righteousness notwithstanding that it were
true, yet is it such in this life, as that it consists rather in the
forgiveness of sins, then in the perfection of virtues. Idem sermon. 18. de
Temp. Idem de ciuit. Dei. l. 19. c. 27. and l. 2. c. 29. Idem de verb. Domim,
sermon. 61. Idem de verb. Apost. sermon. 6. Idem in psalm. 30. Idem in psalm. 70.
Our sanctuary and city of refuge, our enfranchisement is the remission and
forgiveness of our sins, etc. If our righteousness be not in Christ, then it is
no righteousness at all. Our righteousness is he which goes unto the father,
whereas notwithstanding we are not separated from him, in as much as he is one
with us, even with his body, which is the Church. Our righteousness is the
righteousness of God and not our own, which we have in him, and not in our
selves: The law cannot be accomplished by thee, it has been accomplished by
Christ, etc. And therefore says the Psalmist; Deliver me in thy
righteousness: for if thou should look upon and behold mine, thou would
condemn me. Now this is that justice of God which is made ours when it is
given unto us. Again, I know no righteousness in my self; I do not call to
mind any other then thy righteousness: deliver me, by thine and not by mine
own: for if I have no better to save me by then mine own, I shall be numbered
amongst them, of whom it is written; That the not knowing the righteousness
of God, Romans 10.3.
but seeking to establish their own, did not submit themselves unto that
righteousness which is of God: that is to say, to the righteousness which is
of faith, exhibited by grace: Which (says he) raises up those that are cast
down, August. contr. aduers. legis. Idem de Trinitate l. 13.
whereas the law casts down them that are raised up, bestows good things
upon man, where as the Law does nothing, but command goodness: that is, in
as much as it does justify us by the blood of Christ. And what is it (says
he) to be justified in the blood of Christ? The father being angry, sees his
Son dead for us, Idem de great. Christ l. 1. c. 48
and so becomes appeased toward us. Whereupon we shall be saved, not in our
selves, but in God; not by our selves, but by Jesus Christ. And not in our own
righteousness, but in his. For the Apostle S. Paul says very well, that he is
unreprovable, according to the righteousness, which is of the Law; but this
righteousness he accompteth as dung and loss, in respect of the
righteousness which we hope for: Idem in Psalm. 31. and in Psalm. 138.
and which we ought to thirst after, etc. Because (says he in another place)
that the one causes us to loose the other. For, Si vis alienus esse a gratia,
(says he) if thou will have no part in grace; then boast thy self of thy
merits: All wholly is imputed to the grace of Christ, and not to our merits:
Blessed are they not in whom there is no sin found, but unto whom their
sins are forgiven, Idem in Psalm. 142. Idem in Psalm. 142.
etc. In an other place: Hear me in thy righteousness and not in mine own:
if he should say, Hear me in my righteousness, he should call it his merit.
Yea but he calls it in some places his righteousness: But when he speaks
of his own, he understands, given: as when we say, Give us our bread, etc.
But he speaks in a more reformed manner when he says; Idem Sermon. 49 de
Temp. Idem in Psalm. 142.
In thy righteousness. Again; Thou shall quicken me in thy righteousness, not in
mine own; not because that I have merited that thou should so do, but
because that thou have pity upon me. They whose sins are covered, for they
are covered, they are abolished and blotted out. If God have covered our
sins, Voluit auertere; he would turn aside and not see them; and if he
would not see, Noluit animaduertere; he would not take acknowledgement
thereof; neither yet (says he) by consequent punish them: Idem tract. 3. in
John.
Noluit agnoscere, maluit ignoscere; he would not appoint any punishment for
them; he had rather forgive them. For what other thing can it be to see them,
but to punish them? etc. The body of Christ, that is to say, the Church is not
justified in it self, but by grace: And all the members thereof, even all
those that are justified by Christ, are just; and that not in themselves but in
him.

This grace exhibited and powered abroad in Christ, this righteousness of
Christ which must go in payment for ours: Idem de spir. and lit. c. 8.
how shall we come by it? By the merit of our works or by the means of faith?
Verily (says he) by faith. By faith (says the Apostle) every man is
justified: but he adds: The righteousness of God is manifest: He says not,
the righteousness of man, or of his own will, but the righteousness of God:
and yet he means not that essential righteousness, of which God is called
righteous, but that wherewith he clotheth and covers man, when he justifies
the wicked. The righteousness of God notwithstanding by the faith of Christ,
that is to say, Idem Ep. 106.
by the faith, by which we believe in Christ. Again, The law, according to
which the Apostle, a most constant Preacher of grace says, that no man shall
be justified, does not consist only in circumcision or other the Sacraments of
the same, which has figurative promises, but also in the works thereunto
belonging, and which who so performs, lives justly, that is, in the Law of
the ten Commandments, etc. This is far off from that which our Adversaries
answer: That the Apostle in that his whole discourse does mean nothing but
the ceremonial law. And the doers of the law shall not be justified, that is to
say, shall not be made righteous, shall not be held or reputed for righteous. But
(says he) Justification is obtained by faith: In tantum iustus, in quantum
saluus: In as much as thou art saved, in as much as thou art righteous. but by
faith thou obtainest salvation, etc. Again; The law says, thou shall not
covet; faith says, heal and cure my soul: Grace says, Behold thou art made
whole, etc. More plainly; Righteousness is by faith, by the which we believe
that we are justified, that is to say, made righteous, by the grace of God by
Jesus Christ, in such sort as that we are found in him, not having the
righteousness which is of the law, Idem in Sermon. 237. de Temp. Idem in Psalm.
123. Idem in Ioh. tract. 50. and 53.
but that which is by the faith of Christ. And again: If the righteousness of
God be a work, in that we believe in Christ, name the work: To believe
therefore in Christ, is called faith, etc. And by it (says he) the just man
lives: Now it is hardly seen that he lives ill, that belieueth well.
Again: How (says he) shall I possess and enjoy Jesus Christ being absent?
How shall I put up my hand into heaven there to take hold on him where he
sits? Reach thither thy faith and thou have hold of him. The faith of
Christ is to believe in him, which just ifieth the wicked: to believe in him
the mediator: to believe in him the Savior: Such as are desirous to establish
their own righteousness, cannot believe. Idem de patient. c. 21. and Psalm.
104.
And therefore says he in another place: All the old righteous men, even
those which were before the incarnation of Christ, were justified in this faith
of Christ, in that true righteousness, which Christ is to us, in that they
believed, that that should be fulfilled and done, which we believe to be
fulfilled and finished, etc. And neither before nor since this incarnation was
there ever any man found reconciled to God, but by this faith, etc.

Cyrill says: Faith brings salvation, grace justifies, and the work of
God, that is, Cyril. in Ioh. l. 3. c. 31. in Thesaur. l. 12. c. 1. Idem in
dial. de Trinit. l. 5. Idem in Ioh. c. 14. Hieronym. in Psalm. 31.
faith in Christ, etc. Again, We are justified by faith, not by works, nor
yet by merits. Again, Faith makes us familiar with the Father, and by the
Son it sets and establishes our abode near unto him, and we are saved
by faith and not otherwise: according to that which is said, The Lord is my
light and my salvation, etc.

Saint Jerome: Unto that part of the syllogism here propounded: If
righteousness be by the law, then Christ died gratis, that is to say, for
nothing, or in vain, for our Assumption we must take that which follows, and
which cannot be denied; That Christ died not in vain, etc. And thereupon
conclude; Righteousness therefore is not by the law. But rather says he in
another place: Our righteousness consists herein, Ad Galat. 12.
in as much as that that which is hidden is not seen, and that which is not
seen is not imputed; and that which is not imputed shall not be punished,
etc. And this is the exposition of the Psalm: Blessed are they whose sins
are remitted, etc.

Saint Basil, What is our righteousness? Listen and give ear: Basil. sermon. de
Bapt. c. 2. and hom. 29. and in Moral. regul. 1. c. 2. and 5. and regul. breu.
Inter 10.13. Idem hom. de humil. animi. Idem in ep. 7. Chrysostom. de fide in
Psalm. 50 Idem in Mat. hom. 33.
Blessed are they whose sins are remitted. Again, Man must acknowledge that
he is destitute of true righteousness, and that he is justified by faith alone
in Christ. For O man (says he afterward) boast not thy self in thy
righteousness: All that thou art to boast thy self of is in God: without him
thou have nothing to boast thy self of, but rather thou have cause to kill and
mortify, whatsoever is of thy self, that so thou may seek the life that
is to come in Christ: whereof we do already enjoy the first fruits, living
altogether by grace, and of the gift of God.

Chrysostom: No man ever attained life without faith, and faith alone saved
the thief. And what brought God to the saving of this thief? verily,
remission of sins. And what brought the thief on his own behalf? The faith
of his Confession, which by the greatness and height thereof, reached even to
heaven, etc. Again, He that said in S. Matthew, I have kept all these things,
made no question of that which he was to believe, nor how; but what he was to
do, that be might inherit everlasting life: because that the faith of the
Jews (that is to say of that time) was in their works. But says he in
another place; Idem hom. de fide.
Never was there any man justified by works: It is in this as it is in a
lamp, whose oil does not give the light, but feed it: so likewise faith is
not begotten of works, but is nourished thereby: faith must go before works. I
can point you out a faithful man without works, the thief: but life eternal
was never bestowed of any destitute of faith. Works would not be able to
save: faith must break forth and shine before works: works must be content
to follow and come after, as handmaides. Idem ad Galat. hom. 3. In ep. ad Romans
hom. 5. and 17.
In an other place: J live in faith, that is to say, I live by the faith that I
have in Christ: if lesus be dead, it is very manifest that the Law cannot
justify. On the contrary, says he to the Romans: So soon as a man
belieueth, so soon is he justified.

Epiphanius in Anchorato, in a few words: Christ was made righteousness unto
me, Epiphan. in Anchorato.
in as much as he has loosed the bands of sin: and sanctification, in as
much as he has delivered me, that is from the servitude and thraldom of the
same: and redemption, because that by his blood I have remission, etc.

In the Realm of France, about the year 500. this matter was debated, and as
it comes to pass that the light and truth breaks out, by the holding of
argument in matters of controversy, so it was that no man in these contentions
did clear and make plain this matter better then Prosper: The Law has showed
us our disease, Prosper ad Capitul. Gall. c 7 in lib. de ingrat.
and grace in Jesus Christ is laid open and brought to light for the healing of
the same. Is this grace in such sort necessary, as that no man can otherwise
be saved, how holy or excellent so ever he be? Verily says Prosper, answering
to the head points of the Frenchmen: Be it known unto you, that neither
before nor since the Law, was ever any justified, but by this grace, but by
this same faith in Christ. And he repeateth and goes over the same in many
places. Idem in sentent. 315. and in lib. de ingrat.
And this grace, how are we made partakers of it? May we attain it by nature?
Nay (says he) as they which would be justified by the Law, are fallen from
grace: to whom the Apostle says: If the righteousness of the Law, then
Christ died in vain: so say we unto them that call nature the grace, which the
faith of Christ receives, if righteousness be by nature, then Christ is dead
in vain: For Christ came to fulfill the Law, which man could not fulfill, as
also to save and restore nature, lost and spoiled in it self: according to
that which is written: That he is come to seek up that which was wandered and
lost; and to save that which was spoiled. And in the very same terms
speaks the second Council of Orange. How then? And what is the means to
come by it? Let us confess, says he to the Frenchmen, Council. Arans. 2
Canon. 21. Prosper ad Capit. Gall. o^uect. 8. and in ^^de ingrat. Idem
deivocat. gent. l. 1. c 24. Idem de vocat. Gent l. 18. Idem in Ep. ad Demetriad.
that no man can run unto this grace, but by grace. All that my father gives
me, comes unto me, and they come unto him by faith. Per ipsam nisi curratur,
non itur ad ipsum, etc. Unto God (says he in an other place) no man can go,
but he that has his guide and direction from God: send down the light and
truth, and they shall lead me into thy holy mountain, and into thy holy
Tabernacle. Yea without any manner of precedent merits; or yet without all
other precedent cause, save only the good pleasure, save only the good will of
God. In as much (says he) as the cause in us, for which we receive and
obtain grace, is this good will, in which and with which is hidden the reason
of our election, our merits beginning with this grace, which we have received
without merits. Otherwise, it should not be said, if man be not regenerate
and borne again of water and of the spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom
of heaven: But well, if man be not just, etc. And this therefore (says he in
an other place) is the mercy of God, that makes us seek for his mercy; and
which draws us as it were by maine force unto this mercy. That is, because
that he calls us first, and gives us to hear and to believe him, he loves
us first, and gives us to love him, by the infusing of his spirit into us,
etc. And this he handles at large in whole books. Now this particular grace,
which fitteth and prepares us for the universal, Idem de vita contempl. c. 21
to the fountain of grace, is called faith: Faith (says he) the foundation of
righteousness, before which there is not any good works, but from, and of
which all that are good do come, which purges us from all sins,
illuminateth our understanding, reconcileth us to God, associateth and coupleth
us to all them that are partakers of the same nature; breaths into us the
hope of the reward that is to come, increases in us holy virtues, and
confirms us in the possession of the same. And the same the mere gift of
God, contrary to that which Vincentius objected; That faith to believe,
proceeded of man: but that though man did thus come by faith, that yet it must
be God, that should add thereto his spirit: Idem ad object. Vincent. ad
Dubium. 1.2.^. Idem in Ep ad Eu^in.
Otherwise (says he) grace should be no more grace, if it were prevented by
any thing, in respect whereof it should be given. For, says he unto Rusinus:
Man did not deal righteously, whereupon righteousness was added and given
unto him, and in that he did not walk with God, his course and ways were
strengthened, and for that he did not love God, his love and charity was
inflamed. Nay (says he) but he was without faith, and by consequent, wicked;
and therefore and thereupon it was given him to receive the spirit of faith,
and so by it was made righteous: he was blind and dead, and therefore had it
given unto him to receive both life axd sight. Idem in sentent. 374. and l. de
ingrat.
And therefore (he says in an other place) it is not said: Every man that
hears my voice is of the truth, but on the contrary: Every man which is of
the truth hears my voice: because that man is not of the truth, because he
hears the voice, but rather he hears the voice, because he is of the truth,
because he has received this gift of him, which is the truth. And what other
thing is this gift, but to believe in Christ, by the grace of Christ, by the
gift of Christ himself? Inspirata sides.
And therefore they are in as great an error, which attribute the infidelity
of the wicked unto God, as they which would have any other to be the author of
the faith and righteousness of good men, but God himself. For he that has
once lost that which he had received, cannot resume and take again the same,
after that he has lost it: but he must seek to recover the possession of it
again, from whence he first had it, having now suffered it to be lost: To be
brief (he says) to be able to have faith, Idem in sent. 316.
and to be able to have charity, that is to say, to be capable of these
graces, is of, or in the nature of men; but to have faith, or to have charity,
comes from that grace, which is given to none but to the faithful: That is,
God gives and deals freely, where it seems good unto him. But
notwithstanding the Adversary objected unto him, I see S. Paul; who praises
the faith of the Romans, Corinthians Ephesians, and Philippians: and
wherefore should he praise it in them, if it be the gift of God, if it be not
their own and of themselves? Nay (says he) to the end that thou may not
imagine, that it is an argument that it was not given them, Idem aduers.
Collat. c 36.
because it is praised in them, read somewhat further, how he praises God for
the grace which was given them in Christ; how in all things they are made rich
in him; how he has given unto them faith, which works by love; how he
hops and trusts that he which has begun the good work in them, will
finish the same, from the first day, unto the day of Christ. And therefore
conclude the rather, says he to them of Genua, That faith whether young and
newly begun, Idem ad except. Genuens. Idem de vocat. l. 1 c. 23. Council. Arans.
2. c. 5.
or old and grown perfect, are both the gift of God: That the beginning of
faith, unto the consummation and full accomplishment of the perseverance of the
same, is of him, etc. Which the second Council of Orange resolved upon in
these speeches: If any man say that the very beginnings of faith, Et ipse
credulitatis affectus, by which we believe in him which justifies the wicked,
and not the growth and increase only, are not the gift of grace, by the
inspiration of the holy Ghost, calling and reclaiming us from infidelity, to
faith, from impiety and ungodliness to piety and godliness, etc. Let him
be accounted of as an enemy of the doctrine of the Apostles, etc.

Thus Prosper handled the matter, reasoning and arguing the same amongst our
Frenchmen: and this same controversy or the like, was stirred again by one
Abailardus, a long time after, against our Country man S. Barnard; Barnar.
Dom. Sermon. 1.
(for the vnreclaimable pride of man, when all other things yield, will still
stand out and be last in the field) who though he be of the last and newest,
yet is he not the least worth or coming behind the rest for the well
handling of this matter. God (says he) has washed with the water of an other,
those who had been defiled by the sin of an other: And yet not in such sort
altogether an other man's, but that it was our own withal; for otherwise it
had not polluted and defiled us: but thus an other man's for that we have all
sinned in Adam, ours, because that we our selves also have sinned. And howbeit
that we have sinned in an other, yet it was imputed unto us by the judgment
of God; a just judgment and sentence, though secret and hidden. And yet
notwithstanding O man, thou have no cause to complain thy self, for in stead
of Adam his disobedience, thou have the obedience of Christ freely given unto
thee, etc. Idem Sermon. 4. in fer. hebdo.
Of Christ (says he) who is come freely to justify sinners, to make servants
his brethren, and slaves, fellow-heires with him, and banished men, kings. He
has said, Consummatum est, All is fulfilled and finished, there is nothing
left undone, that ought to be done, etc. And how was this done? Jn this (says
he) that he was made sin: all manner of sin, as well original as
personal has been defaced, yea every single and particular sin has been
banished and cast out: shall man's miseries then overcome Gods mercies, or
rather the mercies, the miseries? And he has not only taken upon him the
form of a servant, to be made subject; but of an evil servant to be beaten,
and of a servant of sin, to pay the punishment, he himself notwithstanding
being the party, in whom there was no fault, etc. Let not therefore, the name
of holiness astonish thee: Idem Sermon. 3. ad fratres. Propositum. Idem in fest.
Sanctor.
For God calls not Saints according to merit, but according to his own
ordinance and decree; that is to say, according to his purpose: not according
to their affections, but according to his own intention. And he renders a
reason in an other place: For says he; What can our righteousness be before
God, but a menstruous cloth, as the Prophet says? All our righteousness, to
be short, but unrighteousness? And then, by a stronger reason, what shall our
sins be? And therefore let us have recourse with the Prophet, unto mercy
alone, for it is that alone, that is able to save our souls: and only that
mercy extended and exhibited in Jesus Christ alone. Idem de sepulchro ad
milites.
In Christ alone (says he) who taking upon him the burden of the punishment,
but being nothing possessed of the fault, has merited life and righteousness
for us with God: In Christ alone, who dying for sinners, has remitted the
sin; whereby it comes to pass that there (says he) remains no more
place for merit, and yet notwithstanding our debt is paid: In Christ alone in
whose death, death is hunted and chased away, and his righteousness imputed
unto us. But, What a piece of Justice is it will thou say, that the innocent
and guiltless, should die for the transgressor and guilty person? Yes: And
not justice only, but a work of mercy also, etc. But again; How may the
gutltie be justified by this death? Nay, why may or should he not? One shall
have sinned and all shall be guilty? Now then, should the innocence of one
extend and be imputed but to one? The sin of one, has brought death upon
all: And the righteousness of one should it restore life but to one? The sin
of Adam shall be imputed unto me, and shall not the righteousness of Christ
appertain unto me? The disobedience of one has spoiled me; and shall not the
obedience of the other do me any service, Multo germanius. Idem in Psalm. 91.
Sermon. 14. Idem in Cant. Sermon. 13.14.22.23. Illibata.
etc? Nay rather (says he) we are borne of God, according to the spirit,
both more naturally and lawfully, then of Adam according to the flesh, etc.
And therefore (says he) Jesus Christ has power to forgive sins, as God;
and to die as man, and in dying to acquit the debt of death, in that he was
just: and himself to be sufficient for us all, both unto righteousness and
unto life, etc. Jn this righteousness (says he) thou art saved gratis, and
for nothing in respect of thy self: but in respect of him, not altogedound,
without any touch or stroke of man therein, as having alone triumphed over the
enemy, alone delivered the sillic captives, alone encountered, and alone
overcome, etc. For such as will establish their own righteousness, which
justifies not but accuses, there can no better fall out unto them, then that
they should be given over to their own righteousness, which will ouerset and
ouerwhelme them, in stead of justifying of them, etc. But on the contrary, O
Lord, the sweet smell of thy righteousness, is so large and far and wide
spread every where throughout, as that thou art known not only to be just
and righteous, but justice and righteousness it self, even that
righteousness which justifies the sinner, etc. And it is (says he) in this
righteousness, that I am justified and made righteous: For inlighten thou mine
eyes, and I become prudent and of good understanding, remember not the sins
of my youth, and then I become just, guide me in the way and then I become
holy: but if thy blood do not sue for me, I do not attain salvation: But
blessed, and not just alone is he, to whom sin is not imputed, etc. It is
sufficient therefore for me and in stead of all righteousness, Indulgen. Dei.
Idem Sermon. 61
to have him favorable and merciful unto me, against whom alone I have
sinned: All that, whatsoever he has appointed, not to be imputed unto me, is
as if it never had been: The righteousness of God is, not to sin, the
righteousness of man, is Gods pardon. Hitherto we see, how this holy person
cannot satisfy himself, or think that he has sufficiently set out this
doctrine. My merit (says he) is no other thing then the mercy of God: I am
not poor or spare of merits, until such time as mercies begin to fail. I
will sing eternally: And what? Of mine own righteous works? Nay, O Lord, I
will call to mind thy righteousness alone: for even it also is mine: For thou
art become and made righteousness unto me from God. Should J fear that it
will not be sufficient for both? Nay, this is no short cloak, Idem Sermon. 67.68.
that is not able to cover two: Thy righteousness is righteousness and
indureth to all eternities: This large and long lasting righteousness shall
cover both thee and me for ever, and in me a multitude of sins, Idem Ep. 190.
contr. A bailar.
etc. On the contrary says he; Whereas merit has forestalled and settled it
self, grace cannot find so much as a door or any other place to enter at: All
that thou attributest to merits, belongs unto the grace of God, etc. The
children newborn, stand not in need of merits, for they have the merits of
Christ, etc. For (says he) where as man wanted righteousness of his own,
Aliunde.
the righteousness of an other was assigned unto him: Man was indebted, and
man paid the debt, the satisfaction of one is imputed unto all: the head has
satisfied for the members, Colossians 2. etc. And what reason should there be,
why our righteousness should not come from elsewhere, then from our selves,
seeing that our sin came from elsewhere? And should sin be inherent in the
seed of the sinner, and righteousness separated from the blood of our
Savior? Nay, but as they died in Adam, so they shall be quickened in Christ: J
am defiled of the one by the flesh, but I take hold of the other by faith. And
if thou object unto me the sinfulness of my birth and generation, I set
against it, my regeneration; my spiritual birth, against my carnal birth. Idem
de Caena^^cm^ni. Idem l. degrat. and liber. ar^it.
He that has taken pity upon the sinner, will not condemn the just: And
righteous I may be bold to call my self, but by the righteousness of Jesus
Christ. And what manner of righteousness? The end of the Law is Christ, in
righteousness to all them that believe; seeing he is made righteousness unto
us, from God the father. Now if he have been made righteousness unto me, is
not it mine? The righteousness then of man, consists in the blood of the
redeemer, etc. So far forth as, That it is impossible (says he) that the
least sins should be washed away, otherwise then of Christ and by Christ,
etc. And who is he that justifies himself, but he that presumes of other
merits then his grace? Incentura.
And this also is properly to be said to be he that knows not the
righteousness of God; it is he only that does meritortous works, which has
made them upon whom he may bestow them. That which we call merits, Via regni,
sed non causa regnandi.
is the nurcerie of hope, the matches and matter to make charity shine out,
the signs of a secret predestination, the forerunners of a future felicity,
and the way whereby to enter into the kingdom, but not the cause of reigning,
etc. In as much verily, as the kingdom of heaven is an inheritance, but the
way to come thither, is the fear of God, manifested says the Apostle in good
works, which God has prepared; to the end that we should walk in them, etc.
Whereby we may judge how far Saint Barnard his doctrine is off from that of
our Adversaries in this point, and yet it is not passing three hundred years
since he writ, when as he acknowledges no righteousness able to justify a
sinner, but the righteousness of Christ, imputed to the sinner; continually
using this word of imputation, whereat they stumble, and whereto they oppose
and set themselves so much: He acknowledges not, I say, any merit, but the
merit of Christ, nor any satisfaction, but that which he made for us upon the
Cross.

And he makes all this to be ours by faith alone, Idem in Psalm. 91. Sermon 9.
Idem Sermon. 10 and 15.
as appears by that which follows: Let him (says he) that will, pretend
his merit; it is good for me to put my hope in God. God will save them says
the Psalmist: By what merits? Hear, what comes after: Because they have
hoped in him. Hereby then consider their righteousness, even that which is of
faith, and not that which is of the Law. Faith says, Great good things are
prepared for the faithful: Hope, These good things are reserved for me:
Charity; I run thither ward, as fast as I can, etc. In a word, all the merit
of man, is that he have his hope fixed in him, which has saved every man, etc.
Idem in Cantic. Sermon. 24. Epist. 190.
Whosoever finds in himself remorce and compunction for his sins, hungreth
and thirsts after righteousness: Let him believe in thee O Lord which
iustifiest the wicked, and he shall have peace with God. Being justified (says
he) by faith only: For (says he) the end of the Law is Christ, unto
righteousness (says the Apostle) unto every belieuer, etc.

CHAP. XIX. That good works are the gift of God, and therefore cannot merit,
and to what use or end they serve according to the holy Scriptures and the
fathers.
WHat then? Are our works vnprositable? God forbid. Whereunto good works
serve.
They are unprofitable to justify thee before God; and yet no doubt profitable
to justify, that is to say, to testify thy faith before the Church:
unprofitable, to make thee a Son, to make thee an heir, but profitable
lively to set forth and truly to point out a Son, a child of the promise; in
as much as thou live according to God, in that thou indeuorest to edify his
elect and chosen. For (says the Apostle) we are created in Christ unto good
works, which God has prepared, Ephesians. 2 2. Cor. 5. 1. Pet 2.
to the end that we might walk in them. He is dead: he is risen again for us:
but it is to that end that we may live unto him, that we may die unto sin,
and live unto righteousness: He has delivered us from the servitude of
sin, and from the power of darkness: Rom 13. Iam. 2. 1. Timoth. 5. Romans 8.
but to the end that we might serve unto righteousness; that we might renounce
the works of darkness, and put on the armor of light. Be cause that, Faith
without works is dead: Because that, Who so says, that he knows God, and
does not his commandments, is a liar: And because that, We are debtors to
live according to the spirit, and not according to the flesh. And therefore if
we have not love, The love we bear to God must not consider thereward, but
our obedience and dutiful regard. John 3.
we have not faith, we are not of God; we have nothing to pretend, wherefore we
have any right or part in his inheritance. But certainly that which we do, if
we be the true children of God, we do it not for the inheritance: that were
in some sort too servile a thing: but rather in consideration of the great
bountifulness and loving kindness of God, who has so loved the world: yea
which has in particular so loved us, as to have given his only Son unto
death, to the end that believing in him, we might have eternal life: Who
furthermore has manifested this secret unto us, has given us to believe
therein, has justified us in his Son, and has sanctified us by his holy
spirit: because that this great love and favor of God, toward us most
miserable wretches, ought to beget a love in us, which may make us to love him
alone, and that for himself: which may cause us to renounce our selves for
him, and which may make us love our neighbors, in him: Not to procure us
thereby the celestial Paradise; but for the love of himself: Nay, to loose a
Paradise for him; if we cannot have it but without him. Such ought to be our
love toward God, as that it ought to be entirely and wholly set on him, and
clean and free from all respect of reward or punishment. As likewise the good
child obeys not his father, because he is the heir, this were an evil
sign: but naturally because he is a Son. Neither is he heir because he
obeys, but because he is a child: a child, who by obeying cannot merit this
inheritance; for it is his part and duty: who notwithstanding by disobeying,
might loose it, and that every hour; in as much certainly as the inheritance
depends upon the father, and that grace is lost by ingratitude, if it be not
renewed and supported by the goodness of the father: a bountiful goodness,
descending more freely from the father to the Son, then it ascends from the
Son to the father.

And this again is the cause, The love of God, the gift of God.
wherefore it is a gift of God, that this love of God, which works good
works in us: this love of God, which has begotten us for children to him in
the blood of Christ: even that this same love should give us to be true
children, and should give us to love God, by the operation of his spirit. This
free love I say of the Lord, which has justified us in his blood, and
sanctified us by his spirit: in as much as the merit of Christ works not only
to the obtaining of the remission of our sins, A double or two fold
righteousness, but both of them the gift of God. Romans 6.
in that we die in him; but also to the giving of his holy spirit unto us,
which renueth the spirit of our understanding, to the end that we may live to
him. And yet in the mean time both the one and the other gift, is called
righteousness: the former, that is the imputation of the righteousness of
Christ, for the remission of our sins, when it is said: Abraham believed, and
it was imputed unto him for righteousness: The latter, that is the operation
and working of his holy spirit, renewing us from day to day, from the outward
man to the inward; and from the old to the new, when it is said: 1. Ioh. 2.
That we are freed and set at liberty from sin, to serve unto
righteousness. Again; Whosoever works righteousness, is borne of God, etc.
But these two sorts of righteousness, though they both proceed from one and
the same fountain of liberality, are far differing the one from the other:
That, as which is able to stand out against the anger of God at all assaies,
because it is the righteousness of Christ imputed to every faithful man, by
the which he is justified, that is to say, quit before God: not as one that
has paid the full payment, but as one that has obtained an acquittance and
absolute discharge, and that by having seen the hand writing defaced, and the
Bill of debt cancelled, and therefore he is called, Blessed, to whom sin is
not imputed, etc. This, as which can never make it self able to discharge us
of our debt toward God, as making us day by day more indebted unto him, by
reason of that contradiction betwixt the flesh and the spirit, and by the
making heavy and sad of the spirit of God within us: Whereupon also the Apostle
cries out of himself, Who shall deliver me from this mortal body? etc. And
this little righteousness notwithstanding, as also sanctification, which
appears in our works, is evermore the gift of God, grace for grace; in as
much as those whom he has justified, 1. Cor. 9.
he has also sanctified: he has given us faith and the spirit, and both to
believe and to do: Whereupon the Lord again thus sets upon us and says:
What have thou that thou have not received? Who has given unto me first, and I
will repay it him again? etc. You are not your own: For you are bought with a
price, etc. Why it is called a reward. The word Merit unknown to the
Scripture. Eccles. 16.


And notwithstanding, in as much as Godliness has the promises of this life,
and of? the life to come, God vouchsafes sometimes to call it hyre, which he
gives us of his free promises: hyre promised by him, but not deserved by us; a
reward, whereof he is become debtor unto himself, that so he might crown his
own gifts, unto the faithfulness, I say, of his own promises, and not to the
sufficiency of our merits. For as concerning the word Merit, it is not to be
found in the whole Scripture: the word it self is no less new, then the
doctrine that follows upon it. In Ecclesiast. 16. whence they allege:
Every man shall find according to the merit of his works: Hebr. 13. Their
Gloss has noted. Placetur Deo.
To the Hebrews likewise where they Translate, Talibus hostiis promeretur Deus,
by such sacrifices God is merited; that is by giving and distributing of their
goods, the Greek says, (...), God is well pleased. But let us yet further
hear the testimonies laid down in the writings of the fathers.

The Lord Jesus says Saint Ambrose, Is come to fasten our sufferings to his
Cross, Thus have the old writers spoken. Ambros de Incob. and vita beata l. 1.
c. 5.
and to forgine us our sins; In his death we are justified, etc. Now as our
sins are forgiven us in his death, that in his death also the passions and
sufferings of our flesh might die, that they might be nailed to, with his
nails: Let us live and converse with Christ, let us seek and search with
Christ, the things that are heavenly. We are renewed in the spirit: let us
walk in the spirit, let us not cast our selves into new bills of debt, by
committing new sins: Let us put off the old man etc. But says he, The
ransom of the blood of Christ should be too much abased, Idem de vocat. Gent.
l. 1. c. 5.
if the justification which is by grace, should be due unto precedent merits:
But neither precedent, neither yet subsequent ones, can come in for any payment
in this account. But rather (says he in an other place) seeing that we being
quickened in Christ, are dead unto the world; Idem de suga. Secul c. 7.
we are not any longer to serve the world; we are not any longer to live
according to our former lives, but according to the life of Christ, even the
life of innocence, of chastity, and of all other virtues. We are risen again
with Christ, let us live with him: let us ascend to him: let us ascend and go
up on high in him: And let us provide that the Serpent may not henceforth find
ever a heel about us to trip us upon, or to bruise, by not finding us any more
overtaken and carried away, with these earthly things. Now what is all this but
the same which Saint Paul said: That faith causes love, that having received
life by the faith of Christ, we would live henceforth in Christ? And this is
the same that we said, that he which has justified us by his spirit, has
sanctified us also by the same spirit, unto the renewing of the inward man,
etc.

Saint Augustine in like manner. We say that works justify the faith, August.
de spir. and lit. c. 18. De fid. and operib. c. 1.4. Ep. 105. ad Sixth.
and the faith the Christian, that is to say, that the truth of his faith is
proved by them: Saint Augustine his words follow: No man does a good work but
he that is already justified: but justification is obtained by faith. And
these Maxims are ordinary with him: Opera sequuntur iustificatum, non
praecedunt iustificandum: Works follow him that is justified, they do not go
before him that is to be justified: The merits of the righteous do serve for
use, Idem ad Simplic. l. 1. q. 9 11 Idem de spir. and li^. c. 10. Idem de
patient. c 21. Lib. 1. ad simp. q. 11. Idem de fid. and operib c. 4. Idem Sermon.
181. de temp. de fid. and oper. Idem quest. 23
because that they are righteous, but not to make them righteous: Works do
not beget grace, but grace works: Grace is freely given unto us, not because
we have done good works, but to the end we may be able to to do them. Works
do not prevent the mercy of God, but follow it: Again, They cannot be, if
grace have not prevented them by faith. And good works are by him sometimes
called; The works of righteousness: because (says he) they follow
righteousness, that is to say, justification. And thus you see, that works
are the touchstone of faith; yea the inseparable effects, necessarily
following where faith is. For (says he) to believe in him, that is to love
him: but this can neither the wicked, nor yet the Devils do: but Christians
only, because that faith without love is nothing worth. And it is (says he)
of that health fall faith of the Gospel that the Apostle speaks of, from
which works proceed by this love: For that which brings forth none, Saint
Peter calls a dried fountain: Saint Jude a cloud without water: Saint James
a dead faith, etc. And Saint Paul (says he) is expounded by Saint James,
namely, that he understands not, that he that belieueth, Non finitur
is not bound to do well, but rather that he knows that he is not come to
the gift of justification, by the merits of his precedent works, neither yet
by those that follow, because it is not permitted in this life. For be that is
justified by faith, how can he but afterward walk righteously? etc. One man
therefore (says he) praises the faith of Abraham, and an other his works:
Idem in Psalm. 31. Ex side. Idem in Psalm. 30. Confesss. l. 12.
and yet they be not contrary. Great is the work of Abraham, but as it
comes of faith: J see the foundation to be faith: and I praise the fruit of
the good tree: but in faith I know the root to be neither barren, nor
withered, etc. Whereupon he concludes: Let not a man boast of his works
before faith, neither let any man neglect them after he has once received
grace to believe, etc. And as our Savior Christ does live in thine heart, so
let him also remain and dwell in thy mouth: Council. Arans. c. 12.
so also in thy deeds and actions, etc. This is that which the Council of
Orange does hold upon this question: To love God, is a gift of God: He has
vouchsafed ma^^ to be beloved; himself having loved, without being loved: He
loved us, when we displeased him, to the end that he loving us, we might please
him: for he has shed love into our hearts, etc. To be brief, these good
fathers say: We begin not in any good work, but afterward God helps us to
make an end: Nay, he without any precedent merits, inspireth into us his faith
and his love, etc. But it may be at the least, you will say, that man may merit
afterward. Nay says he: Prosp. de vocat. Gent. l. 1. c. 23. and l. 2. c. 8.
What have thou that thou have not received? etc. And Prosper Aquitanus who was
of the same time: Unto every man (says he) is given, Sine merito, vnde
tendat ad^meritum: without merit, where by he may take the way to merit, and
it is given before any pa^ines or labor taken, to every man, for which he is
to receive a reward according to his labor, etc. And then you will say, yet lo
here both merit and reward; but then again behold ^and mark how he
expounds it: If God find in us what we have committed in our selves, we
cannot but be condemned: Idem sentent. 126.
but if be find in us, what he himself has wrought, we shall be crowned:
Because (says he in an other place) all our merit from the beginning unto the
end, is the gift of God; all our works otherwise, tending to nothing but
condemnation. Which thing ^ee sets down in these verses against the
unthankful. Nam meritum ad mortem subeundam sufficit vnum;
Ad vitam, Idem contr. collat. and contr. ingrat.
nisi quod donarit gratia, nullum.


And therefore concerning the justice imputed unto us, he says: Our
righteousness consists more in the remission of our sins then in the
perfection of our virtues. And that same remission consisting also in the
righteousness of Christ: for from that comes our righteousness, in as much
as we are renewed: Ipsa (inquit) virtutum gaudia^ ^oulnus habent: Idem in sent.
The greatest joys that their virtues can move in them, have their pearcing
wounds and scorching Corasiues: We have not any reward, but that which is
bestowed upon us in our free pardon.

Saint Barnard says in one word; Bernard in Psalm 91. Sermon. 9. and 15. De
Sepulch. Idem in Cant. Sermon. 22.
By faith Christ dwells in our hearts, and as for works they give testimony
unto our faith, how that it lives. Again; The fruit of the knowledge of God,
is the strong cry of prayer, etc. Death being dead, life is restored into his
place: and in like manner sin being taken away, righteousness succeeds it,
etc. And how? Because (says he^e in an other place) they that are justified
from their sins, desire and resolve themselves ^o embrace and follow
holiness, without the which no man shall see God: For they hear the Lord, who
cries, Be holy, etc. But, All these works (says he) all these pretended
merits, Sunt vi^^ regni, non causa regnandi: They are the way to reign, but
not the cause thereof.

But as we said before, these two righteousnesses are very much differing;
namely, that which approves and justifies our faith, from that which
justifies our selves: that, burning and being consumed at the only
appearance of the shining bright^nesse of the face of God, this being of
proof, against the Cannon shot of Gods wrath and Hell it self: that being the
work of the new man, which is renewed but slowly in us, this of the eternal
God himself, who has given himself wholly and entirely unto us. And
therefore all that righteousness before this is held for nothing^ by the
Apostle himself, for worse then nothing, that is for corruption and
filthiness: so far off is it from meriting any thing. And this also even
with the little^ goodness that it has in it, is the gift of God, and the
work of God, working in our hearts by his spirit, which says unto our pride:
What have thou, that thou have not received? That which is most rife in thee,
is the work of Adam, more weighty ordinarily then the rest, and which
concludes against him: Who can draw that which is clean, out of that which is
foul and filthy, etc. For how should a perfect work spring from an imperfect
faith? A sound fruie from a diseased tree? But the case so stands, as that
we daily cry here on earth: Increase our faith, strengthen it, purge it from
all diffidencie and distrust: And notwithstanding we admire here the
goodness of the merciful God: in respect of that which he has given to him
whom he has justified, by the gift of faith, and by the gift of
righteousness: he will have it called a reward; but verily such a one as
grows due upon free promise, and not by purchase. And thereupon our pride
has set in foot, to build the matter of merit; a word not heard of throughout
the whole Scripture, a word condemned throughout the whole Analogy of faith,
which sets before it, no other thing then the merit of Christ, according to
the free promise of the eternal father.

In the mean time, where so ever there is Merces, The abuse of this word
Merit. Ierem. 31.16. Thom. l. 2. q. 114. art. 2.
a hire or reward promised of God: the pride of man has caused them to find
out the merit of men. Jeremy says to the Church of the Jews, assuring them
of their reestablishing: They shall return from the Country of the enemy;
Thy work shall have his reward. From thence Thomas makes an argument to prove
their merit, notwithstanding that there is properly handled the estate and
condition which was to befall them in this world, and not in the kingdom of
heaven: but he concludes notwithstanding, that reward and merit cannot be
but improperly spoken betwixt God and men, betwixt whom there is no manner of
equal proportion: that is, (says he:) That man obtains of God, as in the
nature of a reward, it is because that he has given him power and virtue to
labor. Quasi mercedem. Hieronym. in Esa l 15. c. 95. Mat. 5.22. Luke. 6.23.
Ambr. in Luc. l. 5. c. 6.
But Saint Jerome has spoken better, alleging this place: That this reward
is, their inheritance which serve God. In the Evangelists oftentimes: Rejoice
ye, for great is your reward in heaven, etc. Ambrose verily wheresoever there
is this word Merces, interprets it praemium: he causes it to be attributed
to the mercy of God, and to be received by a Christian faith: and in like
manner all the rest, as we shall see. And as for that which Thomas argues:
That that which is given according to justice, may seem to be a condign and
worthy reward: But the Apostle says; 2. Timoth. 4. Ambros. in 2. Tim. c 4.
Amplissima praemia.
The crown of righteousness is reserved and laid up in store form, which the
Lord the just Judge, will render unto me in that day, etc. Verily he should
have called to mind, that Saint Ambrose expounding this place, says: Because
that God gives exceeding great gifts to them that love him, that is, worthy
of his greatness, and not of our merits. And the ordinary Gloss: Seeing that
faith is grace, and eternal life grace: it cannot be but that he has given
grace. But Saint Augustine, August in hom. 50. Idem hom. 14.
as we shall see more largely and fully hereafter: Nay (says he) Paul, if he
had given thee that which was due unto thee; he should have bestowed punishment
upon thee, etc. Pardon me, Apostle, I do not see any thing, that is properly
thine, except evil: and this is thine own doctrine that thou have taught us;
That when God crowns thy merits, he crowns nothing but his own gifts,
etc. And Thomas himself likewise may seem to come near to the same, Thom. l.
2. q. 114. art. 3.
when he says: That our works considered as proceeding from our free will,
cannot merit, but rather as proceeding from the grace of the holy Ghost, given
unto us. And in deed what man shall be so proud as to dare to say: That
Abraham merited God by his works; under color of those words which God says
unto him: I am thy reward? Abraham, says the Apostle, To whom faith was
imputed for righteousness.

Now it were to be desired, that the old writers had used this word more
sparingly, although their intention and drift be sufficiently clear and
manifest. And whence it sprang.
But the truth is, that that which the Greeks call (...), dignity or
worthiness, the Latins have translated Merit: and consequently that which
they call (...), to be made or reputed worthy; they have expounded mereri for
want of an other verb, to express it in one word. And in deed the old
Glosarie says; (...), mereri, to be made worthy, is expounded by this word,
to merit: And it may be verified by many places. In the disputation that fell
betwixt the Orthodoxes and the Donatists, in the time of Saint Augustine, this
word was ordinarily used in this signification: Proponant, Collat. Carthag. 1.
and 3.
qui ista elicere meruerunt, says Petilian the Donatist; that is to say,
obtinuerunt: for there he speaks of his Adversaries. Emeritus the Donatist in
the same sense, Quis supplicauit, quis legem meruit, quis iudicium postulauit?
Inferring, that seeing the Orthodoxes had obtained and procured the Decree of
the conference; that it also belonged unto them, to begin the first. More
plainly in the Oration and speech made by one Habet-deus a Bishop: To say
nothing (says he) of the Christian blood shed by Leontius, Vrsatius,
Macarius, Paulus, etc. and other executioners, Quos in Sanctorum necem, a
Principibus seculi meruerunt, Whom the common people obtained and procured
from the Emperors or secular Princes, to murder the Saints. And further even
in their own prayers it cannot be otherwise interpreted or maintained; Excita
Domine, potentiam tuam: subueniat misericordia tua, vt ab imminentibus
peccatoru^ nostrorum periculis, te mereamur veniente eripi, aut saluari: A wake
O Lord and stir up thy power, let thy mercy succor us; to the end that by
thy coming, we may merit to be delivered from the danger at hand procured by
our sins, etc. To merit, to be delivered or saved by the mercy, or by the
power of God, can it be otherwise meant, then that they might be made worthy
in that powerful mercy? In some others: Grant unto us to come before Christ
with righteous works, to the end that we being set as fellow companions on
his right hand, we may merit to possess the kingdom, Te largiente, etc.
Grant unto us to be his fellow companions in the kingdom of grace, as we have
merited to have him to participate our nature in the womb of the Virgin. Is
there any man, that can make any other sense of this prayer? An other somewhat
further fetched: Grant unto us that we may sensibly perceive the holy Virgin
to make intercession for us, Me uimus.
by whose means we have merited to receive the author of life. How can we
merit by our works, the incarnation of the Son of God, whether it were
before he came, or since his coming; if we do not take the meaning according
to (...), to be reputed worthy? Saint Ambrose likewise, speaking of the water
of Baptism: O aqua quae Sacramentum Christi esse meruisti; O water which have
desirued to be the Sacrament of Christ, etc. And how can this be understood
any otherwise being spoken of a creature without life? Infinite such other
places may easily be cited of us, out of the fathers. And in deed in certain
Collects, Cassand in Hymn. Eccles. f. 4^. Index Expurg. f. 36. and 38.
in stead of Meruimus, there is put Valeamus, that is to say, We may. And
Cassander confesses that it must be so understood: but our Fathers of Trent
have therefore caused it to have a dashe too many with the Pen, in all his
books.

But in nothing is their mind and meaning better manifested, then in the
interpretation, which they give both to the word Merit, to prove no meriting,
as also to the word Reward, Hillar. Can. 20 in Math. super illud. Idem in Psalm.
51. Donauit. Idem in Psalm. 142. Basil in Psalm. 7. August in Psalm 109.118.102.
to prove that it is not but of grace. Saint Hillarie: The very works of
righteousness would not suffer a man to merit perfect bliss, if the mercy
of God, should not furnish and fit him for the same. Again; Wages cannot come
in the nature of a gift; they are due for work wrought: but God has given
unto us all, of mere gift and free grace, by justification which is of faith.
And again; Remission of sins is not a merit of honesty, but a pardon and
favor flowing from a free will, etc. But in the mean time the wages of the
good are called a retribution. Yea (says Saint Basil) but according to the
custom of the Scripture, which says (...) for (...), retribution or
recompense for a gift: and he retributeth or recompenseth, that is to say,
gives. Saint Augustine: In the way of faith, such are held for no sinners, to
whom their sins are not imputed. God is made our debtor, not in receiving
any thing from us, but in promising so great things unto us. Idem de verb.
Apost Ser. 22.
Let us be glad and rejoice, for we have overcome: because that we are
overcome in our selves; because that we have overcome in him. Him says he,
which crowns thee, because he crowns his gifts, and not thy merits: yea
he crowns them says the Psalm, In miseratione and misericordia; In
compassion and mercy. And not in thee only, O man wosoeuer thou art: But, in
thy self also O thou Apostle, how great so ever thou may be. Idem hom. 50.
hom 14.
I have fought a good fight say thou, etc. The Lord which is a just and
righteous judge, shall render me a crown: he is indebted the same. What shall
he render or repaie unto thee? He shall render me it, for he is a just judge:
He cannot refuse to pay any man his wages and hyre, having perused and taken a
view of the work. I have fought a good fight; that is one work: I have
finished my course, that's one work: and kept the faith; that is a work: It
remains that I should receive the crown of righteousness; that is the
wages. Nay (says he) for the wages, thou have no power to command the same at
all; and in the work thine own power goes not alone: The crown belongs
only unto him, to give where it pleases; the work is of thee, but not
without his aid and help. When as therefore thou say, he recompenceth good
deeds: this is as if that he having prevented himself in giving of good
things, should retribute and make recompense for the same, with other fresh and
new good things. He retributeth them, but unto such good things as he has
already given, to the good fight, to be finished course, and to the faith
kept. For if he have not given them: 1. Tim 4.
wherefore then say thou I have traveled more then they al? And yet not J,
but the grace of God in me. And if he have not given thee to finish the race:
wherefore is it again, that thou should say, it is not in him that wills,
nor in him that runs; but of God that shows mercy. And if he gave thee
not the grace to keep the faith; is it not in vain for us to keep and
endeavor to watch and keep ward, if God do not guard and keep? etc. Bear
with me O Apostle; I see not any thing of thine own, but that which is evil
and naught: Pardon me, Apostle; thus we affirm and speak, because thou have
so taught: I bear thee confessing and acknowledging Gods goodness, I do not
hear thee unthankful; I do not see thee to have any thing that thou have
prepared and gotten of thy self, but what is evil; And therefore when God
crowns thy merits, he crowns nothing but his own gifts, etc. Now if the
merits, for which the wages are pretended as due, be gifts: then by a stronger
reason, the wages given to these merits which are gifts, must needs be a
gift. Idem in Sermon. 141. de Temp. Psalm. 16.
As God cannot give any thing again to us, (because he cannot have received
any thing from us) neither certainly can we retribute or give any thing again
to him for his gifts: for our goodness does not extend or reach to him. Thou
have nothing (says he) to give again unto him, for thou expectest and look
to receive all from him. David sought on every side and looked diligently
about him, what he might retribute and give unto the Lord, and what found he? I
will take (says he) the cup of salvation. Thou thoughtst to have rendered and
given; but behold thou take more and more: and if thou take, then thou
inwrappest thy self in deeper debt; how long then will it be before thou become
fit to retribute and to recompense? etc. In an other place; Grace goes before
thy merit, for merit is of grace, and not grace of merit, for if thou have
purchased grace by thy merit, Idem de verb. Apost. Ser. 15.
then thou have it not freely: But it is said; Thou shall save them for
nothing. And what is this, for nothing? That is thou find nothing in them to
save them, and yet thou sauest them. Thou forgiuest them freely. Thou sauest
them freely, thou go before all merits, to the end that thy gifts may
purchase thine own merits freely: and because thou know no matter to save,
but much to condemn, etc. This is the burden of Saint Augustines song in all
his writings: Idem in sent. 95.
No man ascends up into the heavenly Jerusalem, that declares not manifestly
that it is not of his own work and doing, but of the gift of God. Otherwise
(says he) it should be a debt, it should be a hire and deserved wages, it
could not be well called grace. Grace is not given to merits, but merits are
given by grace: shake off and cast away all thy good merits, and thou shall
find nothing but my free gifts: And therefore verily even in thy wages, nothing
but my graces. And therefore says he: Idem de verb. Apost. Sermon. 2. and in
Psa. 51. and Ep. 105.
Eternal life it self, which is the certain wages of good works, is called
by the Apostle, the grace of God: For, says he, death is the reward of sin,
but the grace of God is eternal life, etc. And the merits of a good man are
the gifts of God: whereunto eternal life being given, what can this be, but
grace for grace? Barnard de Sermon. Sepulch.


Saint Barnard: God has chosen us in his Son, by the spirit which is of God,
charity is spread and shed into our hearts. But this spiritual birth and
generation, is not felt or perceived in the flesh, but in the heart: and that
by them only that can say with Saint Paul: But we have the sense and feeling
of Christ, etc. And therefore says he: Idem Sermon. 30 in Cantic.
When we are busied in our hearts about evil and wicked matters, they are our
own thoughts: but when about good and godly matters, it is the word of God.
And therefore God speaks in us, peace, godliness, and righteousness, and
these things we think not of by our selves, we hear them in us: but the
blasphemies, the murders, etc. those we hear not, but we utter, etc. But it
makes no great matter for us to know, how it comes to pass that such
wickedness is in us, provided always, that we know it to be there, etc. Or
rather that there is matter of error, and that such as is damnable, if we
attribute and give to our selves, that which is of God in us, thinking that the
visitation of the word, that is to say, of the eternal word, is our own
proper thought. Proles Cordis. Idem Sermon. 67 68.
Wherefore the sufficiency of the heart, is of the grace of God, and
whatsoever good thing we think, it is the voice of God and not any birth
begotten of our own hearts, etc. Again: I conceive and take that which is
mine to be mine own: for it is grace that makes me freely justified, etc. Thy
merit, says the Lord, had no stroke in the matter, but it was my good will and
pleasure. The Church has been prevented by a former grace, and after it
comes yet an other grace, etc. Neither has the Church any need to take care
for merit, seeing it has wherein more certainly to glory, Idem Sermon. 13 in
Cantic.
In proposito Dei, in the purpose, that is to say, in the decree and sentence
of the Almighty, who says: I will do it for mine own sake, etc. And from
whence (says he) comes thy glorying, rotten and stinking dust that thou art?
Idem delib. arbitr. Quid praemii.
From thy holiness? But it is the holy Ghost that sanctifies thee; thy
holiness is of God, and not thine own, etc. Again; How (says he) may J
commend the grace of God (may some man say) unto me: If God do all, what
recompense do thou look for? I answer: He has given me to will; let him
also give me the ability to perform the work. And where are then our merits
says he? Give ear: Not works, says the Apostle, etc. For what our will or
desire was, that came through believing grace: that it became better and
amended, that also was the effect of grace, etc. And we must not (says he a
little after) seek or search after merits: for mercy alone does save:
Salvation is of the Lord: Salvation, that is the Lord: The way to salvation,
that is the Lord: Tam nostra opera, quam eius praemia sunt Dei munera, Both our
works and his rewards and wages, are the gifts of God, etc. who works in
us all our good thoughts, good desires, and good deeds. But where shall be
then according to the old fathers, either merit, properly so called, when the
good work is of God, or else the reward, seeing the evil comes of us? And
who sees not that which we have observed heretofore, in many other points,
that the pride of man, which puffs up it self and swells as big as it
can, of an ill Grammar construction, to have made in this point a piece of
worse Divinity: loving rather to exact eternal life of God as a hirelings
wages, then to receive it at his bountiful and liberal hand, for an
inheritance, after the manner of a Son?

But say they, Assuredness in the mercy of God is humility and not pride.
your selves are the proud persons, which dare be so bold as to presume of
this assurance of your justification, and being of the children of God, etc. We
are so: But a word of the pride of Abraham: Who believed (says the Apostle)
under hope, against hope: And he was not weak in faith, neither doubted he of
the promise of God, through distrust, knowing certainly that he which had
promised, was able to perform. And of the pride of David, Psalm. 23.26.30. etc.
Romans 8.
who says. God is my salvation, whom shall I fear? Not (says he) the shadow
of death: I shall never be shaken, never confounded. And of the pride of Saint
Paul. Romans 8. Who shall accuse us, who shall condemn us? Who shall separate us
from the love of Christ? Math. 6. and Luke 14.
Nay (says he) I am fully persuaded, that neither death, nor life, nor Angels,
nor principalities, etc. can separate us, (he speaks of all the faithful and
not of himself) from the love which he has showed us in lesus Christ. A pride
well pleasing and acceptable unto God: which this doubtful and wavering faith
of our Adversaries cannot be as appears in that he reproacheth his Apostle
therewithal, (...): O thou of little faith, why do thou doubt? As neither
that spirit houering in the air, which he forbids them in these words,
(...), etc. And that in such things, as for which they had no such express
promise? Namely, in as much as it was humility in Abraham, to submit himself
and all his reason to the will of God, how contrary so ever it might seem to
him, to be unto the promise, as it is likewise in every Christian, to assure
himself both of the remission of his sins, as also of the kingdom of
heaven, by the free goodness of God manifested in his word: whereas on the
contrary it is a pride borrowed from that first in the fall of man, rather to
believe the doubts of the flesh or of the creature, then the word of the
Creator, as also to go about to attain the least thing that can be, by all
our merits, and then by a stronger reason, to pretend to be Gods, without God:
as our first father did.

And suitable unto the same is that which we learn of the same fathers. Hillar.
in Mat. c 5.
S. Hillarie: The Lord would have us to hope for the kingdom of heaven, which
he has declared to consist in him, without any ambiguous doubting of any
uncertainty, that can be in his will: For if faith become doubtful and
wavering, there is no justification ensuing such a faith. And therefore S.
Cyprian said: Cypr. de mort.
Why should we stand perplexed or amazed? Who needs to tremble and be sad,
but he whose hope and faith do fail him? It is fit for him to fear death,
who will not go unto Christ. And to be unwilling to go unto Christ, belongs
to such a one as belieueth not, that he shall begin when he is dead, to reign
with Christ: For it is written: That the just lives by faith. If therefore
thou be a just man, if thou live by faith, if thou belieuest truly and verily
in God: why do thou not embrace death, it being so certain a thing, that
thou shall abide with Christ, and being so sure to enjoy the promise of thy
God? etc. This is (says he in an other place) not to know God: This is to
offend Christ the master of the belieuers, by the sin of incredulity: This
is not to have in the house of faith, the faith which is est ablished in the
Church. August de verb. Dom. Sermon. 28.
But is not this then over weening? Hear Saint Augustine: Presume (says he)
but not of thy works, but of the grace of Christ: for you are saved by grace,
says the Apostle. To preach that which thou have received, is no arrogancy,
it is faith and faithfulness, it is not arrogant over weening, it is devotion.
But we are unworthy, we are weak in faith, etc. Idem in Psalm. 88.
Yea (says he) but God has said it, but God has promised it: and if all
this may yet seem little unto thee, then he has sworn it unto thee. Seeing
then (says he) that the promise of God is not firm according to our merits,
but in respect of his mercy; no man ought to preach with a trembling
doubtfulnesse, that which he cannot any way doubt of. But must we not all
appear before the tribunal and judgment seat of Christ? Idem tract. 22. in
Johan. John 5.24.
And how dare thou promise thy self (says he) that thou shall not come
into judgment? Nay, God forbid says he, that I should be so bold as to
promise my self that: but I believe him that has promised it: Who so
belieueth on him that has sent me, has eternal life, and shall not come to
judgment, that is to say, to have the sentence of condemnation pronounced
against him; for he is already passed from death to life. And this is brought
to pass by his promise, not by my presumption, that I come not unto judgment.

And this is the same that Saint Barnard argued against Abailardus: Bernard. in
Ep.
If faith (says he) do waver, it is nothing worth, as also our hope is in
vain, etc. Who so speaks that, has not as yet received the holy Ghost. But
Saint Augustine better: Faith consists not in opinion, neither yet in
conjecture, it is fast placed in his heart that has it, and that from him, of
whom it springs: but Certae scientiae acclamante conscientia, Of certain
knowledge, the conscience testifying thereunto. This is the substance of things
to be hoped for, and not a fantasy gathered upon conjecture: By the word
substance, there is set before thee a certain and stable thing. Faith then is
not an opinion but a certainty. But; Who art thou (says he?) Aestimatio.
Idem de sragmentis septem Sermon. 3. Fiducialiter.
And how great is this glory? And by what merits do thou hope to obtain it?
I consider says he three things, wherein my hope consists: The love of
Adoption; the truth of the promise; and the power of the deliverance: As for
any other thing let my foolish reason murmr and repine, as much as it will; I
answer confidently and boldly, I know whom I have believed, and am thoroughly
assured, because he has adopted me in the abundance of his love, because he
is true in his promise; and because he is of power and ability to exhibit and
effect the same. This is that threefold band, that is so hard to break in
pieces, the which has been reached and conveyed unto us from our native
Country, from on high into this prison: Let us hold fast by the same, to the
end that it may lift us up, that it may draw us; yea that it may attract and
hale us to the presence of the glory of the great God, etc. The Disciples say:
Who can be saved? The Lord answers them: Idem Sermon. 5. dedicat.
It is impossible with men, but not with God. Wherefore we are assured of his
power: but where are we so of his will? For who knows, say they, who is
worthy of love, or of hatred? This is it which Abailard did object unto him of
Solomon, and our Adversaries unto us. But says he: It is here that faith must
help us, that the truth must succor us, to the end that that which is hidden
from us in the heart of the father, may be revealed unto us by his spirit: And
that this spirit, that bears witness unto, and persuades our spirits, that
we are the children of God, does persuade us of it, in calling of us, and in
freely justifying of us by faith, etc.

CHAP. XX. How the doctrine of merit entered into the Church, after what
manner it grew and increased, and how it has been resisted and withstoode in
all ages, even unto the time of Saint Barnard.
SEeing then that this doctrine of free justification, opposite and quite
contrary to the merit of works, is so clear and manifest in the Scriptures,
so evidently and plainly taught, and of such continuance in the Church; from
whence possibly may this doctrine of merit at this day taught and held, take
his beginning? And what may be the means that it has prospered and so well
succeeded? And how is it come to occupy the room of the blood of Christ? And
how has such deep presumption seized upon us, as not only to arrogate unto
our selves an ability to fulfill the whole Law of God; but furthermore to
work an infinite sort of works of Supererrogation, and those more meritorious
then the other of the Law? Not serving only to save our selves, but others
also: and that so far forth, as that we should be bold to say, no more with
David: Salvation is of the Lord: but my salvation, yea, and thy salvation is of
me. But and if we stand in need to search out the antiquity of this opinion,
where shall we rather find it then in the mouth of the Serpent? Gene. 3. ^^ay.
4.24.
In the ear of the woman? Yea which is worse, in the heart of our first father:
You shall become as Gods, you shall be like unto the most high and Sovereign
Lord? etc.

In like manner the whole Scripture aymeth and tends to the rooting of this
pestiferous weed out of the heart of man: (...) ^^ope and (...) the (...)
Scrip (...) to hum(...) by (...) of his sin, thereby ^^ining him to see the
necessiue of the merit of christ. Ezech. 16.
The Law as we said, and all the pedagogie thereof, teaching and training us
up, to see our infirmity and want of ability: The Prophets controlling and
reproving us of the same continually, and that both generally and particularly.
In general, God by his Prophets says unto his Church, Thou tookest thy
beginning from out of the land of the Cananites: Thy father was an Amorrhite,
and thy mother an Hittite: In the day that thou wast borne, thy nauel-string
was not cut: Thou wast not washed with water, nor salted, nor wrapped in
swathing clothes: Every man was afraid of thee; I alone stood forth to take
pity upon thee, I saw thee defiled in thy blood, I caused thee to live in the
same, I cast the lap of my garment over thee, I covered thy nakedness, I
entered into league with thee, I washed thee, I anointed thee with oil, I
clothed thee with imbroidered work, I caused thee to grow up and reign: then
did thou put thy confidence in thy beauty, and have played the harlot, by
reason of thy fame and high renown, etc. What other thing can be made of all
this throughout this whole growth of the Church, but that there is nothing in
her as of her self, but pollution and imperfection? And that the whole matter
of her being, and felicity is only of God? That her uncleanness and
disloyalty, proceeds from her trusting in her beauty, notwithstanding that
it proceed not from her self? Esaias. 64
In particular he says of the most righteous and just, the Prophets
themselves being reckoned amongst the same: You are all as a polluted thing,
and all your righteousness as a filthy cloth; your iniquities have carried
you all away as a wind: neither had you any manner of remedy left, but only
to fly and have recourse unto me, who deface and blot out your offenses; Idem.
43. Idem. 53.
and that for mine own sake, who am not minded to call them to remembrance;
and through the atonement made by Christ, upon whom is laid the chastisement
of your peace, who is wounded for your sins, and in whose stripes you are
healed, etc. All which notwithstanding did it let or hinder this people
consisting of men, these men tainted and stained with this first and capital
pride of man from hasting and endeavoring from time to time continually to
return to this pretended righteousness, which is ever floating and swimming
upon our hearts?

In the time of our Savior Christ, Merit amongst the heretical ^^wes.
we see two sorts of people to be infected with this poison: the Essees which
would be so called, as doers and fulfillers of the Law, (accusing the
Pharisees to be no better then bare teachers of the same) whose will worship
is taxed of the Apostle, as devotion of their own devise, as also their
superstitions: Taste not, touch not, etc. wherein they laid the foundation of
their merits. And the Pharisees, who taught that it was in the power of man to
fulfill the Law; having also these same works of supererogation, whereof the
Prophet speaks saying; Who has required this at your hands? Of these,
according to the diverse observations which they had tied themselves unto, the
Thalmud makes seven sects; but one especially which had this name: What ought
I to do, and I will do it? And of these we have an example in him that is
spoken of in the Gospel: All these things have I done even from my youth, etc.
Both the one and the other being very unfit to cast and repose themselves upon
the rest of grace; and by consequent enemies of our Lord, who reckons more
basely of these sorts of people, then of the Publicans and harlors. And
hereupon he breaks out to the denouncing of diverse curses against them; as
such as would not only not receive the kingdom of God themselves, but
hindered the people also by their interpretations and constructions to receive
the same; that is to say, remission of sins in Christ. Whereupon S. John
Baptist, preparing the way to this kingdom, to vnbewitch them, begins his
Sermons at that point: Repent, the kingdom of beauen is at hand, etc. So then
some of the circumcision that received Christ, brought this error into the
Church of Christ: as also they which did obstinately cleave unto Iudaisme, had
not any other ground for the same, then the righteousness purchased by the
Law; and the works thereof, in which their course they are crossed by the
Epistles of Paul written to the Romans and Galathians: for in them he
opposes and sets against their righteousness of works, that which is of
faith and grace; giving them to consider the enormitie of sin, and the
soundness and sincerity of the righteousness of God: In sum he brings
them back, to the seeking out of their salvation in the Cross of Christ;
their blessedness and righteousness, in that that he is made a curse and
sin for them. And yet notwithstanding this doctrine, being of the nature of
that old Serpent, cannot be so cut in pieces by the sword of Gods word, but
that it takes hold again and knitteth together. And so much the rather, Merit
maintained by the Philosophers, brought into the Church.
by how much the flocking of the Gentiles into the Church was the greater, to
whom it was plausible, as agreeing with the Philosophy of the world, and
their free will, the fountain of all man's presumption and ouerweening; being
admitted into the body of Divinity by the Greek Doctors, who sprung out of
the same School, more easily then was either meet or needful. Now the chief
brocher of the same, was one Pelagius a Briton borne, about the year 400. in
the Latin Church, who had been a Monk in Syria, and had many other Monks
his followers. Merit of works confuted.
But God raised up unto us also in those times, to withstand this doctrine,
Saint Jerome, Prosper Aquitanus, Fulgentius, Primasius, and other great
persons, who sharply confuted and gainesaid the same; and above all, one Saint
Augustine, Resistance and head made against the same
who overthrew all the foundations of the same: who also took occasion by this
stumbling stone, to pluck up by the roots all manner of presumption and
preiudicate opinions, which in the former times had crept into the Church, by
the means of Circumcision, Paganism, the Law or Philosophy. What followed
hereupon? He should have rooted out men and all: so deeply had this sprout
taken root in man. For no sooner was Saint Augustine departed this world, but
this heresy sprung up a new in a Monk called Cassianus, meanly learned,
taking his beginning, to the end he might find a more easy and plausible
entrance) at a third Assertion, consisting of a mean or middle nature betwixt
the doctrine of Saint Augustine and Pelagius: and by this means prevailed and
was approved of very greatly in our Country of France: who yet found
presently there to withstand and refell him the foresaid Prosper Aquitanus, and
certain others. This man at that time taught, that many attained grace,
without grace, by the only power of free will: That man craving the same of
himself, it was given him, and afterward grew and increased, according to the
proportion of his merits: That as fully, there might be certain men found,
who, how unwilling so ever they might be, were notwithstanding made partakers
of this grace, through pure and mere grace. Thus making two sorts of
Christians, one saved by free will, and the other freely by grace: That it was
in the power of man after his fall, of himself to do good works: yea to
merit eternal life. But what says Prosper thereupon unto him: Who (if any
others) was mighty in the Scriptures? And here it stood him upon, to have
alleged him wholly: Verily, that it behooved him to have firmly held the
doctrine of Saint Paul, being most excellently expounded by Saint Augustine,
and accordingly he draws our Country men thereunto most learnedly: That no
man obtains grace, but of pure and mere grace: That they that fly thereunto
through the fear of death, and those which run thereto with a joyful hope,
are helped and assisted thereunto, by one and the same grace: That man in Adam
has lost all the means of coming unto eternal life, all the seeds of
piety and virtue: That who so attributes our merits unto any other then God,
or unto man any other thing but his deserts, does greatly err, and speak
against the scriptures; were he a Job, a Prophet, or an Apostle, the law
having been given to no other end but to condemn us, and consequently to make
us to be altered and changed by grace. And yet notwithstanding all this, this
said heresy and natural claim of nature against grace, does not cease
continually to return and swim aloft, being relieved by the Monks, the
Pharisees of these latter times, blown up and kindled by the common people,
who willingly hold and suffer themselves to be persuaded, that their salvation
is of themselves, neglected by the succeeding Bishops, the most part of the^
being ignorant, maintained by the gross and palpable darkness, which for a
long time under the ouerflowing of barbarism, did cover all the world: God
notwithstanding not suffering this truth of salvation in the says of one only
Christ to be chooked and extinguished, as is easy to be verified by the
writings of the most famous and renowned that have lived heretofore. For Greg.
says: We are redeemed by grace: Anno 600. Gregor. in c. 28 Job. l. 18. c 22.
Non nostri Conaminis, sed diuinae dignation is.
who so should give but their right unto all our good works, in stead of
giving unto them Christ, should give unto them sharp and severe punishment:
For it is one thing that man meriteth by righteousness, and an other thing which
he receives by grace. Again, It rests not in our power to attain and come
by the inward light; but herein, even for that God has vouchsafed to bestow
it upon us: For how often do we beg and crave it with inward sighs and
gronings? Et in eius amaenitates recipi non meremur, neither do we deserve
that is to say and affirm with a witness, We are not reputed or thought
worthy to receive it at his pleasure, and at another time all at a blow the
grace of God will assist and help us, etc. Again, Without him there should
some become Saints and holy men, if a man without the gift of the only
begotten Son, Idem in 3. cap. Job. l. 5. c. 8.
could possibly attain the gift of sanctification: But who is he that dare
build himself as on a certainty upon men, when he cannot possibly do it
upon Angels? Again; Our righteousness being examined with the righteousness of
God, is unrighteousness: In destructione iudicis.
Look what is glortous in the eye of the workman, is nothing but dirt and dung
being tried by the Judge. And therefore Saint Paul has said: I find not my
self greatly guilty in any thing: but by and by he adds: and yet am I not
therefore justified, etc. And again, I am restored to life, Idem in cap. 9.
Job. l. 2. c. 11. and in c. 28. l. 18 c. 22. Idem in cantic. canticor.
not by having merited, but by being pardoned. And as for them which boast
themselves of being saved by their merits, they are contrary unto themselves:
for whiles they desire to be innocent and redeemed, they frustrate and make of
no value the redemption in them. But says he in another place: Notwithstanding
that the soul of the holy man do wander out of the way of righteousness: yet if
it lay fast hold by faith on him which justifies the sinner, and bewail
incessantly the sins committed in the time of this faith, by such his
continual washings, it retains and keeps still his righteousness. And of faith
he has these Maxims very ordinary and samiliar: Idem in Ezec. l. 1. hom. 9.
and 7. In Ezec. hom. 19. In Euang. hom. 29. l. 3 indict. 12. Ep. 27.
All the Saints before the coming of Christ were saved by faith: let us not
put our confidence in our tears and mourning, neither yet in our deeds, but
in the intercession of our Advocate: faith goes before brotherly love and
charity: It must be first preached and taught, thereby to raise us up unto
good works: virtues bring us not to believe, but faith brings us to a
virtuous life: True faith is that which says it, and harboreth not any
conditions or manners contrary unto the same; we hold fast the faith, and
therewithal we exercise it in good works. What is all this, but the same
which we affirm and say: That the just man lives by faith: that his faith
shows it self alive by his works. In the same sense does also Cassiodorus,
Olympiodorus, Orgelitanus, and others of the same time, very often speak,
although not altogether so properly in certain places.

The ages following hold of the night shut in, Anno 700. The proceeding of the
abuse.
and yet so as that there shined forth some little glimces of star light. Then
in stead of the teaching of one only remission of sins, in the only blood
of Christ, and that in such sort, as that it was famous and reverently received
throughout all the time that the purer antiquity continued; Gregory and
Cassiodorus had begun to teach: that sins were remitted and forgiven by
martyrdom, alms deeds, forgiving of our brethren, reclaiming of a sinner,
etc. acknowledging notwithstanding, that nothing of all this stood good,
otherwise then in faith; but contrarily that it was continually evil, and
against true and lively faith. Such as followed after, as Cesarius, Adelhelmus,
and others, do reckon unto us twelve deeds which do justify us: Baptism,
Charity, Almes-deedes, Tears and lamentation, confession, affliction,
correction, intercession of the Saints, mercy, the converting of a sinner, the
forgiving of our brethren, and the suffering of martyrdom. But as for faith,
which is the only and alone means, they negligently cast it behind them.
This was the remainder of Pelagius his opinion, which (as our adversaries) they
thought that they had well and sufficiently qualified when they said: That the
first grace was of God, the first remission and forgiveness of Baptism; and
as for all the rest, Anno. 800.
we ought to seek and search for it in our selves, and by our works. Now the
inuocating and praying unto Saints, iumping and falling in together with the
same, about this time, did fortify and add more force to the error. And it is
to be noted, that as in the change of the winds, we see the clouds in
doubtful sort to waver, and as it were stagger, before they resolve upon, and
take the direct course before the wind: even so it fared with the ancient
writing of those times, Beda in Psalm. 24. and 31.
before that they wholly and altogether inclined unto this corruption. For Beda
does clean and wholly clear and free the whole matter: Forgive me my sins,
not for my merits, but for thy goodness sake: for there is no merit, that is a
sufficient price or ransom for eternal blessedness: there is nothing but
the mere grace of God, that brings salvation, yea grace freely given, no
regard had either to merit precedent or such as may after ensue. And by faith,
by the alone righteousness, (says he) of faith, Idem in Psa. 77 Idem l. ^.
in Marc. c. 2. and 4. Idem l. 1. in Luc. c. 1. and 2. Idem l. 4. in Luc. c. 11.
Idem in Ioh. c. 6. Albin. l. 3. de Trinit. c 1. and 7 Idem in Psalm. 4 and 20.
paenit. and in 7. In Ioh. l. 1. c. 1. Bed. l. 3. in Job. c. 1. Anno 900. Haimo
in Ep. ad Romans c. 1. and 4. Impertiendo. Idem in Ps. 84. Idem in Ps. 26 Idem in
Mich. c. 6. Idem in Zach. c. 3. Idem in Cantic. Cant. c. 4. Consortium Diuum.
Idem in Epist. ad Romans c. 10. Idem in Ep. ad Heb. c. 5. and 9. Idem in Ep. ad
Romans c. 6. Adelbert. in altercat. Theophil. in Ep. ad Tim. c. 1 Anselm. in Ep.
ad Romans passim.
which only heals the inward man, which only forgiueth sins, which
only saved them which lived in the time of Circumcision, and that without
their offerings and sacrifices: and which alone adopteth us the children of
God, etc. which is the life of our soul, yea which shows forth his life by
good works, etc. And Albinus writes in like manner: Wash me, O Lord, from
the spots of mine unrighteousness, by the gift of thy mercy: I am very
able to pollute and defile my self, but I have no power to cleanse my self:
there is no man justified in thy sight, but by thy grace, by thy mercy, in the
name of the Savior, and not by his merits. And this grace is distributed and
given unto us, by the means of faith in Jesus Christ, etc. and the same the
gift of God, etc. Neither yet have these famous men so written, but that
withal there have escaped and slipped from them, some places very different
and unlike; (such was the contagion of the time;) as, that we are justified by
humility, patience, virginity, etc. Notwithstanding that they evermore join
faith therewithal.

Haimo Archbishop of Halberstat says: The righteousness of God, that is to
say, the justification by which he justifies them that believe in him, is
manifested in the Gospel, when the Lord says: He that shall believe and be
baptized shall be saved, that is to say, shall be righteous. This is that
righteousness by which all those that believe are justified by the gift of the
Father, of the Son, and of the holy Ghost, which is called the righteousness
of God, because that he in making the faithful partakers of the same, makes
them righteous, etc. and it is called the righteousness of faith, by which
Abraham was justified, etc. And Christ is the Author of this righteousness
unto us; For before the world was framed (says he) God decreed with his Son
to save mankind without any precedent merits: for even man was not as yet,
etc. This Son which has given remission of sins, and all other benefits
of his only and mere mercy: Which is unto us the foundation of all
righteousness: In whose only blood it rests for us to be saved, in as much
as there can nothing come out of us, that can make God favorable and merciful
unto us. In whose passion iniquity was remitted, and righteousness restored
all in a day, and that not only unto justification, but even to the meriting,
(that is to say, to be reputed worthy) of the company of God by them. And
this is to be understood, so far forth as we believe, and as his obedience
is sufficient for all belieuers unto eternal life, the same being perfectly
washed, into the remission which is in his blood. But and if you ask, to what
end then serves the Law, seeing that it does not justify? Haimo answers:
Not to take away sins, but to show and point out the same. Hincmarus; It is
because of transgressions, and for the hardness of the people.

Adelbertus: To teach us our concupiscence, and to learn us to know and
understand what is due unto us for our sins, to the end that thereupon we
may seek for grace. Theophilact: To convince us of sin, and to bring us to
Christ. Anselme: To show in what Chains and bands of sin, such were held
as presumed of their power to accomplish and make perfect their righteousness
by works, that so they might perceive the poison, though thereby they could not
take it away, and to the increasing and augmenting of sin, not to the
cleansing or wiping of it away. Radulph in Leuit. l. 20. c. 1. Gysilb. in alter.
But what, do we not accomplish it then? Radulphus says: What man is he
upon the face of the earth that is able? verily not one. And Gisilbert: So
neither has it brought any thing unto perfection: it has laid open the
wounds, but it has not cured them. Theophyliad Romans c. 3. Anselm. in. 7 ad
Romans Haimo in Psalm. 118. and in c. 6 ad Romans and passim.
Otherwise says Theophilact: We had not had need of Christ. And Anselme; What
is the law but a letter for them that know to read it, and cannot accomplish
or fulfill it? And therefore it has only led us, as by the hand unto grace.
But again concerning this grace, who has moved the Lord to do so much for
us? Verily says Haimo, The only goodness which is in him: and therefore let
no man presume of his merits, but of the only clemency of our Savior, who
(says the Apostle) has saved us freely, that is to say, without any
precedent merits; who saves us (says he) by his preventing grace, and
justifies us by his subsequent grace. Eternal life is given to none as a
thing of due, but by free mercy, Remig in psa. 19.21. and 32 and 70.
etc. And S. Remigius: Adam made the old people; but our Lord Christ the
new, in as much as he has freely justified the same, without any precedent
merits: For we have made our selves sinners, but his only mercy has made us
righteous: yea (says he) it has made of us that were wicked and ungodly,
godly ones: of servants, free men: of condemned ones, such as are to be
received into the kingdom of heaven. Theophyl. in. Ep. ad Tit. c. 3 Anselm. in
c. 5. ad Ephesians.
And Theophilact: He has saved us everlastingly, not by the works of
righteousness which we have done, but by the operation of his only
clemency, etc. And Anselme: This has come to pass through the great and
unspeakable love of God, that the only begotten son has delivered himself
over unto death, the maisler for the servant: Cur Deus. homo. c. 2.
the Creator, for the creature: that he has said unto man, Take my only
son, and give him for thee: that the son has said, Take me, and redeem
thy self, etc. And all the same treatise handles no other thing. And again,
how do we receive this grace? Haimo in c. 9. ad Rom in c. 3 ad Galat. super
Euang. in Oct. Pasch. Remig. in Psa. 10. and in 18. and in 19.
Haimo says: Of faith, and by faith we are justified, heirs through faith,
and not through the law: by grace, and not by merit: to the end that the
promise made unto the seed of Abraham may abide and continue firm, etc.
Remigius: All my faith is in Christ, I believe my self in him only to be
justified and saved: This is my mountain; This is my refuge, etc. The heavens
sing of the glory of God. And what manner of glory? verily (says he) for
that we are not saved by our works, but by his mercy. And this is the great
glory of God, that all having sinned, and all having need of this glory,
namely to be freely justified, even in the mercy exhibited by the Son,
Gisilb. in alt. c. 1. and 13.
etc. Gisilbertus: Faith went before the law, and without the law has
justified the faithful. Our father Abraham pleased God by faith, rather then
by circumcision. Many have perished notwithstanding circumcision: and many
before that it was, have been justified by faith alone: Christ is the
inheritance of the faithful, whom they receive by faith, Theophyl in Abac. c
2.
etc. Theophylact: The righteous man works by faith unto life, whether it be
that which is to come, or be it righteousness it self: Faith justifies in as
much as it vnlooseth sins: The law would justify men, but it has not the
power: faith therefore has done it, which justifies, Idem ad Romans c 9 Idem in
c. 3. ad Gal. Haimo in c. 1. and 3. and 4. ad Romans
and not works: yea (says he) Faith justifies only, and not works. The law
curses us, but faith blesses us, etc. But to be justified, is it not to be
made righteous? And then with what manner of righteousness? Verily says Haimo,
with the righteousness of Christ, by the which he makes the faithful
righteous, in bestowing the same upon them: and therefore it is called the
righteousness of God: And the same is applied unto us by the gift of God: that
is to say, by the redemption which is in Christ, and not by the works of the
Law, etc. Whereby it comes to pass, Idem in Psalm. 83. Gisibert. in alterc.
c. 8.
says he, that to show mercy, is not only to pardon and forgive the sins,
but also to gine righteousness. Gisilbertus says, This righteousness of God, is
not the same with that, by which he is righteous: but that wherewith he
clotheth the righteous, when he freely justifies the wicked. And it is to
this righteousness, that the Law and the Prophets bear witness. The Law,
for in that it commands and threateneth, but justifies not any man: it
shows sufficientlye, that man is not justified, but by the gift of GOD, by
the quickeninge Spirit. The Prophets, in as much as the coming of Christ
has fullfilled that, which they have foretold. Anselm in 1. Cor. 11.
And Anselme, The righteousness of God is by faith, by the which we believe
in Christ: And it is called the faith of Christ, after the same manner that
righteousness is called the righteousness of God: by which we are justified.
And they are said to be of God and of the Lord, because that both the one and
the other are the gifts of his bountiful liberality. Again; And by this
faith we are justified, not by the works of the Law, neither of nature,
neither yet by the power of free will; for justification is obtained by faith:
Idem in c. 10. ad Romans
and thus by the righteousness of faith, is accomplished the true
righteousness of the Law: yea says he, notwithstanding we be justified by
faith, yet it is gratis: for even faith it self is a frank and free gift,
proceeding from above, etc. Again; Idem in c. 5. ad Romans
My impiety (says he) meriteth not this benefit: but what is it then which
the piety of my redeemer meriteth? Neither yet my unrighteousness,
maliciousness or pride: but what is it then that on the contrary his
righteousness, goodness, and humility cannot effect and bring to pass? Yea
what is not the punishment of the Cross able to prevail in against the
kingdom of death? Or the Son of God made man, for the redemption of man;
especially seeing that with him and in him, al our sins are pardoned and
forgiven us, and all his graces given unto us? This faith therefore which
justifies, shall it go bare, naked and unaccompanied? Shall it not carry
with it good works? Yes rather it will appear and shine out more evidently by
works; but not therefore justify us by the works thereof. Haimo says: From
faith man comes to works, Haimo in c. 11 ad Romans
but not from works to faith: faith is conceived in the heart, uttered and
confessed by the mouth, and garnished by good works: and by this faith lives
the just and righteous man unto eternal life: but as for that which is without
works, it is dead. Idem in c. 1. and 4.
Now if Abraham himself had been able to have been justified, without being
assisted by the grace of God, then the gift of justification, should not have
been reckoned as a gift, but as a thing of duty: and then Christ should have
died in vain. Ausbertus: We must first believe, for after that a man
belieueth, he loves: Ausbert. l. 2. c. 2. in Apocaly p. Theophyl. in c. 6. ad
Ephesians. An Ielme in c. 1. ad Romans Ausbert. in A-Apocaly p. l. 10 c 22. Radulph.
l. 1. c. 1. in Leuit.
and faith and love do make us do good works. Theophilact, Charity without
faith profits nothing, yea, which is more, without faith it cannot be.
Anselme, By faith the soul begins to live, being before dead by
infidelity: And faith by which a man lives, works by love: because that
faith without works is dead. But Ausbertus says: How holy and righteous
soever a man may be, yet he is always in such case, as that he may still grow
and increase in virtue: whereupon the Psalmist says: Lord, should thou
forget to take pity upon me? etc. And Radulphus, Hardly can a man do any
good work, without the cleaving thereto of some sin, and therefore it is to
be feared, that so long as we expect and look for the recompense of perfect
devotion, God still exacteth the penalty of the sin, which we have mingled
therewith. And Anselme, Anselm. de mensur. crucis.
If a man should serve God a thousand years, and that with great zeal and
feruencie, he should not merit, ex condigno, to inherit the kingdom of
heaven one half day. For says he in another place: Works are by grace, and
not grace by works: Idem in c. 2. ad Galath.
and therefore no man by any means can be justified by works, but only by
faith, which proceeds of grace. And yet herewithall I am not ignorant, that
sometimes these self same Doctors do attribute much to works. As when Haimo
following Cesarius his trace, Haimo super Euang. in oct. Pasch.
sets down seven ways for the obtaining of remission of sins. And when
Rabanus recommendeth to the same end, fasting and alms deeds: and yet rather
as themselves say, To enter into a certain kind of recompense for their
venial sins (which notwithstanding is contrary to their own Maxims) then
to merit and rather thereby to show forth some tokens of repentance, then to
make up any work of satisfaction, etc. Then thus it behooves, namely, that
their Maxims stand firm and immovable, and that what they say more, be
squared and bounded by them; and that so much the rather, because such Maxims
are uttered by them, at such times as when they speak not after the conceit
of their own corrupt and carnal sense, but as searchers and seekers out of
the true and proper sense and meaning of the word of God. And yet
notwithstanding all this, we are far off from those kinds of doctrine, which
came to be preached in the beginning of this age, wherein we live, namely;
That works without faith do merit to receive and have faith given: That the
works of the faithful do merit and deserve eternal life: That Christians are
able to merit the same, not only for themselves, but also for others, etc. And
thus we are come to the year 1100. But this was the mischief, that that which
was preached ordinarily to the people by the Priests, whether covetous or
ignorant could, more prevail to lead them out of the way, then the other
which was written by these Doctors, who were not but for the learned, could
work to reduce and bring them into the way. And on the other side, that the
soil whereinto this evil seed fell, was very apt to receive and intertaine
this abuse; namely, the natural pride and presumption of man. And yet further
we are to note and observe, that which we have seen, entreating of the
invocation of Saints: that in the Catechism of the sick, or rather such as
draw near their death, Anselm. in Ep. manuscript.
drawn out of the Epistles of Anselme, they were daily taught to oppose and
set against the reproachful checkes of Satan, and the deadly accusations of
their own consciences, nothing but the only merit of our Lord: and against
the wrath of God for sin, no other thing then his righteousness. And for a
further proof, by a place out of Anselme; a sufficient scantling and taste
whereby we may see what consideration all the holy men of the same age,
Anselme in medit.
bad of this matter. My life (says he) does astonish me; for when I have well
and thoroughly sifted it, I find it either wholly sin, or else nothing but
barrenness. But and if there appear any fruit, it is either counterfeit or
imperfect, or else corrupted and spoiled, in such sort as that it cannot
possibly please God, yea that it cannot possibly but displease him. In sum,
either it is wholly inwrapped in sin, and thereupon damnable: or unfruitful
and thereby contemptible. But what cause or need is there, that there should a
difference be put between unfruitful and damnable? For being once proved
unfruitful, is it not by and by damnable? Seeing that every tree, that
brings not forth fruit is good for nothing but to be cast into the fire?
Thou therefore O withered and unfruitful stock that thou art, worthy of
eternal fire, what will thou answer in that day, when an account shall be
taken of thee, even in the twinkling of an eye, of all that time which thou
shall have spent? What will be the distress, that will then come upon thee?
When sin shall accuse thee, and righteousness astonish thee, the gulf of
Hell under thee, the heavenly Judge in heavy wrath and indignation over thee:
within thee, a conscience that boyleth thee: and without, the world which
sets thee on fire? And seeing that the righteous man is scarcely saved, the
sinner when he is come upon and taken at unawares, what hole or corner will he
seek out to shroude himself in? When it shall be impossible for him to hide
himself, and intolerable to appear and stand forth in sight? Whence shall I
borrow counsel, and where shall I find salvation and deliverance? Except it
be from the bosom of that Angel of the great Council? Even from my Jesus,
who is salvation it self? And yet also that Judge, under whose hands I tremble
and shake. Recover thy self and take better hold O sinner whosoever thou art:
despair not: hope in him whom thou fear; fly unto him, from whom thou
did fly and run away. Say unto him: O Christ, for the love of thy name,
deal and do with me according to thy name: look down upon me miserable
caitife calling upon thee. Be thou unto me a Jesus for thy name sake: If thou
receive me into the large and spacious bosom of thy mercy, there shall not
remain any more straightness or anguish through my misery for me. And
although I confess that my conscience has merited condemnation, and that my
repentance cannot suffice unto satisfaction: yet am I certain that thy mercy
is above all whatsoever manner of offenses, etc.

The age also following might seem rather to have amended then impaired the
premises: Lombard. l. 3. did. 27.
at the least if the time be considered in the things then written. Lombard
propounds a question: Wherefore the perfection contained in the Law, should
be commanded and given in charge to man: seeing that in this life no man can
attain thereunto? And answers; Because that no man runs right, if he
know not whether he must run: and how should we know that, Ruper. in Ioh. c.
1. l. 2. Hildeb. Ep. 43. Rupert. in Abac. l. 1. c. 1. Idem in Ioh. c. 11.
if it were not showed forth unto us in these commandments? Rupertus says:
To show thee thy sin, but not to take it away. And Hildebert Bishop of
Many: To the end it might be a caveat for the time to come, and not a cure
for any trespass already past: That is (says he) a preparatiue to the
receiving of grace. Seeing then the righteousness of the Law cannot be found
in us: and that we are not to appear before the eternal God without
righteousness, what other shall we have? Verily (says Rupertus) the
righteousness of faith, which lies in the promise of the coming of Christ:
wherein Abraham believed, and it was imputed unto him for righteousness: Who
(says he) justifies us, and teaches us that we are justified by faith, and
not by the works of the Law. And Honorius of Auston: It is in Christ, that
all men before and under the Law, Hono. in spec. Eccles. Ser^. de natiuit. Dom.
Rupert. l. 11. c. 13. in Ioh. l. 1. in Leuit. c. 17. in Psalm. 17. Idem in Ioh.
l. 7. c 7. Hyldebert Ep. 3.
as also under grace have been saved. And in him, that is to say, in his
blood, in which only lies the remission of sins. For says Rupertus: If
Christ had not washed his well-beloved from their sins in his blood, neither
Peter, nor any one of the rest had had any part with him: but in his blood is
washed away from us not only original sin, but also all our actual sins:
in such sort as that his passion and resurrection, is the sum of our
salvation, and the ground work of our faith. Again; We are washed,
sanctified, and justified in the name of Christ, and by the spirit of God. And
Hildebert applies it very confidently unto himself: I am not troubled or
disquieted within my self about the matter of my redemption: J have been once
redeemed by the blood of Christ; I have no cause to busy my self, in studying
how it may be brought to pass again: this blood is my ransom: this blood is
my price: it should prove and appear an unseemly thing, that I should go
about to redeem my self with a price: Yea me, whose price and ransom is
incomparable and vnprizeable, even Christ. And this Christ given unto us,
Honor. in Psa. 5. and 6. Idem in Dial. de predest. and libero arbit. Praemium.
Rupert. in Io. l. 2. c. 1. and l. 1. c. 1.
for a ransom for our sins, by the mere and free mercy of God: For says
Honorius; The faithful O Lord, are thy mercy: They are saved not by their
merits, but by thy grace: and the kingdom of heaven given unto them, according
to thy grace; and not according to their merits: for what can be man's merits or
deserts, but the reward of evil? And for what merit can be expect or look for
recompense at Gods hand? And Rupertus; The grace of the holy Ghost, is the true
and only remission of sins: We have received grace for grace, the grace of
eternal salvation, for the grace of present faith: unto the which faith we
are freely called, by the preaching of his word, without any precedent merits:
and justified by the free remission of sins. Grace freely given, is freely
bestowed upon us, by the only grace of Christ, even to us all which are
reconciled unto God by him: By the same grace alone, are we directed unto the
heavenly life, which we cannot possibly purchase or attain unto by any merits
of works. I am not more righteous then any other such like man, Idem in Ioh.
l. 5. c. 5.
save only through the free mercy of him who calls and justifies whom he
will, etc. And this grace is received of us by faith, yea by faith only.
Rupertus; Those that are deeply sunk down into the pit of death, in as much
as they are run backward and turned far aside from the living God, etc.
shall yet escape the danger of eternal death, due and deserved, either for
original or actual sins, yea they shall be brought unto the fort of
salvation, in confessing that one little word of faith. Again; Idem in Ioh l.
7. c. 7. Idem l. 10 c 19 in Apocalyp.
In Christ there is neither Circumcision, nor uncircumcision: faith only is
requisite, faith is the chief and principal justification, it is the
fountain and welspring of justification. And in an other place: Magniloqui
dicuntur, etc. Such (says he) are rightly called the greatest brauers, who put
their trust in themselves as being righteous, and thereupon presume of the
works of the Law. As on the contrary, those are called, and are truly poor,
which know themselves sinners, and perceive that they can no way be justified
but by the faith of Christ. And therefore (says he) it is requisite that this
conceitednesse of thinking to be saved by works should be laid down. Idem in
Soph. l. 2. c. 3. Idem l. 2. in Genes. c. 3. Idem in Esa. c. 8.
Without faith it is impossible to please God, it is in like manner impossible,
but by faith: Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, etc. were not saved any otherwise. For
righteousness is Ex fide, in fidem; of faith, and unto faith: Of faith that is
of him who has promised, who has sworn: Unto faith, that is of him, who has
believed in him that promised, and given credit to him that swore, etc. But as
for such as are not true Israelites, they have no such faith, for in seeking
and searching after their own righteousness, they could not stoop unto or
undergo this of faith: but have toyled themselves by seeking the same from
works to works: as if Abraham had been justified by works, when as the
Scripture testifies of him, Idem de Victor. verb. Dei, l. 4. c. 21.
that he believed and it was imputed unto him for righteousness, etc. Very
excellently therefore is it said: From faith to faith, for in that the Son of
God is come, etc. this proceeds of the faith fullness of God, of whom it is
written: God is faithful, etc. Namely herein, that David and others more have
not pierced him through with their sins; and that he accomplisheth by his
exceeding great faithfulness what he had promised of his exceeding great
grace. And this righteousness tends in fidem, unto an other faith, because
it is not possible, that any man should be justified before him, by his works,
but by faith: Idem in reg, l. 2. c. 39.
According to that which is said: If thou observe and mark mine iniquities, O
Lord, etc. And to be brief, he oftentimes utters these words: The only
faith of Jesus Christ is able to justify, etc.

Lombard likewise; Lo^bard. l. 3 d. 19. and 25.
We are justified by the death of Christ, that is to say, cleansed from our
sins, by faith in his death. Beholding him by faith, after the manner of the
brazen Serpent, we are delivered from the bands of sin and the Devil; in so
much as that he is not to demand or look for any thing at our hands. Without
faith in this Mediator, no man has been saved, either before or since; no
man was ever delivered from that condemnation that came by Adam, otherwise then
by faith, Idem l. 3. d. 26. Rupert, in Ioh. c. 1. Impraegnatam mentem. Lombard.
l. 3. d. 23, Honor. in Specul. Eccles. Richard in Apocal. l. 1.
etc. And this faith (says he) is of God, according to that which Saint
Augustine says: The mercy of God shall prevent me, the mercy of God shall
follow me, etc. That is says Rupertus: Because that to believe, is to have
conceived the seed of the word of God with love in his heart, as also to have
his mind and spirit conceived and laden with the same. And Lombard: To love
God, is by believing in him to cleave unto him, and to be incorporated into
him: by such faith the wicked is justified, inso much as that from thence
forward, faith works in him by love: for there are no good works but those
which are done by the love of God; and this love is the work of faith.
Honorius; He is most happy in deed, that belieueth rightly, and that together
with this belief lives well: but faith is the foundation, and the love of God
and our neighbors is grounded upon the same. And Richard; Of faith proceeds
charity, and of charity, do good works spring and grow. And what is all
this, but the same which we affirm daily: that faith cannot stand without
charity, any more then fire can without heat. That the life of faith, even as
that of trees, is known because it brings forth fruit. In a word, that we
are justified by faith only? And yet such a faith, as is never alone, but
which contains in it a certain heat, which is natural unto it, always
acting somewhat, never idle, continually bringing forth, as a fountain of
water, the effects of love, which it bears toward God, and the good works it
performs unto neighbors.

But Saint Bernard, whom we have so often heretofore cited, goes further then
all the rest: For there was in his time a certain man named Petrus Abailardus,
a very Pelagian, who durst say: That whereas Christ had abased and humbled
himself even unto the death, etc. that it had not been, but to have left us a
pattern of living well, and that our salvation consists not in his death and
passion, but in the growth and proceeding of our good conversation. Whereupon
he is not content to give him to understand, that this his assertion is the
same which the Apostle calls, the making of the Cross of Christ of none
effect: but takes his occasion and proceeds further; and having taken the
beasome once into his hand, he sweepeth not only this filth out of the Church,
that caused him to take it into his hand, but withal he applies himself all
under one to sweep away, whatsoever the Jew, Gentile, Philosopher, or
superstitious Monk, had brought and shuffled thereinto with their unclean
feet, or else was negligently looked unto, or tolerated by the sorenamed, it
having fallen out then, as it does oftentimes unto us now, who are not moved or
stirred up to remove and put away the thing that is evil, be it never so
great. And therefore reproving the ways that S. Augustine did walk in, he
deals upon the true justification in the blood of Christ by faith, more
exactly then all the rest.

Our master (says he) knew well that the Law did require more then was in our
power, Bernard. in Sermon. 50. super Cant. Idem Sermon, de verb orig. Idem Sermon 38
super Cantic. Idem Sermon. 11 in Annunciat. Mariae. Idem de milit. templ. c. 11.
Idem Ep. 99. Idem Sermon 22 super Can. fusissime.
but notwithstanding he would give it unto us, that we might be admonished of
our insufficiency: and that such and so great (says he) as that we are never
able to render unto God, that which we owe him: in such sort as that if we
should tear and pull our skins from off our backs, yet are we never able to
satisfy for our sins. But we have recourse unto the voice of the blood of
Christ, which has cried far louder then the blood of Abell, which
proclaims in the hearts of the elect, the remission of their sins. Unto the
Lamb (says he) without spot or blemish, that bears the sins of the world,
alone righteous, and by consequent, alone fit and meet to enter into the holy
of holies. Now if he only enter thereinto, he enters all whole without any
fail, not one of his bones shall be broken. The head shall not enter without the
rest of his members, his faithful ones, Cohaerentes fide, conformes moribus,
which are fastened unto him by faith, and made conformable unto him in their
manners. And they shall enter thereinto covered, and clothed with his
righteousness: For says he, He has given it them, it is imputed unto them:
he is made unto them righteousness from God, yea sufficient righteousness. And
seeing he is made righteousness unto us, it is ours, etc. And as for all our
own, it is nothing but unrighteousness: Idem in Can. sermon. 73. Idem Sermon. 1 in
Natal. Dom Idem de ^^pl. miseric. Dei. Idem de sept. miseric. Idem Sermon. 3. de
Aduent. Dom. Idem Dominic. 1. post oct. Epiph. Idem Sermon. 1. de Annunt. virg.
Mar. Initiat.
For there not the most holy that are, but they stand in need to pray for their
sins, to the end that they may be saved by mercy: Noe, Daniel, and Job, must
repair unto this fountain, Pari voto, with the same request, desire and
thirst, that all others. For even the sins that we daily commit, and which we
account but slight, are such as presently receive the sentence of condemnation
without any delaie. And mine own soul (says he) of it self, if God had not
sustained me, I both do and will confess, was ready and prone to fall into
all kind of sin. But (says he) behold and see his grace, he has justified
us freely, to the end that his grace might be the highlier esteemed of us. And
this grace does not only pardon and forgive us our sins, but gives unto us
his merits. For, to the obtaining of remission of sins, it is necessary to
have indulgentiam Dei, Gods pardon, and it is impossible to have any good
work, if he himself do not give it: but yet much more impossible to merit
eternal life, by any works, if it be not freely given, etc. Whereupon the
Prophet says: Blessed are they, to whom the Lord imputes no sin, etc. And
therefore (says he) we have need of a threefold grace, a converting grace, a
grace assisting us in temptations, and a rewarding grace. The first does rough
hew us, as being that whereby we are called: The second, does set us forward as
by which we are justified: The third does perfect us as by which we are
glorified. And the first is called the good pleasure of God: The second merit,
(but note by the way in what sense and signification he takes it:) And the
third, praemium a gift, wages, recompense, and all three graces. Of the first
it is said: Idem Sermon. 5. de Assumpt. beat Mar.
We have all received of his fullness: of the others, grace for grace: the
gift of eternal life, for the merit, that is to say, for the gift of temporal
warfare. And this grace of justification, sanctification, and glorification is
received in the Church by faith in Christ. For says he; The misled and
unadvised Sinagogue, which has despised the righteousness of God for to
establish her own, was rejected and cast off; but unto the spouse of Christ,
unto the true Church, it is said; Desponsaut te mihi in fide, I have betrothed
thee unto me in faith, judgment, righteousuesse, mercy, and compassion.
Neither must thou say, that thou have chosen me, for I have chosen thee: and
for to move me to make thee my choice, I did not find in thee any merits, but
it was of my self, who prevented thee: And therefore I have affianced thee in
faith, that is to say, not in the works of the Law, and in righteousness, but
that which is of faith and not of the Law. It remains then for thee to judge
betwixt me and thy self, seeing I have affianced thee, not according to thy
merit, but according to mine own good will and pleasure: Wherefore let it be
far from thee to object unto me either thy merits, or the works of the law,
or yet the heat of the day, or the scorching heat of the Sun, which thou
pretendest to have endured: but rather acknowledge that thou art affianced unto
me, both by faith, and also by the righteousness of faith, in mercy and
compassion. For the true spouse acknowledges both the one and the other grace:
namely, the preventing grace, as also that which follows and comes after
it. And what he says of the Church, he says of the faithful; as he does of
the members, that which he says of the body. Idem Sermon. 67. super Cantic.
It is sufficient (says he) to merit, to know that merits are not sufficient.
And not to presume of merits, is to merit; and yet not to presume upon them,
is to presume after a far more sure and certain way: for we have large
matter to glory of, even the ample mercies of the Lord, Idem Sermon. 68. super
Cantic.
and his truth which indureth for ever: That is to say, faith in his promises.
For is there not sure and certain matter for us to glory in, when mercy and
truth do meet together for us? etc. And all this by faith. Believe (says he)
that thy sins are forgiven thee by him, against whom alone thou have sinned,
and who alone is able to deface and blot them out: and thou do well. This is
the testimony which the holy Ghost bears unto our hearts, saying: Thy sins
are forgiven thee. Whereupon the Apostle says, that men are justified freely
by faith: Idem Sermon. 1. in Annunciat. Mariae. Idem super Cant. 22. Ep. 77.
Yea (says he) by faith only: And so Saint Ambrose understands him, in his
book of the death of Valentinian. And with such I am willing either to err or
to be wise, believing that man may be saved by faith alone, yea without the
receiving of the Sacrament, (for Valentinian died whiles he was of the number
of the Catechized) provided that he have a desire to receive it. And this it
may be, was the cause (says he) that our Savior having said: Who so shall
believe and be baptized, shall be saved, in that which follows, says only;
He that shall not believe, shall be condemned, etc. To show that only faith is
sometimes sufficient unto salvation, and that without it nothing avails. But
this faith by which the just man lives, does truly live it self: for
otherwise, how should it quicken and make alive? For by this faith (says he)
the heart is cleansed: And God cannot be seen, Idem l. 5. de confider.
that is to say, known, but of him that has a pure and clean heart. Neither
is this faith any doubtful belief: On the contrary opinion, when it is
grown to a constant assertion, does become fool-hardie; and faith, if it
become wavering, is infirm and weak. And therefore it appears by his
effects, and shows forth the life that is in it. The life thereof (says he)
is Christ dwelling in our hearts: Idem Sermon. 1. in Oct. Pasch. Idem ibidem.
and of a certainty, look where he dwells, he dwells not without love,
sanctification and good works. The life thereof is love, and charity: These
are the life of faith, as faith is the life of our souls. For says he, If
thou divide, actum a fide, action and working from faith, thou make an
unlawful division, and killest faith: Idem Sermon, 24 in Cant. Ep. 107. Idem
Sermon. de resurrect. Domini. 2. Idem de Sermon. omn. fester.
for faith is dead without works. And will thou offer unto God a dead
sacrifice, a faith without love, a body without a soul? etc. Nay (says he)
works do testify the life of faith: Our life is known by moving, and that
of faith, by good works. Now we reason thus: Man lives not, because he is
moved, but he is moved, because he lives: and then the faithful is not
justified, neither inioyeth he the life of his soul, because he does good
works: but because he is justified, because his soul inioyeth life in Christ
by faith, he does good works: These good works notwithstanding are such, as
if the righteousness of God be considered, are by him compared unto the most
filthy thing in the world: and such notwithstanding as they be, if you
consider them according to that small quantity of goodness which they
contain, they are of God, and not of our selves: Idem Sermon. de Annunciat.
Mariae.
the fruit no less then the tree. For says he, It is meet that the holy
Ghost should testify unto thee, that thou have them not but of him, he is the
author, the rewarder and the whole reward: This sovereign good thing, is a
twofold cause of good things unto us, the efficient and the final. And yet
further he says: Without grace we are not sufficient, only to think a good
thought. Idem Sermon. 9 in Psalm. 91. and Sermon. 32
In so much as that speaking of his own works, he attributes them unto God:
As in that his soul has not been given our from the beginning unto all
sin, in that it has been changed from bitterness and vexation into joy and
comfort, in that it has repented after a sound and profitable sort, Idem de
Sept. misericord.
contrary to the repentance of many others, in that he has obtained free
remission, in that he has been kept from falling back into his former sins;
in that he has profited in abstaining from evil, and accustomed the practice
of that which is good; and in that he hops and looks for a better estate in
the world to come, etc. Now then what remains for to attribute unto man? In
stead that of our adversaries we say, what reserve they then as a remainder for
God? For if we owe unto God, that which we pretend and challenge to merit by;
namely a faith working by charity, which is our pretended merit: (for what owe
we not to him, of whom we hold all that we have?) What hire can we pretend for
a thing that is not our own, but only his mercy, which has made it ours, and
which himself, according to the riches of his grace, will be ours? And this
is that, which this our good and bountiful father left us by testament: I know
well (says he) that I have not any merit, In ^^t. Bernar.
to bring me to heaven; but my Lord does possess it by a double title and
claim; namely by nature and obedience: he is himself content with the one,
and gives me the other, etc.

CHAP. XXI. How the doctrine and opinion of merit prospered, proceeded, and
went forward, from the time of Saint Barnard, until these our days. And what
contradictions and resistances were made against it, until the time of the full
springing up again of the Gospel.
But let us now draw near unto the year one thousand three hundred, wherein
Christendom felt a notable change in doctrine generally, but especially in
this article. Therein at that time Philosophy began to reign and ouertop the
sacred profession of Divinity, by the introduction and bringing in of
Schoolmen; so that Aristotle got the upper hand of Saint Paul: Sound and
grounded dealing melted into fine and filed subtlety, curiosity and
temeritie: the later envied the former, and that consequently from one to
another, even to the memory of our age. This scholasticall dealing fell
amongst the Monks; who added Pharisaisme unto Philosophy; seeking how to make
themselves highly reverenced amongst the common people, yea, and to make God
himself bound and beholden unto them, by reason of their austere and stoical
observations, devised and affected of their own voluntary inventions. They
engrossed for good debt which God should become answerable unto them for, all
their Masses, prayers, fastings, sermons, contemplations, watchings,
abstinences, and the discipline and correction usual in their Cloisters, etc.
And that to the making of them auailable, not only for themselves, (for they
were not unprovided of a remanet) but unto so many as became benefactors unto
their fraternities and couents. And to the common people they assigned them for
ready money, therewith to pay for and discharge their sins, to satisfy the
wrath of God, and obtain eternal life. Mighty therefore was the growth and
increase of this abuse, when once such multitudes of people, tanquam agmine
facto, lent their helping hand thereunto. And that so much the more, for that
they being mendicant and begging people, had their maintenance assigned them
upon the pretended merits of the common people, which also that they might the
better attain and come by, they assigned unto them eternal life, to be
received upon the reckoning of their devotions. And here we are not to forget
the manner and form of their donations and gifts, Bulla fraternitatum
Dominicanorum, and Franciscanoru^.
which were passed at this time to Monasteries, which was, as follows. Every
man must deeply weigh and consider, how swiftly this present life does pass
away, and that other approach and come on: and by the same means think and
consider with himself, if there be any thing in his possession, to give unto
worshipful places, for his souls health, that so he may merit to enjoy
eternal rest in Paradise, with saint Peter, and saint Andrew: because that
they by giving their goods, have purchased the kingdom of heaven. The
kingdom of God is worth as much, and according to that which thou possessest.
For what is there, that is more cheap when it is bought, or more dear when it
is possessed and obtained? etc. This was the declaration and manner of speech
used for the moving of their affections, whereupon insued their manner of
giving and disposing; upon this promise then, which was made unto them by the
Monks, I, N. carefully tendering the good of my soul, do give and deliver
unto the Monastery or Covent of, etc. such a piece of ground, etc. And we have
further seen upon the poor men's boxes in Cathedral Churches, within the time
of our own memory these verses.

Hic datur exponi Paradisus venditioni, etc.
Here is power and authority given to set Paradise on sale, etc.
But yet there are every where manifest signs of the degrees of the growth of
this abuse to be seen, which we accordingly will point out in that which
follows. Alexander Ales. p. 3. q. 28. membr 1 art. 5 and q. 60. mem. 10. art.
1. Thom. 1. 2. q. 55. art. 3 2.2. quest. 184. art. 1.
Alexander Ales, and Thomas Sage, very well: That the law is the ministry of
condemnation, not that it self is evil, but for that it shows forth that
which is evil. But Thomas breaks loose in a certain place, and against all
antiquity says, that the law persuades not any impossible thing, but draws
us on unto perfection: in so much, says he, as that it seems that man is
able to fulfill it. And yet to accomplish and fulfill it, Non optimo modo, says
he, sed in fimo: not after the best manner, but at the least in the simplest and
weakest manner. And he gives an example for proof thereof: Behold (says he)
the least and simplest manner of fulfilling the commandment of loving God, is
this, not to love any thing more then him, contrary to him, or inequall manner
with him. There are other more perfect degrees of loving him, but he that can
attain unto them is no transgressor. Now to insist in the same example, I
demand, who is there, or ever has been in the world, that was able to
attain thereunto? that has not set himself down a great way short on this
side? And whether this be not in plain and proper terms, to come to one and
the same point with the Pharisie, I have fulfilled and kept all this from my
youth? etc. Alexander Ales. p. 3. q. 1. memb. 6. art. 2. q. 28. memb. 2. art. 1.


Again, Alexander and Thomas do teach very excellently; that the sin of man,
in respect of God, against whom it is committed, is infinite, and could not be
sustained or undergone, but by the word made flesh, that is to say, by God
himself. Thereupon then they were to conclude, that no man was able to find
any means of pardon or righteousness in himself neither yet how to come by
them, Thom. in Sum de ver^t. matter. 28 Idem 3. Sum. q. 68. art. 1. Idem in
Apoc. c. 1. and ^n sam. de verit. matter 29. q. 7. Idem in Apoc. c. 3.
but in the Mediator: for what is there more repugnant unto the pretended
merit? For indeed they affirm, that before the coming of Christ, no man had
power to be saved but by faith alone in Christ. And then not by the
accomplishment of the law, but rather of mere grace, as they say sometimes.
That remission of sins is given freely: That what we have by the efficacy of
Christ's merit, is freely bestowed, etc. But behold again how Philosophy
carries them away from us, after the free will of Aristotle. Five things (sath
Thomas) are to be considered in justification: First, Dignatio Dei, the
clemency and bountifulness of God, by which he vouchsafes to rouse and awake
the sinner: Secondly, the consent of free will, disposing him: Thirdly, the
infusion of grace justifying the soul: Fourthly, the merit of the justified,
profiting in grace: Fifthly, the nourishment of consolation, which refreshes
the soul. Wherein he makes the freewill of man a ioynt-worker in the matter
of his salvation, with the first grace: and by that means meriting the
infusion of justifying grace, and thereby afterward the increase of grace,
Idem in Apocal. c. 7. and 12.
etc. even to say, That man jointly working with the grace of God, by
contrition, confession, satisfaction, etc. does wash himself: and that the
devil is not only overcome by the passion of Christ, but also by the merits
of the righteous, etc. And after this manner do Albert, Alexander, and others
speak now and then, giving out their lessons by which they teach, what works
enable a man to discharge himself of his sins, at the least such as are
venial. Albert. in Luc. 11.
As Albert; That venial sins are raunsomed, by beating upon the breast,
Pater-nosters, making of signs of the Cross, holy water, confession, etc.
dividing the work of our salvation betwixt God and us Grace, and Free Will:
whereupon such as followed after, did know very well to draw to themselves
the better part. But let us a little examine and see the coherence of this,
with other of Thomas his principles, and let us note in him, that which
elsewhere we have said of Philosophers, namely, that oftentimes they grow deaf,
Thom. aduer. Gent. c. 44. l. 1.
and cannot hear their own voices. To be saved (says he) or to be damned
comes not of the diversity of merits, but of the principal intention of the
first Agent, that is to say, of God, who (says he) of mere grace, has from
all eternity purposed to let some to fall, and fail, and to succor and
assist others, to the end they may not fail or miss, to the end that he may
show in the one the power of his grace, and in the other the defect of nature:
Idem in l. 1. Sent. d. 40. and 41.45.
no man being able by merits, to come from the state of nature, to the state of
grace, but only by the grace of God, which he is not drawn to give, either
for any sight of precedent merits, nor yet through foresight of any manner
of merits in us to come. On the contrary, we see in man, a merit and desert,
whereby to harden his heart: but for any merit tending to the moving of
merc^e, we find none: No not for the grace which is given him unto
justification, and then much less unto predestination: for having chosen from
before all eternity, those whom he pleased, what manner of merits could there
possibly be to move him thereunto? Now this is Thomas which speaks: And I
demand how these Maxims, which he groundeth so surely and substantially, can
agree with the merit of eternal life? the beginning whereof is given and
granted from eternity: and the end whereof is likewise from eternity
ordained, without any regard or consideration of merits.

It may be they will say, the means which come betwixt this eternal decree,
and the final execution thereof, are of our selves: at the least we merit
them in some part, by the concurrence and iumping together of our free will.
Nay rather this is against nature, that he which has fore appointed, and
resolved of the end of a thing of his mere and free grace, before that he
caused it to be of nothing, should not give unto the same thing, Idem in Sermon.
de verit. matter. 27.
by the same grace, the means to cause it to become and prove such. And
therefore (says he) Man is not only said to have the grace of God, because he
is beloved of God unto eternal life; but also because he gives him a gift, by
the which he makes him wore thie of eternal life, which we call, gratiam,
gratum facientem: Grace which makes a man acceptable: that is to wit, this
faith infused by the holy Ghost into our hearts: by the which (says he) all
the fathers of the old Testament became acceptable to God, and justified, and
whereby we also are delivered from sin, and death. And this faith (says
he) quickens the soul by grace, Galat. 2. It purges it from sins. Acts
17. etc. It gives righteousness unto the soul, Romans 3. It betrotheth and
affianceth us unto God. Osee. 2. Iden in 1.2. q. 102 art. 5 Idem in expos. 1.
Decret. In offic. de corp. Christ. In Hymno. Tert. sum. q. 4.49. arr. 1.
AEgid. Fom. c. 12. l. Examer. and l. 2. c. 4.
It adopteth men to be the sons of God. 1. John. 2. It causes us to approach
and draw near unto God. Heb. 11. Finally, by it men attain the hire of
eternal life. John. 6. etc. Again, To establish and strengthen a sincere
heart, only faith suffices, etc. By faith the passion of Christ is applied
unto us, that so we may be able to receive the fruits thereof; Romans 3. It is
unto us, both the beginning and cause of righteousness. Romans 8. That
righteousness which is by the faith of Christ, etc. Yea and yet Aegidius says
further: That all our good works are the works of God: Thou have, O Lord,
says Esai, wrought and brought to pass our works: And we are not sufficient
(says the Apostle to think any good of our selves; it is he which makes us
righteous, and which effects in us the works of righteousness. Now were it
not better to hold him to these Maxims, and to the conclusions necessarily
ensuing hereof, as that we owe unto the infinite grace of God our
justification, to the perfect and absolute righteousness of Christ, our
righteousness, to God by Jesus Christ, the beginning, midst, and end of our
salvation, according to the Scriptures, then (according to the curious
Meditations which happen unto the most excellent wits, when the dry and
barren vein ouertaketh them) to seek our salvation in our selves, in whom
there is nothing to be found but destruction, or for any thing wherewith we
may pay God, or wherewith we may purchase eternal life, both for our selves
and others, out of our own stocks and provision.

In the mean time, we see how the succeeding ages learned to build upon
these strawie, and stubblie foundations. Thomas had said: That free will moved
by the grace of God, proceeded unto good works, and became fellow-worker with
his grace. These men say, That free will of his own nature, does such works
as that they merit, that God should illuminate the worker with his grace, give
him faith, etc. In such sort as that the unbelievers do merit of God by their
works: not any more the gift of faith and righteousness, but faith and
righteousness for a hire, which they call, Meritum de congruo, as a man would
say, of well beseeming: meaning thereby, that if not for righteousness, yet at
the least for seemlinesse sake, God is bound to give them his grace. See I pray
you how this matter agrees with the Scripture: Whatsoever is done without
faith cannot please God: With Saint Augustine, The works of all unbelievers
considered in them, are sins: As also with Thomas: Whereas God is moved to
distribute his grace, it is not in consideration of ante merits gone before, or
to come, but of his free grace and good will, sed ex mera gratia. And this is
the same likewise which the Schoolmen say in their dunsicall doctrine: That
man by his natural power, doing that which is in himself; without faith, and
without the holy Ghost, is able to merit, de congruo, that God should give him
grace. And Gabriel Biel expounds these words: Gab. Biel. in 3. sent. d. 27.
In 4. Sent. d. 14 q. 1. d. 14 l. 3. q. 2.
That which is in himself, loving God (says he) above all things. And this he
affirms that, Man may do of his own natural power, Whereas notwithstanding
in deed the case stands thus, that love proceeds from knowledge: and that
imperfect knowledge cannot beget perfect love. Yea he passes further: for
(says he) as no subject receives any form, except it be prepared and fitted
thereunto: even so it is requisite, that our soul should be prepared for the
infusion of grace, which is our formal righteousness before God: and this it
comes to be by the means of free will, which makes a man to know his sin,
and to be displeased with himself for the same, which he calls,
dispositionem praeuiam: after which he resolves to love God above all, which
he calls, dispositionem concomitantem: which makes the soul apt to receive
the stamp and mark, namely the infusion of his grace, by this act so meriting
the same: even so far forth as that grace of necessity, and that very
speedily is infused into it. Neither more nor less (says he) then in
natural things, vltima and immediata dispositio necessitat ad formam: Which is
as much to say in plain English, as that our free will does not only merit
grace at Gods hand, for seemelinesse sake, but even of necessity and
perforce. Quite contrary to that which Saint Paul repeateth so often times,
By grace. Thomas likewise: Mera liberalitate, meragratia, etc. As also clean
contrary to that, that he makes Grace the beginning of our salvation, in
intention: and the effectiue in the execution, etc.

Thomas again had said: That free will delivers by the grace of God, and
works certain actions, auailable to the purging and taking away of venial
sins, as also to the stirring up of the increase of grace. But such as come
after stay not there: For this infused grace of God, by the merit of the
free will of man is turned by them into a state and disposition of the spirit,
made conformable to the Law, and will of God: by which, Man (says this
Gabriell also) is not only delivered from bond of damnation, but also is made
worthy of life and eternal glory: And the soul (says he) informed and
taught by this grace, by an action drawn partly from this grace, and partly
from a man's own will, does merit eternal life, not any more de congruo, that
is to say, of congruitie, or for seemelinesse sake, but de condig no, for
having done a deed worthy of the same, that is to say, by righteousness. For
even so do they define it: That the works of the regenerate done in charity
in this life, deserve eternal life; in as much as it is to be rendered and
given to good works, by the duty of the righteousness and justice of God.
Rom 8.18.
Clean contrary to that which Saint Paul says: But eternal life is the
grace of God, etc. The miseries of this life, that is to say, the tortures and
torments, that we suffer for the name of Christ, Are not worthy, Non sunt
condignae of the glory which is to come, etc. As if they would use this word
(Condignum) of purpose in despite of the Apostle. Durand. l. 2. D 18. q. 4.
art. 12. Arist. 8. Ethic.
And Durand likewise says in plain terms: That no man can merit:
De^condigno, according to the justice of God, either commutatiuely or
distributiuely: That such merit has his place in the dealing betwixt man and
man, but not with God: that the Philosopher teaches us, That in things that
concern God, Fathers and Mothers, there is no equiualencie or equality: That
to gainesay the same, cannot be without temeritie and blasphemy: That though
God should not give eternal glory to him that should die in grace, yet he
could not be called unjust; no not though he should take it away from him that
had it. On the contrary, that God might say unto him, that which is in the
Gospel: May I not do with mine own, as best likes me? And what should such
a party have to reply, but only the saying of Job: The Lord gave it me, and
the Lord has taken it away from me, etc. Jn as much as every good thing
whatsoever, is of the free gift of God, etc.

Afterward, Thomas had said: That there was some manner of means for man to
fulfill the Law, although not in the highest degree and most absolute manner,
yet after a meaner and weaker fashion. But these men say much more: That it may
not only be perfectly fulfilled, but things much more difficult; as namely,
some such as whereunto we are not any way bound, and therefore be called and
are works of Supererogation. And that as by the fulfilling of the Law, we
purchase eternal life unto our selves; so by the working of that which is over
and above the Law, we purchase the same for others: In which rank, the
traditions of men are reckoned and placed, Deuteronomy. 12. Numb. 15 Esaias. 1.29. Mat.
15.
as also their voluntary devotions, afflictions, affected fastings, whippings
and beating, etc. Of all which things God has said unto us: Do not that which
seems right in your eyes, but that which I have commanded you. Who has
required such things at your hands? It is in vain that you worship me
according to the precepts of men, etc. To be short, a graie Friar became so
shameless, in the Council of Trent, as to declaime, expounding the second
Chapter of the Epistle to the Romans: That those who had lived before the
Law, had obtained eternal life, without the faith of Christ. And we read in
a book, entitled, Flosculi B. Francisci: That all those that were come into
the world since the time of Saint Frances, calling upon him, were saved by him.
And we have seen it, that to wear his hoode, was held for a second Baptism;
to die in his hood, or to put his hand only in the same at the time of death,
with an intent to wear it, as worthy a work as to suffer martyrdom. And
what shall we say, when as yet to this day, to bear about blessed grains, cast
Pictures, and such other the Romish merchandise, are accounted to be as so many
steps to lift a man up into Paradise, Romish ceremonies.
or to bring him back out of Purgatory? When as also their Agnus Dei are
consecrated with this blasphemy: That they may have the same power to deliver
us out of the power of the Devil, that the Son of God, the unspotted Lamb,
slain and offered upon the Altar of the Cross, had to blot out our sins, to
obtain our pardon, and to relieve us with grace: and that such grace, as
whereby we may both merit, and receive eternal life?

We were come then so far (neither can we yet get out) that we would not be
any more indebted unto God; and withal we had robbed him (if it had bin
possible) of the honor of our creation. So mightily had pride (masked under
the shadow of humility) wrought in us, as that we failed not willingly to arm
our selves with our own righteousness, and therein to wrestle against his:
whereas indeed our misery should have brought us on our knees, and have taught
us to implore and sue for his mercy. Yet all these monstrous blasphemies were
not uncontrolled: For as S. Paul opposed himself to them of the Circumcision,
S. Augustine against Pelagius, and S. Bernard against Abailardus and others of
his time: so in this age wherein the Schoolmen and Mendicant Friars stepped
forth for the upholding and fortifying of the same, the Waldenses and
Albigenses, did oppose themselves thereunto, of whose Articles this was one:
That every belieuer is justified by only faith in Christ, etc. Wickliefe in
England in the year 1400. in the open University: Profess. fidei Waldens. ad
Vladislaum reg.
John Hus and Jerome of Prague in the year 1415. in the Council of Constance:
and Jerome Sauonarola in the year 1490. or there about, whose books are so
full of most excellent places for the proving of free justification, against
the pretended merits of whatsoever Saints or Martyrs; as that it would beseem
us to set them down here word for word, and the rather because he was a man
so highly esteemed of in Italy, Tota meditat. in Psalm. 5 1.
as that the Count Picus Mirandula called him the holy Prophet, and took upon
him boldly to defend him in a book written to that purpose, against the Pope.
And what shall we say, Adrian. 6. in 4. Sent.
when they themselves in our time, upon the beginning of the reformation of
Religion, were even ashamed thereof? Certes, Adrian of Vtrecht, who was
afterward Pope Adrian the sixth, says plainly: Our merits are a staff of
Reed: whereupon if a man lean, it breaks, and the shiuers thereof run into
his hand: Our righteousness a defiled cloth; upon this cloth of a good life,
which we have a purpose to weaue up with the works of righteousness, we
continually distill and let drop, Clithou in Cant.
the purulent and filth^^ matter of diverse crimes, etc. And Clithouius said at
Paris: Our merits are none before God, unto whom we owe all: our good works,
if there be any such, are not good unto him, but through his goodness: our
righteousness is nothing but filthiness, etc. In like manner Johannes Ferus a
graie Friar, whom they have in our days termed to be the chief and
principal Preacher and Doctor in all Germany, is censured by Dominicus a Soto
a Iacobine and Spaniard, in 67. places, but principally for having spoken evil
of this Article, according to their intention, in his Commentaries: In whose
defense one Michael Medina a Spanish gray Friar, has purposely written and put
forth a book. The truth is, that he teaches; Ioh. Ferus in Mat. l. 1. In Ioh.
c. 1. v. 4.13.17.19.
That all our old birth (for so he calls the man not regenerate) and all the
powers of our nature are condemned in the Scriptures: that we are nothing but
sin and darkness: that our thoughts, speech, reason and will, are accursed:
that our light, if the same be not enlightened by the word of God, works
nothing in us but error and going astraie: that even the Law, howsoever good
in it self, without grace, begets nothing but hypocrites: that without
faith there is no good works; and that none but such as believe can work
them: that in the regenerate, not only after Baptism, Idem in Ioh. c. 13. v.
10. etc. 14 v. 16 and. c. 16. v. 9.
but even after they become to an actual faith, there abides continually a
remainder of original sin, which brings forth sin in us; whereupon it
must consequently be avouched, that no man is without sin; and
notwithstanding that such as believe do not cease therefore to be clean, that
is in as much as they be purified by faith, and by the same ingrafted into the
body of Christ, participating his holiness, and possessing himself: according
to that which S. Paul says: But you are washed, but you are sanctified, etc.
And that notwithstanding that considered in themselves they are nothing but
sin: yet there is no condemnation for them with God, who does not impute unto
them any their sins and uncleanness, but rather reputeth them for pure and
clean, because of their faith in Christ: Moreover, that this faith which
justifies us, is not any other thing then the free mercy of God: forgiving
sins for his Christ's sake, which only is requisite in us unto salvation, etc.
and it works in us a certainty of the same, so far forth, as that it
leaves us not without a pledge and earnest penie of eternal life: that by the
only merits of Christ we are saved, and made partakers of the same merits by
faith alone. In all which points he does very notably agree with us, that is
to say, with all antiquity; and consequently is condemned by the Council of
Trent, in diverse Canons in the sixth Session.

Now of all this discourse we gather: that this doctrine of free justification
in the blood of Christ, by faith has been of a long time kept and maintained
in the Church in his purity, howsoever deadly assailed by Satan, and that at
diverse times in diverse depending points, as the Sea and seat of our salvation.
That notwithstanding it has been subject to manifold and diverse great
alterations and changes, through the proud and presumptuous nature of man,
through the doctrine of Philosophers, through the subtilties of the Schoolmen,
and the Pharisaical hmuour of the Monks: In so much as that (notwithstanding
the courageous defense of the same by diverse worthy and great personages,
holding unto the year 1200. and more, for the grace of God against the
ingratitude of man,) the said Pharisaicall doctrine did prevail and get the
upper hand: and yet not so absolutely, but that at the same time it was still
impugned and confuted, almost throughout all the nations of Christendom, by
many good people, and that even to the suffering of death for their confession:
being also mightily and soundly crossed by their Maxims, by whose fine
conceits and subtle devises, it had been chiefly established: that in it
there is happened unto us, as it falls out in the Countries far North,
wherein the brightness of the two twilights, do happen and fall out so near
together, as that the day is no sooner dead and departed on the one side, but
it quickneth and reuiueth again on the other: This Article having been no
sooner shut in and covered with the darkness which had ouer-spread and
ouershadowed the Church, but that we might see it incontinently after, more
splendent and glorious then ever it was before. Wherein we may note the
singular goodness of God toward his Church: for in as much as justification is
that point of Christian doctrine which joins man and Christ together, which
makes the proper difference of the Church, from all other sorts of
assemblies: and of a Christian from all other men, as being that, without which
no man can be a Christian: with which alone well understood, we retain both
the name and the effect: and to be short, which may be called by good right,
the life of a Christian, the soul of the Church, the bond of the marriage
betwixt Christ and his Church: it was surely very necessary (seeing that God
according to his promise cannot destroy his Church:) that this article should
be conserved in the same: that such Eclipse as should cover the face thereof,
should be but short, to the end it might return unto his former brightness and
light. In a word, (as Physicians say, that the heart is the first living, and
last dying part in man:) That this heart also of the Church, by which it began
to live, (notwithstanding first assailed and set upon by the venomous poison of
Satan,) was the last that was mortally wounded and stricken, and the first
again recovered: as for certain it is come to pass in our days, wherein God
(making his Gospel as it were to live again, after so long a time of death
and darkness) would of his incomparable grace, that this point should be the
first restored into his former estate and perfection by them, whom he had
raised for the restoration of his Church.

Now in this third part we have entered into the consideration of the Mass, A
brief rehea. (...) of that which has been said before this third book.
in the quality of a Sacrifice: so it remains for our better coming to our
selves again after so long a discourse; that we briefly repeat the same,
which we mean to perform, in manner as follows. The Mass is properly a
corrupting and adulterating of the holy Supper of our Lord: and the Supper of
our Lord was not ordained for a sacrifice taken in his proper signification,
but for a Sacrament. Neither can it be called a sacrifice except for that it is
a holy action, or else because it is a commemoration of the sacrifice of our
Lord once made upon the tree of the Cross for our sins: or thirdly, for that
it is a thanksgiving for the benefits received by him. Wherefore the Mass
cannot properly be called a sacrifice, and much less a propitiatory
sacrifice: in as much as the whole Scripture, and all antiquity do teach us,
that there is not in the Church, any more sacrifices truly propitiatory, then
one, even the blood of our Lord, shed for our sins, represented and shadowed
out under the Law, by all the sacrifices then in use: and fulfilled in the
time of grace, in one only, which ought not, neither can be reiterated,
without sacrilege. From this pretended Sacrifice of the Mass, have been
derived and drawn Masses for the dead, through such an abuse much like to
that which is condemned by diverse ancient Councels, namely, the giving of the
Eucharist unto the dead. Withal we have showed that there is no Purgatory:
that the old and new Testament did never acknowledge it, as neither the first
and most ancient antiquity, if so be they take it not from the heathen: as
also that those which have spoken of it, did not mean the same, which our
adversaries embrace and maintain; but rather that this is an opinion, which
cannot by any means stand and agree with that of theirs: and how that hereby
Masses and Suffrages for the dead, swarm upon the face of the earth. From this
pretended sacrifice likewise have proceeded and sprung the Masses said in
honor of Saints, in which they were both prayed unto and worshipped, yea even
to the offering up in sacrifice, in honor of them, of the Son of God
himself, if one would believe them. Further we have showed that the
invocation and worshipping of Saints, is condemned throughout the whole
Scripture, old and new, and by all true antiquity: that the beginning of this
doting madness, was taken up by the imitating of the heathens in their
Paganism; showing further the manifold contradictions, that were maintained
against the same, for a long time: and thus the whole service of Saints, a
great portion of the Papists doctrine falls down to the ground. And for as
much as Invocation is grounded upon the merit of Saints, and this Merit
oftentimes alleged in the Mass, and that even in their speaking to God, for
the remission of sins; we have verified and auoucht it, that there is not
any manner of meriting at Gods hand, allowed or taught either in the Scriptures,
or in the ancient writers, neither yet in the purer sort of the new and latter
writers; except such as they themselves are at this day ashamed of. In sum,
that there is neither sacrifice, name, nor merit, which ever saved the dead, or
which ever was able to preserve the living; but the only name, merit, and
sacrifice of one only Jesus Christ, God and man, dead for our sins, and
risen for our justification: To whom with the Father and the holy Ghost be
honor and glory, for the riches of his grace eternally, and everlastingly,
Amen.

The end of the third Book.
The fourth Book. Wherein the holy Supper of our Lord is handled and entreated
of as a Sacrament, and consequently of the Mass, and it is a treatise of
Transubstantiation.
CHAPTER. I. What a Sacrament is, and wherein it consists: And of the
difference betwixt the Sacraments of the old and of the new Testament, where
are set down certain rules of the old writers, for the understanding of them.
HItherto we have entreated of the Mass, as it is a corrupting of the holy
Supper of our Lord, in the quality, or under the name and nature of a
sacrifice, it follows now that we examine it, as a counterfeit of the same in
the quality of a Sacrament; a matter entreated of so exactly by many great
personages of this time, as that it may seem a very unadvised and needless
thing after them to enter into the same matter, not treading the steps wherein
they have gone before. Notwithstanding because this work would remain lame
and imperfect, if it should want this part, I will deal thereupon, but so
briefly, as possibly may be, standing not so much upon the matter of dispute,
as the course of the story: to the end that that which seems at the least to
have his stay and maintenance from ancient writers, may be confessed and
acknowledged, not to have any manner of recommendation at all, more then that
which it reapeth from the very newest and latest writers, that have sprung up
in the Church of Rome.

The Law was no sooner given to man, but sin insued thereupon: neither was
sin so soon hatched, but that presently thereupon, man received the writ of
condemnation, and sencibly felt the punishment thereof: whereupon likewise the
Gospel was preached unto him, Gene. 3.
by Gods own mouth: namely, in the promise of the holy seed, which should
bruise the head of the Serpent: and in the incarnation of the Son of God, for
the redemption of mankind, for the remission of our sins. And this Gospel is
the reconciliation of God with men, by the blood of our Lord, shed effectually
before the foundation of the world, in as much as from the same, he has
wrought the salvation and redemption of the Patriarchs and Prophets: and to be
short of al them which have been saved either without the Law, or under the
law: shed notwithstanding naturally in his appointed and determined time, even
when our Savior having taken our flesh, was stretched upon the tree of the
Cross for us.

Man in the mean time in his blindness and perverse nature became unable
either to see or believe this excellent mystery, if God had not revealed it
unto him: The necessity of the sacraments.
but able on the contrary, quickly to forget it, according to our ordinary
negligence and carelessness in heavenly things, if it had not been represented
and set before his eyes continually. And afterward, what appearance or
likelihood could there be conceived of sinful man, unthankful to God, and
condemned and cast away in his own conscience; that God would vouchsafe to be
his God; that he would reconcile himself unto a vile and unprofitable
creature; that he would make a league with dust; give himself to him for a
perpetual inheritance, and deliver his only Son, to suffer a shameful and
ignominious death for him? All of them being works of a bottomless depth of
mercy, toward a most miserable creature, who waited and looked for nothing
else, in the guiltiness of his own conscience, but a bottomless Sea of wrath
and indignation.

This therefore was the cause why God, our Creator, the beginning, middle and
end of our salvation; not content to have promised and given his Son to our
first parents, unto reconciliation and redemption, and in their persons unto
their true posterity, which is the Church, does renew from time to time this
Gospel unto his children, this glad tidings of the league and covenant made
with his faithful ones, for their salvation; giving them sometimes Prophets
to preach his Christ that was to come, and sometimes Apostles, to testify and
bear witness unto him, already come in the flesh, dead, and risen for us.
This is the ministry of his holy word, evermore continued in his Church. He
furthermore ordains for them, Sacraments of this covenant, made and
accomplished; earnest pence and palpable pledges of the certainty of his
promises, testimonies of his faithfulness, and remedies of their distrust and
diffidencie: which speak and testify outwardly, both unto their ears and
eyes, by the analogy and agreement of their nature, and inwardly to their
understandings and hearts, by the working of the holy Ghost accompanying them:
namely, that this covenant is certain, that they in particular are
comprehended and contained in the same, etc. And which more is, they work
within, a faith of the free promises of the Creator, of the remission of sin
in his Son, etc. a confirmation of that most near conjunction, that is
betwixt the faithful and God, an union with Christ, by the bond of his holy
spirit: such as the members have with the head, from which they draw salvation
and life. Whereupon it follows, that they are made new men, for so much as
the power and efficacy of the spirit of Christ, does convert and turn them
into his nature, draw them from their own, regenerate and cast them anew by
little and little, and that both in their affections, as also in their actions,
to put their trust in God, through Jesus Christ, to renounce and forsake
themselves, for the love of him, and to wish well and do well unto their
neighbors, but especially to the members of the same body, both in him and
for him.

Now therefore this is the office and part of the Sacraments: What a sacrament
is.
and thereupon a Sacrament to define it properly, is a holy ceremony
instituted of God, added to the promise of grace made in Jesus Christ; to be an
earnest penie and certain testimony, unto all the faithful, that this
promise of grace, expounded and explaned in the word of God, is particularly
exhibited, ratified and applied to him, unto salvation. And such were amongst
the old people, from the time of Abraham and Moses, unto the coming of our
Lord, Circumcision and the Passe-ouer, instituted of God to such end; in stead
whereof there were ordained for us by our Lord holy Baptism, and the holy
supper, to continue to the end of the world. It consists of a sign, a thing
and the word. Genes. 17.10, 13. Romans 4.


Of these Sacraments the Scripture speaks after this sort. Of Circumcision:
It shall be unto you (says the Lord) for a sign of the covenant, betwixt me
and you, and my covenant shall be in your flesh, for an everlasting covenant.
Thus of the sign. And S. Paul: Abraham (says he) received the sign of the
Circumcision, (...), the seal of the righteousness of faith. And we know that
the righteousness of faith is that which is freely promised and given in Jesus
Christ our Lord. Now behold the effect, and so by consequent a perfect
Sacrament: Deutr. 10. ^o^. 2 28. Exodus 12.
according to that which Moses says, Circumcise the foreskinne of your heart.
And S. Paul; Circumcision is not that which is made in the flesh; but of the
heart; in the spirit. Of the Passe-ouer: The blood of the Lamb, is unto you
for a sign, in the houses wherein you shall be: 1. Corinthians 5.
I will see this blood, and pass over. But this blood, says the Apostle, is
the blood of Christ: Christ our Passe-ouer was slain for us, etc. Behold here
again both the sign and the thing: and both the one and the other by the
word, that is to say, by the institution of Christ, who has ordained the sign
for the thing, and given the thing with the sign; otherwise naked and
unprofitable, not answering the effect, that is expected thereof. This word in
the Circumcision is this: I am the Lord Almighty, etc. I will set my covenant
betwixt thee and me, Genes. 17. Exodus 12.
etc. In the Passe-ouer; The tenth day of the month, let every man take a
Lamb, etc. In which places God instituteth and ordains these Sacraments; and
gives them by his institution, perpetual power in his Church: as by these
words once spoken; Increase and multiply, he has given for ever his blessing
unto holy marriage.

The same is that of the Sacraments of the new Testament. Baptism receives us
into the covenant of God, in stead of Circumcision: the holy Supper, in stead
of the Passe-ouer, does nourish and maintain us therein: whereupon the one is
properly called Regeneration; as a man would say, a new birth: and the other,
The communion of the body and blood of our Lord, to our nourishing unto
eternal life. In Baptism water is the sign; the blood of Christ is the thing
signified: water, which washes away the spots of the body; blood, which
cleanses and wipeth away the sins of the soul, namely by the mediation of
the word, or institution of God, accompanied with his holy spirit which gives
efficacy and power unto the Sacrament. Of the sign S. John Baptist says:
Mat. 5. Act 1. 1 Cor. 12.13. Coloss. 2.11. Romans 3.^. Galat. 3.27. Tit. 3 5.
I baptize you with water; but as concerning the thing; He will baptize you
with the holy Ghost, namely the Lord. Of both together, the Apostle says: We
are baptized into one spirit, buried in baptism, into the death of Christ, and
raised again into his resurrection, and saved by the washing of regeneration,
and of the renewing of the holy Ghost. In so much as that the word, that is to
say, the institution of the Lord, added to the element of water, works
supernaturally in our souls, by the holy Ghost, the same that water does in
our bodies, by his natural property: Baptize ye in the name of the Father,
the Son, and the holy Ghost, etc. And we shall say the same hereafter, but
more largely of the holy Supper, The new Testament of the Lord in his blood:
Which, being instituted to the same end, is also of the same nature with the
other Sacraments: the bread and wine, for signs and tokens most fitly agreeing
with the true and perfect nourishment of the faithful, that is in Christ; a
food and nourishment that cannot better be expressed, then by that of our
bodies, which turn into their substance, that which they eat and drink: save
only that the communion of the body and blood of Christ, has this over and
above, because of his power which is infinitely more mighty then that of ours,
namely, that it conuerteth and changes us into his substance, makes us flesh
of his flesh, and bone of his bones: and causes us to live in him and by him,
etc. Whereas our bodies being stronger then the thing which they eat, do
cause and make the same to live after a certain manner in them, turning it
into their substance. The signs therefore, are bread and wine; and by that
name, they are continually called of S. Paul, and that even after the words, as
they call them of consecration: The thing, that is the Communion of the body of
Christ broken for us, and of his blood shed for our sins: 1 Cor. 10. and 11.
The word, that is the institution of the Lord; which comes thereunto: Do
this in remembrance of me, show forth the death of the Lord unto his coming,
etc.

This is the same that the old writers say; that Christ is the only salvation
of the Church, The Israelites were partakers of one and the same thing with us.
in all the several terms and times of the same, whether before the Law,
under the Law, or under the time of grace: that he is figured in all the
sacrifices, and exhibited in all the Sacraments, as well old as new: as they
which are at all times unprofitable without Christ, and which cannot be
fruitful, but in Christ, who only, is both the foundation and the substance.
Saint Paul said to the Corinthians: J would not (says he) that you should be
ignorant, etc. that our Fathers have all eaten of the same spiritual meat,
and all drunk of the same spiritual drink: 1. Cor. 10.
for they drunk of the spiritual rock which followed them, and that rock
was Christ. The Apostle expressing by the words of eating and drinking, the
communion which they had in Christ; even Christ slain, sacrificed, and
crucified who otherwise did not profit either them or us. But some make
answer: that S. Paul means, that they did verily eat amongst themselves of
one and the same meat, etc. but not of the very same that we. This is the
thing that we must see and try. Certainly the scope and drift of the Apostle
is plain, as to show unto the Corinthians, that they deceived themselves, to
put their trust in the use of the Sacraments, not ceasing in the mean time to
provoke God by their abuses. But says he, our Fathers had Sacraments as well
as we: they eat and drunk the same meat and drink; and notwithstanding,
such of them as provoked God, could not put off or avoid their destruction. If
S. Paul had not meant it by way of comparing of the Christians with the Jews;
what should the force of his argument have been? And had they not liberty to
have replied, they did not eat Christ as we do? etc. But the old writers
shall decide us this controversy.

Tertullian; This water (says he) which distilled and ran from the rock,
Tertul. de Bapt and aduer. Marcion. l. 0.
which followed the people, was Baptism: for if the rock were Christ,
undoubtedly we see that Baptism is blessed through the water in Christ.
Again; Marcion has stricken himself against the rock, whereof our fathers
drunk in the wilderness, etc. Origin; The same which the Jews call the way
and passage through the Sea, S. Paul calls Baptism: and that which they call
the cloud, Orig. in Exodus c. 7. hom. 5.
he takes for the holy Ghost, and would have it to be understood according to
that which our Lord says in the Gospel; If a man be not borne again of
water, and of the holy Ghost, he cannot enter into the kingdom of God. Again;
the Manna which the Jews took for carnal meat, is called by him a
spiritual meat, etc. And he goes over it again a little after in the same
Homely. S. August. in Iohannem tract. 45.
Augustine: The times are changed, but not the faith: in diverse signs is
signified one and the same faith, as in diverse words, they believe the same
things to come afterward, which we believe to be already come: and therefore
says the Apostle: they have drunk one and the same spiritual drink: yea
spiritual not corporal, for they drunk of the spiritual rock: and the same
was Christ: thus you may behold one self-same faith, but diverse signs. There
Christ is the rock, unto us Christ is that which is set upon the Altar. And
they for a great Sacrament of the said Christ, did drink the water that ran
from the rock. But as for us, the faithful know what we drink: if thou
regard and look upon the outward form which is visible, it is an other thing,
but if thou look upon the invisible signification, they have drunk the same
spiritual drink, etc. And in another place; They have eaten the same spiritual
meat. What is this same, but that which we our selves do also eat? Idem de
vtilit. paenit.
etc. Certainly I know not what should be the meaning of the same meat, if it
be not that which we our selves do eat. For there were some that tasted Christ
in their hearts, more then the Manna in their mouths, which made a spiritual
construction of this visible meat, etc. and did hunger and thirst after it,
etc. Again expounding this place of S. John, This is the bread that came down
from heaven, etc. The Manna (says he) the Altar of God, etc. Idem in Ioh.
tract. 26. and in Psalm. 77. Epiph. l. 1.3.
have signified this bread: These things were Sacraments, diverse and dislike in
the signs, but like and the very same, as concerning the thing signified. Give
ear to the Apostle; now brethren, I would not have you ignorant, etc.
Epiphanius reasons after the same manner that Tertullian does against
Marcion. They did eat (says he) the same meat, and drunk the same drink,
even Christ: and in truth says the Apostle, and not in show or appearance
only. They object and allege against us in this point Saint Chrysostom, who
in truth speaks of the Manna and water, as figures of our Sacraments. But so
as that he adds these words: Chrysostom. in 1. Cor. 10. Idem in Homil. Nolite
ignorate fratres.
Howsoever these things were sensible, yet in deed the truth is that they
ministered unto us the apprehension of spiritual matters: not by the
consequence of nature, but by the grace of the gift, and nourished the soul
with the body, inducing and persuading them unto faith, etc. Likewise
expounding this place elsewhere, in an Homely for the purpose, he finds
therein, in diverse considerations, an equality: and in deed the argument of
the Apostle does otherwise lose his force. Likewise the similitude that
Chrysostom uses, in the same homely; That one and the same king is delineated
and drawn, with a former and sleighter draught, and afterward set forth in
lively colors, and yet is evermore the same king. So Christ in the two
Testaments, Bed. in 1. Cor. 10.
and in their Sacraments, etc. Beda upon this place, uses the very words of
S. Augustine, without changing any thing therein at all. Bertram a Priest, in
the time of Charles the bald: Thou ask (says he) what same meat? Verily,
Bertram. in l. de corp. and sang. Dom.
that same which the believing people of these days do eat and drink in the
Church: for it may not be permitted, that diverse things should be meant and
understood, seeing it is the same Christ, that in the desert fed at that time
with his flesh, and gave his blood to drink, unto the people baptized in the
cloud and in the Sea, and which now feeds in the Church, the believing people
with the bread of his body, and gives them to drink of the water of his
blood, etc. And if thou object unto him: But how? Seeing he had not as yet taken
upon him man's flesh; and seeing that as yet he had not tasted of death, for the
salvation of the world? etc. Verily (says he) this same Almighty power,
which turns spiritually the bread and wine at this day, into the flesh of his
body, and into the drink of his blood, did also then inuisibly, make the
Manna given down from heaven, his body, and the water which flowed from the
rock, his blood. It is very true in deed that our Fathers of Trent had
provided, not a dainty dish, but a black dash, for the same in their Index
expurgatorius: ordaining of their wonted faithfulness and true dealing, that
these places should be razed out of Bertram. Index expurg. p. 11. Paschas.
Raper. decorp. and sang. Dom. c. 5. Hug. de S. Victor. in 1. Cor. and q. 80.
Anselm. in 1. Cor. c. 10.
Paschasius, Rapertus, Abbot of Corbie, in the year nine hundred, or there
about: and Hugo of Saint Victor, about the year a thousand one hundred, did
teach the same, though somewhat more harshly then others, that have dealt in
this matter. And these are the terms they use: Non materia, sed
significatione: The same meat, not in matter, but signification: Idem
significantem, velidem efficientem: Jn as much as it signified the same thing,
or wrought the same effect. For say they; That meat was of the same efficacy
with this. Anselme; They did eat in their Manna, the same meat that we do in
our bread, and drunk the same drink of the blood of Christ from the rock,
that we drink from the Cup. And by that means, did eat the same spiritual
meat that we, though it were of an other body: because they did understand
the visible meat spiritually, hungered spiritually, and tasted spiritually,
that they might be spiritually satisfied and refreshed, etc. And therefore
(says he) it is not said, The rock signified Christ, but the rock was
Christ. For so the Scripture is accustomed to speak, calling the things
signifying by the name of those that are signified, etc. And thus speaks the
most part of the Schoolmen. Gratian. C. Inquit. C. in Illo. c. 10. Thom.
Aquin. in 1. Cor. c. 10. Hugo ibid.
Gratian in his Decree, fetches two express and evident Canons out of Saint
Augustine, touching this point. The ordinary Gloss likewise says: They did
eat Manna and drunk of the rock, etc. Signs of Christ which wrought the
same effect in the belieuers. And this was (says it) the same faith. Thomas,
The same spiritual meat with us: but an other corporal, namely the Fathers
which believed in Christ. And Cardinal Hugo very openly, The body of Christ,
the blood of Christ; and thereupon produces the place of Saint Augustine,
Believe, and thou have eaten.

But some man may object: Wherein our Sacraments excel.
What is then the prerogative of a Christian? What is there more in our
Sacraments, then in the old? The answer is clear and plain: the word
Prophetical and Apostolical are of one efficacy, Christ is in the one and in
the other, equal and like unto himself every where: so far as that our
Lord speaking of the Prophetical Scriptures, says, Examine them, for you
believe to have eternal life in them. Thus it is with the Sacraments of the
old and new people: and notwithstanding the word and Sacraments of the new, are
not without their prerogatives, not in substance, but in circumstaunce, not in
kind, but in degree. They agree in this, that they show forth, promise,
signify and exhibit the same communion of Christ, by faith and the holy
Ghost, by the which the elect, since the time of Adam, even to the last man
upon the earth, are to be saved. For without this communion, there was no
salvation, either in the old or new people. They differ, for that under the old
Testament, our Fathers had this communion in Christ to come; and therefore the
work of grace was the more obscure unto the^: but we have it in Christ come in
the flesh, etc. and therefore the same grace more bright and clear. Again,
they agree, in that they seal up salvation and grace to all them in general,
that do receive them in faith: They differ herein, that the old ones were not
properly ordained, but for the posterity of Abraham: but these latter and new
ones, for all the nations upon the face of the earth, that are ingrafted into
the Church, and in the Communion of Christ, in the faith of Abraham. To be
short, they agree, in that they seal up unto us the covenant with the same
God, through the same Christ, for the same reconciliation; whereupon follows
the same fruit, even the remission of sins and eternal life: They differ in
this, that God which has of old spoken by his Prophets, has now vouchsafed to
speak by his own Son; in so much, that we may say with Saint John: That
that which was from the beginning of the word of life, we have heard with our
ears, seen with our eyes, and touched with our hands, etc. And we have also
greater helps, to raise our faith unto a further assurance of grace, by how
much the accomplishment is more then the promise; the exhibiting of him in the
flesh, of more efficacy to move us, then the expectation thereof; and for that
amongst the senses, one is more quick and certainly proving then the other;
and that which is perceived many ways more perswasiue, then that which is
comprehended but one way: and that which is known of the goodness of God, in
the sending of his Son crucified before our eyes, more strong to beget in us
an assuredness of his mercy, and by consequent of his love toward us, and
our inlightning with him, then that which he had spoken unto us by his
Prophets, or figured by his sacrifices in all the times that went before. And
yet in the mean time the old Sacraments cease not to be figures of ours, as
Circumcision, of Baptism; and the Passe-ouer, of the holy Supper. But
certainly, antitypes rather then types, and correspondent figures, not bare
and naked figures; figures, which contained the very same thing, although not
in the same manner, although not in the same degree of clearenesse and
amplenesse. Chrysostom. in hom. Nolite ignorare.
And here it is that Chrysostom his similitude takes place: The Painter
(says he) that goes about to draw the counterfeit of a king, lays the first
lineaments and draught thereof in colors that are more dark and shadowie,
wherein notwithstanding is well perceived the Kings proportion and physnomie:
but when he has laid his liueliest colors, and has fully finished it in all
points, then it is altogether an other manner of thing, Idem hom. 17. in Ep. ad
Haeb.
and yet notwithstanding it is the same thing. And this likewise is in handling
the place of Saint Paul. So say we of Circumcision and Baptism, the one and
the other do graft us into the Church, and seal up unto us our new birth:
Coloss. 2.
in so much as that Saint Paul calls Baptism Circumcision, and Circumcision
Baptism: When you have put off (says he) the body of the sins of the
flesh, in the Circumcision of Christ, buried with him in Baptism. They differ
notwithstanding both in ceremony and clearenesse, because that he in whom they
have their power is come, and was to come: and in their large and wide reach,
rather the^ in any their greatness, in as much as Circumcision was ordained but
for the posterity of Abraham, and that also but for a time, whereas Baptism
was ordained for all nations, and that to continue unto the end of the world.
Which thing S. Ambros. in 1. Cor. c. 10. August. de nupt. and concupisc. ad
Valerium. Bed. in Luc.
Ambrose acknowledges, when he says: That the people of the old world were
baptized in the Sea, that is to say (says he) that they were thoroughly
purified, and that their sins were not imputed unto them. Saint Augustine;
That by Circumcision they were delivered from original sin. And Beda: That
in respect of remission of sin, Circumcision differed not from Baptism. And
the master of the sentences, That it had power to forgive sin, And after him
all the Schoolmen. He adds, but not to confer grace: But very foolishly,
for what is remission of sins, but grace, and great grace, and mere grace?
We shall say the same of the Passe-ouer, and of the holy Supper. In the one
and in the other are signified the offering up of our Lord upon the Cross, and
the shedding of his blood for our sins: but in the Passe-ouer, such sacrifice
and shedding to be done, in the holy Supper such sacrifice, and shedding of
blood already done. Both in the one and the other, are eaten and drunk the
body and blood of our Lord: in the one the thing given with the figure, no
less then in the other the figure given with the thing. And every where it is
spoken of by the terms of eating and drinking: and every where by the name
of celebrating a memorial: as also every where by the name of a Testament and
of a covenant made in blood: So far forth as that Saint Paul calls the
meat of the one and the other, the same meat. The fathers our Supper, by the
name of Passe-ouer; and the Jews Passe-ouer, by the name of Supper. The
difference is, that the true Lamb has been crucified, which was to be
crucified; whereupon our Sacrament is the more clear and plain: given for the
sins of the world, and not of the posterity of Abraham only, and hereby
also it is the more famous and renowned. Finally ordained to be continued, even
till the coming of the Lord, and therefore permanent and unchangeable.

This is that which Saint Augustine says: Testimonies of the Fathers. August.
contr. Faust. l. 19 c. 16 Ritus Propheticus.
It suffices to show unto Faustus the Manichee his ignorance; and to make him
see how deeply they dote, who think that for the changing of the signs and
Sacraments, the things might become diverse: namely, those which the
prophetical service has declared to be promised, from those which the
Evangelical service does witness to be accomplished. Again, The flesh and
blood of this sacrifice were promised before the coming of Christ, by the
similitude of sacrificed beasts: in his Passion it was expressed by the same
truth; and after his ascension it was celebrated and spread abroad, by the
Sacrament of his memory. Again, Venturus, and venit, diuersa verbasunt; He is
to come, and he is come, are diverse words, Idem in Ioh. tract. 26. l. 20. c. 21.
but the same Christ. The Sacraments were diverse in signs, but alike in the
thing: to such as hoped not for, neither yet believed in him, it was Manna and
water; but unto them that believed, the same Christ which is at this day. And
notwithstanding says he; Ours are more easy, Idem in Psalm. 73.
fewer in number, more reuerens and more blessed. More easy for certain, for
the understanding and conceiving of things already come, is ever more easy,
then of those that are to come: fewer in number, for in stead of so many
sacrifices and Sacraments, figuring out Christ, S. Augustine does not
acknowledge any more then these two Sacraments: more renowned; for they are,
spread abroad with the Church, even to the ends and uttermost corners of the
world: more blessed, for by them we are freed from the weighty yoke of
ceremonies. And notwithstanding the spirit of God is shed forth more
abundantly in the new Testament, then in the old, in as much as the
springhead and fountain is broken forth by the coming of the Lord, upon all
people (whereas it was hidden or sealed up for the most part;) that they
themselves to whom it is opened, may draw out thereof abundantly; in as much
as of a more clear knowledge, springs a more powerful faith; and faith is
the hand and vessel, by which we receive the graces of God, whereof we draw
out of this fountain, and that more mightily and abundantly, according to the
measure of our knowledge and faith.

We have handled this matter somewhat the more largely, because that the
demonstration of the matter we have in hand, depends in part on this
proposition: for the better understanding whereof we have also to presuppose
certain other Maxims, held of the ancient writers which do follow. And this
shall stand for the first, That Christ is the substance of all the Sacraments,
as well of the old as of the new Testament; and that in them he was received,
yea drunken and eaten, that is to say, most nearly communicated, as the
Apostle has told us.

The second, that they teach us. is; that the same Christ which is received in
the Sacraments, Christ received in the word, in such sort as he is in the
Sacraments.
is also received in the word, yea drunken and eaten in the same: in as much as
the Gospel is the power unto salvation, unto all belieuers, the word of
reconciliation, which regnerateth us of an incorruptible seed, forgiueth us
our sins, imputes unto us righteousness, makes us one with Christ, and
finally works in us the same that the Sacrament. And this doctrine is not
ours, but the doctrine of the fathers. Orig in Leuit. hom. 9.
Origin says; Sit not down to rest thy self in the blood of Christ, but
learn rather, and take hold upon the blood of the word: and hear him which
says unto thee: This is my blood which shall be given for you, for the
remission of sins: For he that is seasoned with the knowledge of mysteries,
Hieronym. in c. 3. Ecclesiast.
knows both the flesh and the blood of the word of God. Saint Jerome: For as
much as the flesh of the Lord is very meat, and his blood very drink in
deed, Iuxta (...), in a more high and mystical sense, we have only this good
thing in this world, to be fed with this flesh, and to have given us to drink
of his blood: not only (says he) in a mystery, that is to say in the
Sacrament, but in the reading of the scriptures: for the true meat, and the
true drink, which is received of the word of God, is the knowledge of the
Scriptures. And therefore says S. Augustine, That Jesus Christ is preached by
tongues, by Epistles, and by the Sacraments of his body, and blood, etc. That
is to say, that the Sacrament is a dumme word or, as he himself calls it,
a visible word: the word, a speaking Sacrament, a Sacrament received by
hearing: that is to say, Christ; and life by Christ, in them both.

The third, that every Sacrament consists in three things: in the sign, A
sacrament consists of the sign, of the thing, and of the word.
in the thing signified, and in the word and institution of God: The sign
given by the Pastor, and received by the hand of the faithful, which goes
into the stomach: the thing given of God, and received by the faith of the
faithful, which goes unto the soul, and that by the mediation of the word,
and working of the holy Ghost, which accompanies it, which goes together with
the thing signified, in the sign, and yet not changing it in his nature, but
rather making it of a bare Element a Sacrament; of a common creature, a sacred;
and of an earthly, an heavenly one: to be short, the instrument of our
regeneration, conjunction, and union with Christ, wherein lies our life. The
sign which is visible: the thing, that is to say, grace, which is invisible,
the operation of the word, and of the spirit, incomprehensible. And again,
the sign, which has properly his analogy and proportional relation to the
outward man: Grace, that is to say, the thing signified, to the inward man:
inasmuch as he is renewed, nourished, and fostered by the spirit, in his spirit,
unto which the Sacrament is properly offered: unto the soul, I mean, not unto
the body: unto the inward spirit, August in sermon. ad Infant ad alt. de sacram:
Idem de cruit. (...) 10. c. 5. Idem in Quaest. super Leuit. q 84. Idem de Corp.
Christ. Chrysostom. hom. 83. in Mat. Anno 900. Raban. l. de Sacr. Euchar. c 9.
Pach. de Corp. and Sang. Christ. Lombard. l. 4. d. 1. Bernard in Sermon. de Caen.
Dom. The sign called of the Fathers by the name of the Sacrament. Tertul.
cont. Marc. l. 4. Hilar, de consecr. d. 2. Chrysostom. in Mat. hom. 83. August in
Ioh tract. 26. Idem apud Great. exsenten, Prosper. Romans 2.
and not to the outward senses. And this thing also we shall be thoroughly
instructed in by the fathers. S. Augustine says: A Sacrament is a visible
sign of an invisible grace: a sign of a sacred thing, wherein is seen one
thing with the outward sense, and an other thing is understood of the spirit.
Again, The Lord sanctifies by an invisible grace, by the holy Ghost, and
there lies the whole fruit of the visible Sacraments: without this what are
men able to profit? etc. Again, A Sacrament is a ceremony, wherein, under the
covert of visible things, the divine power works more secretly, and privily
our salvation. Chrysostom: Christ has given us insensible things insensible
ones. Rabanus: A sacrament is called all that which by the ordinance of God is
given unto us for a pledge of our salvation: when the thing visibly done, does
inuisibly work within us all manner of other things, etc. And Paschasius, and
Lombard in the very same terms. And Saint Bernard entreating upon this
matter, gives us an example. A Sacrament, says he, is a sacred sign. A
Jewel may be given only for a Jewel: but it may be given also to inuest and
set a man in possession of an inheritance. And then we say the Jewel is of
small value: and that it is the inheritance that we look and seek for. And
thus (says he) our Lord drawing near his death, had care to inuest his elect,
and put them in possession of his grace: for which cause this invisible grace
was given unto them by some visible sign, etc. Where we are to observe, that
the word, pledge, and the similitude of the Jewel, or ring, are of
antiquity. And this for our definition. That which we call the sign, the
fathers do sometimes call the Sacrament: how soever ordinarily this whole holy
action is so called: As when they say, That the Sacrament is diverse and
differing from the thing of the Sacrament, that is to say, that the thing is
one, and the Sacrament of the same another: that is to say again, that the
sign is one thing, and the grace which is the thing signified, is an other.
The figure is one thing, (says Tertullian) but the thing of the figure
another. The figure is one thing (says Saint Hillarie) and the truth another.
The figure that which is seen without, the truth is that which is believed
within. The sensible thing (says Saint Chrysostom) is one thing, and the
intelligible another. The Sacrament (says saint Augustine) is one thing, and
the power of the Sacrament another. The Sacrament of the thing (says he) is
that which some take and receive to life, others to destruction. The thing,
that is to say, grace, whereof the Sacrament becomes a Sacrament, that is to
say, a sign, that no man does communicate to his ruin and destruction, but
every man to life and salvation. And hereof we have examples. In Circumcision,
under which many had the sign and not the thing: whereupon we see that the
Prophets call the Israelites; Of uncircumcised hearts. And saint Paul says,
That Circumcision became to them uncircumcision. And in the Manna, wherein some
(says saint Augustine) did eat nothing but Manna alone; but others did taste
and feed upon the body of Christ. In Baptism, which he says, that Simon the
Magitian received without the i^uisible grace, the sign without the thing.

The sign and the thing notwithstanding, The near conjunction betwixt the
sign and the thing.
(for as much as they cannot be considered the one without the other, being
correlatiues, and so the one presupposing the other, are so conjoined and
coupled together, that the one is oftentimes named for the other: wherein the
fathers do solemnly forewarne us, to take good heed that we take not the sign
for the thing nor the thing for the sign. For the sign is the sign of the
thing signified: for, but in regard thereof, it cannot be a sign: and on the
contrary, it cannot be both the sign and the thing together, neither in
whole, nor in part; no more then a son is not a son, but in respect of a
father: and cannot notwithstanding be a son and a father at once, in one and
the same respect: so Circumcision the sign of the covenant, is called the
Covenant, and the Passage, or Pascal Lamb, the Passover, or Passage; the
rock Christ, and the water of Baptism, Regeneration, etc. All of them being
but signs or remembrances of the covenant, Circumcision of the heart,
communion with Christ, Regeneration of man, etc. which could not be, both the
signs and the things at one and the same time. August. ad Bonisacium. Ep. 23.
And therefore says Saint Augustine, The Sacraments, that is to say, the
signs for the similitude and likeness which they have with the things, do
take the names of the things themselves. And he gives this example: To morrow
shall be the passion of our Lord; to day Christ is risen again; we are buried
with Christ by Baptism, etc. In like manner, he says not (says he) we
signify the burial: but plainly, and absolutely, we are buried, calling the
Sacrament of the thing, (that is to say the sign) by the name of the thing it
self. Again, Idem in Leuit. l. 3. q. 7. and co^t. Adimant. c. 12 Ep. 102.
The thing which signifies, has bin accustomed to be named by the name of
that which it signifies: As, the seven ears, are seven years; he says not,
signify: the rock was Christ, he says not, signifies Christ; as though it
were that in substance, which it is not but in signification, etc. Which thing
Theodoret calls a commutation of names, of the sign or Symbol, to the
thing: Seeing (says he) that God would that those which receive the divine
mysteries, should not rest and content themselves with the things which they
see, but that they should believe, through the change of names, the
transmutation that is made of grace: Not (says he) that the nature is changed,
but that grace is added thereunto. That which is brought in, as said by Saint
Gregory, Gregor. in Dial. l. 4.
may we also say together with him: That in the celebration of the Sacrament,
the high and heavenly things are joined to the low and earthly, and the visible
to the invisible, etc. But Saint Augustine gives us a rule, which we are not
to exceed or pass: August. in doct. Christ. l. 3 c. 5.
It is (says he) a miserable servitude and slavery of the soul, to take the
signs for the things, This is Carnaliter sapere: not to taste any thing but
flesh, to be carnally wise, which is the very death of the soul, etc. The
Jews did obstinately pitch and rest themselves upon the signs: Christian
liberty reuerenceth not a profitable sign instituted of God: but that
whereunto such signs are to be referred, etc. that is to say, for that the
sign and the thing are Correlatiues. And, as (says he) it is a slavish
weakness, and a point of servile infirmity to take the signs for the things
signified; Idem de Trin. l. 9. quaest ex Nou. Test. c. 59. Idem cont. Maxim. l
3. c. 22. Idem in 1. Cor. c. 10. Idem in 2. Cor. 3. Tho. in tract. de differ.
verb. divine. and Lum. Sum. q. 1. art 6. vbi allegat, Petra erat Christus.
so it is a very deep deceit and error, to interpret them unprofitably. And
by name he takes for an example the Sacraments of the Christian Church,
especially Baptism, in an other place: We see therein (says he) water, but
the spirit which is not seen, works therein, which washes away the sins
of the soul: and as visible things become profitable to such as are able to
see: so the spirit to the spiritual, etc. And in another place; In the
Sacraments we are to regard, not that which they are, but that which they
signify: sunt enim signa rerum (says he) aliud existentia, aliud
significantia: for they are signs of things, which are another manner of thing
in themselves then that which they signify. And Anselme in the same sense: The
holy Scriptures call the things signifying, as the signified: for that the
signs seem to make representation of the things they signify: whereupon it
is said: The rock was Christ, which was only by the way of signification, and
not of substance. And in another place: It must be carefully anoyded, that a
figurative speech, be not expounded and taken according to the letter: for this
were carnaliter sapere, to have a carnal taste, etc. and Thomas in like manner;
And indeed the difference betwixt them is so great, as that they cannot be made
one. For Saint Augustine says oftentimes: God only gives the thing: but both
the good and the evil may give the sign. And Chrysostom; When thou art
baptized, August. contr. Maxim. l. 3. c. 22 in Ioh. tract. 5. and con. liter.
Petil. l. 3. c. 4.9. Chrysostom. in Mat. hom. 51. Le^ de Natiuit. sermon 4.
it is not the Minister which baptiseth thee, it is God himself who holds
thy head, by an invisible power neither Angel, nor Archangell durst once touch
thee therein. And Leo the first, Christ gave to the water, the same which he
gave to his mother, the same that made her to conceive the Savior; namely, the
operation of the holy Ghost, gives the power of the regenerating of man, unto
the water, etc. And Anselme, who is not one of the oldest writers: Wherefore
does God alone (says he) give the thing, and men the sign? Verily, because
that without the mediation of his word, the sign is a mere naked and bare
sign: yea it ought to loose and forgo the name of sign, in as much as the
thing whereof it is the sign, cannot be joined thereto. So the Circumcision
of the Turks is nothing: for it is without the institution of the Lord; and as
little is that of the Moors worth, notwithstanding they be Christians: and yet
the sign is there entire; the ceremony, entire. And so although that Manna
should rain down to morrow, yea and albeit water should gush out of the
rock, yet this should be but Manna and water; this should not likewise be to
Christians the participating of Christ: it was that unto the Jews. In the
apple which Adam did eat in the Garden, there was no venime, and
notwithstanding it was deadly unto him: for that the transgressing of the word
of the Lord does beget and bring forth death. In these Sacraments, how precious
so ever they be, there is no gain or good to be got, without the institution
of God; for his word is the life thereof. And this is that which S. Augustine
says: The signs of divine things are visible, wherein we honor the invisible
things: Signacula. August. de Catech. rud. c 26
and yet notwithstanding we must not hold the kind which is sanctified, by the
blessing thereof, as that which is of common use: for there must regard and
consideration be had, what the word does signify, which has been pronounced
upon it, as also that which lies hidden in the same, and whereof it bears the
similitude and likeness. Iren. likewise; Iren. l. 4. c. 34.
The bread having received his style of the word of God, is not any more common
bread, but it becomes an Eucharist, which consists in two things, the one
earthly, and the other heavenly. And the same had been said by him of all the
Sacraments. S. Ambrose; What have thou seen in the mystery of Baptism?
Water: but not bare water. The Apostle has taught thee not to behold or look
upon the things which are seen, but those which are not seen: think that
the Divinity is present therein. Will thou believe the operation and effectual
power thereof, and not the presence? etc. The water, without the preaching of
the Cross of Christ, is of no effect unto salvation, etc. And S. Augustine
again; August. in Io. tract. 30.
You are clean, by reason of the word that I have told you. Wherefore (says
he) did he not rather say, by reason of the Baptism, wherewith you are
washed, if it be not this, that it is the word that washes in the water? That
Baptism is consecrated and hallowed by the word? Take away the word, and what
is the water but water? The word is put unto the Element, and it is made a
Sacrament: for this is also a visible word. From whence comes this great
force and power to the water, that it should by touching of the body wash the
soul, but in that the word makes it such? And that not because it is spoken,
but because that it is believed: for in this same word, the sound which passes
and goes away, is one thing, and the sound which abides and staieth within is
an other thing. Read the Apostle, and see what he adds thereto, to the end
that he might sanctify the same, making it clean by the washing of water, in
the word: washing should not be attributed unto this liquid and fluent Element,
if there had not been added thereto; In the word.

And notwithstanding, all that which God sets before us in the Sacraments,
Faith receives and takes hold upon the Sacrament.
sanctified through his word, is unfruitful and unprofitable unto us without
faith, for by faith alone, it is made appliable and apt to be received of us.
Whereupon also we said: that the grace offered to us therein, is received by
the faith of the faithful, as the sign is received of his hand. For the
Sacraments give not faith: faith receives them, and they increase it. Eue^ as
the word of God being outwardly heard, gives not faith, but faith receives
and nourishes it: faith, I say, begotten in us by the word, not that which
beats our ears, but by the inward, which knocks at the door of our heart,
in the efficacy and powerful working of the spirit. So was Circumcision given
to Abraham, not to the end he might have faith: but, for a seal of the
righteousness of faith (says the Apostle) which he had had in the time of
uncircumcision. And S. peter, Repent and be baptized, Romans 4.
for the remission of your sins. And the little children, or their fathers for
the^ answered therein, Credo: for that the Sacraments are ordained for the
faithful, not to the end they may believe, but because they do believe; not to
the end they may be received into the covenant of God, but in token that they
are received thereinto already: as meat unto men, August. Sentent. 338. and in
Ioh. tract. 26. de cruit. Dei. l. 25. c 25.
not to the end they might learn to eat, but to the end, that eating they might
be fed and nourished. This is it which S. August. says, That for to be a
receiver of the thing, that is to say, of the grace of the Sacrament, it
behooves to dwell in Christ, and to have Christ dwelling in him: It is
requisite to be members of his body, that is to say, incorporated into him by
faith: that whosoever disagreeth, or is at discord with him, though he should daily
receive, receives not any thing but the bare sign: Sacramento tenus (says
he) non re vera, sacramentally, not really, the Sacrament, Chrysostom. in r. Cor.
11.
and not the thing of the Sacrament. And Chrysostom; The more he receives the
sign, so much the more he purchases to himself condemnation: As (says he)
the condemnation of men is grown hereof, namely, that God has manifested
himself unto them in the flesh, etc. And S. Basil: Basil. in psalm 33.
August. cont. Maxim. l. 3. c. 22. That the changing of the names makes no
change in the signs.
The inward man has also his mouth, by means whereof it is fed and refreshed,
by receiving the word of life, the bread that came down from heaven, etc. And
S. Augustine gives us the reason thereof: Because (says he) that men give the
Sacrament, but God the only searcher of the heart gives the thing of the
Sacrament.

The fourth: That this commutation and exchange of names, does not force upon
the Sacraments, a commutation of the signs or elements in their nature, but
only in their use: Otherwise, contrary to the doctrine of the^e fathers, they
should be the same thing unto all men, as well the miscreant and unbeliever, as
unto the faithful, and to the hypocrite, as unto him that truly repents,
etc. It being impossible that Christ, the truth and substance of the
Sacraments, should be received but unto life: although the Sacrament, that is
to say, the signs, may be received of many unto condemnation. And indeed, none
of the fathers ever said, that Manna was converted and turned into the flesh of
Christ: or the water of the rock, yea the water of Baptism, into his blood:
notwithstanding that Saint Paul has said: That our fathers did eat the same
meat, and drink the same drink that we, that is to say, Christ: That the
first of the old writers have acknowledged that the true Israelites did eat
the flesh of Christ in their Manna, and drunk his blood in the rock: That we
all agree together, that in Baptism we are washed from our sins in the blood
of Christ, no less truly then our bodies are washed with water. August. in
ser. ad Infant. citatur a Bed. in 1. Cor. 10. Theodoret in Dial. 1.
And likewise that S. Augustine says: That we must not doubt at all, that the
faithful in Baptism, are made partakers of the body, and of the blood of our
Lord, notwithstanding that they depart this life, before they have eaten the
bread, or drunk the Cup, etc. Because said Theodoret heretofore unto us: That
this commutation of names, is to point out unto us the truth of the Mystery;
not for that there is any change made therefore in the nature of the signs,
but because that grace is added and put to them. And this is the cause why the
ancient fathers, The difference betwixt mysteries and miracles.
do call the Sacraments Mysteries and not Miracles. In divine Mysteries, the
grace of God is hidden: in Miracles, it is manifested and revealed. Miracles
are wrought to move the unbelievers, to convince them in their own
understanding, and (very often) to leave them inexcusable, through the
clearnes and euidentnes thereof: Mysteries are reserved for the faithful, at
least for those that are reputed such, to seal up unto them their salvation, to
stir up their faith, and to raise them from natural sense and understanding to
the spirit; from an opinion to faith; and from the earth unto heaven, etc. And
therefore we see not, that ever the Scripture does lead us to observe and mark
any miracles in the signs of his Mysteries, notwithstanding that it is a duty
to be most carefully discharged, to publish and set forth the maruailous works
of the Lord in the church. It teaches us the famous and worthy passing of the
destroying Angel over the houses of the Israelits, without touching of the^.
The lamb was the memorial thereof, and that so clear and evident a one as that
it was called by the name of the Passover it self. In this passing over then,
there is pointed out unto us a miracle, namely in the difference which the Angel
made betwixt the Israelits and the Egyptians: and in the lamb it reco^mendeth
unto us a mystery. So likewise of Manna, and the rock: in that the one was
rained, and the other dissolved into water, it is a miracle: but in that they
feed and quench the thirst of the true Israelits spiritually, there lies a
mystery. And of the water converted into wine in Cana, S. John makes mention
unto us of a miracle: Of Jorden turned daily into blood, by reason of so many
persons, as daily confessed their sins, and were baptized, how much more
famous had it been and worthy of renown? And yet this was no miracle, but a
mystery. Very excellently thereforefore has a certain Schooleman said: That
we must not look for miracles, Aegyd l. 2. examer. c. 13.
but where they are: That where and so often as ever we can discharge and free
the holy Scriptures, by the things that we naturally see, that there and so
often, we ought not to have recourse unto the power of God, nor unto miracles.
Now we may free them most easily, when we understand mysteries, mistically;
Sacraments, Sacramentally; figures, figuratively; Chrysostom. in Ioh. c. 6. ^om. 46.
spiritual things, spiritually, etc. Chrysostom says; What is it to
understand things carnally? Simply, according to the letter, without conceiving
and taking any further thing to be meant and contained therein. But it is
requisite (says he) to consider and look upon all mysteries, with inward
eyes, that is to say, spiritually. And as we conceive them spiritually, even so
we receive them in like manner, namely, by faith. For says he, Idem in c. 11.
ad Hetr. hom. 21 Theophyl. ibid. Theod. dial. 1. Tho^^. 3. part. sum. q. 78.
art. 2.
We think that the things that rest in hope, are without substance: but faith
gives them a substance; and yet not as though it gave them any thing more, but
because it becomes unto them, their very essence and being, etc. Theodoret;
The things that are mystical, are spoken mistically, and the things which are
not known unto all, are openly declared. Thomas likewise; The word of Christ
works effectually, and Sacramentally: Sacramentally, that is to say, (says
he) according to the force of the signification.

CHAP. II. That the doctrine of the holy Supper must be examined by the rules
above handled, as also all that which is delivered of all other the Sacraments,
as well of the old as of the new Testament.
NOw we are for the most part of this mind; that the rules above named, may be
practiced and used in other Sacraments: but our Adversaries will not agree that
they are so, in the explication and unfolding of the doctrine of the holy
supper: and therefore we are consequently to see, if the holy Scriptures and
the writings of the Fathers do tolerate and admit: yea or rather necessarily
press and urge, that the doctrine of the holy supper be examined and tried by
these same rules: which we reduce into a few words, in these manner of
terms: That a Sacrament is a visible sign of a thing, that is to say, of an
invisible grace: That the sign and the thing are Correlatiues, and that
therefore the one is not the other: That the sign is given by the Minister or
Pastor, but the thing by God alone: That the sign is received by the hand,
both of true belieuers and hypocrites, but the thing by faith, of the belieuers
only: That the likeness, that is betwixt the sign and the thing, has caused
the name of the one, to be attributed unto the other, that is to say, the name
of the thing to the sign, but that thereis not therefore any changing of the
one into the other, neither by way of miracle, nor yet of any supernatural
work, etc. but only of names, the more plainly to point out the mystery:
That Sacraments and mysteries have one proper style, which must be understood,
mistically and Sacramentally, etc. which has been verified and approved, in
all the other Sacraments, as well of the old Testament, whereof the Apostle
says: That our Fathers did eat the same meare, and drink the same drink; as
also in Baptism, a Sacrament of the new Testament.

Let us come therefore unto the holy supper of our Lord. We believe that in it,
In what sort and manner the faithful communicate and receive the Lords supper.
the belieuer receives, drinks and eats, not only bread and wine, but also
the very flesh of Christ, and the true and very blood of Christ: the flesh,
given for the life of the world; the blood shed for the remission of our
sins. That it is not more true, that the bread is broken, and the wine powered
out, or that they become nourishment unto our bodies, for the sustaining of
this frail and brittle life, then it is true, that the flesh of our Lord is
broken, and his blood shed for us, and that they become nourishment for our
souls (dry and barren that they are of themselves, but watered and altered by
his righteousness) to nourish them unto eternal life. Much more then whereas
the bread and wine are turned into our substance, by the operation of our
natural heat, to be incorporated into us; do the flesh and blood of our
Lord, by the operation of the holy Ghost, incorporate us more and more into
him; we communicate his substance, and in the same, his life, and all his
benefits, as members of Christ, bone of his bones, and flesh of his flesh, to
be crucified, justified, sanctified, and glorified in him, insomuch that our
heat being more strong then the bread and wine, does turn and alter them into
our substance; the holy Ghost being stronger and more mightier then we, does
convert and turn us, both to him, and into him. And by that means we receive
not only Christ, really and substantially in the holy Supper, celebrated
according to his institution, but we are wrought into one body, more and more
amongst our selves, of which body he is the head, and we the members: the
faithful I mean, that draw their spiritual life, the sense, motion and
spiritual action of their souls from him, a lively and quickened body by his
spirit, one together by him, one by his grace, with him. And thus have both the
holy Scriptures, as also the old writers spoken and written.

Our Lord says, According to the holy scriptures.
He that comes to me, he that believes in me, he that eats me, be that
eats my flesh, and drinks my blood, dwells in me and I in him, he has
eternal life: he lives through me; I will raise him up again at the last day.
etc. This manner of communication and participation, cease not spiritually to
be performed and effected without the Sacrament: but our Lord, as helps unto
us against our infirmity, has provided and appointed these Sacraments for us:
in the eating and drinking whereof, it pleases him to set out unto us the
certainty of this spiritual life, which is in his body and blood: and that
as verily as the corporal consists in the bread and wine. And as for the
bread he has said of it, John 6.
This is my body: But my body (says he) which is given for you: That body
whereof he had said in Saint John: My flesh is meat in deed: That flesh
whereof he had said: The bread which I will give you is my flesh, and this I
will give for the life of the world. For this body, this flesh, do nothing
avail us, save in that they are given and delivered for us, for the remission
of our sins, and for the redemption of our souls. And therefore he expounds
himself unto the Capernaites. The flesh profits nothing: the words which I
speak unto you are spirit and life. Of the Cup also he has said: This is
my blood, the blood of the new Testament, etc. And in another place, This Cup
is the new Testament in my blood: Not of his blood only, but also of the Cup,
to the end we should not stay our selves, or rest in the elements of this
Cup in deed, which he was to drink for us: even in the elements of that
bitter death, whereof he had said: Let this Cup pass from me: For this Cup,
this Passion, is the new Testament, the new covenant of God with us. And in
my blood (says he) which is shed for you. For the blood of our Lord enters
not into our stomachs, neither yet is it shed or powered into our bowels and
entrails: for to what end should there be any such thing done and acted in
this Sacrament, where the question is of the nourishment of our souls, and of
a feeding unto eternal life? This blood likewise simply considered, makes
not for the profit of our souls: neither as it is blood, neither as yet, in
that it is the blood of Christ: but herein only, for that it is the blood of
Christ crucified for us: the blood of the son of God shed for the remission
of our sins, and for the salvation of our souls. To eat this flesh, to
drink this blood, is to draw by faith, our spiritual life, out of the
fountain of his flesh broken for us: of his blood shed for us: of Christ the
son of God crucified for us. This is to live by him; this is to live in him;
this is to be with him; that is to say, to live by his righteou^nesse, whereas
we die by our own sin: by the redemption which he has wrought, where as
we lay in bondage and thraldom: and finally to be justified by him, and
sanctified in him, that so we may be quickened and glorified also in him.

Neither have the ancient fathers otherwise understood this communicating of
Christ. Saint Cyprian; Our conjunction with Christ does not make any mixture of
persons, According to the old writers Cypr. de Caen. Dom.
it unites not substances: but it effects a fellowship and correspondencie
in affections, it binds the wills together by a firm and faithful league,
etc. He had said, that if we eat not his flesh, etc. we shall not have life
in him. Teaching us by a spiritual instruction, and opening unto us the
spirit, to the conceyuing of so hid and secret a thing, to the end that we
might know, that our abiding in him, is an eating of him: and our incorporating
into him, a drinking of him. And all this is wrought by our submitting of our
selves in obedience, joining of our selves unto him in will, and uniting of our
selves unto him in our affections. Wherefore the eating of this flesh, is a
greediness, or a fervent desire to abide and dwell in him. As by eating, and
drinking, the substance of the body lives and is nourished: even so the life
of the spirit is nourished by this proper nourishment. For look what eating is
unto the body, the same is faith unto the soul. And look what meat is unto
the body, the same is the word unto the spirit, accomplishing and working for
ever, and that by a more excellent power and efficacy, that which carnal
nourishment woorketh but for a time, etc. And again, In the celebrating of
these Sacraments we are taught, to have the Pascion always in our
remembrance. Again, We are made of this body, that is to say, of the body of
Christ, in as much as by the Sacrament, and the thing of the Sacrament, we are
joined and knit unto our head. Now it is most certain and true, that such do
live, as touch the body of Christ. Saint Hillarie, These things taken and
drunk, Hylar. de Trinit.
that is to say, the bread and wine, do cause and bring to pass, that Christ
is in us, and we in him. Not verily, as he there teaches, that his body
enters into ours, but by a similitude drawn from nature: for that we are
joined together, as members to the head, to his human body, holy and
glorious. And this union is wrought by the faith of the death and passion of
the Lord, in his spirit. Saint Augustine: August. Ep. ad Iren. De Consecr. D.
2.
Christ is the bread, whereof who so eats, lives eternally: and whereof he
has said: And the bread which I will give, is my flesh, which I will give for
the life of the world. He determines and sets down how he is bread;
not only according to the word, by the which all things live: but according
to the flesh, taken for the life of the world. For man which was dead in
sin, being united and made one with the flesh which is pure and undefiled,
and incorporated into the same, does live by the spirit of Christ, as a body
lives by his soul: but he that is not of the body of Christ, does not live by
his spirit, etc. Of this body Christ is the head: Idem Ep. 57. ad Dardan.
the unity of this body is recommended unto us, by this sacrifice, etc. By
our head we are reconciled unto God: because that in it is the Divinity of the
only begotten Son made partaker of our mortality, to the end that we might
also become partakers of his immortality. Again, Idem de ciuit. Dei. l. 21. c
25. Compage.
He that is in the unity of this body, that is to say, in the conjunction and
setting together of the members of Christ, of the Sacrament of whose body the
faithful in communicating, are accustomed to receive from the Altar, may
truly be said to be such a one, as eats the body of Christ, and drinks
his blood. And those on the contrary, that are not his members, cannot eat
him. For he has said: He that eats my flesh, and drinks my blood, he
dwells in me, and J in him. Who so therefore dwells not in me and I in him,
cannot eat my flesh, nor drink my blood: he eats it, Sacrame^to tenus, and
not re vera, that is to say, he takes and receives but the sign, and not the
thing. For says he, They which abide not in him, are not his members. And in
an other place, Seeing he has recommended unto us the eating of his flesh,
etc. that is to say, our abiding in him, Idem in Ioh. tract. 27.
and his in us; now we abide and dwell in him, when we are his members, and he
in us when we are his temple. Which thing is much more clearly laid out by
Christ himself; I am the vine and you are the branches, etc. The branches
suck their life out of the Vine, not to the end verily, that they may be
branches; but because they are such already, and yet in so sucking, they
become more fair and beautiful branches: even so the faithful do eat
Christ in the Supper, not to the end that they may become his members, but
because they are his members already: and to the end, that in deriuing and
sucking their life from him, they may become the better growing and thriuing
members. Saint Chrysostom: The bread which we break, Chrysostom. in 1. Cor. c.
11.
is it not the Communion of the body of Christ? Why did not the Apostle as
well say, participation? Because that he would declare and point out some
further matter, and show the great and close conjunction. For we do not
communicate only, for that we receive and are made partakers; but for that we
are united and made one: for as this body, which he has once taken upon him,
is united unto Christ; so by this bread we are united and made one with him,
etc. For (says he) what signifies the bread? The body of Christ. And what
are they made which do receive it? The body of Christ, etc. Whereby we
learn, that the Communion is not a carnal eating, (...)
but a coherence and uniting of the faithful unto the body of Christ, which
could not be better represented, then by eating, which is the most strict and
inseperable way, Leo. ad Cler. and pleb. Constant.
whereby one nature may naturally be joined unto another. Leo the first to the
same sense; This is so current in all men's mouths, as that the very children
cease not to speak amongst the Sacraments of our common faith, of the truth of
the body and blood of Christ: seeing that in the mystical distribution of the
spiritual food, it is both given and taken: to the end that receiving the
efficacy and power of the spiritual meat, we may be translated and changed
into his flesh, who became our flesh, etc. that is to say, let us be fed of
him, as it has been said; as flesh of his flesh, and bone of his bones, etc.
Wherefore to eat the flesh and to drink the blood of Christ, is to fetch and
suck our spiritual nourishment from him; and that from him dead for us: to the
end that the similitude may have his full course, as the corporal man draws
not forth the means of the maintenance of his life from things, any otherwise
then by the dying for the same. To be bidden unto this banquet and eating, is
to be exhorted to maintain and cherish our conjunction with Christ, and our
life in Christ by the continuing of this nourishment: and this conjunction with
Christ works a conjunction amongst our selves, as members of one and the same
body, The conjunction and union of the faithful amongst them selves in the
holy Supper. 1. Cor. 10.
which is more and more nearly and closely wrought in the holy supper, which
S. Paul expresses in these words: We which are many, are one only bread, and
one only body, for we are partakers of one and the same bread, etc. that is to
say, sucking the juice of life from one and the same Vine, we are quickened by
one and the same spirit, etc. which is the second end of the Lords supper, but
yet depending upon the first, in as much as we cannot be joined by faith to
Christ, except we be also united and joined by love and charity unto our
brethren. Ignatius making this conjunction plain, says: There is but one
flesh of our Lord Jesus, and one blood of his shed for us, one bread broken for
all, Ignat. ad Philadelph. Iren. l. 3. c. 10.
and one Cup of the whole Church. Ireneus; The Lord promises to send the
comforter, that is to say, the holy Ghost. For as of dry Corn there cannot
be made any paste, neither yet any bread without licour, so we cannot of many
be made one in Christ, without that water which is from heaven.

Saint Cyprian; Cypr. l. 1. Ep. 6 ad Magn. and l. 2. Ep. 3. ad Caecil.
When as our Lord calls his body bread, made into dough by the mixing
together of many grains, he shows that our people, the image whereof he
resembled, is united together and made one. And when he calls the wine his
blood, pressed out into one from diverse Grapes, be signifies in like manner
our flock joined together and made into one by the mixture, Adunate
multitudinis, of an united multitude. Now this union said Ireneus, as it is
spiritual; (...). August. de Consecr. D 2. c Qu a passus. Ep. 57. ad Dardan.
so it is wrought by the spirit. S. Denis: The Minister (says he) uncovering
the bread that is covered and undivided, and parting it into many pieces, and
distributing the Cup unto all, multiplieth and distributeth the unity
mystically, etc. Saint Augustine; And you (says he) are there at the Table,
and in the Cup you are with us. Again; Christ is the head of this body: This
is the communion which the members have with the head: The unity of this body
is recommended unto us by our sacrifice: this is the communion of the members
amongst themselves. Being the same that the Apostle has signified, saying; We
are all one bread and one body, etc. Chrysostom; What do I speaking of
Communion: we are the body it self. For what is the bread? Chrysostom. in 1.
Cor. 10.
the body of Christ. And what are they made which receive the same? The body of
Christ: not many bodies but one body. For as the bread is made into one lump,
by the kneading of many grains together, and that in such sort as that they
are not apparent, or to be discerned, notwithstanding that they be there,
neither yet any manner of distinction to be made of them, by reason of their
incorporation: even so are we all incorporate, both amongst our selves, (...)
as also with Christ: for we are not nourished and fed, this man of one body,
and that man of an other, but all jointly of one and the same. These are then
the two principal ends of the Sacrament, even the growth and helping forward
of our unity with Christ our head; and of our unity with the brethren, which
with us do make one body in him: which cannot be accomplished more
effectually, then by the remembrance of the death of Christ, which stirs up
in us a love toward him, who has loved us so much, as to give himself to
death for us: even that death which was due and justly belonging to sinners,
etc. So that we not being able either to live or die for any his emolument or
profit, (for what good can there arise from us to him?) we are incited and
stirred up to live and die for his body which is the Church: and not to spare
any thing that is in us, no not our own blood, for the edifying of the same,
or for the good and salvation of our brethren, either begotten of, Basil. de
Baptis. and in Moral.
or redeemed by the same blood. And this is the cause why Saint Basil says:
What profit is there in these words, Take, this is my body? To the end that
drinking and eating, we may evermore be mindful of him, which is dead and
risen again for us: Who so calls not to mind this remembrance, is said to
eat unworthily, etc. And in another place; What is the duty of such as eat
the bread, and drink the Cup of Christ? Verily (says he) to keep the
remembrance of him which is dead and risen again for us perpetually, etc.
Seeing, says likewise S. Ambrose: Ambros. de iis. qui mist. intiantur. c. 3.
That the Sacrament serves not for any use unto salvation, without the
preaching, that is to say, the remembrance and commemoration of the cross of
Christ.

And hitherto it may be, that both we and our adversaries are of one mind, in
as much as we, both the one and the other say: That the body and blood of
Christ are in the Supper, celebrated according to his institution: and are
truly and verily drunken and eaten in the same, by the faithful members of
Christ, in assurance of remission of sins and eternal life. But the
difference and disagreement betwixt us is: Wherein the maine difference lies.
for that we say, that they are received in the supper of the Lord, with the
Sacraments of the bread and wine: They under the accidents of the whitenes,
roundnesse, etc. of the bread; and under the redness and moisture, etc. of the
wine: the substance thereof being (at the very instant of the uttering of the
words by the Priest) quite vanished and become nothing, that so there may be
place made for the body and blood; yea, converted and turned into the body
and blood of Christ, which they call Transubstantiation. Again; that we say,
that the body and blood of Christ, the nourishment of our soul, which is
spiritual, are communicated with us by the efficacy and power of the spirit
of God, and received of us, in like manner spiritually, and by faith: They,
that they are given by the hand of the Priest, under the accidents of bread and
wine, and converted into flesh and blood, by the pronouncing of the words,
which they call Sacramental; received into the mouth, and swallowed down into
the stomach corporally, and really, etc. and that not of the faithful only,
but of all both good and bad which receive them, etc. So that the question or
controversy betwixt us is not: Whether there be a communicating of the body
and blood of Christ in the holy supper: but How. And this (How) is not raised
by us, It proceeds of the curiosity of our adversaries.
neither yet by our incredulity or curiosity, but by our adversaries, who in
stead of resting themselves in the simplicity of the old writers, have so
curiously pried into the same, as that they have wrapped themselves in an
infinite sort of absurdities; thereby causing doubts to arise: yea and doubting
themselves also of, (If) in stead of making it plain unto themselves and
others, of the manner How. Verily Saint Cyprian says: That it is an Apostolic
thing, and appertaining to the sincerity of the truth, to declare how the
bread and wine, are the flesh and blood of our Lord. Saint Augustine likewise
fears not to demand, How the bread is made the body of Christ, seeing that
our Lord in the day of the Ascension, carried up his body into heaven. But he
has also given us rules, by which these kinds of speeches ought to be
expounded. But this holy scanning and sifting out of the truth, is very far
from the profane curiosity of our adversaries: they seek the deciding of the
matter, in the nature of the Sacraments, by comparing of Scripture with
Scripture, and by the analogy of faith, and of the Creed; according to the
true and undoubted rules of Divinity: but these our adversaries by destroying
of the Sacraments, the nature of Christ, and the Articles of our faith, our
only Divinity; by destroying also the Laws which God has set in nature, by
a false kind of Philosophy. So deeply have they delighted and rooted
themselves in an opinion, contrary to faith in the flesh, which profits
nothing, contrary to the word, which is spirit and life, and in the letter
which is dead and kills, contrary to the spirit which is living and
quickening.

They say; The literal sense neither can nor ought to be followed always.
what is there any thing more clear or plain: This is my body; this is my
blood? But again, is there any thing more plain, The rock was Christ? And of
circumcision, This is my covenant? Again, The Lamb is the Passover? These
bones are the house of Israel? John is Elias, I am the true Vine, I am the
bread of life, which came down from heaven? etc. And if the plainness and
clearenesse of places should be tied unto the words, and not to the sense and
meaning; then what clearer places can there possibly be then these: Let us make
man according to our own image and similitude? And the Anthropomorphites have
hereupon concluded that God has the shape of a man. Genes. 1. Luke. 22
Who so has not a sword, let him sell his Coat and buy one: And what then
says Origin; Shall the Bishops put their hand to the sword thereupon? I and my
Father are one: And Sabellius has concluded thereupon; that the Father has
suffered in the flesh. I am the bread of life: August de ciuit Dei. l. 21. c.
25.
he that shall eat this bread, shall live for ever. And in S. Augustines time
there were that taught hereupon, that if a man had communicated at the Lords
supper, how be it he should afterward renounce the Christian profession, yet
he could not possibly perish and fall away for ever. Wherefore as often as ever
we shall read such places, we ought always to remember and call to mind
these rules: The good and prudent Reader (says Saint Hilarious) does look for
the understanding of that which is said; Hilat. de Trin. l. 1. Hieronym. in Mat.
not by fetching it from any preiudicate opinion of his own, but from the
cause of that which is said. And S. Jerome; The discreet Reader is very
careful to keep himself evermore from all manner of superstitious
understanding: he frames and squareth his sense and understanding according to
the Scriptures, August. cont. aduers. leg. and Prophet. l. 2. c. 9.
and not the Scriptures according to it. And Saint Augustine handling this same
matter; One piece of Scripture must be expounded by an other: and all the holy
Scriptures according to the soundness of faith: if we expound any thing done
or spoken figuratively, it stands us upon to see that such expositions be
drawn wisely and not negligently, from other things and words, which are
contained in the holy writings. But above all we have to consider in the
matter of the Sacraments, what a Sacrament is, and in the matter of the holy
supper, that therein is handled the most excellent of all the rest, that is to
say, a great mystery, a profound and high secret: and that so soon as we
hear the word Sacrament, we must lift up our spirits from the beholding of
these outward things, to the apprehending of inward things from the skin to the
marrow, and from of the earth up unto heaven: observing the nature of the
mystery, the signification of the word, and what the thing does permit and
suffer; what the letter says, and what the meaning of the spirit is.

Thus, These words, This is my body, cannot be interpreted without a figure.
This is my body, according to their sense and construction, what shall it
signify? Hoc, this; If it be meant of the bread, then it must be thus taken:
This bread is my body. But this is not their meaning: for they confess that
it cannot be two substances at one and the same instant. And when two chief
and primarie substances, that is to say, two Iudiuidua, as the Logicians call
them, are called the one by the name of the other, there must of necessity be
included a figure: but this they will not yield unto. Furthermore they do not
pretend that it is the body until the last word be uttered: and we are as yet
but in the very first. And in the mean time then, shall it not be the same
which our Lord took, blessed, brake, and gave to his Disciples, that is to
say, bread? What shall then this hoc make? The accidents of bread without the
subject, namely, whiteness, roundnesse, etc? And what manner of speech were it
to say? The accidents of bread are my body, which is given for you: or else
their Indiuiduum vagum, and vage determinatum: This I cannot tell what, in the
air, which they can neither name nor point out so as that it may be
comprehended: How it may be bread in the beginning of the uttering of the
words, and his body in the end. What a number of obscure and strange figures:
to how many contradictorie designments and devises are they driven, and all to
avoid one clear and manifest figure, and that such a one as is very often
and familiarly used in the Sacraments? Afterward, This is my blood. What shall be
the meaning of this Hoc in this place? It is said, that taking the cup, he
blessed it and said; Drink ye all, Bibite ex hoc omnes. This Hoc then is the
cup whereof he says, This is my blood. But can it possibly be, that the cup
should be called blood without a figure? seeing that according to their own
assertions, it is the wine and not the cup? It follows, Est: This is (say
they) a verb substantive. Let it be granted, but is it therefore a verb
transubstantiue? This is my body, that is to say, This is made my body: It is
substantially turned, it is transubstantiated into my body and blood? This is
their meaning, and they call this word in their affected terms and
gibberidge, an operative and practicke Est. But if it be understood of the
bread, then what figure is it? And how will their fond devised fantasy stand,
since they hold, that the bread is not changed or turned, but becomes nothing,
to the end it may give place to the body? And what show of any figure will
there then be here? Hoc est, that is to say, this Vagum Indiuiduum, which has
no name, is transubstantiated into his body. And if it be wandering and
unstable, it is not (...), it has not any substance: Or else, This bread is
become nothing, to give place to the body, etc. But this word, Est, may it be
expounded by the word Fit, factum est, conuertitur, transubstantiatur, it is
made, turned, transubstantiated? Yea and also by Fiat, conuertatur,
transubstantiatur; that it may be made, turned, and transubstantiated, without
a figure? yea and which is more, without any contradiction? And of the cup
particularly, without acknowledging that it is transubstantiated? But this they
do not admit. Let us proceed: Take, eat, but what? Accidents? but they are no
proper objects for the teeth to be occupied about. The body of Christ then?
But as they say themselves, it is not as yet there. And then it is not chewed
there, it is not there broken. What shall then the meaning be of this word
eat? But to endeavor to eat, to make semblance of eating? etc. But how much
better had it been to have expounded this place by the nature of other
Sacraments? whereof it is said: This is my covenant: as here, This cup is the
new Testament in my blood; This is the blood of the new Testament, etc. all
coming to the same sense. Again, The rock was Christ, I am the bread of
life: as here, The bread is my body, the cup is my blood. To expound it I say
by Jesus Christ in S. John: My flesh is meat in deed, and my blood is drink
in deed: Where in plain terms he refers us unto his death, when he
says: Which I will give for the life of the world: As also here, Which is
given, which is shed for you. But, says he to the Capernaites; The words that
J say unto you are spirit and life. And therefore some are of judgment, that
this whole speech of his was nothing else but a resolved and purposed
Commentary, and a preparatiue to the right understanding of the holy supper.
And finally to have expounded it by Saint Paul: Who gives unto us, that which
he had received of the Lord. But what? Accidents? No, but bread; As often (says
he) as you shall eat of this bread, and drink of this Cup, etc. And he goes
over this word bread five times, and that after the words of Consecration as
they call them: and yet notwithstanding, The body of the Lord, etc. For,
Whosoever eats (says he) of this bread unworthily, eats his judgment, is
culpable of the body and blood of our Lord, etc. As if a man should say, Reus
Maiestatis, guilty of high treason against the body of Christ, because he has
abused his Sacraments unto death, which were ordained for him unto life. And
what is there more ordinary in the Scripture, then to use the words of eating
and drinking spiritually? As where wisdom it self says: Such as eat of me,
Ecclesiast. 14. John 7.
shall further hunger after me, and they which drink of me, shall still thirst
after me: Where our Lord the true and essential wisdom cries; Jf any man
thirst, let him come unto me and drink. And particularly in the Paschall
Lamb, a figure correspondent to the holy supper, were not these very words
which they call Sacramental; Verba inquam concepta: This bread is the bread of
misery, which our Fathers did eat in Egypt: He that is hungry, let him come
and eat etc. But the absurdity of this pretended literal construction, and
yet altogether figurative, improper and very strange, shall be better known
by the touch and trial of the same, where we shall see, how that it
destroys the nature of all the Sacraments; of those of the new Testament, yea
even the supper celebrated by our Lord with his Apostles: how that it
destroys the humane nature of Christ, and offers violence unto his divine
nature, and in a word how that it overthrows the analogy of faith, the
consent of the holy Scriptures, the Creed of the Apostles, together withal
the rest of the most firm and infallible points of Divinity, which we purpose
to handle briefly from point to point.

CHAP. III. That the interpretation and Exposition which our Adversaries make
of the words of the holy Supper, does overthrow all the foundations of the
Christian faith, as also the nature of Christ and of his Sacraments.
FIrst and principally, That Transubstantiation does destroy the nature of
every sacrament.
Transubstantiation destroys the nature of every Sacrament: for every
Sacrament consists of a sign and a thing signified, both which abide and
continue whole and entire, in such sort as that it is not possible, that the
one can be the other, neither any part of the other: and notwithstanding they
depend the one upon the other; they cannot be well weighed and considered the
one without the other. But it destroys the nature of the bread, In the sign.
the sign and seal of his body; the nature of the wine, the sign and seal
of the blood of our Lord, either by changing and altering of them; or else by
making them nothing worth; or by reducing them, as others say, into the first
matter, from substances into accidents contrary to all nature, yea contrary
to the Law of the Sacraments it self, which made choice of signs,
proportionable to the things signified: as they rained Manna, to the bread of
life which came down from heaven: Water which washes away corporal spots,
to the righteous blood, which cleanses and takes away the spiritual; bread
and wine which nourish and maintain this life, to the body and blood of
Christ, which do sustain and feed us unto eternal life. Roundnesse,
whiteness, moystnesse, and redness, which they give us for signs, what
analogy have they with the spiritual nourishment? Or the accidents with the
substance? And in stead of deeper and deeper settling us in faith: what is it
that they are able to beget in us but new forged opinions, and vain fantasies?
Let us take from Baptism, water, the sign of this living water of the holy
Ghost, which washes our souls: Mich. 7.
yea, says the Prophet, which drowneth and swalloweth up our iniquities, and
what manner of doctrine remains there behind. Take away bread in the holy
supper, Nehem 9. Psalm 70. John 6. Apocal.
the sign of that bread of heaven, of the bread of life, which gives life
unto the world: Wine, the sign of the blood of the Lamb, wherein we are to
wash our garments, wherewith we likewise comfort our souls, both the one and
the other signs of our union, in as much as they are made of many corns,
kneaded and trodden out into one, and what doctrine or instruction will there
be then left for us behind? What proportion is there betwixt these accidents
and our life? Not that verily of our soul only, but that also of our body?

In the second place, In the thing.
what shall I say of the thing signified? How do they handle it? The thing
signified, is the body and blood of Christ, it is Christ himself. But
wherefore was he given in the holy Supper? Verily says he, To give life unto
the world. And to what world? Verily, unto them whom he has drawn out of
and saved from the world: To them says he, Which believe in him, which abide
in him: To them says the Apostle, In whose hearts he dwells: To them says
S. Augustine, Which are his members, and not to any others. What injury then
and wrong does Transubstantiation offer unto our Lord, unto this precious
pearl of the Gospel, which gives the same to hypocrites and unbelievers,
which casts the same to Dogs and Swine, in such sort as that they regard or
look after nothing else, but that they have a mouth to cast it into, and a
stomach to swallow it down into? Can these courses be maintained either by
the scriptures, or yet by the old church? we say of every Sacrament, that the
sign which is called ordinarily the Sacrament, may be received of all, but the
thing of the Sacrament, res Sacramenti, of the faithful and believers only.
And as for that due regard and consideration which is to be had of the holy
Supper, the word of the son of God, is expreslie laid down concerning the
same. This is my body which is given for you, my blood which is shed for your
sins. He gives them not for meat and food, but to such as for whom it is
shed, as for whom it is broken, that is to say, which are effectually redeemed,
and by consequent his members. And thus says Origin; Orig. in Mat. c. 11.
That of this true and very meat, of this word made flesh, no wicked or
ungodly man can eat: because (says he) that it is the word, and the bread of
life: because that he that eats this bread, lives for ever. Saint Cyprian:
Cypr. l. de Caen. Domini. August. tract. 26. in Ion.
That although that the Sacraments be suffered to be taken and handled by such
as are unworthy, yet they cannot be partakers of the spirit, that is to say
of grace. And Saint Augustine: That the signs are common to the good and
evil, but the thing proper unto the faithful alone: That although they shut
up within their teeth tantae re^ Sacramentum, that is to say, the sign of so
excellent a thing; Idem de ciuit. Dei. l. 21. c. 25. In sent Prosper. 318.
tract. 59. in Job.
yet they eat but their own condemnaion: That none abide in him, but such as
believe in him, that such as abide in him, eat him, that the rest eat
Sacramento tenus, non re vera; the sign, not the thing: That the Apostles did
eat panem Dominum, the bread which was the Lord: but Judas the bread of the
Lord against the Lord, etc. Although Saint Hillarie say, that he communicated
not at all: and the Canon Qui discordat, drawn out of Saint Augustine is
clear and evident therein. Whereas on the contrary, it should prove most plain
and manifest, that if their opinion take place, that the unbelievers and
hypocrites shall receive the body of Christ, Christ shall dwell in their bodies
corporally such as are dead in their sins, shall receive the bread of life,
and in it eternal life? Thus then they destroy the Sacrament of the Supper,
both in the thing, and in the sign, prostituting holiness and sanctimonie,
unto the profane, casting the childrens bread unto dogs; and bestowing the
spiritual life upon the unbelievers. In the signs causing them to cease to be
substances, and signs of a most substantial substance, turning them into
vain and imaginary accidents: accidents subsisting without any subject, and
yet having taste, and apt to feed and sustain, and to beget excrements and
worms, that is to say, substances: yea and to be turned into ashes, that is to
say into matter; (do we consent and agree unto the contradictions contained in
these things?) yea and to be bruised and broken in pieces. For if this be not
bread which is broken, shall it be the body? They are not able to affirm it:
John 19. Exodus 12.
The scripture is very clear and plain: His bones shall not be broken. Thus
then you see how they go about to make them accidents without any body.

Thirdly, the nature of one Sacrament is understood by the other. It destroys
the conformity and correspondency that is betwixt the holy supper and the other
sacraments.
We have affirmed it heretofore out of the old writers with the Apostle; That
in the Sacraments of the old Testament, the fathers received the same meat and
the same drink: (and yet notwithstanding without transubstantiation) even
Christ. And namely in the comparing of the holy Supper they have ^o understood
it. S. Augustine, The same faith abides, but the signs are changed: There
the rock was Christ; here that which is set upon the Altar: There they drunk
the water that ran out of the rock; and we, the faithful know that which we
drink, etc. And Bertram: They did eat and drink the same meat which the
people of the believers does eat and drink in the Church, even the flesh and
blood of our Lord: and infinite others. Let us speak now of those of the new
Testament. Of Baptism it is said: Be baptized in the name of Christ for the
remission of sins. Of the Supper: This is my body which is broken, my blood
which is shed for you, for the remission of sins. Of the one: If a man be not
regenerate and borne again of water and of the spirit, he cannot enter into
the kingdom of God. Of the other: If you eat not the flesh of the Son of
man and drink not his blood, you have no life in you. In a word it is said,
that in the one, We put on Christ, we are baptized into his death, established
and ^ssured into his resurrection, regenerate, renewed, saved, etc. That in the
other; We dwell in Christ, and that we are in him nourished unto eternal life,
etc. And Saint Paul seems to have joined them together in one verse: 1. Cor.
12.13.
We were all baptized into one self same spirit, and we have all drunk of one
self same spirit, that we might become one and the same body, etc. For the
like effects proceeding from the same power, and tending to the same end;
wherefore then will we in these Sacraments find out diverse natures? Tit. 2. 2.
Pet. 1.
And why does water continue still to be water, and nevertheless, the
sprinckling, says the Apostle, of the blood of Christ, washing unto
regeneration and remission of sins, and to salvation, by the operation of the
holy Ghost: when as the bread and wine, by the very same, cannot become
instruments to nourish our souls with the body and blood of Christ, but that
it must first come to pass, that they be made of no reckoning: that the body
and blood do enter into, and take possession of their places; and that the
nature of all, both words and things, holy and not holy, be turned topsie
turuie? As though the power of God were weaker in the one then in the other.
And it is likewise most certain, that there is nothing more familiar amongst
the fathers, Epiph. cont. haeres. l 3. c. 2. and in Anchorat. Chrysostom. in Mat.
hom 83. August. in Io. tract. l. 25. and 26. Eusebius. Emiss.
then to reason from Baptism unto the Supper of the Lord. As when Epiphanius
says; That the strength of the bread, and virtue of the water, are made
powerful in Christ, etc. And Chrysostom speaking of the Supper, The Lord
(says he) has not given us here any sensible thing: we must see and look
upon the same with the eyes of our understanding, etc. And thus (says he) by
the water in Baptism, which is a sensible thing, he has given us
regeneration, which is a gift apprehended by the understanding. And S.
Augustine upon the same matter; The Christian is made fat inuisibly, namely in
the holy Supper: as also he is begotten and borne again inuisibly, namely in
Baptism. And Eusebius Emissenus laboring to declare and show what manner of
change it is, that is made in the bread and wine, lays out the same in plain
sort, by that which is wrought in the regeneration of man, saying; which
continues, idem and idem, the very same: and yet notwithstanding quite
another manner of man, through the growth and increase of faith. Damascene also
in like manner, Damasc. l. 4. c. 14. D. 2. C. Quia corpus de consecr. and C.
vtru^.
though one that has written after the grossest sort in this matter. Gratian
likewise in the Canon, Vtrum, which is taken out of Saint Augustine, and many
other.

Certes the Council of Nice says of Baptism: Our Baptism is not to be
considered with the eyes of the body, but with the eyes of the spirit: and so
of the Supper. Let not your eyes stay themselves upon these signs, but lift
the^ up on high, etc. And he lets not to say of Baptism: See thou water?
consider and behold therein the divine power, which is hid in these waters,
full of sanctification, full of divine fire: that is to say, full of the holy
Ghost, full of his effectual working, and yet not changed into fire, nor into
the holy Ghost: and verily even as little the bread and wine in the holy
table, either into accidents, or any other substances; whereof the same
Council says: That we must understand by faith, that we do truly and verily
receive the body and blood of our Lord, and that they are tokens and pledges
unto us of our resurrection unto eternal life. Ambros. de lit qui mistie.
init. c. 3 and de spir. Sanct. l. 3
Saint Ambrose also is far of from admitting any change or alteration of the
water in Baptism, and therefore cease not to say: Thou see water, and
doubtest thou of the mystery? Thou beleeuest the operation, and will thou not
believe the presence of the divinity and Godhead? From whence should the
operation and effectual working of the same proceed, if it were not by virtue
of the divine presence? Again, Believe not alone the eyes of the body: that
which is not seen at all, is most apparent and clearly seen, in as much as
that is temporal; but this is eternal, etc. And therefore S. Augustine says
not; Take away this water, August. tract. 80. in Ioh.
that the blood of Christ may take the place, and enter in stead thereof: but
rather, Take away the word of God from the water, and then there remains
nothing but common water: add the word thereunto, and it will become a
Sacrament. And in like manner Tertullian: The holy Ghost comes down and
sanctifies the water. Saint Basil: The kingdom of heaven is there opened.
Saint Chrysostom: I believe in baptising the purgation of the soul, Answer
to the objection of omnipotenty
by the working of the spirit, etc. And all these notwithstanding, without any
the least presupposing of the changing of the water. In the mean time these
fellows have nothing to object, or cast in our way, but the omnipotency of
God, and that when as the question properly is not of his Almightinesse in a
miracle, but of his will and pleasure in a mystery. Thus said Praxeas unto
Tertullian: Wherefore could not God be father and son also? Tertul. cont Pra^.
Is it not said, I and the father are but one, etc? Unto whom he answered:
The mighty power of God is no other thing then his will: and the inability of
God his unwillingness: he could have made and framed man to fly, after the
manner of a Kite, but he has not done it, etc. And this his will we come to
understand by his word, whereof it is said: Heaven and earth shall pass; but
the word of God endures for ever. Our Lord has said: That of stones he is
able to raise up children unto Abraham. And who can doubt hereof? And yet
notwithstanding I will not therefore believe, if it appear not unto me out of
his will, that such or such are raised up or begotten of stones: Neither yet if
thou should show me a stone, that it is any child of Abraham's: when as I see
not any other thing in it, then the natural shape and figure thereof, neither
yet by touching it feel any thing but the hardness, heaviness, and coldness
of a stone. For, says S. Augustine: August. in Ench. ad Laurent c. q. de
ciuit. Dei. l. c. 10.
God is properly called Almighty, because he does whatsoever he will, and
because that his will is not crossed, either by the will or power of any other
whosoever. But the will of our Lord manifested in his word, is to feed the
faithful with his flesh and blood in his holy supper: I will firmly and
steadfastly believe that he does it, and will not thereupon go about to remove
or alter either the predicables or predicaments, but will be ready with all
humility to subject and apply my reason to his promise, by an obedience of
faith. Our adversaries cannot conceive, how he should feed their souls, if he
come not nie unto their bodies, if he be not in their mouths: And how does the
Sun, which is a creature, bring forth, quicken, heat and inlighten things,
and that so far off? And he which feeds us in S. John, without Sacraments,
and without signs, Ioh. 6.
why should he come short in the signs and Sacraments? Seeing they afford
relief and help for the underpropping of our infirmity, not diminishing or
any thing impairing his power? and he that dwells continually in the hearts
of his children: why should he not manifest the same on some one day more
plainly and plentifully? Seeing it is he for certain which has ordained it,
and seeing also that his lodging is therein the better prepared, by our faith
by our zeal, and by our repentance. It is a point of deep incredulity and
unbelief in us, not to trust him any longer the^ he is at hand and near unto
us: and that he should not be able to do it but by being near and at hand,
should argue a certain kind of impotencie and weakness in God. And this is
that which S. Augustine says: August. in Ioh. tract. 10.
To the end that no man should deceive himself, in going about to adore the
Head in heaven, and to trample upon his feet here on earth, he has declared
and told where his members be: The Head being to ascend up into heaven, has
recommended unto us his members here on earth and so is departed and gone
hence, etc. He said from on high unto Saul: Wherefore persecutest thou me? I
ascended up unto heaven, and notwithstanding I am yet upon earth: here I sit at
the right hand of my Father: there I do as yet endure and sustain, hunger,
and thirst, I am a stranger, etc. The head although it be not in the feet,
does yet minister unto them the power of moving: and the Son of God the Head
of the Church, shall he not bestow as much upon his members?

Fourthly, Transubstantiation takes from us this consolation:
Transubstantiation depriueth us of the means of doing that which the Lord has
done.
that our Lord vouchsafes to continue unto us in his Church, the same
mystery, which he celebrated with his Apostles: according to that which he
said in express and plain terms: Do this in remembrance of me. The
efficacy of which words must be perpetual in the Church: That is, that
celebrating the same action, and in the same sort, we communicate likewise and
are partakers of the same grace, and in the same manner. But if a contrary
course be taken, and that to the obtaining of an other kind of grace, and after
an other manner, in stead of comfort and consolation, we fall into a doubtful
labirinth: for where is there any institution besides? And where is the word?
where is the promise? And what makes the Sacrament but the word? Whereby are we
made partakers of the fruit and effect but by the promise? If we receive not
the same thing that the Apostles received, and after the same manner, to what
end then should these words of the Lord: Do this, etc. as also those of the
Apostle, I have received of the Lord, that which I have given unto you, serve?
And what other places are there, whence we ought to learn and take knowledge
of the same? But and if it be the very same thing, performed in the same manner:
then let us call to mind, that it is a spiritual thing and not a carnal, and to
be done after a spiritual and not a carnal sort, by faith and not by the mouth:
for he speaks to them of a body broken for the^, which yet was not broken:
and of blood shed for them, August. in Psa. 33. De Consecr. d. 2. C. hoc. est.
vbi Glosa.
which was as yet in his veins: and therefore they did eat and drink, as the
Patriarks and Prophets had done before the^, spiritualy and by faith. And this
is it which S. August. says, That ^e sus Christ giving the Sacraments of his
body and blood unto his Disciples, did carry quodammodo, after a certain manner
himself. If he had done it really, the quodammodo had served to no use: for
quodammodo (say the Schools) is terminus diminuens, a word of restraint
denying the truth of the real presence. August Ep. 23 ad Bonifac.
And then if this be quodammodo, it is that which he says in another place,
secundum quendam modum, that is says he, By the similitude that the signs
have with the things: not in very deed says the canon, but in signification:
not verily and truly says the Gloss, but improperly, that is to say
sacramentally. And indeed that which he says in one place, He carried himself
after a certain manner in his hands: he speaks thus in another place, Idem
de verb. Dom. in Euang. Mat. Sermon. 33. Hug. Cardin. in Mat. c. 26. and in Marc.
c. 14.
He carried the bread in his hands: in as much as he exhihibited and offered
himself under these Sacraments for a spiritual meat and drink unto his
disciples etc. And the Gloss expounding the words of the Supper, says,
Accipite, comedite, Take, eat: Intelligite, fide comedite, understand, eat by
faith etc. Cardinal Hugo likewise, Take, that is to say, believe with your
hearts, and confess with your mouths etc. In the mean time they go about to
grant us a larger privilege then ever the Apostles had, as though we should
receive the body of Christ glorified and immortal, whereas they received it as
it was subject to the death and passion. But we verily content our selves to
receive it as the Apostles did, not aspiring after any more high and excellent
manner; that is, therein to receive the body broken and the blood shed for us:
for the Son of God properly does quicken us, in that he is eternal; but in
that he has made himself mortal, neither does he glorify us, in that he
himself is glorious, but in that he has abased himself, taking upon him the
form of a servant; and being made subject unto the ignominious death of the
Cross. Therein I say to receive it after the same manner, the bread for a sign
and certain pledge of his body; and yet notwithstanding at the very same
instant also to receive his body: the wine a sign and infallible token of his
blood; and notwithstanding at the very same instant to receive his blood, by
the inward efficacy of the holy Ghost: and both the one and the other, for the
remission of sins, and unto the resurrection to life: seeing that Christ is
dead for our sins, and risen again for our justification, etc. And in very
deed the ancient Fathers have not otherwise understood the holy supper of
Christ with his Apostles. Tertul aduer. Marc. l. 5. c. 40. and l. 1. c 14.
Ambr. de iis qui myster. init. c 9. and de Sacr. l. 4 c. 5. Hieronym l. 2.
aduers. Iouini an. and in Mat. c. 26. August. contr. Adaman. c. 12 Idem in
Prolog. super ps. 3. Macar. hom. 27 Theodor. in Polymorph. seu. Euarist. Dial.
1.
Tertullian; He made the bread which he took and gave to his disciples, his
body, that is to say, the figure of his body. And in another place, The bread
by which he represented his body. S. Ambrose; The Lord himself cries, This is
my body: Before the blessing of heavenly words an other kind is named, after
the consecration, the body of Christ is signified. And in an other place more
clearly; The same which is (says he) the figure of the body and blood of our
Lord. S. Jerome; He offered not water but wine, for the figure of his blood.
And in another place speaking of bread and wine: Representing (says he) the
truth of his body and of his blood. S. Augustine; The Lord doubted not to say,
This is my body, when he gave the sign of his body. Again; He has
recommended and given to his Disciples the figure of his blood. Antitypes says
S. Macaire, an Egyptian, Exhibiting the flesh and blood of Christ. Theodoret;
He that has called his natural body, wheat and bread, and which has named
himself a vine, has honored the marks and signs which are to be seen, with
the name of his body and blood, not in changing the nature it self, but in
adding grace unto nature. Eusebius Emissenus, Seeing that our Lord must carry
up into heaven, the body which he had taken upon him, it was needful that in
the day of the supper, he should consecrate for us the Sacrament of his body
and blood: to the end, that that which was once offered up for a ransom, might
continually be honored by mystery. And here we must shun the confounding of
these two words, Truly, and carnally or really, the one with the other, being
such as the old writers accounted of, as much differing, Cyril l. 3. c 24. in
Ioh. Orig. in Genesis hom. 1. c. 1. Hieronym. ad Gal. c. 4.
and carefully to be distinguished: For Jesus Christ calls himself the true
Vine: And Cyrill calls him, the true Manna: And Origin, the Apostles, The
true and very heavens: And S. Jerome the faithful, one true bread: Whom it
had been very hard to have made to believe, that Christ had been really the
Vine, or the Manna; the Apostles, the heavens, or the faithful one loaf, etc.
And thus you see what manner of holy supper it was, that was celebrated and
kept of the Apostles: and I verily believe, that there is not any true
Christian, that wishes or desires any other.

Fifthly, Transubstantiation destroy eth the human nature of Christ. Heb. 2
it destroys the humane nature of Christ, for the truth whereof all the old
Church has so mightily striuen against the heretics of that time, and in the
truth whereof likewise rests the consolation of mankind, the only means of
our salvation: In as much, says the Apostle, as That he has not taken upon
him the Angels, that is to say, the nature of Angels; but the seed of Abraham,
that is to say, the nature of man, taking part with flesh and blood, etc. to
destroy the kingdom of death, by his death, etc. For in presupposing without
the word of God, that this body may be in a thousand places at once, they
conclude against the word of God, that this body has not that which is of the
very nature of a body: against that which our Lord said after his resurrection,
reproving the unbelief of S. Thomas; A spirit has neither flesh nor bone,
etc. and against that which all antiquity teaches: That what he once took
upon him, he never leaves or casts off: That in putting on glory, he did
not put off either nature, or yet the conditions and qualities of nature, etc.
Christ verily in taking our nature, has taken both our flesh and our blood and
this blood distributed throughout his veins, etc. What does then this
Transubstantiation, which shuts up this his body by it self, under the
accidents of bread, and his blood by it self, under the accidents of wine? He
has taken likewise, both our flesh and our soul: and shall then a corporal
substance be turned into a spiritual? The bread into the soul of our Lord?
etc. Or if it be not changed thereinto, shall it remain a body without a
soul? And if this body which was given to the Apostles, were living, was not
then this bread changed into a soul? But they deny it. And if he were dead
then; should he not be dead and living both at once? Dead and invisible as he
was given, but alive and visible as he did give and distribute it? And how many
are the absurdities begotten of one absurdity? And who sees not how the
ancient heretics, which called in question the truth of the humane nature of
Christ, did not a little ground themselves and their assertions upon these
Maxims?

Verily, Jesus Christ our Lord after his resurrection, That Christ is absent
according to his human nature: but every where present as concerning his
divine nature. According to the scriptures John 7 John. 3. Matthew 26. Mark. 6.
Luke. 24. Acts 1.3.
ascended in his body into heaven, and left this world until the time of his
coming again to judge the world, according as he did instruct his Apostles;
as he had made them visible to behold and see, and as they in like manner after
him did advertise and teach us: You shall not have me always with you: I am
here for a while: It is expedient for you that I go: I am come into the world,
and again I leave the world, I go to him that sent me, from whom I am also
come, and if I go not, the comforter will not come. You shall seek me, but as
I have said unto the Jews, whither I go, they cannot come; And now also I
tell it you: that is to say in one word; look not for me any more hereafter in
this humane nature. And in deed, he blesses them, withdraws himself from
them, and is taken up on high into heaven, and set at the right hand of his
father: From whence he shall come again, say the Angels, even as he was seen
to go up into heaven. And it must needs, be says S Peter: That the heavens
do contain him, unto the time of the restoration of all things. And yet
notwithstanding he says; I will not leave you orphans: I am with you unto
the end of the world, I will send you the comforter which shall teach you, etc.
Likewise whenever you shall be two or three gathered together in my name, I
will be in the miast of you: that is according to my divine nature. And thus
have all the ancient Fathers spoken.

Origin; It is not the man, that is every where, According to the Fathers.
Orig in Mat. tract. 33.
where two or three be gathered together in his name; or yet always with us
unto the end of the world; or which is in every place where the faithful are
assembled: but it is the divine power which is in Jesus. Athanasius; I go to
the Father: But does he not fill all things, even heaven, earth, and hell? And
did he never withdraw him self from the Father? And to go and come, are not
these properties belonging to such as are finite and limited within their lists
and bounds of time and place, by departing from the place where he was not, to
the place where he was? etc. But says he: This is because he speaks of the
humane nature which he took upon him, in which it behooves him to go unto the
father, and come from thence again, to judge the quick and the dead, etc. S.
Augustine in an infinite sort of places, and that very largely: You shall have
the poor always with you, etc. Let not good men (says he) be troubled: In
respect of his majesty, providence, grace, etc. it is fulfilled which he said,
I am always with you, etc. In respect of the flesh, which the word took upon
it, August. in Ioh. tract. ^0.
as also in respect that he was borne of the Virgin, apprehended of the Jews,
fastened to the tree, taken from off the Cross, wrapped in linen, laid in the
Sepulcher, manifested at the resurrection, it is the same which is said; You
shall not have me always, etc. The Church inioyed him but a few days, in
respect of his bodily presence, but now it possesses him by faith, and sees
him no more with these bodily eyes, etc. Idem ad Dardan. Ep. 57.
What then? Said one unto him: is he not every where? Yes he is every where
(says he) but as a man is soul and flesh: so Christ is the word, that is to
say, God, as also man, and we must always distinguish in the Scriptures, that
which is spoken of the one, from that which is spoken of the other. By reason
of the one he is the Creator; and in consideration of the other a creature. In
the one, he was here upon earth, and not in heaven when he said: No man
ascends up into heaven, etc. In the other, he was in heaven, notwithstanding
that he was not yet ascended up into heaven, notwithstanding that he was yet
conversant and abiding here upon earth, etc. And therefore stand fast and
irremoueable in thy Christian confession: That he is ascended up into heaven:
That he sits at the right hand: That from thence, and not from elsewhere, he
shall come to judge the quick and the dead: and that in the very same form and
substance of flesh: whereto for certain (says he) he has granted and freely
given immortality, and yet has not bereft it of his nature. And according to
this nature, we must not make account, that he is shed abroad every where;
but rather beware, least we in such sort establish the Divinity of the man, as
that we destroy and take away the verity of the body: For it is no good
consequent, that all that which is in God, Idem in John. tract. 78.
is every where, as God is, etc. And in an other place upon these words; Vado
and Venio ad vos: He went (says he) as man, he stayed behind in as much as he
was God: he went in as much as he was but in one place, he stayed and abode
still, in as much as he was every where. Again; Idem de verb. Dom. Sermon. 60.
and de Tem. Sermon. 40.
It is expedient for you that I go: although (says he) that he be always
with us by his Diainitie: But and if he had not gone away from us corporally,
we should have seen him daily with these carnal eyes, and should never have
believed in him spiritually, etc. And for this cause he has absented himself
in body from all the Church, to the end that faith might be edified and
builded up. Cyril. Alex. in Ioh. 9. c. 21. l. 10. c. 39.
S. Cyrill; It is meet that all the faithful believe, that howsoever our Lord
be absent in body, yet he is present by his power to all them that love him,
etc. And reciprocally no man doubts, seeing he is ascended into heaven, but
that he is absent in the flesh, though present in body, etc. What is this then;
I will not leave you comfortless? That is, how that after he is ascended into
heaven and risen from the dead, Idem l. 6. dial. de Trinit.
he is in us by his spirit, etc. And again, what is the meaning of this, I am
in the midst of two or three assembled in my name? Verily (says he) when as
man, he was conversant here upon earth, he filled notwithstanding the heavens,
not leaving therefore the company of the Angels. And on the otherside likewise,
where as now he is in hraue, Idem l. 11. c. 3. li. de Incarn. c. 21. Fulgent.
ad Thrasimund. l 2.
he cease not to fill the earth with his power, etc. He appeared for us on
high before the father, and he cease not to dwell here below in the Saints by
his spirit, etc. being absent according to his humanity, but present according
to his Divinity. Fulgentius; One and the same Christ (says he) is a local
man, that is to say, tied to one place, in as much as he was borne a man, that
is to say, of the Virgin; and notwithstanding God infinite, that is to say,
without limitation of place, measure or bounds, in as much as he is of the
Father: according to his humane nature absent from heaven, when he was upon
earth, and leaving the earth when he ascended into heaven: according to his
divine nature notwithstanding, not leaving the heavens, when he descended; nor
the earth when he ascended into heaven, Vigil. l. 1. cont. Eutych.
etc. Vigilius, B. of Trent, It is expedient for you (says he) that I go,
etc. And how will he go (says he) unto the father, who never is from him? He
which is all in all with the father, and of whom all things are full? etc. But
says he; This is because he carried out of this world, his humane nature which
he had taken of us, etc. He is then gone from us, according to this humanity;
but in respect of his Divinity he says unto us, I am with you unto the end
of the world. Idem l. 4.
But again, now the days will come, that you shall desire to see the Son of
man, and shall not see him? etc. Verily, because he is after a certain manner
both absent from us and present with us: By the form of a servant which he
carried from us into heaven, he is absent from us: and by the form of God,
which remoueth not from us here on earth, he is present with us, Circumscribi
loco.
and so by this means, he but one and the same, becomes present with us, and
absent from us, etc. But seeing (says he) that the word is every where:
wherefore is not the flesh also every where? These certainly are things very
diverse and different, to be limited and bounded within one place, and to be
every where. The Son of God had a beginning, as concerning the nature of his
flesh: but he had not any, if you consider the nature of his divinity: In
regard of that he is a creature: but in regard of this the Creator: In respect
of that he is a subject to be contained in one place, but in respect of this it
is not possible for him to be contained in any place, etc. And this is the
Catholic faith and fession, which the Apostles have delivered unto us, which
the Martyrs have confirmed and ratified, and which the faithful have conserved
and maintained, even unto this present, etc. And that in such sort, that
although the founders of Transubstantiation have laid such doctrines, as are
contrary to the succeeding ages; Bed. in. hom. Paschah. Bernard. in 1^ Sermon.
de Caen. Dom. sermon. 6.9.10. Hugo. part. 8. c 13. memit. theol. Cyril. 9. in Io.
c. 21.
yet this foundation has always remained firm. In Beda; Christ ascending up
to heaven after the resurrection, left his Disciples corporally, how be it the
presence of his divine majesty did never leave them. In S. Bernard; I go from
you says the Lord, according to my humanity, but I do not go away from you
according to my Divinity: I leave you without my corporal presence, but J
arde and assist you, with the presence of my spirit. And thus have all the old
Schoolmen spoken: so far, as that he which has said otherwise, has been
reputed for an Eutichian, or Nestorian, according to the saying of S. Cyrill:
Ne quis in duos filios Christum diuidere auderet: To the end that no man might
be so bold, as to divide Christ into two Sons, etc. And of such like places a
man might make up a whole volume.

But follows it, that to the end it may retain the humane nature, that the
body of Christ must needs be bounded, and made subject to one certain
place? What other thing is it that all these Doctors have said, in their making
of it a local and circumscriptible body, and subject to local motions? etc.
S. Ambrose says: Ambros. Ep. 22. and l. de Incarn. Domini. and de spir; sanct.
There was in Christ the same truth of body that is in us. Again; Every
creature is bounded within certain limits of his nature, and that, that has
not a bounded and limited power, cannot be called a creature. If then thou
consider the Son of man as man, why do thou not leave him that which
belongs unto man? If as a creature (for so we call him, according to the
phrase of antiquity, in as much as he is man) what do thou call in question
his circumscriptiblenes, if thou be not purposely minded to confound the
Creator with the creature? And not any more to divide and separate with
Nestorius, but with Eutiches to confound and couple together the two natures?
In like manner S. Jerome, Didimus. l. 1 de spir. sanct.
or rather Didimus translated by him, goes further: Yea if the holy Ghost
(says he) were a creature, even he should have a circumscriptible substance,
that is to say, a substance restrained and kept within certain limits. Yea
says S. Cyril; The Divinity could not possibly avoid limitation, Cyril. de
Trinit. c. 2
if it were within the reach of any quantity. And then will the fathers exempt
and except his glorified body from these rules? Can you once think how, seeing
they do not exempt the Divinity it self, if it were possible for it to come
under any presupposed quantity? Theod. Dial. 2
Verily, not Theodoret, who says: It is glorified with divine glory, adored
of the celestial powers, but notwithstanding a body, but notwithstanding
subject to that limitation, which it was before, etc. I heard the Lord who
said: You shall see the Son of man coming in the clouds, etc. But I know
that that which is seen of men is finite and limited, August. ad Dard. Idem ad
q. 35. q. 65. and 20. Idem de diverse. quaest. q. 83. and Ep. 6. Idem in Ioh.
tract. 30. de Consecr. d. 2. C. prima quidem. Idem ad Dar. Ep. 57. and ad
Consent. 46. Nazianz. ad Theod. dial. 1. Council. Chalced. apud. Damasc. l. 3.
c. 3. and Euagr. l. 2. c. 4 Council. Constant. aecumenic. 6.
for never could any man see that nature which is infinite and unlimited. Not
S. Augustine: For (says he) take from bodies, space of place, and so you
shall make the^ not existant: and if not existant, then not to be any thing at
all. Again, Every body is local, and every local thing is a body:
whatsoever is local is in one place, and not in many, and it occupies with
his least part, the least place, and with his greatest, the greatest, etc.
Again, The Lord is on high, but the Lord which is verity and truth (that is
to say, in as much as he is God) is also here: It must needs be that the body,
wherein he rose again (mark how he speaks of his glorified body) should
continue in one place, albeit that his truth be dispersed and shed abroad
every where. Again, Let us not be so insolent as to say, that the body has
not only put off mortality and corruption, by the glory of the resurrection,
but also that it is now become spirit, where it was a body. For I believe and
esteem it to be such a one in heaven, as it was here on earth, when he
ascended into heaven, etc. For a spiritual body is that, which is already
immortal with the spirit, but not that it is changed into a spirit, etc. Not
Gregory Nazianzene: We teach (says he) the same Christ, consisting of a
circumscriptible body, and of an incircumscriptible spirit, of a body which may
be contained in a place, and of a spirit, which no place is able to contain,
etc. Not the Orthodox, and purer Church in the Councels of Chalcedon and
Constantinople III. The two natures after the union, have verily their own
natures, and their natural properties: for either of the^ does retain his
natural property, so as that it cannot possibly be changed. But in the mean
time we have here to observe, that the heretics of that time, against whom
the fathers disputed, do not aleadge for themselves any thing of
transubstantiation: but is not the body of Christ in diverse places at one and
the same time in the holy supper? and then is it not either changed or
confounded with the divinity, or the properties of the one nature become
communicable with the other? which no doubt they would not have forgotten, if
the Church of that time had taught either transubstantiation, or any doctrine
which had come near thereto. They object; yea but our Lord came forth of the
virgins womb, Tertul. de car. Christ. c. 4. 20. 23. and aduers. Marcion. l. 3.
c. 11. l. 4. c. 21. l. 5. c. 19. Quod communi parefacti. corporis lege pepetit.
Orig. in Luc. hom. 14. Ambr. in Luc. l. 2. Hieron. ad Eustoch. de cast. virg.
Luke 2. Durand. l. 4. in l. 4. Sent. D. 44. q. 6 Nu. 21. Leo 1. ad Epis.
Palaest. Hilar. de Trin l. 3. and ad Constant. August. Hieronym. ad Pammach.
Justin. Martyr in quaest. q 120 Cyril. Alex. in Ioh. l. 12. c. 53.
that was closed and shut up; he rise again the sepulcher fast; he went into
his discipls the doors made, etc. Wherefore there is a penetrating of
dimensions, and a concurrence of bodies in one and the very same place, etc.
Tertullian, Origin, S. Ambrose, and S. Jerome did answer them; That Christ
being borne did open the womb of the virgin. And S. Luke alleges the law
to this purpose; Every male opening the matrix, shall be holy unto the Lord,
etc. Out of which Theophilact gathers altogether an other manner of doctrine:
For (says he) this law properly has been accomplished in Christ alone, who
only opened the womb of the virgin: for as concerning other mothers, their
husbands and not their children do open them. And Durand likewise is far
from finding this miracle. To the stone rolled upon the sepulcher, Justinius
Martyr would tell them: That the divine power caused it to make way for him, or
that the Angel rolled it away. And Pope Leo the first likewise; That Christ
rise again the stone of the sepulcher being rolled away. And S. Hilarie in
general, That all closed and shut things are open to the power of God. S.
Jerome, That the creature gives place to the Creator, etc. But yet his
entrance the doors being shut is unanswered; Justinius Martyr answering
purposely this very question: This was not (says he) by changing his body
into a spirit, but by the same reason, that our Lord walked upon the sea,
causing by his divine power the sea to befit to walk upon, which of it own
nature was not so: in so much as that it did not only bear up his body, but
that of Peter's also. The miracle then was in the sea, not in the body: in the
doors which opened by a special power, and not in the subtlenes (as they
speak) of his body. Then he adds; For this is the same with the walking of
his body upon the sea, without being changed; for even so without any manner
of change in his body, he entered in at the doors being shut. And therefore he
would (says he) that his disciples should touch him, to the end that they
might know, that he entered not by changing of his body into a spirit, but
that by divine power, which brings things to pass, beyond the course of
nature, this body of his consisting of gross parts, was entered and come into
them. Saint Cyrill: The Lord went in to his disciples the doors being shut: and
that by surpassing (through his omnipotency) the nature of things. And
therefore let no man trouble himself with seeking out of the cause, but let him
rather consider that the question is not here of a mere man, like to our
selves: but of the Almighty Son of God, to whom whole nature is subject.
This was therefore after the same manner, that his walking upon the sea was,
which naturally is not given to bear up our feet, (and note that this was
before his body was glorified) and therefore when thou read this, beware
that thou be not turned aside, to forsake the true faith, etc. And if thou be
not able to comprehend the same, blame the defects and wantes of thy spirit:
and say rather: That whereas he thus entered in at the doors being shut, it is
because he is God: and yet not any other then he was at the time of his being
conversant as men amongst his disciples before his passion. And in deed the
better sort of their expositors of the later writers do not abuse these places,
to the proving of the said pearsing through of dimensions, imagined and devised
by our adversaries, which makes that two bodies should occupy but one place.
The doors (say they) were opened: Ferus in Ioh. c. 20.
and why not after the same manner that God caused the earth to open? and
swallow up Dathan and his confederates: the sea to make way for the Israelites,
and to drown the Egiptians: or the gates of the prison, for the deliverance of
his Apostles? And if God (say they) were able to bring them out of a prison
fast shut, mortal and corruptible men at they were, why should he not himself
be as able to go in, the doors close shut? The miracle evermore proceeding by
this means from the divine power, united unto his humane nature, and not from
any change made or pretended in the same: and the change also whenever any
is, resting in the things which suffer and obey this power, without any
extending of it self by any manner of way unto the person. Durand: That our
Lord went in the doors being shut, by some other privy and secret place: but
not through the doors shut, etc. But if any one amongst so many have found out
this den or lurking hole; wherefore of so many sundry expositions would they
have us to make choice of that which is most harsh and obscure? And when all is
done, what has this to do with the Sacrament of the holy Supper? But we
answer them two things. In the first place; That in the matter of the
Sacraments, as also of this same, (as Saint Augustine has taught us before)
there is no question to be made concerning any miracle. And in the second
place: That this Maxim abides ever firm; that in God there is not yea and no
toge there: and therefore that no miracle how great soever can imply any
contradiction. For the one S. Thomas tells us: That a miracle comes of
admiration, Tho. in 1. part Sum. q. 105. art. 7.
and that admiration falls out when the effects are manifest, but the cause
hidden and secret. But here we all agree, that the effects are hidden and
secret, whereupon they are called mysteries. And hereupon also S. Augustine does
roundly cut off all the controversies, saying: That the Sacraments are things
of great note and estimation amongst men, August. de Trinit. li. 5. c. 10
and that they may be reverenced as religious things; but that they ought not
to work any admiration in us, as if they were miracles. And by name, he
speaks there of the holy supper: As in deed there was never any miracle read
of, whose effects were not clear and manifest to the senses. And to the
second S. Thomas tells us: God is not Almighty in respect of the things
wherein there is contradiction, because that they cannot be accounted of as
possible things. Thom. 1. p. Sum q. 25. art. 3. and 4. and aduer. ger. t. l. 1
c. 84. and l. 2. c. 25 August. de Trini. l. 15. c. 14
And he lays down for an example: That he cannot make one thing, and that
which is contrary to the definition of the same, as a man unreasonable; a
triangle, and not three angles or three lines, etc. Because says he: This
should be to have them, and not to have them. And to speak in better terms
with Saint Augustine; Because that, This should be an unableness and want of
power: for great is the power of the word, (says he) in that it cannot lie,
for that therein there cannot be Est and non est, but Est, est, Non, non, etc.
But are we not in Saint Thomas his terms, when there is made and set before
us a body without quantity; a quantity without dimensions: and a local
thing without any place: a quantity therefore without quantity; a body
without a body? And thus then they destroy the humane nature of Christ,
wherein lies the principal consolation of mankind; the article also of his
ascension into heaven, of his sitting at the right hand, etc. that is to say,
even our Creed.

In the sixth place, let us see how they deal with his divinity.
Transubstantiation injurious to the divine nature of the Son of God.
It is a rule amongst all the ancient fathers, as we have seen; that men
should distribute the Sacraments, that is to say, the signs: but that God
alone is the giver of the thing, but more particularly in this, wherein it
pleases the Son of God to give himself unto us, his flesh and his blood for
our nourishment unto eternal life. But with what reverence can we say, that
another gives it us, and that in such sort, as that it depends not upon the
institution of the Sacrament in it self, neither yet of the virtue of the
words which they call sacramental: but (as in the works and feats of
Magic, in which strong imagination works the effect) of the intention of
the priest which utters them? Whereupon it follows, that God must needs
have tied his grace to the intention of the confecrating priest: and not to his
own institution, accompanied with his holy spirit? And the Son of God shall
not be ours, that is to say, the life which is in him shall not distribute it
self unto the faithful, further then the discretion of this intention shall
extend? And it shall be in the power, or rather in the weakness of the Priest,
to frustrate and send away empty, a whole assembly and company of
Christians, gathered together in the name of Christ, fervently desiring in a
true faith, and longing after his grace, which he has included in this
precious gift, which he has vouchsafed freely to bestow upon them of himself,
in stead that he has so graciously declared his good will unto us saying: When
two or three of you shall be gathered together in my ^ame, J will be in the
midst of you, etc. Yea to frustrate and disapoint them every manner of way,
whether his purpose and intention stand good or not. For if he be nothing bent
that way, then according to their doctrine, he consecrateth not, neither is
the Son of God communicated. And nevertheless if he do consecrate, yet they
do not communicate therein, for they are always subject to doubt whether he
had any purpose and intention, or not. And whereas there is doubting, there is
no faith: and where there is no faith, there is nothing but sin. Now
themselves are of this judgment, that he cannot receive the body of Christ,
which does not believe in him. Now then what privilege has the virtuous and
godly man more then the wicked, seeing that the intention or not intention of
the Priest, transubstantiateth or leaves vntransubstantiated; seeing that both
the one and the other are subject to doubt of the intention, and therefore of
the effect; and seeing that both the one and the other, whether doubting or
assured thereof, do equally receive or not receive? Likewise what shall become
of their doctrine, De opere operato; That the thing profits and is
available, in as much as it is only performed and done; and not in regard of
the person which does it, seeing that this whole mystery depends now, Ex
opere operantis, of the working and operation of the sacrificer? Moreover,
where shall the excellency of this Sacrament above all other Sacraments be
found: if the rest depend upon the grace of God, without any such necessity
of the intention of him that consecrateth: as the greatest part of them does
hold of baptism, and of that pretended Sacrament of marriage? etc. On God I
say, whose intention and purpose never halteth or fails, neither yet by
consequent, the object of our faith: the same (not to speak any thing more
sharply and grievously of the infirmity of man) being subject to fail every
moment? But further I would know what shall become of their private Masses:
Bonauent. in Comp. Sacr. Theol. rubr. 11. l. 8. Gabr. Biel. lect. 6. lit. C.
seeing that Bonauenture and Biel hold: That besides the intent of him that
consicrateth, there is required the intent and purpose of him that instituteth
and ordains: that it is not sufficient for the Priest to have an intent to
consecrate, if he follow not the intent of Christ in this sacrament? But Hugo
and Biel and the most part of the schoolmen are they not of judgment, that
private Mass, wherein there is no public remembrance made of the death of
Christ, does nothing at all agree with the mind of the institutor? what
consolation then can they of the Church of Rome have in the Sacrament, when in
stead of nourishing of their faith, they maintain and feed doubt and
uncertainty: when as after they have been well prepared, they know not what
they receive: the efficacy of the consecration being unable to penetrate and
pearce according to their doctrine in the Sacrament, without this intention and
purpose: the man likewise not being able to pearce and see into the intent of
the consecrating Priest by any means? Thus in seeking to give too much to the
worthiness of the Priest, they have taken away the effect of the Sacrament
from God, who only works the same: and from the people the profit and fruit
which should come to them thereby, Stella clericoru^.
and for which it was ordained. And all this, that they might be honored in
the dispensation of the mysteries of God, more then God himself, more then the
Creator: whose Creators and makers, since the time of the entering of the
doctrine of transubstantiation, they have not been ashamed to profess
themselves to be. Now the old Church had never any such doctrine: they did not
at any time once think of calling of Christ out of heaven by multitude of
words: What is meant by consecrating
they did attribute the communion of the body of Christ, to the institution of
our Lord, to the operation of the holy Ghost, and to the faith of the
faithful. To consecrate in their language was to sanctify that is, to bless:
that is, to change a thing from the common use, to a holy: and from a profane,
to a sacred: which is accomplished by the word, that is to say, by the
institution of the Lord, which gives it his efficacy. Thus speaks Saint
Cyprian ordinarily: That the bread and the wine of the holy Supper are
sanctified by the word. And S. Augustine expounds it saying: Not for that it
is spoken, but for that it is believed: not the sound that fl^eth away, but the
permanent and abiding power, that is to say, the operation of the spirit of
God, etc. After the same manner have all the ancient fathers written: as S.
Hillarie, Isidor. l. 6.
Ambrose, Jerome, Gregory, etc. Isidore in like sort: By the commandment of
Christ we call his body and his blood, that which is sanctified of the fruits
of the earth, and made a Sacrament by the invisible operation of the spirit of
God, etc. In which sense the profane Authors used also the word Consecration.
Promiscui vsus.
Cornelius Fronto says, Consecrated, that is, that which is made holy, or
turned to a holy use, being before profane, that is to say, of a common use.

But God forbid that our Lord should make the communion of his body which he
offers unto us, subject either to the sound of words, or to the intent and
mind of him that utters them. The ministers as were also the Apostles, are
made for the church, and not the church for them: yea they are the ministers,
and not the Lords thereof: they are not dispensers of their own mysteries, but
of Christ's; and yet which is more, not of Christ's mysteries, but of the signs
of his mysteries only: 1. Cor. 13.
no more then they are of faith, which comes of the hearing of the word,
notwithstanding that they minister the word to us: God having reserved unto
himself the gift of faith to work the same by the effectual power of his
spirit, as a dispensation only from his grace: being no more depending on him
that ministers, then tied to the signs which he ministers, etc. God verily
says to Moses: And thou shall sanctify it, etc. Leuit: 3. August. in quaest.
in Leui.
But he says also in another place: I am the Lord which do sanctify it. S.
Augustine demands thereupon: How can it be that both the Lord and Moses
should do it? Verily (says he) Moses by the visible sacraments, by his
ministry: but the Lord by his invisible grace, by his spirit, as that wherein
lies all the fruit and benefit of the visible sacraments. So John Baptist, the
greatest amongst those that are borne of women, says the Lord, baptized with
water, but the gift of the spirit was of Christ. And by the ministry of Paul
and Apollos many believed, but the gift of faith, by which man belieueth, says
S. Paul himself, is of the Lord. 1. Cor. 3. Canon. vtrum de consecr. d. 2
Which thing the Canon also concludes in express words: That the sacrament is
not of the merit of him that consecrateth, but of the word of the Creator, and
of the power of the holy Ghost bringing all things to pass, etc.

Seventhly, It destroys the analogy and coherence of the holy scriptures: It
destroys the analogic of the scriptures and faith.
for how can it come to pass by taking that course, that after the example of
Esdras, we should come to expound scripture by scripture; and by that key which
S. Augustine gives unto us to open the same: as to expound one place by many,
and not in such a sense as is contrary to many: one obscure and dark place by
many clear ones: whereas the sticking to the words of one place, do overthrow
the clear doctrine of many others: and from this one also do gather nothing
but contradiction and darkness. He that gives us his body, gives us also his
blood, the body and blood alike precious; both the one and the other the price
and ransom for our sins: and therefore the one and the other given in the same
sense. Now the truth is that it is thus said of the blood: Luke 22.
This cup is the new testament in my blood: and this cannot be understood of
the cup but of the wine; namely, as S. Matthew reports and sets it down:
This is my blood, Mat. 26.
the blood of the new Testament, etc. If then there be a most apparent figure
in the one, it cannot be excluded from the other. And as the one is resolved
into these words: This, that is to say, this wine is my blood: So the other in
these, This, that is to say, This bread is my body. And as it is said of the
wine or cup: This cup is the new testament in my blood: So it may be said of
the bread; This bread is the new testament in my body, and. And seeing again
that according to their own sayings, the bread cannot be the body, nor the wine
the blood really, because they are two Jndiuidua (as the Logicians speak)
predicated, and spoken the one on the other, we will express them by the words
of S. Paul, who has not given any other thing unto us then that which he has
received; neither yet taught us any thing but that which himself had first
learned of the Son of God: 1. Cor. 10.
This bread is my body which is broken for you, that is to say, This bread
which I break is the communion of my body: this cup or this wine which I
bless, is the communion of my blood, etc. And if we yet doubt: but what manner
of communion is this? and how is it brought to pass? and how is this eating
and drinking? etc. we must have recourse to our Lord for answer and resolution:
Ioh. 6.50.
This is the bread that came down from heaven, to the end that if any man eat
thereon he might not die; a living bread, a quickening bread, a bread of God
which brings eternal life: My flesh says he, and my blood are truly meat,
truly drink, which I have given for the life of the world: and be it is that
eats and drinks thereof, that comes to me, which belieueth in me, which
dwells in me, etc. If this should offend you as it did the Capernaits, then
learn and understand, That it is the spirit that quickneth, and that the flesh
prositeth nothing, that my words are spirit and life, etc. Neither is there any
cause why it should be objected here that S. John speaks of the spiritual
eating, How S. Ioh. c. 6 must be understood.
and not of the sacramental. For notwithstanding that he speak here of the
spiritual, yet he cease not to declare unto us the manner of the
sacramental, to wit, under the Sacraments, the obiectes of our senses, the
helps of our faith, and yet spiritual. And thus have the ancient fathers
evermore understood it, and have served themselves with this place of S. John,
as a Commentary upon the rest of the Evangelists; which have collected and
gathered the necessity of the expounding thereof siguratiuely: also that the
faithful alone are partakers of the thing of the Sacrament and not the wicked
and ungodly. But as the authors of transubstantiation did afterward more and
more embrace the carnal presence, and consequently, that the wicked and
ungodly did eat Christ, so began they less and less to admit in this matter
and question, the authority of this sermon made by our Lord: a sermon verily
made some year or thereabout before the institution of the Supper: but as is
manifest, an intended preparatiue unto the same: even as the talk and
communication which our Lord had with Nicodemus concerning baptism, was a
preparatiue to Baptism. There our Lord said: John 3.
If a man be not regenerate, that is to say, borne again, he cannot enter
into the kingdom of God. And here: Jf a man eat not my flesh and drink my
blood, he can not have life in him, etc. There Nicodemus was offended: And how
can a man that is old be borne again, can he enter into his mothers belly,
etc. And here the Capernaites: This is a harsh speech who can endure to hear
it? And how can this man give us his flesh to eat? And many of his disciples
al^o, and that so greatly as that they went from him therefore. And there he
expounds his meaning to Nicodemus: Man must be borne again of water and of
the spirit: That which is borne of the flesh is flesh, and that which is borne
of the spirit is spirit, etc. And here in like manner to the Capernaites: It is
the spirit that quickneth: the flesh profits nothing, etc. Now Baptism was
formally instituted after the speech had by Christ with Nicodemus: the sign
added to the thing, the water to the spirit. etc. and yet notwithstanding the
water did not change his nature. This text likewise serves not a little to the
plain laying out of the doctrine of baptism. And in like manner after the
sermon of our Lord to the Capernaites, the holy supper was instituted, the
elements of corporal nourishment, ordained for Sacraments of the spiritual,
etc. And then why should these signs change their natures? And why shall it
not be lawful to allege this place, as well in the matter of the Lords
supper, for the cleerer understanding of the same, that so we may be
enlightened, and made to discern where our spiritual nourishment lies? And
seeing that the institution of baptism coming after, has not at all made
regeneration to be carnal, by the adding of the element thereunto: why should
the putting of the element to the eating and spiritual communicating of Christ
have made it carnal?

Saint Augustine demands: The fathers. August. de consen euang. l. 3. c. 1.
Seeing that S. Matthew, S. Mark, and S. Luke do all of them make mention, how
our Lord took the bread, blessed it and gave it to his disciples, saying unto
them: Take eat, this is my body; how comes it that S. John makes no
mention thereof in this place? that is to say, in the rehearsing of that which
goes before the passion of our Lord? Verily says he, It is a testimony that
our Lord has spoken of that point a great deal more largely elsewhere: and
where then but in this sermon of Capernaum? Chrysostom. in Mat. hom. 83.
And Chrysostom says: How came it to pass, that his disciples were not much
troubled when they heard this? Namely, these words: This is my body, etc.
Verily says he, Because he had handled the great and weighty points of this
thing before hand, he labored not to confirm that which they did already
understand, etc. And again; And he drurke (says he) himself, least the
hearing these words should have said, what then? Do we drink blood, and eat
we flesh? etc. For when he first spoke of these things, many were offended,
only for the words sake: to the end therefore that this might not come to
pass again, he first performed the action himself, that so he might take
away whatsoever might trouble their spirits, or perplexe their minds in the
communicating of the mysteries. Whereby it appears, that those excellent old
fathers have referred the place of S. John to the interpretation of the holy
supper instituted afterward: that is to say; that the eating which is ordained
in the use of the sacrament in the holy supper, is the same that without the
sacrament is declared in that place: If then it be spiritual here, let it be
so likewise there? And therefore let us hear what the fathers say upon the
same. Tertullian: Notwithstanding that he says, That the flesh profits
nothing; Tertul. de resurrect. carn.
we must gather the sense from the matter of that which is spoken. For in as
much as they accounted his speeches to be harsh and intolerable, as if he had
determined in deed to have given them his flesh to eat, to direct and bring
the state of their salvation, to the spirit he did set down aforehand: It is
the spirit that quickens. Mark that he says Verily, which cannot be
expounded and taken there for Visiblie, but for Carnally, etc. Athanasius upon
this place, Whosoever shall have spoken a word against the Son of man. De
peccat. contr. spirit.
whereunto by consequent we have to oppose Spirituallie. Athanasius: The Lord
disputing in S. John of the eating of his body, and seeing that many were
offended, said unto them; what will this be then, if you see the Son of man
ascend and go where he was before? etc. It is the spirit which quickneth, etc.
For be has spoken there both of the one and the other; of the flesh and of the
spirit: and has distinguished the spirit from the flesh: to the end, that
believing not in that only which appears to the eyes, but also in the
invisible nature, we may learn that those things which he spoke, are not
carnal but spiritual. For to how many men should his body be able to be
sufficient meat, that so it might be the food and nourishment of the whole
world? But to draw them from vnderst anding of him carnally, he made mention
of his ascension: and to make them to understand afterward, that the flesh
whereof he had spoken was a spiritual meat, and heavenly food, that he was to
give it them from above: For the things says he, which I have told you, are
spirit and life: As if he said: My body which is showed and given for the
world; is given for meat, to the end that it may be given spiritually to
every one, and that it may become a defensatiue and preservative to all in the
resurrection unto eternal life. S. Augustine expounding these words, August.
in psalm. 98.
The words which I speak unto you are spirit and life, brings in our Lord
expounding those of the holy Supper in these terms: Understand (says he)
spiritually that which J have said: You shall not eat this body which you see,
you shall not drink that blood which they shall shed that shall crucify me:
I have recommended unto you a certain Sacrament, which spiritually understood
will quicken and make you alive: Idem. tract. 27. in Ioh.
and if necessity require that it be visiblie celebrated, yet it must be
understood invisibly. Again, What means this saying, They are spirit and
life: that we may understand them spirituallie, they are spirit and life:
have thou understood them carnally? they are notwithstanding spirit and life,
but not to thee. And spiritually, that is to say, figuratively, mistically.
Carnally, is as much as to say, literally, really. For says he, Thou have to
observe this rule: Idem de doct. Christ. l. 3. c. 16
If in the scripture a word or phrase of speech do for bid thee some vile and
wicked thing, or command thee some honest and good work: that then it is not
figurative: but if on the contrary, etc. thou must then make account of it to
be figurative. If you eat not the flesh, etc. it may seem to command a
trespass, etc. it must needs then be a figurative speech, a phrase and manner
of speech commanding us to be partakers of the death and passion of our Lord;
Cyril. Cateches. mystag. Idem in Leuit. l. 7.
and sweetly and profitablie to call to our remembrance; that his flesh was
crucified and pierced through for us. S. Cyril Bishop of Jerusalem: If you eat
not, etc. Not understanding these things according to the spirit, they went
away offended, supposing that he had invited them to a banquet of man's flesh.
Saint Cyrill Bishop of Alexandria: If you eat not, etc. But if you be the
children of the Church and instructed in the mysteries of the Gospel: If the
word which is made flesh dwell in you, etc. know that the things which are
written in divine books are figures, etc. For there is also in the new
Testament and Gospels, the killing letter, etc. as he shall find that does not
spiritually apprehend the things that are there spoken, etc. and he brings
forth this place for an example. Theoph. in Ioh. c. 6.
Whereupon also Theophilact though he were of that time wherein
transubstantiation was set up, says upon this place: In as much as we
understand it spiritually, we are no profane deuourers of flesh, but rather
we are sanctified by this meat. Again, For that they understood it carnally,
he says unto them: That which I tell you must be understood spiritually, and
that is the way to profit thereby: But to expound and take them carnally, that
profits nothing, but turns into matter of gross offense. Therefore he
adds: The words that I say are spirit, that is to say, spiritual: and life,
that is to say, which have not any thing to do with any carnal thing, but
bring eternal life.

And if then with the consent of all the fathers this place of S. John do
expound and make plain the doctrine of the holy supper, and must be understood
spiritually: then also must those words of the institution be so understood if
we mind not to cause the scriptures to disagree and fight against scriptures,
and one place thereof against many places, yea and that one against it self:
if we will not violently go about to establish quite against all analogy of
scripture the matter of transubstantiation, which yet is not of bread, into a
body, but of I know not what, (as that which has no name) into a body: not
of wine into blood, but of wine or rather of the cup into blood, or rather into
the new testament in blood. If likewise we will not have the bread and wine
abased or turned into nothing in S. Matthew, in S. Mark, and in S. Luke, after
the words: and yet continue in their sound and perfect natures in S. Paul
after the very same: that is to say; If we will not overthrow for the
retaining of the litterall sense of one only word, the spirit diffused
throughout the whole scriptures, and make the sacraments of the Church of
Christ by the hardness of our expositions more raw and carnal then all those
of the Jewish Church.

These are the absurdities which accompany the expositions of our
transubstantiators, whereas ours does retain the nature of all the sacraments,
the agreement of the old with the new; of holy baptism with the holy supper;
of the supper of the Apostles with that of the Christian Church: and above all,
the principal end of the same, which is the nourishment of the soul unto
eternal life by that consunction of the faithful with Christ, as also of the
faithful amongst themselves, which it fostereth and cherishes, etc. It
conserueth in like manner the truth of the humane body of our Lord, which the
other destroys: the excellent dignity of his divine nature, which that
abaseth: and all this by keeping the Analogy of the faith of Christ, and the
harmony of the holy scriptures.

CHAP. IIII. That the Fathers knew not Transubstantiation, nor the real
presence in the signs: And this is prosecuted unto the time of the first
Nicene Council, the same contained therein.
NOw it is also very certain, that such as has been the doctrine of the
Church, not Primitive only, but also for a long time after, even when
corruption had entered this noble and worthy part of the Church not having
been touched or defiled by the first: which thing we shall be able to prove
from time to time by the Fathers: save that we will not repeat diverse places
before alleged, as the course of our treatise has caused us to produce and
cite the same.

Saint Clement Bishop of Rome, Clem. Romans constit. l. 6. c. 6.
in the mystical thanksgiving that follows the consecration: Father we give
thee thanks for the precious blood of Jesus Christ which is shed for us, and
for his precious body, whereof we make up and finish these counterfeites and
resemblances. l. 8. c. 17.
Mark this word counterfeits, that is to say, correspondent figures: and that
after the consecration; Himself having ordained it for us, to the end that we
might show forth his death, etc. Again, in his liturgy after the
consecration: We offer unto thee O king and God according to thine ordinance
this bread and this cup, l. 5. c. 61.
etc. And in another place: The counterfeites (says he) and mysteries of his
body and blood, at which (say the Apostles, as the report is set down by
Clement) Judas was not present with us. l. 2. c. 61.
And yet notwithstanding such, because of the holy mystery whereunto they are
consecrated: That he exhorts men to come unto them, as into the presence of a
king. If this had been the real body of our Lord, would he have made any
other comparison then from himself? would he not have said, that it was
requisite to worship it as God?

Ignatius: Ignat. in ep. ad Philadel.
There is one flesh of our Lord, and one blood shed for us, one bread also
broken for all, and one cup for the whole Church. How was it possible for him
better to distinguish betwixt the signs and the things, then by these four
words: flesh and blood, on the one part, and bread and cup, on the other?
Bellarmine would have him to signify by these words, flesh and blood, his
body stretched out, and his blood shed upon the cross: and by the bread and
cup his body broken; his blood shed in the holy Supper. But do we then eat in
the holy supper an other body, then that which was stretched? and drink we
another blood then that which was shed upon the cross for us? What other thing
is this, then to take from us all our consolation, all our glory? And did not
then the Apostles communicate Jesus Christ crucified? And what becomes of the
glory of that great Apostle, who would not know or glory in any other thing
but him crucified? And what other thing else is this, but in most outrageous
manner to abuse the scripture? That he did not speak in the supper of his
body broken with griefs upon the cross: but of his body broken under the
Accidents of bread, not of his blood shed for our sins, but taken and powered
out of the cup under the Accidents of wine? which notwithstanding to be so,
is proved; for that whereas it is said in S. Luke, shed for you, it is in S.
Matthew, shed for many: for this cannot be referred to the breaking or pouring
out, which is in the celebration of the holy Supper, but to that which was
really made upon the cross. The same father also undermines and ouerturneth
the very foundation of transubstantiation, by the nature of Christ: Ignat. cp.
8. ad Polycarp.
Here below (says he) is the race, but the crown is laid up in heaven: Christ
the son of God, even he who is not temporary, that is to say, not subject to
any time, in time; invisible by nature, visible in the flesh, impalpable, and
such as cannot be felt with hands, and yet notwithstanding for the love of us,
become corporal and palpable, etc.

Justinius Martyr compares the bread of the Eucharist, Justin. in dial. cum
Tryphon
to the cow which was sacrificed in the old law, for them which were purged of
the leprosy: He has given us (says he) to celebrate the Eucharist in
remembrance of his death (note remembrance) which he suffered for them, whose
spirits are purged from sin, to the end that we should render thanks unto God.
Again, He has given the bread (says he) to the end that we should bear in
remembrance, that he was made a body for such as do believe in him; the cup to
the end, that we should yield him thanks, calling to mind the shedding of his
blood. And in the second Apology, Idem in Apol. 2.
after he has described the whole ceremony of the holy supper; This meat
(says he) is called the Eucharist, whereof no man is to be permitted to be
partaker but those which believe that which we teach, etc. For we receive not
these things as common bread and drink, etc. But as our savior having taken
flesh by the word of God, has both flesh and blood for our salvation: so we
are taught that this meat sanctified of him by the word of prayer, wherewith
our blood and our flesh are nourished by changing and alteration, is the flesh
and blood of the same Jesus Christ made flesh, etc. But Bellarmine does arm
and fortify himself with this place; and let us see how, This is not (says
he) bread nor common drink. And who doubts thereof, seeing it is sanctified
by the institution of the Lord? But so it is, that it is bread and drink,
which is not become an accident, but continues a substance: and therefore has
only changed his use; and not his nature: It is sanctified from God by the word
of prayer: This is not then by the five pretended words of transubstantiues,
but by the ordinary and common manner of praying made unto God, according to his
institution, and thereto all the people answered, Amen. And with this meat
sanctified, Our flesh and blood are nourished by mutatio^ and change. Now it
must needs follow, that this is either really or sacramentally. Really, dare
they say so of the flesh and blood of our Lord? And that since Bellarmine
himself denies it. For thereupon says he, it would follow, that the
Eucharist should be the nourishment of the body, and not of the spirit, the^
which there is nothing more absurd. It remains then that it is sacramentally,
and to give place to his similitude; That as our flesh and blood are nourished
by the alteration of sanctified bread and wine turned into our substance: so
are our souls by the flesh and blood of Christ made flesh and blood for us,
and communicated unto us, unto a spiritual life by the operation of the holy
Ghost, Idem expurg. p. 75.
at the same instant that the signs are communicated. Note that the Index has
not forgotten to note, that whatsoever Langus has written upon these places
must be raced, because that he does not therein acknowledge the doctrine of
transubstantiation: And yet he is a professed Romish Catholic.

Ireneus, Iren. l. 4. contr. haeres. c. 34.
The earthly bread receiving the name whereby God calls it, is not any longer
common bread, but the Eucharist, composed of two things, an earthly, and a
heavenly: and thus our bodies receiving the Eucharist, are not any longer
corruptible, having the hope of the resurrection. Let us ponder and weigh all
these words: The bread takes his calling of God; that is to say, by his
institution, of common is made sacred: it is made the Eucharist, the same
compounded of two things, an earthly, and a heavenly. Not then of the accidents
of one earthly thing, and one heavenly thing: but both the two must remain:
the earthly, that is, the sanctified bread, appointed to a holy use, and the
heavenly, that is, the bread of heaven, the living bread, etc. that living
bread, which of corruptible ones, makes us incorruptible, by the faith of the
resurrection, and notwithstanding we as yet creep upon the earth here below,
subject to corruption: after the same sort verily, that the earthly bread
becomes heavenly, becomes living unto us, not by any real change that is
made in his nature, but by the faith, in which we receive it, and by the
vocation which it has received of the institution. Whereupon Ireneus does not
doubt to say, speaking of the Marcionites, heretics of his time; Idem l. 4.
c. 34^ and 57.
How should our Lord have justly confessed, (that is to say, declared,) the
bread, huius conditionis quae est secundum nos, of this earthly nature and
condition, his body, and temperamentum cali^is, that which was in the cup his
blood? Namely, if our Lord were not very man? Again; Taking the bread which
is a creature, the Lord said, that it was his body, the cup his blood, etc. And
we say the same also, that is, sacramentally: And as for our adversaries, Thom.
p. 3. q. 75. art. 8.
if they will have it to be really, let them remember themselves of Thomas his
Maxim; That it cannot be avouched in sound Divinity, That the bread is the
real body of Christ: but that it is an assertion of their own, That the
Catholic Church did never speak so, etc. For as concerning that which
Bellarmine alleges out of Ireneus against us, How will they say, R^latm. l.
2. c. 5. and 6.
that the flesh falls into corruption, and receives not life, which is
nourished of the body and blood of our Lord? taking it in such gross manner,
he ought to call to his remembrance that which he said, handling the place of
Iustine: That there is not a fowler error, then to say, That the body and
blood of our Lord; ordained for the nourishment of our souls, do turn and
work to the nourishment of our bodies.

Clement of Alexandria; Clem. Alex. in ^edag. l. 1.
The flesh and blood of Christ, that is, the nourishment of faith and of the
promise. Again, That that which was blessed was wine, (and not Accidents,) he
shows it saying, I will not drink any more of the fruit of this vine, etc.
And again, There is a double blood of Christ, Hoc est bibere, etc.
the one carnal, by the which we are redeemed, the other spiritual, by the
which we are anointed. And, This is to drink the blood of Christ, to be
partakers of the incorruption of the Lord, etc.

Tertullian, Tertul. l. 4. aduers. Marcion. c. 40.
He made the bread which he took and distributed to his Apostles, his body,
saying, This is my body, that is to say, the figure of my body. Where we have
to note, that by this Hoc, this, he understands not an Indiuiduum vagum, as
our adversaries do, but the bread: and not a bread either vanished away of it
self, or transformed into an other nature, but a bread of a sacramental
condition and quality, in that it is the sign of the body of Christ, yea the
sign of a true body, says he: For there could not possibly be any figure,
if there were not a true body. And from thence he reasons against Marcion,
which denied the truth of his body. Again, Come, says Jeremy, let us cast
the wood into his bread, verily into his body, for God has so revealed it in
our Gospel, (that is to say, Idem ibid. l. 3. c. 19. Idem aduers. cund. l. 1.
c. 14.
the Gospel of Saint Thomas) calling the bread his body, to the end that
from thence thou may know, that he has given the figure of his body in
bread, etc. In bread^ (says he elsewhere) Quo ipsum corpus suum representat,
whereby he represents his own body. And not, In quo, as Bellarmine would
have it, which should be after his sense, Idem de resurrect. carn.
Wherein he gives his body present. He obiecteth a place like to that of
Ireneus, The flesh is nourished of the body and blood of Christ, to the end
that the soul may be fed or fatted of God: An ordinary argument amongst
the fathers to prove the resurrection; That God has evidently showed, that he
would save the soul and the body, when as in the principal ceremonies of
the Church, he has always joined them together, as in the Eucharist; giving
the Sacrament to the body, and the grace to the soul: and sometimes they
speak hyperbolicallie. But let him here again call to mind that which he
lately said, That to take it so, would make a marvelous gross error. And then
that he must understand it sacramentally; which is as much as to say,
expounding Tertullian by himself, by these words, contained in the same book;
Idem ibid. c. 37.
Although our Lord said, that the flesh profits nothing, yet we must be
careful to make the sense answerable to the matter there spoken of; for they
accounted his words hard, as if he had verily determined to have given them
his flesh to eat: To the end therefore, that he might settle the estate of
salvation in the spirit, he has mentioned before, how that it is the spirit
that quickens, etc. Verily, says Pamelius, that is to say, rawlie. From what
place may not a man be able to escape and defend himself from, if such
figures be received in disputations?

Origin gives us these Maxims, which do quite ouerturne transubstantiation;
Orig. in Mat. c. 15.
That which is sanctified by the word of God and prayer, does not sanctify of
it own nature him that uses it, Again: This meat also thus sanctified, as
concerning his material portion, goes down into the belly, and from thence
into the draught: according to that which our Lord has said: That which
enters in at the mouth goes down into the belly, and is cast out into the
draught, etc. What can a man imagine that may be spoken more clearly? If as
some do, a man would say that he speaks not of the Eucharist; it appears
to the contrary by these words taken out of Saint Paul, handling this matter
against them which, did abuse it: And therefore many are weak amongst you,
etc. 1. Cor. 11.
If any man say with Bellarmine, that by the matter which goes into the
draught, is understood the accidents, what Grammar, or what Rhetoric did ever
teach this figure, which takes the matter for the accidents? What is it then
(says he) that profits in this meat? Verily, not the matter of bread, but
the word spoken over the same, to him that eats it worthily: And these
things are spoken of his figurative and symbolicall body, etc. Of this meat
which whosoever shall eat, he shall live for ever, which no wicked man can
eat, etc. Again, We drink the blood of Christ not only in the ceremony of
the Sacraments, Orig. in Numer. hom. 16. In Mat. c. 26.
but also when we receive his words, wherein life consists: according to
that which himself has said: The words that I have said unto you are spirit
and life, etc. And expounding the same words of the holy Supper, This bread
which the word of God confesses to be his body, is the nursing word of our
souls, etc. But says Bellarmine, Idem in Exodus hom. 13. Idem hom. 5. in
diverse. euang. loc.
So that we take heed (says he) that we let not any part of the consecrated
gift to fall. And what is that which we do not our selves for the reverence
due unto the Sacraments? And that receiving the bread of life and the cup,
we ought humbly to cast down our selves, and say with the Centurion: Lord I
am not worthy that thou should enter under my roof, etc. This roof I ask
them in conscience what it is? whether it be our belly or our soul? seeing it
is our soul and not our belly, that must be humbled.

Saint Cyprian: The Lord calls his body, bread made up of many corns: and
his blood, Cypr. l. 1. ep. 5.
wine pressed out of many grapes: Then Hoc, that is to say, This bread, this
wine, against our adversaries. And in another place he yields the reason:
Idem de vnct. Chrismat. Idem l. 2. cp. 3.
Because that in the table of the Lord, the things signifying, and the
signified, are called by the same name. He says not because, that the sign is
transformed into the thing, or that the thing takes the place of the sign.
Again, The blood of him by whom we are redeemed and quickened, can not be
seen, seeing the wine is not in the cup by the which the blood of Christ
ostenditur, is showed. A little after he says, Exprimitur, is expressed: which
is declared by the testimony and sacrament of all scriptures. He disputes
against them which used not any thing but water in the Sacrament: contesting
and solemnly affirming the necessary and unavoidable use of wine: because
that the proportion of the life and corporal sustentation, compared with the
spiritual, is not otherwise well signified and represented therein. And how
then shall the argument be able to maintain it self, if there be nothing
but Accidents? In his sermon of the Supper, (yet some doubt that it was not
his,) Before these words this meat was not commodious for any other thing,
then to nourish the body: but after that the Lord had said, Do this in
remembrance of me; This is my flesh, this is my blood: As often as it is
celebrated with this form of words, and substance of faith, this substantial
bread, and this cup consecrated by a solemn blessing profits unto life, and
to the salvation of every man; the whole together being a medicine to heal
infirmities, and a burnt sacrifice to purge iniquities. Note first, that he
attributes not the consecration to the five words, but to the institution.
Secondly; That the words themselves, which they call Sacramental, are not
those which they determine of and affirm to be; but, Haec est caro mea, hic
est sanguis meus: In the third place: That faith is necessary thereunto.
Fourthly, That it ever continues to be bread, and the cup, blessed and
consecrated, not transubstantiated. And fifthly, That they do not change their
nature, the signs still continuing their power and virtue to nourish the
body; and grace accompanying the same by the operation of the word, to
nourish the soul. This is that which he unfolds and lays open in the same
treatise in other words, which they feign would, but can not abuse to make for
their purpose. The bread (says he) which the Lord set before his disciples,
changed not in his figure, but in his nature, by the omnipotency of the word
is made flesh. They stand and pitch themselves upon the word Nature, as if it
were a substance, and not a property: and upon these words, Is made flesh:
whereas they ought to remember themselves, that this is contrary to their own
doctrine, that the bread should be made flesh: but this matter shall be made
more clear hereafter: As in the person of Christ, (says he) the humanity
was to be seen, but the divinity did conceal and hide it self; so into the
visible Sacrament there is infused by an unspeakable manner, the divine
essence. The divine essence says he, and not the humane nature; the spirit
then and not the flesh. And this uniting of the sign and thing does not
proceed, (says he) to the consubstantiating of Christ, that is to say, to the
making of him the same substancet but, vsque ad societatem germanissimam eius,
but to a most strict and near bond of society. And then not to the working of
any consubstantiation, neither yet transubstantiation; but to a sacramental
union, which exhibiteth to every faithful receiver grace with the thing, the
spirit with the flesh, the heavenly with the earthly, etc. so straightly linked,
as that The things signifying and signified, as he says in another place,
have the same names. Bed. in Oct. Epiphan. Cyril. in Ioh. l. 2. c. 4. Ambros de
iis (...) myster. (...). c. 4. and 9. ^^sil. de spir. ^^ct c. 15. ^^m 6.
According to that which Beda said a long time after him; That the nature of
the bread and wine is translated into the Sacrament of the flesh and blood of
Christ, by the unspeakable sanctification of the holy Ghost. And so speaks
Cyrill of the water in baptism, That it is reformed, and as it were molded
again by the operation of the holy Ghost, into a divine nature. And Saint
Ambrose, I know not therein the use of nature, but the excellency of grace.
And thus they all agree, that there is no transubstantiation in the water of
Baptism; except, as says Basil: Ex presentia spiritus, by the presence of
the spirit. And Saint Ambrose, By the preaching of the cross of our Lord,
etc. And if as yet we stand in doubt of his intent and purpose: The Master
himself (says he) has declared it: These words are spirit and life, the
carnal senses cannot pearce thereinto, if faith come not thereunto; Christ
calls sometimes the Sacrament, that is to say, the sign, his body;
sometimes his flesh, and his blood, sometimes bread, etc. Bread in respect of
the resemblance it has in nourishing: Blood, by reason of the quickening
effect: Flesh, in regard of the properties of his humanity which he took
upon him, etc. Namely, for as much as common bread changed into flesh and
blood, procures life, and the growth of our bodies: by the which effect so
ordinary unto us, the infirmity of our faith is helped: and taught by
sensible argument, that in the visible Sacraments is shadowed out and assured
unto us the effect of eternal life, and that we are not so much united unto
Christ by any corporal passing of his body into ours, as by the spiritual.
And he expresses this conjunction diverse ways: It mingleth not (says he) the
persons, it unites not substances, it associateth affections, and linketh wills
together. Our Master (says he) has taught us to care the flesh, and to
drink the blood: and that by abiding in him, this abode is an eating: this
dwelling in him, is a feeding: this drinking is an incorporation: this
incorporation is an uniting of wills and affections unto his obedience. As
meat is to the flesh, even so is faith unto the soul, the word unto the
spirit, etc. And therefore we do not sharpen our teeth to eat, but with a
sincere faith we break the holy bread, and distribute it; we distinguish and
put difference betwixt the divine and humane nature, and notwithstanding we
join them together, confessing one only God and man, as also being made his
body, we are coupled and united unto him, both by the Sacrament, as also by
the thing of the Sacrament, etc. And to conclude, Ambros. in ser^^. de Chrismat.
In this table (says he) whereat our Lord made his last feast with his
Apostles, he gave unto them with his own hands the bread and the wine: but
he delivered his body into the hands of the soldiers, to be pierced through
upon the cross; to the end that the true sincerity and sincere truth, being
the more deeply imprinted in the Apostles, they might declare unto the
Gentiles, how the wine and the bread are the flesh and the blood, and by what
manner of means the causes agree with the effects, and the diverse names or
kinds are reduced to one and the same essence: and the signifying and
signified things are called by the same names: Censentur iisdem vocabulis
showing thereby that the bread and wine distributed in the holy supper, took
their effect from the body delivered over to the soldiers to be crucified,
according to that which our Lord said in giving the bread; This is my body,
that is delivered for you.

There falls into this time the first Nicence Council, out of which, The
Council of Nice Ex Bibiotheca Vatiana.
procured out of the Popes library, there is one that cites this Canon; In
this divine table let us not be tied here below unto the bread and wine set
before us: but lifting up our understandings, let us know by faith, that the
lamb of God which takes away the sins of the world, is set upon this table,
offered by the Ministers without any offering: (...)
and that we receiving truly his precious body and blood, do believe that
they are (...), the badges, marks, or ensigns of our resurrection. And this
is the cause why we take not much, but a little; that we may know, that it is
not for to fill our bodies, but to sanctify us. This Canon is entitled, Of
the holy Table, and of the mystery of the body and blood of our Lord, which
is celebrated in the same. Now the holy Table is the holy Supper, which
consists of the sign and grace, wherein heaven and earth are joined and
coupled together: and again every mystery must be mystically expounded. In
this table then says he, that is to say, in the holy supper, we have bread and
a cup. But let us not (says he) settle our eyes thereupon; It is too base a
thing for the faithful: but let us have our minds and spirits carried up on
high, that is to say, from the signs to the grace, and from the minister to
God. Upon the material Table, we see nothing but bread and a cup, and the
bread, truly bread, a cup, and that truly a cup: but upon the table of the
Lord, that is to say, in the holy supper we are to exercise our understanding
by faith, that is to say, not to see, but to believe: That the lamb which
takes away the sins of the world, is there offered, is there eaten: Offered
says he, without being offered, that is to say, as the Canon expounds it
self mystically, for the Table is mystical: C. iteratur. C. Hoc est. D. 2. de
consecr.
Non rei veritate, sed significante mysterio: And therefore eaten without being
eaten: and yet truly sacrificed and truly eaten: in as much as we believe,
and call to mind there, that he has been sacrificed for us, in as much also
as we are certain, that we are partakers of this sacrifice which is ours, that
his flesh is our meat unto our resurrection unto eternal life: for he has
said unto us, that he has given it for us. The Council therefore has said,
truly, because there is nothing more true, then the promise of God, nothing
more certain, then his effect when it is received in faith: and
notiwthstanding that the bread and the wine are but tokens or signs, to the
end that following the exhortation accustomed in the old liturgies, Sursum
corda, (...), Life up your hearts on high, etc. We may wait and look for the
receiving of our spiritual food at the hand of God, and not at the hand of
man: yea we lift them up very high, and far above these signs and this
table: before which if the doctrine of our adversaries at that time had had any
place, the Council should have said unto us, as they say at this day: Cast your
selves down before this table; settle and fix your eyes upon your God, that
descends and comes down upon it, see that you kneel down unto and
worship him there.

Saint Athanasius, which was of this time, Athanas. de verbo. quicunque
dixcrit. etc.
will manifest and make clear the purpose of this Council: I have seen
(says he) the like Character in the Gospel of Saint John, where the Lord
entreating of the cating of his body, and seeing that many were offended
thereat, speak in this sort: Does this thing offend you? what will you say
then, if you see the Son of man ascend and go up to the place where he was
before time? It is the spirit which quickens, the flesh profits nothing,
etc. For he has spoken here of the one and the other: of his flesh and of his
spirit: and has distinguished the spirit from the flesh, to the and that
believing not only that which appears unto the eyes, but the invisible
nature also, we might learn that the things which he spoke, are not carnal
but spiritual. Where we shall mark, that he expounds these words of the
Council: Let us not settle our minds upon the signs set before us, but let us
understand and know by faith, etc. By these, That we believe not that only
which appears unto the eyes, etc. He adds, For to what an infinite
multitude of men should his body have become sufficient meat, being ordained
to be the food of all the world? showing thereby that we must always judge
and make account of the body of Christ, as of a true body. And in this sense
the Council said: This is the cause why we receive in a small quantity, etc.
Seeing the scope and drift of the action is the sanctification of the spirit,
and not the filling of the body. And afterward, And therefore he made mention
of his ascension into heaven; thereby to draw them back from understanding of
him corporally; and to the end, that from thence forward, they might learn,
that the flesh whereof he had spoken, was a heavenly and spiritual meat,
which he must gi^e them from above. Whereby we learn, that this eating must
in such sort be understood, as that it evermore include the truth of
Christ's body, and of his local ascension: For (says he) that which I have
spoken unto you is spirit and life: as if he said; This body which is showed
and given for the world, shall be given for meat, to be attributed to every
one spiritually, and to be made unto them a defensatiue and preservative, unto
the resurrection of eternal life. Setting against the badges and notes which
the Council had spoken of, the spiritual distribution of this celestial
meat, that is to say, the thing it self. And this is the cause why in another
place he calls it, The mystical table, as the Council, The holy Table. At
which says he, Who so is partaker does enter into the company of God: that
is, such as receive the thing signified by the Sacrament, that is to say, the
inward grace. The thing then contrary to the doctrine of our adversaries, is
not received by the wicked and ungodly, as those that never come in the company
of God: neither then is it received, by the hand either of the faithful, or of
the minister, incorporated with the sign, etc. For as concerning the place,
that Bellarmine alleges of Athanasius, Thedor. dial. 2 ex orat. Athan. de
fide.
cited by Theodoret, where he says: That it is said of the true body, Sit
thou at my right hand: Likewise, This is my body which is delivered for you,
and that by this body, he was made our high priest, etc. It is to good purpose
against those heretics that deny the truth of the humane nature of our Lord:
but not against us, as also it is still to this day, against the masters of
transubstantiation, which destroy the same.

S. Hillarie, In C. Corpus Christi de consecrat. d. 2.
Bishop of Poictiers of the same time, cited by Gratian; The body of Christ
which is taken from the Altar, is a figure, in that the bread and wine are
seen outwardly: but truth, in that the body and blood of Christ are received
inwardly in truth. Others attribute this to Hillarie Bishop of Rome. Again, We
do verily receive under a mystery, the flesh of his body; and therefore we
shall be one with him. And, To the end that he may be believed to be in us by
the mystery of the Sacraments. And again, There is no place to doubt of the
truth of the body and blood of Christ: for both by the profession of our Lord
himself, and by our faith it is truly flesh, and truly blood, which being
eaten and drunken, do bring to pass, that Christ is in us, and we in him. Now
we are to note the figure opposed and set against the truth: the mystery
against the real presence: and the profession of our Lord jointly with our own
faith, for the making of us partakers of this truth, being the effect which
follows of the conjunction of the partakers of this truth with Christ: from
which conjunction the wicked are excluded: and therefore also from the
receiving of this truth, Hilar. in Mat. c. 30. and l. 8. de Trinitate.
which is accomplished by faith: and therefore the real change can take no
place there. And in deed, elsewhere he says plainly; That Judas did not sup
with our Lord: For (says he) he could not drink there with him, which should
not drink with him in his kingdom, seeing that he promised to al the^ that
drunk then of the fruit of this vine, that they should drink afterward with
him. The same that S. Clement has said unto us before, from the report of the
Apostles. Note, of the fruit of this Vine; and not of the accidents of wine,
and not of the blood of Christ really, but Sacramentally. But they object a
place unto us, wherein I heartily wish more conscience in them, and unto the
Reader, that he would take the pains to read it through, for the better
observing of the rule of this same Doctor therein: That the things which are
said, must be understood by the causes that moved and procured such things to
be said. So (says he) the word was truly made flesh, Idem ibid.
and we as verily and truly do receive the word flesh, by the meat of the
Lord: How can we but judge that he abides naturally in us? Where they
understand, by Cibum Domini^, The meat of the Lord, the Eucharist; and by
abiding or dwelling naturally in us, to receive the body of Christ really at
our mouths. And these are the points which we are to examine. Saint Hillarie
deals here against the Arrians: The Father (says S. Hillarie) and the Son
are one. Even so said they, but yet so one, as we are one with Christ. Now that
we are one with Christ, it is of his free will, not of our nature: and in will,
not in nature, the Father and the Son are also one. Saint Hillarie then to
prove unto them, that the Father and the Son were one in nature; proves unto
them that we are one in nature with Christ: and he handles it after this sort:
First, that there is the same humane nature in Christ and in us, by the
incarnation of the Son of God, which he calls the Sacrament of perfect
unity, the Sacrament of flesh and blood; and by which, Naturalis communionis
propriet as nobis indulgetur, The property of the natural communion is given
unto us by our Lord: Using the word Sacrament, for the Mystery in the work of
the incarnation; as it is his ordinary use to do: a manner of speech, very
familiar at that time, as we read in the conference betwixt the Catholics and
Donatists; where Marcelline, who did sit as President and chief Judge for the
Emperor Honorius, does swear, By the mystery of the Trinity, and by the
Sacrament of the Lords incarnation, etc. In the second place; that besides this
nature, which the faithful and unfaithful are alike partakers of with our
Lord, there is a special and more particular conjunction, which is wrought by
the spirit of Christ dwelling in the faithful, which regenerateth, quickneth,
sanctifies, makes them conformable unto him, and transformeth them into him:
for proof whereof he alleges the 6.14. and 17. of S. John, which our
adversaries will not deny to belong to the spiritual eating of the faithful
only. And this he makes more clear when he adds; that the cause of our
life, is by Christ dwelling naturally in us, by his flesh uniting us unto
himself, and by himself unto God the father: That Christ is in us, by the
truth of his nature: that he dwells in us naturally, we being made by this
most strait bond of union, flesh of his flesh, sucking our life from his
spirit. And this he further declares by sundry sorts of speeches, tending all
to one sense and meaning: That we communicate his flesh: To mingle in us the
nature of his flesh: To be naturally in us and we in him. And this our
adversaries themselves will confess, that it cannot be said of the ungodly, and
by consequent that it cannot appertain to the Sacramental or orall eating,
that is to say, to the eating of the mouth. Ad hereunto: that he which says,
that he is naturally in us, says also; Hilar. de Trinit. l. 8.
That we are naturally in him. But naturally we are not in him, as being in him
carnally or really, but as grafted by faith into his body: so neither is Christ
by this argument, carnally and corporally in us. Thirdly he alleges unto us
as a testimony of his holy union, the supper of our Lord when he says, that
we receive verily and truly the word flesh, Cibo Dominico, By the meat of the
Lord, that is to say, the flesh of the word, the word incarnate, the flesh of
the Son of God, by the instrument of the bread of the Eucharist, that is,
because it is a Sacrament exhibiting this flesh, exhibiting the grace
represented by the sign, which consists in this uniting of us with Christ.
The same which he calls, Sub mysterio, Christi carnem sumere, To receive the
flesh of Christ in a mystery; that is to say, signified in this mystical
pledge. And thus all this makes nothing for the matter of bread, or the
Indiuiduum vagum, transubstantiated into the body: For otherwise it would fall
out that throughout all Saint Hillarie his discourse, Christ should be avouched
and taught to abide in the bread naturally and corporally. And if corporally
and naturally; then verily contrary to the nature and properties of a body;
yea contrary to the condition of those which S. Hillarie acknowledges to be
in the body of Christ. For says he in an other place: He takes away the
foolish and sottish rashness of some, who contend that our Lord was seen in
the flesh, Idem in Psalm. 137.
in the shape of a counterfeit body, etc. Not remembering themselves, that after
the Resurrection of the body, it was said to the Apostles, who thought it had
been a spirit: See my hands and my feet, etc. And by a false or counterfeit
body he means one, that has not all the ordinary conditions of a body: For
in an other place expounding these words: The Son of man which is in heaven,
etc. he evidently puts difference betwixt the natures in Christ; Idem de
Trinit. l. 10. Idem in Psalm. 1^4 and l. 8. de Trinit.
by finite and infinite, being in one place, and being every where, etc. That
he is the Son of man (says he) it is of the birth and bringing forth of that
flesh, which he took of the Virgin: That he is in heaven, and yet
nevertheless upon earth, it is through the power of that nature which abides
for ever. Again; He is present to them which call upon him faithfully, but by
his divine nature, and spirit that pearceth and contains all things: He is in
us, but we have to understand that this is by the holy Ghost, etc. And after
the same manner he expounds the place: I am with you unto the end of the
world, etc. And thus we are come without any Transubstantiation or doctrine
coming near thereunto, even to the time of the first general Council of Nice,
including it within the same.

CHAP. V. The continuance of the belief of the Fathers of the Church, in the
matter of the holy supper, from the first Nicene Council, unto the time of
Gregory the great.
LEt us proceed according to the order of time, and succession of the Fathers.
Dionvs. Hierarch. l. 3.
Saint Denis pretended the Areopagite, (for we have said, that he may seem to
have lived about this time) did not otherwise understand it. After (says he)
that the Bishop has declared the works of Jesus, for the saluaetion of
mankind, according to the good pleasure of his father, etc. and that he has
preached the reverend contemplation of the same, which is apprehended by the
understanding, he takes his way to the Symbolicall administration of the same,
and that according to the holy institution of God: whereupon first crying unto
him: Thou have said it, Do this in remembrance of me: he administreth the
sacred things, and sets in open sight, the things whereof he has preached,
by the pledges presented there in holy sort, etc. Again; By these venerable
and reverend signs (says he) Christ is signified and received, etc. Where we
may briefly note: That the holy supper is celebrated, according to the
institution of the Lord, and in remembrance of him: That this is a Symbolicall,
that is to say, a shadowing and figurative administration of the redemption of
mankind, represented by the signs of bread and wine, the tokens of his body
broken, and of his blood shed for us: That this institution is not tied to the
five words, where to our adversaries would refer it: for he makes mention
by name of others: Thou have said it, etc. And that these signs do signify
Christ unto us, and nevertheless exhibit him unto us, that is to say, his
grace. Now what is there contained in all this, tending to prove any carnal
eating?

They fortify and bear themselves stout upon Saint Cyrill, Cyril. Cateches.
mystag. 4. and. 5.
Bishop of Jerusalem: but let us see upon what ground: If you eat not my
flesh, etc. The Jews (says he) were offended, because they did not
understand those things according to the spirit, thinking that he had invited
them to a banquet of man's flesh. This should suffice to raise and lift up our
minds above the real transmutation: but this that follows, seems to them
to prove their opinion very strongly: Let us hold it for a most undoubted
truth, that the bread which we see, is not bread, although the taste thereof
bewray it to be but the body of Christ, and the wine, in like manner, etc. And
why do they not call to mind and bethink themselves well, at the least of
their own Maxims: That the Catholic Church never said: That the bread was
the body of Christ, etc. And therefore if they will have S. Cyril a Catholic,
they must not have him taken according to the bare letter. But yet let us admit
him to be the expounder of himself: Consider it not (says he) (...), as
mere bread: for it is the body and blood of Christ. And how? Verily (says he)
according to the words of our Lord, etc. And how so ever our senses may go
about to inform us otherwise, yet let faith confirm us therein; Judge not of
these things according to the taste, etc. Then it is bread and wine, and not
accidents: but not naked and mere bread and wine, for they are Sacraments, and
sanctified instruments of God, endowed and clothed with an other quality,
that so they might cloth us with Christ: And what they are more, that we
receive by faith: and that grounded upon the words of our Lord: Namely, that
his words are spirit and life. But have they then either lost or changed their
substance? Mark him yet further. Verily not any more then the water in
Baptism, where of he speaks in the same terms: Think not of this water as
of bare and mere water: Namely, Because it is not any more wawater for drink,
says Chrysostom: But the water of sanctification, etc. Chryrost. in Psalm. 23.
Cyril. Catech. 3.
No more also then the unction, or ointment, whereof Cyrill says: You are
anointed with an oynment, being made partakers and companions of Christ. But
beware that thou account not of it as of a mere ointment: for as the bread of
the Eucharist after inuocating of the holy Ghost, is no more common bread, but
the body of Christ: so this holy ointment, is not a bare or common ointment,
after that it is consecrated, but it is a benefit of Christ's, which by the
coming of the holy Ghost, has a vigor and power of his Divinity. Do thou
then doubt, what this should mean to be no longer bare and mere bread? It is
as much, as not to be any more common bread: it is as much as to say,
consecrated bread. Do thou doubt how far this change extends it self?
(...) and si fiat (...): The ointment, although it be an instrument of the
grace of Christ, is not changed in his nature: No more is the bread and the
wine of the Eucharist, in theirs: though instruments sanctified of God, and
exhibiting his grace. Idem Catech. 5.
For (says he further in an other place) this holy bread is called
supersubstantiall; in as much as it confirms the substance of the soul: It
descends not into the belly, it goes not into the draught, but it is
distributed thorough out thee, throughout the whole man, for the salvation and
profit of the body and soul, etc. that is to say, it goes not in at the mouth
of the body, but it is received by the mouth of the soul, distributed through
all the veins of the same, unto the resurrection of life. And again, Idem
Catech. 4.
Drink this wine in thine heart, namely this spiritual wine, etc.

Saint Ambrose; This oblation is the figure of the body and blood of our Lord,
etc. This is not the bread that goes into the body, but the bread of eternal
life, which strengthens our souls. 1. Cor. 11.
Again; Seeing we are delivered by the death of our Lord, in remembrance
thereof, in eating and drinking: we signified there, the flesh and blood of our
Lord, which have been offered for us. Now what should this be, To be a figure,
to signify, to make mention of, or to have in remembrance: but the same which
we say, That the bread is Sacramentally the body of Christ? Ambros. de Sacram.
l. 4. c. 4.
And that which he says himself, In the Sacrament is Christ? But some object
from an other place, Peradventure thou will say (says he) my bread is usual,
(that is to say, common bread) know, that this bread is bread before the word
of the Sacraments: but after the consecration of bread, it is made the flesh of
Christ, the body of Christ, etc. Namely, by the consecration of the heavenly
word, etc. What is there (says Bellarmine) more clear then this? But and if
it be so clear a case, let him answer us, why Thomas of Aquin, Thom. part.
3. Sum. q. 75. art 8.
and all those after him, condemn this Proposition of Saint Ambrose: That the
flesh or body of Christ is made of the bread: It being observed says he, That
it cannot be properly said, that of a not essence, an essence may be made?
etc. And if it cannot be said properly, must it not then needs be improperly?
And who can or ought to make this impropernesse, propernesse, better then
himself? Therefore he adds: But see thou the efficacy of the word of
Christ? And if then it have such virtue in it self, that the things that were
not, do thereby begin to be, as namely in the creation: Vt sint quae erant,
in aliud commutentur.
How much more effectually shall it work and bring to pass, that things be
again, that which they were before, and that they may be changed into an
other thing? Now then what means this, To be that which they were, but to
continue in their nature? And by consequent, To be changed into an other thing:
but to change their condition and use? Bellarmine takes himself to have played
the tall fellow, when he answers, that Saint Ambrose understands that they
are the same that they were without, but not within. And is it enough to say
so? But Saint Ambrose himself eases us of all these cauils in an other place:
Ambros. de iis qui myster. initiant.
The true flesh of Christ (says he) is that which was crueified and buried:
Of this true flesh the Sacrament is a Sacrament, and our Lord does proclaim
it: This is my body, before the blessing of the heavenly words, an other kind
is named: after the consecration, the body of Christ is signified: and before
the consecration, another thing is said: after the consecration it is named
blood. What is that then in Saint Ambrose, by Saint Ambrose himself: The bread
by the consecration, to be made the body of Christ, the Cup his blood? Even
to be made Sacraments, to signify, to point out the body and blood of Christ.
But he must not play the wrangler here and say: That by the word Kinds, he
understands the apparent accidents of bread and wine, as the
transubstantiators have afterward said. For when he says: Before the blessing
of words, another kind is named: by kinds, he cannot but understand the
substances of bread and wine: for are they not as yet, according to their own
speeches bread and wine? And again this age of the world had not yet learned,
that Accidents are called Kinds. But he does yet further explain himself,
Ambros. de Sacram. l. 4. c 4
by the comparison of Baptism: Peradventure thou say, I see not the kind of
blood: But (says he) it has the resemblance of it. And what manner of
resemblance? For even as thou have received the resemblance of death, Viz. in
the dipping that is in Baptism: so have thou drunk the resemblance of his
precious blood, to the end that there may not remain any horror of blood,
and notwithstanding that it works the price of redemption. Again, Thou thy
self wast, but thou wast an old creature, after thou wast consecrated, thou
did begin to become a new creature, etc. Now we are of this judgment with
our adversaries, that there is not any Transubstantiation in Baptism, neither
in the water which washes, Idem de sacr. l. 6. c. 1.
nor in the creature that is washed. And this is the same, that is said in an
other place: Thou tookest the Sacrament for a similitude or resemblance, but
thou inioyest in truth, the grace and virtue of the nature: I am, says he, the
bread of life, that came down from heaven, but the flesh is not come down
from heaven: He took flesh in earth, of the Virgin, Idem in 1. Cor. 11.
etc. Again, The Testament is ordained by blood: blood is the restimonie of
the gracious work of God; for a figure of the same, we receive the mystical
Cup of blood, etc.

Saint Basil, What do these words profit us: Take, eat, This is my body? To
the end that eating and drinking, Basil. de Baptis. and in Moral
we should remember our selves of him, who is dead, and risen again for us:
And he that recalleth not to his memory thus much, is said to eat unworthily.
And he makes mention again of the same in his Morals. In the Lithurgie
attributed unto him; likewise after the consecration: We draw near (says he)
with assured confidence, unto thy holy Altar, and setting thereupon (...), the
resemblances of the holy body, and blood of thy Christ; we pray thee, that it
would please thee of thy mercifulness and great bounty, to cause thy holy
spirit to come down upon us, and upon the gifts there unfolded and laid open,
and the same to bless and sanctify, etc. Now they could not before the
consecration be called resemblances, or figures; for they were but common
bread and wine: we are of the same mind, and further that they are so also
after the consecration. And nevertheless they are so called by Saint Basil:
Wherefore they are not really the body and blood. Bellarmine of three aunsweres
made heereunto, rejects two, and cleaves to the third; That the body and
blood in the Eucharist, are signs of the body and blood upon the Cross. May
we judge that Saint Basil had ever any such intent, that he ever called the
accidents, Gifts uncovered and laid open; that he prayed to GOD in the same
terms, to have him to send down his holy spirit upon the assistants, and
upon the body and blood of his Son, and that he would bless and sanctify
them by him? etc. Is it possible without blasphemy? And after all, was it not
more ready for him, to say simply: We set before thee the holy body and blood
of thy Son, etc. They object these words unto us; Basil. de Spir. S. ad
Amphiloc.
Who is he amongst the holy Fathers, that has left unto us in writing the
words of invocation, at such time as the bread of the Eucharist and Cup of
blessing are showed. Men prayed unto them says Bellarmine, and then they are
not figures. But he says not, that they were prayed unto; but rather that God
was prayed unto, at such time as men prepared themselves to be receivers of the
Sacraments: Namely, to this end, that he would give unto them, to present
themselves to the same, with reverence, humility, repentance, an approved
faith, etc. And from this place they should rather have learned: that after the
consecration it is evermore bread, it is evermore a cup. But say they: wherefore
should it be accounted rashness to touch the^ there? For S. Basil says: If
such as present themselves rashly to the participating of things sanctified by
men, Idem Sermon. 2. de Baptism. c. 3.
lie open to such great and grievous threatenings, what shall we say of him,
that shows himself rash, and unadvisedly carrying himself against so great a
mystery? Verily we will say with Saint Paul; That he eats and drinks his
own condemnation, not discerning the Lords body. But we may learn of the
said Saint Basil in the same place; that such touching is not meant of the
body, but of the soul. For says he, By so much the more, as he is greater
then the Temple, etc. so much the more is it to be feared, to approach and
rashly to touch with an impure and filthy soul, the body of Christ, then to
come near unto sheep and Oxen, etc.

Out of Gregorius Nyssenus the brother of Saint Basil, they cite a place,
Gregor. de vita Mosis.
but it makes nothing at all for them; for he entreating of the Manna, says;
The bread that came down from heaven, which is the true m^ate, which is
signified in this history, is not a thing without a body: For how should a
thing without a body, become food and sustenance to a body? This would be to
purpose against such as should deny the verity of the body of Christ; and
further can it not serve. But and if they should gather from it: that common
bread, by consecrating may be made the heavenly bread; and the heavenly bread a
body, to nourish our bodies, they should sin many ways against themselves:
for they will not grant, that either the bread may be made a body, neither
yet that it enters into the nourishment of the body: whereupon it remains
that we understand this place, by the Council of Nice: That the Sacrament, to
become profitable both to soul and body, is made unto us a seal of the
resurrection, etc. But will we plainly know this Fathers meaning? The bread
(says he) in the beginning is common, Idem de Bapt.
but the mystery having made it sacred, it is called, and is the body of
Christ, and so the wine: and being things of small account before the
blessing, after the same, which proceeds of the spirit, they work
excellently. What then is there any transmutation of the substance? Thus (says
he) by the newness of the blessing, the same power, that is to say, of the
holy Ghost, makes the Minister reverend, and separated from the vulgar sort:
for of one of the multitude of the people, which he was yesterday, he is
sudainely become a Master and teacher of piety, and a super-intendent of the
hidden and pro found mysteries: and all this without any manner of change made
either in his body or form. Thus again the Altar is holy, and yet it is but a
common stone, not differing from others that walls are made of; but this
comes to pass, by the dedicating of it to God. Let us reason from thence;
therefore neither the bread nor the wine are changed in themselves, neither in
their bodies or forms, but only in that of common ones, they are made sacred,
and sanctified instruments of God, to exhibit unto us his grace, etc.

Gregorius Nazianzenus; Eat the body and drink the blood without being
confounded and doubting, etc. and deny not faith unto the things, which are
named of the flesh and Passion of our Lord, etc. that is to say: Be not
offended as are the Jews and Gentiles, at the Cross and infirmities of
Christ. But say they, he calls it, Eating and drinking, etc. And who will
doubt of that? We do not contend about the thing but the manner. Verily (says
he) let us become partakers of the Passover, and yet notwithstanding
spiritually: Greg. Nazianz. in orat. 2. de Pasch.
although this Passover be more manifest then the old: For the Passover of
the Law, I speak it boldly, was a more obscure figure of a figure, etc. And
then ours also is but a figure; but yet a more clear and plain figure. And in
the funerals of his sister Gorgonia: Idem in funere Gorg.
If (said he) her hand had in any part clasped, and laid close hold upon any
thing of the representations and resemblances of the precious body or blood of
Christ, etc. Then they continued resemblances, that is to say, figures after
the consecration. For otherwise who would believe, that these holy persons,
more zealous verily, and bearing more reverence unto sacred things, then they
of this age, would have permitted these women to touch them thus with their
hands, and so to carry and traile them up and down their houses.

Optatus does agrauate the furious outrages of the Donatists in these words:
Optat. aduers. Parm. l. 2.
You have broken down the Altars, whereupon heretofore you have offered,
whereupon the vows of the people, and the members of Christ have been
carried, from whereof many have received the pledges of eternal salvation, the
protection of faith, and the hope of the resurrection: you have broken the
cups, the bearers of the blood of Christ, etc. The Altar which is the seat of
his body and of his blood, etc. Who sees not that all this must be
figuratively taken; and that the first figures do bind us to the others?
Verily, after the same manner that the members of Christ, that is to say, the
faithful and their vows, have been carried upon the Altar, that is to say,
in spirit, in the same, the body and blood have been set there also, the Cups
have been the bearers, etc. And in like manner when he says, The pledge of
eternal life, the hope of the resurrection, what other thing is this then that
which the Council of Nice said, Pledges of our resurrection? And at the least
of that which he says afterward: What offense has Christ done you, whose body
and blood at certain moments, dwelt in these Altars? They should have learned,
that this could not be spoken or understood, but of the use and celebration of
the holy supper, and that at that time they had not kept them in a tabernacle
upon the Altar, that they might be there still resident, and worshipped
continually.

And as little does that prove, Ephrem. l. de nature. Dei. nimium scrutanda.
which they allege of Saint Ephrem: Why seek and searchest thou (says he)
for things that are past finding out? Thou will leave off to be faithful any
longer and fall to becurious. For whom may this saying better fit, then the
embracers of transubstantiation, for they have vndertake^ to examine these
mysteries, by Auerrhoes and Aristotle? But rather (says he) be faithful and
innocent, be partaker of the immaculate body of thy Lord by a most even faith:
Assure thy self that thou eatest the same Lamb whole and entire, etc. These
things surpass all admiration, he has given us fire and spirit to eat and
drink, that is, his body and his blood, etc. Fire then and spirit, which are
not laid hold on or taken with the hand, but spiritually; but as he has said,
with a most even and upright faith, etc.

Epiphanius, Epiphan. in Anchorato. (...).
We see that which our Lord took in his hands, as the Gospel reports it:
That he rise up at supper, that he took these things, and how that after he had
given thanks, he said, (...), this is mine, and this, and this: And we see that
it is not either equal or like, either to the Image and similitude in the
flesh, either yet to the invisible Deity, or to the lineaments of members: For
this is of a round fashion and insensible as concerning power. There he
reasons how man has received the image of God truly; but yet not according
to the proper nature of the Divinity, but by grace, and he alleges for
proof thereof, the example of the Sacrament. Now then, how and in what manner
is the Sacrament the body of Christ? Verily (says he) he would have said, by
grace: This is mine, this and this, etc. And no man doubts of this speech:
for who so belieueth not that the same is true, as he has spoken it; he is
fallen from grace, and from salvation. Where we are to mark that Bellarmine
leaves out these words, As he has spoken it, that so he may apply them unto
the thing, and not to the speech. The reason then stands, Man is the Image of
God, not according to the proper nature of the Divinity, but by grace: so the
bread is the body of Christ by grace, and not by nature: and man is regenerate
in the image of Christ, not by ceasing to be any more man, but by being
sanctified in Christ; so the bread is made the body of Christ, not by ceasing
to be bread any more, but by being no more common bread, by being made holy,
by being made a Sacrament, etc. And this he declares more plainly by the
similitude of Baptism: For (says he) the virtue of the bread, Ephran. cont.
haeres. l. 3. tom. 2.
and force of the water, are made strong and powerful in Christ, to the end
that not the bread, but the virtue of the bread, might be made virtue unto us,
and the bread is meat, but the virtue which is in it, is unto vinification: So
as water does not only wash and make us clean, but is further made unto us,
the perfecting of our salvation by faith, etc. Where he compares the water of
Baptism, with the bread of the supper. Now in the water there is no change or
transmutation: And he sets the force and virtue thereof, against the
element, and faith against the washing: that virtue which offers the grace
unto us, that faith which receives it in us, in whose souls the mystery is
made perfect, for it is made for them, and not in the Elements, which are made
for us.

Chrysostom has very lofty and hyperbolical speeches: Chrysostom. hom, 60. and
61. ad Pop. Antioch. Hom in Mat. 14.83. In Encaeniis de Euchar. De S. Philog.
Idem hom. 51 in Matthew. Esaias. 6. Hom. 83. in Mat.
but we can have no better expounder of the same then himself, in examining the
places, either in themselves or by comparing them one with an other: He says
therefore, Thou see him, thou touchest him, thou eatest him, thou set thy
teeth in his flesh, thou receiuest him into thee. Yea, but something then of
the manner how I see him: Now, he is invisible unto me: How I touch him: Now,
This is (says he) with a pure and clean heart: How I receive him: Now this
is, In my soul, how I set my teeth in him: Now these are the teeth of faith.
No master of transubstantiation should be so bold as to speak otherwise.
After the same manner then I eat him, that is to say, Sacramentally,
spiritually by faith. The hand of the Minister (says he) gives thee not the
body, it is the hand of Christ that gives it thee: It is not a man, it is a
Seraphim with a pinsers, such as Esaias saw: Suppose that it is the blood that
runs out from his side: Draw near then thereunto with pure lips, etc. Yea
again, but this then is that body and that blood, in the same manner, that he
which gives them unto me is a Seraphim, or Christ himself, after the same
manner, that the burning cole is made unto me in this example the propitiation
of my sins. There is no change made in the person of the Minister, nor in
the nature of the cole, neither therefore in the bread: And notwithstanding we
receive the body, the assurance also of the remission of our sins: but after
the same manner that Christ is given unto us, that is to say, spiritually and
under a mystery. And oftentimes he compares the supper with Baptism: with
Baptism I say, wherein by the agreement of both sides, there is not any
transubstantiation. He has said (says he) this is my body: let us believe
him without doubting or wavering, and let us behold and look upon him with
the eyes of our minds: for Christ his gift is not to be discerned with the
senses, etc. So by the water of Baptism which is sensible, he has given us
regeneration, which is a gift to be received with the understanding. And he
adds the reason: For if thou werst without a body, then would he have given
thee these gifts bare and naked without a body, but seeing thy soul is joined
to a body, he gives thee to apprehend his gifts, by sensible things. But
handling this matter of purpose, and that in these very places, where it has
his proper seat, he is well furnished and provided to expound himself very
sensibly: Idem hom. 46. in Johan.
My words says the Lord are spirit and life, that is to say: We must
understand them according to the spirit, mistically, spiritually, and not
carnally: And carnally (says he) that is to say, simply, according to the bare
letter: Spiritually, that is to say, Idem hom. 17. ad Hebr. and hom 83. in Mat.
Idem hom. 20 in Mat.
by considering the Sacraments with the eyes of the spirit. Again; This
sacrifice is the mark, sign, and figure of him, who was hanged upon the
Cross: God has prepared this table, to show continually the bread and the
wine in the Sacrament, according to the order of Melchisedec, for are semblance
of the body and blood of Christ. As our forefathers celebrated the Passover in
remembrance of the miracles done in Egypt, so shall you celebrate this in
remembrance of me. That blood was shed for the salvation of the first borne,
this for the sins of the whole world, etc. And as Moses says, this shall be an
everlasting remembrance unto you, etc. So I, you shall do this in remembrance
of me, etc. I have desired to keep this passover with you to make you
spiritual. Therefore he drinks with them, to the end that they may not say,
shall we drink the blood of a man? etc. Again, Where the carrion shall be,
Idem. hom. 24. in 1. Cor. c. 10.
thither will the Eagles resort: The Eagles (says he) to show, that it greatly
stands him upon, that will come near to this body to pitch his flight in the
highest and loftiest degree, and that he have nothing to do with the earth,
that he look up unto and behold the Sun of righteousness: And that he have the
eye of his understanding very quick and sharp sighted: for this table is a
table for Eagles to feed upon, and not the Crows. They are to think, says he
in an other place: Idem hom. 60. ad Pop. Antioch. Idem in Psalm. 144.133. and in
Mat. hom. 7. and 90. Idem in Ep. ad Caesar Monach. Idem in oper. impers. hom.
11. in Johan.
That they taste and feed on him, that is set on high and worshipped of Angels:
They are to rise up to the gates of heaven to look upon him, he fills the
spirit and not the belly: He distributeth the holy things unto them that are
holy: Thou may embrace him, but it must be with a pure conscience, touch
him, but by rising in thy spirit, and soaring above the heavens. But what is
there in all this, that makes for the transubstantiators? In the Epistle to
Caesarius, there is a doubt put, and yet it is an old one, The bread (says he)
before it be sanctified is called by us bread, but after that it is sanctified,
by the grace of God, etc. it is thought worthy to be called by the name of the
body of our Lord, notwithstanding that the nature of bread do still abide in
it, etc. And in an other place; If it be dangerous to convert sanctified
vessels to private uses, there being not in them the very body of Christ, but
the mystery of his body, then how much more the vessels of our bodies, which
God has prepared for his own habitation? etc. Whether Chrysostom, Maximinus
or some other were the Author of this book: so it is that he speaks, as was
then the use and custom, and according to the faith received in the Church.
For as concerning that which Bellarmine says, that a certain disciple of
Berengarius did insert it, it is as easy for us to deny, as it is hard and
difficult for him to prove.

Saint Jerome speaks not any otherwise: Hieronym. in Mat. 26.
After (says he) that the Passover was accomplished, and the flesh of the
Lamb eaten with the Apostles: he took bread which comfort the heart of
man, and passes forward to the Sacrament of the true Passover: to the end
that as Melchisedec, Gods high Priest offering for a presiguration of him, had
done; he also might represent the truth of his body. Bellarmine labors in
this place to turn represent into present or offer: Idem ad Hed^^.
but S. Jerome will expound himself. If (says he) the bread which is come
down from heaven, be the body of Christ and the wine his blood shed for many,
for the remission of sins etc. let us ascend with the Lord into this great
hall, etc. and let us receive of him there on high, the cup of the new
Testament; and there celebrating with him the Passe-ouer, let us be drunken
with him, with the wine of sobriety, etc. Then it is here below that it does
represent him, and on high, that it presents and offers him. They reply:
If says he; The bread which he brake, and gave to his Disciples be the body of
our Savior, then our Lord himself est conuina and conuiuium, both the guest
and the feast; he which eats and he which is eaten, etc. Not verily after the
letter, for Belarmine would be loath to blame S. Jerome of heresy, and this is
their heresy: That the bread may be the body of Christ. And therefore in a
mystery, Idem in 1. Cor c. 11.
in a figure, for a remembrance, for a pledge, etc. And he himself also does
use al these words: He took the bread (says he) and blessing it, as he
should suffer, left it to us, for his last remembrance; as he which goes into
strange countries, leaves some one or other token of remembrance with his
friend, etc. which he can hardly look upon without weeping. And this is in
handling the matter of the supper. Idem aduers. Ioum. l. 2. C. de hac. quidem.
de Consecr. D. 2.
In an other place: He offered wine for a figure of his blood, etc. for a
figure of his Passion, to approve the truth of his body. And upon Leuiticus: Of
this oblation (says he) which is maruelously made, for a remembrance of
Christ, it is permitted to eat; but it is not permitted to any according to
his own sense, to eat of that which Christ has offered upon the Altar of the
Cross. What becomes then of that which they say, that the very same is taken
in of men at their mouths? And what distinction shall it be possible for S.
Jerome to make therein; But that that, that is to say, the Sacrament is taken
and received with the mouth; but this, that is the thing is received by faith?
And this is the same that he says in an other place; In Ep. ad Hed^^t. In
Eccles c. 3 Idem in 1. Cor 11. In Esa. c 66.
That all those that have put on Christ in Baptism, do eat the bread of
Angels: that we are fed with his flesh, both in the Sacraments, as also in the
Scriptures: That they which have had the same in such sort, as to be fed
therewith must have a clean and a new spirit: Comparing the receiving of
Christ in the supper, with that receiving of him which is in Baptism, and in
the word. Again; That the flesh of Christ is understood two ways: Either
spiritually and divinely, whereof it is said; My flesh is truly meat, etc. Or
for that which was crucified and pierced with the Soldiers spear. That then
is the Sacramental, that is to say, the Eucharisticall bread so called; for
the strait union of the Sacrament and the thing, etc. And this the real, into
which we are grafted and implanted, by the virtue of the holy Ghost, and
crucified in it, to be glorified with it, etc. For as for that which our
adversaries say, that that is his flesh which cannot suffer: and this his flesh
that is subject to suffering: they should remember themselves, how that this is
spoken many ages after our Lords glorification, whose flesh, as they themselves
hold, cannot any more become subject to suffering.

S. Idem ad Ephesians. c. August. q. ^7. In Leu^t and ad Eund. cont. Maxim. l. 3. c.
22. Idem Ep. 23. ad Bo^^^ac.
Augustine comes. We have seen his Maxims heretofore, as so many
preparatiues to the deciding of this matter: He said unto us: The fathers have
eaten the same meat that we in the Sacraments: and he gave us the holy supper
for an example. Again; The signs of eatimes take the name of the things
signified, the Dove of the holy Ghost: the rock of Christ, etc. He also gives
us now the holy supper for an example: As (says he) secundam quendam modum,
After a certain manner, the Sacrament of the body of Christ, is the body of
Christ, and the Sacrament of his blood, the blood: so the Sacrament of faith,
is says. Note; After a certain manner (that is to say) Per modum Sacramenti,
suo modo, sub mysterio; in manner of a Sacrament sacramentally, under a
mystery. If it had been reallie, he would not have so spoken. And this is
according to that which he says in another place: That in the sacraments men
are to regard, not what they are, Idem cont. Maxim. Ep. l. 3 c. 22.
but what they demonstrate and signify, because they are one thing, and do
signify another. Then they are always the same that they are, and for to
signify another thing, that which they are does not vanish, neither become any
other thing. And hereof he takes for example in S. John, The spirit, water,
and blood. 1. Ioh. 5.8.
And this is the cause why he admonishes us heretofore to look well to our
selves, and beware that we take not the signs for the things signified, and
that in the matter of Baptism and of the Lords Supper, which he touches
expressly and by name saying, Wherein we must observe, what they have relation
unto, August. de doctr. Christ. l. 3 c. 5. and 9.
the more to reverence them, not with a carnal service, but with a spiritual
liberty. But seeing that we could allege and bring to this purpose all S.
Augustine, we will content our selves to stand upon those places that seem
most proper, and coming nearest to the purpose, Idem cont. Admi. c. 12. and in
Psalm. 3. In senten. Prosper.
as well for the one part, as for the other. The Lord (says he) has not
doubted to say, This is my body, in giving the sign of his body: He
admits Judas to the feast, wherein he recomme^deth to his disciples the
figure of his body and blood. The heavenly bread which is the flesh of Christ
is called suo modo, after his manner, the body of Christ, although in deed it
be but the sacrament of that body which was nailed upon the cross, etc. Not
(says he) by the truth of the truth of the thing, but by a signifying
mystery. And to children, August. in ser. ad infantes.
That which you have seen is the bread and the cup, and your eyes declare the
same: but that which your faith (which is to be instructed) demands: the
bread is the body of Christ, the cup is his blood. And this notwithstanding is
the Proposition which our adversaries do so deeply condemn. You will say, yea
but we know well enough from whence he took his flesh, etc. He was crucified,
etc. He sits now at the right hand of the father, etc. How the^ is the bread
his body, the wine his blood? These things brethren, are called sacraments,
because that in them one thing is seen, and another understood? that which is
seen has a corporal figure: that which is understood has a spiritual fruit,
etc. Will thou understand what this body of Christ is? Listen and give ear to
the Apostle, saying, to the faithful, you are the body and members of Christ,
etc. And to communicate thereat, Idem de doctr. Christ. l. 3. c. 26. Idem in
Ioh. tract. 25. and 26.
to eat the same, what shall we prepare for our selves? Not the teeth (says
he) and the belly: Prepare the heart and not the mouth: believe and thou have
eaten. To believe in him, that is, to eat the bread of life, that is, to eat
with the heart, and not to grind with the teeth: He that believes in him
eats him, he is invisibly fatted, seeing also that he is inuisibly borne
again: (let us always note how he compares eating with regeneration) then is
the body and blood of Christ life unto every one, Idem de verb. Domini in Luc.
Sermon. 33. Idem de verb. Apostol. Scrm. 2. Idem de Trin. l. 3. c. 10.
when that which is taken visiblie in the sacrament is eaten and drunk
spiritually, in the truth of the thing, etc. To eat, that is to be made
again: but thou art made again, by making that again which is not wanting in
thee. Eat life, drink life, thou shall have life, and eue^ that life which
cease not to be wholly upright. And yet he says in another place, That the
bread that is ordained for this action, is consumed in the receiving of the
Sacrament. This bread then that is received in the holy Supper, is not that
life: this bread is nothing else but the Sacrament. And again, This bread is
eaten of many which do not eat life. Life then lies not in this bread: it is
from elsewhere, according to that which he says, He in whom Christ dwells
not, eats him not: Idem in John tract. 26.
notwithstanding that he do shut up within his teeth the sacrament, etc. but
rather he eats his own judgment, because of his rash presuming to approach
unto the Sacraments of Christ, being unclean. Which thing we have sufficiently
handled before. Thus says he, That the Christian soul hears not in vain,
Sursum corda, Idem Ep. 1 56.
let your hearts beset on high: neither does it answer in vain, That it has
it in the Lord. These were the words usual in the service, and preparatiues to
the receiving of the Sacrament: Idem Sermon. 152. de Temp. contr. Faust. l. 33.
c. 8. Idem in Ioh. tract. 50. Idem de verb. Domin. in Luc. Sermon. 18. and 33.
and 64.
He touches Christ, that believes in Christ. He is come near unto, not with
the flesh, but with the heart, not by any bodily presence, but by the power of
faith: send faith and thou have hold of him: Thou can not look for him any
more at hand, for he is in heaven: look for him by faith, etc. It is not that
which is seen, that nourishes, but that which is believed: This is not that
bread which goes into the body, but the bread of eternal life that sustaineth
our soul. Our eyes are fed with the light; the eye of our heart with God,
neither can the multitude of eyes diminish or make him less. In like manner of
Christ in the supper. If there were great provision and store of meat allowed
thee for thy dinner, thou would prepare and make ready thy belly: Thou art
allowed, thou art esteemed of God: prepare thy soul. Now so many places, so
plain; and many more in the places from whence these are taken, shall they be
deluded and defeated by some petty and frivolous distinction? They object
these words in S. Augustine, Christ was carried in his own hand: when he says
recommending his body unto his Disciples: This is my body. Let them put thereto
that which is said afterward: Idem in Psalm. 33.1. and 2. Ierm.
And how was he carried in his own hands? Because that recommending his body
and his blood, he took into his hands that which the faithful know; that is to
say, the bread and the cup, and so he carried himself after a certain manner,
saying, This is my body, etc. Now let them expound unto us, what is the meaning
of this, Quodammodo, C. Hocest quod. De Consecr. D 2. Idem Ep. 118. c. 3
after a certain sort, except it be Sacramentally: Or as the Canon says,
Improperly, not in truth but in a mystery: To the end (says he) that the
sense may be. It is called the body of Christ; that is to say, it signifies
it. He compares, say they, the devotion wherewith it ought to be honored, to
that of the Centurion, who said unto our Lord, I am not worthy that thou
should come under my roof, etc. But to what purpose if we receive but the
sign? Where as we take the thing by faith, and the sign with the hand. As the
Centurion received the Lord corporally, under this roof, and spiritually and
by faith in his soul: and corporally without faith unto condemnation,
spiritually by faith unto salvation: according to that which Saint Augustine
says in an other place: That the Virgin is not vn^happy, Idem in ps 98.
because she did conceive and bear our Lord in her womb, but by faith in her
soul. But he has said, say they; Worship his footstool, and thereby he
means his flesh. And of his flesh he says: That no man does eat it, that
has not first worshipped it. This is not then the bread. And who doubts,
that we ought not to worship the flesh of Christ, united hypostatically to the
Deity? And that no man can eat it, which does not believe it, and that no man
can believe it, which does not worship it; and that no man can truly worship
it, except that he believe it? And is not this same against our
transubstantiators, which teach that the wicked eat it? Of those I speak,
which can neither worship, nor believe it? But to worship it, is to worship it
in heaven, and not in the bread: lifting up our spirits on high, and not
casting down our eyes upon the earth. And this is it that we dispute: Not
(says S. Augustine) the sign that is seen, Idem de doctr. Christ. l. 3. c. 9.
and which goes away, but that whereunto it ought to be referred. But let
them blush and be ashamed, that they have not added there to that which
follows: Upon what ground so ever thou fallest down to worship, look not
down unto the earth, but up to the holy one, whose foot stool it is, Idem in
Psalm. 98.
that is to say, the humanity of Christ: And when thou worshippest him, let
not thy thoughts rest in the flesh, and without being quickened by the spirit,
for it is the spirit that quickneth, etc. And this is the cause why our Lord
said to the twelve, etc. Understand sptritually that which I have said: you
shall not eat this body which you see: neither shall you drink this my blood,
which they shall shed that shall crucify me: I have enjoined you by
commandment to use a certain Sacrament, which spiritually understood will
give you life, etc. Had it not therefore been better for them, that they had
left this place unremembered? They cite an other place: That which is taken from
the fruits of the earth, (says he) consecrated by mystical prayer, let us
take for the spiritual salvation, in remembrance of the passion of our Lord,
Idem de Trin. l. 3. c. 4.
etc. it is not sanctified to be so great a Sacrament, but by the invisible
operation of the holy Ghost. And what is there here for any man to doubt of?
As though there were no other operation of the holy Ghost but
Transubstantiation? For is not regeneration in Baptism, a marvelous work
also of the holy Ghost? Wherein notwithstanding the water in his substance
received not any change. But as for that which he says of the fruits of the
earth, and that they are made a great Sacrament, they should have learned, that
for to continue Sacraments, they also continued fruits of the earth: and for
to continue fruits of the earth, they did also continue Sacraments, that is to
say, sacred signs of the grace of God.

And such like, and less forcible to prove any thing, are these places
following: It is one Passover which the Jews celebrate as yet with a lamb:
idem contr. li. Pet. l. 2. c. 37.
It is an other which we receive of the body and blood of our Lord. And who
denies it? and even since the true Lamb, which has caused to cease the
tipical or figurative; and which has take from it both the thing, and also the
Sacrament? Again, In stead of all the old sacrifices, the body of Christ, Idem
de ciuit Dei, l. 17. c. 20
is offered and administered to them which are partakers thereof. Or who
doubts of this point? And how often has it been told them, that the question
is of the manner? And in the end, Idem apud Yuon Carnut. Sermon. ad Neophyt Idem
de doct. Christ. l. 3. c. 16
they would find it in a place cited by Yuon Bishop of Charters: Take and
receiuean the bread, that which was hanged upon the Cross, and in the Cup,
that which issued out of the body of Christ. And what is this but the same that
he said to the children, as here he speaks unto Nouices, or new converted
Christians? These things are called Sacraments because that therein one thing
is seen, and an other understood: Communicate in the passion of our Lord, and
keep fast in your memories, that his flesh was crucified and pierced through
for you. And yet this place is not found in his works, but alleged by the
said Yuon of Chartres. Let only the sound Reader judge here, what swaie or
force these places can afford, amongst so many others, by which they are most
clearly and planely expounded.

Cyrill, Patriarch of Alexandria, gives us these Maxims: Cyril. An^t. 12
Our Mystery is not an Anthropophagie, that is to say; consists not in
eating of man's flesh: we must not set the spirits of the faithful in the
scrole of these gross conceits; being occupied in things, that are received
by a pure, exquisite and only faith, etc. Christ enters into us by faith, and
dwells in us by the holy Ghost: for the holy Ghost is not separated from the
Son, etc. Cyril. 3. c. 24. l. 11. in Ioh. Idem in Leuit. l. 7. Idem in Ioh.
l. 3. c. 24.
If thou stand persuaded according to the letter, in that which is said; If you
eat not the flesh, etc. this letter does slate thee: but if thou be persuaded
to understand it spiritually, there is the spirit of life to be found therein,
etc. The only begotten Son of God, is the true bread, which gives life to
every thing. As the earthly bread sustaineth the weakness of our flesh, so he
quickneth our spirits by the holy Ghost, and delivers the body from
corruption; that is to say, according to that which has been said so often; to
make us partakers of the resurrection of life. Again; This flesh, Idem l. 4.
c. 14. and 16.17.
or this body is made alive, because it is by a certain unspeakable manner
joined to the Son of God, by whom al things are quickened and made alive. And
hereupon when we eat this flesh, we have life in us; in as much as we be
joined unto him, in that we are the body and members of Christ; in that by the
blessing of the mystery, we receive the Son of God himself. And it is
necessary, if any man receive the flesh and blood of Christ, that he be so
coupled to him, as that Christ be found in him, and he in Christ, etc. To eat
then the flesh of Christ, with S. Cyril, is to believe in Christ, it is to have
him dwelling in him, living in him by his spirit, to be a member of Christ,
and one with Christ, etc. And he that has not Christ in him, does not eat his
flesh, neither yet drink his blood, etc. How can this agree with the pretended
eating of the mouth? They object unto us that he says upon S. John; Idem in
Ioh. l. 11.
We are united and made one with God the Father, by the mediation of our
Sautour: for we receive corporally and substantially the Son of God,
naturally united to the Father; and thus we are glorified, being made
partakers of the supreme nature, etc. which is properly spoken of the
incarnation, which he calls a mystery; as S. Hillarie a Sacrament. And
withal let them not dissemble and pass over S. Cyril his Exposition upon this
sentence: I am the Vine and you are the branches: which is in such sort as S.
Hillarie has expounded it before, and to the same sense: That the drift that
Cyril shoteth at is very clear and evident to them that will read the place:
And that as to be united to Christ according to the spirit, is to have the
spirit of Christ regenerating his: so to be corporally united unto him, or
according to the body, is to be joined to his body, and to become members of
his body, made conformable to him in this life, by the beginning of
sanctification, and spiritual life, waiting and attending till we be
perfected in him, that is to say, glorified in the celestial life. Now says
he, this union is made by faith, and cherished and strengthened by the eating
of his flesh, and drinking of his blood: and that he that eats and drinks
them, is in Christ, and Christ in him, etc. He understands then that this
corporal and substantial union is wrought by a spiritual eating, by that
pure and exquisite faith, which he requires: and not by the corporal, which
is common to us with many dry and rotten members, even the ungodly and
infidels, of whom it cannot be said, that Christ is in the^, or they in Christ.
And in deed he has there to deal against heretics, which pretended Christ was
not called a Vine, according to his humanity, but according to his deity: He
holding on the contrary: that the faithful are made partakers of the nature
of Christ, as the branches do communicate with the Vine, by the participation
of his spirit, Affi^i.
etc. And this is that which he says: That they are fastened to Christ, as the
branches to the Vine, firmly and substantially joined and glued to him by his
spirit: That they are made branches, in as much as they are regenerate, and in
as much as the root does impart unto them his qualities: They bring forth
fruit, in as much as they hang upon the Vine, joined to the same by faith and
holiness, Idem in Ioh. l. 10. c. 13.
and nourished and fed up to eue^ie virtue, by his holy spirit, etc. In a word,
altogether as he says: That Christ is corporally in us, in like manner says
he, as we are corporally in Christ: Now our bodies are not corporally in
Christ, but we are grafted thereinto by faith: neither then is the body of
Christ corporally in us, but spiritually received by faith. Now of conscience,
can this be understood of an eating which is made by the mouth, or that can be
done, but by those that are truly faithful? So that in Cyrill to be
corporally joined, is not after the manner as they are wont usually to take it
in the Schools, Ratione modi, sed ratione obiecti, that is to say to be
conjoined by the means of the body, but to be joined to the body. And in deed
he declares this conjunction by a place in the Corinthians, where the
faithful are called the members of Christ, that is to say, inseparably joined
to the body of Christ: and not verily by the body, but says he, by the
mediation of his spirit: As also by that place of Saint John, where we agree,
and are of judgment, that it is spoken of the spiritual eating and not of the
corporal. But I would entreat the Reader, to read the whole place, that he
may the better judge of counterfeited and cloaked dealing. They object in the
mean time the Synod of Ephesus, wherein Cyrill was president: We come (says
he) unto the mystical blessings, and are sanctified, being made partakers of
the holy body and precious blood of Christ, etc. not receiving it as a common
flesh, which God forbid, neither yet as the flesh of a sanctified man, etc. but
as that which is become the very flesh of the word, or eternal Son of God.
And who would have them to doubt of this? But the question is not of the object
of our Communion, but of the manner. And behold thus he expounds it: When
(says he) they had heard: If you eat not my flesh, etc. they were troubled,
etc. Because (says he) they had not as yet been made acquainted with the form
and most goodly administration of this mystery: Idem in Ioh. l. 12. c 58.
That is, as he says to Euoptius: That we must not handle or deal with that
which is not gotten but by pure and only faith, according to the conceits of
man's brain: That the body of our Lord is not common, although the nature of
the divine word be not eaten: That the participation of this mystery, is a
true confession and remembrance, that the Lord is dead for the love of us, and
that he is risen again for us, and that by occasion thereof, he fills us
with his divine blessings: Finally, that the operation of the Sacrament, is not
wrought in the bread, Idem in Leuit. 15.
or wine, but in us, but in our souls. For (says he in an other place) the
Lord says: Take, eat, and not keep it, reserve it till to morrow, etc. (And
this is to be noted against hereafter, and for that there be some that
allege it under the name of Origin:) And that the effect thereof, is the
dwelling of Christ in us by his spirit: But (says he) he enters into us by
faith.

Theodoret, Theodor. dial. 1.
who was present at the Council of Ephesus and Chalcedon, decideth this
question, dealing against the Eutichians, saying: Our Lord giving the
mysteries, called the bread, body, and the wine wherein the sop had been
dipped, blood. Then the Orthodoxe brought in, in that Dialogue yields a
reason to the Erranist, that is, to him that disputed with him and maintained
the error, saying: Verily he changed the names, giving to the body the name
of the sign, and to the sign the name of the body. And that in the same
manner that he called himself a Vine; he called the sign blood. And again
he gives the reason: To the end (says he) that they which are partakers of
the divine mysteries, do not rest themselves upon the nature of things which
are seen, but that because of the change of the names, they believe the
change, which is wrought by grace. For he that calls his natural body,
corn and bread, etc. has honored the visible notes and signs, with the name
of his body and blood, not by changing their nature, but by adding grace to
their nature, etc. Which is as much, as if he should say unto us; that, This is
my body, This is my blood, should be expounded by these words of the same our
Lord: I am the bread of heaven: I am the stock of the vine, etc. In an other
place; Idem Dial. 2.
The mystical signs (says the Orthodoxe) which are offered to God by the
ministers of God are the signs of the body and blood of our Lord. But says
he to the Erranist, Thou have entangled thy self in thine own snares, for
they forsake not their own natures after the sanctification, but abide in
their first substance, figure and form, palpable and to be felt as before,
etc. And he that shall compare Bellarmines answers by his sensible Accidents
with the text of Theodoret, which is worthy the reading throughout, shall find
them altogether fond and frivolous.

In the mean time, we con him hearty thanks, Gelas. de duab. nature. in
Christ.
for that he so freely confesses that Gelasius, whether he were Pope, or
Bishop of Cesarea, is of the same opinion with Theodoret, as he was also living
in the same time: Certainly (says he) it is a divine thing, as also the
Sacraments of the body and blood of Christ which we receive, for thereof and
by them, we are made partakers of the divine nature; and notwithstanding they
cease not to be the substances of bread and wine: And verily the image and
semblance of the body and blood of Christ are celebrated in the action of the
Sacraments. Note Image and semblance, that is to say, The figure and not the
thing. Again, Which abide in their first substance of bread and wine. Is it
enough to say, that by the word substance, he understood accidents?

Leo the first, Bishop of Rome; Leo 1. ep. 23. ad Cler. and pleb. Constant.
In the mystical distribution of the spiritual food that is given, that is
taken, to the end, that receiving the virtue of this celestial meat, we might
be turned into his flesh, which is made our flesh. Look how many words there
be, so many breaches are there made upon transubstantiation. Mystical
distribution, that is to say, sacramental: Spiritual food, the virtue of the
heavenly meat, to be turned or changed into his flesh, which is made our
flesh. For this is not wrought by any disgesting of the flesh, as they pretend.
They object again (for the rest will carry the question away,) Idem sermon. 6.
dereiunio. 7. men's.
That is received in at the mouth, which is believed by faith. And therefore
say they, it is received in at the mouth: whereas we on the contrary expound
him by S. Augustine; Thou take the bread of the Lord in at thy mouth, if
thou belieuest with thy heart: Thou take the bread of the Lord to thy
condemnation, if thou belieuest not. And thus that which thou belieuest by
faith, thou receiuest at thy mouth; be it unto thy condemnation, or be it unto
thy salvation.

Hesychius; If his body had not been crucified, we should not have eaten him,
Hesychius in Leuit. l. 1. c. 2. l. 2. c. 8. l. 6. c. 22
for the meat that we now eat, is that we receive the memorial of his
passion. Again; He forbids us once to think or conceive any earthly or
carnal thing of the holy things, and commands us to receive them divinely
and spiritually, etc. And it was a custom in his time as he himself
testifyeth, To burn all that which remained of the Sacrament in the fire. An
argument that they had not received any such opinion in the Church then, as is
at this day.

But they have a conceit, that they shall reap a better crop out of Eusebius
Emissenus; not that Greek of whom S. Jerome speaks: for seeing he speaks
of the Pelagians, it cannot be he: but the author of the sermon, De corpore
Domini, a Latin no doubt whom some take to be Faustus Rhegiensis: others
Caesarius, and the later writers; some one, some an other: but both of them
Abbots of Lirin. Let us hear him: Let all doubting or wavering of faith depart
far away from us. Herein we agree, C. Quia corpus de consec. D. 2.
This sacrifice must be in deed by faith, not by the outward appearance; by the
inward affection, not by the outward sight. And in that also. But say they; The
invisible Priest changes his visible creatures into the substance of his
body and blood by his word, by a hidden and secret power. Mark, the invisible
Priest, and not the visible, or minister. But so it is say they, that he
changes it, even in conscience, taking these words after the letter, would
they subscribe unto them? could they approve them by their own Maxims: That
it is an error, yea an heresy to hold, that the bread may be made the body
of Christ, that it may be turned into the body of Christ? Against their Gloss
also upon the word Conuertantur, which expressly condemns and disaluoweth
this proposition, De paue fit corpus Christi, and alleges the inconveniences
thereof, etc. Let us then expound him by himself, and not by our preiudicate
opinions. In the Sacrament (says he) seeing that our Lord removed his body
far away from our eyes, it was necessary that he should consecrate the
Sacrament of his body and blood, in the day of the Supper: To the end says
he, that Coleretur iugiter per mysterium, C. Semel. Christ. de consecr. D. 2.
that might be continually celebrated by a mystery, which had been once
offered for the price of our redemption: and that as the redemption being
perpetual, went for the salvation of all, that so also the oblation of that
redemption should stand perpetual: (that is says the Gloss, Gloss. ibid.
the preaching of this only sacrifice, after which there is not any other to
come:) And that this perpetual sacrifice might live in our remembrance, and
might always be present with us in the grace thereof: Asacrifice (says he)
which must be judged of by faith, and not by the outward appearance or kind, by
the inward affection, not by the outward sight. Here now you may behold a
manifest opposition, of the mystery against the realitie; of the remembrance
against the presence; of the presence of grace, against the real presence; of
faith, against appearance; and of affection against sight. But notwithstanding
say they, there is a change. And what change? verily such a one as he there
describes and sets down: for he compares the change that is made therein,
first with the creation: For as (says he) in the twinkling of the Lords eyes,
there were incontinently subsisting and extant, the heaven, the sea, and the
earth, although of nothing: by the same power also in the sacraments, whereas
this virtue commands, the effect does incontinently follow. Now would they
say, that by the consecration Christ was created anew? And to bring forth
nothing, is this to change and turn, is this to transubstantiate? And what
can they then infer, but that the same spirit, which made the heaven and the
earth, does conioyne and unite them together in the holy supper, as we have
diverse and sundry times said? And secondly, with the change which is made in
us by our regeneration in Christ; into which says this Eusebius, Non viuendo
sed credendo transiliisti; we enter not by living, but by believing: we are
made of the children of perdition, the adopted children of God, by a hidden and
secret pureness, continuing and abiding, idem atque idem, one and the same in
substance, but otherwise much altered and changed by the proceeding and growth
of faith. Changed says Bellarmine, accidentally, and not substantiallie. And
therefore the bread and the wine in the holy supper, in like manner changed,
said Theodoret in a word, Not in their nature, but by addition of grace, etc.
And how then shall we there receive the body of Christ? verily in a manner
proportionable to this change, and correspondent to this object. When (says
he) thou come to the altar, to be fed of these spiritual meats, look by
faith upon the body and blood of thy Lord, touch him there with thy mind and
spirit, mente continge, take him by the hand with thy heart, drink him haustu
interioris hominis, with the full and large draughtes of thy soul, and with
all thine inward man, etc. And yet this is the man amongst all the rest, by
whom they take themselves best underpropped.

Procopius Gazaeus says also, Procop. Gazeus in Genes. c. 49. Macar. Egypt.
Anachor.
The Lord gave the image, figure or tipe of his body to his disciples, not
admitting any more the bloody sacrifices of the law. Macarius an Egyptian more
clearly, saying: That there ought to be offered in the Church bread and wine,
the resemblances and representations exhibiting the body and blood of Christ:
the fathers of the old Testament knew it not; how that they that should
receive the invisible bread, should also spirituallie eat the flesh of Christ,
etc. Figures then evermore, and types and representations of the body and
blood, which forbid and exclude all manner of realnesse in the kinds: as
likewise all change in the substances, in that they always call them bread and
wine, etc. And thus we are come to the time of Gregory the first, about the
year of our Lord, 600.

CHAP. VI. That of a long time also after Gregory, transubstantiation was not
known: And further that all the most famous liturgies received of our
adversaries, are repugnant thereunto.
NOw Gregory 1. Anno 600. Gregor. dial. 4. c. 58. Et in registro.
had not as yet been infected with this error, howbeit he had inwrapped
himself in many other. Who is there (says he) of all the faithful, that
doubts, that at the hour of the sacrifice, at the voice of the minister, the
heavens are opened, or that the heavens are joined to the earth? etc. and we
will be ready to tell it them at all times, if they will hear: And heaven is
not only joined to the earth, but God to man, and righteousness to a sinner,
etc. They say that this is under the Accidents of bread, we in the nature of
our soul. Which is the more beseeming divinity? But when S. Gregory says;
When we take the bread, whether it be heaued up or not heaued, we are made one
body with the Lord our Savior: To what end should he say, heaued or not
heaued, if there be nothing but accidents? And is there not any great
difference whether we our selves be made the body of our Lord; or else the
bread and wine; the Indiuiduum vagum, accidents hanging in the air? Idem hom.
22. in Euang.
But says he; The blood is sprinkled upon the two posts, when it is not
taken of the mouth of the body only, but also with the mouth of the heart:
That is to say, say they, when it is taken also in at the mouth of the body.
But we say, that this is according to the rule above specified; which gives to
the sign the name of the thing; That is, that the sacrament is taken in at the
mouth of the body, the thing by the mouth of the soul: and in the faithful
the one with the other. Which S. Gregory lays open elsewhere in these
words, speaking of the ungodly; Howbeit, Idem l. 2. expos in l. 1. Reg. c. 1.
that they receive the Sacrament with their mouth, yet they are not replenished
with the virtue of the Sacrament. And therefore say we, they did not take the
flesh and blood: For he that receives them says the Lord, has eternal life.

Beda follows S. Augustine step by step, Bed. 1. Cor. 10.
and it may be that Bellarmine for the same cause has left him out. He
teaches them, that the sacraments of the old and new testament are the same
in substance: That in all sacraments the sacrament is one thing, and the virtue
of the sacrament another: and particularly in that of the holy Supper, that
that which is seen has a corporal figure, but that which is understood, a
spiritual fruit: That the bread is said to be the body of Christ, after the
same manner that we are called his members, etc. To be short says he, The
creature of bread and wine, Idem in Luc. l. 6. c. 2^.
by the unspeakable sanctification of the holy Ghost, is translated into the
Sacrament of his flesh and blood. Into the sacrament says he, not into the
thing it self: that is to say, of elements they are made Sacraments; they are
made instruments of the holy Ghost, for our spiritual food: that is, for the
analogy that is in them: In as much (says he) as the bread strengthens our
flesh, and the wine makes blood in the flesh, the one referred mystically (he
says not transubstantiated really) to the body of Christ; the other to his
blood. And in deed says he in another place. No unfaithful person eats the
flesh of Christ. Again, Idem in Exodus c. 12. and in 1. Cor. 10.
If you be the body of Christ and his members, your mystery is set upon the
table of the Lord, you receive the mystery of the Lord, etc. And this is about
the time of Charles the great, that is to say, near 800. years after Christ,
who likewise says in his book against images, That our Lord has not left any
other image of himself, then the holy Supper. Carol. Mag. de Imaginibus. No
transubstantiation to the time of Charles the great.
Albinus also under him; That he that abides not in Christ, (namely by faith)
although that he fasten his tooth upon the Sacrament, yet he eats not the
body of the Lord. And we may affirm it with a good conscience, that hitherto
there could not be learned out of any of the books of the fathers any
doctrine that tended to the teaching of the transubstantiation of the Romish
Church, but to the contrary. Which thing the liturgies and ecclesiastical
prayers, which they make reckning of as most ancient, can witness unto us.

In that which they pretend to have been S. James his liturgy, Further proof
by the lithurgies. That which is attributed to S. James.
he speaks of the Sacrament in these words: A divine and celestial
mystery, a spiritual table, wherein the Son of God (...), is mystically set
before them: He craves of God by prayer, To declare (...), manifestly, that
which he there makes show of (...), in signs; He exhorts the people (...),
To lift up their hearts on high: He rehearses the institution of the holy
Supper sincerely: after which the people answer: We declare the death of the
Lord, and confess his resurrection, etc. He prays likewise a long time after
that the words are pronounced; That it would please God to send his spirit
upon those gifts: that is to say, upon the bread and wine, which he calls
notwithstanding, Honorable, reverend, renowned, etc. And upon them that are to
be partakers of the same, (...)
to the end that they may be sanctified unto them, and made the body and blood
of Christ. Of Christ says he, Which is divided and distributed unto them, that
is to say, in the Sacrament, And which yet notwithstanding is not divided, nor
distributed; that is to say, in himself. With whom all this does well agree,
howsoever it does no whit agree with the power and efficacy of the five
words, or with any part of all the fantastical devise of transubstantiation?

That which is attributed unto Clement Bishop of Rome, The liturgy of S.
Clement. (...).
calls the bread and the wine after the consecration, Figures, as we have
said: and the words there are worth the consideration; We beseech thee O Lord,
that thou would vouchsafe to look down upon these gifts here set before
thee; and that it may please thee to send down thy holy spirit upon this
sacrifice, (note after the consecration) the testimony of the sufferings of
our Lord Jesus, to the end that he may manifestly show, that this bread is the
body of thy Christ, and this cup his blood, to the end, that they which
receive it, may be confirmed in piety, having remission of their sins, etc.
If the gifts and the sacrifice be one self same thing, and the one and the
other Christ reallie, with what mouth can they pray unto God, that he would
vouchsafe to look down upon them, and to send his holy spirit thereinto?
etc. And how does the bread become a witness of the passion of Christ? yea
Christ himself? And why does he pray unto God, That he would manifestly show,
how that the bread is the body of his Christ already, as our adversaries
hold, transubstantiated into Christ, by the consecrating words which went
before? And that which he says; To the end, that they which receive it, etc.
which in the Greek cannot be referred to any thing but the bread and cup. And
how comes it, that it is not rather referred to the body? etc.

We have already spoken of that which is attributed to Saint Basil: The
liturgy of S. Basil.
he calls the bread and wine after consecration, (...), that is to say,
figures: he prays God to send both upon them, as also upon the communicants,
his holy spirit for to sanctify them: The bread to be the body of our Lord,
etc. The communicants to be united together amongst themselves, and united unto
the body and blood of Christ, in such sort as that they may have him dwelling
in their hearts. And the exhortations that go before are, That no man should
think that there is any earthly thing: that there is any word of any mortal
flesh: the Lord is offered for the faithful, etc. Again, how will any of all
this agree with carnal transubstantiation, linked to the words that do not
consecrate? Or how will this agree being communicated with the infidels, with
that wherein they have no part: or as it is referred to the elements, which are
not otherwise to be considered of, then as instruments of our conjunction and
coupling with Christ: not to the end that we may have him to pass through our
mouths; but to the end we may possess him dwelling in our hearts by his
spirit.

The Preface of S. S. Ambrose his liturgy. Ambr. l. 4. c. 5. de Sacr.
Ambrose his liturgy begins as all the rest, Sursum corda, the minister
prays that it would please God to accept of the oblation that is offered unto
him, The figure (says he) of the body and blood of Christ. And this word,
figure, is by name in his book of Sacraments, where it is wholly recited,
being maliciously defaced and put out of the Mass, published in the name of S.
Ambrose. The institution of our Lord follows, wherein are the words which
they call consecrating: and notwithstanding after the same pronounced, We offer
unto thee this host or oblation without spot. And which? The holy bread (says
he) and cup of eternal life: and we pray thee, To receive it upon thine
altar, by the hands of thine Angels, as thou vouchsafedst to receive the gifts
of thy child Abel, and the sacrifice of the Patriarch Abraham, etc. I refer
it unto them even on their consciences, if this can be referred to the true
body, and true blood of our Lord, being alive and not subject to any passions
by the hands of the minister? Again, that which follows, Thy body is broken
O Christ, thy cup is blessed, let thy blood be to us unto eternal life. Can
this be spoken and that in their own judgments, but of the bread, and not of
the body? seeing that in the body they do not allow of any breaking? And in
deed he calls the kinds after the consecration, Creatures, in these words,
Per quem haec omnia Domine, semper bona creas, sanctificas, viuificas, etc. By
whom O Lord thou createst all these things, as also sanctifiest and quickenest
them, etc. But the prayers which are said after the communion, which they call
Post-communions, will witness with us of the intent of the Church, We which
receive the pledge of eternal life, do humbly beseech thee, that this which
we have touched by the image of the sacrament, may be received of us by a
manifest receiving, etc. Again, Having been refreshed with celestial meat and
drink, we pray thee that we may be made strong through this prayers, in
remembrance of whom we have received these things. Again, That we may receive
the saving effect, the pledge whereof we have received by these mysteries.
Note, Pledge, Image of the Sacrament, communication, mysteries, etc. which they
also commonly call; Commercia sacrosancta redemptionis nostrae; The sacred
traffic of our redemption; Celestial gifts, the celestial Table, celestial
sacraments, spiritual nourishmentes, which are received by the spirit in
visible mysteries, but by an invisible effect, etc.

Now follows that which is attributed unto Chrysostom, S. Chrysostomes
liturgy.
but with what appearance of truth we have showed before: for it cannot be of
five hundred years after. The prefaces therein are customarie: There is
something said of change, but by the inuocating of the name of God, and by the
power of the holy Ghost, not by the pronunciation of words, and not in the
nature of the elements, but in the use: for likewise after the blessing there
is a prayer, For the precious gifts sanctified: And the bread is called Holy
bread, which is distributed unto those that are present in these words; The
Lamb of God, the Son of the father, is distributed and not divided, daily
eaten, and never consumed: but he sanctifies them which are partakers thereof.
Can this be any otherwise spoken, then figuratively? They object unto us, that
it is there said: That Christ is present there, That he is there touched with
the hand, and seen with the eye, etc. And would they have all this understood
according to the letter? How then is it said both before and all with one
breath; Christ is there invisibly: It is not incident for him to be discerned
there by our sight? etc. And how will these contradictions in one and the same
Periode agree and stand together; but only thus, by understanding the sign to
be spoken of in the one, and the thing in the other? Can they any way relieve
themselves still holding their opinions, without falling as says the Canon,
into greater and more dangerous heresies then ever did Berengarius? But verily
Chrysostom. has spoken thus elsewhere, Christ is crucified before your eyes, his
blood runs down from his side, etc. And S. Paul likewise to the Galathians,
Christ is crucified before your eyes: As in S. Jerome, Hyeronym. in Psalm. 85.
Tertul. de baptism.
Our faces in baptism are marked with the blood of Christ: In Tertullian, We
are washed in the passion of our Lord, etc. In S. Barnard: Washed in his blood,
in Baptism, etc. And all this without any real transmutation in the elements.

In the Mass also used at this day, The liturgy of the Latins.
although that it have been ouertrimmed again and again, we may find sorne
traces and footinges thereof: for the bread and the wine are there called,
Dona, Munera, gifts, offerings: and the same gifts after consecration, are
called Creatures: Per quem haec omnia semper bona creas, etc. Whereas the
massing Priests would have us believe, that after they have once gone over
them, that they become the Creator himself. And they pray unto God, That he
would vouchsafe to accept them as the offeringes of Abell, etc. If it were
Christ himself, with what face could this be done? Furthermore, there are as
yet many Post-communions carrying S. Ambrose his style: As this, Pignus vitae
eternae, etc. the pledge of eternal life. Again, Quod specie gerimus, reru^
veritare capiamus.
Lord let thy Sacraments accomplish in us that which they contain, to the end
we may receive in truth that which we handle in figure. Otherwise, how will they
expound this without a figure, That the body that I have taken, and the blood
that I have drunk cleaves unto my entralles: if we understand it not of the
entralles of the soul, and by consequent of the mouth of the same: according
to the words which follow, That so there may not remain any spot of mine
iniquities in me? etc.

They think themselves to have done a great act against al these so evident
proofs, and that figures are given to make clear and plain, and not to make
obscure and dark. And that more is; there is not any place in the scripture
without speaking either of their figures, That the whole discourse of the holy
supper is full of figures.
or our own, wherein there are so many figures to be found: Father let this
cup pass from me: Let a man sell that he has to buy him a sword: This cup is
the new Testament, etc. I will not drink any more of this fruit: Behold thy
mother, etc. Are these figures? And is there not also both before and after the
passion, not only figurative speeches, but also figured deeds? The washing of
the feet of the Apostles: The sop given to Judas, etc. The breathing upon the
Apostles, etc. in these words; Receive the holy Ghost, etc. And yet these
figures (whether those concerning actions, or those concerning words) such as
both expressly signify, as also give much light to that which is intended to
be delivered, yea more then many other words would have done. For what store
and number would have sufficed to lay open the duty that our Lord would that
S. John should perform to the virgin? or the humility which he recommended
to the Apostles? or to have set forth the presence of the spirit, which he was
as certainly to send unto them, as they had sensibly felt the breath which
went out of his mouth?

CHAP. VII. That the old Church did not believe or teach Transubstantiation,
seeing it neither did nor observed in respect of the kinds, or Sacraments, that
which is practiced at this day.
But do we desire to be yet more fully satisfied in this point? If the old
Church had believed or taught transubstantiation, it wanted not either
knowledge to discern that which is meet and convenient for the service of
God, nor yet conscience to practice it, nor zeal or devotion to procure it:
and then would it have put in practice that which the Church of Rome did
afterward: and which it cease not as yet to do. Now it did not forbid the
touching of the sacraments, it did not heave them, it did not worship them, it
did not make any store or resecruation of them, that the people might worship
them, it called them not, My Lord and my God: as they do at this day. And
therefore it did not believe then as they do at this day: and therefore also
it did not acknowledge them for any other thing then instruments of the grace
of God, etc. And all this has been already sufficiently proved before, or
else may very easily be proved by the testimony of all antiquity. The
sacraments were handled in the old time Tertul. ad vxorem. Gregor. Nazianz. de
Gorgon. Euagrius. Council. Altisiod. c 35.37.


All the faithful did touch the Sacraments, yea the women: The truth thereof
is manifest, for we have seen it given into their hands: That it has been
said unto them, accipite, take: That the women in Tertullian and Nazianznee,
are said to lock it up, to carry it away with them: That the remainder was
wont to be given to children that went to school: That the forbidding of women
to touch them with their bare hands was not till about the year 700. and that
but by a provincial Council holden at Auxerre: And the custom of giving it
them into their mouths, was but two hundred years after that. Likewise the
wine was carried about in glasses, and the bread in ordinary chestes, as it is
read of Exuperius Bishop of Tholosa. The fear of shedding them was not entered
before that time, because they were reputed and taken but for Sacraments: that
is to say, signs: and which more is, they were not any longer so reputed and
taken, then the very time of their using.

They were not heaued or elevated to make the people admire and wonder at them:
That they were not he^ued.
They were not shaven at all over the head: but on the contrary men lifted up
their eyes and hearts on high, being taught thereunto by this notable preface,
Sursum corda: Men were plucked from off the earth by the Canon of the Council
of Nice: Fix not your eyes on the things here below, etc. Where as if there
had been any Deity betwixt the hands of the Minister, men would have
addressed themselves thereunto: Dionys. Hierar. c. 3.
men would have learned to content and rest themselves there. They bring forth
a place out of Saint Denis: (...), he brings into open view, the gifts which
bad been covered and wrapped together till then. And this is that which
Pachymeres expounds in these words, (...), he sets in sight. Let them not
then forget, that this is after that they have sundry times called them (...),
that is to say, signs, representing, say I, the body and blood of Christ,
(...), made conformable to our nature. Again, That where he says, (...), he
sets in open sight: he adds without any interruption or breach, (...),
the things signified by the signs: that is to say, but carefully expounding
them unto those that are present. But the custom was: That the gifts and
offeringes were brought and offered by the people: And that of those offerings,
there was bread and wine taken for the Sacraments; That they stood covered
with a white linen cloth, till such time as they came to the communion, and
then they were uncovered: And this he calls (...), etc. This is that which
the expositors of Saint Denis do say: Pachymeres, After prayers, the holy
gifts are uncovered, and vnwrapped, having stood covered unto the time of the
communion. Maximus adds; That the cup was also covered, but he says that
it was not observed in his time. It is further to be noted, that it was a great
loaf that was cut into many pieces: whereupon Saint Denis says, And opening
the loaf that is covered and undivided, and dividing it into many pieces, and
distributing unto all the unity of the cup, that is to say, one only cup:
He accomplisheth symbolicallie or figuratively the unity, that is to say, he
teaches them, that they are all one in Christ: one amongst themselves,
nourished with the very same bread: quickened with the very same spirit. This
was not then any bread elevated and held to be seen over the head, that it
might be worshipped; but to advertise the people, to the end they might
prepare themselves to the communion, in these words, which were then uttered;
(...), holy things to them that are holy: by which they were put in mind not to
worship the Sacraments, but rather to refrain to come thereto, except they
came with faith and repentance, resolved to live according to Christian unity
and charity, etc. This is that which S. Chrysostom says, The Minister
speaks these words, to the end, Chrysostom. in cp. ad Hebr. hom. 17.
that if any man be not holy, he may not approach or come near the same. And
in the liturgy attributed to him: Approach (says he) in the fear of God,
faith and love. Cabasilas, Draw near, that ye may communicate, behold here is
the bread of life, but not except ye be holy: And yet (says he) not that it is
required that we should be perfect, but tending and striving to perfection,
etc. And as the Christian Church began to multiply, they had a veil in their
Churches, which made a partition between the holy table and the body of the
Church, and this was drawn at what time the people came up to the communion;
whereof we have spoken heretofore: And whereof we read in Chrysostom, Cum
vela diducuntur, Chrysostom. in ep. ad Ephesians. hom. 3
when the vailes are drawn together, etc. Apuleius also makes mention thereof
in the mysteries of the Gentiles. But they stand upon this word, (...), He
lifts it up on high: which Maximus a late Greek writer does use: and they
will not see, that in the same Liturgies, the Minister (...), lifts up, the
Gospel that is to say, shows it unto the people. Was this then to the end
that they should wrrship it? Was this as though there had been a God really in
that book of the Gospel? or as though that book were God? But here is to be
noted; that out of all the Latin Church which is made the mother of all these
goodly ceremonies, they cannot bring forth any thing for their purpose, and
therefore are constrained to run to the Greek Church. They do likewise
agree and consent, that in the Churches of Ethiopia (in which there is never
any service done without a communion,) Aluares in the history of Ethiopia.
there is not used any elevation at all. But the truth is, that this bread did
not begin to be thus elevated amongst themselves, before such time that two
foul abuses, transubstantiation, and the alone eating of the minister, did
iumpe and fall out together. For then as we shall see hereafter, they began to
bend themselves to feed the eyes of the people, in stead of their spirits and
souls. Durand. l. 4. in 6. part Can. Ioh. 12. Leuit. 7.
In the mean time Durand cease not to be so shameless as to apply those
words of our Lord in S. John, to that end; When I shall be exalted or lifted
up, I will draw all men unto me: this being spoken of the lifting up of our
Lord upon the cross. In another place with some more probability he says;
That this custom was taken from the elevation and shaking of the offeringes
that was made in the Jewish law: as we have touched in his place. Now it is
also certain, that the Sacraments were ordinarily taken of the offerings of
the people. That it must not be worshipped.
Of adoration we say likewise: That the commandment of God is most plain and
express; Thou shall worship one only God: The difference also from
elsewhere is found so great, being from a bread dedicated to the service of
God, to God himself, as that there is no appearance, but that if it had been
our duties to have worshipped it, the holy scriptures would not have concealed
the same from us: And the danger also so great, either to do it, without
subject; for that were idolatry: or to omit it, the subject being there:
seeing this might grow to a contempt of God. Seeing then the Evangelists;
seeing Saint Paul, who is so careful in exhorting us to prove our selves, and
who reproves the Corinthians so sharply, for that they did not tarry one for
another, says not one word thereof unto us: seeing further that no old
writers rightly understood, do speak of any worship to be given to the
Sacraments, as no more unto the bread or wine of the holy Supper, then to the
water in baptism: what follows to be concluded upon, but that it was
because transubstantiation was not known? For who can in any Christian sort
doubt, that Jesus Christ is to be worshipped, where he is both with that honor
that is due to God, and also to the uttermost of man's power, by deed, word, and
thought? Who sees not also what a strong and mighty argument this had been
for the Orthodoxes against the Arrians and Arrius himself; when to prove the
eternal divinity of the Son of God, they gathered all the places where it
is said, that he was worshipped: if they had been able to have alleged unto
them, and that from the use or tradition of the Church, That this is true we
prove, because we worship him, yea both you and we in the Sacrament, under the
Accidents of bread and wine, etc. To the Arrians I mean with whom we read
not that there was any disagreement for the Sacrament? And on the contrary
what a prize had it been for Eutyches against the Orthodoxes: seeing he
undertook to maintain, that the humane nature of Christ is confusedly mixed
with his divine, if he had been able to say; And that it is true, we worship
the body and blood, etc. in the Sacrament: which thing ought not so to be, if
they be not really there, and there they cannot be, if they be not in all
places: and to be in all places, is an incommunicable property of the divine
nature, etc. I leave to speak, how that the holy Supper was wont of old to be
celebrated after the manner of a banquet, wherein they used to sit: where we
see again a bar crossing the Mandatum of the Monks of the order of Saint
Bennet: According to that which Saint Augustine tells us: That many even in
his time upon the day that the Lord made his Supper, did celebrate the same,
wherein they did one feast another, to show forth the death of the Lord, and
to testify their union: Not in a temple, not upon an Altar, but in a private
house, upon a table: nothing the less holy notwithstanding, seeing this gift,
that is to say, this action, sanctified the Altar. Now herein we agree: That
Christ, God and man must be worshipped every where: That at the name of Jesus
every knee must bow: That every tongue must confess, that he is unto the
glory of the father: we honor his holy word, his holy Sacraments: we hear
him with all attention: and we draw near unto him with reverence: let our
adversaries call it honor, worshipping: yea and adoration if they will,
provided that we be agreed upon the thing. But we say: That we must put a
difference betwixt the Sacrament, and our God himself: That the same honor is
not due to the one, that is due to the other: That that same which we give to
the Sacraments, is for that they be instruments and vessels of his grace: and
not because of themselves, not upon any consideration of their being reallie
and substantiallie himself: not, says Bonauenture, As though they did
contain grace, but for that they signify and set it out.

They allege unto us again their pretended Areopagite: Answer to the places
objected out of the fathers. No invocation. Claud. ^^spens. de ador. Euchat. l.
1. c. 2. (...). Donys. Hier. c. 3. vbi and Pachym. (...).
He (say they) does invoke and pray unto this sacrament; for he says, O holy
and divine ceremony show unto us openly, that which is concealed and kept
close from us in these obscure and enigmaticall signs, etc. Replenish the eyes
of our spirits with a singular light, etc. But let them listen a little to his
expositor Pachymeres thereupon: He speaks unto this ceremony, (says he)
as if it had a soul, and that not without appearance: as Gregory the divine
says, O holy and great Passover: For our Passover and this holy ceremony is
our Lord Jesus, unto whom he directs his speech: Our Lord, verily, which is
the substance of the holy Supper, as he was of the Passover: as he is of
Baptism: and as he is of all the Sacraments. And if thou would further
know, where he seeks him; Verily in heaven, not upon the table; for he
called them signs and said unto us a little before. Let us pass from the
effects, to the causes, etc. And then when Saint Ambrose said to the water of
baptism: O water which washest the world by the blood of Christ; which have
merited, that is to say, have been made worthy, to be a Sacrament of Christ,
etc. shall he be thought to have adored, shall he be judged to have
transubstantiated it into Christ? And when their pretended Amphilochius cries:
O worshipful and reverend conception, meaning of the virgin, make us
inheritors of eternal life, preserve thy people and thine heritage, etc. shall
he have crowned this conception with the Godhead? And when themselves say to
the oil: Aue sanctum oleum, sanctam Chrisma, I salute thee O holy oil, or
holy unction. To the Cross: Aue Rex noster, due spes vnica; I salute and pray
God bless thee, O our King, our only hope: shall they be thought to have
really transubstantiated him? Nay rather let them acknowledge, that this place
concludes nothing, Epiphan. in Anchor.
let them remember that Epiphanius did heretofore name this mystery unto us,
An insensible thing, that Pachymeres compares it, to Nazianzene his Passover:
And therefore that this manner of speech is an Apostrophe, a Rhetorical
figure, that in other points they do not agree amongst themselves, as whether
the body of Christ be there dead or alive; having a soul, or not having a
soul; sensible, or insensible, etc. And therefore that they are first to agree
themselves, before they go about to fortify themselves from this place.

Origin; When says he, thou eatest and drinkest the body and blood of our
Lord, Orig. in diverse. euang. loc. hom 5.
the Lord enters in and comes under thy roof: and therefore humble thy
self with the Centurion, etc. He means then that the Sacrament is adored:
and then he means also that we adore the Saints, that is to say, virtuous
people, when they come to see us. For he teaches in the same place, two ways
by which Christ enters into the faithful: the one when the Minister of the
Church visits them; the other when they receive the incorruptible meat of the
Sacrament. And this is that which he says elsewhere; That God is in us by the
preaching of the Apostles, and by the Sacrament of his blood. Idem Lom. ^.
And that this visitation is wrought in us by the word and spirit: he declares
and makes plain there also, Speak only the word (says he) come only with
thy word: Thy word is a looking glass, it is a perfect work: show forth in
this thy bodily absence the power of thy spirit, etc. If then according to
Origin, we ought to adore the Sacraments and ministers: then with as good
right such men as are godly and virtuous: but if these, then it must be only
with a civil worship and adoration, and so must that wherewith we worship the
other. And if the adoration due to God alone, being given to good men makes
idolatry: then also if it be given to Sacraments or ministeres, or else this
place concludes nothing.

Chrysostom; The wise men worshipped this body in the manger: Chrysostom. in 1.
Cor. 10.
they worshipped it with fear and trembling: Let us at the least follow these
barbarous and rude men, we which are citizens of heaven. He speaks of the
body of Christ, represented in the Sacrament, and exhorts the people to come
thereunto with reverence. But the wise men verily did not worship him as God;
but as a king. And therefore this is but to return to that which Saint Clement
says: Clem. l. 2. constit.
Draw near unto this Sacrament with the same reverence that you would do unto
a King: that is to say, unto some honorable person. He adds: Thou see him
not in the arms of a woman; but thou see the Minister present; the spirit
abundantly shed upon this sacrifice: The Priest verily with the eyes of the
body; but the spirit with the eyes of the spirit. For was it not more ready
otherwise, if he had had any such purpose, to say, as following the
opposition; Not in the arms of a woman, but in the hands of a Priest: Not the
spirit shed upon the things set before them, that is to say, upon the
Sacraments: But Christ sacrificed himself. But the coherence and scope of the
matter does carry us to conceive; That Chrysostom labored to raise the
hearts of those that were present, from base and low things unto high and
heavenly things, when he says unto them, That there are not any but Eagles
that approach and come near unto this body: Those (says he) that have
nothing to do with the earth, that have the eyes of the understanding, sharp,
clearly seeing, and bent upon the Sun of righteousness: He transporteth
and conueigheth them as much as in him lies, above the heavens: when he
says unto them also: We must with the wise men worship this body: This
body verily, which is no more on earth, but on high at the right hand of God.
And then verily, after all these Hyperboles, in spirit and not in body: that
is, says he, In as much as this mystery causes that the earth is a heaven
unto thee: that the gates of heaven are open unto thee; that thou have access
and entrance thereinto, etc. And afterward how? Verily, In purging thy soul,
in preparing thy spirit, to receive these mysteries, to see, touch, and eat
this body. After the same manner verily, that Saint Jerome said of Paula:
Thou have offered by faith the same offeringes that the wise men did offer:
thou have worshipped with them God in the cribbe, Chrysostom. in Lithurg.
etc. But say they, he prays unto him in his Liturgy (I mean that which is
attributed unto him:) as Christ truly, and not the Sacrament: Hear (says
he) O Lord, from the seat of the glory of thy kingdom: which art set with
the father, who aidest, succourest, and relieuest us here below invisibly,
etc. O Lord have pity upon me poor sinner, etc. Here I appeal to their
own consciences, whether he frame this his prayer unto God, or the Sacrament?
Is this to draw us to gaze and look upon the Altar, or to raise us up unto the
heavens of heavens?

Saint Ambrose, Ambr. de spirit. sanct l. 3. c. 12. Psalm. 95. and 98.
Worship his footstool: that is, the flesh of Christ, (says he) which we
worship in the mysteries, which the Apostles worshipped in Jesus, etc. And
Saint Augustine in like manner: No man eats this flesh, except he have first
worshipped it. Who doubts that we ought to worship the flesh of Christ?
Christ inseparably God and man? Who doubts likewise, that no man can eat
this flesh, if he have not first worshipped it? worshipped it by a true faith:
worshipped it with heart and affection, etc. But we worship it after the
same manner that we eat it: We eat it as we take it, and we take it as
we touch it: In truth, but in spirit; in spirit, but in truth: And God
forbid that Christians should not have any other means to touch Christ, but
with their hands: or to eat him, but with their teeth: seeing that the
virgin is not blessed for having conceived him in her womb; nor Simeon, for
having received him into his arms: but rather by having believed in him. What
shall we say then to these good Fathers? Verily, the same that they say unto
us themselves, Ambr. in sermon. 58. de Mar. Magdal. and in Luc. l. 10. c. 24
Augu. de cognit. ver. vit. c. 40.
We worship Christ as we touch him: And, We touch him (says Saint
Ambrose) not with a bodily touching, but by faith. After the same manner
(says he) That Saint Stephen on earth saw and touched Christ in heaven. Yea
says Saint Augustine, He saw him being under the roof of the seat of
judgment, which he pearsed through (says he) and the heavens above the
same: and therefore with the eyes of the spirit. We worship him in the
mysteries, but not the mysteries: in the Sacrament, but not the Sacrament: the
Creator in the creature sanctified, but not the creature. For Saint Ambrose
which calls it a creature: Thou have seen (says he) the Sacraments upon
the Altar: Chrysostom. in Marc. hom. 14 Ep. 120. c. 21. Psalm. 21.
Thou have admired this creature, howbeit a wonted and well known creature,
etc. had never counseled us to worship and adore the creature. So likewise
says Saint Chrysostom: That we worship Christ in the Sacrament of
Baptism. Saint Jerome; That Paula had worshipped him in the cribbe: was it
ever in these men's minds to say, that they had worshipped the water or the
cribbe? Or would they have said therefore, that either the water or the cribbe
were transubstantiated into Christ? But they ought therefore to have added that
which follows in S. Augustine, Worship him for he is holy. And who is this
that is holy? Even he, says he, for whose love and sake thou worshippest the
stool, etc. that is to say, the flesh of Christ, the humanity of Christ. And
when thou worshippest it, rest not thy thoughts upon the flesh, least then
thou should not be quickened by the spirit, etc. And this same good and
sound faith is set forth in another place of Saint Augustine which they
allege, and that somewhat more commendablie. For in the place where it is
said, Rich men were brought to the table of the Lord, they took the body and
blood: But they did but only worship: they were not filled full, etc. that is,
because they contented themselves to make profession of his name, without
conforming of themselves unto Christ: And this he declares by these words,
Non saturati sunt sicut pauperes, vsque ad imitationem: They were not filled
and fed full as were the poor, to the conforming of themselves unto him.
They are not ashamed to add, Illud, that so they may make him say: Hardingus.
That they worshipped the body and the blood: and not simply, They
worshipped. And some one amongst them has added as drawing the text to a
further length: They have acknowledged that Christ was there present. The same
impudency should thrust him forward, and cause him to add; Reallie,
corporally, and Per modum transubstantiationis, etc.

They would feign be beholden to Theodoret: and as we have seen, there is not
any one more against them: for he has told us, That the signs are not
changed: that they continue in their nature and substance, etc. And their
greatest Doctors are of judgment, that there cannot be had any adoration
without transubstantiation. He says therefore, And yet notwithstanding these
same signs of bread and wine, which retain their first substance, are
vnderstoood, believed and worshipped, as though they were the things which they
are believed to be. Worshipped therefore, as they are understood, and as they
are believed: that is, Vt Antitypa, ratione prototypi, as signs in respect of
that which is signified: As the Council of Nice II. speaks of images, no
respect being had to that which they are, but to that which they represent. For
likewise Theodoret calls them Images, in the words next ensuing: Compare
(says he) the pattern with the person, and thou shall see therein the
similitude and likeness: for it is requisite that the figure should resemble the
verity. Now the images of any thing whatsoever, are not worshipped with that
worship, which is due to God: and by consequent to adore or worship in
Theodoret, can not be any other thing, then to honor, reverence, and receive
with reverence, which we most willingly yield unto the Sacraments. Proofs out
of the fathers. Clem. Constit. l. 2. c. 6. August de Trinit. l. 3. c. 10 De
catechism. rud. c. 26. Idem de doct. Christ. l. 3. c. 9
And of a truth this is the same that the fathers teach us. S. Clement (if
those be his books) That all do take in order the precious body and blood of
our Lord, drawing softly thereunto with fear and reverence, as to the body of
a king. S. Augustine, The sacraments may be honored as religious things. And
in another place: As visible signs of divine things wherein the invisible
things, are honored and not as common things, seeing they are sanctified by
the blessing. Again, He that worshippeth a profitable sign instituted of God,
and whereof he understands the power and signification, does not worship
that which is seen, and passes away: but rather that unto which all such
things ought to be referred. Where it is to be noted, that he uses the words
of adoring and reuerencing indifferently, that he refers them not to the
signs, but to the things signified? And a little after he gives for an
example, the sacrament of Baptism, Idem de bono persevere. l. 2. c. 13.
and the celebration of the body and blood of our Lord: and of this by name he
says; That that which is said: Sursum corda, is, to admonish us to pray unto
God, that he would lift up our hearts to ascend and taste the things that are on
high, where Christ is sitting at the right hand of God: Not the things that
are upon earth: God (says he) to whom we must render thanks for so great
a thing, etc. And when likewise it shall have at any time escaped any of the
fathers, to say altogether rawlie, (which yet has not at any time,) J
worship the excellency of the Sacrament. What other thing should this be,
but of the same sense with that which Tertullian says; I adore the fulness or
sufficiency of the scriptures? Of the scriptures, because there God speaks
unto us, gives the effectnall working of the spirit, etc. And yet they are not
God: neither are they adored, or worshipped as God. Of the Sacrament then in
like manner, seeing it pleases God therein to give and in a near and strait
manner to communicate himself with us, and yet not therefore God, but the
instrument of the grace of God, to be reverenced because of his blessing of it:
but not to be adored or worshipped as his essence or proper person. In like
manner none of all the East churches did ever admit adoration; neither those
that are under the government and jurisdiction of the Patriarch of
Constantinople, Aluares.
nor those under the jurisdiction of Antioch. And the Abyssines also at this
day do receive the communion standing, though that with great reverence: and
besides, though they be of the same judgment with us in the adoration and
worship due to our Lord: whom S. John (say the fathers) worshipped and adored,
being as yet in the virgins womb: whom (says a certain writer) if the
doctrine of transubstantiation had place, the Church should have in like manner
worshipped in the stomachs of the Ministers and faithful people; and every
man in his neighbor. But this thing never came into the mind of any man once
to think or imagine.

What shall we say, The old writers did not call the Sacrament their Lord. Cypr
sermon. de laps.
when furthermore they labor to bring credit unto the same from antiquity,
as though the old writers had called the Sacrament, Their Lord and their God?
But let us see with what pretense or shadow of truth. S. Cyprian reports,
that it came to pass in his time, that a certain man, who had renounced God,
for fear of persecution, taking the holy communion in the company of
Christians, opening his hand, found the sacrament turned into ashes. This
miracle (says he) may be a lesson unto us, that the Lord withdraws himself,
when men deny him: that is to say, that he forsakes them which renounce him.
They gather notwithstanding, that the Lord of whom he speaks, is the
Sacrament. The Lord verily forsakes such a one as denies him. Is it then the
Sacrament which has denied him, or man? Verily man, and not the Sacrament. And
God then does not here forsake the Sacrament, but man. But God for an evident
sign that he has forsaken man, does also leave him destitute of the
Sacrament. Paul. Diacon. l. 15.
So as Deuterius an Arrian Bishop would have baptized a man after his manner,
the water dried up suddenly in the font. Saint Cyprian might here have said as
before; That God did teach us thereby, that he did withdraw himself; that is
to say, that he would take away his grace when we abused it: but he had not
therefore gathered thereof, that the water was God, because he had showed his
wrathful indignation in drying it up. Cypr. in orat. Domin.
Again, We beg and crave says S. Cyprian, that our bread, that is to say
Christ, may be given us every day. And who doubts that Christ is our bread,
the bread come down from heaven, which gives life to the world, that he may
be our life, our way? etc. But S. Cyprian says not that the Sacrament is
Christ: but the words that follow do make him plain; To the end (says he)
that we may dwell and live in Christ; and that we may not at any time separate
and put our selves far away from his sanctification and body. But this abode
and dwelling, as he told us, is made by faith: This conjunction is not a
mixture of substances, Idem sermon. de caena Domin. Se infundit. Tertul. de
baptism.
but an agreement of wills, etc. But they yet set his words further on the
rack, causing him to call it God: For (say they) he says; That by an
unspeakable manner, the divine essence is infused into the Sacrament.
Therefore it is God. And then also we will call the water in baptism God. For
Tertullian says; That the holy Ghost descends from the father, and rests
himself upon the waters of baptism. Saint Ambrose: That the whole Trinity
sanctifies them. Paulinus in his verses: That this water does even conceive
God, Augu. de baptism. cont. Donat l. 3. c. 10. and l 1. c. 19. C^pr. de vnct.
chrysmat.
or by God. Saint Augustine, That God is present with his word and Sacraments.
And there is not one amongst us that doubts thereof: and yet what one amongst
them all is there, that will say, that the water is God? What is meant then by
that which S. Cyprian says: The divine power is shed upon the visible
Sacrament? Verily, the same which he says in an other place; In the
Sacraments the divine power does work most mightily and powerfully; the truth
is present with the sign, Adest signo.
and the spirit with the Sacrament, etc.

Chrysostom; Let us draw near unto the body of our Lord with honor and
cleanness: And when thou shall see it proposed or set upon the Table; say
(...) (says he) and not, (...); in thy self, and not to the Sacrament, (not
to that which thou see set before thee, for the Grammatical construction
will not suffer it,) because of this body, I am not any more earth and ashes,
etc. Of this body, toward whom he exhorted us in the sentences going before to
fly up on high, after the manner of Eagles: Of that body then, which is at the
right hand of the father, not in the hands of the Minister: Of that body in a
word, which is not enclosed in the bread, but signified by the bread, whereof
he has said unto thee before: What signifies the bread? The body of Christ.
And indeed he speaks unto thee to come unto the Sacrament with reverence: but
to GOD with feruencie of love, and firmenesseof faith. And that thou should
set before thy self in the same at that instant, thine own misery, and his
mercy, that so thou may be a worthy partaker of this mystery: Thy
myserie, in that thou art nothing but earth and ashes, his mercy, in that he
vouchsafes to raise these ashes unto glory: Thy misery, in that thou art
nothing but sin and corruption, his mercy, in that he has made his own
Son sin for thee, in that he has given his body, to be broken, and his
blood to be shed for thy transgressions. And therefore coming unto this
Sacrament of the remembrance of his death, August. aduer. Iudae. c. 1.
thou ought of good right say unto him: Because of this body, I am no more
earth and ashes. But to approach or draw near thereunto (says Saint
Augustine) is to believe: The true and proper approaching is performed by the
heart, and not by the flesh: by the power of faith, Idem de peccat merit. l. 1.
c. 18.
and not by the presence of the body, etc. As likewise to us of Baptism: We
are carried to Christ our Physician, that we may receive the Sacrament of
eternal salvation: that is carried to Christ in Baptism, after the same
manner, that we approach and draw near unto God in the Sacrament of the
Eucharist; who also says the same unto us in the hearing of the word:
Chrysostom. hom. 12. de mulier Cananaea.
Draw near unto him which is preached unto you. And concerning this drawing
near, Chrysostom says unto us in an other place: There is no need why thou
should pass from one place to an other, to draw near unto him, he is
daily at hand unto thee. And the Apostle in the same sense: Let us draw near
unto the throne of grace, etc. The sound notwithstanding which ringeth loud in
Sermons, and the water which is sprinkled in Baptism, August. de Vnico.
Baptif. contr. Petil. c. 5 Ambros. de iis qui initiant. mist. c. 9.
was never called God. Saint Augustine on the contrary says: One God is more
then one Baptism: for Baptism is not God but a Sacrament of God. Of the same
consequence are these that follow. Saint Ambrose says of this Sacrament: Taste
and see that the Lord is good. Verily, as he that distributeth his graces unto
us in this Sacrament: as he, that therein offers us his flesh and his blood,
etc. And there also he says: The body of Christ is signified: It is become,
not a corporal, but a spiritual meat. He speaks therefore of our Lord,
and not of the Sacrament of him, of whom he adds, Blessed are they, that
put their trust in him. Saint Augustine upon Beda: Who shall dare to be so
bold, as to eat his Lord? Deverb: Dom. secund. Luc. Sermon. 19. Hieronym. ad
Pammach. August. ad Infantes citatu^ a Beda in 1. Cor. Idem in Ioh. tract. 7.
But much more, say we so: for he says, It is bread, and it is bread, and it
is bread: God the father, God the Son, and God the holy Ghost: God, who,
whatsoever he gives thee, gives thee nothing better then himself. But
verily, it is that heavenly bread: of whom S. Jerome says: The Saints and
holy men are fed with this bread: they are filled full with every word of God:
they have one and the same, both for their Lord, and for their meat: Of whom
Cyrill says; This flesh has the divine word, who naturally is life. And of
whom Saint Augustine says in like manner: Every belieuer is made partaker of
the body and blood of our Lord, when he is made a member of Christ in baptism,
etc. He is our meat, but so as that we have our mouth and taste in our hearts,
etc.

Wherefore they should rather have pitched and grounded themselves upon these
general propositions, so express and plainly set down in the fathers.
Chrysostom; Chrysostom. in oper. imperf. hom. 11.
The word of God, is nothing less then the body of Christ. Saint Jerome; I
hold that the Gospel is the body of Christ: And although (says he) that these
words: He that eats my flesh, etc. may be understood of the mystery, yet it
is more truly meant of the word of the Scriptures; namely; Seeing that the word
and the Sacraments are instruncents, Orig. in Exed. hom. 13. Ambr. de Bened.
Patriarch.
wherein it pleases God to lay open his graces. Origin, Do you make account
that there is less danger in neglecting the word of God, then in neglecting
of his body? Who doubts but if that the Sacrament had been very God, but
that they would have spoken otherwise? Saint Ambrose says; He gineth us this
day the bread, which the Minister daily consecrateth by his word: that is meant
of Christ. We may also take the Lord himself, who says, I am the bread of
life. Epiphanius; This bread is of a round fashion, insensible, etc. Our Lord
all sense, wholly sensible, whole God, wholly moving, etc. Origin; This bread
sanctified by the word of God and prayer, in regard of the material parts
that it has, passes into the belly, and so goes into the draught, etc. Is
not this plainly to distinguish the heavenly bread, that is to say, Christ,
from the sanctified bread, that is to say, the Sacrament? The creature, from
the Creator; and that which goes into the stomach, from that which pearceth
into the soul? Who is he then that can any longer endure, that such
blasphemies should be fathered upon antiquity, Stella clericor. Sermon.
Discipuli. Sermon. 3. Creatur a vobis mediantib. vobis. That nothing was
reserved. Clem. Ep. 2. Idem in Lithurg. Apul. Metamorph. l. 11. Ruf Eccles.
hyst. l. 2. c. 23. Gloss. antiqua apud Turneb. Orig. in Leuit. hom. 5.
Hieronym. in 1. Cor. 11. Hesych. in Leuit. l. 2. c. 8. Euag. l 4. c. 30.
Niceph. l. 17. c. 25. Council. Matisc. 2. c. 25. Council. Turonens.
making the same to call the creature, God; yea or rather, which is a great
deal worse, that it should have called God, a creature? For they are not
ashamed to utter it in their words and writings: That their Priest is the
Creator of his Creator: He that created you, has given you power to create
him: He that has created you without your selves, is created by you, by the
means of you.

And surely, let us further add this one thing: That if the Fathers had had
any such opinion, they would not have used that which remained of the Sacrament
in such sort, as we read they did. Their pretended Clement I. says: After
that euerte man has taken it, the Deacons set up the rest and carry it, in
pastophoria, that is to say, into the Ministers their lodgings or Chambers. And
thus also it is called by Apuleius and Ruffinus, in the description of the
Temple of Serapie, etc. Think with your selves whether the poor Christian
Martyrs in the time of Nero, had had any leisure as then, once to dream of
this goodly frame and workmanship? Origin; The Lord said unto his Disciples of
the bread that he gave them: Take, eat, he did not post them over to eat of
the same afterward, neither did he command them that it should be kept unto
the next morning. Saint jerome; After the Communion, they that did eat the
supper together in the Church, did make an end of all that which was remaining
of the sacrifices. So that out of that sacred use, they did eat it as common
bread. Hesychius; We see how they use to burn in the Church, all that which is
not consumed. According to Euagrius and Nicephorus: They were given to the
little children, that were in the Schools, to cate them the same hour. And
the Council of Mascon, II. have ordained and decreed that it should be so.
That of Tours, about the year 813. held under Charlemaine, adds thereto:
That it be done with discretion. Likewise Cardinal Humbert a Burgundian
writing against Nicetus, Blames the Greeks, for that they did not burn it.
But it is for certain, that it was not kept, elevated, or shut up close in a
box, to be worshipped of the people. We read rather that it was sent to the
sick, and such as were absent: that Bishops in token of their Christian
unity, and that they were all one bread, did mutually send this sanctified
bread, Council. Laodic. c. 14.
one to an other, etc. The Parishes likewise at Easter, one to an other. Which
thing was forbidden in the Council of Laodicea, Can. 14. And therefore, there
was but a little kept, because that in the fervent zeal of those times, the
holy supper was celebrated almost every day: and that a great deal less,
then the water of the Fonts, which for all that was neither transubstantiated,
nor worshipped. And this was the custom of the Church. Some of superstition
carried it into their houses; and some women would wrap it up in their
handkerchefs, locked it up in their Coffers, and eat it at their own houses,
etc. Now let men judge, if the first ages of the Church did ever take the
Sacrament to be God; if it would have suffered these prophanations? But these
examples are worthy to be as much accounted of in the Church, as theirs that
used to put it in childrens mouths, abusing this place: If any man eat my
flesh, etc. or of others, who would put it in the mouths of those that were
dead, etc. being practices that have been condemned by many Councels. And they
are happily vanished and worn away of themselves, howsoever they were grounded
upon very ancient tradition, even since the time of Tertullian and S.
Cyprian, as also by the ordinance of Charlemaine: That the Ministers should
have the Eucharist consecrated euerte day, L. 1. c. 161.
for children: Because they had no other stay or foundation, then the
Scripture misunderstood. The custom likewise being, not of keeping it, but of
giving it to them which were in extremity, grew hereupon, that many sinking
and shrinking away under the heat of persecution, they were excluded and put
from the Sacraments, by the severity of this first discipline, and that even
to the hour of death, whereto the famous story of Serapio is to be referred:
And then that they might be comforted, by their being received into the peace
and Communion of the Church, having given tokens of repentance; the Ministers
of the Church accompanied with their friends, did communicate unto them the
holy Supper, and oftentimes also did communicate with them.

Again, we read not in all those 800. years, The questions moved in these
latter ages, were not heard of in the first, no not of 800. years after Christ.
which fall into the time of Charlemaine, in any of the books of those grave
and holy Doctors, any of the questions wherewith the Schools were afterward
filled. The people which read and heard the word of God and his service, in
their own language; was wonted to the phrases and manners of speeches used in
the Scriptures: the sheep of the Lord, did hear and understand his voice, and
rested contented and satisfied therewith. Barbarism brought into the Church,
did beget these barbarous Expositions; and consequently these blasphemous
questions, not as they are barbarous: If our Lord do leave heaven to come into
the place of bread: If in coming thither he pass through the air: If he do
forsake the same again so soon as the kind is stricken upon with the tooth; or
else if he go down into the stomach: and being in the stomach whether he
rest therein altogether; and how long staying in the stomach; whether he wait
and attend there, till the form of the bread at the least be disgested,
whether he change himself at such time into the soul, or body of the
Communicant, or whether he vanish into nothing, or else return to heaven.
Whether the accidents of bread and wine do cleave unto him, or else abide
hanging in the air: Whether the Priest in removing the host, do remove the
body of Christ, or the accidents only: Or rather whether the Priest removing
the accidents, God do fit and accommodate the body of Christ to this moving.
Again; Whether the thing nourished (or rather poisoned, as it is to be seen)
become a new substance, which God creates in the stomach, and whereunto they
fasten themselves: Whether the body of Christ be whole and all in every part
of the host, or at the least in those parts, which are to be seen, by an
indifferent and mean sight; as also the blood, in any the least drop. Whether
he be there always standing, his head turned toward the Priest, etc. Or else
after the same manner of position and placing, that he is in heaven; set, or
otherwise; and whether he be there clothed or naked. Whether the Priest be
able to consecrate all the bread and wine of the world, or that only, which is
before him: And whether that which he sees only, or that also which he sees
not, provided that he be equally distant from the one and the other: Whether
the words become of sufficient power, being spoken once or many times, to
consecrate many hosts: And what the words must be; whether those that our Lord
spoke, when he blessed the signs, which we know not, or those four, Hoc est
corpus meum: Or whether Enim, be requisite and necessary thereto or not: Or
else, Quod pro vobis datur, etc. Whether the intent of the Priest be
requisite, if not actual, yet at the least habitual, or inclining or
disposed: Whether that Christ be entered into the bread, after this word Hoc is
spoken, or after Est, or the whole five words. Whether he enter into the same,
seeing, hearing, speaking and doing all that which he sees, hears, etc. in
heaven; or else blind, deaf, dumb, etc. and a thousand such like which we
shall see hereafter. Questions, such as we shall not find any step or trace of,
in all the writings of the reverend old Fathers; as neither of their doctrine:
Whereat these good fathers, would be afraid and ashamed if they should live
again; and which verily, I should have made conscience to have uttered, if
conscience did not bind me to discover and unfold the absurdities whereinto one
falschood once received, has cast and plunged us: being also such, as Dame
impudency her self would blush at: howsoever that strumpet clothed with
Scarlet, died in the blood of the Martyrs of Christ, do not blush thereat at
all.

CHAP. VIII. What has been the original, proceeding and increase of the
opinion of Transubstantiation, unto the year 1215. And how it was ratisied and
established by a decree in the Council of Laterane.
THus then we see, what the opinion was, not only of the first old writers,
but of all almost the later, concerning the holy supper; and how far off it
was, from that which is received at this day: And now it only remains that
we see, how it is transubstantiated, by what degrees and manner of proceeding:
The original of Transubstantiation.
which work we will frame and apply our sclues, in these our next labors,
to set down. Now it is a fresh to be set before our eyes, that the first
zeal of Christendom being decayed and dead: Christians came but few and
seldom, to the receiving of the holy Sacrament, in so much as that we have
heard those good Fathers complaining of the same in their Sermons, and forced
to implore and crave the aid and authority of the Emperors, whose Laws to
that effect are extant with us: That every person should communicate every
Sabbath, after that at the least thrice a year, upon pain of not being held
any more for Christians. The Ministers the^ that feared, that their offerings,
which were at that time their principal stay and maintenance, (for there were
not as yet any personages, or foundations of Masses, or private services)
should come to be dried up, were constrained, as we have seen, to teach the
people, that although they communicated not, it would not fail to yield them
great advantage and furtherance to the salvation of their souls, if they would
but only be present at their service: And the more easy to persuade them the
same, as we say before, they did suggest into them by little and little: That
there was not handled a Sacrament only, but also a sacrifice: So that though
they did not communicate in the one, yet at the least they were partakers in
the other. A doctrine plausibly embraced of the most part of those, which had
learned the meaning of the trying and proouing of themselves, which is required
in the receiving of the Lords supper; not coming to the same, but with fear
and trembling: and which on the contrary did see, that there was nothing more
easy, then to be present at this pretended sacrifice, the profit whereof was
so highly commended to them, and also underpropped, as we have seen heretofore,
by the Laws of the Emperors. And to make the same to be the more reverently
thought of, they apply themselves the more freely to deceive, (the present age
being now ouer-shadowed with ignorance, and the people brought to entertain a
service which was done altogether in an unknown language: by means of the
alteration of languages, which happened almost throughout al Christendom:) with
diverse discourses and sundry speeches taken out of those godly Fathers: a
thing impossible for any man to have effected in their time, the people being
then seasoned with the doctrine of Christ, by the reading of the Scriptures;
the preaching of good Bishops: the frequenting of their Sermons, and the
Ecclesiastical service, which every where was done, according to the rule of
the Apostle, in the vulgar tongue. And yet we are not to imagine, that this
monster was perfected by such increase and growth all at once. For first it
found such as by whom it was conceived, and after, some to bear it: others to
bring it forth, others to receive it upon their laps, others to nurse it, and
others to like and beautify it: Many were the ages that ouer-passed, before it
came to any certain form or shape: and hardly has it as yet attained an
assured and secure estate, as we shall see, when as the most learned and
soundest part of Christendom, has condemned and smothered it right out
sometimes, by the spirit of the mouth of the Lord.

Damascen about they year 800. was the first that removed the marks of the
ancients, concerning this matter: proving also a patron of many other
superstitions in his time, but particularly of the adoration of images. Out of
this man our adversaries allege these words: The bread and wine are not
figures of the body and blood of Christ: L. 4. c. 14.
God forbid; but it is the very deified body of the Lord; the Lord himself
saying: This is my boby, not the figure of my body, etc. directly contrary to
Tertullian, Saint Ambrose, and Saint Augustine; The Lord has not doubted to
call the bread his body, although it were but the figure, and sign of his
body, etc. Again, Damascen says: If any man have called them
representations, (...), as Basil, it is before their sanctification. Whereas
we are of judgment with Bellarmine, that before the same, they could not be
called by that name: and in deed it is after. But of what force can these his
speeches be, if he agree not, either with our adversaries, or with himself?
Thou demaundest (says he) how the bread is made the body of Christ, etc. I
answer thee, the holy Ghost works these things, far surpassing speech and
understanding, but the bread and wine are taken. Then they retain their
substance. Again; God stooping to our wonted use and custom, works the
things that are above nature, by the things that are accustomed unto nature: As
in Baptism he joins the grace of the holy Ghost, with the oil and water;
and has made the same the washing of regeneration: So, because it is an
ordinary thing for men, to eat bread and drinkewine, he has joined to these
things his Divinity, and has made them his body and his blood, etc. Then the
bread and wine do continue in the holy supper, no more transubstantiated, then
the water and oil in Baptism. And declaring this conjunction afterward: Esaias
(says he) saw the coal, not altogether simple: but made one with the fire: so
the bread of the Communion is not altogether simple, but joined to the
Divinity: But yet not without the abusing of the comparison used of the
ancient writers, for the representing of the Union of the humane nature with
the divine in Christ. Now the burning cole abides still a cole, in Esaias: and
notwithstanding a propitiation for his sins. How does all this agree with that
deified body, that he spoke of a little before? With that which they say at
this day, that came after Thomas: That the bread is not the body of Christ:
That the essence of bread goes not into the essence of the body, but that it
gives place to the body, but that it vanishes away, etc? And who sees not,
that these are patches, ill fauouredly set together by a Monk, which knew not
whereunto to hold himself? Upon. l. in Cant. and l, 5. sub fine.
Aponius (a great man in his time) deals somewhat better: Christ, according
to the place, time, and cause, is become the meat and drink of the Church, by
the Sacrament of his body and of his blood. And in an other place, he calls
this Sacrament, Desponsationem annuli, and traditionem osculi, The ring and the
kiss of the affiancing of Christ unto his Church: that is to say, the certain
pledge of the conjunction of the faithful with Christ. And now consider the
doctrine of the Church in the VII. general Council, Citatur in Nicaen. Syn.
2. art. 6.
held at the same time at Constantinople, under the Emperor Constantine V.
wherein all Images of Christ were condemned, this only (for so the holy supper
was there called) being reserved: All those (says he) do glad and rejoice
themselves, which bring to the salvation of the spirit and body, the true
image of Christ, which our high Priest, taking wholly upon him our fleshly
mass, when he drew near unto his Passion, gave unto his Ministers and
Disciples, for a figure and remembrance of exceeding great efficacy: for
having freely and willingly offered himself to die, he took bread, blessed
it, etc. and said: Take, eat, for the remission of your sins: This is my
body, etc. Do this in remembrance of me: as not having there any other kind
that he had made choice of, neither yet figure, wherein his incarnation might
be represented. Behold then the Image of his quickening body, which is
honorably and gloriously exhibited, etc. But this Council was afterward
condemned by the second Nicene Council, which established the adoration of
images: And without all doubt, not without the shaking (by that means) of the
truth of this Article; as it will be seen in that which Theophilact writes.
But that second of Nice was also condemned, by that of Francford and of Paris,
as we have seen before, held under the authority of Charles the great, Jews
and Lotharius: which may be the cause that our French Doctors should as yet
hold the same firmly, Anno 900. Theoph. in Marc. c. 14. and in Mat. 26. (...).
for true and sound doctrine.

Theophilact therefore about the year 900. to suit Damascen: The bread is not
the figure, or any kind of pattern of the body of our Lord, but the body of
Christ is turned into it. Or else in an other place: In Ioh. c. 6.
The bread (...), is turned into the body. Again; It is not only a certain
figure of the flesh of our Lord, but the very flesh of our Lord, etc. Verily,
no more constant or assured then Damascen, seeing that he says in the same
places: God stooping down and applying himself to our infirmity, does keep
the figure of bread and wine. He says not the accidents: (...)
He transformeth and changes them into the power and virtue of the flesh and
blood. He says not into thy flesh and blood. And it is not here to be
forgotten, that in diverse Copies these words are not to be found. Again; We
celebrate an oblation without blood, the remembrance of an oblation which he
has once made, etc. The remembrance, how can that agree with the real
presence? But when he says, Transformeth or changes from one element to an
other: who shall better interpret him then Saint Augustine, that it is changed
from an element to a Sacrament, by the power of the word, that is to say, by
the institution of Christ? Otherwise, if a man should go about to take it
literally, our adversaries, who allow not of this proposition, The bread is,
or, is made the body of Christ, could they admit of this of Theophilacts; The
body of Christ is turned to us into bread: The bread of the Altar is
transformed and changed into the body of Christ? And what exposition will
they give then thereunto, except this, he is become our spiritual food and
nourishment? Seeing that he says in an other place: That there is not any
carnal thing: In a word, that the bread, as we say, with all the ancient
writers, is Sacramentally the body of Christ.

Now in the life time of Charles the great, Johannes Eryngerus, Scotus, a Monk
of the order of Saint Bennet, companion to Alcuinus, and Schoolmaster to
Charles the great, had written a book of the holy Supper, wherein he deals
against this abuse, touching it, even from the conception thereof: a certain
argument and proof of that which the worthy Beda had taught, for as much as
he was his Disciple. The occasion of which my speech arises upon certain
places in Beda his works, which some have corrupted; in like manner upon Saint
Matthew, which Auentinus witnesses that he found out, by comparing together the
old Copies, which are kept in the ancient Monasteries of Germany, In
Biblioth. Passaulensi and Waltfacrens.
to have been falsified, by some such like faithful and upright Catholic
dealing, as our fathers of Trent have used in their Index Expurgatorius,
devised and ordained in that Council, against all the most notable writers
that have written, since the year 100. But of this Scotus his works we have
nothing, for his book was burnt in the Council holden at Verseillis by Pope
Leo the ninth, more then two hundred years after his death; at such time as
Berengarius was there condemned.

But so it is that we have Bertram his book, who was a Priest, and writ the
same to king Charles the bald, brother to the Emperor Lotharius; how this
controversy grew hotter and hotter in France, and how there were two
questions consulted upon by the said Charles: The first was; Whether the bread
and wine taken by the mouths of the faithful, be the body and blood of
Christ in deed and verily, or mistically and Sacramentally: The second; Whether
it be the same body, that was borne of the Virgin Marie, etc. sitting at the
right hand of the father, etc. And of this book there is mention made by the
Abbot Trithemius, Trithem. de doctorib. eccle. and Chron. Hirtsaugien.
who calls it, Opus commendabile, a laudable work. As also of his person,
whose rare gift both in divine and humane learning, as also in soundness of
life, he much praises and commends. And his resolution, which he gave to
King Charles, debated and argued from the testimonies of all the old writers,
it was this in sum: S August. S. Hieronym. S. Ambros. etc.
That the Fathers under the Law in their Sacraments, did eat the flesh, and
drink the blood of Christ, as we do: That the eating in the holy supper is
accomplished after the same way and manner, that regeneration in Baptism: that
the visible elements are Sacraments, signs, mysteries, and similitudes or
resemblances, which are taken by the mouth and hand: That the invisible things,
that is, the flesh and blood of Christ, are received into the soul, and taken
by faith: That the sanctified Elements continue and abide still in their first
substance, and yet exhibit unto us, by the institution of the Lord, that which
he has promised by his word: The fruit whereof is, to be joined to Christ,
and made fellow sufferers with him in his sufferings, the image and remembrance
whereof is celebrated in this mystery. I would entreat the Reader, not not to
grieve to read this book, because it is learned, and sets forth in very
lively sort, the opinions of the Fathers: pressing and urging the places of
Scripture, and of the fathers; and as it were foreseeing all the cauils of the
masters of Transubstantiation. But let him that buyeth or reads it, see, that
it be of those that were Imprinted before the Council of Trent; because that
in sign of their perseuering in their honest and faithful course, they
ordain and appoint in their Index, Index. page 11
that whatsoever it contains to their dislike, should be either changed or
quite raced out: that is to say, the greatest part of the book. Their manner of
correcting and interpreting, is no grosser, but to turn the affirmative into a
negative, and so on the contrary: as for example: For visibiliter, to put
inuisibiliter, for substances, accidents: for temporal, eternal, etc. And
this is further to be noted therewithal, that he was not taxed of heresy for
the same: and that the Abbotte Trithemius, which forgot not to set the brand
upon others, when there was cause, has not once pointed at any such thing in
him.

Haimo, Bishop of Halberstat, and one of Alcuinus his hearers, Haim. in 1 Cor.
11 and. in Sabbarh. post Iudic.
who was Schoolmaster to Charlemaine: This is my body (says he) that is the
bread, that Christ gave to his Disciples, and to all the predestined unto
eternal life; and that that which the Ministers do consecrate daily in the
Church, by the power of the Divinity, which fills this bread, is the body
of Christ. Now I would know if they will approve of this Proposition: That this,
hoc, is the bread? Then it is not their Iudiniduum vagum, nor yet their
accidents. Given to the elect or predestined: not then to the wicked and
ungodly; and not by the mouth. Filled with the divine power: not then with
Christ really, who is that fullness. And in the end: This bread, the body of
Christ: And how, according to their own speeches, without heresy? How then,
but Sacramentally, by the near conjunction of the thing with the sign?
Again; The flesh that Christ took in unity of person, and this bread, are not
two bodies but one. And how can this be otherwise then by this Sacramental
union? The one then, as says the Canon, In truth, the other in a mystery.
Again; At the same instant that this bread is broken and eaten, Christ is
offered and eaten; whole notwithstanding and living. Then it is the bread that
is broken and not the body, and not the accidents. And therefore according to
that which he says afterward, Hoc facite, Sanctify this body, in remembrance
of me in remembrance (says he) of my passion, of your redemption, that I have
redeemed you with my blood. He adds, The Lord therefore has left this saving
Sacrament to all the faithful, that so he may imprint in their hearts, that he
died for their redemption. So some man being about to die, leaves unto his
friend a gift, and says unto him; keep that in remembrance of me, and he is
heavy and pensive when he sees it: and we when we are partakers of this
eternal gift in the Sacrament, must come to it with reverence, remembering our
selves, with what love he has loved us, giving himself a ransom for us. The
bread therefore is a Sacrament of the gift; and not the gift it self, (and that
upon far stronger reasons then any he touches) which assures us more and
more, of the real possession of our life and nourishment in Christ: In whom
(says he in an other place) to abide and dwell, is, to eat him is to live by
him, is to be bone of his bones, flesh of his flesh, and one with himself.

Rabanus Maurus, Archbishop of Maguntia: The creator of things and redeemer of
men, Raban. in eccl. l. 7. c. 8.
making of the fruits of the earth, that is to say, of Corn and wine, a fit
and convenient mystery, turned them to Sacraments of his body and blood. He
says not into his body and blood. Idem l. 1. c. 5. de proprie: rerum and verb.
He would (says he in an other place) that these Sacraments should be
received into the mouths of the faithful, and become their food, to the end
that by the visible work, the invisible might be showed, that is to say, by
the true corporal eating, the true spiritual eating. What is now become of our
accidents? For even (says he) as the material meat does nourish and refresh
the body outwardly: so the word of God does comfort and nourish the soul
inwardly, etc. Where he lays down before us the agreement and analogy,
which once coming to cease, as in deed it cease by Transubstantiation,
there follows the destruction of the Sacrament. Some object: But are they not
the body and blood? Let us hear him: Because that bread does confirm and
make strong the body, it is very fitly called the body of Christ: and the
Wine, because that it makes the blood in the flesh, is referred to blood.
Note also, That they are named. But when they are sanctified: then by the holy
Ghost, they become the Sacraments of the divine body. Idem de sacr^m. Euchar.
c. 10. and 41.
And then, not into the very thing of the Sacrament: Which (says he in an
other place) he has left unto us, because it must needs be, that he should
ascend up into heaven; to the end, that they might be figures and Characters
of his flesh and blood unto us, and that our spirit and our flesh, might be by
these things the more abundantly nourished, to the receiving by faith, of the
things that are invisible and spiritual. So by this it appears, that the
thing of the Sacraments is spiritual, and received by faith, that is to say,
spiritually. And so in deed it is not received, but of the faithful, even by
such as have the spirit of Christ dwelling in their hearts. For says he; The
Sacrament is one thing, Idem de prop. Sermon l. 5. c 11. Idem l. 1. c. 3.
and the power and virtue of the Sacrament is another thing: The Sacrament is
taken in at the mouth; but the virtue of the Sacrament by the inward man: The
Sacrament is turned into the nourishment of the body, but the virtue of the
Sacrament works in us unto eternal life: The Sacrament by some is taken to
their destruction: but the thing always unto salvation. If they say, that the
wicked in the Sacrament do receive the body of Christ, but not the power and
virtue of the same: how can they without blasphemy, separate the body of
Christ from his soul? Or the one or other from his Divinity? From his spirit?
And who can receive that, but to his salvation? They reply again: It is as he
says; That the figure and Character is verily the same which it is outwardly
perceived to be: Idem de Sacr. Euchar. c. 14.
but that which is taken inwardly, is altogether truth without any shadow. And
without doubt also we say, and himself does lay it open: We participate the
flesh of Christ which was crucified for us, verily and truly: and the
Sacraments of the same in deed, are there: And thus there is truth and verity
in every thing, whether it be the thing, or else the Sacrament of the thing.

Paschasius, Pasch Ratpert. de Corp. and Sang. Domini c. 1.19. and 50.
Abbot of Corbie in Saxony, held the contrary opinion: for the Schools and
Monasteries were divided concerning this point. And yet, so new was this
doctrine, as that we may see, that he was not able to utter his mind, or to
speak what he would seem to mean, in the book which he made. He says: The
Lord has done in heaven and in earth whatsoever he would, and that because it
was his will: where he takes for granted, the thing that is in question:
Although it be the figure of bread and wine, notwithstanding after the
consecration, we must altogether believe that it is the body and blood of Jesus
Christ. And al his arguments are drawn from the omnipotency of God; without
any proof of his will. But would the masters of Transubstantiation approve and
like of these words; Paschas. ad Prudeg.
The bread and wine are the flesh and blood of Christ? And yet notwithstanding
he is much troubled in himself, when he considers: That there must be in
the Lords supper the figure, and notwithstanding the truth: And how the one may
be without the prejudice of the other, etc. In so much as that he is forced to
say: That it is no marvel, if this mystery be a figure, and if the words
thereof be called figures; seeing that Christ himself is called an engraven
form and figure, Ide^ de Corp. and Sang. Dom. l. 4.
even he which is the truth it self: That we believe that that is done
spiritually, and that we ought so to believe it to be: That he is offered for
us mystically: That we walk by faith, and not by sight: That our Lord has
left us these visible figures, ascending up to heaven, to feed our spirit and
flesh, by faith in spiritual things, etc.

Nevertheless, notwithstanding the resistances and oppositions of the most
learned, the abuse ceased not to spread it self further into diverse countries
abroad: because that the ignorant people, who have always the stronger side,
did perceive and see, that both authority and profit would grow unto them
thereby. We read by name, that in England there rise a great schism betwixt Odo
Archbishop of Canterbury, assisted by the meaner and inferior sort of
Priests, being the parties affecting Transubstantiation, and the most learned
of his Clergy. To whose arguments and places alleged out of the Fathers,
he opposes authority and force: And secondly to win the Idiots and simple
people, he uses illusions and false miracles; whereof these ignorant ages did
never want good store. This was about the year nine hundred and fifty. But in
France, Berengarius, Deane of Saint Maurice of Augiers, about the year 1050.
Anno 1050. Lau^ranc. con. Berengar.
displaieth again the ensign of truth, and writes a Treatise of the Lords
Supper: whereof we have nothing more then it pleased Lanfrancus his
adversary, to cite in his writings against him: And yet notwithstanding such
as that thereby he does neither injury the truth, nor his good name; although
he make it evident and apparent enough, that he has not forgotten to weaken
and detract from the force of his reasons, so much as he possibly could. This
Berengarius therefore writ privily to Lanfrancus, a Millaner, then Abbot of
Bec-Heloin in Normandy, what he thought of the holy supper: Lanfrancus being
absent, his Canons did open the letter and sent it to Rome: In it he praised
the book of Johannes Scotus, written in the time of Charlemaine. The letter is
made known in a Synod holden at Rome and condemned, the Author being never
heard. Lanfrancus is enjoined to refute it, if so be he would clear himself
of all suspicion of having any part in that pretended error, which was so much
the more, because of such intelligences as did in very familiar sort pass
betwixt him and Berengarius: Scotus his book was burnt two hundred and fifty
years after his death. Berengarius continues his virtuous course, and had for
his Disciples and followers diverse great personages in France: amongst others,
Freward and Waldus, Knights, etc. A thing very likely, seeing that the Popes,
otherwise more curious and careful about worldly complaints, then studious in
questions of Divinity, did so much molest and trouble them. Leo the ninth
therefore called a Council at Verscillis in Piemont, and came thither himself
in person: Berengarius durst not appear, but sent thither only two of his
friends to tender his reasons; who were easily made afraid. The Council of
Rome thereupon became the more emboldned: and gave order notwithstanding that
the French Church should assemble a Council at Towrs, to cause Berengarius to
stoop and become subject. This was in the time of Pope Victor the second, and
there was Hildebrand (afterward Gregory the seventh) on his behalf, the most
violent and headstrong Prelate that ever lived. There appeared Berengarius,
who declared unto them: That he did not teach bare and naked signs in the
Eucharist, but that the bread and wine there used, were most undoubted pledges
and seals of the real Communion in the true body and blood of our Lord,
which all those have, and, there receive which take these signs with a true
faith: That the bread and wine notwithstanding do not change their
substances: but rather, of common ones are made holy ones, of elements,
Sacraments, etc. And that to conclude, he held for other matters, as all the
ancient Fathers have written, and according also to the sense and meaning of
the Lithurgie ordinarily read in the Church, etc. Thus the Council rested
satisfied at his hands.

But Pope Nicholas II. perceiving that this doctrine was on foot again, cited
Berengarius to Rome the second time, to appear in the Consistory of Lateran,
and thither he came being drawn and allured by fair and flattering speeches.
The first argument that was framed against him, was, that if he did not retract
his former opinions, he should be burnt: and thereupon Humbert the Burgonian,
afterward Cardinal, drew a reuocation, such as we read in the Decree: That
he does confess, C. Ego Berengar. de consec. d. 2.
that after the Consecration, the bread and wine, are the very body and blood
of Christ: That they are there sensibly and in truth handled with the hands of
the Priests: broken and bruised with the teeth of the faithful, etc. And that
he curses all them which do judge otherwise, etc. that is to say, the whole
Romish Church at this day, which holds these propositions for heretical:
That the bread is the body, that the body is bruised with the teeth, etc.
Lanfranc. de Sacr. and Alger.
Where it is also to be noted, that he says: Of the faithful, not, of all
those that are partakers thereof: a remnant and small parcel of the pure
doctrine, and a sign of the as yet imperfect delivery and teaching of the
impure and corrupt. And therefore the Gloss of the Decree adds thereunto:
Beware, least thou should not rightly understand that which Berengarius
says here, and so should fall into greater and more gross heresies, then
ever he did: And the Gloss upon the Canon, Vtrum, has these words: C. Vtrum.
de consecr. d 2. ex August. vbi Glos.
It is not lawful to eat Christ with the teeth: Berengarius (says he) said
the contrary, but he spoke hyberbolically, and went beyond the listes of the
truth. And by consequent, Pope Nicholas and the Council of Rome, consisting of
114. Bishops, and the whole Romish Church, mentioned in the Canon, Ego
Berengarius. So slenderly was this Bears whelpe as yet licked. In the mean
time this goodly recantation is sent throughout all Christendom; and
Provincial Synods assembled in every nation, to cause it to be received. But
Berengarius returns into France, refuses it, and publishes the cruel and
violent dealing wherewith he had been tormented by the Church (as he calls
it) of the malignant, Ecclesia Malignantium. Auersanus Episcopus.
the Council of vanity. Then begin Humbert, made Cardinal upon that
occasion; and Guitmond, of a Monk of the Cross Saint Leuffroi, made Bishop of
Auers, to write against him. This was toward the year 1059. In the end
Berengarius died in France: the fiery and terrible threatenings of the Pope,
according to his former practice, still perseuering: And he had an Epitaph made
him by Hildebert, or Fuldebert Bishop of Man's, Epitaph. Bere^gar. per
Fuldebert. Episc. Cenoman. apud Mamelsbur. vel per Hildeb ex Gaguin.
such as he could, for the greatest and most holy person of that age, which
begins: Quem modo miratur, semper mirabitur Orbis, etc. Wherein he
extolleth his piety and wonderful learning, both for the benefit of those of
his own time, as also of the posterity, wherein he bewaileth his death, as
threatening a ruin to the whole Church, in as much as in him rests the hope
and glory of the Clergy: wherein he says that envy her self which did
oppress and bear him down, does weep over him, etc. Afterward he
concludes with a very fervent desire, and wish that he might lie down and
live with him: that his estate and condition at the time of his departing out
of this life, might be no better then his, Mamelsbur. l. 3. c. 58.
etc. But it is more to the purpose, to see it in Mamelsburiensis, who recites
it wholly. And Platina likewise the Popes their Historiographer, in the life of
John the fifteenth, does give an honorable testimony of him. Some add, that
dying he should say: To day Christ will appear unto me, according to my
penitentnesse, as I hope unto glory, or because of others unto pain. The most
sound interpretation whereof is, that he did repent of having yielded or turned
aside from the profession of the truth, and that he feared that he had offended
his brethren through his infirmities. And it is to be noted herewithall,
Lanfrancus and Guitmond do not speak as our adversaries.
that Lanfrancus, Alger, and Guitmond do not yet use such terms and speeches
as these days are full of. But they begin to call the bread and wine Kinds,
after the consecration: where the Fathers called them by this name before the
same, understanding by this word, Substances, and not appearances or fantasies
only: as those of this time. Again; they begin to say, that the body and
blood invisible in the Kinds, are Sacraments of the visible body and blood,
for fear that man's infirmity should be offended and surprised with the
horror of the thing. But they as yet, had not been to learn their lesson at
Sorbone: As, that the substance of bread and wine do vanish: that the
accidents abide hanging in the air: and yet notwithstanding are removed by
the hand, and are bruised with the teeth of the Priest, etc. Neither had they as
yet entitled this their carnal fantasy, and called it by the name of
Transubstantiation. But after the consecration they retained the name of signs
and marks. Lanfrancus says oftentimes with the fathers: The Sacrament of the
Altar, is the figure of the body and blood of our Lord, etc.

And what shall we say more; Pope Gregory the 7. his staning in doubt of the
truth of Transubstantiation. ^enno Card. in Gregor. 7.
when as Benno Cardinal of Hostia, and Deane of the Cardinals, does make
mention in his History, that Pope Gregory the seventh called Hildebrand, who
had been present at the Council of Tours, as Legate from Pope Victor II.
against Berengarius, is in such distressing doubt, as that he sends two
Cardinals, such as were his trusty and faithful Agents in matters of weight,
Acto and Conno, unto S. Anastasius, to the end that they should fast three
days with Suppon, archpriest of that Parish, singing three days the Psalter
and the Mass, to the end that God would show unto them by some sign, which
was the sounder judgment, that of the Church of Rome, or that of Berengarius:
And notwithstanding all that (says he) there came nothing of it. Not yet
satisfied he enjoined the whole company of the Cardinals to fast for the same
end and purpose. And when as Johannes Portuensis, to whom he committed all his
secrets, (even he that first said Mass in Latin at Constantinople, according
to the manner of Rome) said after his death, Ex ambone B. Petri, from out of the
Chair or Pulpit of Saint Peter: in the hearing of all the people and Clergy;
Hildebrand and we have done a deed, for which we ought to have been burned
alive: Being about to say, says Benno: That he had consulted with the
Sacrament, as with an oracle, against the Emperor Henry his enemy: and that
afterward he cast it into the fire, in the presence, and against the good
liking of certain Cardinals which then were there with him. This Hildebrand I
say of whom they cannot sufficiently content themselves with saying, and that
for good cause; Vir Pontificatu dignus, etc. A man worthy of the Popedom,
etc. Wherefore the Decree of Pope Nicholas II. could not so quickly root out of
the hearts of men, the old and ancient truth: but that the traces thereof, might
as yet be seen in such as were most devoutly addicted unto the Romish Church.
Anselme, Lanfrancus his Disciple and successor, as well in the Abbey of
Bec-Heloin, as in the Archbish-oppricke of Canterbury; teaches conformably to
the Fathers: That the Fathers under the Law, did eat the same spiritual meat
that we; even the body and blood of Christ: That in the Sacraments, they
signifying things, that is to say, the signs, do take the names of the things
signified: And thus (says he) the rock was Christ: That the breaking of bread
was a sign of the breaking of his body, which should be done at his Passion:
that to eat him unworthily, is to eat him with the mouth of the body
worthily, with the mouth of the heart, etc. Saint Bernard, entreating upon the
supper: A ring is absolutely given for a ring, and it carries no further
signification with it: It is also given to advance a man to some place of
honor and dignity, or else to set one in possession of an inheritance: in so
much as that he which has received it may say: The ring is nothing worth, but
it is the inheritance that I seek and aim at. After the same manner our Lord
drawing near to his death, had care to set us in possession of his grace; to
the end that his invisible grace, might be given us by some visible sign. And
for that are all the Sacraments instituted: for that cause also the Eucharist
and Baptism, etc. What will they here say, which blame and are offended with
us, for that we call the Sacraments a ring or pledge? In an other place he
puts down this comparatiue speech: Idem in Cant. sermon. 33.
Men use not to take with like cheerfulness the crust of the Sacrament, and
the finest of the flower of the Corn, faith and riches, remembrance and
presence, eternity, and a stinted time, the face, and the Glass, the Image of
God, and the form of a servant. Again, Idem de S. Martinio, ser. 21.
The true substance of the flesh is exhibited unto us in the Sacrament, but
spiritually, not carnally. And what is the meaning of this spiritually? Verily,
says he in an other place, expounding these words: Noli me tangere: This
touching from henceforth, seeing Christ is gone up into heaven, is done by the
affection, not with the hand: with the desire, not with the eye: by faith, not
by feeling. Thou shall touch him with the hand of faith, the finger of desire,
the fiery flames of devotion, and with the eye of the understanding, etc. To
believe him, is to have found him. Hug. erud. Theolog. trac. 6. c. 7. Summae
Senten. and de sacr. l. 2. p. 8. c. 8. and 13.
The faithful know that Christ dwells by faith in their hearts: what can
there be more near? Hugo of Saint Victor; This visible kind is named flesh, by
the custom of the Scripture, which gives to Sacraments, the names of the
things whereof they are Sacraments. Again, The bread is proposed and set
before men, that in it may be taken, and by it may be signified, the truth of
the body and blood of Christ. And again, The receiving of the Eucharist, is
the Sacrament and image of the participation of Jesus: For this his Sacrament,
which we take visibly, is the sign, that we ought to be united unto him
spiritually. In a word, It is better for thee (says he) that Christ should
enter into thy understanding, then into thy belly: This meat is for the soul
and not for the body. Which bears in a word this lesson with it as we take
it: That the bread is the body of Christ Sacramentally in signification, and in
figure: exhibiting notwithstanding unto our souls, the thing in truth,
spiritually and by faith. And Berengarius does interpret it in the same words,
cited by Lanfrancus. Now I am not ignorant that these same Doctors have in
other places spoken altogether as properly: but so it is that Barbarism had
not as yet choked and suppressed the old language of the Church,
notwithstanding that persecution was every where intended against them, that
would speak it freely. Oppositions.
Peter de Bruits a famous Doctor at Tholose, who taught that the transmutatio^
of the kinds was contrary to the word of God, Petrus Cluniacensis, l 2.
being followed of a great number of people in the Prouences of Dolphinie,
Prouence, Languedoc, and Guien, was burned alive: And Henry his fellow
Scholar, did not shrink to take his place upon him in most courageous sort
and manner as also diverse others with him. An Abbot rose on the other side in
France, who preached the very same doctrine: an other in England, holding
disputation, Panem esse Sacramentum, non rem Sacramenti: That the bread is the
Sacrament, and not the thing: but this man was oppressed by Malachias Bishop of
Ireland. In Graecia likewise they disputed and reasoned sutably to this
doctrine: Whether the body of Christ, Nicetas.
after it is taken, be corruptible, or incorruptible. Nicetas takes the one
part, and Humbert the Burgonian the other, men agreed upon, as contrary one to
the other in all things. Thus, by these frivolous and fantastical questions,
turning into cruel contentions, the true body of Christ was rent in pieces,
and his very blood contemptuously shed and spoiled; whereas it was instituted
for the union and knitting together of the Church.

Now come in Gratian and Lombard Friars, patrons and protectors, the one of the
Canonists, the other of the Schoolmen: the one a compiler of the Decrees: the
other of the sentences: Anno 1200. The Canons.
the greater part whereof is taken from the Fathers, but sometimes not
according to their true sense, the rather to fit them thereby to their times.
And hereby we shall still be able to perceive and see, that the truth thereof
cannot be hid or concealed. Let us begin with Gratian: The Canon Inquit is
very plain and manifest: Gratian. C^nq^^t. 80. De Consec d 2 C. Quia passus
3^. ^c Consec. c. 2 and ^ Null^ (...). C. ^um. Quid 43 c. o^ccr^ d 2. and ^b.
Gl. and C. Non hoc. 4^ ibid.
That the Fathers of the old Testament, did eat the same spiritual meat that
we, etc. The Canon; Quia passus: That every faithful person, is partaker of
the body and blood of Christ, of his bread and Cup in Baptism: Maxims
altogether contrary to those of the transubstantiators: And as concerning the
Eucharist; the Canon, Prima quidem says, You shall not eat this body which
you see, you shall not drink the blood which they shall shed that shall
crucify me: I have recommended unto you a certain Sacrament, the same
spiritually understood does quicken you. And the Gloss; You shall not eat this
body, etc. that is in this sort and greatness, but in the Sacrament. Which is
directly against that which they teach: That the same body which was crucified,
is eaten in the Eucharist. Now to the end they may loose themselves out of this
snare, they patch it up with these words. Ipsum and non ipsum; That is the
same, and not the same: the same invisible, not the same visibly, etc. But the
Canons; C. Dupliciter. 2^ (...) est quod 4^ d. ead and (...) Gloss. A^^ust in
psa. 98. T^om. op. 58. c 19 C. de hac quidem. 75. d. 2 vbi Hieron. C. Hoc
Corpus 27. de consecr. d. 2.
Dupliciter, and hoc est quod does quite break off whatsoever hold they might
seem to have; The flesh and the blood of Christ are taken two ways: either as
they are spiritual and divine, of which the Lord says: My flesh is truly
meat, etc. Or for the flesh which was crucified, and the blood which was shed
with the spear, etc. Now Saint Augustine means that it is this, that is
neither eaten nor drunken. Again, by the Canon, De hac quidem; It is not
permitted (says he) to any man to eat of the host, that Christ has offered
upon the Altar of the Cross: but rather of that other which is admirably done
in remembrance of it. Then there is nothing left for us to eat but the
remembrance and memorial only, etc. Again; The heavenly bread which is the
flesh of Christ, is called the body of Christ; suc modo, after a sort: though
notwithstanding so it be, that it is the Sacrament of the body of Christ: that
is of that which being visible, palpable and mortal, was fastened upon the
Cross; and that this offering up thereof is called passion, death, etc. Not in
the truth of the thing, but in a signifying mystery, etc. In the Gloss, It is
called the body of Christ, that is to say, significat, it signifies it: The
heavenly Sacrament, which truly represents the flesh of Christ, is called
the body of Christ; but improperly, etc. Thus then according to the Canons, we
eat in the Eucharist, the flesh of Christ, etc. spiritually, not carnally. Now
it follows that we look a little about us, C Quia corpus 34. C Qui manducant
57. C. Vt quid. 46. C Credere 18. C. Tunc^^s. 89 C Non iste panis. 55. De
Consecr. d. 2.
to see, whether it be by faith, or with our mouths. The Canon, Quia corpus
says, The Lord having to ascend up into heaven, did consecrate unto us, in the
day of the Supper, the Sacrament of his body and his blood; to the end that
that which had been once offered for payment and satisfaction, might be
continually honored in a mystery, and that this perdurable offering might
still live and abide in remembrance, which must be waighed and considered of,
fide, non specie: By inward faith, not by outward appearance, and pondered by
the inward affection, not by the outward sight. The Canon: Qui manducant: That
which is taken in the Sacrament visiblie, is in truth eaten and drunken
spiritually: That, which is seen, is the bread and cup, etc. That wherein it
is needful that the faith should be instructed, is, how that the bread is the
body of Christ, etc. And they are called Sacraments, because one thing is
seen, and another understood: That which is seen has a bodily shape, but
that which is understood a spiritual fruit. The Canon, Vt quid, whereto do
thou prepare thy belly and teeth? believe and thou have eaten. The Canon,
Credere: to believe in Christ is to eat the bread of life. The Canon, Non iste
panis: It is not that bread which goes into the body, that feeds the
substance of our soul; but the bread of eternal life. The Canon, In illo,
Christ is in that Sacrament: not therefore a corporal meat, but a spiritual.
And again the above said Canon; C. Quia corpus. 34. d. 2. de Consecr.
Quia corpus: when thou go up to the Altar, to be fed with spiritual
meats, behold by faith the holy body of thy God; touch him with thy
understanding; lay hold upon him with the hand of thy heart. Against all these
they have but one only miserable Gloss to object, which says; So soon as the
kind is touched with the teeth, Glos in C. Trib. de consecr d. 2. C. Qui
manduc. 57. and Mis. in sequent. C. Vtrumque 71. C. vt quid. 46, C^mutat. 69. A
sumente nonconscissus, non confractus, non diuisus, integer capitur. Ioh. 19.
Gl. in C. Ego Bereng. 41. and in C. vtrum.
so soon is the body of Christ rapt and conueighed with speed into heaven,
etc. And yet it is diversely canuased and tossed by the Canonistes and
schoolmen. Of eating with the mouth should follow the chawing of it with the
teeth. But these Canons are contrary to that. The Canon; Qui manducat; When we
eat it, we make not any morsels or bittes thereof: The faithful know how they
eat the flesh of Christ. It is eaten by parts in the Sacrament, that is, in
the signs, but it is all whole in thine heart. The Canon, Vt quid; whereto
do thou prepare thy teeth? The Canon, Vtrum, It is not lawful to eat him
with teeth. The Mass likewise in the sequences and conclusions following
thereon: He that takes him, cutteth him not, bruseth him not, neither yet
divides him into morsels, etc. Contrary to this ancient truth is only that
Canon, Ego Berengarius, (made by the Cardinal Humbert, as it were in despite
of all antiquity) which says; That he is broken and bruised with the teeth.
But without alleging against him the Gospel, which says, Not one of his
bones shall be broken: we will only lay down the words of two Gloses, which
proclaim for heretics, both Pope Nicholas II. as also the whole Church of
Rome of that time: The Gloss of that same Canon which says, Refer all to the
kinds, for we make not any part of the body of Christ: otherwise, thou shall
fall into a greater heresy then Berengarius: And the Gloss of the Canon,
Vtrum, upon these words: Is is not lawful to eat Christ with teeth,
Berengarius, (says the Gloss) says the contrary: (that is to say, Cardinal
Humbert in the retractation which he drew for Berengriaus;) but he spoke
hyperbolically, and so exceeded the bonds of the truth. Of the eating of him
with the mouth, it would follow that the wicked and ungodly should eat the
body of Christ. The Canons again are contrary thereunto. The Canon, Qui
discordat, He that is at strife with Christ, C. Qui discordat. 64. C. Qui
manduc 57. C. Quia passus 35. C. Christus 56. Fidelium dentibus atters. C Prima
quidem ^aeres 43. d. ead. C. Non oportet. 3. C. Panis. 38. C. Hoc est quod
dicim. 47. C. Ante benedict. 39. C. Panis est 54.
eats not his flesh, neither yet drinks his blood, although he should
every day take the sacrament of so high and great a thing, as a judgment of
his destruction. The Canon, Qui manducant, They that eat and drink Christ,
eat and drink life. The Canon, Christus, Christ is the bread, of whom who so
eats shall live for ever. Likewise the Canon, Ego Berengarius, attributes it
as proper to the faithful, to eat him with teeth. In brief, upon the
question also of transubstantiation; If the body of Christ, after the words
spoken must be sought for in heaven, or in the hands of the priest: and if of
the wine and bread there be nothing remaining but the Accidents: Christ (say
the Canons) is in heaven until this world shall be consummate and finished. The
body of Christ must be in one place, but the truth is spread abroad every
where. And as for the kinds: We must not offer any other thing in the
Sacrament, then wine, water, and bread, which are blessed in the figure of
Christ: Before the blessing one kind is named, but after the blessing the body
is signified. The bread and cup are a nourishing of the resurrection, by the
mystical consecration, that is, by the efficacy of the word and institution
of Christ. That is, says the Gloss: A spiritual refreshing of the soul,
which rayseth us up again from the death of sin. Again, The bread and the
cup (says he) continue the thing that they are: and yet notwithstanding they
are turned into another thing. Note, They continue the thing that they are. And
he expounds it by way of consequence: For as thou have taken the similitude
of death, so also do thou drink the similitude of blood. Then not the body
reallie, nor the blood. But the Gloss says, In as much as they signify them.
In brief, The sacrifice of the Church consists in the Sacrament, and the
thing of the Sacrament, as Christ consists of God and man, Constat ex Deo and
homine.
etc. Seeing that every thing contains the nature and truth of those things
whereof it is made. Now then reason thus: Christ to be God, cease not to be
man: neither therefore the bread and wine to be bread and wine, notwithstanding
that they be Sacraments. And thus you may see how by the decree it self, made
by Gratian the Monk, and authorized by the Popes; there cannot be any
transubstantiation.

Let us come to Peter Lombard, Lombard.
commonly called the Master of the Sentences: How often is he troubled to shift
himself of the fathers? And so much the more hardly, because he would needs
broach his own opinion; whereas Gratian for the most part contented himself
to report what other men thought. To the end therefore that he may establish
the received opinion of his time, he cutteth off by the foundation, Idem l. 1.
d. 2.
that which the first and ancient ages had embraced and allowed: concealing and
keeping back such part of that which he alleged out of the fathers, as
might hurt him; August in psalm. 73.
not making mention of any thing, as far as in him lay, save that which he
thought might serve his turn. First, S. Augustine had said in a hundred
places, after S. Paul; That the Fathers under the law had eaten in their
Sacraments the same spiritual meat that we do eat in ours: He teaches that
those did only signify and shadow out salvation, but that these do give it:
alleging a lame and maimed place out of Saint Augustine, which he ordinarily
expounds by these words: That they were Sacraments of Christ to come, and
ours of Christ already come, etc. Secondly, S. Augustine after Saint Paul
has taught us; That we put on Christ in Baptism; That therein we are made
partakers also of the body and blood of Christ: And all the fathers were wont
to reason from Baptism, to the holy Supper; from the water, to the bread and
wine, acknowledging the power of the holy Ghost alike in the one and in the
other: Lombard perceiving how this might seem prejudicial unto him in the
pretended transubstantiation, more sparingly and pinchingly; Baptism (says
he) washes us: the Eucharist does perfect us in goodness, Lombard. l. 4. d. 3.
etc. even so far, as that he lets not to prefer and set confirmation
before it: Thirdly, the Fathers had not acknowledged in the Sacrament, any
thing besides the sign, and the thing of the Sacrament in the holy Supper,
namely, the bread and wine sanctified for signs, and the body and blood for
the things. Now Lombard against the nature of a Sacrament, acknowledged in all
other Sacraments, to lay the foundation for his transubstantiation,
acknowledges therein a double sign, and a double thing. The double sign, The
kinds which he calls bread and wine before the consecration: And after the
same, The invisible body and blood, signs of the visible body and blood of
our Lord: And for the double signs: One contained and signified: that is, the
flesh of Christ, which he took of the virgin, and the blood which he did shed
for us: and another not contained, and notwithstanding signified, the unity of
the Church, and the conjunction thereof with Christ, which he calls the
mystical flesh of Christ: C. Non hoc. C. Dupliciter.
directly contrary to Saint Augustine, and the Canon which says: You shall
not eat the flesh which the Jews shall fasten to the cross: neither shall ye
drink the blood which they shall shed, etc. Fourthly: All antiquity did tell
us, that the signs abide in their nature, Saint Augustine and S. Ambrose in
special: After the consecration they are the same that they were, Lombard. l.
4. d. 8.
Lombard subtillie, They retain the names of that which they were before:
Contrary to the Canons, Non oportet: In Sacrament. Cum omne: Panis, hoc est,
quod dicimus, etc. Fifthly, The Fathers by consequent did teach; That the
faithful received Sacramentum, De consecr. d. 2
and rem Sacramenti, the sign and the thing: the unbelievers the Sacrament
only: He then that makes a double sign and a double thing, and the thing
which he calls contained and signified, a sign after the consecration of the
signified and not contained, that is to say, the body and blood of Christ
invisible, under the appearances of bread and wine, signs of the visible and
sensible body of Christ, teaches, as it were by the spirit of contradiction,
That the wicked eat the thing of the Sacrament, and not the Sacrament. They
eat not the Sacrament: (so did the Fathers call the bread and the wine:) for
according to Lombard, there remains nothing but Accidents, which are not
subject to the teeth: And notwithstanding our Lord has said, Take, eat. And
the Apostle. He that shall eat of this bread, etc. And notwithstanding if we
believe him, they eat the invisible body and blood of Christ, but without
being partakers of the visible body and blood, whereof it is the sign:
Against the Canons, Qui discordat, Christus: Qui mandacant, etc. And that which
is worse, against the Son of God himself, who says unto us; He that eats
my flesh and drinks my blood, he dwells in me, and I in him, he has
eternal life, etc. Take this for remission of your sins, etc. Whereas
certainly he does not distinguish by invisible and visible: And against the
true Divinity also, which teaches us; That the flesh and blood of the Son
of God are not without his soul, without his spirit, or without his divinity.
Neither then without eternal life, or without nourishment to them that receive
him, and that unto life, and to the resurrection unto life. And this is it that
Lombard says in these words, Lombard. l. 4. d. 9.
The wicked receive sacramentallie, that is to say, under the sacrament, that
is to say, under the visible kind, the flesh of Christ, taken of the virgin,
etc. but not the mystical, which is not received of any but the good: that is
to say, the unity which is betwixt Christ and his members: that which they
call the proper and natural body: this the spiritual body: whereas the old
Church did never know in our Lord any more bodies then one: and that a very,
true, and natural body. And also he has not a little to do to clear and
quite himself of Saint Augustine, yea and when he has done his best, yet he
sees not how to shift him off, but by falsifying and corrupting of him.
Sixthly, The Fathers never acknowledged after the sanctifying of the kinds any
more changes of names then one: as the giving of the name of the thing unto the
sign: and they called these substances by the name of kinds, both before and
after: Lombard understands by kinds, The accidents only, as whiteness,
taste, weight, etc. He disputes, whether this change be formal or
substantial. In the beginning he says, That he cannot decide the question:
Afterward he is more bold, Affirming resolutely, that it is not formal, for
the qualities still remain. And can these qualities remain without matter?
Some say, substantial, that is to say, that the substance of the bread, is
turned into the body. And what then (says he) should the flesh of Christ grow
and increase continually? Others, That the body and blood do take the place
of the substances of bread and wine. And what becomes then (says he) of the
substances of bread and wine? Do they pass into the matter lying there in
open sight, or do they vanish into nothing? etc. Others, That the one and the
other abide together, the one for the sign, the other for the thing. Now there
is not any one of these questions to be found in the Fathers, as neither those
which follow: What foundation the Accidents do rest upon: upon some subject,
Idem l. 4. d. 12.
or without any subject: whether the body and blood do there take their form,
or whether our Lord be such a one there, as he shall appear in judgment?
Whereto for a conclusion Lombard adds this: Whether he be there broken in
deed, or seem only so to be? etc. And here again he is in a foul pussle,
how to rid himself of the Canon, Ego Berengarius: which notwithstanding he
concludes on the contrary: That there is not any thing but the show, that is
to say, the similitude or appearance, broken, etc. Now thus many opinions and so
diverse, and yet notwithstanding uncondemned, being left as problemes and free
for every one, do prove unto us, that these good men were not as yet
persuaded to what side to bend, and that this doctrine was yet but very new
and raw to the Church. For if it had had any long standing: who doubts but
that so many worthy personages, during so many ages, would have become resolved
and resolute long before? But it is about this matter that all the schoolmen
do busy themselves from this time forward, some of them taking the one side,
and others the other, until the time of the Council held at Lateran, wherein
the question was decided: though afterward they could not rest resolved, so
many were the doubts and scruples that crossed that vain and idle vision. In
the mean time it happens that Lombard should make a scope, and say, That
Christ is not sacrificed or offered in the Mass in effect and in deed, but in
a mystery: And that the Mass is not properly a sacrifice, but a
representation and remembrance of of a sacrifice. Let us reason thereupon; If
he be there, then there also is a sacrifice, yea there is a real sacrifice:
but if there be no real sacrifice, if there be nothing made but a
remembrance, then is there no host offered, nor yet the body and blood of
Christ, reallie in the host.

Now in the year 8215. C. firmit. credimus de sum. Trin.t. and fid. cathol.
The establishing of transubstantiation. In Council. Lateranens. l. de fid.
cathol. S. vnt.
Pope Innocent the third, in the Council of Lateran published his decree, We
do constantly and firmly believe, etc. which determines the form and manner
of this pretended transmutation, and gives the name to this monster in these
words; That in the Sacrament of the Altar the body and blood of Christ are
truly and verily contained, the bread being transubstantiated into his body,
and the wine into his blood, by the divine power. And ever since that time it
has been so taught in the Church of Rome. But iumping together at the same
time we have the Albigenses in all these Provinces, as Dolphinie, Prouence,
Languedoc, and Guien, which being offended hereat, do rise against the Church
of Rome. The Pope more sharply bent upon their subversion, then conversion,
sends on the one part Dominicke, to preach unto them; but Leopold Duke of
Austria, and Simon Count of Montfort, in deed to force them by their great
power and armies: He bent and employed against them the Croisade, ever before
that appointed to go against the Turks: In a word, he filled all these
Provinces with flames of fire, and streams of blood, and spread them here and
there in scattering wise, clean contrary to his mind, throughout all the
parts of Europe. And the Chronicles of England do testify, that there were
some of them that fled thither for the same matter. And Vincentius says, that
they were burned at Paris by Dozeus. And if we doubt whether it were for the
same faith; the confession of the Waldenses, Confessio fratrum Waldensium.
will make the case clear and plain unto us: which we entreat the reader to
take the pains to peruse; because that all the arguments of the Patrons of
transubstantiation are therein very soundly confuted, according to the time;
and the purity of the doctrine agreeablie laid down. The sum whereof is,
That in the Supper the faithful does receive the very body and blood of
Christ; That the bread and wine do neither change their nature nor substance:
because that if the element should cease to be, there should not be a
Sacrament any longer; That as concerning the rest, the body and blood of
Christ ought not to be sacrificed, nor yet elevated, that it may be adored, but
received by the faithful, etc. And this is added, because that at that time
the doctrine of a sacrifice had proceeded very far, and that there was a
like endeavor for the mutual establishment of transubstantiation and the
sacrifice; the one without doubt being a great deal the more recommendable by
reason of the other.

CHAP. IX. What has been the manner of the proceeding and growth of
Transubstantiation since the Council of Lateran, unto the time of the Council
of Trent: and the absurdities and contradictions proceeding of the same.
WHerefore ever since the time of the decree of Lateran, the Schoolmen have
occupied themselves in the defending of Transubstantiation by Philosophy:
Brutish questions proceeding of transubstantiation, which the fathers never
knew. Innocent. l. 4. c. 19. Lombard. l. 4. d. 13. Ioh. de Burg. de custodiend.
Euchar. c. 10.
whereas such as had been before them, could not grow to a resolution about
the manner of the change. And now the Doctors handle no other matter, but
wholly give themselves to find out reasons for the maintaining thereof, and
the Popes altogether occupied about the devising of ceremonies, for the
honoring of it, as God himself.

Innocent III. a great promoter of this monster, moves this monstrous and
brutish question; What eats the Mouse when she gnaweth the sacrament? Lombard
has answered, God knows. And notwithstanding toward the end; It may be
safely said, that the body of Christ is not taken by beasts. But the school
of Sorbone has noted, Hie Magister non tenetur; Other follow not the judgment
of the master of the sentences in this point. Johannes de Burgo, very
grossly; The Mouse does take the body of Christ: Innocentius more subtillie,
The bread passes away miraculously when the body comes: and the body
passes and gets it self away when the Mouse draws near, Alex. p. 4 q.
45. membr. 1.
and the bread comes into his place again. Alexander Hales; The body of
Christ is even in the belly of the Mouse, and yet no disparagement to the
body of Christ, nor yet to the Sacrament: in the body in like manner of a
dog or hog, etc. Bonauenture verily deals more honestly, The Mouse cannot
eat it: God forbid it should ever come to that. And what would the Fathers say
concerning these absurdities, which teach us, That no body receives the body
of Christ, that has not first worshipped it? And that many worship it, which
do not receive it? And what unequal dealing is this here, to eleuate and hold
up on high a piece of bread for the body of Christ; to call it our Lord, to
adore it, and believe it to be God; and after this eleuating of it, to debase
it so far, as to make it subject to the filthy vomiting of men, and
devouring guts of greedy beasts? And this may serve for a scantling of the
goodly divinity proceeding from this devise of transubstantiation: and their
books are full of the like.

Their contrarying and crossing one of another, is a thing no less worth the
noting. The contrarieties which they have uttered, in the deciding of the
former questions. Gl. in C. Tribus. Durand. in Rational. l 4. c. 41. Aftesa. in
Sum. 4. part. tit. 17. Richard. 4. d. 9 q. 1. Bonau. 4. d. 9. q 1. Thom. 3. q.
80. art. 3. C.S. quis per ebrietatem. and ibi. Gloss. Caiet. tom. 2. tr. 2. c.
3. and 5. Thom. opusc. 58. c. 13.
The first, Is the body of Christ taken in at the mouth? passes it into the
stomach? To the first they answer, yea: At the second they are astonished.
Gratian his Gloss says; So soon as the tooth touches it, it is swiftly
conueighed up into heaven. Durandus, From the mouth, it passes and goes
forward unto the heart: that is to say, into the soul: And then there cease
to be any corporal presence, the spiritual only remaining. Another; Yea it
goes down into the belly, provided that the kind have not been changed in
the mouth. Others, it passes down thither, and there abides until the
kinds be consumed. How much better had it been for them to have held
themselves to the Fathers, The heavenly bread which nourishes our souls, is
not that which goes down into the stomach, etc. And in deed Cardinal
Caietanus was ashamed of the contrary, saying: That it is most false to
affirm and hold, that the body of Christ is taken corporally: for it is
taken spiritually in the Eucharist, by believing, and not by receiving. Again,
He that eats not, cheweth not the body of Christ, but the kinds: but the
spiritual eating, which is performed by the soul, obtains the flesh of
Christ which is in the Sacrament, etc.

Secondly, The body of Christ at such time as it is taken in the Eucharist, is
it in heaven, or not? Thomas answers, It is visiblie in heaven in the shape
of a man: but his divinity and his body, is upon every altar sacramentallie.
If he understood this word as Saint Augustine does, we shall agree together:
but he understands it by an invisible body. And what shall then become of
that which all the Fathers say unto us, As he is God, he is infinite, he is
every where: but as he is man, he is finite, limited, and abiding in one
place? Whereunto they bring forth this goodly distinction: but let him prove it
that can, The body of Christ is in a place, but not locally: It is quantu^,
but not after the manner of a quality: that is to say, it is a body, but not
corporally, etc.

Thirdly, What becomes of the substances of bread and wine in this change.
Gl. in C. species de consecr. d. 2. and in C. firm. ext. de Sum. Trinit. Caiet.
in Tho.
Thomas says after Lombard: That they are turned into the substance of the
body and blood of Christ. Gratian his Gloss, and the extrauagants, That they
vanish to nothing. And Pope Innocent the third in like manner: Scotus thereupon
refuteth Thomas: and Caietanus refuteth Scotus. Likewise they are not agreed
upon their propositions: for diverse let not to say after all the Fathers: The
bread is the body of Christ. Scotus to the contrary says, That it cannot be
said so: and as far off is that, Panis fit corpus Christi, The bread is made
the body of Christ. But rather: Of bread, the body of Christ is made, etc. C.
Non oportet and ibi Gloss. de Consecr. d. 2. C. Cum Martha S. Veru^ de celebr.
Miss. Thom. 3. q. 14. art. 8 Durand. l 4. c, 42. Scot. in Rep d, 2. and 3 and
d. 10 q. 1.
And how much shorter had it been for them, to hold themselves to the fathers;
The bread is the body of Christ, is made the body of Christ, Per modum
Sacramenti, after the manner of a Sacrament? Fourthly, What becomes of the
water in this change? who is it that brings it to nothing? That
transubstantiateth it into blood with the wine? And into Christ's vital humor?
etc. Thomas more subtly turns it, From water into wine, and after from wine
into blood? Durandus deals more so berlie, Who dare be so bold to decide the
question? And what shall become then of their Allegory; That the water
signifies the Church; the mingling of the water with the wine, the conjunction
of the Church with Christ? But Scotus after all this, gives the cross blow
unto all these pretended changes, The first opinion (says he) was, that the
substance of bread did abide: the second, that it did not, but that it
vanishes into nothing, or is resolved into the first matter: the third, that
the bread is turned into the body of Christ, etc. But I say, that although the
substance of bread shall abide, yet is shall not take away our worshipping of it,
and yet shall not be any cause of idolatry: and that the substance of bread
does more fitly represent the blood of Christ, then the accidents alone, Petr.
de Alliaci. l. 4. Sent. d. q 6.
seeing there is more resemblance betwixt substance and substance, then betwixt
a substance and an accident. And the Cardinal of Alliaco has followed his
steps: The manner (says he) that admits that the substance of bread abides
and remains, is not repugnant unto reason, nor unto the authority of the
Bible: on the contrary, it is more easy to understand, and more reasonable,
and does not admit of Accidents without any subject: which is one of the
difficulties that is therein to be found. Make these and transubstantiation
agree.

Fifthly, If the substances be not any more there, then what will ye make of the
whiteness, and roundnesse? Lombard, l. 4. d. 12. Aimoinus. ex Adem. l. 5. c.
19 Platin. in vit. Clem. 5. Thom opuse. 59. and q. 3.79 Durand in Ration. l. 4.
c. 41.
etc. These accidents in a word, and whereupon founded? Some of Lombard his
time said, That they are in the air. Lombard, That they are without any
subject. And Thomas after the same manner. Some reply, But we see that they
nourish. As for example, King Jews the gentle (says the Monk Aimoinus) who
for the space of forty days did not eat any other thing: and an Emperor,
Henry the fourth, as says Platina, was poisoned in the host, etc. Worms
likewise are begotten therein. There, of one pretended miracle they make a
hundred. Thomas says, That they are accidents notwithstanding, but such as
are able to nourish: That the worms in that which remains are engendered of
the demensiue quantity. Others, Of the substance of bread. And others, Of the
next air. What millions of absurdities does one absurdity beget?

Sixthly, This miracle, in sum, that brings forth so many, By what words is
it done? If it be by these words, Hoc est corpus meum: wherefore then does the
Priest say afterward, Iube haec perferri. Command that these gifts, that is to
say, the Sacraments be laid upon thine heavenly Altar, Lombard. d. 13 l. 4. G.
of in C. Vtium in V. Perfer. decons. d. 2.
by the hands of thine Angel? etc. And in deed Lombard is not far off: And
many collect thereby, that the consecration is made in heaven by the ministry
of the Angels. And if it be not by these words, why then do they so delight
themselves to insist upon them? And then also by what others? And where is the
end, where the beginning? Here lies the great controversy. And in the mean
time you will say, if you should hear them speak, that they are all of one
judgment, and that they make not any question of any thing be it never so
small. What will they say unto us then? Durand in Rational. l. 4. c. 41
Lombard. l. 4. d. 2 Thom. opusc. 59. and 3. q. 78. Hug. Card. in Luc. c. 26.
and in Marc c. 4. Scot. in Rep. d. 8. q 2
Christ (says Durand) consecrated by the word Benedixit: And his reason is,
because that our Lord brake the bread before the words, Hoc est corpus meum.
Thomas is thought to go about to draw his neck out of the collar, by saying,
That the Evangelists have not kept any order therein. Hugo the Cardinal
delivers four sorts: And notwithstanding says he, There is but one true
sort to become by. And who is it then, that shall be able soothly to declare
the same? Scotus says very ingeniously and freely. That he is wholly ignorant
in this point: and that this is a lawful ignorance, and that he that thinks
himself to know what and how forcible words are requisite thereunto, is
deceived: And further, that the Grecians, which tie not themselves to these
words, do not therefore fail to consecrate. Is not this to say plainly enough
with the fathers, that the sanctifying of the Sacraments does not depend upon
certain words, Thom. l. 4. sen. d 8. art. 6. Innoc 3. de Offic. Miss. p. 3 C.
6. and 14. Scot. in l. 5. Sent. d. 2. q, 3.
as magical works do; but upon the Lords institution? Afterward, Hoc, what
shall it be unto us? With Thomas hoc is as much to say, Hoc contentum, that
which is contained under these kinds or accidents is my body. To Innocent the
third, this hoc is not any word tending to consecration: is brings not
thereunto either yea, or nay. And thus also says Scotus; and it signifies an
Indiuiduum vagum, whereof Christ pronounces, that it is his body, already
consecrated already made by the blessing going before; whereof it is said,
Benedixit, etc. And Durandus swarueth not far from the same sense, Durand. l. 4,
when he says that by hoc there is nothing signified: but that it is put
down, materialiter, etc. To Bonauenture, hoc means the bread, Gerson cont.
^lor. l, 4.
the substance of bread. Gerson takes it so also. And Gardener living within
our remembrance, has followed him. But this proposition; The bread is, or is
made the body of Christ, is holden at this day to be heretical. And
therefore they say; The forms or the Accidents of bread shall not be any
less: for how shall either one substance become another: or the Accidents a
substance? To Occam, Hoc is as much to say, as Corpus Christi, the body of
Christ. Oce^m. in 4. Sent. d. 13. q. 6. and 7. Betr. de Alliac, ibid,
And what shall then the meaning of this be; The body of Christ is the body
of Christ? And thus writes Petrus de Alliaco. A proposition says Holcot,
Vain and fond, for it is idem per idem. And because he cannot be there till
all the words be uttered; Johannes de Burgo adds thereunto, Hoc, That which
is here present under this kind, or which very quickly shall be there, is my
body. Holcot. in 4. Sent. q. 3.
And Holcot to get himself out of the briars, It signifies something that is
common to both terms, termino a quo, and termino ad quem: But he tells not
what. And how much better had it been for them to have kept themselves to the
exposition of the Fathers; This is the figure of my body: you are my body in
a Sacrament and mystery? As also unto the old Canons; This signifies my
body, etc. Upon the rest of the words they do not agree any better. Est to
some of them is a verb Substantive: Others disallow of them, and will have it
to be a verb operative. And of these fellows that hold of operative, some
will have it expounded by Fit, is made: Others by Conuertitur, is changed:
Others by transubstantiatur, is transubstantiated, etc. And they will again,
that Fit be as much as Fiat: And Conuertitur, conuertatur, etc. that is to
say, This may be made my body, This may be changed into my body, etc. And
again, some will, that as soon as it is spoken, all is finished: Others are
of mind, that the five words must be fully finished: And others, all that
which follows, Which is given, or which is shed for you, etc. And who shall
be able to gather together either all their frivolous questions, whereof the
Fathers never knew one: or yet all their contradictions, infallible sequences,
both of the uncertainty of their doctrine, as also of the spirit of lying,
reigning amongst them? In the mean time hear them speak: They jar about a
controversy which is betwixt Luther and Calvin, thinking to cloak and
conceal such a multitude of contrarieties as are amongst themselves.

And thus when they have cast about every way, The Schoolmen show that they
are forced by the authority of the decrees of Lateran. Hugo Card. in Mat. c.
26. and in Marc. c. 14. and in Luc. c. 26
now at the last they break out and say, that it is the Council of Lateran,
or rather the tirannie of the Pope, that tyeth their tongues like prisoners,
and not the concluding of their pretended reasons. Cardinal Hugo in his
perpetual Postill, swimmeth betwixt the truth and the errors of that time, as
well as he can, He blesses says he: but he sticks long in the bringing
forth of the words of blessing, as having purposed to accommodate himself to
the opinion then received: to which end he brings forth four constructions
of this text, and those very diverse. Fregit, he brake: that is to say,
Frangendum in cruce signauit; he signified, that his body should be broken
upon the Cross. Accipite, take, that is, (said he) by believing with the
heart, and confesting with the mouth. Comedite, eat, that is, by joining your
selves to him in love and unity. This is my body, this is my blood: that is,
that I have given you for meat, which I have given you for drink: according
to that (says he) which he says in Saint John 6. My flesh is truly meat,
and my blood is truly drink. Now it is so that our adversaries understand it
of the spiritual eating. And afterward says he, To whom gives he it?
Verily, unto his disciples: His disciples and not others have right to eat and
drink it, they which go and sit down in his schools, that ruminate his
lessons of humility, of mildness, gentleness, charity, etc. And yet in the
mean time he lets not after all this to wind himself here and there
within the errors of the time. Thom. 3. p. Sum q. 76. art. 1. Damasc. l 4. c.
4.
Thomas after he has spent all his breath about the proving of the doctrine
of Transubstantiation, turns back at the last to approve of Damascen his
opinion: The coal is not of simple wood, but it is united to the fire: so the
bread of the Communion is not simple bread, but bread united to the
divinity. And we agree to him, if he mean a Sacramental union; if he
mean, that it is said of the bread, This is my body which is given for you.
In like manner as it is said of the cole: This has touched thy lips,
therefore thine iniquity shall go away, and propitiation shall be made for
thy sins. For he would not have it meant of any hypostaticall thing. Bonau.
in l. 4. Sent. d. 8. and d. 1. q. 3.
Bonauenture does flatly deny every part of Thomas his exposition: That the
bread was the body of Christ, at such time as our Lord uttered these words,
This is my body. Again, they hold it for an error; That grace is essentially
contained in the Sacraments, as the medicine in the box: but they hold, that
it is in them in as much as they do signify and shadow it out. Now the body
of Christ, upon their consciences, is it without grace? That grace
notwithstanding is in them, if the default be not on the behalf of the party
that communicates. Could he deliver his mind in better terms, that the body
of Christ is not received but by the faithful? And his conclusion urges the
matter yet further; Thus understanding (says he) that the grace is in the
soul, and not in the visible signs: that is to say, that the effect of the
Sacrament is wrought in our souls by the operation of the holy Ghost; and not
any miracle in the substances of the bread and the wine. The same upon the
word, Eat: Eating (says he) is properly found to have respect unto
corporal things, and from thence is translated unto those that are
spiritual: And therefore if we will take well the right spiritual eating, it
is necessary that we should go from the proper signification of the word,
Idem in l. 4. d. 9. q 1. Scot. l. 5. Rep. in 4. Sent. d. 10 q. 1.
unto the borrowed and translated. And so by this means he acknowledges a
figure therein. And note, that he was both a gray friar and a Cardinal. John
Duns, says Scotus, near hand 100. years after the Council of Lateran, durst
be so bold, as to call the matter in question again, If the body of Christ
be really contained under the kinds: and reasons by argument that it is
not. And his grounds are, Idem d. 11. q. 3
That the quantity cannot suffer it: so neither the localnesse and
circumscription of place which go inseperablie and naturally with a true and
natural body, such as is the body of our Lord: that as a temporal thing
cannot be at diverse times together, no more can a local thing be in diverse
places together. And therefore that the opinion which holds, that the bread
and wine abide in their substance, Idem d. 2. and 3 and 104.20.
seems unto him the more probable, and no less worthy to be embraced, etc.
Notwithstanding, that he holds himself to that which the Church ordained in
the Council of Lateran: Because it is said, that Saint Peter's faith shall not
fail, etc. Although (says he) that the words of the scripture might be
maintained and defended by a more easy exposition, Occam. in centilog. theol.
concl. 25, 26. etc.
and in all likelihood more true. Occam durst propound and set down, That the
body of Christ is every where, as God is every where: and that if there were
an host that did fill all the world, the body of Christ might be together
with every part of the same, when it should be consecrated. Directly against
the Council of Ephesus, which concludes that every nature should retain
such his properties, as could not become really communicable from one to
another. And from him the Vbiquitaries of this time may seem to have drawn
their fountain and water spring. But in another place he holds, Idem l. 4.
q. 6.
that the opinion which sets down, That the substance of bread abides, and
that the body of Christ is coexistant with it, is most probable, and least
subject to inconveniences, not repugnant to reason, neither to the authority
of the Bible: notwithstanding that he keeps himself unto the determination
of the Church, and such opinion as is most commonly received. Durand. de S.
port. in l 4. Sent. d. 11.
Gulielmus Durandus of Saint Poursain, whom the university of Sorbone calls
Magister, by the way of excellency, and the most resolute Doctor: and that
more wisely: It is rashness (says he) to say, that the body of Christ by
the divine power and virtue cannot be in the Sacrament in any other manner,
then by turning of the bread into him, etc. For this is a hard and harsh
speech, and may seem to derogate from the Almightinesse of God, etc. And what
now will they have to say unto us, which allege nothing for themselves but
his omnipotency? On the contrary (says he) it being granted and set down,
that the substances of bread and wine do remain, there can not but a
difficulty must needs arise; namely, that two bodies are together, but yet
not too great, or such a one as is unanswerable. But the contrary being
granted, there follow many: namely, how the Accidents can nourish, be
corrupted, how there can any thing be engendered in them: seeing that there is
nothing made, but there is presupposed or thought to be a matter: and
therefore it seems that men should rather hold them to this former, etc. And
yet notwithstanding these Patrons of transubstantiation do not let to shuffle
us up together two bodies in one and the same place, in the stone of the grave,
Holcor. in 4. sent. q. 3.
in the doors that were shut, etc. and consequently one body in a thousand
places, according to Holcot: If there had been (says he) a thousand hosts in
a thousand places, at the same time that Christ did hang upon the cross,
Christ had been crucified in a thousand places, etc. In the end, whereas
Scotus did shift out himself by the Church, this man will come to the
scripture: We may not (says he) here heap one difficulty upon another, Idem
in d. l 4. d. 11. q. 3. number. 5.
but rather according to the doctrine of the scripture, do our endeavor to
clear and make plain the things that are obscure and dark: And therefore
when there is found out one course and means that is evidently possible, and
that may be understood, and another that cannot be conceived or understood, it
seems that the former in all likelihood should be chosen and retained, etc.
As for example, It is most clearly to be understood, and in all probability
possible, that the substances do abide and continue: and contrarily, for the
contrary. The Cardinal of Alliaco told us; Card. de All. in 4. Sent. q. 6.
Biel. in Can. lect. 40.
This opinion which sets down and grants, that the substance of bread
remains, is not repugnant unto reason or the scriptures, but is both more
easy and also more reasonable. Gabriel Biel more boldly, Whether it be by
changing or without changing, there is nothing expressly found in the Canon of
the Bible. To be brief, in the Canon of Lateran, Pope Innocentius the third
did not curse those that held the contrary opinion; namely, That the
substances of bread and of wine do still remain: although he make mention
there all along; that it is the style and ordinary course of Councels, to set
down and allow of the one, and to curse the other. And if Wicklife in England
about the year 1370. had kept himself only to that point, without seeking to
remove the Popes power and authority, he should never have been molested:
notwithstanding he died in peace in his own parish, and his bones were not
burnt till a long time after. Council. Flor. Sess. Vit.
But yet there is more behind: for in the Council of Florence, which was held
in the year 1439. under Eugenius the fourth, where the Pope and the Emperor
of Constantinople were in person: as the Grecians and Latins could not agree
upon the matter of transubstantiation, as it is recorded at large in the Acts
of the said Council; this controversy did not let or hinder, why there should
not be an unity signed between the said Greek and Latin Churches, which
began, Exultent coeli, etc. That Transubstantiation was no Article of faith
until the Council of Trent.
a most evident sign, that the opinion of transubstantiation remained as yet
disputable, and that the contraie was not held for heresy: So far was it
off, from holding the place of an article of faith, as it does at this day,
and that by virtue of the Council of Trent, which did first pronounce and
ordain it so to be: If any man say, that the substances of bread and wine do
still continue, etc. let him be accursed. So young and new is that pretended
antiquity of transubstantiation. And therefore a daughter begotten, not of the
Apostles, nor yet in the ages next following them: not of the Fathers of the
first five hundred years, or of the second, or yet of the third: but to speak
properly of those Fathers which we daily see, and whose fathers also we have
been able to behold and look upon: begotten in the very declining and
extreme old age of the Romish Church: and borne in a most corrupt age, whether
you take it for doctrine, or for manners. For if Saint Jerome said of his time,
as bewailing it, that it was as the lees and dregs, in respect of the pureness
of the former times, what would he have said of the present, but have called
it, Ex faece Tartarum, the very grossest part of the lees, even the Tartar it
self.

Now as concerning that scruple which remained from time to time amongst the
most learned, as a thing that they cold neither digest nor conceal, The Popes
their decrees for the honering of Transubstantiation
as we have found out by their writings: The Popes according to their
pretended omnipotency in the Church, (for therein lies the foundation
thereof, and not in the divine omnipotency) do not make any bones at all to
leap over it, letting it alone: for it did so much import them to see the
stablishing of it, for the authorizing of the sacrifice of the Mass, and the
making of the same to be worshipped of the people: from whom the ordinary
communicating of the holy Supper had been taken, and restrained to one only
priest, from whom likewise at such time as it came there to be received but
once a year, they had also taken the cup. Now therefore the question is of
honoring of this new doctrine: and behold how it has proceeded.

In stead that it had been accustomed to hold up the offerings which were
consecrated to God for the poor; The elevation of the bread or host.
whether it were done in the imitating of the Jews, or for the stirring up of
the people unto the like charity; the priest begins to eleuate the host,
that is to say, the bread, which of a great one which it was wont to be, able
to have fed many persons; and by consequent to have been distributed in the
holy Supper to a great multitude, is brought down and rebated by little and
little, as it were to nothing, serving in deed but for one alone, that is to
say, to that which they call a singing bread, Durand. in Rational. l. 4.
at the least says Durandus, of the greatness of a penny. And we have a decree
from Honorius the third, about the year 1220. after the Council of Lateran in
these words: Let the Priest oftentimes teach his people reverently to bow
themselves when the wholesome and saving host is elevated, L. 3. decret. de
Celebr. Missar. Blond. l. 7. dec. 2. Thom. Cantipratensis. and Jacob. de
Vitri^to. Gerard. Lorich l. 5. ^^prtuat. M^ss. C. Tribus gradib. de cons. d. 2.
Innoc. 3. l. 3. de r. tit. 44. and in Conc. Lateranens. c. 20.
etc. Gregory the ninth, about the year 1230. adds thereunto, a little
bell, to give every man warning to fall down upon his knees. The which is
done, says Durandus, That the people might be forewarned of Christ's coming
down upon the Altar. And this is the cause why Gerardus Lorichius in his book
of the Mass infers of this elevation, That the Mass was not lawful, if it
were not done for the public use of the Church, the people there taking the
Sacrament, or else celebrating the sacrifice of praise: and by consequent, that
the private Masses that are made without the people in general, are rather
abominations then oblations.

Unto the time of Clement the third, about the year 1188. we see that the
Eucharist had not any peculiar place in the Churches where it was kept and
worshipped: For he ordained, That there should be so much bread set upon the
Altar, as the people could make an end of, and that what remained, should be
made an end of by the Clearkes. Innocent the third therefore after the Council
of Lateran, about the year 1215. after that he had brought to pass, so far
as in him lay, that transubstantiation should go for an article of faith;
commanded that in all the Churches there should be made a coffer, we call it
the box wherein the Sacrament is kept, or (...), as Saint Matthew, who puts
us in mind thereof, wherein the Eucharist, that is to say, this host
consecrated by the priest, may be kept under key. And because that this
ordinance was not well observed, it was shortly after renewed by Honorius the
third, about the year 1220. Honor. l. 3. Decr. de celebr. Miss.
Also these words were ordinarily written in Cathedral Churches upon the
boxes, or tabernacles made for the hosts, in great letters; Hic Deum adora,
here honor God: or else, Flecte genu, lapis hic honorabilis hospite Christo,
etc. Bow the knee, this stone is worthy honor, because that Christ lodges in
it, etc. What is this but a clear and plain exposition of the place of Saint
Matthew; Mat. 24. ecce est in (...). nolite credere.
If they say unto you, behold he is in the secret places, etc. believe them
not? The same Honorius ordained, That the Priests should carry the host
honorably, when it should be taken out of the boxes, to be carried to the
sick; whereas the old Church did send them the Sacraments of the assembly,
even the Sacrament of the faithful, as we have seen in Justinius Martyr. And
at this time there was a Council held at Colen, under the Emperor Radulph of
Hapsbourg, the chief of the house of Austria, where we note how much the
Church had profited since the Council of Lateran: for it is there, that we do
first of all read these goodly and wholesome Canons, whereof the old fathers
never took any manner of notice: That the Priest should make choice of a very
sound cup, and such a one as had a fast and sure foot: That the pottes
should be marked, that so he may not take water for the wine: That he look
well to it, that his host be whole, sound, and not over old: That he put not
above two or three drops of water: That he make as quick dispatch in the
pronunciation of the words of the Canon, as possibly he can, that so he may
not be tedious unto those that are present, and avoid other inconveniences;
That the elevation be done after the words Hoc est, etc. And that the little
bell be rung thrice, that so they may come from every part and corner to adore
and worship: That if there fall any small thing of the body or of the blood
upon the pall of the Altar: In piscinam.
that then the stone be cut and burned, and the ashes put into the holy place,
or cast into the fish-poole: if it be any part of the shrowde, it must be
washed, and the water drunk fasting by the Priest: If it be upon the stone, or
upon the ground, let the Priest lick it up, then let it be scraped afterward,
and the scrapinges put into the holy place, or into the holy fish-poole: if
that a spider or a fly be fallen into it; let them be taken out warily, and
burnt over the fish-poole: Caute.
let the priest have a box of gold, silver, Iuorie, or at the least of copper,
to keep it in, etc. That when he goes to carry the host unto the sick, he
say the Letanie and other prayers at he goes: and let him go with the little
bell, and the wax candle burning: let such as shall accompany him reverently
going and coming, have ten days pardon: let such as meet it, if they be on
horseback light down, that they may kneel unto it, let the priest demand
before that any man do communicate, if he do not believe, that under the form
of bread is the body of Christ, borne of the virgin Marie, crucified, risen
again, etc. If a man should vomit it up again, that the pieces be gathered
up, and that they be given to a faithful man to take and eat: and that the
rest of the vomit be burnt, and set near unto the Altar, etc. And this I
thought necessary to set down at length in this place, to the end that every
man may know, that all these inventions are of the appendances and begetting of
transubstantiation: And therefore it cannot be but new in the Church, seeing
they are so new and so lately entered thereinto.

But the abuse stayed not here: for in the year 1264. The feast-God Petr.
Praemonstrate. sis, and Arnold Bostius. Bull. Urban. Pap. ad Euam. reclusam,
data apud vrbem veterem, 6. Id. September. anno Pontif. 3. Platim. in vit. Vrb.
4. Naucl. de Tho.
Vrbanus the fourth instituted and ordained the celebration of the day, which
they call the feast-God, with his Octaues: and that upon the pretended
revelation of a certain woman of the country of Luke called Eve, shut up in a
Monastery, whom he had known before his Papacy. We have as yet his letters
written to the said Eve, which begin; We know holy daughter, that thou have
des^^^ that there might be instituted a solemn feast of the body of Christ
in the Church, etc. Then follow these words more then blasphemous, which turn
the song of the holy virgin, to be applied to this silly woman, and to this
idol; Magnificet animatua Demmum, let thy soul therefore (says he) praise the
Lord, etc. Because thine eyes have seen thy salvation, which we (that is to
say, the Pope) have prepared before the face of thy people, etc. By the same
means he sends unto her, Quaternum, in in quo officium continetur, a scedule
or book of the office: which some hold to have been composed by Thomas
Aquinas, a great defender of this new opinion; and to have had given unto him
therefore for a gift from the Pope, a Dove of silver: whereupon it comes,
that being painted, he is always set forth with the picture of a Dove at his
right shoulder: And namely, he turns the hymn, Pange lingua gloriosi, which
Fortunatus had framed about the year 600. upon the passion of our Savior, to
the honor of this feast. But because as says the Gloss of Decretals, In
Decret. de reliquils and ve nerat. Sanct. vbi Gloss. Clem. l. 3. Pomerius.
De reliquiis and veneratione sanctorum, that this constitution was not
received in every place; about the year 1311. that is to say, some 50. years
after, Clement the fifth ordained in a Council holden at Vienna, that it should
be observed of all: And about the year 1360. began the Processions and
Tabernacles at Pauie, the pattern whereof was recommended to all Christendom.
For in deed in that of Clements, there was not as yet any mention made of
bringing it forth in procession, and offering of it in the streets to worship;
for in it there are only these words; That this feast was ordained for the
preparing of every one to the better receiving of him, etc. In like manner,
there is every where mention made of two kinds. But in despite that
Berengarius, who had striuen against and beaten down transubstantiation, was
Deane of S. Maurice of Angiers: he was recommended unto this same City, that
he might in most singular and solemn sort celebrate this festival day: And
hence sprung the original of the solemnities of Angiers: more execrable,
cursed, and in derision of our Lord, then it was ever in any other place.
Since, Pope Martin the fifth, and Pope Eugenius the fourth, after the year
1400. redoubled the pardons again: so far forth, as that those of the day of
the Octaues, calculated and reckned by Pomerius, do amount to forty four
thousand days of true pardon: and that as well on his part and behalf that
looks on, as on his behalf that communicates. And this is the goodly
divinity of Popes upon the holy Supper of our Lord. The pomp of Rome. L. 3.
Ceremon. eccles. Roman.


Let us add hereunto the pomp of Rome; for it is yet come in of a later time,
and after the other: In the midst of the same a little before the Pope, there
is led a white ambling gelding, which bears the pretended Sacrament, shut
up close and fast in a box. This ambling gelding has a little bell of a very
good sound hanging at his neck: a sumpter-cloth is spread over it, Lib.
Pontifica lis. sect. 1. 2, 5. 12. l. 1. and 3. de offic. sacrist.
wrought with the Popes arms; twelve lusty cutters or ruffians walking
before, etc. Sometimes also if the Pope go into the fields, they send it with
train and baggage. And he that is desirous to know yet further, let him read
the Pontifical books, wherein they entreat of Processions through the
City, of the Pope, or of the Emperor his coronation. But this is a thing for
us to mark and prove, namely, what agreement there is betwixt these inventions
and devises of Popes, and the institution of our Lord: Take, eat, do this in
remembrance of me, etc. As also what means there are for them to excuse this
idolatry, There can no excuse be made for their idolatry. Sum. Angel.
Euchar. c, 26.
according to their own Maxims.

They hold that, If the Priest have not had an intent and purpose actual, as
some say: habitual, as others, to consecrate; that then he does not
consecrate. That likewise if he had not any further purpose then to consecrate
half a bread; that then the other half is common bread. Those then that
worship, if he have not had any purpose to consecrate, what do they worship,
but the creature? And with what faith, seeing when as he has had a purpose,
they are not able to sound the truth and find it out? Thom. Salisburiens. de
art. predican. c. 25.
Wherefore it will behoue men to have recourse to Thomas Salisburiensis his
consideration; as, To worship upon condition, that every duty and thing
required to the action, be well and truly done? etc. They hold also, That the
intent of him that consecrateth is not sufficient, if his also that did
institute the same do not concur: Bonau. in Copend. sacr. theol. l. 6. rub.
11.
that is to say, that the Priest have an intent (says Bonauenture,) if he
work not according to the institution of Christ. To worship then in a private
Mass, is it not idolatry, seeing that Hugo of S. Victor, Gabriel Biell, and
Gerardus Lorichius, their great Masters of transubstantiation do openly hold
and maintain, That the private Mass wherein there is not made any remembrance
or public Communion, is against the institution of Christ? And further seeing
there is such an infinite number of cases, and such as are very ordinary,
Thom. p. 3, q, 13. Ioh. de Burgo. Pupilla. c. 3. Gerson. contr. Florent. Extr.
de celeb. Miss.
and notwithstanding not perceived of those that are present, wherein the
priest does not consecrate at all; As, If he forget to put wine into the
cup: if the bread be made of any other then wheat flower: if there be more
water then wine, if the wine be eager and sharp; if of seven leaves more or
less, he did think but of six: if he have omitted but one word. Of those
words say I once again, whereupon they are not agreed amongst themselves,
etc. who shall assure their faith that are present thereat, of the
consecration; and by consequent, warrant their consciences against idolatry?
How that many notable personages of this time have been ashamed of the
doctrine. Pic. Mirand. in Thesi^. secund. Thom. and Scot Idem in Apo in disput.
de Euch.


Now it is very certain, that many in these our days and times have been
ashamed of this doctrine. Johannes Picus Count of Mirandula, durst dispute
publicly at Rome against transubstantiation. And his Theses are; That the true
body of Christ is locally in heaven, and sacramentallie at the Altar: That
these words also, Hoc est corpus meum, do not consecrate, if the former be
not expressed, that is, Pridie quam pateretur, etc. That is to say, that the
institution lies not in certain words, but in the institution of Christ:
That the four words, tenentur, materialiter, non significatiue. Likewise he
delivers a particular manner of eating the flesh, and drinking the blood of
Christ in the holy Supper: Sine conuersione panis in corpus Christi, vel
paneitatis adnihilatione: without changing of the bread into the body, and
the reducing of the bread into nothing: that is (says he) in as much as God
can quamcunque creaturam suppositare, change or unite himself hypostatically
unto any creature whatsoever, etc. In which mean time (says he) The bread
should continue bread, and the body should be with the bread, etc. And yet
notwithstanding this his Chymera and monstrous brood, he was not published an
heretic: Card. Caiet. t. 2. tr. 2, c. 3. and 5
because that every one was as yet admitted and suffered to bring his
determination and conclusion concerning the same. The Cardinal Caietan
clearly and plainly: It is a most manifest and notorious untruth, that the
body of Christ may be taken corporally: but in deed Divines teach, that he
is taken or received spiritually, and yet not by taking or receiving, but by
believing. Fisher Bishop of Rochester, otherwise called Roffensis, writing
against Luther: Ioh. Fisher. cont. Captiuit. Babilonie.
Hitherto (says he) S. Matthew speaks, who alone has spoken of the new
Testament: Neither has he therein any one word, by which it may be proved,
that in our Mass there is wrought a true presence of the flesh and blood of
Christ. Nay, says he a little after, It cannot be proved by any part in all
the Scripture. The Cardinal Contaron, in the Colloque of Ratisbone, in the
year 1541. upon this, that the place of Pope Gelasius was alleged unto him:
That the nature and substance of bread and wine continue in the Sacrament, was
not able to answer any thing to the contrary. In the Colloque of Poissi in
this Realm, holden in the year 1561. betwixt the Bishops and the Doctors of
the Church of Rome, and the Ministers of the reformed Churches, it was agreed
upon in these words: We confess that Jesus Christ in his holy supper, does
set before, give, and exhibit unto us verily and truly, the substance of his
body and blood, by the operation of his holy spirit: and that we receive and
eat Sacramentally, spiritually, and by faith, that very body which aied for
us: to be bone of his bones, and flesh of his flesh, to the end we may be
quickened, and apprehend all that which shall be requisite for our salvation.
And for as much as faith resting it self upon the word of God, effects and
makes present the things that are promised; and that by this faith, truly and
in deed we take the true and natural body and blood of Jesus Christ, by the
power of the holy Ghost: In this respect we confess the presence of the body
and blood of the same Jesus Christ in the holy supper. But the University of
Sorbone at the Cardinal of Tournon his provoking and pricking of them forward,
did disclaim and disauow such as did speak for them; (only to the end that
they might not give this advantage, namely, to have failed by any manner of
means:) Notwithstanding that those which had been chosen for the conference,
and which had given their consent to undertake this encounter, were the most
famous and notable men of the Clergy; as Charles, Cardinal of Lorraine:
Cass. in co nsult.
the Bishops of Valence and Sees, and the Doctors, Salignac, Bouteiller, and
Despense. Cassander in his consultation to the Emperor Maximilian the second,
upon the controversies of this time, acknowledges: That Transubstantiation
both in name and effect, is new, and that it had been better to have held the
ancient terms of the fathers: And that also the abuses therein were come to
that head, as that they were very near unto Idolatry. And in other of his
writings, he delivers his mind to the like effect. Index expurg. p, 36, 37.
38.
It is very true that the fathers of Trent did appoint, that all such should
be raced out and defaced, as did displease them. To be short, the Popes
Legates, from the time of Luther his first protestations, being sent at sundry
times into Almainie; Campegius, Contaren and Caietan, did make open profession
of their dislike of this doctrine, both to the Emperor and to the Princes, as
also in their conferences, saying: That things were miscarried both in this
Article and in many others. Only, the Council of Trent, that is to say, the
Pope in that Council, to make quick dispatch, and to the end that there
might not be any thing found, that stood in need to be reformed, would not have
it, that there was any thing therein amiss: doing herein, as in all other things
clean contrary to Saint Peter, (who knowing, acknowledged his fault:) and
showing himself most evidently thereby to be the Son of perdition, as one
that in the bravery of his mind would himself become a reprobate, and draw
all the world after him unto destruction: knowing it in the eminent and high
place, wherein he is, The Doctors of this time do not agree amongst themselves.
Bellarm. l. 1, de sacr. c. 18. and l. 1, de Euchar. c. 10, and 11. Turrian.
sibi ipsi contrar. 1, c, 22. tract
but not acknowledging it.

What then? From the time of the holding of this Council, have they agreed
together and have been of one judgment? The Jesuits, the stighlers of this
doctrine; yea amongst themselves? This is the only thing, which remains for
us now to look unto. They stand exceedingly upon these words: Hoc est corpus
meum: and yet they are not agreed either amongst themselves, nor every man in
himself. Bellarmine in one place, calls them, Principtum productinum, the
producing principle: Namely, the body of Christ, of bread. And in an other
place he will not that Hoc, should signify the bread, but the body of Christ,
by an identical proposition, by a fond and foolish consequent. But how can this
thing be, if he be not hatched, but by the virtue of these words? And not as he
says, by the beginning, but by the end of them? Again; Hoc est, Bellarme. l.
1 de Euch. c. 11.
is a word operative: It follows then, that Hoe est, is as much as to say,
hoc fiat, this is, that is to say, This may be made my body: And yet for all
this they will not grant that it is any figurative speech, neither yet will
they, that Est does signify, fiat, but Est simply. Who sees not then, that
it must be a simple Enunciatiue: and not a practicke, as they speak, or
operative any longer? Again, who says, that Hoc does signify the bread or
the Cup: Scarg. l. 1. c. 5. pro sacrat. Euchar, Veget. de Miss. f. 13. these.
23. and fol. 7, these. 11. Bellarm, l, 3 Euchar. c, 18 Veg. de re ali praesent.
these. 133. Scarg. art. 7. Turr. tr. 1. c, 22 Bellarm. l. 3. de Euch, c, 15, and
l. 1, c. 2, and l, 3. c, 20. and l, 3, c. 6. Turr, tr, i. c. 18.
and who on the contrary says, that it signifies that which is secret and
hidden under the forms thereof. What difference is here betwixt the form and
the body, the substance and the accidents? Again, some say that the body of
Christ is made of the bread, and his blood of the wine, as of his matter:
others deny it. And Bellarmine does affirm and deny both together. Again,
sometimes urged out of Tertullian and Saint Augustine, they acknowledge that
there is a figure, and sometimes they do wholly and flatly deny it, etc. And
they speak as uncertainly of the change and transmutation. Sometimes
Bellarmine says that the substance of bread is turned into whole Christ, body
and soul, God and man: sometimes into the body only, etc. And sometimes that
he is there hypostatically or personally, and as he speaks with his
personalitie, that he may not fall into Rupertus Tuitiensis his error:
sometimes that he is not. And there are that say, that the substance of bread
is turned into the truth of the body: and others, into the power and virtue of
the same only. Besides others, which in diverse places, affirm sometimes the
one, sometimes the other. Now what becomes of this body afterward? Their
answers herein, have no less uncertainty and ambiguitie; For one says,
after that the kinds be altered and corrupted, it withdraws it self: Nay,
says an other, it still continues and abides there, Idem tr. 1, c, 19 Veg
assert. 205 Bell^rm. l, 3, de Euchar. c. 10 and 24. and l. 1 c. 14 Veg. de
re^l. Praesent. c. 58 Turr. tr. 1 c, 11 and 19 Scarg art 12 pro sacratiss
Euchar. c 6. etc Cont. Vel. Vega de Miss. fol. 11 these, 19. and 20. Idem de
real praesent these. 84 Scarg. in art. 11. Turr. tr. 1. c. 7 tr. 2. c. 11. and 8
Stel. Clericor.
for an incorruptible seed of the resurrection, and that if not in substance,
yet in power and effectual operation. Let us reason thus then: If the
efficacy and powerfulness be sufficient for the seed of the resurrection and
incorruption: Wherefore the body in our body? And wherefore do we admit this
absurdity, of having so many bodies within our bodies, a thing contrary to
reason, nature, and all Divinity? An absurdity, wherein as yet they infold
and wrap themselves. For if the glorified body, be supernaturally every where:
wherefore say they that he comes down upon the Altar, and why do they say,
that he departs and goes his way, in respect of his body? If he come down,
if he go up, why do they say, that he is not circumscript and tied to place,
and that he is corporally every where? Again, sometimes they say: We set our
teeth in the flesh of our Lord, we devour and feed upon him with our teeth,
etc. We chew him, we break him, etc. And sometimes they are angry, that one
should object it against them as their reproach: they vex themselves, they
deny it. To be short, (for we should never have done, if we should go about
to gather together all their contradictions, and this shall suffice for a
taste,) when shame seaseth upon them, they are offended, that a man should lay
it to their charge that they have said: That the Priests are creators of their
Creator, etc. And by and by, they come again to their mutual byace, and do
freely utter it: That the Eucharist is no creature: That it is the Creator
himself: That it is an Hypostaticall grace: That it deserves to be adored
and prayed unto, etc. And yet the same nevertheless (say they) that depends
upon the intent and purpose of him that consecrateth.

Now we have finished the whole history of the doctrine of Transubstantiation
taught in the Church of Rome: The comparing of the holy supper and the Mass
together.
But how far is it off from the ancient simplicity of the Christian Church:
and how far from the institution made by our Lord, of the holy supper? The
Sum whereof is thus: That in the holy supper we are seriously admonished of
our bond and obligation unto our Lord; and of our duty toward our neighbor:
likewise nourished and strengthened in our conjunction with Christ our head;
whereupon depends our true life, which approves and makes it self
manifestly known, (as the soul does it self by his motions) by our zeal
toward God, and our behavior toward our neighbors. Therein we call to mind
our obligation, when we remember according to his commandment, the death and
Passion of our Lord: That we were dead in our sins, dead verily and
eternally; seeing it was requisite and necessary, that the eternal Son of
God should expose and give himself to death, even to the death of the Cross,
to redeem and set us free from that death: therefore eternal death. And
thence is that action of praise and thanksgiving that follows, solemnly
observed and performed in this action, and perpetual in our souls, if we be
truly faithful: For he that willingly belieueth this great and unspeakable
benefit, how can he possibly forget it? How can it possibly be, but that he
should occupy and as it were power forth himself in a continual exercising
of praise and thanksgiving? Seeing I say, he sins every moment, he cannot
be without matter to humble himself every moment, and to have his eye both
upon death and also upon hell; and accordingly again he has matter every
moment to raise up him self again in hope, by the remembrance of this
eternal Sacrifice, upon the mention that is made, namely in this Sacrament:
How that the Son of God has given his body for him, has been broken with
cares and griefs; and how that his blood was shed for the remission of his
sins. And this is the cause why this Sacrament is called, both a remembrance
and an Eucharist, or action of thanksgiving: For of the remembrance of this
benefit, of this gift of salvation (and by this unspeakable means) there
follows in every Christan heart, a serious and hearty Eucharist or
thanksgiving. But this effect by name, is wanting in the Papists their Mass:
For this remembrance is not practiced in it at all: the death of the Lord is
not showed forth there at all unto the people: This is, in steed of whatsoever
it should be, a heap of words, and a variety of gestures, neither the one
nor the other understood. We are taught likewise in the holy Supper, our
duties toward our neighbors: for we are not only created of one and the same
Mass; but regenerate and begotten again, but redeemed and bought with one
price, even blood; but made members of the same body: and quickened by one and
the same spirit, but living, moving, and feeling, from one and the same head:
One with him, through the grace of his good pleasure and will: One therefore
amongst our selves, both by his commandment, and by natural duty. And if
the head, the eternal Son of God, have given his life for us, to make us I
say, his members: what do there members owe, yea what do they not owe one to
an other? Seeing also, that this head most lively feeling all that which these
members do or suffer, do not disdain to declare and manifest unto us: that
what is done or denied unto the least, is done or denied unto himself, and
from him has either reward or punishment? And this is the cause why the
Fathers have called it (...), an assembly, a Communion: And this second fruit
and effect is also wanting in the Mass; where there is no Communion betwixt
the members, nor any signification of this conjunction of Christ with us, of
our selves together, all men using of so many corns to make but one Loaf and
one wine; and al of us sucking life out of the same death: nourishment from the
same meat, of the flesh and blood of our Lord: But particularly, in respect
of our selves, we being members of Christ, and quickened by Christ, are there
nourished and strengthened both in Christ and of Christ. And it is not more
sure, that the Minister does give us the bread and wine, that we take them
with our hands, that we eat and drink them, that they are converted into our
substance, and become nourishment for our bodies, to maintain and strengthen
this life, then it ought to be sure and certain to every Christian, that our
Lord in the holy Supper celebrated according to his institution, does give
unto us at the same instant, his flesh and blood: That we take them by faith,
that we eat and drink them, that they are turned into the life and substance
of our souls, becoming the food of the same, to maintain and strengthen us
unto eternal life. Yea, and which more is, that by the predominant and
ouer-ruling power that they have, they turn our souls both to Christ, and
into Christ, uniting them unto him, and making them one with him: and our
bodies, consequently and proportionablie after the manner of our souls, do
make us bones of his bones, flesh of his flesh, members of that head, governed
by his spirit: and one with him; to raise again one day our bodies and souls:
to be glorified and reign with him. And this fruit also of the holy Supper is
lacking in the Mass of the Church of Rome, wherein there is not any thing at
all representing this strait and near conjunction with Christ, or that true
eating, by the which it is cherished and maintained, wherein such as are
present, do neither eat nor drink corporally nor spiritually, wherein they
become all together idle gasers and starers upon the Priest, which eats and
drinks, and upon a pretended mystery both deaf and dumb: and wherein, in a
word, there is not any one action, which stirs up their consciences, nor any
manner of instruction to help forward and ad unto their knowledge.

These are the principal ends, for which our Lord instituted his holy Supper,
and whereof we have been altogether destitute under the Church of Rome, which
in steed of this sacred meat, which we were wont to eat at our Fathers table,
has fed us with husks, apish toys and mummeries: intertaining in stead of
all that which was the old fashion of Rome, the poor people, with vain pompes
and ceremonies; and therefore famished with the want of the grace of God. From
that far country, whether our humane fancies had transported and led us, we
are put in mind of our Fathers table, and become resolved to return again
home unto him; from these abuses and deceits, so far differing from his
institution, to his truth; and from our sins to his grace, and that by his
grace. Father (have we said) We have sinned against heaven, and against thee:
we are not worthy any more to be called thy children. And he has according
to the same, even his wonted mercy, put a ring upon our finger, clothed us
with Christ, and caused us to eat his flesh and his blood. They were dead
(has he said) but they are returned to life: they were lost, and they are
found again, etc. To God be praise and glory for ever, by the same his Son
Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen. Let us now run over and briefly rehearse
again, all that which we have handled and entreated of in this whole work.

In the first Book we have handled the rearing and raising up of the Mass, A
brief rehearsal of the whole work.
from time to time, and from parcel to parcel: we have showed that the old
service did consist of a public confession of sins, in the reading of the
old and new Testament, and that of whole books of the same, in singing of
Psalms by the whole Congregation, in a Sermon unto the people, which was made
by the Bishop or Pastor, expounding either some place, that had been read, or
some such other as he judged fit for the edifying of the Church: in offerings,
which were offered by the people for the poor and other uses of the same: in a
general prayer, for all the necessities of the Church and state: in the
institution of the holy Supper, taken out of the Gospel, or the Apostle: in a
witnessing of the sincere love of the faithful, one toward an other, before
they should draw near unto the holy Table: and in a denunciation unto such as
were not of this number, to the wishing of them to abstain: in the
distribution of the holy Supper, unto all the people, under both kinds: during
the time of which action, they ceased not to sing Psalms, or to read the
Scriptures: and finally in a solemn thanksgiving for the benefit received, as
well in the death and Passion of our Lord, as in the Communion of his body and
blood in the holy supper. Which done, the Bishop or Pastor sent the people away
with a holy blessing. And it is not to be forgotten, as we have seen, that all
this was done in an understood and known tongue. As for prayers for the dead,
praying unto Saints, the Canon of the pretended sacrifice, and all the parts
whereof it is framed, we have seen them brought in many ages after, and that
at several times, and great distaunces betwixt one and an other, and still
impairing and growing worse from time to time. Retaining therefore, for our
service, that which we well perceive to be truly ancient, and rejecting that
which is notoriously new: what shall such service be, to speak according to a
good conscience, but the same, that is now used in the reformed Churches?

In the second Book, we have compared the circumstances of the old service,
and those of the Mass: First, we have found the Church under persecution:
without public places, to call upon the name of God in. Afterward we did see
Churches built for the same, but without any manner of Images, with tables (let
us call them if you will Altars) for the communicating of the holy supper: but
without Lamps, burning of Incense, Consecrations, Dedications, etc. We have
observed the lawful election and calling of the Bishops unto the holy
Ministry, by taking due examination of their lives and doctrine; administering
the word of God and the holy Sacraments in the vulgar tongue, heard and
understood of every one, wearing such apparel as was modest, but ordinary,
not tied unto a single life, but rather bound unto an exemplarie chastity: not
called Sacrificers, except in that they sacrificed the Gospel: and to say no
more, without annoynting, or any other character or mark of the beast. All,
whatsoever is more, was brought in a long time after, and by degrees; sometimes
by a foolish imitation of some point of Iudaisme; and sometime by the
importunate custom of Paganism; as namely, by Images, Altars, Lamps, burning
of Incense, Unctions, Consecrations, Dedications, whether it be of living
persons, or things that are dead, vows and characters; Barbarism in service,
and such like things, etc. Cutting off them, and casting away this new device,
and holding our selves to the old, in all these circumstances, of places,
times, persons, and all the rest of that sort, shall we not see that which the
reformed Churches have alleged: namely, the service of God purged from
Idolatry, superstition, vanity, and so many foolish ceremonies, and the
Clergy also, from all their pomp whether Jewish or Heathnish, wherewith they
bewitch the silly vulgar sort? Yea that more is, from that loathsome impuritie
of life, which makes them offensive, yea which makes them to stincke
throughout the whole world; and lastly the people from being holden and kept
under Barbarism, sottishness and gross ignorance, namely, of their own
salvation, and that which is only necessary for them.

In the third and fourth, we have entreated of the ancient doctrine of the
holy Supper, comparing it with that of the Romish Mass. And first, as
concerning the Sacrifice; it is manifestly showed, that the Church did never
either know or acknowledge any more then one only propitiatory Sacrifice: even
Christ nailed upon the Cross for our sins, the remembrance whereof is
commanded in the holy Supper: for the which also, there are solemn actions of
praise and thankfulness performed in the same: That these Masses or
Sacrifices, whether they be for the quick or the dead, were not known amongst
the ancient writers, no nor yet Purgatory it self, where upon they are
founded: No more were the Sacrifices in the honor and invocation of the Saints
deceased, as unto whom there was neither Adoration nor Invocation assigned:
whose merit also was never employed by the Fathers: either for ransom, or
remedy for sins, but that only one of the alone mediator, the Son of God
our Lord. And as concerning the Sacrament: that the ancient Church followed
therein the institution of the Lord, in the simplicity thereof: administered it
unto the faithful people, after the holy service, distributing unto them the
bread and wine, assured pledges and seals of the flesh and blood of Christ,
which they received at the same instant in a true faith, by the operation of
the holy Ghost, unto the nourishing of their souls, and their assurance of
resurrection unto eternal life: not imagining notwithstanding for all this,
that there was any change in the nature of the signs, but only in their
condition and use: And therefore it did not eleuate, worship, lock them up,
carry them in procession, or call them God, or Lord, etc. as they use to do
at this day, and yet there reigned therein both more fervent zeal, and clearer
knowledge. That all this on the contrary is very new, brought in not above
three days ago, Heri aut Nudiustertius, as the Scripture speaks, condemned
of it self by the only date of their instituting thereof, being in the times
of most gross and palpable ignorance, joined with less religiousnesse and
greater store of corruptions, then ever had haunted the Church of Rome before.
Let us then take away the propitiatory Sacrifice and Transubstantiation: and
what remains but the Sacrifice of thanksgiving? The Sacrifice of
remembrance, and the Eucharisticall sacrifice, which we acknowledge in the
holy Supper? As also that strait and near Communion which we have therein by
faith in our Lord, that we may be redeemed by his obedience, and live by his
righteousness, to be one with him: and by consequent, one with our brethren.

And thus every thing deducted and rebated: novelty renounced, and antiquity
embraced: we renounce and quite disclaim the Mass of the Romish Church, but
we most willingly and joyfully receive the Communion of the reformed Church.
For that which is more in substance, we may speak it with a good conscience:
either it is of the vanity of man, or of the perverseness of the devil. Might
it therefore please God, for his holy mercies sake, to open all our eyes to
know his ways, but principally to move our hearts, and to direct our feet to
walk therein, and therein to continue and go forward: that so we may escape
the penalty of the Lords sentence pronounced with his own mouth: If you were
blind (says he) you should have no sin: He that knows his Masters will and
does it not, shall be beaten with many stripes. And to God Almighty, the only
author and ordainer both of Sacrifices and Sacraments: To Jesus Christ our
Lord, our only Sacrificer and Sacrifice, our life and spiritual meat: and to
the holy Ghost, the true inspirer of this life, and distributor of this
nourishment, be honor, glory and Empire for ever. AMEN.

FINIS.
Faults escaped.
Page. Line. Faults in the Preface Corrections. 1. 14 then they 3. 1 provided
that it be although 3. 26 word wood 4. 26 will wills 4. 34 whatsoever which
also 6. 6 through the sight out of the sight 6. 24 not by number, not by
succession of Bishops not by succession not by number of Bishops 8. 35 son
perdition son of perdition 8. 38 insufficiency sufficiency 9. 39 Cyprian
Cyrill 30. 3 bolted bolstred 11. 36 they there 12. 25 profoundly plainly or
simply 14. 29 that what they have said of such what they would say of such 15.
39 of the Mass of the Mass is to be built? 17. 9 his principles her
principles 17. 11 his her 17. 30 fit sit 19. 5 we should wound the body of
Christ not being subject to pain we should make the body of Christ incapable
of grief of pain 19. 10 with less the^nothing in a moment 22. 5 familiarly
doctrinally 23. 21 typo typho 23. 36 an old man an old woman 24. 11 it serves
not any more either for seed, grain or grass it is not in the seed or but
peeping above the ground or in the blade 24. 33 that should have cosiselled you
to fly from the plague into your town, from the wolf into your sheepefold,
and from fire into your barn that should have told you of a plage in your
city, of a woolfe in your flock, and of a fire in your barn Faults in the
text of the book.
Page. Line. Faults. Corrections. 3. 22 changed and altered of righteousness
thirsty after righteousness 4. 34 Lord of Escales Lord Scaligers 5. 53
celebtated celebrated 6. 39 (...) (...) 6. 45 he served they served 7. 4 (...)
(...) 8. 8 breads loaves 9. 27 commended unto them commanded them 9.47 (51. l.
5 son sum 10.49. and 11. l. 20 (...) (...) 11. 22 not only received not
received 11. 22 aswoll as the substance and doctrine, but also grounded in
express and plain sort upon the word of God. although the substance and the
doctrine was not only received in the Church from the beginning and nativity
thereof, but expressly founded on the word of God, 12. 46 is are 13. 44 so much
as the Lords prayer any thing but the Lords prayer 14. 43 mystical divinity
mystical divinity, of Dionysius Areopagita 16. 11 written to Euaristus
written by Euaristus 16. 12 to by 19. 34 excepted one that unless it were that
21. 22 ad and 21. 23 Trire Treuers 21. 46 there was a place wherein they used
to speak of the preaching then was there place for a sermon which was commonly
taken out of them 22. 4 Prebats Prelates 22. 24 to certain signs of the cross
with certain signs of the cross 25. 11 they should ask counsel at those
whom they follow: wherefore if in the sacrifice which is they should ask the^,
whom they have followed; forasmuch as if in the sacrifice which is 26 2
Minister Priest 26. 54 (...) (...) 27. 16. and 31.36 Damascene Damasus 31. 22
of reading of lesson or the order of reading 31. 24 think not that it is not
to the think not that it is to the 31. 48 Homilia tractare, Homilia, tractare,
31. 48 Tractatus Sermo Tractatus, Sermo, 33. 46 (p. 82. l. 37 Sancta victoria
Sanclo Victore 34. 46. and 74. l. 27 (...). (...) 36. 9 whole lump whole Mass
37. 7 (...) (...) 39. 21 prices pieces 42. 33 was this man his shot was made
and framed by him 44. 5 in the time from the time 44. 30 vnde memores vnde and
memores 44. 35 per me pro me 44. 36 409 490 44. 50 that Council a Council 47.
41 Caspergillum Aspergillum 49. 16 deriuing bringing back 51. 9 (...) (...) 52.
1 in the mean in the mean time 54. 9 of gesture and matter of manners and
doctrine 54. 16 (...) (...) 54. 41 thou son of God thou only son of God 55. 3
(...) (...) 55. 53 Archbyshopricke Popedom 60. 17 as yet the Mass is called
as it is yet in the Missall or Masse-booke 63. 1 Pastors Priests 63. 2 Priests
sacrificing Priests 63. 30 officij, etc. officij comburere, etc 64. 49 of
diverse to diverse 65. 1 Gregory the 3. comes after and walks as crookedly
as the crab Gregory the 2. Gregory the 3. follows the ways and treads in
the steps of Gregory the 2. 65. 23 whereupon may whereupon it may 66. 3
reproving the ways of Pope Gregory the 7 following the steps of Pope
Gregory the 7. 67. 55 as well as the Catholic Romish although Catholic and
Romish 69. 10 witness to all witness all 69. 38 as the Moon when she is past
the chage Dele. 71. 30 by hy his by his 74. 28 can it by heart could say it by
heart 76. 6 diposed disposed 76. 7 though they might envy me for the same
though it be but a trouble unto me 76. 27 Elder Priest 76. 43 vu
communicationis ius communicationis 78. 14 there is no mention made of the
communion of the body there is no mention made but of the communion of the
body 79. 52 applied unto the parties receiving, and not to the parties
distributing applied rather unto the parties receiving then unto the parties
distributing 80. 11 what is it (says he) that you have not yet learned of the
blood of the lamb, in hearing of it as also in drinking of it: which blood
That this is nothing but the blood of the lamb, you have not only now learned
it by hearing it so called, but by drinking also: and this very blood 80. 34
see Jesus saw Jesus 81. 34 where we are when we are 83. 34 480. or 560. ounces
60. or 70. ounces 83. 49 Transubstantiotion Transubstantiation 83. 52
ouermeasures Corollaries 84. 25 in stead of the cutting of the kind in stead of
the cup which was the kind taken from them 84. 40 though it may seem to
receive but one kind though it be sufficient to receive but one kind 85. 30
some certain years some hu^dreds of years 86. 35 way well may well 87. 32
Doctor of Traunces Exstaticall Doctor 88. 29 Was there There was 91. 3 that is
done that is due or fit to be granted 93. 53 Master or Pastor Chiefe-Pastour
95 8 thirst, tears, incarnation, etc. thirst, tears, etc. 96. 22 (...) (...)
96. 40 and that which is more although 96. 40 has very little authority may
very well 98. 8. and 28 Elders Priests 98. 49 accipiant, ne ex ijs accipiant,
but with this prouiso ne ex ijs, 99. 4 of ministry of being a Priest 100. 14
and 39 a Minister Priest 100. 54 (...) (...) 102. 1 that the infidel can
thence play the divine that the infidel or unbeliever ca^ divine or guess what
they are doing 102. 20 if he may lawfully be so called if a man may so say 103.
5 for them or him for him 104. 22 defends the exercise of religion forbids
the exercise of religion 106. 4 at such time as Christians fell to gratify and
temporise with Paganism at such time as the Christians came to have the upper
hand of the Pagans 106. 8 (...) (...) 106.46. and 107.4 was were 108. 19 have
has 109. 17 and 18 at the Lords table and at of the Lords table and of 109.
42 break did break 110. 24 Pastor Priest 114. 21 It is a folly to pray unto
images that do not know the gods It is a folly for him to pray to images that
knows not the gods 118. 12 God Gods 118. 24 or for Nicholas the Patriark of
Constantinople who was more then 700. years after deleautur haec verba 118. 51
Athanasius Epiphani^s 120. 37 in good earnest very faithfully 121. 6 his there
122. 30 concerning wherefore wherefore 126. 2 Zonera Zonaras 126. 14 which had
bin at the 6. general Council dela 127. 20 gardea^t to her soune gwardian to
her son Constantine 127. 24 maintained the abolishing of images maintained the
abolishing of images by the word of God 130. 48 I^^as of Orleance I^^as Bishop
of Orleance 138. 54 we must honor them we must honor them for themselves 139. 7
What will now become of Thomas his ordering of the controversy betwixt Scotus
and Bonaue^tura etc where is now the decisio^ of Thomas, Scot, or Bonauenture,
etc? 140. 12 do foresee that it is good, that they should have no other but
latin inscriptions have yet no other but Latin inscriptions 141. 19 lump
lamb 141. 42 Sylua Sylxa 142. 46 would never consent would never consent says
Aluarez 143. 18 in a small chest in a little basket 146. 54 are as as are 147.
32 Latin a Latinist or one that speaks Latin 147. 39 the Minister Priest
147. 46 Pastor Priest 148. 4 Pastor Priest 148. 21 prayers public prayers
150. 34 ci l. 153. 29 might be saved, might be saved, in any language 159. 39
the Pastors Priests 160. 11 Ministers Priests 161. 19. and 29 Elders Priests
162. 7 Maximilianus Maximianus 162. 40 the Bishops had not any more to do to
give orders then the Priest the Bishop had nothing but the collating of Orders
more then the Priest 163. 11 Cream de Chrismate 163. 34 apparel of a Minister
apparel of a Priestor of a Minister 163. 54 of silk velvet 164. 41 and 42
Elders Priests 165. 11 no prescription no prescription says the law 167. 11
woman wife 168. 54 judgment against judgment subtlety against subtlety 170.
12 (...) (...) 173. 37 wast want 174. 43 who had bin always married who was
never married himself 175. 54 general Council 1. general Council 176. 47
aforesaid foretold 177 12 Synecius Syricius 178. 20 great resistance great
resistance in France 178. 31 Elder Priest 183. 5 Bishop Archbishop 183. 10 the
whole service of the Church the whole service of the Church throughout
Christendom 184. 25 the second time afterward 188. 25 but we hear Salui^^ but
let us hear Saluia^ 191. 29 making the world believe that this Council was
held at two several times dissembling this that this Council was. 191. 44
Again the words Again that the words 198. 27 toward a ma^s neighbor toward
a ma^s neighbor Ecclesiast. 35 199. 29 Whereupon it is said Now if they reply
200. 10 Now we are of judgment now we agree with them in this 201. 37 this is
not the true this is the true 202. 11 as accessory and privy to that which went
before it as an accessarie to that which went before it 206. 9 they should be
forced they should be forced according to the law 207. 18 my priesthood
consists in fishing; in preaching the Gospel my Priesthood consists in
preaching that is in declaring and setting forth the Gospel 207. 51 of the
Gentiles of the Gentiles, and that during the time that they were Gentiles 208.
10 they are of judgment they do agree 211. 26 He could not find any sacrifice
but that of prayer grounded upon the doctrine of verity, neither any word
te^ding that way He could not find there but one only prayer founded upon the
doctrine of truth; of the Sacrifice not so much as one word 212. 9 it is so
far from apparatiues it is so far from being apparent 213. 22 as
consecrated as holy 213. 36 And of him And of this place 213. 49 and that of
the Lords is also an Altar: and so an Altar does infer a sacrifice and a
sacrifice the mass and so by a conseque^t the table of the Lord is also an
altar, now if there be an alter, there must needs be a sacrifice, and if a
sacrifice then the Mass 215. 51 (...) (...) 215 54 Evangelists, Prophets
Apostles, Evangelists, Prophets 216 49 be better by better 217 27 it should
fall out should it fall out 218 23 Sacrifictum cruentum aut incruentum
Sacrificij cruenti, aut incruenti 218 7 know it by name know the name thereof
218 46 Sacrament Sacrifice 219 33 and taken for granted and learned 220 8 in
the presence of his in the presence of his father 224. 44. and 26. l. 4 Psalm
50. Psalm 49 226 30 And that one For that one 227 48 the penance of sinners
the penitencie or repentance 228 27 Take eat, and sacrifice, offer unto God
take cate, and not sacrifice or offer up unto God 229 45 of Memen^^ of their
Memento 230 19 to their pretended sacrifice to the host 232 22 setting before
us ingendring in us 232 23 monuments thereof motions 132 31 Brutis bruits 232
45 sacrifiees sacrifices 233 14 there is added another heap of more then good
measure there followed these Corollaries or additaments 233 50 penance
repentance 234 10 by intreary, by entreaty only 234 27 is infinity is finite
234 28 Some say unto them a man may say unto him 234 41 Sacrament Sacrifice 245
3 will you go to inquire of the devils will you go to idols, will you run unto
devils 247 14 penance repentance 248 28 regnerating regenerating 248 39 my such
torment as is given to them though a man should rack their sayings never so
hardly 249 24 who would not admit of the first who would not admit of any but
the first 252 20 where either 252 34 and others also of others also 252 35
very watchful and well advised, that the devil do not seduce and deceive us
to be friends and wish well to the devil lest he might seduce and decei^e us
253 19 for ever nunquam never 253 39 to be watchful and watie of him to be
friends and at one with him 255 23 that cannot make their market they cannot
help themselves 256 36 (...) (...) 258 46 unto every one of every one 259 18
that fire, that did sit that fire, to wit the holy ghost that did sit 259 28
his life for a pray his life for a pray says the Prophet 261 51 or by which of
the old writers do they approve their own, these men are they whom I ask,
which make such account of the fathers, which think them all to be on their
side. So that it will suffice us only to deny their interpretation by which
of the ancient writers will they prove their Purgatory, I mean they which make
so great account of the fathers, and think they have them al on their side^ If
they cannot allege so much as one it will suffice us only to de^ie their
interpretation 162 22 the devils say they do not worship the devils, say they,
did not worship him 263 19 (...) (...) 263 20 or here for hell 264 53 what time
must they endure in the burning and flaming fire of this Purgatory what
blessedness or happiness is there to be found amidst the burning and flaming
fire of this Purgatory 265 9 we are able to say we are able to say with S.
Paul 266 32 his sins her sins 268 3 he has not he that has not 268 7
shall be come shall come 269 18 (...) (...) 269 49 the law all the law 269 37 is
sound there is found there 269 29 (...) (...) 274 26 (...) (...) 276 34 grudged
grieved 280 1 unbaptized before Baptism 280 10 as he gave it that he gave it
280 54 for then for them 281 29 do never fail of their fruit do never fail of
their fruit at what time so ever they be made 281 33 the Minister the Minister
or high Priest or Bishop 283 10 prayers which are made for the good, are
thakesgiuings for the wicked prayers which are made for the good are
thankesgiuings; for the wicked 282 6 (...) (...) 282 18 (...) (...) 287 15 to
which he reserved the number of feasts to (where he goes a bout to restrain
the number of feasts) to 289 24 even against their wills to the devotions of
their order after them with emulation unto the devotion of their order 293 51
unity of the ancient Church custom of the 295 28 becoming a humble ^uter for
the sense and feeling of his sin and misery suing unto thee as often as he
shall feel or find within himself the sense of any eui^ or grief whatsoever
296 27 toward to his people toward his people 299 37 or us to us 300 48 ^enio
viuo 300 44 (...) (...) 301 33 Bishop Archbishop 301 48 found it founded it 303
41 many nations all nations 308 14 for similitie sake for Ciuilities sake or in
a civil manner 311 30 it is meet is it meet 312 1 to have friends in the Court
to have friends in the Court when a ma has any suit unto the king 314 11
because the word dwells in him because the word of God dwells in him 315 40
Gorgia Gorgonia 316 26 at Angelos nominare atque A^gelos nominare 316 44
colebant colunt 318 48 is not to be denied is not to deny 319 23 we do not
adore or worship them we do not adore or worship them, only we honor them 321
23 to hot and distempered choler (a man for that cause certainly unworthy to
be admitted into any disputation concerning religion) to hot and distempered
cholle^ (which is unworthy to have any place in disputation of Religion 322 1
but both 325 18 praying always praying also 327 18 named Madaurensis named
Maximus Madaurersis 327 37 neither they neither this 329 39 supporting of the
same supporting of the contrary opinion 330 6 iudicant indicant 331 19 (...)
(...) 336 19 length greatness 341 11 by the light in the light 341 28 And
Cassander In Cassander 341 44 no not for himself but for himself 342.47.
346.49 By a man By one man 344 11 repaireth his work he repaireth his work 348
25 in as much as it is not so much a fire, which being blown up, breeds to
such a disease, as it is not able to cure us of again, as a heap of dead
ashes in as much as it is not a fire which needs only kindling, or a disease
that wants only remedy: but it is indeed as a heap of dead ashes; 349 43
thee hereunto thereunto 350 40 But it is not, it may be so bad as men report it
to be But it is not (it may be) so bad as men report it to be 351 2 a malice
malice 354 23 any righteousness in us any petty kind of righteousness in us
356 34 the the gift the gift 360 49 name the work it gives the denomination
unto this work 362 20 But will But well, 366 4 but for the love of himself:
Nay, to loose but for the love of him and our selves: nay, to loose 367 1 of
his works; To the of his works, the Greek text reads it plainly according
to his works; To the 367 52 let not a man let no man 368 2 this is that which
the Council of Orange does hold upon this question This is that which the
Council of Orange says, which was held about this question 369 38 sparingly
circumspectly and wisely 370 10 Grant unto us to be Grant unto us to merit
to be 370 52 he retributeth them He retributeth then 372 5 Not works Not by
works 372 21 but a word of the pride But in a word of the pride 372 31 (...)
(...) 374 41 Essees Esseans Jews 375 33 meanly learned reasonably well learned
376 26 I find not my self greatly guilty I find not my self guilty 376
33.34 his her 377 2 As faith As for faith in Christ 380 36 there shall not
remain any more straightness, or anguish thorough my misery for me It shall
be never a whit the straicter for me 381 1 Honorius of Auston Honorius
Augustiu^ me^tis 382 38 reproving the ways treading in the same steps 384 36
will be ours wills to be ours 385 38 Thomas Sage Thomas say 385 53 is
infinite, and could not is infinite, and therefore cannot be satisfied, but by
an infinite punishment, which could not 386 8 sath says 388 16 Des condigno de
condigno 388 19 That in things, that in things 390 6 hmuour humor 391 11 of
the son the son 397 36 and was to come which was to come 397 36 and in
their large and wide reach, rather the^ in any their greatness and in extension
rather then in intention 400 30 That which is brought in as said by S. Gregory
may we also say together with him Which thing caused S. Gregory to say; and us
with him 401 1 Minister Priest 401 34 in it in him 407 1 the brethren our
brethren 409 17 transubstantiatur transubstantietur 411 17 whereas on the
contrary, it should prove, etc Notwithstanding all this, is it not clear, that
if their opinion take place, that unbelievers and hypocrites do receive the
body of Christ, that Christ must needs reign in them corporally? That such as
are dead, etc 412 45 in Baptising in Baptism 412 47 cha^ging of the water
changing into water 414 2 denying the truth abating somewhat from the truth 414
18 For the son of God properly does quicke^ us in that he is eternal, but in
that he has made himself mortal For the son of God to speak properly,
does not quicken us, in that, etc 415 23 did not a little ground themselves
might very well have grounded themselves 416 20 always with us always with
us present 416 32 whereas now he is in heaven, he cease not to fill the earth
with his power whereas now he is in heaven in body, he cease not, etc. 417 4
not any more to divide and separate with Nestorius, but with Eutyches to
confou^d and couple together the two natures not any more to divide and
separate with Eutyches, but with Nestorius to confou^d etc 417 29 if it were
within the reach of quantity if it were made quantity 418 7 the doors made
the doors made fast 419 23 this should be an unableness, and want of power
this should be an impotencie and not an omnipotency 422 10 so began they less
and less to admit so would they not any longer admit 422 47 the hearing they
hearing 423 41 if you eat not, etc if you eat not, etc. If thou take this
according to the letter, this letter will kill thee, etc. But 424 37. and 42
counterfeits and resemblances symboles and signs 426 1 receiving the vocation
of God receiving the vocation power or invocation of God 428 23 uniting of the
sign and thing uniting of the sign with the thing 428 28 the heavenly with
the earthly heavenly bread with the earthly 429 28 Ministers Priests 431 6 So
says he If says he 431 8 cibum Domini cibum Dominicum 431 30 faithful only
faithful only; and not to the Sacramental eating, which is common betwixt
them and infidels. And this, etc 433 2 as mere bread as mere bread or as bare
wine 433 19 power of his divinity power by his divinity 434 45 that he prayed
if he had prayed 437 20 after the same manner that Christ is given unto us after
the same manner that Christ gives them unto us 439 50 Thou can not look for
him any more at hand, for he is in heaven, look for him by faith Thou can
not touch or reach him any more with thy hand, touch him or reach him unto
thee by the hand of faith 440 19 That the virgin is not unhappy That the
virgin is not happy 442 1 partakers of the nature of partakers of the humane
nature of 443 23 for the rest will carry the question away for the rest is of
no great consequence 443 26 thou take the bread of the Lord thou take the
bread the Lord 443 39 others Caesarius, and the later writers, some one, some
another others Caesarius a later writer then either of them both 443 42 This
sacrifice must be indeed by faith This sacrifice must be esteemed and measured
by faith 444 39 The fathers of the old Testament knew it not how that they that
should receive the invisible bread, should also spiritually eat the flesh of
Christ, etc the fathers of the old Testament knew it not; and that those which
received the visible bread should spiritually eat the flesh of our Lord, etc
446 1 With whom all this does well agree, how soever it does no whit agree with
the power and efficacy of the, etc How does all this agree or rather not
disagree with the power and efficacy, etc 446 27 that there is any earthly
thing that here is, etc 448 16 Chap. vj Chap. vij 453 39 That all do take in
order Let all in order take 455 4 (...) says he and not (...) 455 40 S.
Augustine upon Beda S. Aug. as we read in Bid 456 51 if any man eat my flesh
if any man eat not my, etc 457 2 Ministers should have the Eucharist
consecrated Priests, etc 457 20 these blasphemous questions not as they are
barbares these no less blasphemous then barbarous questions 457 22 so soon as
the kind is stricken upon with the tooth so soon as the kind or pieces of
bread is touched of the teeth or received into the mouth 458 41 in the vulgar
tongue in the vulgar and known tongue understood of the people 462 21 whether
it be the thing or else the Sacrament of the thing whether it be in the the
thing or else in the, etc 466 13 Gratian and Lombard Friars Gratian and Lombard
brothers 470 3 in the year 8215 in the year 1215 470 20 by Dozeus by dozeins
474 19 John Duns says Scotus John Duns called Scotus 474 50 that there cannot
but a difficulty then there follows but one difficulty 475 18 in the Canon
of Lateran in the Counsel of Lateran 476 37 lapis hic honorabilis lapis hic
venerabilis 477 3 shroud corporal 477 23 country of Luke country of Liege
478 7 twelve lusty cutters or ruffia^s walking before twelve Sergeants, or
Bedels, or fellows with tip staves as it were walking before, 478 43 that the
institution that the consecration 479 49 yea amongst themselves at the least
amongst etc 480 34 and that he is corporally and that he is not corporally 480
42 mutual byace usual byace Marginall faults in the Preface.
Page. Faults. Corrections. 3 Orig. in Ier. Orig. Hom. 1. in Ierem. 4 Chrysostom. in
5. Mat. in S. Mat. 4 Hom. 33. 13 6 Cypr. de simpl. Pontif. Cypr. de simplic.
Praelat. 7 Amb. l. 1. de poenit. c. 9 c. 6 9 In Acta Hom. 32 33 11 Es. c. 1 c.
2 Marginall faults in the text of the book.
Page. Faults. Corrections. 4 Mark. 24 14 6 Acts. 23 13 13 Distich. Did. 17
Christians Jews 20 Ephesians. 18.19 Ephesians. 22 Walafr. 22 2 25 Sermon. Sermon. 6 26 e.
vasa c. vasa 33 De temp. De temp. 237 34 Amb. l. 5. ep. 8 l. 5. ep. 33 35 Iren.
l. 34 c. 32 39 Amb l. 4. and 6 l. 4. c. 5. and 6 42 Catech. Catech. 5 42 Retr.
l. 22 l. 2. c. 2 42 Aug. ep. 50 ep. 59 42 Aug. l. 20 Aug. l. 20. contra Faustum
79 Polyd. c. 21 c. 11 49 c. sui, etc c. fui. etc 49 Cyrill. 6 l. 6 50 art. 42 4
59 Greg. 71 17 63 Genesis 22. fol. 44 21. fol. 94 67 Greg. 3 33 70 gestu gestis 70
l. 7. c. 90 l. 7. c. 94 70 161 167 74 gerer gener 77 Amb. l. 2 l. 1 79 D. Can.
2 D. 2. Can. 2 81 Ser. 5 9 82 se Epis. vocal. Cenom. Euesque 85 l. 4. c. 51 c.
61 62 q. 12 q. 2 87 c. 23 c. 35 94 Is. 58.43 58.4 95 11.12.13 11.12.23 95 Act.
2.24 Act. 2.20 98 Q. con. Q. 7. con. 99 Apoc. Apoc. 2 103 13 13. 18 104 c. 42
c. 2 106 c. 49 26 109 11. 1. and 18 11. and. 8 110 1.10 T. 10 115 Ps. 65 95 115
c. 1 c. 2 122 l. 20 l. 10 126 1.14 T. 14 135 8 28 145 8.8 8.3 145 suck Luke 149
Marmiculus Marm. Siculus 150 c. 10 c. 20 154 and q and 9 155 ep. ad ep. 1. ad
157 Anomantas Anomanitas 161 1. Cor. 83 11 161 8 18 161 l. 4. l. 5. 162 D. 12 D
21 163 Strabo Strab. c. 25 169 d. l l. 1 170 vir vtr. 183 c. 146 c. 46 183 1.2
T. 2 184 Greg. 7 Greg. 3 185 Titanum Trianum 202 c. 146 c. 13 203 Veg. Verg.
207 c. de c. 22. de 209 Ps. 109 Ps. 95 213 Act. 1 2 222 At. 4 Orat. 4 225 c. 41
c. 1 225 l. 10 l. 1.10 232 Part. 13 3 233 c 4 c. 2. and 4 233 l. 1. c 2 l. 2.
c. 2 238 c. 49 c. 47 258 Ps. 118 Pf. 118. conc. 20 258 Ephesians. 4 Epes. 5 263 3.
p. q. 62 3. p. 52 263 de cor and great. c. 12 266 l. 4. c. l. 4. c. ^ 267 l.
sent. l. 4. sent. 267 tract. tract. 1 267 resp q. 10 resp. q. 60 268 c. 2, 8 c
28 270 in Hierem. in Hirerem. Hom. 13 272 l. c. 10.25 l. 10. c. 25 272 de fide
operibus de fide and operibus 273 Page 3.8 page 38. 281 Hom. 22 Hom. 21 282 l.
c. 9 l. 1 c. 9 284 Ps. 8.10 Es. 8.19 285 de anima. c. 5.7 c. 57 289 Dominic.
Dominic. a Soto in 4 Sent. d. 19. q. 3. art. 2. 301 Apoc. 1.8 Apoc, ^.8 305 de
cura pro mortuis gerenda de cura etc. c. 13 317 Haec. resp. haeres. 318 Hom. in
Mat. hom. 1. in Mat. 323 Ps. 95 Ps. 96 326 Paralip. Paralip. 32 327 de vera
relig. De vera relig. c. 55 330 c. 27. c. 28 333 Ps. 91 in Psalm. 91 341 Ps. 19
49 342 Conc. Arans. Conc. Arans. 2 342 Genesis 6.5 8.64 342 Romans 6.8 Romans 8.6 347
Sermon. 7^ 78 348 Col. 2.23. Col. 2.13 349 Luke 12.24 12 48 351 In John. 4.
tract. 41

FINIS.

