To the most Honorable Assembly of the Commons House of Parliament.
A Brief of the Petitioners Cause.
CHarles Brag sometimes Parson of the Church of Stalbridge of 27. pound 4.
shillings value in the Kings Books, did before the Stat. of 13. Eliz: (as the
Earl of Castle-hauen pretends,) Lease the Rectorie of Stalbridge aforesaid, to
Henry Audley for 61. years, which Lease was after the said Statute confirmed
by Geor. Lo. Audley the now Earl of Castle-hauens Father then Tenant in tail
of the Aduouson of the said Church, And confirmed also by the the L. Archbishop
of Cant. During the time the Bishop of Gloucester held the Bishopric of
Bristoll in Commend. within which Sea the Church of Stalbridge was.

The said Church of Stalbridge fell void by Brags institution and induction
into a second Benefice with Cure in An. 31. Eliz: and came to the King by Lapse,

Alan Bishop Clarke 7. IACOBI before his institution to the Church of
Stalbridge first accepted a presentation from (...) the now (...) of (...) and
became bound in bonds of 1500. pound to the said ((...) then both Patron and
Leasse as aforesaid of the said Church and Rectorie upon condition that he the
said Alan Bishop should resign the said Benefice of Stalbridge within six
Months after warning given. And that likewise the said Alan should not
question the said Lease so made and confirmed as aforesaid, but accept of 27.
l'. 5. s. per annum; the Benefice being worth 300. l'. per annum at the least.

Alan Bishop after his bonds so entered into finding the said presentation
defective was by the means and best furtherance of the said (...) and by the
mediation of Sir Francis (...) now Lo. (...) of (...) presented, admitted,
instituted and inducted to the said Church of Stalbridge by the late L.
Chancelors presentation under the broad Seal, Ratione lapsus, The Patent of
presentation containing in the body thereof these words, ( Rogantes etc.) and
in the foot thereof these words. Per Dominum Cancellarium Angliae, And for the
obteyning of the said presentation the said Alan Bishop made a counterfeit
Certificate, in his own hand writing, and thereby informed that the said
Church of Stalbridge was but 17. pound value in the Kings Books and in the
Lord Chancelors right and gift.

Afterward the said (...) and Alan falling out, the said (...) by a writing
under his hand and seal bearing date the 14. day of April in the 14 year of
his Maieiesties reign etc. Warnes the said Alan to resign according to the
Conditions of his bonds before specified, whereupon the said Alan gave way
under his hand and Seal to any faithful Minister that would accept of the
said Benefice, and acknowledged the same to be void, and so the said Simonie
and lapse came to light.

Then Caleb Morley in May next following upon his Majesty's own presentation
to the said Church of Stalbridge. Ratione lapsus seu aliquo alio quocunque
modo, was admitted, instituted, and inducted Parson thereof, His Patent of
presentation having in the body thereof these words ( Mandantes etc.) and in
the foot thereof these words, Per Breue de Priuato Sigillo. And afterward the
now Earl of Castle-hauens Father viz. George Lord Audley who confirmed the
said Lease as aforesaid dyed.

The Questions upon the whole Precedent matter are Two.
I. Whether Morley or Alan Bishop be lawful Parson of Stalbridge. II. Whether
the said Lease be good against Morley being Parson.
To the first is answered, that the Church was at that time void when his
Majesty presented the petitioner Morley, and not full (as is supposed) for
Alan Bishop, was never Parson there for Two Causes,

1 He the said Alan Bishop was for ever disabled for the same Benefice by
reason of his Simonicall Contract as aforesaid, as may appear by the Statute
against Simonie as follows. If any person shall or do for money reward,
gift, profit or benefit directly or indirectly, or for or by reason of any
promise, agreement, grant, bond, Covenant, or other assurance directly or
indirectly present any person to any Benefice with Cure, that every such
Presentation shall be utterly void; And the person so corruptly taking,
procuring, seeking or accepting any such Benefice, shall thereupon be adjudged
a disabled person in Law to have or enjoy the same Benefice. And the said Alan
Bishop has been sentenced and deprived for the said Simonie, by seven
Reverend Bishops, and seven others in his Majesty's Court of High Commission;

2 The said Alan Bishops presentation is void also by deceiving the King in
his Grant; Coke 6. Reports fol. 29. For he made a counterfeit Certificate, in
his own handwriting, that the said Parsonage was but 17. pound value in the
Kings Books, and in the Lord Chancelors right and gift as aforesaid, and so
obtained a Presentation under the broad Seal by the warrant of the Lord
Chancellor, whereas in truth the said Parsonage is 27. pound 4. shillings value
in the Kings Books, and therefore in the peculiar and imediate gift of his
Gracious Majesty, and beyond the Lord Chancellors power and gift.

The late Honorable Lord Chancellor Egerton acknowledged in open Court that
Morley was rightful Parson of the said Benefice, and granted the Writ De vi
laica remouenda to settle him in quiet possession, which possession was further
also confirmed for Morley by a Verdict, Judgment and Execution to the value of
20. l'. against the said Earls Bailiffe, for taking and carrying away his
Tithes, in his Majesty's Court of Kings Bench.

And whereas it is alleged that the opinions of some of the Judges are against
Morley; their opinions were grounded upon a wrong Case, as making the King to
present as well the said Alan Bishop as Morley, without any mention of the said
counterfeit Certificate and suggestion, which being afterward made known to
the now Honorable Lord Treasurer, his Lordship did acknowledge thereupon that
the King was deceived in his grant, and the grant void as aforesaid. And
further how ever the pretense be, it will appear, that it is but one of the
said Judges that gave and holds the said opinion, all being done likewise,
without hearing Morley or his learned Counsel.

And whereas it is alleged that a verdict did pass against Morleys Leasee for
4. l'. that was by the evidence of Alan Bishop the said convicted and deprived
Simonist being a principal party, who against his Oath upon Record in the
Hon. Court of Chancerie, and High Commission testified against the said Morley.
And it was by a Judge who should have given the said Morley the benefit of the
Law before (whereby, his Majesty's Title had never come in further question)
but did not, being requested and required thereunto, and again the said Judge
gave his opinion without hearing against the King and his right and Title, etc.

The Kings grant must be taken a^ intentionem non ad deceptionem. 1. H. 7. 13.

And if the King grant upon false Suggestion or Information, this shall be
taken more strongely for the King and strictly against the Patentee.

REASONS in equity against Alan Bishops Presentation by the warrant of the L.
Chancellor.
1 If this case shall be made good for Alan Bishops Presentation, the King and
his Successors will loose their right and praerogatiue and this will be the
leading Case. 2 The Lord Chancellor by the same reason may give all the Church
livings the King has. 3 The Lord Chancelors Warrant may give any thing the
King has. 4 By the self same reason meum and tuum shall be all one. 5 Alan
Bishop (a deprived Simonist) shall be rewarded for his deceit, and others
encouraged to do the like.
To the Second is Answered that the said Earl has not a good Lease in Law of
the said Parsonage for these Reasons.

1 The said Earl can set forth no Title to the said Lease. 35. H. 6. 6. and 7.
2 The Patron confirming being but Tenant in Tail, and now dead, his
confirmation is determined by his death. Litleton 107. page 31. Ed. 3. Fitz.
Tit. Grant. 61. ^ The Lord Archbishop of Cant. (Sede Bristol vacant) could not
confirm but during his supposed Gardian-ship at the most. 20. Ed. 4. 2. Rastal
514. Wards 9. ^ The said Archbishop was not then Guardian of the said Church,
but the Bishop of Gloucester, viz. Cheiney, who then held the Bishopric of
Bristoll in Commend. 5 The reuersion being in the Crown, the Queen viz. Eliz:
ought likewise to have joined in the Confirmation with the Patron aforesaid.
Judged in the Duchy. 6 The said Lease was Antedated about two years before
the said Brag came to be Parson there, that so made or Antedated the said
Lease.
Yet by color of this Lease the Gleabe lands are made away from the Church
into the said

Copieholds for lives having but a pretended estate of 10. years.

And the Petitioner Morley still remaining Parson of the said Church for these
five years space, has nothing to supply the Cure, being disposest of the
profits thereof by an Iniunction given with out hearing.


