THE Catholic Triumph: Containing, A Reply to the pretensed Answer of B. C.
(a masked Jesuit,) lately published against the Trial of the New Religion.
Wherein is evidently proved, that Popery and the Doctrine now professed in
the Romish Church, is the New Religion: And that the Faith which the Church of
England now mayntaineth, is the ancient Roman Religion.

Psalm. 22. v. 16. Dogs are come about me: and the council of the wicked,
lays siege against me. Psalm. 120. v. 3. What reward shall be given to thee,
thou false tongue? even mighty and sharp arrows, with hot burning coals. AT
LONDON Printed for the company of Stationers. 1610.

To the most reverend Father my very good Lord, TOBY, the L. Archbishop of
York his Grace, Primate of England.
Fifteen years (most reverend Father) are now fully expired, since I first
began to write against the professed adversaries of the ancient Christian,
Catholic, Apostolic, and old Roman religion; I mean the late Bishops of
Rome, the Romish Cardinals, the Jesuits, Iesuited Papists, and
Gunpowder-popish-vassals: In which space of time, I have published so many
Books in defense of the Catholic Faith, as are in number correspondent to
the years. A very long time it was, (the argument in hand considered,) before
I could any way extort any Answer to any of my Books. Howbeit, when the
Jesuits after mature deliberation, had seriously pondered with themselves,
that through their long silence, many Papists did utterly renounce Popery,
and joyfully embrace the Catholic Faith, this day sinceerely professed in our
Church: then they became so ashamed of their silence in that behalf, that in
the year 1605. they published a little Pamphlet, tearming it, The forerunner of
Bells downfall: Five Books were printed, but hid under a Pipkin, least they
should be seen, or burnt with the Sun.
wherein they avouched with brazen faces, that they had written five Books five
years before that time, against my Motives and my Survey of Popery. And least
it should be objected against them, that it cannot be so, seeing we can neither
see them, nor hear of them; the Forerunner tells us very gravely, (but to
their endless shame,) that the Answer is suppressed, and upon just occasion
stayed from the publication. Alas, alas, how are silly Papists bewitched,
with the iugling and deceitful dealing of these seducers? They have been
buzzing about the answering of my two first Books, My Book of Motyues, and
Book of Survey.
(as they them selves tell us,) almost the space of six whole years: and when
after their great pains and labors of so many years, they had framed the
answer in the best manner they could devise; then they suppressed the same
upon just occasion, as their Forerunner in their name tells us. Forerunner,
page 15.
What, have they bestowed five years in writing five Books against two of my
Books, and dare not to this day publish any one of them? To what end were they
written, but to be published?
Out upon lying lips; Out upon traiterous Jesuits, and Jesuitical deceyuers
of the world; The truth is, that there is no truth in these men: And it is an
evident testimony, that they are not indeed able to answer; for otherwise,
they would not for very shame have protested so much in print, and have
performed nothing less. I am verily persuaded, that they will never during my
life, (which they wish to be short, and therefore have they provided my Winding
sheet, and other indirect means, to take away my life,) frame any full and
direct Answer to the said Books; because in truth, all the Jesuits in the
Christian world, are not able to perform it, the truth being so clear and
forcible against them. After the Forerunner, a pretensed Answer, was
published in the year 1606. against the Down fall of Popery. For refutation
of which silly Pamphlet, I addressed my Book, entitled, The Jesuits
Antepast; (which seems to their dainty mouths so vntouthsome, that I deem,
it will serve also for their Post-past,) as I had formerly published an other
Reply, (entitled, The Popes Funeral,) to the Forerunner of the Downfall.
Now lately in the end of the year 1608. an other pretensed Answer (a silly
thing God wot,) was published against my Book, entitled, The Trial of the
new religion. This Pamphlet came to my hands in November last; at which time,
I was very ill in body, and also distant above one hundred Miles from mine own
Library* the want whereof, at that time, was far more grievous to me, then
were all my painful infirmities of body; In the midst of which, whiles I am
writing for the truth, I find no little comfort: The case so standing, albeit
your Grace was then above forty Miles from me; yet did I presume to bemone my
self unto your Grace for the supply of my present want of Books; with whom my
suite found such intertainement, as I neither did, nor ever could expect.
Books indeed I expected* but that your Grace should also send them to me upon
your own charges, most freely and Christianly offering to send me your whole
Library, (which is indeed, a Library most excellent,) if I should and in
need thereof, it seemed to me such an honorable savor, as that I could not
now in duty, omit to make this public acknowledgement thereof. The Jesuits
and Iesuited Gunpowder Papists, not able to endure the sound of my Trial,
wherein Popery was termed and proved the New Religion; have suborned (as it
seems) Robert Parsons that lewd companion and traiterous Friar, to publish
that supposed Refutation, the sum and substance whereof, they had (no doubt)
collected and framed to his hands. His name he dares not disclose, least the
great disgrace, (which can not but ensue upon that silly Answer,) should
eternally cleave unto him, as being one, who not able to defend Popery, by
honest and Christian-like proceeding, bestirreth himself to effect the same,
by continual forgerie, by lying, by coozenage, and deceitful dealing; as in
this Book I shall make apparent: Wherein, what my self have effected, or
rather God in me, let the iuditious and honest Reader judge; and for that
which he finds well done, give God the glory. Such as it is, I dedicate unto
your Grace; as unto him, who has deserved my uttermost service. The Almighty
bless your Grace, with many happy years in this life; and with eternal
glory, in the life to come. Amen. Iunij 3. 1609.

Your Graces most bounden, Thomas Bell.

Brief Instructions, for the better understanding of the Discourse following.
Instruction 1.
THE Pope, Cardinals, Jesuits, and all Papists generally, do bear the world
in hand, that the Church of Rome this day keeps inuiolably that Faith and
Religion, which S. Peter and S. Paul in their time, planted there. I hold and
defend the negative; proouing the same soundly and evidently throughout this
whole Discourse. We all agree in this; This Church of Rome has foulely
corrupted the old Roman Religion, which our Church has reformed.
that the Church of Rome had once the true, ancient, Christian, catholic, and
apostolic Faith, which she received from S. Peter and S. Paul: my self most
willingly subscribing thereunto. I neither impugn the old Roman religion, nor
reprove the ancient Bishops there: it is the Late vp-start-religion of the
Romish Church that now is, which I detest and write against in all my Books;
as against that Church, which so abounds with Errors, Heresies, and
Superstitions, as I know not when and where to find the like; no not among
Ethnicks, Publicans, Turks, Jews, or Saracens.

Instruction 2.
There are many sects of Friars this day in the Church of Rome: A.D. 527.
the Benedictiues began in the year 527-after Christ. A.D. 1084.
The Carthusians began, in the year 1084. after Christ. How this Sect had the
first original, it is worthy the Reader should yield his due attention: this
is the truth of the Story. While one Bruno was the reader of Philosophy at
Paris, that famous City in France; a friend of his (being a man of good
carriage and honest external conversation) departed out of this life: The
Papists ascribe salvation to popish Monkry.
this friend lying dead upon the Coffin in the Church, sounds out these
words, in the ears of the said Bruno; I am damned by the just judgment of
God. With this wonderment, the said Bruno was so terrified, that he knew no
way how to be saved, but by inuenting the sect of the Carthusians. Behold
here, the subtlety of the Devil; who never wants means, how to set up
Superstition and Idolatry: for if the Story be true (as it is most true, if
many famous Popish Historiographers be not notorious liars) then doubles, the
Devil was the author of the voice, as which brought forth the spirit of
Pride, not the spirit of Humility. Bruno the author of a new popish sect.
I prove it, because this Bruno (who had vowed perpetual obedience to his
superior) could not now be content to continue a Monk amongst the
Benedictiues, but he must be the Lord Abbot of a new Sect: For, since the Sect
of the Benedictes was the ready way to Heaven, as late vp-start Popery taught
him; it follows of necessity, that either he condemned his own Religion,
and consequently his own, if not the Devils invention: or else, my consequence
perforce must be admitted. And here I note by the way, the formal deformity
of all the Sects in Popery: to weet, that the Papists ascribe Merit and
salvation to the same: Hence Popery is convinced, to be the new Religion.
and so Popery is the New religion.

Instruction 3.
The aforenamed Benedictiue-Monkes, in a short time began to be dissolute, and
so to be divided into many new Sects. Some were called Cluniacenses: some,
Camaldnenses: some, Vallisumbrenses: some, Montoliuotenses: some,
Grandimontenses: some, Cistertienses, some, Syluestrenses: All which, being
most variable in life, manners, and observations; will for all that, be reputed
right Benedictiues. Even so forsooth, as our late Popes or Bishops of Rome,
must needs be S. Peter's successors; though as like to him, as York is like
foul Sutton. A.D. 1335.
This sect of the Benedictiues, far altered from the first institution, was
reformed in the year 1335. for (as Polydorus that famous Popish writer
reports) Monks do not long continue, in the due observation of their
Monastical institution.

Instruction 4.
A.D. 1119.
The Sect called Pramonstratensis, began in the year 1119. the first Author
thereof was one Norbertus by name: Who doubles either condemned the former
Sects, at the least of imperfection; or else was puffed up with the spirit of
Pride, as were his fraterculi before him.

Instruction 5.
A.D. 1170.
The Sect of the Carmelites began, in the year 1170. It was invented by one
Almericus the Bishop of Antioch. A.D. 1198.
The Sect of the Dominicans began, in the year 1198. The sect of the
Franciscans began, in the year A.D. 1206.
1206. A.D. 1371.
The Sect of the Iesuates began, in the year 1371. A.D. 1540.
The Sect of the Jesuits (that cursed crew) began in the year 1540. after
Christ: Ignatius Loyola was the father of Jesuits, these proud and lordly
Friars.
the Author of this Sect, was one Ignatius Loyola, a Soldier and a Spaniard
borne. This Sect, as it was the last hatched, so does it in pontifical Pride
surpass all the rest. It is by them selves termed ( Ordo sodalitatis Jesus;)
the very name expressing their proud and hautie minds. For, no name of so
many Sects before them, nor any other appellation could content them; unless
they were termed, the Fellows and Companions of our Lord Jesus. Their dear
breathren the Secular Seminarie-Priestes tell them roundly, even in printed
Books published to the view of the whole world, Behold the Jesuits lively
purtrayed* in their best beseeming colors.
that they are notorious Liars, cruel Tyrants, arrant Traitors, merciless
Murderers, right Machiuels, Scribes and Pharisees, Gypsees, Firebrands of
sedition: that they ride (like Earls) in Coaches, with many Servants attending
on them: that they must have their Chambers perfumed: that Gentlewomen must
pull off their Boots: that they trowle up and down, from good cheer to good
cheer: that they are Thieues: that they threate^ a conquest of noble England:
that they promise to restore men to their Liuinges, that will take part with
them against their natural Sovereign: in brief, that they are the wickedst
men upon earth. Note well my Anatomy.
All which, and much other like stuff, the Reader may find at large, in the
Anatomy of Popish tyranny.

Instruction 6.
The name ( Pope) was common to all Bishops every where, for more then 528.
years after Christ. The Bishops of Rome ( Sozimus, Bonifacius, and Celestinus)
more then 417. years after Christ, could allege no better grounds or
reasons for their now falsely usurped Primacie; then that only which the Nicene
Council had allotted to them. For which cause, the aforenamed Popes, falsified
the Canons of that most famous Synod; as S. Augustine, The Fathers of the
African Council, did stoutly control the Bishops of Rome, for their forgerie
of false Canons.
and hundreds of Bishops with him in the Africane Council assembled, freely and
roundly told Pope Celestine, in their Epistle directed to him; exhorting him to
surcease from such proud challenges, and calling his falsely pretended
sovereignty, Fumosum typhu^ seculi, smokely statelines of the world. The
aforenamed Popes, feigned certain false Canons, to have been made by the
Fathers of the famous Nicene Council: The Bishop of Romes authority limited
by the Council of Nice.
by the which (as they reported) a supereminent power and jurisdiction was
granted to the Bishops of Rome, over and above all other Bishops in the
Christian world. Whereas the true Canons of that holy Synod, did confine,
allot, and limit, the jurisdiction of the Bishops of Rome; even as it did
allot, limit, and confine, the jurisdiction of other Bishops else where. The
Fathers of the African Council sent this way, that way, and every way, to
search and find out the true copies of the Canons of the Council of Nice:
yea, to the Churches of the East, to the Bishops of Antioch,and of Alexandria:
Hence sprang the Bishop of Romes falsely pretended Primacie.
But when all was done, that possibly they could perform, the Bishops of Rome
could no where ground and stablish their fondly imagined prerogatives; save
only upon false and counterfeit Canons, untruly fathered upon the Nicene
Synod.

Instruction. 7.
The Emperors successively following Constantine, worthily surnamed the Great,
granted great privileges to the Church and Bishops of Rome; which
excellency, privileges, and prerogatives, the Bishops of Rome cunningly
procured, by a counterfeit and falsely forged donation of Constantine the
great: The Emperors were deceived, and so gave away their royal prerogatives.
for, the late Emperors giving credit to the counterfeit donation, yielded up
their lawful Segnories, royal Soueraignties, and regal Prerogatives, to the
Bishops of Rome; supposing they had only restored to them, that which was
wrongfully deteyned from them: For while they gave away their own, they
unawares, and fondly deemed, that they only restored that, which was not their
own in deed.

Instruction 8.
The word ( Pope) was not the proper and peculiar name to the Bishop of Rome,
A.D. 528.
for the space of 528. years after Christ. Universal Bishop.
The Church of Rome was made the Head of all other Churches; and the Bishops
there, the heads of all other Bishops, A.D. 607.
by the imperial constitution of Phocas 607. years after Christ. That the Pope
could not err iudicially, was not authentical in the Romish Church for 1500.
years after Christ. That the Pope could vnmarrie persons lawfully married by
Christ's institution, was never heard of in the Christian world, A.D. 1550.
until the year 1550. after Christ; at which time Pope Julius presumed to
dissolve lawful Matrimony, by his unlawful Dispensation. It was never
thought lawful for the natural Brother to marry his natural Sister, until
the time of Pope Martin, who by the instigation of the Devil, A.D. 1418.
set the same abroach, in the year 1418. after Christ. Popish Venial sins,
A.D. 1566.
were first hatched by Pope Pius 1566. years after Christ. That the Blood of
popish Saints could work man's redemption, A.D. 1161.
was never heard of for the space of 1161. years after Christ. The like may be
said of many other Popish Articles: for which I refer the Reader, to my
Trial of the New Religion. I deem it enough for the present, to insinuate to
the Christian Reader, that our Church has only abolished Superstition,
Errors, and Heresies, by little and little crept into the Church; and does still
keep all and every jot of the Old Roman Faith and Religion. The Capucheenes
at Rome did the like, when they (even with the Popes good liking) reformed the
dissolute Franciscans. Yea, Pope Pius himself of late days did the like,
while he reformed the popish deformed missals and breuiaries, in his late
Council gathered at Trent. If he that now is Bishop of Rome, would reform
all the rest, by abolishing all Novelties by little and little brought into the
Church, as we have done; he should find the remnant, to be the Old Roman
religion in very deed. Mark well the whole Discourse following; where all
this is soundly proved, as more cannot be wished.

The Contents of the Chapters.
Chapter 1. Proouing: THat the name and word ( Pope) was in the primative
Church, common to all Bishops as well of Rome as else where. That the Bishop of
Rome neither is, nor ought to be; nor ever was called, The universal Bishop of
the whole Church. That the name ( Pope) was not peculiar to the Bishops of
Rome, for more then 528. years after Christ. That the Jesuit, volens nolens,
is enforced to grant the same. Chapter 2. Proouing: That the Pope may not be
controulled, though he carry with him thousands upon thousands into Hell. That
it is Sacrilege, to dispute of the Popes power. That the Pope with his
Pardons, can deliver all souls out of Purgatory-fire. That the Pope can
dissolve that Matrimony, which is firm and stable by Christ's institution.
That the Pope can dispense with the Brother, to marry his own natural
Sister. That the Pope has as great power, as Christ himself had on earth.
That the Pope may do, whatsoever pleases him. That the Pope can make of
nothing, something. That the counterfeit Donation of Constantine, was the
original of all Popish superroyall power. That whatsoever the Emperors of
latter time, gave to the Church of Rome, they were induced to do the same, by
the coozening tricks of the Bishops of Rome. That the Popes ( Sozimus,
Bonefacius* and Celestine,) falsified the Canons of the Nicene Council, so to
advance themselves above all other Bishops. That no Bishops nor Priests,
ought to appeal to the Church of Rome. That the Council of Nice gave the
primacie of honor to the Church of Rome, because it was the Seat of the
Emperor, and Caput Mundi. That all Christians (even the Bishops of Rome) are
subject to the Canons of the Nicene Council. That the Nicene Synod did
confine and knit the jurisdiction of the Bishop of Rome. Chapter. 3. Proouing:
That Marriage of Priests was ever lawful, during the time of the old
Testament. That the Marriage of Priests is prohibited only by the law of Man,
and not by any positive constitution either of Christ or his Apostles. That it
was ever lawful for the Bishops and Priests of the East-church, to marry, and
to beget children in time of their Priesthood. That the Marriage of Priests
was ever lawful also in the West-church, until the time of Pope Siricius: and
in Germany, for the space of 1074. years after Christ. That all secular
Priests may Marry, notwithstanding the Popish solemn Vow annexed. That by
Popish faith and doctrine, Marriage is of force after the single Vow of
chastity. That the Vow single, is of one and the same nature with the Vow
solemn. That the Marriage of Priests is lawful after the solemn Vow, so it
be done by the Popes Dispensation. That the forced and coacted Chastity of
Priests, has been so intolerable, as nothing has brought more shame to
Priesthood, more shame to Religion, more grief to godly men. Chapter. 4.
Proouing: Chap. 4. Of the Popes Pardons.
That popish Pardons are neither found in the holy Scripture, nor in the
ancient Fathers: That the popish Master of sentences, could find no mention
of them, in the writings of the holy Fathers. That Bishop Fisher granted
the young age, of late popish Pardons. That the best learned Papists, are not
able to defend the same. Chapter. 5. Proouing. Chapt. 5. Of popish Purgatory.
That the Greek Church never believed Purgatory. That the Church of Rome
believed it not, for the space of 250. years. That the Church of Rome believed
it not all at once, but by little and little. That the invention of Purgatory
was the birth of popish Pardons* That the primative Church was never acquainted
with the Popes Pardons; nor yet with popish Purgatory. Chapter. 6. Proouing:
Chap. 6. Of Auricular confession.
That popish Auricular confession, cannot be proved out of the Old Testament.
That the New Testament does not impose an heavier yoke upon us, then did the
Old. That popish Auricular confession, is not necessary for man's salvation.
That it is neither commanded by Christ, nor yet by his Apostles. That it is
established by the mere law of man, grounded only upon a falsely imagined
Apostolical unwritten tradition. That it was not an Article of popish Faith
for the space of 1215. years after Christ. Chapter. 7. Proouing: Chap. 7. Of
Venial sins
That every Sin is Mortal of it own nature. That five famous popish Writers
( Roffensis, Almaynus, Bains, Durandus, Gersonus) do all confess the same.
That the Jesuit S. R. grants freely, that the Church of Rome had not
defined some Sins to be Venial, until the days of Pius the fifth; which was
not fifty years ago. Chapter. 8. Proouing: Chap. 8. Of the Popes faith.
That the Pope may err, both in Faith and Doctrine iudicially. That many Popes
have erred De facto: That great learned Papists did constantly confess so
much. Chapter. 9. Proouing: Chap. 9. Of the condign Merit of Works.
That true Merit, and condign Merit, is all one. That the regenerate do Good
works, and receive reward above their deserts. That Good works do follow
Justification, but go not before the same. That the best Works of the
regenerate, are stained with sin; and in rigor of Justice, deserve eternal
death. That Good works are so necessary to attain eternal life (as the way
and means, by which God has decreed to bring his chosen to it; but not as the
cause thereof) as without them, it can not be had. That Good works are the
effects of Predestination, depending upon it; not it upon them. That Good
works in a godly sense, may be called Meritorious; that is, they so please
God, that of mercy he rewards them. That without the mercy and promise of
God, they do not merit Heaven. That Charity is not the form of Faith. That
Faith as a worker, does not justify; but respectively, as an instrument
apprehending Christ's merits, and applying them unto us. That Good works,
though they be neither the efficient, nor the formal, nor the final cause of
Justification (which ever goes before them) yet are they the material cause,
and cause, sine qua non, (as the Schools term it) the cause or condition,
without which Justification shall not have effect. That Good works must be
done for three respects. That Gods Promise does not make Good works, to be
condignely worthy of the reward. That condign merit of Works, was not an
Article of Popish faith, for more then 1540. years after Christ. Chapter. 10.
Proouing: Chap. 10. Of Transubstantiation.
That Transubstantiation is a Monster, lately begotten in Germany, and borne in
Rome. Chapter. 11. Proouing: Chap. 11. Of popish invocation of Saints.
That popish Invocation, does not only make Saints the mediators of
Intercession, but also of Redemption. That it makes Saints joint purchasers
of salvation with Christ's most sacred blood; so it be not in the same degree.
That it was not hatched, for more then 1160, years after Christ. Chapter.
12.Of the popish Communion under one kind. Chapter. 13.Of popish private Mass.
Chapter. 14.Of Pope Martins Dispensation. Chapter. 15,Of worshipping of Images.
Chapter. 16.Of Church-seruice in the vulgar tongue. Chapter. 17.Of the pieces
of popish Mass. Chapter. 18.Of the mysteries of the popish Mass. Chapter.
19.Of kissing the Popes feet. Chapter. 20.Of praying upon Beedes. Chapter.
21.Of changing the Popes name. Chapter. 22.Of the Paschal Torch. Chapter. 23.Of
the popish Pax, and the mystery thereof. Chapter. 24.Of the Popes Bulls.
Chapter. 25.Of the popish Agnus-dei. Chapter. 26.Of Candelmas-day. Chapter.
27.Of the doleful Oath, which popish Bishops make to the Pope. Chapter. 28.Of
the popish Lent-fast. Chapter. 29.Of the annulling of popish Wedlock. Chapter.
30.Of the Popes falsely pretended Superiority, over and above a general
Council. Chapter. 31. Proouing: That the Faith and Doctrine of the Church of
England, is the old Roman Religion.
The Jesuits Proeme.
B. C.
INtending to note the principal untruths of Bells Pamphlet, I have thought
good first to salute his Epistle, and see what wholesome stuff he presents in
that, to his Patrons.

T. B.
I Answer: Jesuit has published; and handsomely paint him out in his best
beseeming colors, time would sooner fail me, then matter whereof to speak:
Howbeit, as I mean, for the most part, to let pass his slanders, his railing
words, his fooleries, his absurdities, his contradictions, and his impertinent
trifles; so will I (by Gods holy assistance) confute all the parts and parcels
of his foolish and ridiculous Pamphlet; not omitting any thing of any moment in
the same. Jesuit has passed over in deep silence, my principal and chiefest
grounds, arguments, The Jesuit only snatcheth at such pieces, as he thinks
he may best deal withal.
authorities, and reasons; as not able to say any thing against them: which the
iuditious and honest Reader, will soon perceive with all facility. Friar does
but snatch at pieces here and there, with the which he thought he might best
deal, at the least, in some colorable show of words. But let us hearken (I
pray you) to that attentively, which (he says) he found in my dedicatorie
Epistle.

B. C.
The Minister falls roundly to the matter, presenting his Patrons with a
trick of his occupation, in his very first entrance: his words be these.
B.C. page 2.
The visible Church (says Bell) as writes Egesippus, remained a Virgin free
from all heresies and corruptions, during the life of the Apostles: (...) apud
(...) 3 cap. 32.
that is to say, about one hundred years after Christ; to which time, S. John
the Evangelist was living: but after the death of the Apostles (says he)
errors by little and little crept into the Church, as into a void and desert
House. This Collection (which Bell has made) is powdered with lies, and iugling
tricks, thick and threefold. Bell belyeth both Egesippus and also Eusebius, O
the most monstrous lie in the world.
whom be quoteth in the third Book of his History, in the two and thirty
Chapter; as the relator of those words of Egesippus: Read the place he that
please, no such thing shall there be found, nor the name of Egesippus so much
as once mentioned. The Minister both abuses his Patrons and others, with a
notorious untruth of his own; fathering that upon Eusebius, which is not
there to be found. God of his mercy either convert or confound the liar.
Neither can this dealing of his proceed from other root, then mere malice;
as whose brains are employed about nothing more, then the hammering of lies,
cauils, and corruptions against the Catholic faith.

T. B.
I answer: Jesuits accusation, which here he makes against me, is too too
grievous, and more then intolerable unto godly ears: For, he charge me
first, to have powdered mine assertion with lies and iugling tricks. Then, to
have done the same thick and threefold. Thirdly, to have belyed both Egesippus
and Eusebius. Fourthly, he impudently affirms, that no such thing can
possibly be found, as I have alleged out of Eusebius. Fifthly, that my
position is so false and so far from the truth, that the name of Egesippus
is not so much as once mentioned. Sixthly, that I have of mere malice,
slaundered Egesippus and Eusebius; being men of great learning.

Jesuit may very well be thought, Secundo principaliter.
to be his only Son. But how shall this be proved? All that shall read his
book, must needs think he says the truth, because he affirms it so
impudently, (confidently I would say.) This text of Christ's holy Gospel, may
well be verified in the Jesuits, and their accursed Iesuited crew: Ioh 12.
ver. 41.
They loved the pray^e of men, more then the glory of God. The truth is never
ashamed; she will show her self to the confusion of the newly hatched sect of
Jesuits, and of the late start-vp Romish faith and religion. These are the
express words of Eusebius, as Ruffinus a very learned Father (who lived above
1200. years ago) has translated them. Eusebius. hist. lib. 3. cap. 32.
Post haec idem scriptor addidit etiam hoc, quod vsque ad illa tempora virgo
munda et immaculata permanset ecclesia: sequitur; Vt vero et apostolorum chorus
et omnis illa aetas, quae a domino susceperat viuae vocis auditum, de hac luce
discessit; tum velut in vacuam domum, falsae doctrinae impius se error
immersit. After these things, the same writer ( Egesippus) added this also,
That unto those days, the Church continued a pure and immaculate virgin: but
after the death of the Apostles and all that age, which had heard our Lord
speak in live voice unto them; false and erroneous doctrine began to intrude
her self, as into a void house or desert place. Thus writes Eusebius, in
that very Book and Chapter: where our Jesuit impudently avouches, that no
such thing can be found; no, not so much, as Egesippus once named: albeit, both
the whole matter, and the words, be in very deed, as I have here truly put
them down; yea, Egesippus is named in the very beginning of the said Chapter,
as the relator of the Story; and in these words (the same writer) eftsoons
insinuated to the reader. Upon my salvation, the Jesuit has most impudently
belyed me.
Is it now true (sir Friar Jesuit) that I have powdered mine assertion with
lies? Is it true (sir liar) that I used Iugling tricks therein? Is it true,
that I have done the same thick and threefold? Have I belyed both Egesippus
and Eusebius? Can no such thing be found in Eusebius? Is not Egesippus once
named in that Chapter? Is he not once named expressly, and twice virtually? If
all this be true, as it is must true in deed; what shall I say, or what can I
say, to this shameless and impudent Friar? Apage, apage, Out upon rotten
Popery; out upon lying Jesuits; out upon the new Romish Religion; which can
be defended by no better means, then by impudency, falsehood, and flat lying.
What shall, or what can the Reader expect at the hands of this shamlesse,
impudent, The Jesuit is as honest, as he that has no truth at all in him.
and lying Jesuit, in the rest of his Pamphlet, who intertayneth him in the
very beginning, with such leasings, such iugling tricks, and such diabolical
accusations? What has this shameless and impudent Jesuit deserved? the
Whetstone; nay rather with Chore, Dathan, and Abyram, to go down quick into
Hell. Nomb. 16. verse. 24.30.
This doubtless, if nothing else should be said; were enough to prove Popery,
to be the new Religion. I wonder, how the Jesuit durst publish such notorious
slanders? but on the one side, being at a nonplus, and not able in truth to
say any thing for the antiquity of Popery; and on the other side, choosing
rather to consecrate his soul to the Devil, Out upon all lying and traiterous
Jesuits.
by lying, slaundering, and deceitful dealing; then to grant Popery to be
the new Religion: He thought to face out the matter, by imputing that to me,
which most justly and properly pertayneth to himself. And withal, he very
politikely considered (the master Devil of Hell suggesting it unto him) that
his best course was, Popery can not in truth be defended; it is the new
Religion.
to do the same in the beginning. These things thus standing, all wise
Papists (I trow) will look more carefully into the matter; and from hence
forth, not give credit to such lying Doctors, such false Teachers, and such
notorious slaunderers of the innocent. If all Jesuits in England, all
Dominicans in Spain, all Franciscans in France, and all Cardinals in Rome,
should conspire together, The Jesuit begins, continues, and ends, with
lying.
how to accuse the innocent* I know not (it is above my reach and capacity)
how they could surpass this impudent lying Jesuit, in such kind of
treachery. This one thing I will now say, which will appear before the end of
this Discourse, that as he here begins, so he continues unto the end. For;
if his lies, slanders, cauils, coozening tricks, false dealing, and
ridiculous sophistications be once taken away; very little, or rather nothing at
all, will remain in this his pretenced answer, to the trial of the new
Religion. It wounds the Pope and his Jesuits, to hear Popery termed, the
New Religion: they are not able to endure the sound thereof.

The Jesuits first Chapter* of this name and word ( Pope.)
B. C.
ALbeit the name ( Pope) was attributed also to other Bishops, yet was it in
such special manner given to him, that it sufficiently declared his Supreme
authority over all other.

T. B.
I answer: S. Epiphanius called Athanasius Pope, in these express words.
Epiphan. haer. 68. p. 213.
Eusebius praedictus Nicomedia episcopus erat totius ipsoru^ collectionis
administrator, ac concinnator detrimenti in ecclesia, et aduersus papam
Athanasiu^. Eusebius the forenamed Bishop of Nicomedia, was the administrator
of their whole collection, and the contriuer of the detriment in the Church,
and against Pope Athanasius. S. Hierome called S. Augustine Pope, in sundry
Epistles written to him in these words. Apud Aug. epist. ^1.13.14.17.18.25.30.
Domino vere sancto et beatissimo Papae Augustino, Hieronimus in domino
salutem: Hierom to the truly holy and most blessed Pope Augustyne, sends
salutations in our Lord. S. Austyn called Aurelius Pope, Aug. ep. 76.
who was but his fellow-Byshop; and in many things far inferior to him. S.
Austyn, but Alipius also, called the same Aurelius Pope. Aug. ep. 77.
that S. Hierom callen not only S. Austyn Pope, but also S. Epiphanius Pope in
like manner. Moses and Maximus, with the Deacons Nicostratus and Ruffinus, and
sundry confessors did all with one uniform assent, Apud Cypria^. page
11.46.61.66.
call S. Cyprian most blessed Pope. Rome, writing to the Clergy of Carthage,
called the same Cyprian Pope. But doubtless, neither would, neither durst the
Clergy of Rome, have called Cyprian the Bishop of Carthage Pope; if the name
had then been proper, or any way peculiar to the Bishop of Rome. Valla. de don.
Constant. ^ol. 34. B.
Eighthly, that Laurentius Valla, a very learned and famous Writer, yea and a
Roman borne, is Consonant to the Clergy of Rome; in that most excellent and
learned Declamation, which he published against the counterfeit Donation of
Constantine: these are the express words, of that great Learned Roman:
Transeo, quod rasuram coronam vocas, et Papam pontificem Romanu^, qui nondu^
peculiariter sic appellari erat captus. I let pass, that thou calls his
shauing, a Crown; and the Bishop of Rome, Pope: who began not yet to have that
name peculiarly. Lo, for more then 330. years, the Bishop of Rome did not
begin to challenge that name.

B. C.
Which appears first, because when any was called Pope without further
addition, it was understood only of the Bpshops of Rome; as is evident out of
the Council of Chalcedon, where it is said; The most blessed and apostolic
man the Pope, does command us this thing. Secondly, because the Bishop of
Rome was called Pope of the whole Church; Act. 16.
as we read in the same Council, where Leo is called Pope of the universal
Church. In breuiario. cap. ^1.
And Liberatus affirms, that there is no Pope over the Church of the whole
world, but the Bishop of Rome. Thirdly, because he is called the Pope, or
Father of general Councels, and of the whole World; but he calls not other
Bishops, Popes or Fathers; but his Breathren or Sons: as is apparent out of
an Epistle of Pope Damasus to the Eastern Bishops, recited by Theodoretus; and
in the Epistle of the Council of Chalcedon to Pope Leo.

T. B.
I answer: Jesuit began with notorious lying, so he continues here, and in
every place to the end of his Pamphlet: For, the Council of Chalcedon says
not, as our Jesuit with lying lips avouches: no, no, not the Council; but
Bonifacius a Priest of Rome (sent by Leo to the Council) a sworn vassal to
the Pope; and such a one as durst not but say what the Pope had enjoined him,
says so: These are the express words. Act. 16. Page 10.
Bonifacius presbyter sedis apostolicae vicarius, dixit; beat^ssimus et
apostolicus vir Papa, inter caetera hoc nobis mandauit: Bonifacius Priest the
Popes deputy said; the most blessed and apostolic man the Pope, among other
things, gave us this commandment. Jesuit says truly (though meaning nothing
less) when he tells us, that it is said out of the Council: For, most true
it it; that it is so out of the Council, that it never came into the same. The
Popes Vicar indeed would gladly have advanced the Pope; but the Council made
no reckoning of his proud and arrogant words. Jesuit still lies, when he
impudently avouches (as his wonted manner is) that the Council called Leo,
Pope of the whole Church: For the words, The Jesuit is full of notorious
lies. Act. 16. page 21^.
which our Friar fathereth upon the Council, are only the words of Lucentius
the Popes deputy; but not the words of the Council. The Fathers of the
Council contemned the arrogant speeches of this Lucentius; as they did the
other of Bonifacius before. Jesuit impudently and most shamefully belyeth
Liberatus; as who has no such lofty words in the behalf of Leo, but barely
and nakedly calls him Pope: and who is so far from tearming him Pope over
the Church of the whole world, that he flatly affirms the contrary in
sundry other Chapters. In one place, he has these words; Lectus est tomus
papae Leonis ad memoratum flauianum, Liberatus, cap. 13. page 621. in Bre^iar.
contra dogma Eutychis directus: The Tomb of Pope Leo was read, which he
directed to Flauianus against the opinion of Eutyches. In an other place, thus:
Legati sedis apostolicae ab ipso concilio fugientes, retulerunt Papae Leoni
iniquitates Dioscori: Cap. 12. page 620.
The Messengers of the apostolic Sea fleeing from the Council, showed Pope
Leo the wickedness of Dioscorus. In an other place, thus: Cap. 23. page 630.
Se^^rus Antiochenus iam fuerat condemnatus, et Anthinus Constantinopolitanus,
ab Agapeto Papa Romano, et Menna Constantinopolitano, et libellis datis
aduersus ^os Imperatori Iustiniano: Seuerus of Antioch was condemned, and
Anthinus of Constantinople, of Agapetus the Pope of Rome, and Menna of
Constantinople; and Libels were presented to the Emperor Justinian, against
them. Many like places I could easily allege, out of the Breuiarie of
Liberatus; but one for many may suffice, which cutteth the Popes head and neck
from the shoulders. These are the express words: Cap. 12. Page 20.
Sed fortissimus Leo anciens legatoru^ suoru^ suggestione^, et Theodorit^
quaerelas suscipiens, litteris suis Theodosiu^ Imperatorem et Pulcheriam
Augustam petit; vt fieret intra Itaham generale conciliu^, et aboleretur error
fidei per violentiam dioscorj factus: But courageous Leo hearing the suggestion
of his Messengers, and receiving the complaints of Theodoritus, directing his
Letters to the Emperor Theodosius and Pulcheria the Empress, desires them,
that a general Council might be gathered within Italy, and the error of
faith abolished, which Dioscorus by violence had set abroach. Thus writes
Liberatus, whom our Friar relyeth upon, as one of his chiefest Patrons. Out of
whole words, I observe Pope is termed plain Leo, without either welt or
guard. Pope could not gather a Council in Italy; but only requested the
Emperor to do it. East had still the chief sovereignty of Rome and all
Italy, even 457. years after Christ. A.D. 457.
And consequently, that the late Bishops of Rome, do most shamefully abuse the
world, when they impudently avouch, that the Emperor Constantine the great,
gave to Syluester the Bishop of Rome, his golden Crown, dignity, title, and
interest, both of Rome, Italy, and the whole Western parts. For the Council
of Chalcedon was holden in the year 457. after Christ: A.D. 327.
which was about 130. years after the falsely pretended donation of
Constantine, and his departure to Constantinople from the city of Rome. Quinto
principaliter.
But hereof more at large, in the next Chapter now following. Jesuit
egregiously belyeth both Damasus that good Bishop of Rome, and Theodoretus that
grave and learned writer: for, no such thing can be found in Theodorete, in the
place quoted by the Jesuit. Theod. hist. lib. 5. cap. 10.
These words are all that the Jesuit can truly father upon Theodorete; which
how far they are from his notorious lie, let the indifferent Reader judge.
Confessio catholicae fidej qua^ Papa Damasus misi^ Paulino episcopo
Thessalonicae in Macedonia: The confession of the Catholic faith, which Pope
Damasus sent to Paulinus the Bishop of Thessalonica in Macedonia. Here is not
one word, of any Supremacy of the Bishop of Rome. Nay, the same Theodorete,
even in the Epistle next and immediately aforegoing, confounds the Jesuit,
and strikes him stark dead: these are the express words. Theod. hist. lib.
5. cap. 9.
Dominis reuerendissimis et pijssimis fratribus ac collegis, Damaso, Ambrosio,
Brittonj, Valeriano, Acholio, Auemi^, Basilio, et caeteris sanctis episcopis in
magna vrbe Roma coactis, synodus sancta episcoporu^ orthodoxoru^ qui conuenere
in magna vrbe Constantinopolj, in domino salutem: To the most reverend Fathers,
our most holy breathren and fellows, Damasus, Ambrosius, Britto, Valerianus,
Acholius, Auemius, Basi^ius, and to all the rest of the holy Bishops assembled
in the great City of Rome, the holy Synod of Catholic Bishops assembled
in the great City of Constantinople, send greeting in our Lord. Thus writes
Theodoretus. A.D. 371.
Out of whose narration, I observe Constantinople, wrote to an other Synod of
holy Bishops assembled in the great city of Rome. Constantinople Synod,
called the Bishops at Rome assembled, their Fellows; and did not ascribe any
other name or title to Damasus, then the Bishop of Rome. Jesuit fondly
imagines) had been due to the Bishop of Rome; then doubtless, so many, so
learned, and so holy Fathers assembled at Constantinople, would have given the
Bishop of Rome his due title, and not have called him barely their Fellow,
Sixto principaliter.
as they did the rest. Jesuit fathereth upon the Council of Chalcedon,
Notetur cap. 2* in conclus* ^0. valde.
is cosen german to the counterfeit Donation of Constantine: of which
forgerie, and more then ridiculous foolerie, the Reader (God willing) shall
find sound and large proofs in the next Chapter. The reason is evident;
because six hundred and thirty learned and holy Bishops assembled in council
at Chalcedon, Fuerunt 630. episcopi in Chalcedone, A.D. 457.
decreed the Bishop there, to be equal to the Bishop of Rome, in all
Ecclesiastical affairs. I will allege the express words of that famous
Synod: which our Jesuit uses not to do, least it should discover his lies,
falsehood, and cunny catching tricks: These are the words of the Council.
Act. 16. page 212.
Gloriosissimi iudices dixerunt; ex his quae gesta sunt, perpendimus omnem
quidem primatum et honorem praecipium secundum canones, antiquae Romae deo
amantissimo Archiepiscopo conseruari: oportere autem sanctissimu^
Archiepiscopu^ regiae Constantinopolis nouae Romae, eisdem primatibus honoris
et ipsum dignu^ esse, et potestate^ habere, ordinare metropolitas in Asiana, et
Pontica, et Thracia diacesibus. Sequitur: Reuerendi Episcopi dixerunt; haec
iusta sententia, haec omnes dicimus, haec omnibus placent, hoc iustu^ decretu^.
quae constituta sunt, valiant. haec iusta sententia; omnia ordinate decreta
sunt. The most glorious Judges said; We perceive by these things which are
defined, that all Primacie and chief Honor according to the Canons, is
reserved to the most holy Arch-byshop of old Rome: but the most holy
Arch-byshop of the royal city of new Rome, must have the same primacie of
Honor and power, to ordain Metropolitans in the Dioceses of Asia, and Pontus,
and Thracia. The reverend Bishops answered: This is a just sentence; this we
all say; this pleases all; this is a just decree. The things which are
decreed, let them be of force. This is a just sentence; all things are orderly
decreed. Thus teaches us this most famous Council of 630. Bishops, very
learned and holy Fathers. Out of which Decree, I observe Rome, was not of
Power, but of Honor. gave no other name or title to Leo, then Bishop of Rome,
but Arch-byshop of old Rome. Anatolius then Bishop of Constantinople, calling
him Arch-byshop of new Rome. Constantinople equal with the Bishop of Rome in
all things, the primacie of Honor only excepted: in which pre-eminence of
Honor, the said 630. Fathers decreed constantly, that the Bishop of
Constantinople or new Rome, should be the next to the Bishop of old Rome. And
this doubtless, is that very doctrine which I defend: For I willingly grant
both in this, and in all my other Books, The Bishop of Rome the chiefest
Patriarch, but yet under the Emperor, as other Bishops else where.
that the Bishop of Rome is the principal and chiefest Patriarch, and ought
according to the ancient Canons of the famous and holy Council of Nice, to
have the chiefest place in all Ecclesiastical meetinges, councels, and
Assemblies, before all other Bishops in the Christian world. This assertion
is yet more plainly confirmed, in an other place of this famous Council of
Chalcedon: these are the express words. Act. 16. page 208.
Definitiones sanctoru^ patrum sequentes vbique et regulam, et quae nunc
relecta sunt centum quinquaginta deo amantissimorum episcoporum, qui congregati
sunt sub piae memoriae Imperatore maiore Theodosio, in regia ciuitate
Constantinopoli noua Roma, cognoscentes et nos, eadem definiuimus de
priuilegijs eiusdem sanctissimae Constantinopolitanae ecclesiae Romae nouae*
Council. 1. Constant. A.D. 383. Celebratum*
etenim sedi senioris Romae propter imperium ciuitatis illius patres
consequenter priuilegia reddiderunt, et eadem intention permoti centum
quinquaginta deo amantissimi episcopi, aequa sanctissimae sedi nouae Romae
priuilegia tribuerunt; rationabiliter iudicantes imperio et senatu vrbem
ornatam aequis senioris regiae Romae priuilegijs frui, et in ecclesiasticis
sicut illa, maiestatem habere negotijs, et secundam post illam existere: We
following the definitions of the holy Fathers every where; and knowing the
Canons and the Decrees of the 150. holy Bishops, assembled under the Emperor
Theodosius the elder of holy memory, in the royal city Constantinople new
Rome; Mark this: The Bishop of Rome was made the chief Patriarcke, because
Rome was the head of the Empire.
have defined the very same, touching the Privileges of the same most holy
Church of Constantinople new Rome: For the Fathers gave Privileges
consequently to the seat of old Rome, for the Empire and dominion of that
City. And the 150. most holy Bishops having the same intention, gave equal
Privileges to the most holy seat of new Rome; judging according to reason,
that the City which was honored with the Empire and the Senate, should enjoy
equal Privileges with the old royal Rome, and excel in Ecclesiastical
affairs, as it, and be the second after it. In these words of these 630. holy
and learned Fathers, it is very clear and evident, that the Bishop of new
Rome, was equal to the Bishop of old Rome in all things, the primacie of
Honor only excepted. Which illation is soundly confirmed by the decree of the
famous Council of Constantinople, in these express words. Council. prim.
Constantinop. Can. 5. et habetur did. 22. cap. Constantinop. ciuitatis.
Constantinopolitana ciuitatis Episcopum habere oportet primatus honore^ post
Romanum Episcopum, propteria quod sit noua Roma: The Bishop of the city of
Constantinople, must have the honor of Primacie, after the Bishop of Rom^,
because it is new Rome. Lo, all that, wherein the Bishop of Rome excels the
Bishop of Constantinople, Honoris primatum.
and consequently all other Bishops; is nothing else in deed, but the sole and
only Primacie of honor. Which Primacie, we are so far from denying it,
that we give the same to our Arch-byshoppes and Metropolitans in the Church of
England. To which I add (and it is very emphataicall) that the principal and
chief cause of making the Bishop of Rome the chief Patriarch, Mark this
point well.
and of giving him the Primacie of honor, was this, and no other: viz. because
the city of Rome, was the Imperial seat of the Emperor. So affirm two most
famous Councels, of Constantinople and Chalcedon: Council. primum Constantinop.
A D. 383. celebratum.
And these Councels are consonant to the most famous Council of all Councels,
since the death of the Apostles: to weet, the Council of Nice in Bithyni^;
although that sacred Council did not produce the reason, for the aforenamed
Primacie of the Bishop of Rome.

B. C.
To this may be added, that seeing ( Pope) signifies ( Father,) as Bell
according to the truth confesses; it follows that the Bishop of Rome was in
old time reputed Superior to all, in that he was called the Father of Fathers.
For Steven Bishop of Carthage, writing to Pope Damasus, Epist. ad Damasum.
in the name of three Councelles celebrated in Afric, gives him this title.
To Pope Damasus our most blessed Lord, exalted with Apostolical dignity, the
Father of Fathers.

T. B.
I answer, that while our Jesuit labors to stablish the Popes falsesly
pretended sovereignty, The Jesuit proves himself a noddy.
he proves himself a very Noddie: for I have already granted, that the
Bishop of Rome for the excellency of that City, is the chiefest Patriarch;
and so may be called the Father of Fathers: that is, the chiefest Father or
Bishop of all Fathers or Bishops in Christ's Church. It is one thing to call
the Bishop of Rome, Father of Fathers; an other thing, to call him universal
Bishop, or universal Father. The former, our Church of noble England,
admits, while she approoueth two Primates; the one of England, the other of
all England. Even so do we repute our two Arch-byshops, of Canterbury and
York, to be the Bishops of Bishops, Every Arch-byshop is Bishop of Bishops, in
a godly sense and meaning.
or Fathers of Fathers (which is all one;) for either of them, is Bishop of
Bishops, within his province; that is, the Chiefest of all the rest. But this
is nothing to that superroyall power, of which we are to entreat in the next
Chapter: Mark well the next Chapter.
which I wish the reader to mark with such attention as apperteyneth
thereunto. But the latter, both we, and great learned Popish writers, do
utterly disclaim. In the Popes own decrees, I find these express words.
Did. 99. cap. primae sedis.
Primae sedis Episcopus non appelletur princeps sacerdotu^, vel su^mus
sacerdos, aut aliquid huiusmodj, sed tantu^ primae sedis Episcopus. Vniuersalis
aute^, nec etia^ Romanus pontifex appelletur. Let not the Bishop of the
chief Seat be called the Prince of Priests, or the Hie Priest, or have any
such like name; but only, the Bishop of the first Seat. And Universal
Bishop, none may be called, no not the Bishop of Rome himself. What? does
Gratianus that famous Champion of the Romish Church, tell us so? We have read
the Popes Decree, which was taken out of the Affrican Council: the words of
Gratianus have sounded in our ears. Nay, you shall hear a greater wonder.
Pope Pelagius does constantly deliver the self same doctrine, and defines it
for the truth, to be received and believed: these are his express words.
Did. 99. cap. Nullus.
Nullus Patriarcharum vniuersalitatis vocabulo vnquam vtatur; quia si summus
Patriarcha vniuersalis dicit, Patriarcarum nomen caeteris derogatur. Sed absit
hoc a fidelibus, hoc sibi velle que^piam arripere, vnde honorem fratrum suorum
imminuere, ex quantulaecunque part videatur. Quapropter, charitas vestra
neminem vnquam, etiam suis in epistolis vniuersalem nominet; ne sibi debitum
subtrahat, cum alteri honorem infert indebitum. Let no Patriarch ever use the
word of Universality; Let these decrees of the Popes be never forgotten
because if the chiefest Patriarch be called Universal, the name of Patriarchs
is derogated from the rest. But be this far from the faithful; that any
should willingly snatch that to himself, which may any way seem to diminish
the honor of this breathren, though in never so small a degree: Wherefore, let
not your charity in your Epistles, name any Patriarcke at any time,
Universal; least while ye give to an other, that honor which is not due, ye
take from your selves that which is due. To which I add this Epigramme, set
down as the contents of the Decree in the beginning thereof. Nec etiam
Romanus pontifex vniuersa^is est appellandus: Neither may the Bishop of Rome
be called Universal. Pope Gregory is consonant to Pope Pelagius, in these
express words. Gratian Did 99. cap. ecce.
Ecce, in presatione Epistolae quam ad meipsum qui prohibui, direxistis;
superbae appellationis verbum vniuersalem me Papam dicens, imprimere curastis.
Quod (peto) mihi dulcissima sanctitas vestra vltra non faciat; quia vobis
subtrahitur, quod alteri plus quam ratio exigit, praebetur. Sequitur, sin me
vniuersale^ Papa^ vestra sanctitas dicit, negat se hoc esse, quod me fatetur
vniuersum: sed absit hoc; recedant verba quae veritate^ inflant, et charitate^
vulnerant: Behold, in the Preface of your Epistle, which you addressed to me
forbidding it; you labored to impose upon me a word of proud appellatio^,
calling me Universal Pope: which I pray your sweet holiness, not to do to me
any more; because that is taken from you, which is given to an other, more then
reason does require: For, if your Holiness call me Universal Pope, you deny
your self to be so, seeing you call me Universal: But God forbid; Floruit
Greg. A.D. 591.
away with words that puff up the truth, and wound charity. Thus writes
Gratianus, the compiler of the Decrees: thus, The Bishop of Rome is confounded.
Pope Pelagius: thus, Pope Gregorius. Out of those Positions thus constantly
delivered, I observe sundry very profitable and necessary documentes. Rome,
may be called, Universal Pope. Gregory (who lived more then 590. years after
Christ) utterly refused the name of Universal Bishop or Pope, calling it a
proud name; and sharply reproved Enlagius the Patriarch of Alexandria, for
ascribing the same unto him. Pelagius the predecessor of Gregory, detested
and abhorred the same proud and arrogant name. So then, I may lawfully
conclude, that the name ( Pope) in popish sense and meaning, was not proper and
peculiar to any Bishop of Rome, for the space of 591. years after Christ. How
impudent therefore is our Friar, when he avouches the Council of Chalcedon,
Council. Chalc. A.D 455. celebratum.
to have called Leo the Universal Pope; Liberatus to have termed him Pope,
over the Church of the whole world? Pope Damasus and Theodoretus, to have done
the same? All which, are mere lies, notorious slanders, and irksome
falsifications; invented by the Father of lies, and his dear children the
Jesuitical crew, to defend late vp-start Popery (if it were possible) from
the imputation of the New religion,

B. C.
And this may be the reason, that albeit sometime in the primative Church, the
name was also given to other Bishops; yet seeing in foresaid manner it agreed
peculiarly to the Bishop of Rome, as declaring his sone reign authority over
others, the former custom ceased, and so it remained alone to him.

T. B.
Three things our Friar freely grants in these words: all which (such is the
force of truth) are altogether against him self. Pope) was given to other
Bishops in the primitive Church: and consequently, he must grant, volens
nolens, that to challenge that name, as the Bishop of Rome this day does, is a
rotten ragge of the New religion. Rome, Our Friar slaundreth the primitive
Church.
as declaring his Sovereign authority over others. In which his assertion, a
notable absurdity is employed; viz. that the name ( Pope) was aralogon, and
consequently was given to other Bishops; but improperly, analogically, and by
way of similitude; as every mean Logician can tell, or Iesu^te. Pope) did in
process of time, Our Friar confuteth himself.
cease to be given to other Bishops, and so remained to the Bishop of Rome
alone. Which doubtless is that very doctrine, which I in the trial do
defend. To which I must needs add this one thing, though little to our Friars
liking: viz. that the name ( Pope) was given to other Bishops, in the ancient
Church; as I have proved in my Trial, even hundreds of years after the
Primitive Church. To which addition, this (to cheer up our Friar) is
consectarie: to weet, that the Clergy of Rome, writing to the Clergy of
Carthage, called S. Cyprian, See the trial, and mark it well.
the most blessed Pope: Which verily (as is already said) they neither would,
nor yet durst have done, if the name in such a peculiar manner, as the Friar
would make us believe, had been due to the Bishop of Rome. For if the said name
had been peculiar to him, and his supposed soueraignetie implied therein; other
Bishops could never have enjoyed the same, in the purity of the Church. Nay,
other Bishops would never have improperly accepted of that name and title;
which none but the Bishop of Rome, could properly ascribe unto himself.

B. C.
With the former, he has coupled an other; saying thus: And so in process of
time, the Bishops of Rome were solely and only called Popes; and of Late
years, our Holy Father, and his Holiness, is his usual name. A gross
untruth.

T. B.
This assertion has two parts: The former, our Friar has freely granted, in
his immediately aforegoing words. The latter, he must likewise yield unto
against his will; or else be condemned of the whole world: For, besides that
the Jesuitical Cardinal Bellarmine, and the popish Bishop Josephus Angles, in
their Books, of Late years dedicated to the Bishops of Rome, have given them
the title of Holiness even in the abstract; it is so evident, that his
Holiness, is of Late years, the usual name of the Bishop of Rome; that if
any man either in Rome or in J^ahe shall deny the same, he may justly be
censured worthy of the Whetstone. That which he says of Theodoretus, the
Council of Chalcedon, S. Cyprian, and S. Austin, is very frivolous and nothing
to the purpose. For first, I say, of Late years; and yet the youngest, of our
Friar named, lived above a thousand years ago. Secondly, there is great
disparitie between a peculiar, and an usual name. A peculiar name pertains
solely and only unto one: but that an usual name may agree to many at once,
it cannot be denied. Thirdly, as our Friar has confessed, that the name (
Pope) was of old time given to many; and yet afterward remained to the Bishop
of Rome alone: so must he volens nolens confess; of the name Holiness.

B. C.
Prosecuting his former matter, he says: But this Emperor (that is,
Justinian) lived after Christ his birth, about 528. years: ergo, this point of
popery, is a rotten ragge of the New religion. It is new, for that it comes
short by more then 400. years, of the time of S. Peter's doctrine.
In which words, he venteth out an untruth. For be it, that it was then
appropriated to the Pope, as he says; yet how can it be New, which by his own
confession was used xi. hundred years ago? That is, so many ages before the
foundations of his Religion were laid, or the name of a Protestant heard of in
the whole world.

T. B.
Our Jesuit desiring to discharge the Pope and Popery, of Newness, would
prove it by my grant: viz. because I confess the name ( Pope) to have been
appropriated to the Bishops of Rome, a thousand years ago. But our Friar in
thus disputing, does prove him self a very Daw. For he must learn to know,
that the newness of a thing may be considered two ways; absolutely, and
respectively. And consequently, The newness of Religion may be considered two
ways.
that though the name ( Pope) be Old, absolutely considered; yet it is New
respectively, when it is compared with the time of the Apostles. Now so it is,
that you Papists bear the world in hand, that your Popery is the Old
religion, and that selfsame Doctrine, which S. Peter and S. Paul delivered to
the Church of Rome. This is the Doctrine which I oppugn, even in the beginning
of this present Chapter. But our Friar is so besotted with malice, The word or
name (Pope) is a ragge of the new religion.
that he cannot discern the truth: my reason stands thus. You Jesuits and
Iesuited Papists, affirm desperately and damnably, that your Late start-vp
Popery, is the Old religion, delivered by S. Peter and S. Paul to the Church
of Rome. But that is so far from being true, that the very name ( Pope) is
New; as wanting above 500. years of that age or time, whereof you brag and
boast: ergo, The name was old, as common to al Bishops; but not as proper to
one.
seeing the Apostolic and first Religion is only the Old religion; and that
which comes after (as Tertullian truly writes) the false and New religion;
it follows of necessity, that the name ( Pope) coming 500. years after the
Old religion, is but a rotten Ragge of the New. Where I wish the Reader to
remember, that I speak of the name ( Pope) in that sense, in which the
Bishops of Rome usurp the same That which our Jesuit adds of
Protestants, how absurd it is, shall (God willing) by and by appear.

B. C.
O Friar, great is thy malice against the truth.
I omit here, how many Ecclesiastical names have been brought into the Church,
as Consubstantiall against the Arrians, Incarnation against other Heretics,
the better by a new name to declare an ancient article of Faith. Will Bell for
all that, call these Words, rotten Rags of a New religion? He never dare
offer it* and yet with no less reason may be do it, then he does here the
name of the Pope.

T. B.
Who sees not to what shifts our Jesuitical Friar is driven? He affirms
desperately, that I may with no less reason, call the holy names appropriated
to the son of God, rotten rags of a New religion, then the name of the
Pope. But out upon such Rotten divinity: out upon such paltry Friars. The
sacred names (Consubstantiall, and Incarnation) are equiualently, Ioh. 10. v.
28.29.30. Mat. 9.6. Ioh. 1. v* 14.
according to the substance and true nature of the things signified by the
same, set down in many places of the holy Scriptures: Which was made most
apparent against the Arrians, by the Fathers of the first famous Council of
Nice: but the name ( Pope) as it is of Late years challenged by the Bishops of
Rome, and here avouched by the impudent Friar, is so far from being either
expressly or virtually contained in the holy Scriptures, that all sacred Writ
utterly condemns the same; as a Rotten ragge of a New religion, invented at
Rome above five hundred years after the death of S. Peter and S. Paul. Again,
the Holy names of Consubstantiall and Incarnation, were not first common to
others, and afterward attributed to the son of God: B.C. page 12.
But the name ( Pope,) as I have proved, Let the Friars confession be well
remembered. page 12.
and as the Friar has plainly confessed, was first (and that more then
500-years) common to all Bishops, and in process of time, appropriated to the
Bishops of Rome. Thirdly, the thing truly signified by the holy words
(Consubstantiall, and Incarnation) never could agree to any creature in the
world: but the thing truly signified by the word ( Pope,) did in the primative
and purest age of the Church, does at this present; and may in time to come;
truly agree to all true Bishops in Christ's Church. Now, touching the name of
Protestant, I answer thus: viz. That about the year of our Lord God 1529. the
Duke of Saxony with others, The protestation of the Duke of Saxony, and of
the rest.
protested publicly and constantly, against the decree of Ferdinando the
Emperor, that they could not with safe conscience, obey and yield unto the
same. Whereupon the adversaries did ever since that time, maliciously call all
reformed Catholics and sound Christians, by the name of Protestants. But (as I
have proved in the Jesuits Antepast) we are the Legitimate and reformed
Catholics; and the Papists are Bastardes and deformed Catholics: and
consequently, the thing truly employed in the name ( Protestant) is as old, Read
and mark well the antepast.
as the Religion delivered by S. Peter and S. Paul to the Church of Rome. Which
mine Assertion shall by the power of God, be made most evident, before the end
of this Discourse. See and note well the end of the 16. Chapter, and the 17.
Chapter with it: as also, the 29.30. and 31. Chapters, being the three last of
this present Book.

The Second Chapter, of the Popes Superroyall power.
B. C.
TO season the beginning of his Chapter with a little of his mendatious powder,
be writes thus. Bonifacious Bishop of, etc.

T. B.
To this before, I answer in particular and plain terms, it shall not be
amiss, to lay open to the indifferent Reader, the Popes falsely challenged
Superroyall power: Which I hope in God, to perform most plentiously, by these
Conclusions following.

The first Conclusion.
The Popes own Decrees teach us, Gratian. Did. 40. cap. si papa
that though he be most wicked, and carry with him thousands upon thousands
to the chiese Devil of Hell; yet may no mortal man reprove him, for his such
detestable and cursed dealing. These are the express words of the Popes own
Canon. The Pope may not be judged, though he carry many thousands of men into
Hell fire.
Si Papa, etc. innumerabiles populos cateruatim secum ducit primo mancipio
gehennae, cum ipso, plagis multis inaeternum vapulaturus; huius culpas istic
redarguere praesumit mortalium nullus, quia cunctos ipse iudicaturus a nemine
est indicandus, nisi deprehendatur a fide deuius. These are the words of Pope
Bonifacius, as Gratianus (who compiled the Book of Decrees) has related them.
I heartily wish the Reader, to ponder seriously what I write; protesting upon
my salvation, that in all mine Assertions, Authorities, and Allegations, I
deal faithfully, ever citing the express words, as I find them in mine
Authors, their authorities, and reasons.

The second Conclusion.
The Popes Power is so sacred, so eminent, and so surpassing great, as it is
become flat Sacrilege to dispute of the same. Victoria a most famous and
learned popish schoole-Doctor (who was the first man that brought Scholasticall
doctrine into Spain,) delivers this point of doctrine, in these express
words. Vict. relect. 4. depotest. Papae aeade^ propos. 16.
Non spectat ad subditos determinare aut examinare, quid possit Papa, aut quid
non possit, et quomodo teneantur parere vel non; quia sacrilegium est disputare
de potentia principis, et praecipue Papae. It pertains not to popish vassals,
to determine or examine what the Pope may do, or what he may not do; and how
they are bound to obey, or not: because it is Sacrilege to dispute of the
Power of the Prince; especially of the Pope. We may not dispute of the Popes
power.
Lo, we may not dispute of the Popes Power; no, not to know and learn, how
and wherein we ought to obey him. This is it indeed, that makes so many
silly Papists every where: For Papists must believe all things, but examine
nothing that the Pope does. And why, I pray you? Forsooth, least his coozening
tricks, and the newness of late Popery should be known, and so both the
Pope and all his Iesuited Popelings be utterly overthrown.

The third Conclusion.
The Pope can deliver (if he list) all men in this world, from the pain due to
their sins in this world: The Pope can save others, but not himself.
and not this only, but also bring all souls out of Purgatory; if that be
done for them which he requires. Three very learned and famous Popish
Doctors, Syluester Pryeras, Bartholomaeus Fumus, and Vig^erius, do constantly
and resolutely affirm this conclusion. Sylmester has these express words.
Syluest. do indulg. par. 7.
Sicut potest (Papa) liberare a paena peccatorum debita in hoc mundo, omnes qui
sunt in mundo; si faciant quod mandat, etiamsi essent millies plures quam sunt;
itae liberare potest omnes qui sunt in purgatorio, si quis pro ets facial quod
iubet: As the Pope can deliver all in this world, from pain due for sin in
this world; if they do what he commands, though they were thousands more
then they be: even so can he deliver all that are in Purgatory, if any do
that for them, which he commands. And least any man should think that
impossible, which the Pope requires to be done, Syluest. vbi sop. par. 7.
the same learned Writer tells us in an other place, that it is a thing very
easily done: these be his words. The Pope can bring all the Souls out of
Purgatory.
Indulgentiae simpliciter tantum valent, quantum praedicantur; modo ex part
dantis sit authoritas, ex part recipientis charitas, et ex part causae piet
as: Pardones are simply worth so much, as they are paid; so there be
authority in the giver, charity in the receiver, and piety in the cause or
motive. But so it is (no Papist dare or can deny the same) that the souls in
Purgatory be in charity, by popish faith and doctrine; for otherwise, they
could not be out of Hell. And doubtless, that the Pope has authority to give
Pardons, Sanders, Stukely, Parry, and others had such Pardons.
as also that he grants them for good and godly causes; ( viz. for saying
Masses, Trentals, Diriges, for murdering of noble Princes, for blowing up with
Gunpowder, Towns, Cities, Commonweals, and the like,) I suppose no Papist
will deny: If they do, my argument is the stronger; and my self shall very
willingly agree thereunto. Bartholomaus Fumus has these express words: Fumus
de Papa, par. 11.
Papa posset liberare omnes animas purgatorij, etiamsi plures essent si quis
faceret pro eis, quod iuberet; peccaret tamen indiscrete concedendo: The Pope
could set at liberty all the souls in Purgatory though never so many, if any
would do that for them which he commands; mary he should sin, by his
indiscreet pardoning. But Viguerius proceeds further, and is bold to tell us;
that it is neither inconvenient, nor against the justice of God: these are his
express words. Viguerius de sacram. ordinis in fine.
Nec est inconueniens, quod Papa purgatoriu^ posset euacuare; non enim per hoc
aliquid detraheretur diuinae iustitiae: Neither is it inconvenient, that the
Pope can harrow Hell; for that does derogate nothing, from the justice of God.
Antoninus that famous popish Arch-byshop, iumpeth with the rest, in these
express words: Antonius part. 1. tit. 10. cap. 3.
Quia Ecclesia hoc facit et seruat, credencu^ est it a esse: Because the Church
this does and observes, we must believe it to be so. Lo, we must believe the
Pope and Church of Rome.
Now, to say that the Pope can deliver al souls out of Purgatory, but does it
not to keep himself from sin, is altogether vain and frivolous: For
Syluester and Viguerius. The Pope is a merciles man.
concur as sweetly in delivering all together jointly, as in delivering one
by one severally. The Popes inordinate affection of lucre, is hereby convinced;
in that, albeit he can with one only Pardon, set open the gates of
Purgatory, and set all the prisoners there at liberty; yet will he not
extend that compassion to them, but takes this course with them; that they
shall appoint Ptalegata by their last Wills and Testamentes, Behold popish
ptalegata.
for Masses, Diriges, and Trentals, to be said yearly, or rather perpetually
(if their ability will extend so far:) with which Masses, Diriges, and
Trentals, his Pardons shall concur, and so deliver the^ by policy and
discretion. By reason of which couetously devised policy, we may this day
behold in Spain, Great su^mes of Money given, for saying popish Masses
Rome, and Italy, so many Alters erected, so many Churches sumptuously decked,
so many Priests richly maintained; especially in S. Gregory's Church at Rome:
for which Masses, Diriges, and Trentals, huge sums of money are given daily,
yearly, perpetually; not for the Masses formally concedo, but yet formally for
the Priests panis, and materially for the Masses, constanter assero.

The fourth Conclusion.
The Pope has often by his most wicked and execrable Dispensations, taken upon
him to dissolve that Matrimony, which is firm and stable by Christ's own
institution. The former part is proved, by the popish learned Canonist and
great Divine Martinus Nauarrus in these express words. Nauar. in ench^r. cap.
22. par. 28.
Diuiditur (Matrimoniu^) ante consummationem, per dispensationem Papae iusta de
causa sactam: Matrimony is dissolved before Consummation, by the Popes
Dispensation upon just cause granted. Now, to prove that the Pope may this
do, Navarre takes it for a good ground, that the same has been often
practiced by the Pope. Thus does he write: Nauar. vbi super.
Quorum opinio adeo obseruatur, quod etiam ter vel quater ad petitiones meo
consilio antequa^ in vrbem venissem oblatas, Paulus 3. et Pius 4. per suas
dispensationes dissoluerunt quaedam matrimonia omnino clandestina nondum
consummata, in remedium animarum alioquin probabiliter periturarum. What cannot
the Pope do?
Whose opinion (he speaks of the Canonistes,) is so observed, that three or
four times before my coming to Rome upon petitions made by mine advise,
Paulus the third, and Pius the fourth, The Pope can save Souls.
with their Dispensations dissolved certain secret Matrimonies not yet
consummate, for the sauegard of souls, which by likelihood would otherwise
have perished. Couarruuias an other very learned and most famous popist
Canonist, Couar. to. 1. cap. 7. par. 4* N. 13. col. 1.
does confirm the same, while he tells us constantly, that Pope Paulus the
fourth, and Pope Julius the third, dispensed in like manner. Now, for proof of
the latter: viz. that holy Matrimony before consummation or copulation is
firm and perfect, and cannot be dissolved by the power of man; our Savior
himself teaches us, when he says: Mat. 19.7.
Quod Deus coniunxit, homo non separet. That which God has conjoined, let not
man put asunder. Again in an other place, thus. Luke. 16. v. 18.
Omnis qui dimittit vxorem suam, et alteram ducit, maechatur: Every one that
puts away his Wife, and marryeth an other, commits adultery. Yea, S.
Paul says plainly: 1. Cor. 7. v. 10.
That if the Wife depart from her Husband, she must either remain unmarried,
or else be reconciled to him again. But our holy Father the Pope in his
Decretals, does answer this matter very lustily (though nothing clerkely) in
these words. Greg. lib. 1. tit. 7. cap. 3.
Non enim homo, sed Deus separat, quos Romanus pontifex (qui non puri hominis,
sed very Dei vicem gerit in terris) ecclesiarum necessitate vel vtilitate
pensata, non humana sed diuina potius authoritate dissoluit: For, not man, but
God, does separate those, whom the Bishop of Rome (who bears the person not
of pure man, but of the true God here on earth,) dissolueth not by humane, but
rather divine authority; as the necessity, or utility of the Church
requires. The popish Saint and angelical Doctor Aquinas, proceeds further,
uttering these express words. Aquinas in supl. mento, q. 25. art. 1.
Christus poterat relaxare, ergo et Paulus potuit, ergo et Papa po^est; qui non
est minoris potestatis in Ecclesia, qu^m Paulus suit: Christ could pardon (or
dissolve Matrimony,) therefore Paul could pardon, The Pope has as great
authority, as S. Paul had.
therefore the Pope also can pardon; as who is of as great authority in the
Church, as Paul himself was. So then, a primo ad vltimum, by Aquinas his
doctrine, the Pope can do as much as Christ. He can no doubt, make the deaf
to hear, the dumb to speak, the lame to walk, the blind to see, and the
dead to rise again to life. But our holy Father must pardon me; if I believe
not these things, before I see them done. And yet do these things follow by
an inevitable and irrefragable consequence, of that Doctrine which the Pope and
his angelical Doctor have taught us.

The Fifth Conclusion.
The Pope can Dispense with a Monk already professed, that he may become a
married man. Nauarrus that famous popist Canonist, is, and may be a witness
sufficient of this popish Theme: these are his express words. Nauar. de
iudiciis, notab. 3
Papa potest dispensare cum Monacho iam professo, vt contrahat matrimoniu^; imo
de facto multi Papae dispensarunt: The Pope can dispense with a Monk already
professed, that he may be a married man: yea, many Popes have de facto
dispensed so indeed. See the ^. chapter in the 11. proposition.
Hereof see more at large, in the 3. Chapter, and the eleventh Proposition.

The Sixth Conclusion.
The Pope can Dispense with the full Brother, to marry his own natural and
full Sister, of the same Father and the same Mother. This may seem very
strange to the Christian reader: What will not the Pope do?
But I have proved it plentifully, in the Popes Funeral. Pope Martin the fifth
of that name, did Dispense (as is already said:) but for the better
contentation of the Reader, let him ponder seriously, the 14. Chapter
following: Where (God willing) Pope Martins Dispensation, shall be examined to
the bottom.

The Seventh Conclusion.
The Pope may do, whatsoever pleases his Holiness; as whose bare will, is a
sufficient warrant so to do. The Popes own dear gloss upon his Decretals,
tells us peremptorily and without blushing, that this Conclusion is true:
these are the express words. Gloss. lib. 1. decretal. tit. 7. cap. 3.
Quia in his qu^ vult, et est pro ratione volunta^: For in those things which
the Pope will do, his will is a reason sufficient. And it follows in the
same place: Nec est qui e^ dicat, cur ita facis? Neither may any say to him,
Why do thou so? Pope Boniface in his Decrees, yields the reason hereof; if
we will believe him, pleading for himself: these are his words. Gratian.
did. 40. cap. si Papa.
Quia cunctos ipse iudicaturus, a nemine est iudicandus: For, the Pope is to
judge all others: but none may judge him. God save our holy Father the Pope.

The Eight Conclusion.
The Pope has Universal Jurisdiction over all Kingdoms and Empires; and
fullness of Power, in as ample and large manner as Christ himself had. The
popish famous Friar Augustinus de Ancoua, has these express words: Aug. de
Ancoua in su^ma, P. 152.
(Papa) tanquam vicarius Dej filij caelestis Imperatoris, iurisdictionem habet
vniuersalem super omnia Regna et Imperia: The Pope, as he that is the Vicar of
the Son of God the heavenly Emperor, has universal jurisdiction over all
Kingdoms and Empires. Pope Nicholas, after he has told us many fables of the
Church of Rome, Lo, the Pope is the universal Lord of the whole world.
does at length tell us; that S. Peter, and the Bishops of Rome his
successors, have all Power both earthly and heavenly: these are his words, in
the Book of Popish decrees* Did. 22. cap. omnes.
(Christus) Beato Petro aeternae vitae clau^gero, terreni simul et cae^estis
imperij iura commisit: Christ committed to S. Peter the Porter of heaven gates,
the rightes both of earthly and heavenly regalitie. And the popish gloss
annexed to this Decree of Pope Nicholas, delivers the matter in more gallant
terms: The Pope is an other God.
these are the words. Argumentu^, quod Papa habet vtrumque gladium; viz.
spiritualem et temporalem: This is an argument, that the Pope has both
Swords; to weet, the Spiritual, and the temporal. And in the Margent it
confirms the same, in these plain terms: Papa habens vtrumque gladium
transtulit Imperi^m: The Pope having both the Swords, translated the Empire.
Yea, the Pope Boniface the eight, made a flat Decree for the confirmation of
his pretended right to both Swords: as is to be seen in his extrauagant, (
Vnam sanctam de maioritate et obedientia,) set down in the sixth Book annexed
to the Decretals. Appendix Fuldensis vnfouldeth this arrogant and brutish
Decree, in these plain terms. Appendix Fuldensis.
Hic Papa (Bonifacius 8.) constitutionem fecerat, in qua se dominum spiritualem
et temporalem in vniuerso mundo asserebat. Vnde requisiuit Philippum regem
Franciae, vt a se regnum suum cognosceret, quod rex facere, contempsit: The
Pope would be King of the whole world.
The Pope (he speaks of Boniface the eight) made a constitution, in which he
affirmed himself to be both spiritual and temporal Lord in the whole world:
Whereupon he would have had Phillip king of France, to have acknowledged his
Kingdom from him: The Pope was well rewarded.
but the King laughed him to scorn for his pains. Johannes Gersonus, a very
learned Papist, and sometime Chancellor of the famous University of Paris,
affirms wonderful power to be ascribed to the Pope: thus does he write.
Gers. de potest. eccles. consid. 12. part. 3.
Sicut non est potestas, nisi a Deo; sic nec aliqua Temporalis vel
Ecclesiastica, Imperialis vel Regalis, nisi a Papa; in cuius faemore scripsit
Christus, Rex regu^, Dominus Dominantium: Like as there is no Power, but of
God; so is there neither any Temporal nor Eccesiasticall, Out upon filthy
Popery
neither Imperial nor Regal, but of the Pope; in whose thigh Christ has
written, the King of Kings, the Lord of Lords. Lo here (gentle Reader) two
things are proper to God alone: the one, to be King of Kings and Lord of
Lords; the other, to be the author of all Power: both which, the Papists
ascribe unto their Pope. Thus writes M. Gerson of the Popes Superroyall power,
which his flattering Parasites have with his good liking, given him; although
the same Gerson being otherwise a very zealous Papist, did utterly dislike and
deride the same. The Pope himself from his own pen ( Gregory the ninth)
delivers us this doctrine. Greg. 9. libr. 1. decretal. tit. ^3. cap. 6.
Ad firmamentum caeli, hoc est, vniuersalis Ecclesiae, fecit Deus duo magna
Luminaria; id est, duas instituit dignitates, quae sunt pontificalis
authoritas, et regalis potestas. Sequitur, vt quanta est inter Solemn et Luna^,
tanta inter Pontifices et Reges differentia cognoscatur: To the firmament of
Heaven; that is, of the universal Church, God made two Lights; that is,
Pontifical authority, and power Royal: that we may know, there is as much
difference between Popes and Kings, as there is between the Sun and the
Moon. Glossa vbi super.
The Popes gloss upon this goodly Text, sets down precisely, how far a
King is inferior to a Pope; that is, to any Bishop of Rome, in these words.
The Emperor not thought comparable to the Pope.
Restat, vt Pontificalis dignitas quadragesies septies sit mayor regali
dignitate: It remains, that the dignity of the Pope is forty times seven
times greater, then is the power of the King. Thus writes the gloss, disputing
out of Ptolomaeus; that the Pope must be infinitely greater, then any King in
the whole world. Well, let us hear the Clerkely sentence of Pope Gelasius, in
his own behalf: these are his words. Did. 96. cap. duo sunt.
Honor et sublimitas episcopalis, nullis poterit comparationibus adaequari. si
regum fulgori compares, et principum diademati, long erit inferius, quam si
plumbi metallum ad auri fulgorem compares: Mark this: The Emperor is compared
to Lead, and the Pope to Gold.
The honor and dignity of a Bishop, can not be equalized by any comparison:
If it be compared to the excellency of Kings, and to the Diademes of Princes;
it shall be found far more inferior, then if thou compare a piece of Lead
with bright shyning Gold. So then, the Popes own Decrees, make it clear and
evident, that the Lordly and more then Royal titles ascribed to them, do
sound well in their ears.

The Ninth Conclusion.
The Pope can by his supereminent excellency and fullness of Power, change the
nature of things, apply the substantial parts of one thing to another, and of
nothing make some thing. The Popes dear gloss upon his Decretals, does
plainly deliver the truth of this Conclusion, in these most golden words.
Libr. 1. decretal. tit. 7. Cap. ^. in glossa.
(Papa) naturam rerum immutat, substantialia vnius rei applicando alij; et de
nihilo potest aliquid facere: quia in his quae vult, ei est pro ratione
voluntas; et plenitudinem obtinet potestatis. The Pope changes the nature of
things, by applying the substantial parts of one thing to another; and he
can make of nothing, some thing: for, in those things which he has a mind to
do, his bare Will is to him a sufficient warrant; and he has the fullness of
Power. Antonius that famous popish Arch-byshop and canonized Saint, coming as
Ambassador from the Pope, tells us (if we may believe him) that the Pope is
Christ's Vicar upon earth, and of equal power with God omnipotent: these are
his express words. Antonius 3. part. tit. 22. cap. 5.. 8.
Cum autem vicarius Christi sit Papa, nullus potest seipsum subtrahere ab
obedientia eius de iure, sicut nullus de iure potest se subtrahere ab
obedientia Dei. Mark well for Christ's sake, and detest late start-up Popery;
for it is the new religion, as every child may see.
et sicut recepit Christus a patre ducatum et sceptrum ecclesiae gentiu^ ex
Israel egrediens, super omnem principatu^ et potestatem, et super omne
quodcu^que est, vt ei genua cuncta curuentur; sic ipse Petro et successoribus
eius, plenissima^ potestatem commisit: For seeing the Pope is the Vicar of
Christ, none can lawfully withdraw himself from his obedience, as none can
lawfully withdraw himself from Gods obedience: And as Christ received of his
Father, the Dukedom and Scepter of the Church of the Gentiles, over all
Principality and power, and above every thing that has being, that to him
every knee may bend: even so Christ has committed most full Power, to Peter,
and to his successors (the Bishops of Rome.) Out of these Popish authorities,
I observe (to the confusion of the Pope, and Popery) these golden Lessons. The
Pope chalengeth equality with God.
(though it be very strange and wonderful) is truly deduced out of these
words: ( Super omne quodcunque est, vt ei genua cunctae curuentur,) forasmuch
as it must needs be granted even of the Pope himself, that God has not
only a being, but such a supereminent being, as of which all other beeings
depend, and from thence receive their beeings. Antichrist: it can not with any
reason be denied.

The Tenth Conclusion.
The first occasion, and Popish falsely pretended foundation of all the
forenamed Arrogant, Lordly, Superroyal, and plain divine tytles ascribed to
the late Bishops of Rome, was a counterfeite and falsely pretended Donation
of the Emperor Constantinus surnamed the great, at his departure from the West
into the East, about 327. years after Christ; that is, to Constantinople from
the city of Rome. Behold the proof. The Popes Decrees compiled and gathered
together by his devoted vassal Gratianus, Gratianus, did. 96. cap.
Constantinus.
bear the world in hand, and tell the Readers, that the Emperor Constantine
the great, gave great Power, royal Excellency, and imperial Majesty, even
the royal Crown of pure Gold from off his head, This kind of coozenage
advanced the Pope.
with all his title, right, prerogatives royal, authority, power, and
dignity whatsoever, not only in Rome, but also in Italy, and in all the West
parts, to the Bishop of Rome and his successors for ever. And the rather to
persuade all people, that Constantine gave to the Bishops of Rome (as is
already said:) the said popish Decree sets down the worthy motive, by which
the Emperor was induced to translate the Western Empire, with all his royal
right there, and to bestow the same upon the Bishops of Rome. These amongst
many other long periods, do plainly intimate his motive. Mark the words well.
Vnde congruu^ perspeximus, nostru^ imperiu^ et regni potestatem orientalibus
transferri regionibus et in Bizantiae prouinciae optimo loco nomini nostro
ciuitate^ aedificari, et nostru^ illi^ imperium constitui: quonia^, vbi
principatus Sacerdotu^ et Christianae religionis caput ab Imperatore caelesti
constitutu^ est, iustu^ non est, vt Imperator terrenus habeat potestatem:
Whereupon we have thought it meet, that our Empire and power of our kingdom,
should be removed to the Eastern regions; and that a City should be built
for our name at B^zantiu^, This is a ridiculous motive.
a place most fit for us; and that our Empire should be appointed there.
Because, where the Prince of Priesthood, and the head of christian religion,
was appointed by the Heavenly Emperor; it is not meet, that an earthly
Emperor should have power. Thus disputes the Pope, The Popes learned
disputation.
for his Primacie and Golden Crown; insinuating himself (if we will believe
his Antichristian pleading;) to be the Emperor of the western World. This
falsely pretended Donation (of which I have written more at large in the
Downfall of Popery,) the latter Popes did ever object, and violently obtrude
it upon the Church; never ceasing with importunity to solicit the succeeding
Emperors, to confirm the said supposed Donation, and to make Rome the head of
all Churches; until such time as Pope Boniface the third of that name, did
with much ado, obtain of the cruel and bloody tyrant Phocas, then the
Emperor (who ravished many virtuous Matrones, and murdered the good Emperor
Mauritius with his wife and children,) that Rome should be the Head of all
Churches: This was effected, about 607. years after Christ. So then, the
Majesty of the Bishops of Rome was not heard of in Christ's Church, A.D. 607.
for the space of 327. years after Christ: at which time, a counterfeit and
false Donation was fetched from Hell, in the name of the Emperor Constantine
the great. Neither could the Bishops of Rome persuade any one of the Emperors,
for the space almost of three hundred years after that supposed Donation,
either to confirm the same, or to make Rome the Head of all Churches. Phocas
did not approve the donation.
One only Phocas (that wicked Emperor) gave some credit to it, and made Rome
Head of all Churches. Of which subject, I have else where disputed more at
large, both in the Downe-fall of Popery, and in my Suruay. Now, that it is a
counterfeit and falsely pretended Donation (albeit the Bishops of Rome have
with many coozening tricks, made use thereof for their advancement,) I will
evidently prove, and plainly convince, by the clear testimonies of many
learned and famous Writers, who all are of high esteem in the Church of Rome.
Nicolaus de Cusa, a famous and learned Cardinal, wrote to to the Council of
Basil his opinion, concerning the falsely supposed Donation of Constantine:
these are his express words. Cusanus de concord. cathol. lib. 3. cap. 2. ad
conc. Basil.
Sed in veritate super modum admiror, sires ita est, eo qu^d in autenticis
libris et in historijs approbatis non inuenitur. Relegi omnia quae potui gesta
Imperial^a, ac Romanoru^ pontificu^ historias; sancti Hier onymj, qui ad cuncta
colligendum diligentissimus fuit, Augustinj, Ambrosij, ac alioru^ opuscula
peritissimoru^. Reuelui gesta sacroru^ conciliorum, quae post Niconumfuere, et
nullam inuenio concordantiam ad ea, quae de illa donatione legu^tur. Sanctus
Damasus Papa, ad instantiam beati Hieronymj, actus et gesta praedecessorum
dicitur annotasse: in cuius opere de Siluestro Papa non ea inueniuntur, quae
vulgo dicuntur: But in truth I greatly admire, if it be so, seeing it can not
be found in any authentical Books, and approved Histories: I have read all
the Acts of the Emperors* and the Histories of the Bishops of Rome, which
possibly I could find; the works of S. Hierome, who was a most diligent
searcher out of Antiquities, Behold, how this learned popish Cardinal
confounds the supposed majesty of the Pope.
of Augustine, of Ambrose, and of other most learned Writers. I have reuolued
the Acts of the sacred Councels, which were after the council of Nice; and I
find nothing agreeable to those things, which are read (in the Popes Decrees)
of that Donation. Holy Damasus the Pope, at the request of S. Hierome, gathered
the Acts and doings of his predecessors; in whose work, those things can
not be found, which commonly are fathered upon Pope Siluester. Thus writes
Cardinal Cusanus, affirming the supposed Donation of Constantine to be
counterfeit. He adds withal in the same place, many long Periodes to the
same effect: viz. That Constantine gave neither the West Empire to the Pope,
nor yet Rauennas; no, nor the City of Rome. Yea, he plainly avouches, that
the Bishops of Rome acknowledged the Emperors for their Lords: that Pope
Agatho granted the City of Rome to belong to the Emperor Constantine, who
summoned the sixth general Synod, A.D. 681.
and lived more then 340. years after Constantine the great; who is falsely
reported, to have given away Rome, Italy, and the whole Western Empire, to
the Bishops of Rome. Vide did. 96. cap. ecclesiae.
He also affirms constantly, that Pope Bonifacius acknowledged the City of
Rome, to pertain to the Emperor Honorius. To be brief, Cardinal Cusanus
adds these express words: Et vt breuiter dicam, nullibi contrarium legi;
quin vsque ad illa prefata Pipini tempora, Imperator remanserit in possessione
locorum pretactorum: nec vnquam legi alique^ Romanorum pontificum, vsque ad
tempora Stephani secundi, in illis locis nomine sancti Petri aliquid iuris
praesumpsisse habere. haec credo vera esse, non obstante famigera opinione de
contrario quae Palea habetur. Did. 96. cap. Constantinus.
quoniam absque dubio, si non fuisset illud dictamen apocryphum, Gratianus in
veteribus codicibus, et Canonum collectionibus inuenisset; et quia non inuenit,
non posuit: And to be brief, I have no where read the contrary, but that the
Emperor was still in the possession of the aforenamed places, until the days
of Pipinus: Neither did I ever read, The Pope is an usurper.
that any Bishop of Rome presumed to challenge any right in those places in the
name of S. Peter* until the time of Pope Stephanus the second: This I believe
is the truth, notwithstanding the opinion to the contrary in the Popes
Decrees. For without doubt, if that report were not apocryphal, Gratianus
would have found it in the old Books and collections of Canons: but because he
did not find it, Constantines Donation is not in the old decrees.
he did not set down the same. Yea, the said Cardinal adds yet further;
that he found the same report of Constantines Donation, in an other Book, in
far larger manner, then it is set down in the Popes Decrees: which when he
examined diligently, he found by the very words thereof, many arguments of
falsehood and deceitful dealing, too long to be rehearsed. Much more has the
said Cardinal touching this feigned Donation: which in regard of brevity, I
omit.

Antonius that famous Arch-byshop and popish canonized Saint, confirms the
opinion of Cardinal de Cusa, in these words. Anton. p. 1. tit. 8. c. 2.. 8.
Tertium dubium est de donatione facta ecclesiae a Constantino, de qua habetur
in decretis dict. 96. Constantinus. Sed illud cap. non habetur in antiquis
decretis: quid ergo et quantum donauerit, non est been certum: The third doubt
is, of the Donation which Constantine made to the Church; of which mention is
made in the Decrees, in the 96. Distinction, Did. 96. Constantinus.
and chapter Constantinus. But that Chapter can not this day be found, in the
old Decrees. What therefore, and how much he gave, it is not very certain. But
this is certain, by S. R. that learned Jesuits confession; that the Pope was
never personally in any Council of the East; S. R. page 411. Mark this point
well.
least he being then the Emperors temporal subject, should be placed under
the Emperor. O humble Pope! Raphael Volateranus, a famous and grave
Historiographer, iumpeth with Cardinal Cusanus and Antonius, in these words.
Volateran. in vita Constantini magni.
De dono Constantini aut concessione, apud nullos extat authors, praeter quam
in libro decretorum: Concerning the gift or grant of Constantine, it can be
found no where in any Writer, save only in the book of Decrees.

Cathalon. in practic. Cancellar. Apostolicae.
Paulus Cathalanus vtriusque iuris doctor, and Chamberlain to Pope Alexander
the sixth (who was as likely as any, to know what possessions the Pope had and
held) does affirm the supposed Donation of Constantine, to be a forged, Lo
no approved history makes mention of Constantines donation.
false, and counterfeit thing; of which, no approved Historiographer makes
any mention. Not Eusebius (says he) who was a most diligent searcher out of
Christian Antiquities. He adds, that neither Hieronymus, nor Augustinus, nor
Ambrosius, nor Basilius, nor Chrysostomus, nor Ammianus, nor the tripartite
History, nor yet Pope Damasus in his Chronicle, nor Beda, nor Orosius, have
made any mention of the same. After which large, pithy, and constant Narration,
he adds these express words. Cathalan. vbi super.
Et constat, per plures quam tercentum annos post Constantinum, Imperatores
tenuisse gubernacula vrbis et Italiae, per duces, praesides et exarchos; et
vrbis Romanae, vsque ad tempora Innocentij secundi: Sequitur, et in vita Phocae
Imperatoris, legitur impetrasse Pantheon Bonifacium Papam ab eo: A.D 1130.
Vnde ergo habuerit terras Ecclesia, vide gesta Caroli magni, et Pipini, et
Pium (Papa^) in dicto dialogo: The Emperors kept Rome and Italy in their hands,
for the space of more then 300. years after Constantine.
And it is evident (says this great learned Writer, highly devoted to the Pope)
that the Emperors for more then 300. years after Constantine, kept in their
hands the government of the City, and of Italy, by their Chieftaines,
Presidentes, and Exarchates; and of the City of Rome, until the time of
Jnnocentius the second: And in the life of the Emperor Phocas, Pope Boniface,
as we read, got Pantheon of him by request. From whence therefore the Church of
Rome had her possessions, we must gather out of the Acts of Charles the great,
and of Pippin, and of the Dialogue of Pope Pius. To which I add, Cathal. vbi
super in marg.
that Pope Pius wrote a Dialogue against the pretensed Donation: For in the
margent, I find these words. Papa Pius dialogum scripsit, contra donationem
Constantini: Vbi super, in marg.
Pope Pius wrote a Dialogue, against Constantines Donatio^. Again, an other
Margent following, has these words: Mark this wonderful narration.
Argumentu^ forte. Ca. M. Et Pipinus, spoliatis veris Imperatoribus, ecclesiam
Romanam ditarunt. Charles the great, and Pipine, spoiling the true Emperors,
enriched the City of Rome. Mark well, this is wonderful. The Popes were
enriched, by the robbery and spoil of the true Emperors: A thing incredible,
if a Papist had not reported it. Laurentius valla era^ patricius Romanus.
Laurentius Valla a very learned Writer, and Citizen of Rome; has published a
large Book in print; in which he only zealously and learnedly declameth,
against the falsely pretended Donation of Constantine the great. His
declamation touched the Pope so narrowly, that he did it not without the
danger of his life. How be it, he choose rather to hazard his life for the
good of Christ's Church, then with his silence, to bewray and betray the
truth. The whole subject of his Book, and the argument which he there
handles, is nothing else but this in very deed: viz. to lay open to the eyes
of all christian readers, Lying and Coozenage. the original of Popish royalty.
the false reports, miserable shifts, and plain coozening tricks, which the
Bishops of Rome set abroach by false Books, and fabulous Decrees, to advance
them selves above all Royal and Imperial power, and to be thought equal with
Christ the Son of God. He soundly confuteth every Period, Sentence, Clause,
and Word, See and note well the christian dialogue, chapter, 4. page,
90.91.92.93.94.
of the fabulous and lying Decree, published under the name of Constantine the
great. Yea, he proves and plainly conuinceth, out of the very words of the
Decree; that it is nothing else but a false, lying, and counterfeit
imagination, invented to advance the Bishops of Rome above the Emperors of
Rome, and all Power upon Earth. To recite his large and manifold authority,
proofs, arguments, and reasons; would both be tedious to the Reader, and
needless in the thing it self. It may suffice to lay open to the gentle and
thankful Reader, some special points contained in the said learned and worthy
Declamation. The first point is this: The. 1. point. Fol. 19. A.
viz. That Melchiades, who was the next Bishop before Siluester, confuteth the
said Donation falsely fathered upon Constantine the great: For, Melchiades
affirms plainly (says Laurentius Valla) two things of great consequence:
The One, that Constantine was a very zealous Christian in his time, and gave
license throughout the whole world to all within his dominions, not only to
become Christians, but also to build Churches every where: The Other, that the
Emperor Constantine, gave Melchiades the Palace of Lateran, and those
Grounds, of which Gregory makes often mention in his register. Valla in
declamat. page 18. B.
And this great learned Roman, confirms the same in his words immediately
afore-going: which are these. Omnis fere Historia, quae nomen Historiae
meretur, Constantinum a pu^ro cum patre Constantio Christianum refert, multo
etiam ante Pontificatum Siluestri: Every History almost (which is worthy the
name of an History) tells us, that Constantine of a child was a Christian
with his father Constantius; De donat. et curat. Leprae Constantini, Lege R^num
episc. Paduan. in hist. de vitis pontific.
even long before Siluester was the Bishop of Rome. This Valla affirms
constantly, as we see. And consequently, the Donation pretended to be given to
Siluester, and the curing of Constantines supposed Leprie, can not stand
together with the same.

The 2. point. fol. 26. B.
The Second point is this: viz. That the words of the Decree do plainly
convince, that Constantine never gave any such gift to Siluester. These are his
express words: The Popes decree confuteth it self.
O furcifer: Ecclesiaene, id est, templa Roma erant Petro et Paulo dicatae?
quis eas extruxerat? quis aedisicare ausus fuisset, quum nusquam foret, vt
Historia ait, Christianis locus, nisi secreta et latebrae: O verlet! were
Churches; that is, Temples dedicated to Peter and Paul at Rome? Who built them?
Nay, who durst be so bold as to build them? seeing (as Histories do relate)
there was no place for Christians any where, but Caves, Dens, and Groves, to
hide them in.

The third point is this: viz. that the Decree fathered upon Constantine,
calls the Bishop of Rome, Pope: The 3. point. fol. 34. B.
which name for all that, was not yet peculiarly ascribed to the Bishops of
Rome. These are Valla his express words. A very fond popish assertion,
concerning Constantine.
O tuam singularem stultitiam Constantine! modo dicebas coronam super-caput
Papae, ad honorem facere beati Petri; nunc ais non facere, quia Siluester illam
recusat: et quum factum recusantis probes, tamen iubes eum aurea vti corona: et
quod hic non debere se agere existimat, id tu ipsius successores dicis agere
debere: transeo, quod rasuram coronam vocas, et Papam pontificem Romanum, qui
nondum peculiariter sic appellari erat caeptus: O Constantine! great is thy
folly; before thou sayd'st, that the Crown (of Gold) upon the Popes head, made
for the honor of S. Peter; now thou says it does nor, because Siluester
refuses it, and thou approouing the fact of Siluester refusing it, do for
all that command to wear it: and what he thinks he may not do, that thou
commaundes his successors for to do. I let pass, Mark this well, both for
the name and the crown.
that thou calls his Shauing, a Crown; and the Bishop of Rome, Pope; who had
not yet peculiarly gotten that name.

The fourth point is this: viz. The 4. point fol. 34. B.
That the most Christian and worthy Emperor, became the Popes Footman, and
held his Stirroppe. These are the words: Tenentes fraenu^ equi pro reuerentia
beati Petri Apostoli, dextratoris officium illi exhibuimus: The Emperor must
hold the Popes Stirrup.
We held the Bridle of his Horse: and for the reverence of S. Peter the
Apostle, we became his Footman, or waighter at his Stirroppe. Thus writes
Valla; and thus is the counterfeite Decree, which Valla very sharply
reprooueth, and learnedly confuteth. So that this counterfeite Donation with
Constantines departure, See the 8. steps of the Popes ladder, in the downfall
of Popery.
was the first step of the Popes Ladder: of which I have disputed at large,
in the Downe-fall of Popery.

The 5. point. fol. 45.46.47. A.B.
The fifth point is this: viz. That what so ever the Emperors of latter time
gave to the Bishops of Rome, concerning the Roman Empire, the dominion, and
territories thereof; Mark for Christ's sake. This is wonderful.
they were induced to do the same, by the coozening tricks and deceitful
reports of the Bishops of Rome, which they falsely fathered upon the most
Christian and worthy Emperor Constantine the great. Let us hear attentively,
Fol. 45. A.
what Laurentius Valla delivers from his Pen.

His first place (which I mean to stand upon, is this: Haec dicta sint, vt
nemo miretur, si donationem Constantini co^mentitiam fuisse Papae multi non
potuerunt deprehendere; tametsi ab aliquo eorum ortam esse hanc fallaciam reor:
at dicitis; cur Imperatores, quorum detrimento res ista redebat, donationem
Constantini non negant, sed fatentur, affirmant, conseruant? Ingens argumentu^,
mirifica defensio: nam de quo tu loqueris Imperatore? Si de Graeco, qui verus
fuit Imperator, negabo confessione^; fin de Latino, libenter etiam confitebor:
etenim quis nescit Imperatorem Latinum gratis esse factum a summo Pontifice, vt
opinor, Stephano; qui Graecum Imperatorem, quod auxilium non ferret Italiae
priuauit, latinumque fecit; ita vt plura Imperator a Papa, quam Papa ab
Imperatore acciperet: These things are written to this end, that no man think
it strange, if many Popes could not perceive Constantines supposed Donation,
The Pope uses coozening tricks.
to be counterfeit; although I think, that some of them invented this
coozening trick. But ye will say; Why do not the Emperors, who sustained
the loss, deny the gift of Constantine, but rather grant and support the
same? A great argument, a marvelous defense. For, of what Emperor do thou
speak? If of the Greek, who was the true Emperor in deed; I deny the grant:
If of the Latin, I willingly agree thereunto? For, See the downfall of
popery, page, 13. and note it well.
who knows not, that the Latin Emperor came freely (though falsely) to the
Empire by Pope Stephans gift; who deprived the Greek Emperor, for that he did
not succor Italy; and placed a Latin in his stead: so as the Emperor
received more of the Pope, then the Pope of the Emperor.

His second place is comprised in these words: Fol. 46. A. Did. 63. cap. ego
Ludouicus. A.D. 817.
Ego Ludouicus Imperator Romanus, Augustus, statuo et concedo per hoc pactum
confirmationis nostrae tibi beato Petro principi Apostolorum, Mark these words
well.
et per te Vicario tuo domino paschali summo pontifici et successoribus eius in
perpetuu^; sicut a praedecessoribus nostris vsque nunc in vestra potestate et
ditione tenuistis, Romana^ ciuitate^ cum ducatu suo et suburbanis, atque
viculis omnibus et territorijs eius, montanis et maritimis, littoribus et
portubus, seu cunctis Ciuitatibus, Castellis, Oppidis, ac Villis, in Tusciae
partibus: tu ne Ludouice cum paschale pacisceris? si tua, id est, Imperij
Romani sunt ista, cur alteri concedis? si ipsius, et ab ipso possidentur, quid
attinet te illa confirmare? Sequitur, merito pactum appellas, quasi quandam
collusione^: sed quid faciam, inquies? repetam armis, quae Papa occupat? at
ipse iam factus est me potentio^: repetamiure? at ius meum tantum est, quantum
ille voluerit. Non enim haereditario nomine ad Imperium veni, sed pacto; vt si
Imperator esse volo, haec et haec inuicem Papae promittam. Fol. 47. B.
Sequitur, Sigismundus cum Romam verisset, vt pro Imperatore Romanorum
coronaretur, non aliter a Papa coronari potuit, quam vt Constantini donationem
ratam haberet, eademque omnia de integro donaret: quid magis centrarium, quam
pro Imperatore coronari, qui Romae ipsi renunciasset? et coronari ab illo, quem
et co^fitcatur, et quantum in se est, dominum Romani Imperij faciat? Lo, the
people of Rome ought to crown the Emperor.
Acratam habere donationem, quae vera si sit, nihil Imperatori de imperio
reliqui fiat? Quod vt arbitror, nec pucri fecissent: Quo minus mirum, si Papa
sibi arrogat Caesaris coronatione^, quae populi Romani esse deberet: si tu
Papa, et potes Graecum Imperatorem priuare Italia, prouincijsque occidentis, et
Latinum Imper: facis, cur pactionibus vteris? Cur bonae Caesaris partiris? Cur
in te imperium transfers? Quare sciat, quisquis est Imperator To. me iudice, se
non esse, nec Augustum, nec Caesarem, nec Imperatorem, nisi Romae imperium
teneat; et nisi operam det, vt vrbe^ Romam recuperet, plane esse periuru^: nam
Caesares illi priores, quorum primus fuit Constantinus, non adigebantur
iusiurandu^ interponere, quo nunc Caesares obstringuntur; sed quantum humana
open praestari potest, nihil imminuturos esse de amplitudine imperij Romani,
eamque sedulo adaucturos: I Lodowicke, Emperor of Rome, Augustus, do decree
and grant by this covenant of our Confirmation, to thee S. Peter Prince of the
Apostles; and by thee to thy Vicar Lord Paschall the high Priest, and to his
successors for ever; as you have holden them of our predecessors until this
day in your power and dominion, the City of Rome, with her Dukedom Suburbs,
Streets, Territories, Mountains, Marshes, Shores, Ports; and all Cities,
Castles, Towns, and Villages in the coasts of Thus^a. Do thou Lodowicke,
covenant with Paschall? If these things be thine; that is, pertain to the
Empire, why do thou give them to an other? If they be his, Lo the Popes
supe^^oyall power, is gotten by coozenage.
and he have them in possession, to what end must thou confirm the same? Thou
truly calls it a Covenant, as it were a Collusion. But thou will say, What
shall I do? Shall I by force require the things, which the Pope has in
possession? But he is now become stronger then my self. Shall I demand them*
as my right? But my right is only that, which he will afford me: for, I
came not to the Empire by right of inheritance, but by pact and covenant; so
as I can not be Emperor, unless I will give the Pope what he desires.
Behold the folly of all follies in the world.
Sigismundus coming to Rome there to be crowned Emperor of the Romans, could
not be crowned of the Pope but upon this condition; that he would confirm
Constantines Donation, and give all the same things anew. What is more
contrary, then that he should be crowned Emperor, who had renounced Rome? nay
be crowned of him, whom he both confesses, and as much as in him lies, makes
the Lord of the Roman Empire? And should in like manner confirm that
Donation, which if it be true, no part of the Empire shall remain in the
Emperors hand? Which thing I think, children would not have done. Wherefore,
Lo, the people of Rome, not the Pope, ought to crown the Emperor.
it is less to be admired, if the Pope challenge to himself the Crowning of
Caesar, which of right pertains to the people of Rome. If thou be Pope, and
can deprive the Greek Emperor of Jtaly, and of the Western Provinces, and
make a Latin Emperor, why do thou use Couenantes? Why do thou divide
Caesar's right? Why do thou translate and give away the Empire from thy
self? Wherefore, let him know, whosoever is the Roman Emperor, that if I be
judge, he neither is Augustus, nor Caesar, nor Emperor, unless he hold and
keep the Empire of Rome; as also that he is perjured, unless he employ his
best endeavor, to recover the City of Rome again: For, the former Caesar's,
of whom Constantine was the chief, were not urged to take that Oath, which
this day is imposed upon the Caesar's; but no way to diminish the amplitude of
the Roman Empire, and as much as man's power can effect, to enlarge the same.

His third place is contained in these words: Fol. 48. A.
Vt quisque pessimus est summorum Pontificum, ita maxim defendendae huic
Donationi incu^bit: qualis Bonifacius octauus, qui Celestinum tubis parieti
insertis decepit: hic et de donatione Constantini scribit, et regem Franciae
priuauit, regnu^que ipsum, quasi donationem Constantini exequi vellet,
Ecclesiae Romans fuisse et esse subiectum indigauit. Quod statim successores
eius, Benedictus et Clemens, vt improbum et iniustum reuocarunt: Verum, quid
sibi vult ista vestra Pontifices Romans sollicitudo, quod a singulis
Imperatoribus donationem Constantinj exigitis confirmari, nisi quod iurj
diffiditis vestro? Lo, the Emperor cannot give away the Empire.

O most holy Popes! O coozeners! O deceivers.


Sed laterem lauatis, vt dicitur, nam neque illa vnquam fuit, et quodnon est,
confirmarj non potest; et quicquid denant Caesares, deceptj exemplo Constantinj
faciunt, et donare Jmperium nequeunt: The more wicked every Pope is, the more
he employeth himself to defend this Donation. Such was Bonifacius the eight;
who deceived Celestine with Trumpets placed in the wall. This man writes of
the Donation of Constantine, and he deprived the King of France, and judged
his Kingdom, as one that would execute Constantinet gift, both to have been,
and this day to be subject to the Church of Rome: which his successors
Benedict and Clement, One Pope is ashamed of that, which an other does.
forthwith revoked, as a thing wicked and unjust. But what means this your
solicitude, O ye Bishops of Rome! that ye do exact of every Emperor, to
confirm Constantines gift, if ye do not distrust your own right? But all in
vain (as the proverb says,) for it never was at any time; and what is not,
can not be confirmed. Yea, whatsoever the Caesar's do, they do the same, being
deceived by Constantines example (or supposed gift,) and they cannot give away
the Empire.

His fourth place, is comprised in these words. Fol. 51. B.
Praescipsit Romana ecclesia: O Imperiti! O diuini iuris ignari: nullus
quantu^uis annorum numerus, verum abolere titulum potest: Fol. 52. A.
Sequitur, parum ante me natum, (testor eorum memoriam, qui interfuerunt) per
inauditu^ genus fraudis, Roma papale accepit Imperium, seu tyrannidem potius,
cum diu libera fuisset. Is fuit Bonifacius nonus, octauo in fraud et nomine
par; si modo Bonifacij dicendi sunt, qui pessime faciunt. Fol. 53. A.
Sequitur; sed quid plura opus est in re apertissima dicere? Ego non modo
Constantinum non donasse tanta, non modo non potuisse Romanum Pontificem in
eisdem praescribere, Fol. 54. A.
sed etiamsi vtrumque esset, tamen vtrumque ius sceleribus possessorum
extinctum esse contendo; cum videamus totius Italiae; multarumque prouinciarum
cladem ac vastitatem ex hoc vno font fluxisse. Fol. 54. B.
Sequitur, Papa non modo remp: quod non Verres, non Catilina, non quispiam
peculator auderet; sed etiam rem Ecclesiasticam et spiritum sanctum quaestui
habet; quod Simon ille Magus detestatur: et cum horum admonetur, et a quibusdam
bonis viris reprehenditur; non negat, sed palam fatetur, atque gloriatur,
licere ei, quauis ratione patrimonium Ecclesiae a Constantino donatum, ab
occupantibus extorquere. Fol. 55. A.
Sequitur: Nulla itaque vnquam religio, nulla sanctitas, nullus Dei timor; et
quod referens quoque horresco, omnium scelerum impij homines a Papa sumunt
excusationem: in illo enim comitibusque eius, est omnis facinoris exemplu^; vt
cu^ Esaia et Paulo, in Papam et Papae proximos dicere possumus, Nomen Dei per
vos, blasphematur inter Gentes: qui alios docetis, vosipsos non docetis: qui
praedicatis non surandum, latrocinamini: qui abhominamini idola, sacrilegiu^
facitis: qui in Lege et in Pontificatu gloriamini, per praeuaricationem legis,
Deum veru^ Pontifice^ inhonoratis. The Church of Rome pleads Prescription. O
foolish men! O men that know not the law of God! None, though never so great
number of years, O wicked Bishops of Rome
can abolish the title of truth. Not long before my birth (I call to witness
the memory of them that were present) by such fraud as was never heard of,
Rome received the Papal Empire, or tyranny rather, when it had a long time
remained free. Boniface the ninth was the man, equal to the eight, in fraud
and name; if we may call them Bonifaces, who live most abhominably. But what
need more be said, in a matter most evident to all the world? I contend, not
only, that Constantine gave not such great gifts; not only, that the Bishop
of Rome could not prescribe in such things: but, although they both had been
so, yet that the tytles of both were extinct, with the wickedness of the
possessours; when we may see, that the dectruction and desolation of all Jtaly,
and many Provinces, sprange only out of this Fountain. The Pope sells for
gain, not only the Commonweal, which neither Verres, nor Catiline, nor any
notorious robber, durst do; but also the Treasure of the Church and the holy
Ghost; which Simon the Magician does detest. And when he is admonished of these
things, and good men reprove him for the same, he denies not, but openly
confesses and glories therein; that he may extort, and by what means soever,
The Pope boasts of his naughty dealing.
take from the possessours, that Patrimony which Constantine gave to the
Church: Therefore he had never any Religion, sanctimonie, or fear of God. And
(I tremble while I speak it) men polluted with sins of all sorts, allege
the Pope for their excuse: For he, and his retinue, are the example of all
kind of mischief; so, as we may justly exclaim with ^say and with Paul,
against the Pope and his devoted Pope-lings. You are the cause, that Gods name
is blaspheamed among the Gentiles: You that teach others, do not teach your
selves: you that preach against Stealing, commit Robbery by the hie-way side:
you that abhor Idolatry, practice Sacrilege: ye that glory in the Law,
and boast of the Popedom; by transgression of the Law, dishonor the true
Bishop, which is GOD. Mark well these Golden observations.
Out of these plain and evident testimonies of these famous, zealous, and
great learned Papists ( Gratianus, Victoria, Syluester, Viguerius, Fumus,
Nauarrus, Couarruuias, Gregorius, Aquinas, Augustinus de Anchona, Glossator
decretalium, Gersonus, Cardinalis Cusanus, Antoninus, Volateranus, Paulus
Cathalanus, and Laurentius Valla,) I observe these manifold, Christian, golden,
and worthy Lessons: Out upon the new Popish religion.
and carry thousands upon thousands to Hell; yet may no man reprove him, for
such his detestable and cursed dealing. de facto, dispensed with the full
Brother, to marry his natural and full Sister, of the same Father and the same
Mother. O rare woonderment of the world.
his bare and only Will, being a sufficient warrant so to do. Constantinus,
Constantinus.
surnamed the great. Rome soliciting the Emperor Phocas with great
importunity, to confirm the supposed Donation of Constantine; obtained with
much a do, vnderpretence of the said Donation (not the confirmation of the
pretended gift) but, A.D. 607.
that the Church of Rome should be the Head of all Churches. Rome (now called
Popes ((...)) neither did, Let all these observations be ever well remembered.
nor could persuade any one of the Emperors, for the space almost of three
hundred years after that supposed Donation; either to confirm the same, or to
make Rome the Head of all Churches. S. Hierome, nor S. Augustine, nor S.
Ambrose, nor any approved History, does make any mention of the said
Donation. Rome, not the Pope, should set the Crown upon the Emperors head.
Rome, Italy, and the whole Western Empire until the days of King Pippine: as
also, that Pope Boniface acknowledged the City of Rome, to pertain to the
Emperor Honorius. Cusanus, a great learned man and a zealous Papist, avouches
constantly, This Cardinal wounds his Pope.
that he never read of any Bishop of Rome, until the time of Stephanus the
second, who durst in the name of S. Peter, presume to challenge any right in
the aforenamed places. Vixit Stephanus A.D. 741.
upon which the Popes would ground their Superroyall pretended Prerogatives, is
a false and counterfeit Narration, and can not be found in the old Decrees,
Vixit Pipinus. A.D. 750.
Charles and Pippine spoiled the true Emperors, and so enriched the City of
Rome. Melchiades (who was the next Bishop of Rome before Syluester) does
roundly confute the said Donation; as a thing falsely fathered upon Constantine
the great. Rome were not peculiarly called Popes, for the space of many hundred
years after Christ. Mark this point well.
Furthermore, that the Emperor is reported by the Popes counterfeit Decree, to
have holden the Bridle of his Horse, and to have waited at his Stirrope. Where
I wish the Reader, to observe seriously with me, that the late Bishops of
Rome have used many coozening tricks (especially the false Donation of
Constantine, The original cause of kissing the Popes foot.
and his pretensed service to the Pope) so to advance their state and
superroyall Pomp; and to cause Kings and Emperors to kiss their feet.
Rome, The Bishops of Rome deceived the Emperors.
that wholly proceeded from a sandy and rotten foundation, with which the said
Bishops and their flattering parasites seduced them: viz. from a counterfeite
and falsely supposed Donation, of Constantinus surnamed the great. Rome, The
Bishops of Rome, are the fyrebrands of all mischief.
with their devoted Popelinges, are the cause of all kind of mischief and
naughtiness. To all which (so to cheer up the Pope and his Popelinges) I will
add a fine and grave testimony, of the Popes dear Friar and learned
Schoole-doctor Franciscus a Victoria: his words are these. Victor. de potest.
Papae et council. relect. 4. page 139.
Et paulatim ad hanc intemperantiam dispensationu^ deuentum est, et hunc talem
statum, vbj nec mala nostra, nec remedia pati possumus; et ideo necesse est
aliam rationem excogitare, ad conseruandas leges. Da mihi Clementes, Lines,
Syluestros, et omnia permittem arburio eor^m: Out upon rotten popish
dispensations. The Popes own learned Doctors, can not endure them.
sea vt nihil grauius dicatur in recentiores Pont^fices, certe multis partibus
sunt pris^is illis inferiores: By little and little we are brought to these
inordinate Dispensations, and to this so miserable state; where we are neither
able to endure our own griefs, nor the remedies assigned (by Popes) for the
same: And therefore we must perforce invent some other way, for conservation of
the Laws. Give me Clements, Lines, Syluesters, and I will commit all things
to their charge: But to say nothing grievously against latter Popes; they are
doubtless inferiors to the old Bishops of Rome, and that by many degrees.
Thus writes this learned Friar; who (if he durst have spoken his mind
freely) would have told us mirabilia. Rome; but utterly (so far forth as he
dares) condemns the latter Popes or Bishops of Rome. Lo, the late Bishops
of Rome do degenerate from the old, and are very naughty men.
Whose assertion in very deed, iumpeth with the doctrine which I defend; and
plainly conuinceth late Romish faith and superstition, to be but a rotten
Ragge of the New religion. Now, let us hear what the Jesuit is able to say
for him self, for the sauegard of the life of late start-vp Popery.

B. C.
To season the beginning of his Chapter with a little of his mendatious powder,
he writes thus. Bonifacius Bishop of Rome, and third of that name, above six
hundred years after Christ, obtained of Phocas then Emperor of Rome, that
Rome should be the Head of all Churches: Before which time, no authentical
Writer can be named; who ever ascribed the Headship and universal Government
of all Churches, to the Church of Rome. This is a manifest untruth. In the
Council of Chalcedon, Maximus Bishop of Antioch, was confirmed by Leo the
first. Act. 7.
Pope Julius the first, restored Athanasius Patriarch of Alexandria, to his
seat: Paulus Patriarch of Constantinople, and Marcellus Bishop of Ancyra,
deposed unjustly by an Eastern Synod, as writes Sozomenus: whose words be
these. Lib. 3 cap. 7.
For as much as the care of all did belong to him, for the dignity of his
Seat; he restored to every of them their Church.

T. B.
I answer: Jesuits irksome and fond disputation, would soon have an end.
For first, the famous Council of Chalcedon was conuented and holden by the
commandment of Martianus the Emperor, and not of Pope Leo; as is evident and
manifest to every child, in the very beginning of the 7. Action quoted by our
Jesuit. Again, the Fathers of that famous Council acknowledge themselves to
have come thither, at the Emperors commandment; to make peace between
Maximus bishop of Antioch, and Juuenalis Bishop of Jerusalem. These are the
express words of the Judges themselves. Chalc. council. Act. 7. prope initiu^.
Gloriosissimj Iudices dixerunt; diuiniss et pijss. noster Dominus Jmperator,
rogatus a Maximo et Juuenale sanctissimis Episcopis, praecopit nos agnoscere de
motis inter eos capitulis: The most glorious Judges said; The most holy and
religious Emperor our Lord, being entreated of the most holy Bishops Maximus
and Juuenalis, commanded us to examine the controversies between them.
Thirdly, Lo, the Emperor commanded the Bishops to examine the
controversies, and they called him their Lord.
it was the Council, not Pope Leo, that confirmed Maximus, and concluded a
peaceable unity between him and Iuuenalis. Fourthly, no mention is made at
all of Pope Leo, who is not so much as once named in the said action of the
holy and famous Council. Fifthly, Anatolius the most reverend Arch-byshop of
New Rome, confirmed by express words the aforenamed Unity. Thalassius the
reverend Bishop of Caesaria did the like, in these express words. His, quae
per consensum ordinata sunt inter amantissim^s Episcopos Maximum et Iuuenal^m,
et nos consentimus: To these things which are ordered by consent between the
most beloved Bishops Maximus and Juuenalis, we also give our consent. Diogenes
the reverend Bishop of Cyzice, did the like; in these express words.
Consentio his, quae a Paetrebus factae sunt: I give my consent to that, which
the Fathers have decreed. Sixthly, all the Fathers of the Council did the same;
these being their express words. Omnes reuerendissimj Episcopj clamauerunt;
nos ita dicimus, et consentimus his, quae a Patribus dicta sunt: All the most
reverend Bishops showted; We say so, and we give our consentes to those
things, which the Fathers have decreed. By these manifold testimonies, it is
clear and evident, that the Fathers, who were assembled in Council at the
Emperors command, decreed and confirmed peace between Maximus and Iuuenalis;
as also, that they sought to the Emperor (not to the Pope) for the decision of
their controversies. Neither is Pope Leo so much as once named, The Jesuit
began with lying, and means so to continue to the end.
in that action of the holy Council. What therefore shall we, or what can we
say, to our lying Jesuit? but that as he began with lying and deceitful
dealing, so he means to continue his falsehood, his lying, his
falsifications, and his conny-catching tricks unto the end.

Secundo principaliter.
Secondly, that our Jesuit seems not to have read S^zomenus himself, but to
have mistaken the Chapter by some note sent him from his best aduisors: for, to
hear that Popery is proved the New religion, does so gall and trouble them,
that they can not sleep quietly in their beds, for thinking how to withstand
the same. Many of their deepest heads, have conspired against the truth: and
Robert Parsons that brazen-faced. Friar, was put in trust to gather their
instructions, and to publish the same in the English tongue: Leonem ex
vnguibus, I know the Lion by his paws. The Narration of Sozomenus is in the
eight, not in the seventh Chapter. No, no, Sozomenus in the 7. Chapter cutteth
the Popes throat, and strikes the Jesuit stark dead: these are the express
words. Sozom. lib. 3. hist. cap. 7.
Romanae vero Ecclesiae Episcopus, et sacerdotes per occidentem, haec in sua^
contumelia^ vergere duxerunt, (etenim sententia^ eoru^ qui Nicaeae conuenerant,
qua^ inde ab initio per omnia approbabant, nec dum reliquerant, sed ad illius
norma^ sentiebant,) et Athanasiu^ ad se venientem amice susceperun^,
causamqueillius ad se traxerunt: But the Bishop of the Church of Rome, and the
Priests throughout the West, judged the things to tend to their reproach (for
they had not yet forsaken their Sentence and Decree who were assembled at Nice,
which from the beginning they approved in all things, but followed it in
their judgments as the rule,) and friendly received Athanasius when he came to
them, and took his cause into their hands. Thus writes Sozomenus; by whose
relation it is evident, that not the Pope alone, but all the Bishops
assembled together in a lawful Synod, effected that, which our lying Jesuit
would deceitfully father upon the Pope. Athanasius of Alexandria, Paulus of
Constantinople, and Marcellus of Ancyra, being unjustly molested by the
Eastern Arrianizing Bishops, sought to Julius then Bishop of Rome, for his
help and countenance, as to the chiefest Patriarch, who by reason of his
place, was of great authority, and highly esteemed. Pope ^ulius willing to
afforde the said Bishops the best help he could, called together the Bishops
of the West, and with their Decrees in a lawful Synod, declared the Eastern
Bishops to have offended against the Council of Nice; All Christians are
subject to the Canons of the Nicene Synod.
whose Canons all the faithful in the Christian world were bound to reverence
and obey. And thus the holy Bishops unjustly deposed from their seats, were
again restored to their places, by force in deed of the Nicene Canons. For,
neither could the Pope alone, nor yet the whole Synod of Western Bishops have
restored them; but that their definitions were firmly grounded upon the holy
Nicene Canons. For, as we see by Sozomenus his Narration, the Bishop of Rome
with the Bishops of the West, followed the Nicene Canons as their rule, in
all their Decrees, resolutions, and proceedinges whatsoever.

B. C.
In his arguments against the Superiority of the Bishop of Rome, this is one.
Seventhly, the famous Council of Chalcedon, gave the Bishop of
Constantinople, equal authority with the Bishop of Rome in all
Ecclesiastical affairs. In which words, is one untruth cunningly couched.
For he calls that here, the decree of the Council, which was by the
ambition of Anatolius Bishop of Constantinople, effected in the absence of
the Roman Legates. If Bell can prove that this surreptitious Decree of the
Eastern Bishops, was ever confirmed; then were it some thing which he
brings: But the Bishop of Rome his Legates withstood that their indirect
proceeding, pronouncing it to be contrary to the Decrees of the Nicene Council.

T. B.
Though it be the mere truth, that the Romish faith and doctrine this day
taught, See and note well the 30. chapter of this Book. For there, all now
living Papists, are proved flat Heretics.
believed, and violently with Fire and Faggot obtruded upon many thousands of
people, is the New religion; yet does that truth so gall, pierce, and wound
the Pope and his Iesuited Popelings, that they can not endure the noise or
sound thereof. For which respect, our Jesuit turning himself this way, that
way, and every way but to the truth; omitteth six truethes (by me briefly
touched in my Trial, but proved at large in my Suruay,) and begins to
cavil, and scornefully to bicker with the seventh; thinking by means of
confusion and disordered proceeding, to cover and hide the nakedness and
newness of rotten Popery, and to dazell the eyes of his Readers, that they
shall not behold and discern the truth. But it will in time prevail, maugre
the malice of the Pope, The maine point of the difficulty.
of his Iesuited vassals, and of the greatest Devil of Hell. Two things the
Jesuit here touches, in which the maine point and issue (even prora et
puppis of the controversy of the Popes falsely pretended Sovereignty) does
consist: The One, concerns the Council of Nice: the other, the Council of
Chalcedon. For the exact examination of which difficulties, I put down
certain Aphorisms, hoping (by Gods holy assistaunce) to hit the nail on the
head; and to make the hearts of the Pope and his Popish crew, as heavy as any
Lead.

Aphorism first.
The most famous general Council of Nice, The Bishop of Rome is confyned.
did confine and limit the jurisdiction of the Bishop of Rome, as well as of
other Bishops every where. Behold the proof, and mark it well. Nicene
Council in the first Canon, has these express words. Co^c. Nicen. can. 5.
De his qui communione priuantur, seu ex clero, seu ex laico ordine, ab
Episcopis per vnamquamque Prouinciam sententia regularis obtineat, vt hi qui
abijciuntur, ab alijs non recipiantur: requiratur autem, ne pusillanimitate,
aut contentione, aeut alio quolibet Episcopi vitio, videatur a congregatione
seclusus: Vt hoc ergo decentius inquiratur, been placuit, annis singulis, per
vnamquamque Prouinciam bis in anno concilia celebrari; vt co^muniter simul
omnibus Episcopis congregatis Prouinciae, discutiantur huiusmodi quaestiones:
et sic, qui suo peccauerunt Episcopo euidenter, excommunicati rationabiliter ab
omnibus extimentur; vsquequo, vel in communi, vel Episcopo placeat, humaniorem
pro talibus far sententiam. Concilia vero celebrentur, vnum quidem ante
quadragesimam Paschae, vt omni dissensione sublata, munus offeratur Deo
purissimum: Secundum vero, circa tempus Autumni: Concerning those who are put
from the Communion, whether they be of the Clericall or Laicall order, let the
sentence of Bishops throughout every Province given according to the Canon,
be of force, that they who are rejected, be not received of others. Let
examination be had, least any be secluded through pusillanimitie, or
contention, or other fault of the Bishop. That this therefore may be duly
examined, it has pleased the Council well, that yearly in every Province,
Councels should be kept twice in the year; that when all the Bishops of the
Province shall meet together in one place, then such questions may be duly
examined: And so, they that have offended their Bishop manifestly, may be
judged by all, to be excomunicated not without a cause; until it please the
Bishop of the place, or all in the Province, to show them favor. Let the
Councels be kept, one before Lent; that all dissension being taken away, a most
pure Oblation may be presented unto God: The second, about Autumn. Thus this
holy and most famous Council; out of whose definition, two things are
cleared: the one, that the Bishops of the Province should end and determine all
appeals; No appeals to the Bishop of Rome.
no mention at all made, or any regard had, of or to the Bishop of Rome:
The Other, that the ancient Canon ought to be kept; which commands, that
none should receive them to the Communion, who were excomunicated and condemned
by others. Mark this well.
So then, the Council of Nice did curb the Pope, and kept him under in his
former state. And withal, the holy Council provided a very Christian remedy,
The remedy against unjust excomunications.
that none should be unjustly oppressed by his Bishop. Which remedy was
this: viz. That he who found himself grieved, might appeal from his Bishop;
yet to the Bishops of the Province, but to none else. Can. 4. Firm^tas eoru^
quae gerantur per vna^qua^que prouinciam, Metropolitano tribuatur Episcopo.
that none should be created Bishops, but by the Bishops of their own
Province: as also, that the Metropolitan of the Province, (not the Bishop of
Rome) should have authority and power to confirm those, who were made
Bishops within the Province. Rome had no prerogative of power, but only
within his own Diocese, is constantly avouched by the said Council, in the
sixth Canon thereof: These are the words of the Council, Can. 6. Ruffin. hist.
libr. 1. cap. 6.
as Ruffinus (an ancient and learned Writer about 1200. years ago, and so
within eighty years of the time of the Nicene Council) has interpreted the
same. Et vt apud Alexandriam, et in Vrbe Romae vetusta consuetudo seruetur, vt
vel ille Aegypti, vel hic suburbicariarum Ecclesiarum sollicitudinem gerat: And
that in Alexandria and in the city of Rome, the old custom be kept; that the
one have the solicitude of Egypt, the other of the Churches adjoining and
about Rome. Thus writes Ruffinus, showing very plainly, that the Bishop of
Alexandria had as great jurisdiction (or rather more) as the Bishop of Rome.
Yea, Cusanus a popish Cardinal, Cusan. de concord. cath. lib. 2. c. 13.
understands the Canon after the same manner with Ruffinus. And it is
confirmed by the fourth Canon of the same Council, as Ruffinus cites it:
these are the words. Absque quo, ordinatione^ irritam esse voluerunt: Conc.
Nicen. can* 4. apud Ruffin.
Without whose authority (he means the Metropolitan) the Council decreed
the ordination to be void and of none effect. Nota valde 30. cap. ^uius operis.
But this sacred Decree of a Council so holy and so famous, the Pope this day
contemns, and challenges the right of all Metropolitanes to himself.
Constantinople and of Chalcedon, did make the Bishop of Constantinople equal
with the Bishop of Rome, in all Ecclesiastical affairs; excepting only the
Primacie of honor; Super in hoc ip^o cap.
as we have already seen. See, and note well the 30. Chapter of this present
Book.

Aphorism second.
The Canons of the holy Nicene Council, are but only twenty; though the Pope
and his Jesuits, would have them to be foure-score. For Council. Aphric. cap.
105.
This is very clear and evident, by the testimony of the famous Affrican
Council; as by and by (God willing) I shall unfold. Constantinople, and
Chalcedon, have flatly decreed against the falsely pretended Primacie of the
Bishop of Rome; which Councels for all that, did in every respect highly
reverence the Decrees and Canons of the Nicene Council* and consequently, the
said Councels did not acknowledge any Canon of the Nicene Synod, which made
for the pretended Primacie of the Bishop of Rome. But this Aphorism shall be
further proved by an evident demonstration, in the Aphorisms immediately
following; and therefore there is no need, now to stand longer about the same.

Aphorism third.
The Council of Sardica is not a legitimate and lawful Synod, but a bastard
and counterfeite conuenticle: I prove it; Augustine does acknowledge no
Council of Sardica, Aug. co^tr. Cr^scon. libr. 3. c. 34.
save one only, which was Heretical. Cusanus (who was a great Champion of the
Romish Church) is of the same opinion. De concor. cath. lib. 2. cap. 25.
Sardica, is against the Council of Nice; concerning Appellations to the Pope.
Can. 105. ad Caelest. vrbi^ Romae episcopum. A.D. 425.
Affricane Council, in their Epistle to Caelestine then Bishop of Rome; do
most constantly affirm with uniform assent, that the Council of Nice
forbids Appeals to the Church of Rome: these are their express words.
Praefato itaque debitae salutationis officio, impendio deprecamur; vt deinceps
ad vestras aures hinc venientes, non facilius admittatis, nec a nobis
excommunicatos, in communionem vltra velitis excipere: Quia hoc etiam Niceno
Concilio definitum, facile aduertet venerabilitas tua. Nam etsi de inferioribus
Clericis vel Laicis videtur ibi praecaueri, quanto magis hoc de Episcopis
voluit obseruari; ne in sua prouincia communione suspensi, a tua sanctitate,
vel festinato, vel praepropere, vel indebite videantur co^munioni restitui?
Presbyterorum quoque et sequentium clericorum improba refugia (sicuti te dignum
est) repellat sanctitas tua; quia et nulla patrum definitione hoc Ecclesiae
derogatum est Aphricanae; et decreta Nicaena sieve inferioris gradus Clericos,
sieve ipsos Episcopos, suis Metropolitanis apertissime commiserunt.
Prudentissime. N. iustissimeque prouiderunt, quaecu^que negocia in suis locis
vbi orta sunt, finienda; nec vnicuique Prouinciae gratiam sancti spiritus
defuturam, qua aequitas a Christi sacerdotibus et prudenter videatur, et
constantissime teneatur; maxim, quia vnicuique concessum est, si iudicio
offensus fuerit cognitorum, ad concilia suae Prouinciae, vel etiam universal
prouocare. Nisi forte quisquam est qui credat, vnicuilibet posse Deum nostrum
examinis inspirare iustitia^, et innumerabilibus congregatis in concilium
sacerdotibus denegare. Hic omnes Pontificij illoqueantur. Vide inferius 30.
cap. vbi omnes Papistae plane probantur haeretici.
Aut quomodo ipsum transmarinu^ iudicium ratum erit, ad quod testiu^
necessariae personae, vel propter sexus, vel propter senectutis infirmitatem,
vel multis alijs intercurrentibus impedimentis, adduci non poterunt? Nam, vt
aliqui, tanquam a tuae sanctitatis latere mittantur, nulla inuenimus patrum
Synodo constitutum. Quia illud quod pridem per eundem Coepiscopum nostrum
Faustinum, tanquam ex part Niceni concilij ex inde transmisistis; in
verioribus concilijs quae accipiuntur Nicena, a sancto Cyrillo Coepiscopo
nostro Alexandrinae Ecclesiae, et a venerabili Attico Constantinopolitano
antistite ex authentico missis, quae etiam ante hoc per Innocentium Presbyterem
et Marcellum subdiaconum, per quos ad nos ab eis directa sunt, venerabilis
memoriae Bonifacio Episcopo praedecessori vestro a nobis tra^smissa su^t, in
quibus tale aliquid no^ potuimus reperire. Therefore due salutation premised,
we heartily desire, that henceforth you do not easily receive those, that
come from hence unto your ears; neither hereafter receive into your communion,
such as be excomunicated by us: For this also is decreed by the Nicene
Council, as your reverence will easily perceive. For, although it seem there
to be decreed only of the Lay people, or Clerks of the inferior order; how
much more does the holy Council intend it, of the Bishops themselves? least
such as be suspended in their own Province from the Communion, should hastily,
abruptly, or unduly, be by you restored to the same. Let your holiness reject
the impious refuges of Priests and other inferior Clerks, as it becomes
you; because no Decree of the Fathers, does spoil the Aphrican Church of this
liberty; and the Decrees of the Nicene Council, have most plainly referred,
Lo^, appeals must be to the Metropolitanes, not to the Pope.
not only Clerks of inferior degree, but also the Bishops themselves to
their Metropolitanes: For they have most prudently, and most justly provided,
that all businesses whatsoever, shall be there ended, where they began; neither
the grace of the holy spirit to be wanting to every Province: by which equity
among Christ's Priests, may both prudently be foreseen, and most constantly
observed; especially, because every one has freedom, if judgment given
offend him, Mark well: not one word of appeals to the Pope.
to appeal either to a provincial or general Council: unless perhaps any
be of this mind, that God will inspire the justice of examination to every one
at his pleasure, and deny the same to a multitude of Priests assembled
together in Council. Or how shall judgment beyond the Sea be approved,
where meet and necessary witnesses can not be present, either by reason of
the sex, or through the infirmity of old age; or by many other intercurring
impedimentes? For, that any should be sent from your Holiness, These words
wound the Pope to death.
we find it not defined by the Fathers, in any Synod at all: For, that which
you lately sent by Faustinus our fellow-Byshop, as on the behalf of the Nicene
Council; in the true Councelles received from Nice, and sent authentically
from S. Cyrill our fellow-Byshoppe of the Church of Alexandria, and from
venerable Atticus the Prelate of Constantinople; which also we sent formerly to
Bishop Boniface of venerable memory your predecessor, by Jnnocentius Priest,
and Marcellus Subdeacon; by whom they were directed from them to us, we can not
find any such thing. A.D. 425.
Thus wrote these learned, ancient, and holy Fathers, to Celestinus the Bishop
of the city of Rome. Their narration and attestation (though very long and
plentiful) I thought good to lay open to the Reader, in their express words
at large: because they do so lively discover Popysh forgerie, Jesuitical
treachery in the best beseeming colors, and declare so evidently Popery to
be the New religion, as nothing can be more. Which most constant assertion, of
so many, so ancient, so holy, so grave, so learned Bishops, whosoever shall
prudently and duly ponder, Episcopi fuerunt. 217.
that man doubtless can not but detest and abhor Popery, as a newly coined
Faith and Religion. For Celestine, The universal Bishop, but simply and
plainly, Vrbis Romae Episcopum; The Bishop of the city of Rome. Nicene
Council has so defined it. Nicene Council committed both inferior Clerks
and Bishops themselves, to be censured and taxed by their Metropolitanes.
Celestine then Bishop of Rome, that the Nicene Fathers provided most prudently
and most justly; that Dissentions and all Controversies whatsoever, should be
decided and finished, where they began. Where I admonish the Reader, to observe
seriously this word ( Iustissime, Mark well the word (Iustissime)
most justly:) for doubtless, if Justice require to finish and determine
causes, where they began: then does the Pope unjustly, when he seeks to draw
the hearing thereof to the Court of Rome. Nicene Council (say they) gives him
this freedom, Note the cause and manner of appealing.
to appeal from his Bishop, to the Metropolitan; and from the
Metropolitan, unto a general Council: but never a word, of appealing to the
Pope. Celestine (for so they term him, but not. Universal Bishop,) that if
his proud and greedy desire were put in execution, many mischiefs would ensue
thereupon. Mark well for Christ's sake.
For out of it do follow two necessary and inevitable Corollaries. viz. That
the Council of Sardica, is a falsely pretended and counterfeite Synod; as
which has decreed that in favor of the Pope, which these Fathers of the
Affrican Council deny any Synod to have done. viz. That neither the Council
of Nice, nor yet any other lawful Synod, did ever decree transmarine Appeals
to the Bishop of Rome: I say (transmarine,) because I willingly admit the
Priests and Bishops of Italy, to appeal unto him, as to the chief
Patriarch and Metropolitan of the city of Rome; but not as to the Universal
Bishop of the whole Christian world: For no such thing is decreed by any
Synod, as these Fathers do affirm.

Aphorism fourth.
All that can be said for the Popes falsely pretended Primacie, is fetched and
derived from the authority of Man. I prove it two ways. Rome to advance
himself above his breathren and fellow-Byshoppes, invented (by the help of
his flattering Parasites) a forged and counterfeit Donation of Constantine that
famous Emperor. Which certes, he would never have done, if he could by the
holy Scriptures have exalted himself, Peruse the 10. Conclu^. and mark it
well.
or otherwise have magnified his estate. Of which counterfeit Donation, I have
discoursed at large in the tenth Conclusion. Nicene Council, thinking so in
time, to attain his hearts desire; which in these last and worst days, came
so to pass in deed. But the famous Councelles of Constantinople and Chalcedon,
made no reckoning of such falsifications and proud attempts. And the Fathers of
the Affrican Synod, albeit for a time they answered very modestly; that they
could find no such prerogative in the Nicene Canons, and yet were content to
expect true Copies from the East; and in the interim for charity sake, to
admit Appellations to Rome; Epist. ad Bonifac. cap. 101. Fumosum typhum seculi.
did for all that in the end, come roundly upon the Pope, and told him flatly;
that no Synod had so decreed, and that they could no longer endure such
smoakie stateliness, and so forth: as in the third and second Aphorism, is
already proved in the 30. Chapter of this Book, all now living Papists are
proved flat Heretics.

Aphorism fifth.
The reasons which the Pope and his Pope-lings use, to prove that the Nicene
Council made more Canons, in which the Popes falsely pretended Primacie is
stablished; albeit they be with Papists reputed as invincible Bulworkes, will
for all that, after due and full examination thereof, be found as strong as a
Copwebbe, and as heavy as a Feather. Isidore being requested by 80. Bishops,
to gather the Nicene Canons together, Prefat. Isidor. Conc. to. 1.
found out many more; even fourscore in all. But I answer; first, that the
variety found in Isidore, in the Epistle of the Bishops of Egypt to Pope
Marcus, and in the answer of Marcus to them; do evidently convince the same
writings to be false, forged, and counterfeit. Jsidorus tells us forsooth,
that they are more; but how many, he knows not. Mary he adds withal; that
by the Decrees of Pope Julius, they must be Seauentie. Athanasius, and the rest
of the Bishops of Egypt, affirm constantly to Pope Marcus, that the Council
of Nice had foure-score Canons. Yet Pope Marcus in his rescript to the said
Bishops, clippeth off Ten from that number. Now, what Horse would not break
his Halter, to come to this pleasant harmony? Secondly, that the very words
of the Preface fathered upon Jsidorus, do prove it to be forged and
counterfeit: Prefat. Isido. in fine.
for there I find mention made of the general Council of Constantinople,
which was holden in the time of the Emperor Constantine and Pope Agatho,
against Macarius, Stephanus, and other Bishops. But so it is, A.D. 678.
that the said Council was celebrated six hundred, seventy, and eight years
after Christ True it is likewise, that Isidorus died in the year 637. after
Christ: 637.
and consequently true it must be thirdly, that Jsidorus was dead, The Popes
forgeries can make dead men to live.
at the least 40. years before that general Council; and so he could not
possibly tell those foure-score Bishops of it; unless perhaps he rose
again after he was dead. To which I must needs add, that though Jsidorus be
feigned in that Preface, to have interlaced all the decretall Epistles of the
Bishops of Rome, which he could any where find: viz. of Clemens, Anacletus,
Euaristus, and the rest, unto Pope Siluester; yea, unto Pope Gregory the
great: yet does not Isidores authority (though he were an holy Bishop) win
or bring any credit to the same Epistles. And why I pray you? Because
forsooth, it is a bastard and counterfeit Preface, begotten in the Popes forge
of falsifications; The Popes Decretall Epistles are forged.
even like to Constantines Donation, and many other Popish coozening tricks:
as is already proved.

Athanasius and other Bishops of Egypt, did send to Pope Marcus, for the true
Copies of the Nicene Canons; Recript. Marci. to. 1. council.
as also that the same Pope sent 70. Canons Nicene, to the said Bishops of
Egypt, But I answer; first, that though Pope Marcus affirmed them to be only
seauentie, yet did Athanasius and the other holy so supposed Bishops,
constantly avouch them to be foure-score. Secondly, that though the Bishops
of Rome boast and babble much of their Prerogatives and extraordinary Graces,
yet can small credit be given unto them; seeing they have made away (by their
own confessions) no less then 50. Canons of the holy Nicene Council,
Thirdly, They were 70. say they, and now but twenty.
that the forgerie is discovered, both by the writings of Marcus, and of
Athanasius: for, Athanasius and the Bishops of Egypt, sent not to Pope Marcus
for the Copies, until the Arrians had burnt them at Alexandria. Yet so it is,
that they were burnt in the time of Constantine the Emperor, as it does and
may appear to every indifferent reader, by the complaint of Athanasius, Epist.
ad Ortho. in perseq. Hierony. in Chron. A.D. 335. et 342.
when he was driven from Alexandria into exile. And true it is likewise, that
Pope Marcus was dead in the time of Constantine, many years before the Copies
were burnt at Alexandria. And consequently, true it is thirdly; that both the
rescript of Pope Marcus, and the Epistle of Athanasius, with the other Fathers
of Egypt, are like to the forged Donation of Constantine; viz. false and
counterfeit.

viz. of Athanasius of Alexandria, Paul of Constantinople, Asclepas of Gaza,
Marc^llus of Ancyra, Hist. trip. lib. 4. cap. 15. Soc^. lib. 2. cap. 15. Soz.
lib. 3. cap. 8.
Lucina of Adrianople, and of many others; who all being driven out of their
Churches by the Arians, were restored by Pope Julius to the same. But I
answer, that the Dignity and Prerogative of the Sea of Rome in restoring
them, was only of credit and honor, not of power and jurisdiction. This is
already proved so soundly and plentifully, as more can not be wished. Peruse
the first, second, and third Aphorisms, and mark them well: Mark well the
Aphorisms, and forget them not.
Which being truly performed, all that possibly can be said for Appeals to
the Church of Rome, will be as light as a Feather, and pass away as Smoke
from the fire. The jurisdiction, force, efficacy, and power of hearing,
restoring, and judging the causes of the Appellantes; rested wholly in the
Council, then at Rome assembled. Athanas. Apolog. 2.
This both Athanasius, and Julius himself, do plainly testify. Athanasius
discoursing thereof, does most manifestly ascribe it to the Council. Julius,
when the Arrians reproved him for ouerth warting that which they had done in
their Council, answered roundly: that the doings in one Council, may
lawfully be sifted, examined, and discussed in an other: that themselves had
offered to have the cause debated so in just judgment, and for that end had
requested a Council to be called: Iul. in Ep. ad Episcop. Antioch.
congregatos* et apud Athanas. apolog. 2.
that Athanasius and the rest, appeared at the Council, and that they who
should also have appeared, made default: and that thereupon the Council
finding their iniquity, relieved the parties wrongfully oppressed. In brief,
that whatsoever he dealt or wrote therein, he did it not on his own head;
but on the Councels judgment and consent: For, these are the express words
of Julius: Tom. 1. Council. P. 391.
Visum est nobis, ac vniuerso Conci^^^: It seemed good to us, and to the whole
Council. So then, it was not the Pope, but the Council, that heard and
determined the causes of Bishops. Such power of jurisdiction neither did
Julius claim, neither did Athanasius give it him. To which I add; that
whatsoever Julius and the Council did, was by virtue and power derived from
the Nicene Canons: Soz. lib. 3. cap. 8.
So does Sozomenus write, on the behalf of Athanasius and the rest. I add
likewise, that this Epistle of Julius (as it is in the first Tome of Councels)
is a bastard impe, and a plain counterfeit. The legitimate Epistle is truly
set down, in the works of Athanasius.

Nicene Council, command that no Decrees of Councels be of force, without the
consent of the Bishop of Rome. But I answer: first, Socr. lib. 2. cap. 17.
Sozom. li^ 3. cap. 10.
that Socrates and Sozomenus have no other ground, whereupon to build that their
Narration; but the bare testimony of Pope Julius himself, in that Epistle
which he wrote to the Arrians: which Epistle is a counterfeite; as I have
already proved. Secondly, Conc. Nic. can. 5.
that the Commandment of the Nicene Council was, that Councels should be kept
yearly twice in every Province. But doubtless, it were ridiculous to say or
think, that the Pope must be called twice every year, into every Province in
the Christian world. Nay, it is a thing impossible to be done.

Flauianus Arch-byshop of Constantinople, appealed to Pope Leo, from the
Council of Ephesus, deposing him unjustly. And that Theodorete Bishop of
Cyrus did likewise appeal to the same Leo, being unjustly vexed by the same
Synod. But I answer; first, that Flauianus indeed appealed from the Council
of Ephesus; yet not to Pope Leo, but to a greater and a more lawful Council.
Secondly, that Theodoretes cause was judged and determined by the same Council
of Chalcedon. The former is proved, by Leos own Epistle to the Emperor
Augustus: in which Epistle he complayneth to the Emperor, Leo ad Theodos.
August. Epist. 23.
of the fewnes and oppression of the Bishops assembled at the second profane
Synod in Ephesus; and withal, humbly beseeches the Emperor, that seeing
Plauianus had appealed, it would please his Majesty to have a Council kept in
Italy: The Emperor calls all Councels.
These are the express words of Leo himself. Omnes partium nostrarum
Ecclesiae, omnes mansuetudini vestrae cum gemitibus et lachrymis supplicant
sacerdotes; vt quia et nostri fideliter reclamarunt, No^ qui conuenimus
Episcopi ex diuersis Prouincijs in Sedensia Isauriae* ad ma^datum pietatis
pientissimi regis nostri Constantii, haec colloquuti sumus iuxta regiam
voluntatem. Epiphan. haer. ^3. page 259,
et eisdem libellum appellationis Flauianus Episcopus dedit, generalem Synodum
iubeatis intra Italiam celebrari; quae omnes offensiones ita aut repellat, aut
mitiget, ne aliquid vltra sit vel in side dubium, vel in charitate diuisum: All
the Churches with us, all Priests with sighs and tears beseech your
clemency; that seeing such as are ours, have faithfully disclaymed, and
Flauianus Bishop has appealed, you would command a general Council to be
called and kept within Italy; that so all contentions and offenses may either
be taken away, or at the least so mittigated, that hence-foorth nothing be
either doubtful in faith, or divided in charity. Lo, the Emperor, not the
Pope called Councelles even within Jtaly; and that for more then 450. years
after Christ. A.D. 456.


Nic^ne Council sent their Epistle to Pope Siluester, beseeching him to
confirm and ratify with his consent, the things which they at Nice had
ordained. To which I answer: first, that the Epistle is forged and a plain
counterfeite; as which is flatly against sundry Canons of the same Council, as
is already proved. Again, because there were 318. Bishops at the Council,
and yet only two ( Osius of Corduba in Spain, and Macarius of Constantinople,
with Victor and Vincentius Priests of the city of Rome,) were the authors of
that Epistle; as the tenor thereof does specify. Thirdly, Alexander was Bishop
of Constantinople, not Macarius. Nicephorus, lib. 8* cap. 7. Genebr. lib. 3.
page 563. Niceph. lib* 8. cap. 15. Cassiodor. hist. ^rip. lib. 2. cap. 4.
because Macarius was not then the Bishop of Constantinople, but Alexander:
so writes Nicephorus, a famous Historiographer, and a great friend of the Pope
and Church of Rome: Yea, Genebrarde the Popes own dear vassal, does plainly
confess the same. Fourthly, because that famous City had not then, the name
of Constantinople, but was called Bizantium: so witnesses the same Nicephorus,
in these express words. Idem postea Alexandro Episcopo Constantinopolitano
accidisse dicunt: vix dum post Synodum Constantinus Byzantiu^ venerat: The like
Miracle did Alexander Bishop of Constantinople, when the Emperor
Constantinus was scarce come from the Council to Byzantium. The former
Miracle, of which Nicephorus speaks, was wrought by Spiridion a very simple
Bishop; but an holy man. The latter, by Alexander of Constantinople, then
called Byzantium: Two miracles were done by Spiridion and Alexander.
either of which twain, converted a great learned Philosopher, to the faith of
Christ Jesus miraculously. Fifthly, because the said Epistle seems to be made
by some frantic or fond fellow. But how do I prove it? Forsooth, because it
desires the Pope, to call together all the Bishops of his city of Rome:
all which, could but be his own sweet self, seeing there was but at once one
Bishop of one City. Sixthly, because Julius, not Syluester, was then Bishop
of Rome: This to be so, Cassiodorus does plainly testify in these words.
Hist. trip. lib. 2. cap. 1. A.D. 327.
Communicabant igitur Nicaeno concilio, ex Apostolicis quidem sedibus Macarius
Hierosolymitamos, Eustathius iam praesidens Antiochenae apud Orontem, et
Alexander Alexandriae, quae est apud stagnu^ Marinum: Julius ante Romanus
Episcopus propter senectutem defuit, erantque pro eo praesentes Vitus et
Vincentius Presbyteri eiusde^ Ecclesiae: There came therefore to the Council
of Nice from the Apostolical seas Macarius of Jerusalem, Eustathius of
Antioch President, and Alexander of Alexandria: but Julius the Bishop of Rome
was absent, by reason of his old years; and Vitus and Vincentius Priests of
the same Church, Nicephor. hist. l^b. 8. cap. 14.
were there in his room. Nicephorus is consonant to Cassiodorus, in these
express words: ^taque Imperator, malum id ad summum excrescere cernens,
decentatissimam illam in Bithynia Nicaenam Synodum promulgat; et literis
locorum omnium Episcopos ad constitutam diem eo euocat: Sequitur, Hierosolymis
Episcopatu^ gessit Macarius; Romae, Julius; Constantinopoli, Alexander: et
Romanus antistes propter aetatem decrepitam, Constantinopolitanus vero, propter
multam imbecillitatem in sedibus suis remansere: Sed eorum nomine bini
Presbyteri missi sunt; Mark well: Julius, not Syluester, was Bishop of Rome in
time of the Nicene Council.
a Iulio quidem, Vitus et Vincentius; ab Alexandro autem duo alij, et vita et
eruditione plurimum excellentes: Therefore the Emperor perceiving that the
evil did grow to an head, did proclaim the most famous Nicene Synod in
Bithynia; and by his Letters, did call the Bishops every where, to come
thither at the day by him appointed: Macarius was then Bishop at Jerusalem;
Julius at Rome, Alexander at Constanti^ople: The Bishop of Rome by reason of
his old age, and the Bishop of Constantinople by reason of infirmity, did
stay at home in their own Seas: But in their names, two Priests were sent
from either of them: Vitus and Vincentius, from Julius: and from Alexander
other two, very excellent both in learning and conversation. Sozomenus iumpeth
with Nicephorus: yea, Soz. lib. 1. cap 17.
so do also P^atina in Agathone, and Beda in his Chronology; as Genebrardus
the Popes dear darling freely grants. Where I wish the Reader to observe
seriously with me, Apud Genebr. lib. 3. p. 561.
that the Council of Nice was holden in Bithynia, in the twenteth year of the
reign of Constantine the great, in the thirteenth year after his coming to
Byzantium; Nicephor. lib. 8. cap. 26. Socrates. lib. 1. cap. 16* Geneb. p. 561.
and that it continued three years, and something more. This Observation is
profitable to the Reader, for diverse good respects. Seventhly, because if this
Epistle were admitted for good, yet would it nothing help the Pope or his Jesus
tea Popelinges: the reason is at hand; because it requires not the Pope alone,
but together withal, the Bishops in his City, or (if ye will) in Jtaly, to
confirm the decrees thereof: So then, this helps not to discharge Popery of
the New religion.

Rome in the Decrees of the Nicene Council, had not her pre-eminence and power
limited, but was followed as a pattern in advancing others: for (as Pope
Nicolas says) the Nicene Council durst not make any Decree of that Church, as
knowing that nothing could be given her above her desert. But I answer first;
that seeing that Example is allowed therein, and made a pattern of the rest,
it follows by an inevitable consequence, that the Council did thereby
decree, that the Bishop of Rome should keep himself within those limits:
For he must perforce confess, that as the Bishop of Alexandria had but the
pre-eminence of all thereabout: even no more had the Bishop of Rome. This is
confirmed, because it follows immediately in the same Canon; likewise also in
Antioch, and in other Provinces, Nic. council. Can. 6.
let the Churches enjoy their Privileges and Prerogatives. For, the words of
the Council being grounded upon the custom of the Bishop of Rome, that as
he had had pre-eminence of all the Bishops about him; so Alexandria and
Antioch, should have of all about them; and likewise other Churches each in
their own Provinces; do evidently convince (mark well my words,) that the
Pope neither had formerly pre-eminence of all through the world, neither this
day ought to have the same. The old custom is it, Antiqua consuetudo seruetur*
that the holy Council does respect, not any prerogative of the Church of
Rome. Secondly, because both Ruffinus and Cardinal Cusanus (as I have already
proved) do confirm this mine exposition. Thirdly, because the words next
following in the selfsame Canon, Con. Nicen. can. 6.
The Popes falsely pretended primacie, is quite overthrown*
do utterly overthrow, and as it were cut the throat of the Popes falsely
pretended Primacie: These are the words. Illud autem generaliter clarum est,
quod si quis praeter sententiam Metropolitani fuerit factus Episcopus, hunc
magna definiuit Episcopum esse non oportere: But that is generally clear, that
if any be made Bishop without the consent or judgment of the Metropolitan,
the famous Synod has decreed, that such a one ought not to be a Bishop. Now
sir Jesuit, if this be true, as it is most true, (for all the Christian world
does and must obey the Decrees of the holy and famous Council of Nice,) then
doubtless your Popes pretended Supremacy lies in the dust, and is by virtue
thereof, trodden under foot: For, he challenges a prerogative over all
christian Nations, to make Bishops every where at his own good pleasure; as
also to discarde and displace them, whosoever are made without his consent.
Conc. Nicen. can. 7. Habet. did* 65. cap. quonia^ mos.
Fourthly, because the next Canon has no regard of the Church of Rome, or of
any prerogative of the Bishop thereof: these are the words. Quia consuetudo
obtinuit et antiqua traditio, vt Aeliae Episcopus honoretur, habeat honoris
consequentiam, salua Metrop^lis propria dignitate: Because Custom and old
Tradition, has obtained, that the Bishop of Jerusalem or Elia be honored,
let him consequently have honor, the proper dignity of the Metropolitan
city ever being safe. Out of these words, I observe first, that the
pre-eminence and honor of particular Churches depends of an ancient
Custom, and not of any Supreme power or Prerogative of the Church of Rome.
Secondly, Every Bishop has his proper dignity.
that the Canon plainly teaches us, that every Metropolitan Bishop has a
proper Dignity; and consequently, that such Dignity rests not in the Pope,
or Bishop of Rome. Thirdly, because the Fathers of the famous Council of
Chalcedon, have (as is already proved) granted equal Privileges to the
Bishop of Constantinople, with the Bishop of Rome, in all Ecclesiastical
affairs.

To which I add first, Addition first.
that the Council of Chalcedon decreed nothing, save that only which the
three first and most famous Councels of Nice, Constantinople, and Ephesus,
decreed before them. This to be so, Petrus the Metropolitan of Corinthus,
Athanasius, Alexander, and many other Bishops, in their ioynt-Epistle to the
Emperor Leo, constantly affirm in these express words. Epi. ad Leone^
imperat. To. 2. council. P. 270.
Vnde vero dignata est nobis scribere vestra transquillitas, et aperte iussit
nostram manifestare sententiam, haec, pietatis vestrae potentiae declaramus;
quia ea quae a Chalcedonensi sancto et universally concilio definita sunt,
tanquam sanctis Synodis praecedentibus consona et in nullo contraria, aut
sanctorum trecentorum december et octo patrum Niceno concilio, aut
Constantinopolitano 150. aut Ephesio sub beatae memoriae Cyrillo celebrato,
omnibus sententijs manner immutilata decreuimus: Whereas your tranquillity has
vouchsafed to write unto us, and withal has commanded us plainly, to
declare our sentence; this we signify to the power of your piety; that those
things which the holy and universal Council of Chalcedon has defined, as
consonant and no way contrary to the holy precedent Synodes; either to the
Nicene Council of the 318. holy Fathers, or to the Council of Constantinople
of 150. holy Fathers, or to the Council of Ephesus celebrated under Cyrill of
blessed memory, we have decreed the same with all our sentences, so to
continue without maime or diminution.

I add secondly, that Gregory the great (who was Bishop of Rome himself,
Addition. 2.
and a good man in deed) did admit the four first general Councels, of Nice,
Constantinople, Ephesus, and Ch^lcedon; and did reverence the same, as the
four Gospels. Gratian. did* 15. cap. sicut.
These are his express words, as Gratianus has related the same in the Popes
own Decrees. Sicut sancti Euangelij quatuor libros, sic quatuor Concilia
suscipere et venerarie me fateor: Nicenum scilicet, in quo peruersum Arij dogma
destruitur. Constantinopolitanum quoque in quo Eunomij et Macedonij error
conuincitur. Ephesinum etiam primum, in quo Nestorij impietas iudicatur.
Chalcedonense vero, in quo Euticetis et Dioscori prauitas est reprobata. Haec,
tota deuotione amplector, integerrima approbatione custodio: As I profess my
self to receive and reverence the four Books of the holy Gospel; so also the
four Councels in like manner: to weete, the Council of Nice; in which the
perverse opinion of Arius is confounded: the Council of Constantinople also;
in which the error of Eunomius and Macedonius is convinced: the Council of
Eph^sus also the first; in which the impiety of Nestorius was censured: the
Council of Chalcedon in like manner; in which Eutiches and Dioscorus were
condemned: These Councels I embrace with great devotion, and keep them with
most holy approbation.

Cornelius was Bishop of the Catholic Church of the whole world; not of the
City of Rome only: and they prove it by these words of Cornelius, in his
Epistle to S. Cyprian. Corn. ad Cyprian. To. 1. council. page 226. Ep. 11. apud
Cyprian.
Nec ignoramus vnum D^um esse, et vnum Christum esse Dominum quem confessj
sumus, vnum spiritum sanctum, vnum Episcopum in Catholica Eccesia esse debere:
We are not ignorant, that there is one God, one Christ, one holy Ghost: and
that there ought to be one Bishop in the Catholic Church. But I answer, that
Cornelius means the Catholic Church of the city of Rome, calling it rightly
the Catholic Church; The Church of Rome how it is Catholic.
yet not as it signifies Universal, but as it connotateth a Church constantly
holding the Catholic Faith. I prove it, because Cornelius himself (in whose
Epistle that is written) says in an other Epistle directed to Fabius, Com.
Epist. ad Fabium habetur To 1. council. page 222* circa med.
where he entreats of the same matter; that there ought to be one Bishop in
that Catholic Church, wherein there are ^ixe and forty Elders, and seven
Deacons, with seven Subdeacons, so forth: These are the express words. Ita
igitur lepidum Euangelij patronu^ Nouatum omnino prae^erij^, scilicet vnum
solum Episcopum oportere esse in hac Eccesia catholica: Note well the 30.
chapter following.
in qua tamen non ignorabat (quomodo enim poterat?) Presbyteros esse
quadraginta sex, Diaconos septem, Subdiaconos septe^, Acolythos quadraginta
duos, Exorcistas et Lectores vnacum ostiarijs quinquaginta duos; viduas, et
alios morbo atque egestate afflictatos, mill et quingentos: quos omnes Domini
gratia et benignitas abunde sustentat: He therefore omitted altogether this
pleasant defender of the Gospel Nouatus, because there ought but to be one
only Bishop in this Catholic Church: in which for all that, Mark the words,
(in this.)
he was not ignorant (for how could that be?) that there was forty six
Elders or Priests, seven Deacons, seven Subdeacons, forty two Acolythes,
Exorcistes and Readers together with Sextenes, fifty two; Widows and others
needy and sick persons, a thousand and five hundred: All which, the grace and
liberality of our Lord does abundantly relieve. And toward the beginning of
the Epistle, I find these words, as Eusebius relates the^. Eusebius. hist. lib.
6. cap. 33. et To. 1. council. p. 221. ex Ruffino.
Epistolae quidem Cornelij Episcopi Romani scriptae ad Fabium Episcopum
ecclesiae Antiochenae, ad nos peruenerunt; quae tum acta concilij Romae habiti,
ab omnibus in Italia, in Africa, inque alijs in locis de eo errore decreta
erant, euidenter declarant: The Epistles of Cornelius Bishop of Rome, written
to Fabius Bishop of Antioch, came to our hands; which did evidently declare
the things which were then decreed touching that error, in a Council then
holden at Rome of all the Bishops in Jtaly, Africa, and other places. This
was the case: the Church being troubled at that time, with the Schisms and
Heresies of Nouatus; the Nouatians refused the communion of the Catholics, and
thereupon ordained new Bishops for their Schismatic conuenticles: whereby it
came to pass, that in one City, there were two Bishops at once; a
Catholic, and an Heretic. In Rome, Habetur To. 1. conc. p. 222. inter decreta
Cornelij.
Cornelius and Nouatianus: in Carthage, Cyprian and Fortunatus. Nouatus being
very desirous to be a Bishop, joined to himself two desperate companions;
and by that means, three Bishops: who were very rude and simple men. These
Bishops he deceived with fair speeches, promises, and coozening tricks.
He told them constantly, that they must go to Rome with all speed; that by
their sentence and judgment, all controversies might be decided and fully
ended. The Bishops giving credit to the report, by reason of their
simplicity; came to Rome with all convenient speed. Nouatus, with a company
of odd companions like vnvnto himself, found means to get them into an odd
corner, prepared for that end and purpose: where, so soon as the Bishops
were made merry with Wine and delicate cheer, Episcopi temulenti, et exaturati
erant.
he violently compelled them to make him Bishop, by a vain and imaginary
imposition of hands: Which being effected, he challenged the Byshopricke of
Rome jointly with Cornelius. Cornelius being lawfully possessed thereof, and
relying upon the Decree of the Nicene Council in that behalf, affirmed
constantly, Conc. Nicen. can. 8. contra Nouatians.
that there could be but one Bishop in that Catholic Church (of Rome.) The
Catholics therefore communicating in faith and Christian love with Cornelius,
termed him the Bishop of the Catholic Church.

S. Cyprian, that all Heresies and Schisms, have sprung out of this only
fountain, and no other: Cypr. Ep. 55. ad Cornel.
viz. that one Priest for the time in the Church, and one Judge for the time in
stead of Christ, is not regarded: To whom, if the whole brotherhoode would be
obedient, according to Gods ordinance; no man would make any thing ado,
against the company of Gods Priests. Where, by one Priest, he means one
Bishop; and by one Bishop, Cornelius the Pope; to whom he writes those
things: and consequently, he argues the Pope to be the Bishop of the whole
Church; and one Judge for the time, in Christ's stead. But I answer; first,
that this in effect is the same, Note well the tenth Objection, in the end
thereof.
with the former of Cornelius: and consequently, it ought to admit the same
answer: For, he speaks it upon occasion of injury, which the Nouatians
offered himself in Carthage: for, the Nouatians there, had ordained a new
Bishop against him; as their fellows did in Rome, against the good Bishop
Cornelius. Secondly, Notetur Genebr. lib. 3. in Chron. p. 528.
because the words both precedent and subsequent, do clearly insinuate, that
he means it of all Catholic Bishops, each in his own charge; yea, that he
applies it to himself, not to Cornelius. Thirdly, because he speaks of a
Bishop, who has been approved in the Byshopricke four years: Which
circumstaunce, can by no means agree to Cornelius, Genebr. vbi supra, p. 527.
seeing he was not three years Bishop there. Fourthly, because he writes
the same to an other, expressly of himself. Thence (says he) have Heresies
and Schisms sproung, and yet do spring; because the Bishop which is one and
rules the Church, Cyprian. ad Florent. Ep. 69
is despised by the proud presumption of certain men.

S. Ambrose calls Damasus the Ruler of the Catholic Church. Ambrose. in. 1.
Tim. 3.
But I answer; first, that those Commentaries are falsely fathered upon S.
Ambrose, that holy and famous Bishop of Millan. The Divines of Louan have
well observed, Prefat. in lib. excus. Antuarp. a Plant.
and freely testified the same. Secondly, that these words ( Cuius hodie
rector est Damasus) can infer or conclude no more; save this only, that
Damasus was (not the Ruler, but) a Ruler of the Church. Damasus might rightly
be called a Ruler of the Church, in that he was Bishop of the Church of Rome,
though not the Ruler of the Universal Church. The word ( Rector) may fitly be
englished a Ruler, Rector must be a Ruler, not the Ruler.
but not, the Ruler. Thirdly, that these words (at this day) have a semblance
and relation to the days of Timothee: viz that as Timothee did govern the
Church in S. Paul's time, so was Damasus in his time Ruler of the same: So then,
this is the true sense and meaning thereof; to weete, that as Timothee was
placed at Ephesus to set that Church in order, and to rule it; not to rule the
whole: so was Damasus appointed to rule the Church of Rome; but not all other
Churches in the world. Cyprian de unit. Eccles. prope initiu^. page 297. nota
comment. ibid. p. 306.
For (as S. Cyprian truly says) Episcopatus vnus est, cuius in solidum a
singulis pars tenetur: There is one Byshopricke, part whereof every Bishop
holds wholly, in solidum. This word ( in solidum,) must be well marked and
faithfully remembered: For doubtless, if there be but one only Byshopricke,
whereof every Bishop has one part wholly to himself; it follows by a
necessary and an inevitable illation, This reason can never be truly answered.
that there can be, but one only part thereof remain to the Bishop of Rome:
For, he can not possibly have that whole, of which every other Bishop has a
part wholly. Let this be well marked, and never forgotten: For if these
Aphorisms, and the Conclusions aforegoing, be seriously pondered, and
thoroughly understood: all that the Jesuit here says, or possibly can be said
by the Jesuiticall seditious crew, will soon appear very childish and of no
force at all. Howbeit, for the better help of the simple Reader, I will
answer in particular to all such points, as shall but seem to have any
color of the truth. Proceed therefore sir Friar, and plead courageously for
the Pope.

B. C.
If Bell can prove, that this surreptitious Decree of the Eastern Bishops
was ever confirmed, then were it something which he brings: They spoke more
boldly then wisely.
But the Bishop of Rome his Legates withstood that their indirect proceeding,
pronouncing it to be contrary to the Decrees of the Nicene Council. And
Lucentius in particular spoke confidently, saying; That the Apostolic Sea
ought not to be abased in their presence. And Pope Leo himself did bitterly
inueigh against Anatolius, for this his presumption, and going against the
Nicene Canons.

T. B.
I answer; Sozimus, Bonifacius, and Celestinus) falsified and urged the Canons
of the Nicene Council, for the falsely pretended Primacie of the Church and
Bishop of Rome. But the holy, learned, and famous Bishops of the Aphrican
Council (whereof S. Austin that rare light of the Christian world was one,)
did roundly control that their forgerie and naughty dealing; calling it
Fumosum typhum seculi, the smoakie stateliness of the world. Fumosum typhu^
seculi.
This is already proved very copiously, in all the precedent Aphorisms;
especially in the third and fourth. Demetrius the Siluer-smith for the like
end, plead for the Temple of the Goddess Diana. Act. 19. verse. 24 27.
Yea, so pleaded Pope Boniface the eight, about three hundred years ago,
against Philippe the fair, A.D. 1294.
then King of France. The Pope challenging Superroyall power, would needs
excomunicate Philippe the French King; but there was never excomunication which
cost Pope so dear, as that did him: for his Messengers were committed
prisoners, Lo, the whole Clergy with the King condemned the Pope.
his Bulls burnt; and Boniface himself being taken by Naueret Chancellor of
France, presently after, dyed for very sorrow: Wherein King Philippe did
nothing, but by the Council and consent of the whole Clergy of France. So
Bennet the 13. otherwise called Petrus de Luna, interdicted Charles the sixth
and his Realm: but the King sitting in his Throne of Justice, in the
Parliament or high Court of Paris the 21. of May, A.D. 1408.
1408. gave sentence openly, that the Bull should be rent in pieces, and that
Gonsalue and Conseleux the bearers thereof, should be set upon a Pillorie, and
publicly notified and traduced in the Pulpit: Which Decree was accordingly put
in execution in the month of August, with the greatest scorn that could be
devised; the two Messengers having this inscription upon their Miters: Lib. 3.
c 17. fol. 182.
These men are disloyal to the Church, and to the King. These words are put
down by the French Papists, in their Book called; The Jesuits Catechism;
translated into English by the Secular Priests. Leo is a party, and so can
not be a competent Witness in his own cause: For, as one of your own Popes
truly said; 4. Personae; accusator, reus, testes, index.
in every trial, there must be four distinct persons; the accuser, the
accused, the witnesses, and the Judge. Fourthly, that the holy, wise, and grave
Fathers of that famous Council (which S. Gregory reverenced, as one of the
four Gospelles,) laughed the Popes Messengers to scorn, and concluded with
all their several subscriptions against the Pope: yea, they protested
publicly and zealously, that no Bishop was compelled to any thing, but that
they all decreed as they believed. These are the express words of the Holy
Synod: Conc. Chalced. Act. 16. page 211. col. 1.
Gloriosissimj Iudices dixerunt. Hj, quj relecto tomo subscripserunt Asianj et
Pontj sanctiss. Epispopj, dicant, si voluntate propria, vel imposita sibj
aliqua necessitate coactj subscripserunt: Let the most holy Bishops of Asia and
Pontus, which have subscribed to the Articles openly read, declare unto the
Council; whether they subscribed of their own free accord, or by compulsion
of Anatolius or any other. The holy and most reverend Fathers answered
severally; protesting before God, that they subscribed voluntarily according to
their knowledge, and as they constantly believed: no one or other, There was no
compulsion used, as the Popes parasites falsely pretended.
any way constrayning them thereunto. It would be a thing tedious to the
Reader, and laborious to my self; otherwise I would set down the several
subscriptions of the Bishops: For, though they be long, yet do they conteyne
such Christian variety of words, as are able to touch the heart of every
honest Reader. This may suffice to confound our Jesuit, and to clear
Anatolius that blessed Patriarch, of the immodest speeches of Pope Leo against
him.

B. C.
The Fathers of the Council of Chalcedon, Relat. Synod. Act. 3. in fine.
made suite to the Pope to confirm their Decrees.

T. B.
I answer: first, that this Epistle is like to the other of the Nicene
Fathers: that is to say, a bastard and counterfeite. This is soundly proved in
the fifth Aphorism; Aphorism. 5.
in the first, sixth, and seventh Objections: Let them be well remembered.
Secondly, In relatione Synodi Act. 3. in fine.
that the suite which the Fathers of the Council made to Pope Leo, did argue
only a prerogative of Honor, not any sovereignty of Power. Which I prove by
a triple mean. For first, these are the words of the request. Rogamus igitur,
et tuis Decretis nostrum honera iudicium: We therefore desire you, to honor
our judgment with your Decrees. He was the chief Patriarch and Bishop of
that City, which at that time, reigned and was reputed Caput mundj; and so his
consent was of great authority, in that behalf. Secondly, his Messengers
would not agree to that prerogative of honor, which the Council had confirmed
to the Bishop of Constantinople; and therefore they requested him to consent
thereto, because the Emperor Theodosius had so commanded them. Thirdly, the
Fathers say plainly, that the Emperor confirmed the Council: these are the
words; Opportunum credidimus esse, honoris e^us confirmationem ab vniuersalj
Concilio celebrarj: We thought it meet and convenient, that the whole
Council should celebrate his Honors confirmation. To which I add; that
seeing the Fathers of this Chalcedon Council, did approve and confirm the
Canons both of the Nicene and of the Constantinopolitane Synod (in which
Synodes this pretended Prerogative is condemned,) it must follow of necessity,
that the said Epistle or relation is a counterfeit.

B. C.
It can not truly be called a Decree of the Council, which was not confirmed
by the Head; no more then that, an Act of Parliament, which is not confirmed by
the King.

T. B.
I answeere; first, with the famous popish Bishop Melchior Canus, Canus, lib.
5. c. 5 p. 164.
that it is not in these affairs, as in humane assemblies: Which the holy
Prophet does plainly insinuate, Esa. cap. 55. v. 8.
while in the person of God, he utters these words. For my cogitations are
not your cogitations, neither are your ways my ways, says the Lord.
Secondly, that there is great disparitie between the Pope and the King,
concerning the subject now in hand. For the King has a sacred sovereignty
over all the people within his dominions, as over his natural Subjects and
loyal Servants. Mark well, the precedent conclusions, and aphorisms, and
this is very clear.
But the Pope has no sovereignty over transmarine and foreign Christians;
as I have already proved. Nice, Constantinople, Ephesus, and Chalcedon; all
which S. Gregory reverenced as the four Gospels,) deny the Popes falsely
pretended Primacie, in all foreign and transmarine Kingdoms; and confine his
jurisdiction to the City of Rome, and to the suburbican territories of the
same. All which is soundly and plentifully proved in the Conclusions and
Aphorisms next aforegoing.

B. C.
But it may be, Bell will say, that the confirmation of the Council, belonged
not to the Pope: It is not possible, that he dare offer it.

T. B.
I answer: first, that seeing the Pope (as is already proved) takes upon
him to change the nature of things, by applying the substantial parts of one
thing to an other; to make some thing of nothing, the proper action of God in
creation; to depose Kings, to translate Empires, and to bestow the same at his
good pleasure; to make it Sacrilege to dispute of his power; to terrify men
so with Fire and Faggot, and with thunderboltes of cursing Excomunications,
that though he carry thousands to Hell, yet may no man say; Why do thou
so? It may seem no marvel, Bell would gladly have the Popes favor, if joined
with the favor of God.
if Bell (poor soul) be afraid to anger his Holiness. Nevertheless,
because the truth is never ashamed, but will in time prevail; Bell, post
deosculationem pedum, and to prove our Jesuit in this, as in many other
things, a most impudent and notorious liar; dare boldly tell the Pope, that
the Confirmation of Councels belongs not unto him: Bell dare prove the
Jesuit a liar.
Yea, Bell will not barely say it, but he will produce such strong arguments,
such weighty authorities, and such invincible reasons, as will make the Popes
ears to tingle, when he shall read or hear the same. Mark well this my
Discourse, unto the end: I purpose in God, to proceed by way of Sections, for
the better illustration of the business now in hand.

The first Section, of reasons in general concerning the subject now in hand.
I have already proved in my Book of Motives, that every Monarch has
supreme sovereignty over all Persons and causes within his Dominions: Lib. 2.
cap. 6. concl. 1.2.3.
and consequently, that no Laws can be of force in his Kingdoms, without his
royal assent, approbation, and confirmation of the same. King Josaphat
appointed in Jerusalem, Levites, Priests, and Princes, of the families of
Israel, that they should judge the judgment and cause of the Lord to the
inhabitants thereof. And he commanded them, saying: Thus shall ye do in the
fear of the Lord, faithfully and with a perfect heart. Yea, 2 Par. 19. V. 8.9.
he distinguished and limited the offices and functions both of Zabadias the
civil Magistrate, and of Amarias the Hie Priest; thereby insinuating
evidently, that the chiefest power and jurisdiction rested in the King, not in
Amarias the Hie Priest. 2. Par. 17. V. 7.8.9.
The same King, to gather the Church which was decayed, sent Preachers into
sundry parts of his Kingdom; appoynting Noblemen to accompany and assist
the^, to countenance their ministry, 2. Par. 14 4. 2 Par. 15.13. Deuteronomy. 13.5.
2. Par. 34.33.
and to compel the people to hear the^. K. Asa used his authority in
commanding Judah to seek the Lord, threatening them with death, that should
refuse so to do. King Josias after he had abolished Idolatry, compelled all his
Subjects to serve the true God, and to live in his fear. 2. Par. 30. V. 1.2.5.
Ezechias commanded all Israel and Judah to come to the house of the Lord at
Jerusalem, there to keep the Passover; which had been a long neglected, and
not observed in such sort and perfect manner, as God had appointed. King David
and King Solomon did in like manner show their supreme authority, both over
all their Subjects, and in all manner of causes. For larger discourse whereof,
See the Golden Balance, and mark it well.
I refer the Reader to my Golden Balance of Trial. Now if every King have
within his Dominions, the chief Power and Sovereignty over all persons and
causes; it must needs follow, it can not be denied; that the Confirmation of
Councels belongs not to the Pope. Which consequence will appear most
evidently, throughout the Sections following. To which I add; Super, ex Cypr.
Object. 10
that seeing there is but one Bishopric, whereof every Bishop has a part in
solidu^, as is already proved; the Confirmation of Councels can belong no more
to the Bishop of Rome, then it does to other Bishops. For, with that whole, to
which many have equal title and right, no one of them has more to do then an
other. This in general may suffice: I haste to the particulars.

The second Section of the Council of Nice.
A.D. 327. Episcopi erunt 318.
The first general Council of Nice of 318. Bishops, (in which Arius denying
the consubstantialitie of the Son of God, was condemned,) was celebrated in
the year 327. after Christ; not by the appointment of the Pope, (who in those
days was but reputed as other Bishops) but by the flat and express
commandment of the Emperor Constantinus worthily surnamed the great. Socrat.
Hist. lib. 1. cap. 9. et cap. 8. idem apertissime asseritur.
All the Fathers assembled in the sacred Council of Nice, wrote to the Church
of Alexandria, and to the inhabitants of Egypt, Lybia, and Pentopolis, in these
express words. Quoniam per gratiam Dei et pientissimum Imperatorem
Constantinum, qui nos ex varijs ciuitatibus et Prouincijs congregauit, magna ac
sancta a Synodus Nicaeae collectae est, omnino necessarium visum est, vt ad vos
quoque a sacro Synodo darentur literae, quo cognoscere possitis, cum quae mota
et examinata, tum probata sint et obtenta: Eusebius. de vita Constable. lib. 3. prope
initium. nota valde. quib. digestis, ad sua redire quemque permisit.
Because through the grace of God, and by the commandment of the most holy
Emperor Constantine, who has called us out of diverse Cities and Provinces,
the great and holy Council of Nice is assembled; it seems necessary, that
the whole Council send Letters to you, by which ye may understand, as well
those things that were called into question, as the things that are decided
and decreed in the same. Out of these words of the famous Historiographer
Socrates, I observe these memorable documents for the good of the Reader.
Nicephorus, Lib. 8. Hist. cap. 14.
) who were the most virtuous and learned Priests in the Christian world.
Letters; so far were they in those days, from ascribing the chief
Prerogative in Councels, to the Bishop of Rome. Rome himself was also
commanded by the Emperors Letters, even as other Bishops were: Albeit both
he, The Bishop of Rome commanded by the Emperor to be at the Council.
and the Bishop of Constantinople, by reason of infirmities, were excused, and
their Messengers allowed in their absence: So writes the famous
Historiographer Nicephorus. This Observation would be marked, as which strikes
the Pope stark dead: For, the Pope was so far from being the Commander of
all, that himself was commanded, as the rest. Syluester could not confirm
the Nicene Council, as the Popes flattering Popelinges tell us; because Julius
(as Nicephorus, Sozomenus, Super, in 6. Obiectione.
and others do constantly affirm) was at that time, Bishop of Rome.
Sozomenus has these words: Soz. Hist. lib. 1. cap. 17.
Verum cum institutum hoc Imperatoris conceptae spei non respondisset, nec
conciliari contentiosi potuissent; et iam qui ad conciliandam Pacem missus
fuerat, reuersus esset; Synodum Nicaeae Bythiniae celebrandam conuocauit, et
omnibus vbique Ecclesiarum praesidibus, vt ad indictum diem adessent, scripsit:
But after the matter succeeded otherwise then the Emperor expected, neither
could the contentious persons be reconciled; but Hesius that was sent to make
peace, was now returned; he caused a Synod to be kept at Nice in Bythinia, and
wrote to all Bishops every where* to be present at the day appointed.
Nicephorus has these express words. Lib. 8. Hist. cap. 14.
Quapropter infectis rebus ad Impetatorem redijt, qui ad pacem componendam
missus fuerat, Hosius: itaque Imperator decantatissimam illam in Bithynia
Nicaenam Synodum promulgat, et literis locorum omnium Episcopos ad constitutam
Diem eo euocat: Epiph. haeres. 69. rex de Ecclesia sollicitus, vniuersalem
conuo cauit Synodum trecentoru^ dece^ et octo Episcoporum.
Wherefore Hosius, who went to make peace, returned to the Emperor not having
accomplished the matter; the Emperor therefore does publish the famous Synod
of the world, to be celebrated at Nice in Bithynia; and with his Letters
calls thither the Bishops of all Countries and Provinces, to be present at
the day appointed. Lib. 1. hist. cap. 7.
Theodoretus in his History Ecclesiastical, plainly testifies the same
truth. Thus we see evidently by the uniform testimony of four very grave
Historiographers; whereof three lived more then a thousand and one hundred
years ago; The Bishop of Rome was reputed as a com^on Pre^^e.
that the Bishop of Rome had no more to do in General Councels, then other
Bishops had. They tell us first, that the Emperor sent Hosius the Bishop of
Corduba in Spain, to make peace, and to bring the contentious to unity, if it
could be. Secondly, that when he saw that would take no place, then he
proclaimed a Council to be holden at Nice in Bythinia. Thirdly, that he
commanded all Bishops, even the Bishop of Rome himself, to come to Nice at
the day by him appointed.

The third Section, of the Council of Constantinople.
The second General Council holden at Constantinople, against Macedoneus and
his accomplices, for denying the Divinity of the Holy Ghost; was called by the
commandment of the Emperor Theodosius the great, about 384. years after
Christ. Socrates has these words. Socrates, lib. 5. ^ist. cap. 8. et cap. 7.
in fine. A.D. 384.
Impeperator vero nihil cunctatus, Synodum suae fidej. Episcoporu^ ad hoc
conuocat, vt Nicanam fidem confirmantes, Constantinopolitanae Ecclesiae
Episcopu^ ordinent: sperans autem futuru^, vt illis et Macedoniani
coadvnarentur, etiam illius haeresis Episcopos conuocat: The Emperor
Theodosius with all expedition, calls a Council of Bishops embracing the
right Faith, that as well the Faith of the Nicene Council might be confirmed,
as that a Bishop might be appointed at Constantinople: and because he was in
hope to make the Macedonians agree with the Bishops of the right Faith, he
calls also the Bishops that were of the Macedonian-sect. Sozomenus is
consonant to Socrates in one place, and in an other place adds these words.
Soz* hist. lib. 7. cap. 7. et cap. 12.
Theodosius vero Imperator, Paululu^ post praecedente^ Synodu^, Episcopos earu^
haeresum conuocauit: sequitur, cum autem conuenissent, accersito ad se
Nectario, Imperator cu^ eo de futura Synodo co^municat; iubetque vt quaestiones
ex quibus natae fuerant haereses, in disputatione^ proponat; quo vna fieret in
Christu^ credentiu^ Ecclesia, et constitueretur dogma consonu^, ad qua^ religio
conformaretur: The Emperor not long after the precedent Synod, calls the
Bishops of those Heresies together: When they were assembled, the Emperor
calls Nectarius (the Bishop of Constantinople) to him, and consulteth with
him concerning the future Synod; Vbi super cap. 9.
and commands him to propound in disputation those questions, from whence
the Heresies did spring, to the end that there might be one Church of the
faithful, and a consonant rule of faith, which might be as a pattern of
religion. Sig^bertus a famous Popish Monk, writes in this manner. Sigeb. in
chron. 386.
Secunda Synodus vniuersalis 150. Patru^ congregatur Constantinopoli, iubente
Theodosio, et annuente Damaso Papa; quae Macedoniu^ negante^ spiritu^ sanctu^
Deu^ esse co^demnans, consubstantiale^ patri et filio spiritu^ sanctu^ esse
docuit: The second general Council of an hundred and fifty Bishops, is
assembled at Constantinople, by the commandment of Theodosius, Damasus the
Pope agreeing thereunto: in which Synod^, Macedonius, who denied the Holy Ghost
to be God, was condemned; and the consubstantiabilitie of the Holy Ghost with
the Father and the Son, was confirmed in the same. Theodoretus is consonant,
Theod. hist. lib. 5. cap. 6.7.9.
and utters many worthy periods.

The fourth Section, of the Council of Ephesus.
The third general Council, being the first Ephesiue of two hundred
Bishops, was proclaimed by the commandment of the Emperor Theodosius the
younger; against Nestorius denying the virgin Mary to be (...), and affirming
Christ to have persons twain; proouing that two natures did subsist in one
only person of Christ Jesus, A.D. 433.
in the year of our Lord God 433. Euagrius has these words. Euagr. lib. 1.
cap. 3.
Cum ista Cyrillus venerandae memoriae Alexandrinorum Episcopus literis suis
reprehendisset, Nestorius vero reprehensioni illius restitisset, et neque
illius, neque Celestini veteris Romae Episcopi monitis acquiauisset, sed
temulentiam suam aduersus vniuersam Ecclesiam nihil veritus effudisset; haud
praeter rationem a Theodosio iuniore Orientis Imperatore petijt, vt ipsius nutu
Synodus colligeretur. Imperialibus itaque literis, cum ad ipsum Cyrillum, tum
ad omnium vbique Ecclesiarum Episcopos missis, ad sacrum Penticostes diem, in
quo venit ad nos spiritus S. Conuentus indicitur: When Cyrillus the venerable
Bishop of Alexandria had by his Letters reproved the wicked blasphemy of
Nestorius, and Nestorius had withstood the same, neither yielding to his
admonition, nor to Celestines the Bishop of old Rome, but still malepertly
powered out his drunken conceits against the whole Church; then Cyrill not
without cause, requested the Emperor Theodosius the younger, that by his
authority a Synod might be called: by the Letters therefore of the Emperor,
directed to Cyrill and to all other Bishops every where, the Synod is
appointed upon the sacred day of Penticost, at what time the Holy Ghost came
down upon us. Thus writes this famous Historiographer. Out of whose words, I
gather many worthy instructions. Cy^illus the Bishop of Alexandria, nor
Celestinus the Bishop of Rome, could by any means reclaim or diswade
N^storius from his cursed and blasphemous opinions. Cyrillus lamenting the
harm that thereby did redound to the Church, sought to the Emperor for
redress thereof; humbly requesting him, that a general Council might be
gathered for the peace of the Church, and for the condemnation of the Heresy
of Nestorius. Cyrillus, that holy and learned Bishop, (who was reputed a
Saint in his lifetime) did not make suite to the Bishop of Rome for calling
of the Council; which doubtless he would have done, if the gathering of
Councels had belonged unto him. S. Cyrill sought immediately to the Emperor,
not once acquainting the Bishop of Rome therewith. Rome himself was commanded
to come to the Synod, even in such sort as other Bishops were. Which I
prove by a double mean: First, because the Story says, That the Emperor
called omnium vbique Ecclesiarum Episcopos, the Bishops of all Churches every
where. Secondly, because Nicephorus says, that Celestinus the Bishop of Rome
was absent, but appointed Cyrillus in his stead. These are the words. Nicephor.
lib. 14 hist. cap. 34. et hab. 1. to* co^c. page 600.
Celestinus autem Roma Episcopus propter nauigationis pericula Synodo adesse
detrectauit: ad Cyrillum tamen, vt locum suum ibj obtineret, scripsit: But
Celestine the Bishop of Rome was absent from the Synod, by reason of the
danger of Navigations: yet he wrote to Cyrillus, that he might supply his place.
Touching the Popes absence from Councelles, the Jesuitical Cardinal
Bellarmine, gives better and sounder reasons (though unawares both against the
Pope and himself,) which I willingly admit, Euag. hist. lib. 1. cap. 10.
wishing the Reader to observe and mark them seriously with me; as which are
both memorable, and of great consequence. This Cardinal yields two reasons,
Bellar. de conc. ib. 1. cap. 19.
why the Pope was never present at Councels in the East-churches, by himself,
and in his own person; the one forsooth, because it was not convenient, that
the Head should follow the members: the other, because the Emperor would ever
sit in the highest place. The Emperor ever had the highest place in Councels.
Out of whose words, I must needs note two important points by the way: The
one, that in the ancient Church, the highest place in Councels, was ever
reserved to the Emperor: The other, that the East-churches did never
acknowledge the Popes Primacie, which he this day arrogantly challenges over
all Kingdoms and Regalities. To which twain, this pleasant adiunct must of
necessity be annexed: viz. that our humble Father the Pope, (who
hypocritically calls himself seruus seruorum Dej,) would never come to
Councels in the East parts; because (forsooth) his charity was so great,
Behold the Popes humility
that he could not endure to see the Emperor sitting in the highest place. And
it is not amiss for the benefit of the Reader, if I here adioyne the manner,
how the Emperor Constantine sat in the Council of Nice. Sozom. hist. lib. 1.
cap. 19.
Sozomenus that grave Historiographer (who lived more then a thousand, one
hundred, and seventy years ago) has these words. Congregatis itaque in
vnum locum, per medium sacerdotu^ ad caput conuentus transeundo, in throno
quodam qui ipsi paratus erat, confedit, ac Synodus sedere iussa est. Erant. N.
vtrinque ad parietes Palatij multa posita subsellia; hic vero thronus maximus
erat, et reliquas seeds excellebat: Therefore when the Bishops were come
together, the Emperor passing through the midst of them to the head of the
assembly, sat down in a Throne prepared for him, and willed the Bishops to
sit down. There were many Seats on both sides, to the walls of the Palace;
but the Emperors was the chief, and surmounted all the rest. Cassiodorus has
these words. Cassiod. in hist. tripart. libr. 12. cap 5.
Non multo post tempore, iussio principis Episcopos vndique Ephesum conuenire
praecepit: No long time after, the commandment of the Emperor charged the
Bishops to come from every place to Ephesus. Nicephorus writes thus. Nicephor.
libr. 14. hist. cap. 34.
Theodosius Imperialibus literis, in metropoli Epheso locorum omnium Episcopos
conuenire iussit, sacram Pentecostes diem qua conuenirent, constituens:
Theodosius by virtue of his Imperial Letters, commanded the Bishops in all
places to come to the Metropolitan Church of Ephesus, designing the holy Feast
of Pentecost for the day. In which assertion, two things are to be marked.
The One, that the Bishops come together at the Emperors commandment:
The Other, that the Emperor appointed both the place and the time of their
meeting. Sigebertus has these words. Sigebert. in Chron. An. 433
Tertia Synodus vniuersalis, Ephesina prima, ducentorum Episcoporum, iussu
Theodosij iunioris Augusti aedita est: The third universal Synod of two
hundred Bishops, was celebrated at Ephesus by the commandment of the
Emperor Theodosius the younger. Lo, every Historiographer relates the
Emperors Commandment: but no mention is made of the Pope at all.

The fifth Section, of the Council of Chalcedon.
The fourth general Council of Chalcedon, of six hundred and thirty
Bishops, against Eutyches, for denying two natures in Christ after his humane
assumption, (although he granted him to have had two Natures before the
hypostaticall union) was celebrated by the commandment of the Emperor
Martianus; in the year 454 after Christ. A.D. 454.
Nuephorus has these express words. Lib. 15. hist. cap. 2.
Earum rerum gratia, Imperatorum literis, locorum omnium Episcopis conuocatis,
Synodus Chalcedone est coacta; quae quidem primum Nicaeae conuenerat, quo etiam
Romanae vrbis Episcopus Leo, per Pascasini, et Lucentij, et aliorum
Ministerium, liter as miserat: sed ea Chalcedonem Bythyniae est translata, quod
Imperator ipse Synodo ei adesse vellet, magnum Constantinum imitatus: In regard
of these matters, a Council was gathered at Chal^edon, and all Bishops sent
for thither by force of the Emperors Letters: which Synod at the first, was
assembled at Nice; whither Leo the Bishop of the City of Rome sent Letters
by Pascasinus, Lucentius, and others: but it was removed thence, to Chalcedon
in Bithyniae, that the Emperor might be present at the Synod, after the
example of Constantine the great. Thus writes Nicephorus; a man greatly
devoted to the Pope. Out of whose words, I note these memorable points.
First, that the Council was assembled, by the commandment of the Emperor.
Secondly, that the Emperor appointed where the Synod should be kept. Thirdly,
that the Emperor translated it to Chalcedon, at his own good pleasure.
Fourthly, that Leo is barely termed, the Bishop of the City of Rome; neither
the Universal Patriarch, nor Bishop of the Whole World. Sigebertus is
consonant to Nicephorus: his words are these. Sigebert. in Chron. et An. 452.
Instantia Leonis Papae iubente Jmperatore Martiano, congregata et habita est
quarta vniuersalis Synodus sexcentorum et triginta Episcoporum apud
Chalcedonem: The fourth general Council of six hundredth and thirty
Bishops, was holden at Chalcedon by the commandment of the Emperor
Martian, at the request of Pope Leo. Thus writes Sigebertus the Popes own
dear Monk, who was willing every way to advance the Pope, so far as might
stand with the truth. And yet he tells us plainly, The Pope requested, but
the Emperor commanded the thing to be done.
concerning the assemblies of Bishops in Councelles, that the Pope could
only request; and that to command the same, was in the Emperors power.
Euagrius in his History in the second Chapter and second Book, teaches the
self same verity. To be brief, Leo Ep. 33. ad Theod.
Pope Leo in his Epistle to the Emperor Theodosius, together with the whole
Synod, make humble suite unto him, to command a General Council within
Italy: his words, and the whole Synodes, are verbatim set down in the first
Aphorism aforegoing. Vide Aphor. 5. in object. 5. et nota valde.
But doubtless, if the gathering and confirming of Councels belonged to the
Bishop of Rome; neither would the Pope, nor the Romish Synod have made suite
to the Emperor in that behalf; especially, for a Council to be kept in
Italy, where the Popes now a days challenge all power both Ecclesiastical and
Secular. To which I add, that the Emperors for the space of more then 450.
years after Christ, confirmed the Councels with their royal edicts. This is
so lively set down before our eyes, in the most honorable fact of the Noble
Spanish King Reccaredus; as it is able to penetrate the very heart, and
thoroughly to persuade every one, that shall seriously ponder the same, and in
the fear of God. Conc. Coact. A.D. 585. Episc. 72.
This religious King Reccaredus in the year of our Lord God 585. commanded
all the Bishops within his dominions of Spain and Gallicia, being 72. in
all, to come together in his royal City of Toledo, there to confute and
condemn the Arian heresy: When they were come thither, the King sat down in
the midst of them, and declared the cause that moved him to send for them.
After that, he enacted a public Edict, for the inviolable observation of all
the Decrees of the Council; straightly charging as well the Clergy as the
Laytie, to obey and keep the same. Lastly, he subscribed his own name; and
that before all the Bishops, who in their due places subscribed after the
King: These are the express words of the Kings subscription, set down in
the end of the said Edict. Edict. regis, de co^firmat. concilij: in 2. to.
council. in council. 3 toletano.
Flauius Reccaredus rex, hanc deliberationem qua^ cum sancta definiuimus
Synodo, confirmans, subscripsi: I Flamus Reccaredus the King, confirming this
Consultation which we have defined with the holy Synod, have subscribed
thereunto. The next that subscribed after the King, was Mausona the
Metropolitan in the Province of Lusitania: after him subscribed Euphemius the
Arch-byshop of Toledo: The residue followed in order; as in the second Tome of
Councels is to be seen. Conc. Tolet. 3. in 2. tom. council.
These particular subscriptions I note, as a matter of great moment against the
Papists; who will grant no Prerogative or Royal place to Kings, in time of
Ecclesiastical Synodes. Out of the words contained in the Kings
subscription, I observe sundry golden Lessons. Ex Council. cap 18.
Ex decreto Domini nostri Reccaredi regis, simul cu^ Sacerdotali concilio: by
the Decree of our sovereign Lord Reccaredus the King, together with the
Council of the Bishops. Quam cum sancta definiuimus Synodo: Which we
defined, with the holy Synod. To all which, I think it not amiss, to add
these golden words of S. Augustine. Aug. Epist. 50. prope med. ad Bonifac.
Quomodo ergo Reges Domino seruiunt in timore, nisi ea quae contra iussa Domini
fiunt, religiosa seueritate prohibendo atque plectendo? Aliter. N. seruit, quia
homo est; aliter, quia etiam et rex est: Quia homo est, ei seruit viuendo
fideliter; quia vero etiam Rex est, seruit leges iusta praecipientes, et
contraria prohibentes, conuenienti vigore sanctiendo: sicut seruiuit Ezechias,
Lucos et Templa Idoloru^, et illa excelsa, quae contra praecepta Dei fuerant
constructa, destruendo: 4. Reg. 18. 4. Reg. 12. Iona. 3. Dan. 1^. Dan. 3.
sicut seruiuit Josias, talia et ipse faciendo: sicut seruiuit rex Niniuitarum,
vniuersam Ciuitatem ad placandum Dominum compellendo: sicut seruiuit Darius,
Idolum frangendum in potestatem Danieli dando, et inimicos eius Leonibus
ingerendo: sicut seruiuit Nabuchodonosor, omnes in regno suo positos a
blasphemando Deo, lege terribili prohibendo. In hoc ergo seruiunt Domino Reges,
in quantum sunt Keges; cum ea faciunt ad seruiendum illi, quae non possunt
facere nisi Reges: How do Kings serve God in fear, but by punishing with
religious severity, Neglecta disciplina, impunita saeui^ nequitia.
such things as are against Gods laws? For the King serves God one way, as
he is man; an other way, as he is King: As he is man, he serves God in living
as becomes an honest Christian; as he is King, he serves God in making sharp
Laws to the furtheraunce of Virtue, and to the suppressing of Vice: As
Ezechias served God, while he destroyed the Groves and Temples of Idols, and
those Hie places which were erected against Gods laws: As Josias served God,
while he performed the same, or like duties: As the King of the Ninevites
served God, in compelling the whole City to serve God: As Nabuchodonosor
served God, while he with very sharp Laws terrified all his subjects from
blaspheming the everliving God: In this therefore Kings serve God, as they are
Kings; when they do that for the service of God, which none but Kings can
do. Thus writes S. Austin, that ancient Father, that holy Writer, that
learned Doctor, that strong Pillar, that worthy Champion of Christ's Church.
Out of whose Discourse I observe many things, well worthy to be engraven in
Marble with Golden letters; in perpetuam rei memoriam. it belongs to the
office, duty, and charge of Kings, to purge the Church and House of God, from
Heresies, Errors, Superstition, and Idolatry. Quis mente sobrius, Regibus
dicat? Nolite curare, in regno vestro a quo teneatur vel oppugnetur Ecclesia
Domini vestri; non ad vos pertineat, in regno vestro quis velit esse sieve
religiosus sieve sacrilegus: Who well in his Wits, will say thus to Kings?
Have no regard, neither take any care, who within your Kingdom either protect
or oppugn the Church of God: you have no charge, neither does it pertain to
your office, who in your Kingdom be Religious, or who be Sacrilegious. Kings
have charge of men's Souls.
but much more of their souls. Which not only S. Austen faith, but the whole
course of Scripture teaches the same: For, the godly Kings as well in time of
the Law of Moses, as in the time of the New Testament and law of Grace; did
manage all matters, Ios 18. Number. 27.17. 2. Par. 23. v. 11.
both of Church and Commonweal. For which cause, the Civil Magistrate was
commanded to read the whole Book of the Law; as well of the first, as of the
second Table; and to study the same night and day. For which cause, the Civil
Magistrate was commanded to go out and in before the people, and to lead them
out and in; that the congregation of the Lord, should not be as Sheep without
a Shepherd. For which cause, the Book of the Law was delivered into the Kings
hands; at such time as he received the Crown, and was anointed King. Lastly,
(and this strikes dead) that Kings as Kings serve God; when they do those
things, which none but Kings can do. If this golden Periode were soundly
understood, Mark well for Christ's sake.
and perfectly kept in memory; it alone, would be enough to trample Pope and
Popery under foot. For, I pray you (sir Friar) did not Constantinus surnamed
the great, Theodesius the elder, Theodosius the younger, and Martianus, gather
the four first general Councels (of Nice, Constantinople, Ephesus, and
Chalcedon,) which Pope Gregory did reverence as the four Ghospels? did they
not call the same Synodes, as they were Emperors, Kings, and Monarchs? I
wot they did: it is already proved; it can not be denied. What? Did not
Reccaredus as King, command all the Bishops of Spain and Gallicia to
assemble themselves before him at Toledo, there to decide and determine causes
ecclesiastical? did he not tell them the cause, why he sent for them? did he
not sit down among them? did he not define with them? did he not subscribe
before all the Bishops? did he not confirm the Decrees and Canons of the
Council, with his royal edict? we have already seen it; we have viewed the
very words; it is proved most manifestly. Now, let us duly ponder, and
thoroughly understand; what of necessity must be inferred hereupon. S. Austin
affirms constantly; This assertion is wonderful; mark it well.
that when Kings serve God as Kings, then do they that which none but Kings
can do. But so it is, that Reccaredus and the other Kings, both called and
confirmed Councels, as they were Kings; for it is already proved: ergo Kings,
and none but Kings, can call and confirm holy Councels and sacred Synodes. The
reason is S. Austens, when he resolutely avouches; that while Kings serve God
as Kings, they do that which none but Kings can do: for, if Kings as
Kings, call and confirm Councels; none doubtless which are no Kings, can
do the same. And consequently, no Bishop, (no not the Pope of Rome) has
authority to gather Councels, or to confirm the same. Two things only, the
Pope may in show of words seem to object for himself.

To the former Objection, this is my answer. Mark well my words.
are in deed so brought into thraldom by the Pope, where Popery bears the
sway, as they may truly be said to do the office not of Kings as Kings, but
rather of Servants and Slaves to the disholy Father the Pope of Rome,
Possessor malae fidei in the beginning, can have no just title by prescription
in the ending. Thirdly, that if we suppose and grant him to be the true and
lawful King of Jtaly; yet can no more be rightly inferred thereupon, save
only that he can call and confirm Councels within Jtaly, and make Laws to
his subjects of the same Kingdom. In which case, I for my part, will not
contend with him; as who only deny his usurped authority, in other
transmarine and foreign Kingdoms. Now let us hear the Friar once again, to
recreate our spirits with his merry conceits.

B. C.
Surely it were me^re madness to think, that Anatolius would every way have
had equal authority in all Ecclesiastical causes, as the Minister affirms;
seeing then we must grant, that he desired Jurisdiction in Italy and Rome it
self: Nay, what were it else, but to condemn Anatolius of gross foolerie, in
suing for that superextrauagant grace of the Pope, to the injury of his own
Sea and Dignity.

T. B.
I answer; first, that our Jesuit here, unawares condemns rather their
famous Pope Gregory of mere foolerie, then Anatolius to whom he imputes it:
For, if Gregory's report be true, the Council of Chalcedon offered him the
name of Universal Bishop? and yet did the same Gregory object the desire
thereof against the Patriarch of Constantinople, as a proud name derogating
from the right of all other Bishops: Yea, your own sweet self (sir
Jesuit) do in this very Chapter, ascribe no less unto your Pope, and withal
admit other Bishops beside his Holiness. Secondly, that Anatolius might
truly have had equal authority with the Bishop of Rome in all
Ecclesiastical causes, and for all that, not have desired jurisdiction in
Jtaly and Rome it self. For our Jesuit must know, that these three are
intrinsecally distinguished one from an other: viz. Identitie, Equality, and
Similitude. There is often Similitude, where Equality wants: and many times
equality, where no Identitie can be found. Thirdly, that the Council of
Chalcedon approoueth, whatsoever the Nicene Synod has decreed: and
consequently, it takes not away from any Bishop his proper dignity. Lastly,
Peruse the Aphorisms, and mark them well.
that this which our Friar here obiecteth, and whatsoever else where to the
like effect, is soundly confuted in the Aphorisms aforegoing; especially, in
the third and fifth of the same. And for further proof, mark well my next
Answer following.

B. C.
Nothing is determined in the Council of Nice touching the Church of Rome, but
that is made the rule of other Churches; as Pope Nicholas the first, notes:
who also affirms, that the Authority of the Roman Church was not from Men,
but from God.

T. B.
I answer; Nicholas, nor any other Pope, is a sufficient witness in his own
cause: as is already proved. Rome; six hundred and thirty holy and learned
Bishops in one Synod; 217. in an other; Let the Aphorisms be well marked.
200. in an other; 150. in an other; 318. in an other; (all which is already
proved in the Aphorisms aforegoing) would never have limited, or once
offered to alter the same. These express words of the Fathers of the Chalcedon
Council, may for the present, be sufficient. Conc. Chalc. act. 16, page 208.
Tom. 2.
Etenim sedi senioris Romae propter Imperium Ciuitatis illius, Patres
consequenter priuilegia reddiderunt: For the Fathers consequently gave
Privileges to the Sea of old Rome, for the Empire of that City. Lo, Men (not
God) gave Privileges to the Sea of Old Rome. And they yield this reason for
the same: because (forsooth) the City of Rome was the Seat of the Empire,
Note well the tenth Conclusion.
and reputed Caput Mundi, the Head of the World. Nicholas says, that they
took example of the form of the Church of Rome, for that which they would
give to the Church of Alexandria; he grants in very deed that as the Bishope
of Alexandria had but the pre-eminence of all there about; no more had the
Byshope of Rome. And so it follows, that the Council thereby did decree;
that the Bishop of Rome should keep himself within those limittes. Cardinal
Cusanus and Ruffinus, do so understand the Canon of the Nicene Council. Conc.
Nicen. Can. 6.
Yea, other Canons of the same Council, do plainly insinuate the same sense;
Can. 4.5.7.
as at large it is already proved. Rome had universal sovereignty from God,
as Pope Nicholas untruly avouched; then could no Bishop of Rome, nor yet the
holy Council of Nice; have given or permitted such custom, to the Bishop of
Alexandria. The reason is evident; because whatsoever is De Jure Diuino, no
Mortal Man can dispense with the same. This is so clear and certain; as no
learned Papist, either does or can deny the same. Austen, do so teach us:
these are the very words: Did. 8. cap. quicontempta.
Qui contempta veritate, praesumit consuetudinem sequi, aut circa fratres
inuidus est et malignus, quibus veritas revelatur; aut circa Deum ingratus est,
inspiratione cuius, Ecclesia eius instruitur: nam Dominus in Euangelio, ego sum
inquit, Veritas; non dixit, ego sum Consuetudo: itaque Veritate manifestata,
cedat Consuetudo Veritati: He that contemns Verity, Ioh. 14.^.
and presumes to follow Custom, is either envious and injurious toward his
Brethren, to whom the truth is revealed; or else ungrateful to Godward, with
whose inspiration his Church is instructed: for our Lord says in his Gospel,
I am the Truth; he said not, I am Custom: therefore when Truth is manifest,
let Custom give place to the same. Again, in an other place thus. Did. 8.
cap. frustra.
Hoc plane verum est, quia ratio et veritas consuetudini praeponenda sunt: This
is true in deed, that Reason and Truth must be preferred before Custom. The
same Decrees out of S. Cyprian teach us the same: these are the words. Did.
8. cap. si tolus.
Non debemus attendere, quid aliquis ante nos faciendum putauerit; sed quid
prius qui ante omnes est Christus, prior fecerit: neque. N. hominis
consuetudinem sequi oportet, sed Dei veritatem: We must not regard, what any
before us thought should be done; but what Christ first did, who is more to be
respected, then all others. Again, in an other place thus. Did. 8. cap.
consuetudo.
Nam Consuetudo sine Veritate, vetustas erroris est: propter quod, relicto
errore, sequamur Veritatem: Custom without Truth, is the antiquity of
Error: wherefore let us leave Error, and follow the Truth. Pope Gregory is
consonant, and plainly avouches the same Truth: Did 8. cap. si.
co^suetudinem.
Vsus qui Veritati est contrarius, est abolendus: Use contrary to Truth, must
be abolished. Did. 1. cap. consuetudo. Nota Glossam.
Consuetudo est ius quoddam moribus institutu^: Custom is a certain Law,
instituted by the frequent actions of men. It follows in the same Decrees:
Quod pro L^ge suscipitur, cum deficit Lex: Which is received as Law, when Law
can not be had. And in the Gloss, I find this exposition. Hic videtur, quod
tunc demum recurrendum est ad Consuetudinem, cum Lex deficit: et sic est
argumentum, quod nunquam secundum Consuetudinem est iudicandum, si ius
contrarium praecipiat: Here it seems, that then we must have recourse unto
Custom, when Law is wanting: and so we have an argument, that we must never
judge according to Custom, if Law command the contrary. Nota valde Glossam.
Sequitur in Glossa. resp, quod non secundum consuetudin^m, sed secundum iura
est iudicandum. I answer, that Judgment must not be given according to
Custom, but according to Law. And consequently I conclude against Pope
Nicholas, and against all J^suites, and Iesuited Papists; that seeing the
sacred Councels of Nice, Constantinople, Ephesus, Chalcedon, and Aphrican,
yielded no prerogative to the Bishops of Rome, save only in respect of
Custom: and seeing withal, that Pope Sozimus, Celestinus, and Bonifacius, did
challenge their falsely pretended Primacie and Prerogatives only by the Canons
of the Nicene Council, (as I have already soundly proved,) and for that end,
Pope Sozimus falsified the same Canons, and the other Popes urged the same, for
the furtheraunce of their falsely pretended Title, Primacie, and Prerogatives,
but were therefore in the end, roundly controlled, and utterly rejected of the
Fathers of the Aphrican Council; the Popes or Bishops of Rome must hold them
selves contented and satisfied, with that jurisdiction which the holy Synodes
have allotted them.

B. C.
The true meaning therefore of the Canon is, that the Bishop of Rome before
the definition of any Council, used to commit the government of Egypt, Libia,
and Pentapolis, to the Bishop of Alexandria; as Pope Nicholas the first, does
expound.

T. B.
The Jesuit should have named the Pope, that first gave such government to the
Bishop of Alexandria, and in what year it first began. Which doubtless
he would have done, if possibly he had been able to perform the same. The
truth therefore is, as I have proved evidently* and Pope Nicholas is like to
Sozimus, and others of that ungodly (...)* They (...) neither tell where, when,
or by what Pope, such government was first committed to the Bishop of
Alexandria: and yet do they never cease, to demand the like of us: but (I
hope) this Catholic Triumph, will stop all their mouths. Conc. Nicen. can.
4.7.
Yea, two other Canons of the Nicene Council, are flat contrary to Pope
Nicholas his exposition: for, the seventh Canon gives honor to the Bishop of
Jerusalem; yet not by reason of any Commission from the Bishop of Rome, but
for an old Custom and Tradition. The same seventh Canon in like manner,
ascribes a proper dignity to every Metropolitan. And the fourth Canon
avouches constantly, that nothing done in any Province is of any force or
strength, unless the same be confirmed by the Metropolitan. As for the Popes
Universal sovereignty, no Canon yet extant in rerum natura, (neither of the
Council of Nice, Constantinople, Ephesus, Chalcedon, or Aphrican,) makes any
mention thereof.

B. C.
The word ( Superroyall) I suppose slyly mocketh at that, which venerable
antiquity confesses. I will content my self with the testimony of S.
Chrysostom, who speaking not only of Bishops, but inferior Clergymen,
instructs them how to deal with secular Potentates coming unworthily to the
Sacraments, in this manner. If a Duke (quoth he) if a Consul, if he that
wears a Crown, come unworthily, stop and hinder him; thou have greater
power then he. Hom. 83. in Matthew.
And the Minister denies, that the late Queen might preach the Gospel, or
administer the Sacraments. Which functions notwithstanding, other of their
Clergy might execute: whereof it ensues, that in these Spiritual points,
their power was above that of the Queens, and so truly in a good sense may be
called Superroyall, which so much his superscoffing gravity seems to deride
and taunt.

T. B.
I answer: Ezechias highly renowned in holy Writ, though he were but very, 2.
Par. 29. v. 5.11.15.
young in years, did for all that, in regard of his prerogative Royal and
Supreme authority in causes Ecclesiastical, call the Priests and Levites,
his Sons; charging them to hear him, and to follow his Commandment; for so
are the words of the Text. Yea, Josias that famous King, did sundry times
command the Hie Priest. But of this subject, I have entreated so copiously in
other Books, 4. Reg. 23. v. 1.2.3.4.
as it is here a thing needless, to stand longer upon the same. S. John the
Baptist. Yea, I further grant, that if the vices of Princes, Kings, and
Monarchs, be notorious and scandalous to the whole Church, then the Bishops
may denounce such Potentates, to be enemies to the truth, adversaries to God,
and no true members of the Church; but to be holden for forlorn people, and as
Ethnickes and Publicanes, How wicked Kings, ought to be dealt withal.
until they give true signs of unfeigned repentance. But withal, this must
ever be remembered and most loyalty observed, of all Bishops in Christ's
Church; viz. That the Prince (though full of manifest vices, and most notorious
crimes in the world) may never be shunned, neither of the people, nor yet of
the Bishops. The reason is at hand; Because God has appointed him to be
their Governor. Much less may the people forsake their obedience, to his
sacred prerogative Royal and supereminent Power: And least of all (for it is
most execrable, damnable, and plain diabolical) may either the people alone,
or the Bishops alone, or both jointly together, depose their undoubted
Sovereign; though a Tyrant, Heretic, or Apostatate: for even in that case,
all loyal obedience and faithful service in all civil affairs, and
whatsoever else is lawful, must of duty be yeeled unto them. He may be
admonished by Gods true Ministers in the pulpit and court of Conscience, if his
vices be public and scandalous to the Church: but he may never be judged in
the court of their Consistory, touching his power Royal and Princely
prerogative. Their power is only to admonish and rebuke him, and to pray to
God to amend what is amiss. He has no Judge that can punish him, but the
great Judge of all; even the God of Heaven. The popish Cardinal Hugo
delivers this most Christian doctrine, though to the utter confusion of the
Pope. Hugo Card. in Psa. 50.
Tibi soli, quia non est super me alius quam tu, qui possit punire: ego. N. sum
Rex, et non est aliquis preter te super me: To thee only (says Cardinal
Hugo,) because there is not any above me, but thy self alone, that has power
to punish me: for, I am a King; and so besides thee, there is none above me.
And the popish Gloss does give this sense and meaning, of the Prophets words.
Gloss. Ord. in Psa. 50.
Rex omnibus superior, tantum a Deo puniendus est: The King is above all, and
he can be punished of none, but of God alone. But for a larger Discourse of
this Subject, I refer the Reader to the Downfall of Popery. holy Canons of
our English Church, do flatly prohibit the same. Jesuit does show himself to
be a silly disputer, while he argues the defect of power Royal, for that the
King in some respect, is as it were subject to the Minister. For I pray your
worship (good sir Friar,) does not your Pope himself fall down prostrate,
before the feet of a silly Minister or Priest, The Pope is subject to a silly
Priest.
when he confesses his sins unto him? Does he not humbly submit himself
unto the same silly Priest? Is not the silly Priests power above the Popes,
while he absolueth the Pope from his sins? Is not the silly Priests Power
above the Popes, while he inioyneth Penance to the Pope? I wot he is, though
not (...) and absolutely, yet (...) and in some respect or sort: If any Papist
shall this deny; I can prove by his Popish denial, all their Popes to perish
everlastingly.

B. C.
S. Cyprian opposing himself against the Pope, does nothing prejudice the
Authority of the Pope. For albeit the Pope commanded Rebaptization not to be
practiced; yet did he not define the question, or pronounce any censure against
Cyprian, or others of his opinion: much less was it condemned by a general
Council, with reason, S. Augustine brings in his defense; Lib. 1. de Bap^.
C. 18.
and so it was free for him without danger of Heresy, to persist in his own
opinion.

T. B.
I answer: Cornelius, then Bishop of Rome, together with the whole
national Synod of all the Bishops of Jtaly, had made a flat decree touching
Rebaptization: and though also Pope Stephanus had confirmed the same Decree,
straightly commanding to observe the same: and though thirdly, our Papists of
late days do obstinately affirm, that their Pope can not err when he
defines iudicially; yet this notwithstanding, S. Cyprian teaches and tells
us plainly, that in his days, Eusebius. Libr* 7. Hist. cap. 2.3 4.
the Bishop of Rome had no such Power or preheminent prerogatives, as he
this day proudly and Antichristianly takes upon him: For he roundly withstood
the Decree of Pope Stephanus, who then was Bishop of Rome; and both sharply
reproved him, and contemned his falsely pretended Primacie. And for all that,
S. Cyprian was ever reputed an Holy Bishop in his life time, and a glorious
Martyr, being dead. But if the Bishop of Rome had been Christ's Vicar, and so
privileged as our Papists bear the world in hand he is; then doubtless, S.
Cyprian must needs have been an Heretic, and so reputed and esteemed in the
Church of God. Yea, if any Christian shall this day do or affirm, as S.
Cyprian did; or publicly deny the Popes falsely pretended Primacie, in any
place, country, territories, or dominions, where Popery bears the sway,
then without all peradventure, he must be burnt at a Stake with Fire and
Faggot for his pains. Of which Subject, the Reader may find a larger
Discourse, in my Christian Dialogue. S. Austen says, that S. Cyprian would
have yielded to the Decree of a general Council, albeit he made no reckoning
of the Popes Decree, even joined with the national Synod of all the Bishops
of Jtaly; he gives us to understand two memorable points of Doctrine, which
I wish the Reader to observe attentively. This kills the Pope.
The One, that the Definitive sentence of the Bishop of Rome is not
infallible, although he define jointly with an whole national Synod: And
consequently, that his Definitive sentence may much more be false and
erroneous, when he decrees and defines without a Council. For, if S.
Augustine had been of that mind, that the Bishop of Rome could not have
erred in his Judicial and Definitive sentence, either apart, or with a
national Council; he neither would nor could have excused S. Cyprian, who
scorned and constantly refused to yield to the same. Yea, S. Cyprian himself
would for his great piety, have humbly yielded to the Popes sentence; if he
had known him to have received such a Privilege and Prerogative from Heaven:
But neither did the Bishop of Rome in those days, stand upon any such
Prerogative of not erring; neither did any learned Father of that age, ever
dream of any such extraordinary Privilege. No, no, For this point* read and
note well my Christian dialogue.
the most that the Bishops of Rome could say and allege for their falsely
pretended Sovereignty, when S. Augustine and the other Fathers of the Aphrican
Council, rejected and condemned appeals to Rome; was only this, and no other
thing: viz. that the Fathers of the Nicene Council, had granted such
Privilege and Primacie to the Church of Rome. And therefore did S. Austen both
gravely and prudently excuse S. Cyprian, for that he would have yielded to a
lawful general Council: As if he had said, S. Cyprian was no more bound to
follow the Opinion and Decree of the Bishop of Rome, then the Bishop of
Rome to follow his. Jesuit says truly, though unawares against himself; that
it was free for S. Cyprian without the danger of Heresy, to persist in his
own opinion: For, it was not in the power of the Bishop of Rome, to make
that Heresy, which was not Heresy before.

B. C.
That it was lawful and usual before the time of this Council to appeal to
Rome, is evident out of S. Cyprian, who reports how Fortunatus and Felix
deposed by himself, appealed to Cornelius Bishop of Rome. And one Basilides
deposed in Spain, appealed to Pope Stephen; as the same Cyprian recounteth.
Such as Marcion are fittest for you and your Pope.
Not to speak of Marcion that ancient Heretic, who excommunicated of his
Bishop in Pontus, came to Rome for absolution; as Epiphanius relates: And
therefore Pope Leo calls it an ancient custom to appeal to Rome.

T. B.
I answer; First, that many distressed persons in their distressed and
desperate causes, have many times indeed sought to Rome for help and succor.
But, we must not so much regard and consider, what has been done, especially
by naughty and disobedient persons; as what ought of right to be done, and
according to the Law of God. Persons driven to the brincke of desperation, by
reason of their bad and wicked dealing; will soon attempt any thing, which may
any way seem to better their doleful and miserable estate. Even so men
desirous of Honor, will easily hearken unto that, which seems any way to
further their intended purpose. But that such Appeals were never approved, by
the holy Fathers and ancient Councels; I have copiously proved in the
Aphorisms of this Chapter; and S. Ciprians opposition against the Bishop of
Rome, Mark well the Aphorisms.
does evidently confirm the same. What Pope Leo says, is of no force.

B. C.
That many Canons are wanting in the Nicene Council is most certain: Constable.
Epist. Apud Eusebius. Lib. 3. de vita Constable. in initio. Haeres. 69. Ep. de Synod.
Ari. et Selenc.
For one Canon of that Council was about the observation of Easter day, as
testifies Constantine in his Epistle, and also Epiphanius and Athanasius: but
this Canon is in none of those twenty which be now extant, and of which only
so many years since, Ruffinus makes mention in his History.

T. B.
I answer: Nicene Council, which are not this day to be found in the Canons
now extant. But withal I constantly avouch, that there is a great disparitie
between Canons and Decrees; as the late popysh Synod of Trent plainly
tells us. And consequently, that there were but twenty Canons, howsoever
some other things besides were decreed at that time. To which I add, that all
Decrees are not always thought necessary to be put in print. Whereof we have
an evident example, in our English Parliament-statutes: for it is often thought
convenient, not to put them all in print. Epiphanius distinguishes Canons from
Decrees: these are his express words. Haeres. 69. page 217.
In eadem Synodo Canones quosaa^ posuerunt Ecclesiasticos, simulque de paschate
decreuerunt vnam vnitatem ac consensum: In the same Synod they put down
certain Canons Ecclesiastical, and withal they decreed one unity and
consent, touching the Keeping of Easter. Lo, this ancient and holy Father
makes a clear difference, between the Canons of the Nicene Synod, and the
Decrees thereof. Nicene Canons to have perished, which we constantly deny; yet
would it not follow thereupon, that such Canons contained the Popes falsely
pretended Primacie: especially, seeing both the holy Fathers and most renowned
Councels, do stoutly impugn the same. This is proved at large, throughout
the Aphorisms aforegoing. Aphrican Council, told the Pope roundly; that they
had used all exquisite diligence to find out the true Copies, True Copies were
sent from Alexandria, and Constantinople.
and to that end had sent Messengers into sundry parts of the East; howbeit,
such Canons as the Pope pretended for his falsely challenged Sovereignty, none
could any where be found. And therefore they advised him to surcease, and to
give over his claim; for they could no longer endure such Fumosum typhum
seculi: such smoakie stateliness of the world. I use the very words of the
holy Synod, as I have already proved. Julius swore solemnly, that he had
locked them up in a Coffer of his Church. These are his express words: Conc.
Aphric. Epist ad Celest. cap. 105. in fine.
Si quis aute^ de his ampliora atque abundantiora sc^re voluerit, in sacro
nostrae Ecclesiae sedis (...), et ea quae prae^^ximus, inuenire poterit:
Rescript. Iulij ad orient. page 393. cap. 29. to. 1. conc.
If any shall desire a larger Discourse hereof, he may find these Canons, and
much more like stuff, in the Holy Arc or Coffer of the seat of our Church.
Thus writes Pope Julius: nay rather, thus swears that holy Pope. For these
words follow immediately: Verum me dixisse, testis est Diuinitas: A strange
and unusual manner of swearing.
The Divinity is a witness, that I have spoken the truth. Here I wish the
gentle and honest Reader, to ponder duly these points with me. First, that
this Epistle of Julius is a counterfeite, as I have already proved: for, if
the Pope had so laid them up, as here he swears solemnly; Sozimus and the
other Popes, who made such ado with the Bishops of Afric about those
Canons, would roundly have showed the same: Yea, doubtless, if they had once
had them in their Coffer under a Lock, they would rather have lost all the
rest, then them. Popery abounds with tricks of legierdemain.
Secondly, that the world has been too long abused with this kind of coozenage
and tricks of legierdemaine. Thirdly, that if the Bishops of Rome can not
keep those Canons, which make so much for the advancement of their stately
Sovereignty, how can we safely credit them, in keeping pure and free from
errors, such Books, Councels, and Canons, as make greatly for us, and wholly
against them selves? We can not do it. Fourthly, that if counterfeite Books,
Histories, and Canons, were wholly, laid away; Popery (believe me,) would
soon fall of it self: For, in this supposed rescript of Pope Julius, directed
to the Bishops of the East; there is such abundance of matter for the Popes
Superlordly Sovereignty, as would certainly serve his turn, if it could so be
admitted. But Gods holy name be blessed, the forgerie is so palpable, as every
one may with all facility discover the same. Conc. Aphric. Epis. ad
Bonifacium, cap. 101.
Fifthly, that S. Augustine, Alipius, Possidius, Marinus, and all the other
Bishops, 217. in number, assembled in the famous Aphricane Synod, do
plainly avouch, and constantly affirm; that the true Copies of the Canons of
the Nicene Council, were at Antioch, Alexandria, and Constantinople; and that
they were content for charitie-sake, to observe such proceedinges touching
Appeals, as the Popes Messengers did allege out of their commonitorie from
Rome, until true trial should be made thereof, out of the true Copies from
the East, which were to come from Cyrillus Bishop of Alexandria, and Atticus
Bishop of Constantinople: which trial being duly made, by the true Copies;
the Popes forgerie was manifest, and the holy Fathers protested constantly,
that they could no longer endure such arrogant and smoakie stateliness.
Fumosum typhum seculi.


B. C.
Bell also, both in his other Books, and in this Pamphlet in the next Chapter,
obiecteth out of Socrates; That a Canon was made in the Nicene Council by the
suggestion of Paphnutius; which permitted Priests to remain with their former
Wives. But this Canon is no where to be found, amongst those twenty.

T. B.
I answer: Jesuit to be hanged many times, where once would serve the turn:
For, if we shall search from the East to the West, and from the North to the
South; yet shall we never be able to find out a more shameless liar, or a more
notorious falsary, then is this Jesuit. thereof. Out upon lying Jesuits; fie
upon rotten Popery; away with all such beggarly trumperie. Suruay, is so far
from being as the lying Jesuit impudently avouches, (who seems to be
composed intrinsecally of lying) that it is flat against the same, and able
to torment the Jesuits conscience (if he have any left) while breath is in his
body. God for his mercy-sake, either soundly convert such lying wretches, or
else confound them everlastingly. The Jesuit durst not deal with me, as I do
with him, and others: that is, set down my express words: and that done,
make application of the same. He began with lying, even in the highest degree:
he continues still in lying; and he has no other means in the world, Mark
well for Christ's sake.
but either to end with lying, or else to confess Popery to be the new
Religion. This is such an undoubted truth, as I am not afraid to die in the
same. My words in the next Chapter concerning this point, are in one place
these: viz. For this respect did holy Paphuntius stand up in the Council of
Nice, (at such time as the Fathers then and there assembled, thought to have
severed married Priests and Bishops from their Wives,) and told them according
to Gods word, that to forbid marriage to Priests, was too severe a Law. In an
other place of the self same Chapter, my words to the same effect are these.
Thirdly, seeing Priests marriage was holden for lawful in the famous Council
of Nice; and that the holy Bishop Paphuntius did pronounce openly in the
same, that the conjugal acts of married Priests was true chastity: whose
sentence was approved of the whole Council; Survey, Part. 3. cap. 3. Page 232.
and thereupon the matter was left as indifferent for every Priest either to
marry, or not to marry, at his own free choice. In my Suruay likewise, two
places do manifestly convince our impudent lying Jesuit: In the former place,
these are my express words. Thirdly, that although Socrates and Sozomenus
ascribe it to the old tradition of the Church, for unmarried Priests so to
continue; yet does not Casio^orus make any mention thereof, in his Tripartite
Collection. And howsoever Paphuntius alleged Tradition, to mitigate the
severe Laws intended by the Council; yet is it very certain, that such
Tradition was neither general nor divine. In the latter place, these are my
very words. Vbi Super, Page 235.
I say fourthly, that the Tradition which Socrates and Sozomenus speak of, was
by example, and not by doctrine; as both Gratianus and the Gloss expound
them. These are my very words, in four several places; which do so condemn
the Jesuit in his own conscience, that he durst not for his Lugges, once
name them, or truly set them down: For, I was so far from saying, That the
Nicene Fathers made any Canon in this behalf; that my words now truly
recounted, do plainly convince the flat contrary. But mark well the third
place in my said Suruay, where I have these express words: Vbi super, Page
233.
The Law which the Fathers the^ thought to have made, was a new Law never heard
of before. I prove it: Because Socrates has these words: Socr. Hist. lib. 1.
cap. 8.
Visum erat Episcopis legem noua^ in Ecclesia^ intraducere: The Bishops
thought indeed, to have brought a new Law into the Church: But the Council
was persuaded, with Paphuntius his oration, and referred the whole matter to
every Priests free election, making no Law in that behalf: Hist. Tripart.
Libr. 2. cap. 14.
For Cassiodorus has these express words. Synodusque laudauit sententiam
eius, et nihil ex hac part sanciuit, sed hoc in vniuscuiusquod voluntate, non
in necessitate dimisit: And the Synod commended his opinion, and so decreed
nothing in the matter; but left it in every man's election, to do what he
thought good, without compulsion. I therefore conclude, Lo, the Council made
no Law or Canon in this matter.
that albeit the Bishops in the Council of Nice assembled, would indeed have
made a new and strange Law against the marriage of Priests; yet did the spirit
of God speaking in Paphuntius, utterly dissuade them from that ungodly purpose.
These are my words truly recounted, both out of my next Chapter, and out of
my Suruay: which being so, what reward ought our Jesuit to have? Even an
Halter about his neck, and to be hanged up on the Gibbet, Our Friar belyeth
Bell.
for his horrible falsehood, and most notorious lying. Bell (says our Jesuit)
obiecteth out of Socrates, that a Canon was made in the Nicene Council, by the
suggestion of Paphuntius. Bell (says the true Bell indeed) truly affirms out
of Socrates, that the Fathers thought to have made a new Law; Mark well the
words in my Survey.
but through the persuasion of holy Paphuntius, made none indeed. True Bell
says; that the spirit of God speaking in Paphuntius, did utterly diswade the
Fathers from that ungodly purpose. Bell says; the Fathers intended to have
made a Law, but made none indeed. Hold fast this truth. The Jesuit says;
Bell affirms, the Fathers to have made a Law. Remember this, shameless liar.
To be short; Bell had rather want, A Mil-horse is one thing, a Hors-mill an
other thing.
both his Arms, both his Legs, and both his Eyes; then to use such lying,
false-dealing, and coozening tricks, as our Jesuit has in common use and
custom. For, it is one thing, to intend the making of the Law; an other thing,
to make the Law indeed.

B. C.
These Canons of Appeal being found formally in the Council of Sardica, where
Appellations to Rome are ratified and confirmed; both Pope Sozimus and others,
call them by the name of the Nicene Canons, though they be found in the
Council of Sardica: And the reason is, for that these two Councels are
accounted for all one; both because the same Fathers that were present at Nice,
were also a great number of them at Sardica: and also for that no new thing
touching Faith, was there enacted.

T. B.
I answer: Sozimus had understood and meant the Canons of Sardica, when he
named the Canons of Nice, about which there was so much ado; as we have
already seen: then doubtless, it had been his part to have named them; though
for no other end, but only for unity, peace, and charitie-sake. Jesuit,
Mark that Appeals to Rome are no matters of faith.
when he avouches no new thing touching Faith, to have been enacted in the
supposed Synod of Sardica. And my reason is this; for that Appeals to the
Church of Rome, are no matters of Faith indeed. Nice could not err, either in
defining matters of Faith or Manners. And consequently, seeing the Synod of
Sardica in the fourth and seventh Canons, In the third Aphorism.
has decreed flat contrary to the Synod of Nice in the fourth, fifth, sixth,
and seventh Canons; it can not be deemed a legittimate and lawful Synod, but
a bastard and plain counterfeite; as I have already proved, in the third
Aphorism of this present Chapter: To which place I refer the Reader, as
where he may find whatsoever his heart can desire. This only will I here say
for the present; that not only the other first three general Councels after
Nice, ( viz. of Constantinople, Ephesus, and Chalcedon,) being all three after
it, decreed contrary to it; but (which is more to be admired,) 217. Bishops
(of which S. Austen was one) assembled in the famous Council Aphrican,
affirmed constantly with one uniform assent to Pope Celestine; Epist. Conc.
Aphric. ad Celest. Cap. 105. To. 1. Council. Page 591.
that no Synod had made such Canons, as the Bishops of Rome alleged for
their own pomp and statelynesse. These are the express words of the holy
Synod. Nam, vt aliqui tanquam a tuae sanctitatis latere mittantur, nulla
inuenimus patrum Synodo constitutum: For, that any should be sent from your
Holiness, we find it not defined by the Fathers in any Synod. This Argument
can never be truly answered.
Now, notwithstanding this uniform assertion of so many, so learned, so holy,
and so ancient Fathers; yet is that falsely supposed prerogative of Appeals
to Rome, plainly decreed in the fourth and seventh Canons of Sardica. And
consequently, either the Synod of Sardice was a bastard and counterfeite
Conuenticle, or else the two hundred and seventeen Fathers of the Aphrican
Council, avouched to the Pope a most notorious untruth. Lately Popery is
mere foolerie.
But doubtless, neither could so many holy Fathers for their great reading and
learning, have been ignorant of the said Council, if any such lawful Synod
had been extant: neither for their rare piety, would they have gainesayd or
withstood the same. Nicene Fathers to have been also at Sardice; is like to the
counterfeite Donation of Constantine, the rescript of Pope Julius, and such
like: of which I have discoursed at large, in the conclusions and Aphorisms of
this present Chapter. Sozimus, Bonifacius, and Celestinus, during whose times
the controversy did continue) to have urged the Canons of Sardica, if any such
lawful general Synod had been extant: And consequently, seeing they never
once related them; it follows, that in their days, there was no such
Council extant in very deed. Gregory reverenced the four first general
Councels, Gratian. Did. 15. cap. sicut.
as the four holy Ghospels: but for all that, he never made mention of the
Synod of Sardica, which (if it had been extant and no counterfeite,) ought to
have had the second place. Sardice, are flat contrary to the fourth, fifth,
sixth, and seventh Canons of Nice. And yet without all peradventure, no Synod,
especially coming within a few years after Nice, (which Council all the
Christian world did highly reverence at all times,) either would or durst have
decreed against the same. To that which is here and else where said of the
Centuristes and M. Perkins, this may in general yield sufficient contentation
to the honest Reader: viz. that albeit they do not in every point, iumpe
precisely with Bell; yet do they not speak any thing in defense of Popery,
nor any where plead for the supposed antiquity thereof. No, no, they utterly
reject Popery, and every where condemn the same. To that of Policarpus, I
answer; that his coming to Rome was not to insinuate any sovereignty of
Anicetus over him, as the very end did declare; but to visit that famous
imperial City, the Queen of the world, and Caput mundi, Matt. 12. v. 42.
and to see the old Monumentes in that place; even as the Queen of the South
came from far, to hear Salomons Wisdom, and to behold his glory. To that
of Jrenaeus, I have said sufficiently in many places of this Chapter; as also
to that of Policrates, and the other Bishops of Asia: That which I have said
of S. Cyprian, does evidently confirm the same. And the testimony of Eusebius
is consonant, while he writes in this manner: Eusebius. Hist. lib. 5. Cap. 24.
Sed hoc non omnibus placabat Episcopis; quin potius e contrario scribentes ei,
iubebant, vt magis qua sunt pacis ageret, et concordia atque vnanimitati
studeret: denique extant etiam ipsorum literae, quibus asperius obiurgant
Victorem: All Bishops liked not his dealing, but by their Letters directed to
him, they commanded (mark well the word) that he should rather do those
things which belong to peace, and should endeavor himself to establish
concord and unity: To be brief; their Letters are extant, in which they
reprove Victor (the Bishop of Rome) very sharply. Thus writes the ancient
and learned Father Eusebius; clearing two things unto us. The One, that
Irenaeus and the other holy Bishops, did chide and reprove the Pope.
The Other; that they did not only rebuke him, but (which is much more), freely
in their Letters to him, command him. Mark well the word; ( Iubebant,) they
commanded him. For (says our Jesuit,) The Pope was both reproved and
commanded.
the other Apostles sent not Peter by any authority of command, but only by
request and petition; as Princes and Superiors without any touch of their high
Office or Dignity, may be sent by their inferiors: their sending proceeding
from petition, nothing empeacheth their high Sovereignty. But our sir Friar
either desires to deceive others, or knows not what he says. For without
all peradventure; in proper phrase of speech, whosoever is sent by an other or
others (mark well my words,) the same person or persons, as they be sent, are
inferiors: For this reduplication (sent as sent,) implies intrinsecally a
duty and subjection; The Reduplication must be well marked.
even in him or them, who otherwise may be superiors. Whenever one goes to
a place upon request, he is not properly sent thither by him that made the
request, but freely takes that journey in hand of his own accord: He does it
willingly, not by compulsion; of charity, not of duty. To which I add; that
it is a disloyal speech of a Subject, to affirm that the King may be sent of
his Subjects. Howbeit I will not deny, but the King in some matters of great
consequence, may be persuaded by the advice of his grave Councillors; that his
corporal presence were necessary, and thereupon resolve with himself to go
in proper person: Yet in such a case, it can neither truly, nor properly be
said; That the King was sent of his Subjects, but that he took the journey
in hand freely and of his own accord, though perhaps the rather by their
advise. To that of our Jesuit, where he says; That S. Paul being inferior to
S. Peter, reprehended him: and that Bell, if he were a Bishop, would look as
the Devil looked over Lincoln, and none might admonish him of any fault. I
answer in this manner: First, that our Friar does too much injury to S. Paul,
while he makes him inferior to S. Peter; and withal does no little dishonor
to his Popes, who in all their Pardons. Dispensations, and such like trumperie
do ever rely upon the joint authority of S. Peter and S. Paul, grounding
their power and sovereignty in them both. Galat. 1. v. 1.
For S. Paul received not his Authority from any mortal man, but from God
himself immediately: Yea, himself says of himself, that he had as great
Power as Peter: the one over the Jews; the other over the Gentiles. Galat. 2. v
8.
Secondly, that every Apostle received from Christ himself, equal Power over
the whole World; Mat. 28. v. 19.
every one of the eleven, having the same Commission that Peter had. Thirdly,
that our Jesuit seems better acquainted with the Devil, then he is with
God; as who bears his Reader in hand, that he knows how the Devil looked
over Lincoln. Fourthly, that not Bell, but the Pope is the man; who may carry
thousands of souls into Hell, Did. 40. cap. fi Papa.
and yet no man may say unto him; Why do thou so? This is already proved,
in the Conclusions aforegoing. Here I deem it not amiss, for the complement
of the Popes falsely pretended Sovereignty, to adioyne a testimony of one of
his holy Martyrs, by way of digression.

The Digression.
THe Secular popish Priests as well French as English, have published in print
may Books; in which they have most lively pourtrayed and painted out the
Jesuits in their best beseeming colors. They affirm constantly in their said
Books, of the Jesuits in general; that they be Proud men, Tyrants,
Coozeners, Thieues, Gypsies, Murderours, and men of no Religion. Of Robert
Parsons that traiterous and foule-mouthed Jesuit, in particular; that he is a
Bastard, a notorious Drunkard, a Deceiuer, a Traitor, a prouoker of others to
Treason, the Monster of mankind, a Farie-brat, begotten of some Incubus; and
what not? All which, are plainly and truly related in my Book, entitled, The
Anatomy of Popish tyranny: Which Book, he that has not seen and read, may
seem to be ignorant of the deepest points of Jesuitical Theology. These
Books do so gall and wound the Jesuits, at the very heart, as they know not
in the world what to say or answer in that behalf. Clerk and Watson lately
executed for their most notorious treasons, wrote sundry Books against the
said Jesuits. This Jesuit B. C. is so mightily assailed and turmoyled, with
that which I cite out of Watson, that in one place, to weete, in his Epistle
about the 27. page, he has these words. The Author he alleges is some
Quodlibetarian Minister, though poor Watson bears the name. But in an other
place, to weete, in the eight Chapter of this present Pamphlet, he writes
thus. Bell shows small conscience in belying the dead, and laying more faults
upon him unjustly; when alas, he had otherwise too many. Again, Watson
speaks of matters of fact. In which twain, the Jesuit flatly contradicts
himself: In the former, he would gladly find out an other Author. But in the
latter, he unawares fathereth the Book upon Watson; telling Bell, that he
belyeth the dead. To which I add: that Watson upon his death, did acknowledge
himself to be the Author. Robert Parso^s begot two Bastards, Male and Female,
upon the body of his own sister. Between his age of 17. and 23. he was an
Heretic of the Family of Love, till he became a Jesuit.

See my Anatomy. P. 71.




The Jesuits third Chapter, of the Marriage of Priests and Ministers of the
Church.
THe Jesuit greatly lamenting, that the prohibition of the Marriage of
Priests can not be justified, and not daring to deal with my Survey, The
marriage of Priests is soundly handled, in the Survey of popery.
(where the same is most largly handled, and all Objections and difficulties
which possibly can be imagined, distinctly and soundly answered,) complayneth
grievously; that I seek to deceive my reader, in not proouing in my Trial
what I say for the same, but referring the Reader to my Survey. The truth is
this, that in the Trial I meant only to show to all simply seduced Papists;
that, late Popish Faith and Doctrine was not the old, (as they ignorantly
believe,) but the new Religion in very deed. And my purpose was, to effect
the matter with such brevity; as every one might buy the Treatise for a small
piece of money, The trial of the new Religion, is here soundly defended.
and carry it in his Bosom about with him; and so be able to point as it were
with his Finger, (against all such as boast of Popery as of the old Religion,)
when and by whom every maine point of late Papistrie, first began. Our Jesuit
seeing their Pope confounded, and their Faith and Doctrine proved to be the
New religion; can not tell in the world what to do, say, or think, for and in
the defense thereof. Let us hear his own words: thus does he write. It
serves not the turn (says he) to tell us, that he has done it in his
Suruay. I therefore to content our Friar Jesuit, (if it will be,) am here
resolved to set down such special kinds of proof, derived and taken out of
my Suruay, as are able to persuade all indifferent Readers, that the Marriage
of Priests ever was, and this day is, both honest and lawful by Gods law; and
only prohibited by the wicked and cursed Laws of men; the Bishops of Rome I
mean.

The first Proposition.
Only the Romish church forbids Priests marriage.
All Ministers which are not Papists, nor subject to the laws and rules of
Popery, may lawfully Marry, even by the doctrine of the Church of Rome. I
prove it; because all such Ministers are mere Laymen, by the judgment of
the Church of Rome; which Church for all that and none other, debarreth
Priests and other Ministers of the Church, from the freedom of honorable
Wedlock. This Assertion is plain and evident; it needs no proof at all.

The 2. Proposition.
Marriage was ever lawful for all Priests and other Ministers of the Church,
during all the time of the Old Testament. This Proposition is clear to all
such, as shall duly reuolue the holy Bibles. For the holy Prophet Jeremie was
the son of Helkiah, who was one of the Priests that were at Anathoth: Ier.
1. v. 1. 1. Sam. 1. v. 3. Exodus 18. v. 1. and 2. Luke 1. v. 8.9.13 14.18.19
Leu. 21, v. 13.14.
Hophni and Phineha^ were the sons of Helj the Priest: Sephora was the
daughter of Jethro, the Priest of Midian; S. John the Baptist who was the
precursor of our Lord Jesus, was the son of Zacharias the Priest: Yea, the
High Priest was appointed by God himself, to marry a Maid of his own people;
so honorable was the marriage of Priests in his most holy sight.

The 3. Proposition.
Marriage is lawful for Priests and other Ministers of the Church, even now
in the time of the New Testament. Where by the word (Priests) I understand
all such as are admitted to preach Gods word, and to administer the holy
Sacraments. This Proposition is proved very copiously in my Suruay of
Popery; Suruay, P. 220.
as well by the Textes of holy Writ, as by the flat testimony of S.
Chrysostom, S. Clement, S. Eusebius, S. Theophilactus, and many others: To
which place, for brevity, sake I refer the Reader; especially, because this
truth will be proved again and again, in the Propositions following.

The 4. Proposition.
The Marriage of Priests is only by the law of man prohibited, and not by any
positive constitution either of Christ, or his Apostles. I prove it many
ways: Con. 26. Q. 2. Cap. Sors. Neither Christ nor his Apostles, do forbid
Priests Marriage.
Copula namque Sacerdotalis vel consanguineorum, nec Legali, nec Euangelica,
vel Apostolica auctoritate prohibetur; Ecclesiastica tamen lege penitus
interdicitur: For the Marriage of Priests is neither forbidden by the Law of
Moses, nor by the Law of the Gospel, nor by the Law of the Apostles; yet is
it altogether and wholly forbidden by the Law of the Church (of Rome.) Mark
well these words (gentle Reader) for Christ's sake; for they are able to
confound all Jesuits, and Iesuited Popelinges in the world. Gratianus, who
has taught us out of the Popes own Decrees this godly and memorable lesson,
was a very famous Popish Canonist, brother to Petrus Lombardus surnamed, The
Master of Sentences, and of such renown in the Popish Church, that his Books
are this day read publicly in their Diuinitie-schooles. Gratianus so learned
and so famous in the Romish Church, lived with his brother Lombardus even then,
when the Pope was in his greatest pomp and tyranny. Gratian so learned and so
renowned amongst the Papists, did even in the altitude of Popery commit that
to the open view of the world, which utterly overthrows all Papistrie, and
turns it vpside down. Exodus 14.22. Heb. 1^.29. Number. 22.28. Dan. 3.25. 4.
Reg. 6.6. Act. 12.7.10.
For our Lord God, even that mighty God Jehouah, which caused the Red Sea to
give place to the Israelites; who caused Balaams Ass to speak; who caused the
Fire to suspend it force in the burning Furnace; who caused Iron to swim upon
the Water; who caused Yron-lockes and Brazen Gates to open voluntarily: that
mighty God I say, enforced Gratian that learned, famous, and zealous Papist, to
confess openly for the battering down of Popery; that the marriage of
Priests, (which the Pope forbids upon pain of eternal damnation) is
neither forbidden by the Law of Moses, nor by Christ, or his Apostles.

Caietanus that learned and famous Cardinal of Rome, whose words are these.
Caiet. in Quod lib. ^ontr. Luth.
Nec ratione, nec authoritate probari potest, quod absolute loquendo Sacerdos
peccet, contrahendo matrimonium: nam nec ordo in quantum ordo, nec ordo in
quantum sacer, est impeditiuus matrimonij: siquidem Sacerdotium non dirimit
matrimonium contractum, sieve ante, sieve post, seclusis omnibus Legibus
Ecclesiasticis, stando tantum ijs quae habemus a Christo et Apostolis: It can
never be proved, neither by Authority, nor by Reason, if we speak
absolutely, that a Priest sins by marrying a Wife: For neither the order (of
Priesthood) in that it is order; neither order, as it is holy; is any
hinderaunce unto Matrimony: For Priesthood breaks not Marriage, This cutteth
the Popes throat, he can no longer live.
whether it be contracted before Priesthood, or afterward; if we set all
Ecclesiastical Laws apart, and stand only to those things, which we have of
Christ and his Apostles. Thus writes this great learned man; whose testimony
is so clear and evident, that no denial, no evasion, no trick of
legierdemaine, can have any place. For he says Suruay, p. 269.
Panormitanus that famous Papist, teacheh the self same doctrine: his words
are set down in the 12. Proposition: see them there. Viguerius; as also of
their Saint Antoninus, sometime Arch-byshoppe of Florence: Viguer. de differ.
vota,. 5. ver. 14. Ant. p. 3. Tit. 1. C. 21.. 1.
These are the express words of Antoninus* Episcopatus ex natura sua, non
habet opponi ad matrimonium: The office of a Bishop of it own nature, is not
opposite or against Marriage. The case we see, is most clear and perspicuous
to every child: viz. that the Marriage of Priests is very lawful, as which is
neither forbidden by Christ, nor by his Apostles. No, no, the Bishops of Rome
only have prohibited it; as I have at large discoursed and proved in my
Suruay of Popery. Mark well the eleventh Proposition following, as which is a
confirmation hereof.

The 5. Proposition.
It was ever lawful for the Bishops, Priests, and Deacons of the
East-church, to be Married, and to beget children in the time of their
Priesthood. This Proposition is proved by the flat testimony of the sixth
general Council holden at Constantinople, in the year of our Lord God 677.
where 289. Bishops were assembled. A.D. 677.
In the 13. Canon of this famous Council, three special things are decreed.
There was small account of the Church of Rome.
as labor to separate Priests and Deacons, from the use and company of their
Wives. And after all this, this great and learned Synod, adds this worthy
and memorable Observation: viz. that they have thus decreed, albeit they know
the Laws of Rome to be otherwise. Where I note by the way, that so many
learned Bishops did 677. years after Christ, utterly contemn the falsely
challenged Primacie of the Church of Rome.

This Decree of the famous Council, is confirmed sundry ways: Can. 6. Apost.
Episcopus, aut Praesbyter, aut Diaconus, Vxorem su^m praetextu religionis non
abijcito: si abijcit, segregator a communione; si perseuerat, deponator: Let
neither Bishop, nor Priest, nor Deacon, put away his Wife under pretense of
Religion: if he so do, let him be excommunicate: if he continue, let him be
deposed. Out of these words, I observe these golden Lessons.

Urban; as his devoted Champion Gratianus tells us: These are his express
words. Cum ergo ex Sacerdotibus nati, in summos pontifices supra legantur esse
promoti; non sunt intelligendi Either the marriage of Priests is lawful, or
many Popes have been Bastardes.
de fornicatione, sed de legitimis coniugijs nati, quae Sacerdotibus ante
prohibitionem vbique licita erant; et in orientali Ecclesia vsque hodie eis
licere probantur: When therefore we read, that Priests Sons are made Popes,
we must not understand Bastardes, but Sons borne in honest and lawful
wedlock, which was every where lawful for Priests before the prohibition; and
the same is this day lawful in the East Church. The popish famous Arch-byshop
and canonized Saint Antoninus, sings the self same song with Pope Urban, and
the Popish Canon Law: These are his words. Anton. P. 2. tit. 11. cap. 2.. 9.
vide Cassiod. lib. 9. cap. 38. idem plane asserit.
Quia Grae^i etiam in Sacerdotio coniugio vtuntur. For the Greeks, even in the
time of their Priesthood, have the use of Wedlock. Out of these words of the
Popish decrees, together with Antoninus his constant affirmation, I gather
these memorable observations. Socrates, whose express words are these. Cum
omnes quj praeclarj sunt in orient, abstineant; et Episcopj, non necessitate
legis, sed si voluerint, hoc faciunt; multj enim illorum Episcopatus tempore,
etiam liberos ex legitimi^ vxoribus sustulerunt: Seeing all of account in the
East, abstain, and the Bishops do the same; not by any necessity of Law,
but upon their own free will and pleasure: for many of them even at that time,
when they were Bishops, did beget children of their lawful wives: 6.
Proposition
And Nicephorus in his History, does constantly affirm the same. Niceph. lib.
12. Cap. 34.


The 6. Proposition.
The Marriage of Priests was ever lawful also in the West Church, until the
cursed Prohibition of Pope Siricius; A.D. 389.
which was for the space almost of 400. years after Christ. I prove it, even
out of Siricius his own words. In Epist ad Aphrican.
Quod dignum, et pudicum, et honestum est, suademus, vt sacerdotes et leuitae
cum suis vxeribus non coeant: We council that, which is meet, chaste, and
honest; that Priests and Deacons have no copulation with their Wives. Tom. 1.
Council.
His reason he adds in these words: Romans 8.8.
Qui autem in carne sunt, Deo placere non possunt: They that are in the flesh,
they can not please God. Out of these words of our disholy Father Siricius, I
collect these worthy documents. Priests were married, both in the East, and in
the West Church.
he found both Priests and Deacons married. Which I gather out of these
words: ( Cum suis Vxoribus, With their Wives.) For if they had not exercised
conjugal acts with their Wives, in vain should Siricius either have
inueighed against them, or dissuaded them from their Wives. Heb. 13. v. 4.
Wedlock (which The Apostle terms Honorable) was such a carnal vice, as
none could please God in the same. Mark well the next Proposition.

The 7. Proposition.
Siricius his Prohibition notwithstanding, Priests were still married in many
places a long time: yea, in Germany the Marriage of Priests was used without
restraint, Pope Hildbra^d was reputed an Heretic, for denying the marriage of
Priests.
for the space of a thousand seventy and four years after Christ: viz.
until the days of the ungracious Pope Hildebrand, who termed himself
Gregory the seventh. I prove it by the clear testimony of Lambertus
Schafuaburgensis, a man whom their trusty friend Ar. Ponta^us Burdegalensis,
affirms to have handled the Histories of his time, very exactly: I will
neither add, change, or take any one jot from his words. Thus does he write.
Lamb. Schaf^ in Chron. A.D. 1074.
Hildebrandus Papa cum Episcopis Italiae conueniens, iam frequentibus Synodis
decreuerat, vt secundum instituta antiquorum Canonum, Presbyteri vxores non
habeant, habentes aut dimittant, aut deponantur; nec quisquam omnino ad
Sacerdotium admittatur, qui non in perpetuu^ continentiam vitamque caelibem
profiteatur. Sequitur; aduersus hoc Decretum protinus vehementer infremuit tota
factio clericorum, hominem plane haereticum et vesa^i dogmatis esse clamitans,
qui oblitus sermonis Domini, quo ait, non omnes capiunt verbum hoc, qui potest
capere, capiat. Mat. 19. V. 11.13. 1. Cor. 7. V. 9.10.
Et amplius; qui se non continet, nubat, melius est. N. nubere, quam vri;
violenta exactione homines viuere cogeret ritu angelorum, et dum consuetum
cursum naturae negaret, fornicationi et immunditiei fraena laxaret: Pope
Hildebrand, together with the Bishops of Italy, decreed in frequent Synodes,
that after the ordinances of old Canons, Priests should not have Wives; and
that such as had Wives, should either put them away, or be deprived of their
Liuinges: and that none should be admitted to the order of Priesthood, Priests
made Votaries against their wills,
but he that would profess the perpetual Vow of single life. Lo the popish
Priests tell us, that the Pope is an Heretic, and a mad man.
Against this Decree, the whole faction of the Clergy stormed woonderfully,
crying out that (Pope Hildebrand) was mad, yea a flat Heretic, as who had
forgotten the word of our Lord; who says, that all can not live continent: And
of the Apostle; who says, He that cannot abstain, let him marry; for it is
better to marry, then to be burnt: And would violently compel men to live
like Angels: and while he denied the accustomed course of Nature, he opened the
window to Fornication and uncleanness. Out of these words, I observe these
documentes. Lambertus was a Monk, and a great Patron of Popery: Germany,
above a thousand and seventy years after Christ; that is to say, until the
days of Pope Hildebrand, who termed himself Gregory the seventh. Germany,
A.D. 1074.
that the learned Bishops, Priests, and others of the Clergy, reputed Pope
Hildebrand an Heretic for withstanding the same. Germany. For Lambertus
tells us freely and truly, that all the Clergy withstood the cursed Decree
of the Pope, and proclaimed him an Heretic: and this they did, even by the
flat testimony of Christ and his Apostles. Germany, that great and goodly
Country; the Pope did not only enforce the^ violently against their ancient
Customs, but withal made the way to all filthy living. This my Doctrine is
confirmed by a double argument: Pelagius the second of that name (who was
Bishop 200. years after Siricius, Vixit Pelag. 2. A.D. 580.
) did willingly admit the Bishop of Syracusa, albeit he were a married man,
and had a Wife and Children; neither was that Bishop then urged to forsake
the use of holy Wedlock. Did. 28. cap. de Syracus. vibis.
Gratianus, a man of great reputation among the Papists, does in the
forenamed Distinction refer out of Pope Pelagius his words, Priests may
lawfully marry, even by the judgment of learned Popish writers.
in this manner. Sieve ergo Presbyter, sieve Diaconus, sieve Subdiaconus fuerit,
quod praefa^is ordinibus constitutj licite matrimonio vtj possunt: Whether
therefore he be Priest, Deacon, or Subdeacon, it is evident, that such as are
within the aforenamed Orders, may lawfully have the use of holy Wedlock. Out
of these words of Gratianus that learned and zealous Papist, I infer against
the Doctrine of the Pope; that Priests, Deacons, and Subdeacons, may not
only be Married, but withal, while they be Married, have the use of holy
Wedlock. Nicholas (who lived above three hundred years after Pelagius) was so
far from disquieting Married Priests for their Marriages, Did. 28. Cap. vlt.
that when the Bulgarians complained of that fault so supposed, he persuaded
them to be content, and not to dishonor their married Priests. This is that
Doctrine, which the Popes own Canon Law affoordeth us: we heartily thank him
for it. Let us add hereunto, that the Constitution of Pelagius was not of
force in Sicilia, Did. 31. Cap. primo.
save only three years before the Popedom of Gregory the great: which
doubtless was more then two hundred years after the Popedom of Siricius: For
thus does Pope Gregory write: Ante triennium, omnium Ecclesiarum Subdiaconi
Siciliae prohibiti fuerunt, vt more Romanae Ecclesiae suis vxoribus nullatenus
misceantur: Quod mihi durum atque incompetens videtur, vt qui vsum continentiae
non inuenit, neque castitatem promisit, compellatur a suo Vxore separari: Pope
Gregory confounds the late Popes of Rome.
Three years ago, all Subdeacons of Sicilia were charged to forbear the use
of holy Wedlock, according to the custom of the Roman Church: Which seems
to me a very hard and inconvenient thing; that he who neither has the gift
of Continency, neither yet has vowed Chastity, should be forcibly secluded
from his Wife. Out of these words I observe these Instructions. Sicilia, A.D.
588.
about three years before the time of Gregory the first. and Ministers in our
Churches, as also of all secular Popish Priests every where, is lawful and
true Wedlock by the doctrine of Pope Gregory: the reason is at hand, because
none of them are Votaries: For, to the Vow which they call Annexed, they are no
more bound in the West Church, then they are in the East. Mark well the next
Proposition.

The 8. Proposition.
All secular Priests are so free from the solemn Vow, which by the Church of
Rome is annexed to Ecclesiastical orders; that their Marriages are true,
perfect, and of force, the supposed dissoluing impediment thereof not
withstanding. I prove it, by a triple argument: Scotus, Nauarrus, Josephus
Angles, Durandus, and the rest, do all freely grant, that this Vow is only
annexed by the ordinance of the Church, and by the power of man. This Dilemma
girdeth the Pope and his Iesuited Popelinges.
their Vow must either be by the word spoken, or by the deed done. Not the
former, because no such word can be proved. Neither the latter, because if the
act it self in taking orders, should be the Vow annexed, or essentially
include the same; it would follow thereupon necessarily, that the Greeks
likewise should become Votaries, seeing they do the self same thing: Who for
all that, See the 4. Proposition, and mark it well.
were never Votaries, nor yet so reputed by the Learned Papists; as we have
already seen in the fourth Proposition. Nauat, in Euch cap. 22.. 18.
as Nauarrus, Josephus, Gratianus, Sectus, Durandus, Antoninus, and all learned
Papists willingly do grant. Mark the next Proposition well.

The 9. Proposition.
Albeit by Popish faith and doctrine, all such as Marry after the single Vow
of Continency, do sin mortally; yet does their Marriage hold, and is of
force. Thus teach all Learned popish Doctors with uniform assent, no exception
can be made; Angelus, Rosella, Calderinus, Couarruvias, Paludanus, Mayor,
Siluester, Nauarrus, Fumus, Scotus, Aquinas, and the rest, do constantly
affirm it. It shall suffice to allege the words of Fumus, in the name of
all the rest: Thus does he write. Fumus de matrim.. 55
Secundum impedimentum est votum simplex: nam qui vouet castitatem simpliciter,
si contrahat, mortaliter peccat, violans fidem Deo datam; tamen tenet
matrimonium: The second impediment is a single Vow: for he that voweth
Chastity simply, if he afterward marry, commits a mortal sin in
breaking his promise made to God; but yet the Matrimony holds and is of
force. Mark the next Proposition again and again.

The 10. Proposition.
The Vow single, is of one and the same nature with the Vow solemn, not
distinguished by any essential, but mere accidental difference. I prove it
by the plain affirmance of Josephus Angles, a very learned Friar and a famous
popish Bishop: these are his express words. Io. Angles in 4. s. q. de voto
art. 6. diffic* 2*
Votum solenne et simplex ex part subiecti specie accidentali differunt,
propterea quod voti simplicis subiectu^ est ad contrahendum matrimonium habile,
licet contrahendo peccet: at vero subiectum voti solennis, est ad contractum
matrimonialem inhabile: transgressiones voti simplicis et solennis eiusdem
speciei sunt, etiamsi qui solenniter vouet, grauius peccet: ratio est, quia
specifica differentia actuu^ est penes obiecta; et cum idem sit vtriusque voti
obiectum, nempe seruare continentiam, erunt actus eiusdem speciei: erit tamen
voti solennis transgressio grauior, ratione perfectioris status: Mark well,
that the Vow single and solemn, are essentially one and the same.
The Vow solemn and single, differ accidentally in respect of the subject,
because the subject of the single Vow is able to contract Matrimony, albeit he
sin in so contracting: but the subject of a solemn Vow, is enabled to
matrimonial contract: the transgressions of the Vow single and solemn, are of
the same nature or kind, albeit he that makes the solemn Vow, sins more
grievously: The reason is, because the specificall difference of acts, rests
in the obiectes: and seeing there is one object of both the Vows; to weete, to
keep chastity, the acts must be of the same nature or kind; howbeit the
transgression of the solemn Vow shall be greater, by reason of the perfecter
state. Thus disputes Friar Josepth, after the opinion of other popish Doctors.
And doubtless his Discourse is evident, because every specificall difference
moral aryseth of the obiectes; and consequently, seeing the object of Vow
single is one and the same with the Vow solemn, the difference between them
can no way be essential; neither can the Vow solemn dissolve Matrimony
contracted, forasmuch as the Vow single being intrinsecally the same, can not
do it. Mark well the next Proposition.

The 11. Proposition.
The Popes dispensation does make Priests marriage lawful, ergo, God does not
forbid it.
Matrimony even after the solemn Vow of Religion, is with our Jesuits and
Iesuited Papists, very lawful and of force; so it be done by and with the
Popes Dispensation. This doctrine is taught by many learned Papists;
Antoninus, Richardus, Hugo, Innocentius, Conarrunias, Nauarius, and others. The
same Doctrine is confirmed, even by the real and usual practice of sundry
Popes. It may suffice in regard of brevity, to allege one, in the name of
all. The Popish S. Antoninus, sometime the Archbishop of Florence, has these
words. Ant. p. 2. (...) 11, cap. 2. ^*
Papa dispensare potest in statuto Concilij vmuersalis: de Voto solennj per
pr^fessionem etiam patet, quod licet Papa non possist facere, quod professus
non fuit professus, potest tamen facere, quod non sit obligatus relig^oni et ad
votum religionis; quia in omni voto intelligitur, excepta authoritate Papae:
Infra; et communiter Canonistae tenent, quod Papa potest dispensare in voto
solenni religionis, non quidem tantum vt sit religiosus, et non seruet vota,
sed de religioso potest facere laicum; ex magna causa vrgente: The Pope can
dispense in the Decrees of a General Council. It is also clear, that he can
dispense in a solemn Vow of profession: For, albeit the Pope can not make a
professed person, not to have been professed; yet can he this do, that the
professed person shall neither be bound to his Religion, nor to his Vow:
because we must understand, that in every Vow, the Popes authority is
excepted: And the Canonistes do commonly hold, that the Pope can dispense in
the solemn Vow of Religion; not only that one be still a Religious person and
keep not his Vow; but he can also make of a Religious person, a mere
Layman, upon an urgent cause. To this Popish canonized Saint and famous
Arch-byshoppe, let it not grieve our M. Friar, if I add the worthy testimony
of their famous Popish Canonist and great Divine Martinus Nauarrus; his words
are these. Nauar. de iudic. notab. 3. p. 275.
Papa dispensare potest cum Monacho iam professo, vt contrabat matrimonium; imo
de facto multj Papae dispensarunt: Lo, the Pope can make the marriage of
Friars, Iesuit^s, and Nonnes, to be very lawful.
Lo, the Pope when it pleases his Holiness, can make of Monks, mere
Laymen: he can also make Monks to continue Monks still, and for all that,
not to keep their Vows. Yea, how soever his Jesuits and Iesuited Popelinges
cry out against the Marriage of Priests; yet can he make the Marriage of
Monks (and a fortiorj the Marriage of secular Priests) to be lawful
Marriage, even with his bare word. I will say nothing of Couarruvias,
Richardus, Paludanus, Scotus, Caietanus, Josephus Angles, and others; for of
their verdictes, the Reader may find great plenty in my Suruay of Popery: See
and mark well the fourth Proposition aforegoing. Only here by the way, I
would tell our holy Father (if it would please him to hear me) that seeing he
can with his word make the Marriage of Priests lawful; it were good he should
do it, for that which he may read in the next Proposition.

The 12. Proposition.
The forced and coacted Chastity of Priests has been such and so
intolerable (even by the confession of the best learned Papists,) as nothing
in the whole world has brought more shame to Priesthood, more harm to
Religion, more grief to godly men. The great and famous Popish Cardinal
Panormitanus does prove this Proposition so learnedly, and with such Christian
gravity, as it being well marked, is able to confound all Papists in the
world: these are his express words. Panorm. de Cleric. coniug. Cap. cum Olim.
Continentia non est in Clericis secularibus de substantia ordinis, nec de iure
Diuino; quia alias Graeci peccarent, nec excusaret eos consuetudo. Sequitur, et
non solum credo potestatem mess Ecclesiae hoc condendi, sed credo pro bono et
salute esset animarum, quod esset salubre statutum, vt volentes possint
contrahere; quia experientia docente, contrarius prorsus effectus sequitur ex
illa Lege continentiae, cum hodie non viuant spiritualiter, nec sint mundi, sed
maculantur illicito coitu cum eorum grauissimo peccato, vbi cum propria vxore
esset castitas: Continency of secular Priests is neither of the substance of
Priesthood, nor of the law divine.
Continency in secular Priests, is neither of the substance of their Orders,
nor of the Law divine: For otherwise, the Greeks should sin, and their
Custom could not excuse them. And I do not only believe, that the Church can
make such a Law, but also that such a Law were for the good and for the
salvation of souls, that such as would, might marry; for experience teaches,
that a contrary effect follows of that law of continency, seeing this day
they live not spiritually: neither are they clean, but polluted in unlawful
copulation with their most grievous sin, though they might live chastely with
their own Wives. Thus writes learned Panormitanus, the Popes famous Canonist,
his dear Abbot, his reverend Archbishop, his honorable Cardinal. Panormit.
de cleric coniug. cap. cu^ ol^^.
Lo, the Pope^ learned Doctors, write against the Pope.
Let us now hear what Polydorus Virgilius a zealous and learned Papist says:
for he, seeing he was an Italian, knew best the Italian and Romish fashion.
These are his express words; I will neither add to them nor take ought from
them, but will deal synceerely and truly (though our Jesuit be far from it)
not only in this Book, but in whatsoever else I shall write hereafter, even
upon the peril of my soul. Polyd. lib. 5. cap. 4. in sine.
Illud tamen dixerim, tantum abfuisse, vt ista coacta castitas illam coniugalem
vicerit; vt etiam nullius delicti crimen, maius ordini dedecus, plus mali
religioni, plus doloris omnibus bonis impresserit, inusserit, attulerit, quam
Sacerdotum libidinis labes: proinde forsitan tam e republica Christiana, quam
ex ordinis vsu esset, vt tandem aliquando ius publici matrimonij Sacerdotibus
restitueretur; quod illi sine infamia sancte potius colerent, quam se
spurcissime eiuscemodi naturae vitio turpificarent: Yet this I will say, that
this forced and coacted Chastity (of Priests) was so far from excelling
Chastity in Wedlock, as no crime whatsoever has brought greater shame to
Priesthood, more harm to Religion, more grief to all good men, then the
unchaste life of Priests. Lo, Priests marriage was once deemed very lawful.
Therefore, it were perhaps no less necessary for the public weal of
Christendom, then for the order of Priesthood, that once again Priests might
marry publicly, and so live honestly and without shame, and not pollute
themselves so filthyly. This is the doctrine of Polydorus, well worthy to be
written in Golden letters. Yea, the Marriage of Priests is so honorable and
so lawful by Gods law, and the prohibition thereof so dishonorable and
doleful; that Pope Pius the second of that name (who before his Popedom was
named Aeneas Syluius, a very learned and famous writer) did deliver his mind
and opinion concerning this subject, in this manner; as his own dear Platina
has published the same. Platina in vita P^j. 2. p. 342.
Indoctum Episcopum Asine comparandum; corpora malos medicos, animas imperitos
sacerdotes occiacre: vagum Monachum diaboli esse mancipium: virtutes Clerum
ditasse, vitia pauperem facere: Sacerdotibus magna ratione sublatas nuptias,
maiori restituendas videri: Lo, one Pope condemns an other.
Pope Pius used to say (as writes his own devoted vassal Platina,) that a
Bishop without learning, was like unto an Ass (and consequently, that there
are many Asses in popish Churches:) that evil Physicians did kill men's bodies,
and ignorant Priests their souls: that a vagrant Monk was the Devils slave:
that Virtues had enriched the Clergy (in times past;) but that Vices (of late
days) do make it poor: that there was great reason to debar Priests of
Marriage; but greater reason to restore Marriage again unto them. Thus writes
Platina of Pope Pius. Now, for the benefit of the Christian reader, I observe
these godly and necessary Lessons, out of these three learned and famous
Papists. Priests to Marry. The Jesuit is stricken dead.
Vt ius publicj matrimonij Sacerdotibus restitueretur: That the right of
public Wedlock, might be restored to Priests again. O sweet Jesus! how
impudent are our Jesuits and Iesuited Papists, who inueigh so bitterly
against Priests Marriage, which is their proper right? Nay, how tyrannical is
the Pope, who violently debarreth and keeps them from their right. The right
of Priests, that is, their marriage, must be restored again.
Let these two words, never be forgotten: viz. ( Ius) and ( Restitueretur:) for
the former word ( Ius, right) does argue Priests Marriage to be their proper
right: And the latter word ( restitueretur, might be restored) does argue the
tyranny of the late Bishops of Rome. The reason is evident, because
Restitution can never be truly exacted, but where injustice went before, and
consequently, seeing by the joint testimony of these three famous popish
Writers, that the Marriage of Priests ought to be restored to them; it
follows of necessity, that the taking away of Marriage from Priests, was
savage, brutish, cruel, tyrannical, and odious to God and all godly men: For,
it was flat injustice, and violently imposed upon them. Neither has any good
come to the Church of God thereby, but filthy life and uncleanness abounded
every where. Which is not mine Assertion, but the flat and plain Accusation
of three learned, zealous, and famous Papists, Pope Pius him self being one
of the three.

The 13. Proposition.
When the Fathers of the first famous Council of Nice, intended and meant to
have brought a New law into the Church, A.D. 327.
and to have abandoned the marriage of Priests; then our merciful Father the
mighty God Johouah, (who never has been, is, or will be wanting to his Church
in necessary points of Faith and Doctrine,) raised up his faithful servant
Paphuntius, a man very famous by manifold miracles in his life time, to
withstand and gainesay that cursed and never enough detested Law, which the
Fathers assembled at Nice were about to bring into the Church. This Paphuntius
(the man of God) excited by the spirit of God, stood up in the midst of the
Council, and constantly affirmed before them all, that to forbid Marriage to
Priests, was too severe a Law, seeing by the testimony of Christ's blessed
Apostle, Marriage was honorable in all sorts of men: Hebr. 13. V. 4.
whereupon, the Council made no Decree in that behalf. This Proposition is
proved, by the uniform assent of three learned and famous Historiographers,
Cassiodorus, Socrates, Sozom^nus. Socrates has these express words. S^cra.
lib. 1. ^ap. 8.
Visum erat Episcopis legem nouam in Ecclesiam introducere: The Bishops meant
and intended, to bring a new law into the Church. But Paphuntius so persuaded
the Council, by the power of the Holy ghost, that they referred the whole
matter to every Priests free choice and election, making no Law in that
behalf. For Cassiodorus has these express words. Cassiodor. hist. tripar.
libr. 2. cap. 14. Vide Gratian. did. 31.
Synodusque lauda^it sententiam eius, et nihil ex hac part sanciuit, sed hoc
in vniuscuiusque voluntate, non in necessitate reliquit: And the Synod
commended ( Paphuntius) his opinion, and decreed nothing in the matter; but
left it in every ones election, to do what he thought good without compulsion.
Sozomenus is consonant, and confirms the same truth. Sozo. lib. 1. cap. 22.
The case is evident, it cannot be denied.

The Corollarie of these 13. Propositions.
Rome; as is proved in the first Proposition. Siricius, almost 400. years
after Christ; as is proved in the sixth Proposition. Siricius his Prohibition
notwithstanding, Priests were still Married in many places a long time; and in
Germany above a thousand years after Christ, without restraint, even until
the days of the ungracious Pope Hildebrand; as is proved in the 7.
Proposition. A.D. 1074.
Rome, that the supposed dissoluing impediment thereof notwithstanding, their
Marriages are true, perfect, and of force. of one and the same nature with the
Vow solemn, not distinguished by any essential, but mere accidental
difference; as is proved in the tenth Proposition. Nice, thought it not
agreeable to Gods word, to make any Law against the Marriage of Priests; as is
proved in the 13. Proposition. I can not, I may not, but must of necessity
conclude, with this inevitable and irrefragable illation: ergo, the Prohibition
of Priests Marriage, is but a rotten ragge of the new Religion.

The Refutation of the Friars third Chapter.
In these 13. Propositions (if due application be made thereof,) all the
untruths, lies, miserable shifts, and colorable euasions of our Friar
Jesuit, will easily appear and vanish away, as does the smoke of a Fire,
especially, Read and mark well the Suruay of Popery.
if my Discourse in the Suruay of Popery, be duly pondered with these 13.
Propositions. For, all that our Friar has said in this Chapter, and whatsoever
else any other Jesuit or Iesuited Papist in the world, is able to say against
the Marriage of Priests, is very largely, distinctly, and soundly resuted, in
my Suruay of Popery. The Jesuit full of nothing but Wind, Vanity, Railing,
and lying, would dazell the eyes of his Reader, with crying out against
Untruths, when indeed, all untruths proceed only from his own lying
lips. Two things only may seem to the vulgar Reader, to carry some show or
color of truth: which both are soundly confuted in my Suruay. Howbeit for the
better satisfaction of the indifferent Reader, especially of such as perhaps
have not read my Suruay; I am content once again to examine the same.

The former color of truth pretended by our Friar, is this in very deed: viz.
The former difficulty.
That Saint Paphuntius in the Council of Nice, persuaded the Fathers only
unto this; to weete, That they which were called to the Priesthood being
Married, should not be separated from their Wives which they had: for, it was
the old Tradition of the Church (says our Friar:) That those which were made
Priests being not yet Married, should not afterward marry Wives. Thus
pleads our Jesuit, out of Sozomenus and Socrates. Mark now my Answer to
the same.

The Answer.
I answer; 4. Proposition
This I have proved in the 4. Proposition, by the flat testimony of many
famous Popish Writers: yea, out of the Popes own Decrees: Read the Proposition
to the end, and mark it seriously. 5. Proposition
This truth is cleared in the fifth Proposition, even out of the Popes own
Decrees. 6. Proposition
This is made evident, in the sixth and seventh Propositions. 8. and 9. Propos.
This truth is soundly proved in the 8. and 9. Propositions: Let them be well
marked. 12. Propos.
This truth is proved in the 12. Proposition, and it strikes dead. Now,
seeing first, that no positive Constitution against Priests Marriage, can
truly be derived either from Christ or his Apostles: seeing secondly, that it
was ever lawful for Priests in the East Church, to be Married: seeing
thirdly, that it was lawful for Priests even in the West Church, to Marry
every where, for the space almost of 400. years; and in Germany above a
thousand years after Christ: seeing fourthly, that Secular Priests are no
Votaries: seeing fifthly, that the Pope is bound to Restitution for taking away
of Priests Marriage; I must perforce conclude against our Jesuit, that the
Tradition which Socrates and Sozomenus speak of, was neither General, nor
Divine; howsoever Paphuntius alleged it, so to mittigate the rigorous and
severe Laws intended by the Council. I prove it by a double argument: First,
because if there had been any such Tradition general or divine; the Greeks
could not be excused, who never yielded thereunto. Secondly, because so many
Learned Papists do constantly affirm and teach; that neither Christ nor his
Apostles, made any Law against Priests Marriage. To which I must needs add,
that if there had been any such Tradition received either from Christ or his
Apostles, neither would holy Paphuntius have pleaded against it, neither yet
the famous Council have yielded to him in that behalf. But the Council of
Carthage (will some say,) makes mention of Apostolical tradition to the same
effect. I answer with the Popes own dear Gloss upon his Decrees, in these
express words. Gloss. did. 84. Cap. in Preterito.
Ergo Apostoli d^cuerunt exemplo et admonitione, non institutione vel
constitutione: Therefore the Apostles taught it by example and admonition, and
not by any Law or Constitution. But how by Admonition and Example, Polydorus
says plainly, that S. Paul was married. Lib* 5. Cap. 4. Lege Locu^.
did the Apostles teach the single life of Priests? S. Paul, albeit he were
some time a marryed-man (as S. Clement very probably deduceth out of the holy
Scriptures;) yet did he after that, live a single life; and withal, exhorted
others (that had the gift) to live as he did. 1. Cor. 7. v. 7, 8, 9.10.32.3^.
But here three things must seriously be observed. 1. Cor. 7. v. 25.
if S. Paul had no warrant to inioyne Single life; much less had the Council
of Nice such a warrant: and least of all, had the late Bishops of Rome (men
of dissolute life, and scandalous behavior,) such power and authority.

The second color of truth pretended by our Friar Jesuit, is of S.
Epiphanius, S. Hierome, Eusebius, The Second Difficulty.
and Pope Zachary: Let us therefore hear his own words, and his
scholasticall dispute.

B. C.
The holy Priesthood ( says Epiphanius) is for the most part, of Virgins or
Unmarried folk, Page 52.
or if those be not sufficient for the Ministry, of those which contain
themselves from their own Wikes. And in an other place: But the Church (quoth
be) does not admit the Husband of one Wife, yet living and begetting Children.

T. B.
I answer: Epiphanius speaks not of any Law, that was made in his time,
against Priests Marriage; but of a voluntary usage of some few in some few
places. Which mine answer, is virtually employed in these words, (for the most
part.) See the 5. Proposition.
even by the Popes own Decrees, besides many other weighty and important
proofs; that it was ever lawful for Bishops, Priests, and Deacons, of the
East Church, to have Wives and to beget Children as others did. To which I now
add for the complement thereof, this lively testimony of the Council of
Agatha, in these express words; Presbyterj, Dinconj, Subdiaconj, vel
deinceps, quibus ducendi vxores licentia modo non est, etiam aliarum nuptiarum
euitent conuiuia: Lo, Priests in old time might marry every where.
Priests, Deacons, and Subdeacons, and the rest who now have not License to
Marry, must not be present at the Feasts of other Marriages. Out of these
words of this Council, I observe Jesuits and Antichristian Bishops of
Rome, that it was sometime lawful for Priests to Marry. Siricius, which was
about 51. years before it. For, when the Council says, (who are now debarred
from Marriage) it implicitly affirms, Mark this point well for Christ's sake.
that before they might freely have Married. If therefore Epiphanius mean not,
as is already said; his bare word may not be admitted against the Canon of
The Apostles, Epiphanius Here Is. 59. A.D. 439.
against the famous general Council of Constantinople, against the Council
of Agatha, and against the Popes own Decrees. Yea, S. Epiphanius grants,
that some Priests were Married in his time. And Polydorus says, that S. Paul
called his Wife, Sister; and rejects S. Hierom^^ exposition. Lib. 5. Cap. 4.
See, and note well the fifth Proposition.

B. C.
S. Hierome likewise writing against Vigilantius, says; What shall the Church
of the East do? What the Church of Egypt, and the Apostolic Sea, which take
Virgins for their Clerks or Continent; or if they be Married, give over to be
Husbands? Will Bell for all this, tell us, that Priests were ever Married in
the East-Church; and without all respect, give S. Epiphanius and S. Hirome, the
word of disgrace?

T. B.
I answer: 1. Cor. 7. v. 32.33.
Lege lata to do the same. For, as the unmarried Bishops and other inferior
Ministers, Many worthy Ministers live unmarried in our Church of England.
in our Church of noble England, do not make a Law to the rest whose Marriages
they honor and approve: so neither did the single life of some few, make a
general Law for the rest in the primative and ancient Church. We honor,
reverence, and highly commend the Single life of our Clerks, who have the
gift of Continency: we only and solely condemn that coacted and forced
Chastity, which brought such filth, shame, and confusion to the Church, that
three most famous, zealous, and learned Papists, ( Polydorus, Panormitanus,
and Pope Pius,) were moved, See the 12. proposition, where this is proved.
and as it were enforced with zeal unto the truth, to write as sharply
against the same, as my self have done. Hieromes true meaning, then not Bell
(good M. Friar) but holy Paphuntius, but the Apostolic Cano^* but the Council
of Constantinople, All this is sou^dly proved already.
but the Council of Agatha, but Sozom^nus, but Socrates, but Gratianus, but
the Popish canonized Saint Antoninus, and the Popes own Decrees, do give to
Epiphanius and Hierome the word of disgrace. Mark well the ^.4.7. and 13.
Propositions. Agatha approve the Decree of Siri^ius, (to which it alludeth) by
adding an other absurd constitution to the same; yet does it freely and
plainly tell us, that Priests were lawfully Married before that time: The
Popes law is flat tyranny.
Which is a testimony so clear and apparent for Priests Marriage, as all the
world may justly abhor man's Law made against the same. Let the words of the
Council of Agatha never be forgotten, because they strike the matter dead:
For, in that the Council says (which are now debarred from Marriage) it
plainly gives us to understand (it may not for shame be denied,) that it was
sometime lawful for Priests to Marry: that is (as I have already proved,)
until the time of Siritius. To which I must needs add that, which I have
soundly concluded in the eleventh Proposition: Mark well the 11. Proposition.
viz. that the Pope (by popish Faith and Doctrine) can make lawful the
Marriage not only of Secular Priests, but also of Friars, Monks, Jesuits,
and Nuns: And consequently, that God never did prohibit or forbid the same.
But what an absurd Decree is that, which the Council of Agatha added to Pope
Siritius his cursed and execrable Law? this is it: The Council of Agatha
charge all unmarried Priests, that they be not present at the Banckets and
Feasts of other Marriages. Is not this absurd? Our Lord Jesus himself,
vouchsafed to honor Marriage with his sacred presence. John. 2. v* 2, 8.
He and his Disciples were together at a Wedding in Cana of Galilee; where he
wrought his first Miracle, in changing Water into Wine: and yet (I trow) our
Papists will not say, that Christ and his Disciples were Married men. Whether
the Pope be Antichrist, or not, viderint ipsi. But that these, and the like
Decrees be pregnant conjectures, and more then probable signs, that he is the
forerunner of Antichrist; I constantly here affirm, and am ready to gage my
life for the trial of the same. Page 54*


B. C.
Notwithstanding it is meet, that they shoud refrain themselves from the
company of their Wives, who are consecrated and busied in the Ministry and
service of God.

T. B.
This Testimony with the other already answered, do tickle the Minister and
fetch blood; as our Friar Jesuit prateth, to the comfort of his devoted
Popelinges. I answer; veruntamen, notwithstanding or but) has relation to
that which went before* and so rather makes against the Friar then for him
self. Eusebius the Author by him alleged, says not, that any Law made
either by God or man, did prohibit the marriage of Priests, but only that in
his judgment, it is convenient for Priests to refrain from the company of
their Wives. Eusebius were living in these our backslyding days, and should
behold the filth and execrable fruits of coacted Single life in the Popish
Clergy; Note well the 12. proposition.
he would doubtless change his opinion, with the famous, learned, and zealous
Papists ( Polydorus, Panormitanus, and Pope P^us,) and cry out aloud; that
coacted and forced Chastity in the Romish Clergy, was so far from excelling
chastity in Wedlock; as no crime whatsoever has brought greater shame to
Priesthood, more harm to Religion; more grief to Good Men, then the unchaste
and filthy life of the unmarried Romish Priests. Out upon Romish unmarried
Priests.
And that therefore it were meet and expedient, to restore to Priests the
free use of Marriage, as it was in the beginning and primative age of the
Church. Now how this Assertion of Eusebius does tickle me, and fetch blood
from me, let the Reader judge.

B. C.
Pope Zachary writing to Bonifacius our worthy Countriman, then Bishop and the
Apostle of Germany, has these words (speaking of Priests: P. 58.
) From the day of taking Priesthood, they are to be forbidding, yea even from
their own Wives. Of this Decree the Magdeburgians make mention. True it is,
that they score it up for one of his errors: But it gives us a sufficient
warrant, to score up that also for a notorious untruth, which Bell speaks of
the long lawful liberty of Ecclesiastical Wiuing in Germany.

T. B.
I answer: Zachary absolved the French men from their loyal obedience to
Childerich their Sovereign, and confirmed Pipine the traitor, in his rome and
Kingdom: Whereof more at large is to be seen in The Downfall of Popery. See
the Downfall Page 10.
Rome authority to make Apostles; and that I may see their Commission, before
I be urged to believe the same. Zachary to his Apostle Boniface, is not
sufficient to debar Husbands from their Wives. Zachary, Priests were still
Married in Germany for the space of three hundred years, and Pope Zacharies
charge contemned, as a most wicked and unlawful thing. For, Pope Hildebrand
found them Married in his time, in the year of our Lord God 1074. who
laboring to separate Priests from their Wives, was for his pains, reputed a
mad man, and an Heretic; as I have proved at large in the Seventh
Proposition: which I wish the Reader to ponder seriously. Mark well the
seventh Proposition.
four distinct persons must concur; as every learned Divine, every skillful
Canonist, every approved Summonist, and every mean Legist, will confess:
viz. the Person accused, the Accuser, the Witness, and the Judge. And
consequently, Reus, accusator, testis, iudex.
the Bishops of Rome can not be Judges, when and where they are the parties
accused. This is a point of great consequence, which the Reader must ever have
in remembrance. I end with the testimony of Nicephorus; that in the East
Churches, Bishops did beget children of their lawful Wives, Nicephor. Lib.
12. Cap. 34.
even in the time of their Episcopal charge and dignity.

The Jesuits fourth Chapter, of the Popish execrable Pardons.
B. C.
THis Chapter, though it be but short, P. 61.
yet it lacks not the seal of his occupation: for his conclusion is adorned
with this notable untruth. The Popes Pardon (quoth he) is a rotten Ragge of
the New Religion, brought into the Church after a 1300. years, by Bonifacius
the eight. This tale he has told us diverse times before; and therefore the
more reason I have to challenge it for a rotten Lie of the Ragge-maister of
Rascal.

T. B.
I answer: Jesuit for fear of burning, durst scarcely touch three of the
same. The first Lie.
His first lie is this: viz. That I have told this tale of the Popes Pardon
(that it is a rotten Ragge of the New Religion) diverse times before. For I told
not this tale at all, save only in this present Chapter: let the Reader peruse
all three Chapters aforegoing, and if he do not find this tale once told (as
in truth he can not,) then in charity let him bestow the Whetstone upon our
Friar, as upon the man who has the best deserved it. His second lie is this:
viz. That my saying is a rotten lie. For I have proved it to be the mere
truth even in this Chapter, as it will better appear (God willing) by this my
present Answer. His third lie is this: viz. That I am the Rag-maister of
Rascal. For, albeit both in the very Title of his Book, and in sundry other
places, The Jesuit is at a non plus.
he terms me in that scornful manner; yet is it so far from the truth,
that the name of the Town where I was borne, is not Rascal (as he would have
it) but Raskell, with k and e, not with c and a, as his lying lips affirm
it. But what if the name were, as the Jesuit scornefully affirms; must I be
a Rascal, because I was borne in a Town so called? Is every Pope Holy,
because his name is Holiness? Pope Hogsnoute.
Was Pope Sergius an Hog, because his name was Hog-snoute? Is an humble man
proud, Raskell is a goodly Country Town, and has ever had in it many tall
fellows, very faithful to the Crown.
because his name is Proud? Is a valiant man a Coward, because his name is so?
Is a man all good, because his name is so? no wise man will say so: Yet must I
forsooth, be a Rascal, because I was borne in a Town called not Rascal, but
Raskell; where I never continued, save only during my minority and nonage.
Does not every child see and perceive, that our Friar wants matter; and that
he is at a non plus? If he were able to defend Popery, with Truth,
Scriptures, Councels, Fathers, or good Arguments; he would never use such
miserable shifts, and silly euasions. His third lie is this: viz. That he has
proved mine assertion to be a Lie. For, I have with invincible reasons and
authorities, proved the contrary to be the known Truth. He names an
unknown Book, ( The doleful Knell,) where he would seem to have proved
the matter: Yet such a Book I never saw to this day, neither can I learn that
any other has seen the same: But more hereof to speak, fitter occasion will
be offered hereafter: In the ninth Chapter following.
And if I live to see such a Book extant, it shall not (God willing) be long
unanswered. Trial, (even in this very Chapter) to be a very rotten Ragge of
the New religion: Read the Trial, and mark well the 4. Chapter.
And this I did perform in that place, many ways: First, by the express
words of Syluester Pryeras, (a man so profound and learned, that he was by
the Papists surnamed, Absolutus Theologus,) who constantly affirms, that the
Popes Pardons were never known to us, neither by the Scriptures, nor yet by
the ancient Fathers; but only by the late Writers. Lo, Syluester de indulg.
the Popes Pardons are so new, that neither the Holy Scriptures, nor yet the
old Fathers knew them; but the late Writers only* Ergo, they must needs be
Rags of a New Religion. How can the Friar deny this, withoutblushing? His
own conscience accuses him. He can not tell doubtless, what in the world to
say or think. He sees evidently, that Popery is proved the New Religion.
He perceives right well, that he is not able with all the help of his best
friends, to defend the Pope from utter shame. Secondly, by the flat testimony
of the Popish canonized Saint Antoninus, sometime Archbishop of the famous
City of Florence; who delivers the self same Doctrine, that Syluester did.
Thirdly, P. ^. Tit. 10. Cap. 3.
by the Doctrine of Petrus Lombardus, their famous Master of Sentences; A.D.
1149.
who (though he with great diligence collected into one Volume all the worthy
Sentences of the old Fathers) could never for all that, The old church knew not
late Popish Pardons.
find the Popes Pardons, or any mention thereof, in any of their Writings.
For, (as Syluester and Antoninus truly write) the Old Writers were not
acquainted with any such thing. Fourthly, by the free confession of M. Fisher
that famous Popish so supposed Martyr, sometime Bishop of Rochester in noble
England; Cont. art. Lutheri, art. 18.
who in his Answer to M. Luthers Articles, was enforced to admit the Newnes of
the Popes Pardons. To all which, and much more plainly set down in the
Trial, our Jesuit says not one word. He was so frighted forsooth with the
Conclusion, that he durst not once touch the Premises; but passing them over
in deep silence, Our Jesuits manner is, to answer my chiefest grounds with
deep silence.
he cur^alleth the Ergo, and seuereth it from the Consequent; because it did
connotate and plainly lay open to the Reader, that the Premises went before.
I wish the Reader to peruse the Trial, that so he may see the coozening
tricks of the proud Friar. Mark the Complement following.

The Complement of this Chapter.
FOr the better instruction of the Christian Reader, and the utter confusion of
our Friar, and of all other Friars, Jesuits, and Iesuited Popelinges, let us
seriously ponder and constantly remember, that there be two kinds of Pardons:
These two kinds of Pardons, must be well remembered and distingu^shed.
The One, De pamtentijs iniunctis: the other, D^remissione peccatorum. Concerning
the former kind, (which were only relaxations or mittigations of Discipline
and Canonical Penance enjoined by the Church) I grant very willingly, that in
the primative and ancient succeding Churches, they were very frequent and
usual: For, in those days and ages, such as were notorious offenders, and
had given public scandal to the Church, were enjoined by the Church, to do
public penance for their public faults, before they could be admitted
into the Church again. Which godly Discipline is this day observed (God be
thanked for it) in all particular Churches throughout this Realm of noble
England. Yea, in the ancient Churches many years of penance (or public
exercises of humiliation) were ordained for every public grievous Offense.
Whereupon it came, that when many penitent persons gave evident signs of true
internal remorse, for their former scandalous conversation; then the Church
thought good to give to such penitent persons, The ancient Councels did give
one kind of Pardons, but never late Popish Pardons.
some relaxation of their so enjoined public penance. Which kind of Pardons,
the famous Council of Nice, of Arles, of Ancyra, and others, did usually give
to penitent persons. Of which manner of pardoning, the ancient Fathers,
Tertullianus, Cyprianus, Jrenaeus, Eusebius, Sozomenus, and others, do often
make relation. But concerning the latter kind of late Popish Pardons; that is,
of applying to whom they list, and when they list; as well to the living, as to
the dead, the Merits of Christ and of his Saints, as condign satisfaction
for their Sins; no Scripture, no Council, no Father, no ancient approved
Historiographer, makes any mention at all. Which truth I have so plainly
proved in my Book of Motives, Libr. 2. Cap. 2.
as no Papist in Europe is able to answer the same: The Book has been extant
in print, now 15. whole years; The Jesuits promise answers, but perform none
truly.
and to this day no answer (though often promised) will appear. But let our
Jesuit proceed, in his wonted manner.

B. C.
I will add one testimony more of our Enemies the Waldenses, who appeared to
ye world about the year 1270. as testifies Claudius Cussordius and Guido: one
of whose Here^^es was against the Popes Pardons, as is most certain; and
Kemnitius confesses: which argues, that Par^ons were long in use before the
year 1300. And therefore be it known to Bell, that he has runge out a
notorious untruth.

T. B.
I answer: Waldenses appeared to the world, one hundred years before the
time our Friar names: viz. about the year 1169. and so has he in this
point, runge one notorious untruth, though but a very small one, in respect of
his other manifold and most impudent lies. Chemnitius does not confess, as our
Friar impudently affirms. But wisemen may and will believe him at leisure,
seeing he refers them for the proof, to his invisible Book ( The doleful
Knell:) For I protest to all the world, that I can neither see it, nor find out
any man, who has seen that same Book: And therefore I have great reason to
think, that no such Book is extant in deed; especially, because the Jesuits
have long sithence, and many times affirmed, both in words and writings, that
my Motives and Suruay, were answered: which for all that, was such a notorious
lie, as the said Books remain to this day unanswered; insomuch, Yea sundry
have utterly renounced Popery.
as some of their dearest and most devoted vassals, are ashamed of their
silence in that behalf, and begin to stagger and to doubt of the Popish
Faith and Religion. My Motives were printed in the year 1593. And my Suruay of
Popery, in the year 1596. So as the Jesuits have had the former in their
hands, now 15. years fully complete: and the latter, 12. years* with the
vantage of a large assisse. Mark the* ^. Chapter well.
But more of this subject, in the 9. Chapter following (God willing) toward the
end of the same. Friars two Witnesses ( Guide and Cussordius) are in honesty
and credit comparable to himself; base fellows, men of no reputation,
Knights of the Post, who will say or swear any thing for the Popes pleasure.
Friar says without proof, that it is most certain, that one of the Heresies
of the Waldenses, was against the Popes Pardons; let him know from me, that
therein he is a foul mouthed lying Friar: For, Platina their dear friend the
Popes Abbreuiator Apostol^^us, has these express words. Platina in Bonif. 8.
in med.
Iubilaeum idem retulit anno millesimo trecentesimo, quo plenam delictorum
omnium remissionem his praestabat, qui limina Apostolorum visitassent, ad
exemplum veteris testamentj: Pope Boniface brought again the Iubilee after
1300. years, and gave full Pardon of all sins, to such as did visit S.
Peter's Church and S. Paul's, ( in Vaticano at Rome) after the example of the old
Law. Out of these words, I observe these golden Lessons. Boniface the Jewish
Pope. I prove it by the word ( retulit, he brought again) from the Jews.
Jewish ceremonial Law. Leu. 25. v. 11.12. Suruay, part. 1. book* ^. chap. 5.
Of this Iubilee, see wonderful Popish coozening tricks, lively discovered
in their colors, in my Suruay of Popery.

The Perioch of the Chapter.
Greek Fathers never believed, as (God willing) shall be made evident in the
next Chapter; Boniface was the first that gave general Pardons for all Sins,
A.D. 1300.
in the year 1300. after Christ; I must perforce conclude against the Pope and
Popery, that the Popish Pardons are a Rotten Ragge, (not of the Old, but) of
the New Religion. The next Chapter must be joined with this.
This Chapter connotateth an intrinsecall order to the next following, and so
must be coupled together with the same.

The Jesuits 5. Chapter: of Popish Purgatory.
B. C.
IN this Chapter, after he has disputed against Purgatory with the authority
of Roffensis, he comes to his recapitulation, and says: Secondly, that the
Church of Rome believed it not, for the space of 250. years: after which time,
it increased by little and little.

T. B.
Whosoever shall but with an indifferent judgment peruse my Trial of the new
Religion, together with this Answer of the Jesuit, (which is not of one man
alone, but of many together; as will appear before the end of this my Reply,
God willing,) that man doubtless can not but see as clearly as the noone day,
that Popery is the New Religion. Popery is the new Religion, it can not be
denied.
This is mine Answer; let it be well marked: For my life and soul I dare gage,
that the Jesuits Answer shows evidently to all judicious and indifferent
Readers, that it is the truth which I defend; and that all the Papists in the
world, are not able in truth to confute the same. His miserable shifts, his
silly euasions, and coozening tricks, do every where, and in every Chapter
declare; that the Jesuit is at a Non plus, and knows not for his life, how
to defend the Pope. For, viz. That he not daring to allege all mine
Assertion, His 1. coozening trick.
which truly contains the true meaning of their famous Martyr so supposed,
late Bishop of Rochester, as which are his own words in deed; he at the
first, leapeth over 40. lines almost, in which the force of my Disputation
rests; and only touches my Recapitulation. This coozening trick being
after his manner performed, he combineth an other with it, His 2. coozening
trick.
implying a greater coozening by many degrees. This coozenage is contained in
these words; ( Secondly, that the Church of Rome.) I prove it first, because
every Child knows that the first, goes before the second. Secondly, because
the first, The Jesuits use many coozening tricks.
which the Friar would not (because he durst not) touch at all, contains (nay
proves) the maine point in this controversy: the point is this. This Bishop
was a Learned man, a great Papist, and said for Popery, what possibly he
could; yet does he grant many things, (of such force is the truth) which
quite overthrow Popery, and turn it vpside-downe. First, we see by his free
assertion, that the Greek Church never believed Purgatory to his days; and
so it was to them unknown 1517. years: All this, the Jesuit passes over in
deep silence, and begins at ( Secondly.) Lo M. Fisher, that Learned
Bishop (for so I grant he was) tells us plainly and resolutely, that the
Holy Fathers and Learned men of the Greek Church, never believed Purgatory,
until his time; that is, for the space of 1517. years after Christ. But our
Jesuit is so blind, that he could not see these words: Nay, rather he durst
not acknowledge them, because he can not frame any colorable answer to them.
This is the truth in very deed. His third coozening trick is in the omission
and not speaking of these words; His 3. co^zening trick.
( Thirdly, that the Church of Rome did not believe Purgatory all at once, but
by little and little.) These words our Friar J^suite durst not once name, least
they should have given him a mortal wound: For in deed to speak the truth,
they strike dead. They show plainly, that as the holy Fathers of the Greek
Church never believed Purgatory: so neither did the Fathers of the Latin
Church believe it, all and wholly at one and the same time, but by little and
little. Ah poor Purgatory! thy birth by peece-meale, makes thee the New
Religion. Thou art a Monster, among the Iesuited Papists. Thou wast neither
begotten, nor borne at once; but by little and little. O silly Popery! O new
Religion! His fourth coozening trick is employed in omitting these words: His
4. coozening trick.
( Fourthly, that the invention of Purgatory, was the birth ^f Popish Pardons;
as which could have no place, till Purgatory was found out by feigned
revelations.) Mark how gallantly our Jesuit confuteth Bell. What truth is in
Popery: we see, that our Friar fears once to touch my grounds. He does but
snatch at odd parts of my Disputation. not able to say ought to the r^st.
You see, he is not able to endure the sound of the Bell: Of five points of
great consequence, he durst name only two; the Second forsooth, and the Fifth.
Of the five, three seemed every way unanswerable. To the second and the fifth,
he thought he could say something, in show of words; albeit very nothing, in
the truth of the matter: Which (God willing) shall soon appear, after the
due examination of his words. But first, (because the controversy is a maine
point of Popish Religion, and the ground of Popish Pardons,) I will take the
pains to lay open to the Reader, the express words of the Bishop their
glorious Martyr. Thus does he write* I will not alter, add, or take away one
word, upon my salvation* to answer it. Sed et Graecis ad hunc vsque diem non
est creditum Purgatorium esse. Legate qui velit Graecorum veterum commentarios,
et nullum quantum opinor, aut quam rarissimum de Purgatorio sermonem inueniet.
Roffens. Cont. art. Luth. art. 18.
Sed neque Latini simul omnes, at sensim huius rei veritatem conceperunt. Et
Paulo post; non absque maxima sancti spiritus dispensatione factum est, quod
post tot annorum curricula Purgatorij fines et Indulgentiarum vsus ab
orthodoxi^ generatim sit receptus. Quamdiu nulla fuerat de Purgatorio cura,
nemo quaesiuit Indulgentias: nam ex illo pendet omnis Indulgentiarum
existimatio. Si tollas Purgatorium, quorsum Indulgentijs opus erit? His. N. si
nullum fuerit Purgatorium, nihil Indigebimus. Contemplantes igitur aliquandiu
Purgatorium incognitum fuisse, deinde quibusdam pedetentim, partim ex
reuelationibus, partim ex Scripturis fuisse creditum, atque ita tandem
generatim eius fidem ab orthodoxa Ecclesia fuisse receptissimam, facillime
rationem aliquam Indulgentiarum intelligimus. Quum itaque Purgatorium tam sero
cognitum ac receptum Ecclesiae fuerit vniversae, quis iam de Indulgentijs
mirari potest, quod in principio nascentis Ecclesiae nullus fuerat earum vsus?
Caeperunt igitur Indulgentiae, postquam ad Purgatorij cruciatus aliquandiu
trepidatum erat:

The Greeks to this day, do not believe there is a Purgatory. Read who will
the Commentaries of the ancient Greek Writers, A.D. 15^7.
and he shall either find very seldom mention of Purgatory, or none at all.
If thou mark well this Doctrine, proceeding from the pen of such a famous
and learned Papist; thou can no^ but abhor the Pope and late start-vp
Popery.
But neither did the Latin Church conceive the verity of this matter all at
one time, but by little and little: Neither was it done without the wonderful
dispensation of the Holy Ghost; that after so many pluralities of years,
Catholics both believed Purgatory, and received the use of Pardons generally.
So long as there was no care of Purgatory, no man sought for Pardons: for of
it depends all the estimation, that we have of Pardons. If thou take away
Purgatory, to what end shall we need Pardons? For, if there be no Purgatory,
we shall need no Pardons, Considering therefore how long Purgatory was
unknown; then, that it was believed of some by little and little, partly by
Revelations and partly by Scriptures, and so at the last, believed generally of
the whole Church; we do easily understand the cause of Pardons. Since
therefore Purgatory was so lately known and received of the Universal
Church, Who can now admire Pardons, that there was no use of them in the
primative Church? Pardons therefore began, after the people stood in some fear
of Purgatory. These are the words of M. Fisher sometime our Bishop of
Rochester; a Popish so supposed glorious Martyr, and a man for his great
Learning, renowned throughout the Christian world: who writing against M.
Luther in defense of Popery, (to which he was woonderfully addicted,) spared
not so say and to plead what possibly he could invent, for the free passage and
credit of the same: Whose best pleading, (which he possibly was able to
affoorde the Pope and Popery) does roundly and clearly turn it vp-side
down. I desire the Reader right heartily, even in the bowels of our Lord
Jesus, to mark attentively, and then to judge and give his censure
Christianly, I wonder, how any can read such Popish Doctrine, and be a Papist
still.
between the Jesuit and my self. Which if he shall indeed perform, (all
partiality set apart) he can not but evidently perceive (my life I gage for
the trial) that Popery is the New Religion. He can not but see, that the
truth is that which I defend. He can not but behold as clearly as the noone
day, that the Friar is condemned in his own conscience, and can not tell what
to say. For Greek Church, S. Basil, S. Gregory, S. Chrysostom and the rest.
never believed Purgatory. And who were those Greek Writers? S. Basil, for
his great skill, surnamed the great; S. Gregory Nazianzene, for his surpassing
knowledge in Divinity, surnamed Theologus; S. Chrysostom, for his Learning
and Eloquence surnamed, the Golden mouth: to say nothing of all the rest: If
these ancient Fathers, these Holy men, these so learned and so famous Writers,
with all the rest of the Greek Church, Late Pop^sh Pardons, prove Popery to
be the new Religion*
did not believe there was a Popish Purgatory for the space of 1517. years;
for so long after Christ, was this Bishop living; who for all that (as we
have seen) affirms unawares against himself, the Pope, and Popery; that
they believed it not in his time: What noddies, what fools, how void of all
feeling, of all sense, of all reason, may they justly be censured? Who to the
eternal peril of their souls and salvation, will needs believe such
erroneous, heretical, and most execrable Doctrine, such diabolical Faith, and
plain Heathenish Religion. Latin Church (and consequently the Church of Rome)
did not believe the aforenamed Purgatory, for many hundreds of years after S.
Peter's death; whose successor the Pope boasts himself to be. Latin Church
at one and the same time, but by little and little.

Behold here (gentle Reader) what a worthy Fisher was my Popish Lord of
Rochester: he has caught with his Net at one draught, ten goodly Fishes;
that is to say, ten golden and worthy Lessons for Christian edification.
Which effect will appear more evidently, before the end of this Chapter.

B. C.
Secondly, that the Church of Rome believed it not (that is Purgatory) for the
space of 250. years: after which time, it increased by little and little. This
either he means is gathered out of the testimony of Roffensis; and that is
not true: for nothing does Roffensis speak of 250. years, or deny that
Purgatory was always believed in the Church; although he confesses, that
the Doctrine thereof was not so well known, as now it is; which is far
different from this Proposition: Purgatory was not believed of the Church of
Rome, for the space of 250. years after Christ. Or else he affirms of
himself, that Purgatory was not believed until that time: and then must I be
so bold to tell him, that it is also a manifest untruth.

T. B.
I answer: Friar is bold, untruly to charge me with untruths: so I must be
bold to return the same untruths unto himself; and for his just demerites,
reward him with the Whetstone. Jesuit would very gladly impose upon me two
untruths, so to hide the nakedness of Popery; he has committed no fewer
then three notorious Lies. First, he says roundly, though untruly, that
Roffensis (the Bishop of Rochester) speaks nothing of 250. years. His
first notorious Lie.
This is his first notorious Lie. I prove it sundry ways: First, because he
tells us resolutely, that the Greek Fathers believed not Purgatory, for the
space of 1517. years; and consequently, not for the space of 250. years.
Secondly, that after many pluralities of years, Purgatory and Pardons were
received. Thirdly, that Purgatory was a long time unknown. Fourthly, that
afterward some believed it by little and little. How say thou now, sir Friar,
does your Popish Bishop say nothing, of 250. years? Are not 250. contained
in 1517. years? Do not many pluralities of years, something touch 250.
years? Do not thou o Friar, Argumentum ad hominem. Page 65.
extend the age of the Primative Church (how truly shortly will be seen) unto
250. years? And yet does the Bishop tell thee, that both Pardons and
Purgatory, were unknown to the primative Church: Ergo, I must score this up,
for a flat and known Lie. Secondly, he says impudently, that the Bishop
does not deny, that Purgatory was always believed in the Church. His second
notorious lie.
This is his second notorious and shameless Lie: I prove it by a threefold
argument: For first, the Bishop says plainly in express words, that the
Greek Fathers ( S. Chrysostom, S. Basil, S. Gregory, S. Epiphanius, and the
rest of those great Learned men, and stout Champions of the Church,) believed
not Purgatory, for the space of 1517. years. Secondly, that the Fathers of
the Latin Church believed it not for many years. Thirdly, that afterward some
believed it by little and little. Where I wish the Reader to observe seriously,
this word ( deinde, Mark well the word (deinde.)
afterward;) for it strikes dead, confounds the Jesuit, and proves
manifestly, that Popery is the New Religion. The case is so clear and
evident, as every Child may easily perceive the same: For, that which was
believed afterward, must perforce be vnbeleeued at the first. Again, that
which was sometime unknown, must needs be sometime vnbeleeued; or else our
Friar must needs say (which for his Lugs he dares not say) that the Pope
forsooth and his Iesuited Popelinges, believed they know not what. His third
notorious Lie is this: His third notorious lie.
viz. that I untruly charge their Bishop of Rochester, in fathering upon
him, that the Church of Rome believed not Purgatory, for the space of 250.
years after Christ. For, I have evidently and irrefragably, deduced out of the
Bishops express words; The Church of Rome believed not Purgatory for the
space of 1000. and odd.
that the Church of Rome believed not Purgatory, for more then 250. years
thrice told: yea, not for the space of more then one thousand years. I prove
it once again, to the Jesuits and the Popes everlasting shame. Mark well my
Discourse for Christ's sake, gentle Reader: for in so doing, thou can not but
abhor and detest Popery, as a fond and new Religion. I protest upon my
salvation, that I believe as I write; as also, that the late Bishop of
Rochester (whom our Friar names Roffensis, John Fisher, the Bishop of
Rochester.
which word only connotateth the place where he was Bishop, but is not his
name,) proves the same effectually: this is the proof. Greek Church never
believed Purgatory. Latin Church did not believe it of a long time.
Bonifacius the eight, A.D. 1300.
1300. years after Christ; as I have already proved out of Platina, the
Popes devoted vassal, and sometime his Abbreuiator Apostolicus. And
consequently, that seeing such Pardons as I speak of in this place, were not
known for the space of 1300. years after Christ: and seeing withal, that
they were in use shortly after Purgatory began to be feared; Mark well this
Discourse: for it strikes dead.
it follows by a necessary and inevitable illation, that Purgatory was not
known and believed, for the space of 1200. years at the least: And so I trow;
nay am well assured, not for the space of 250. years after Christ; even by the
flat testimony of their great learned Popish Bishop, my late Lord of
Rochester.

B. C.
As I have proved against him in the Doleful Knell, out of S. Denis S. Paul's
scholar, and Tertullian; yea, and to his utter confusion, convinced out of
himself.

T. B.
I answer: Friar is at a non plus, then would he be thought to have done that
else where, which he is not able to perform in deed: and therefore does he many
times send me, to this invisible Book; of which more at large (God willing)
before the end of this Discourse. in reru^ natura,) I shall with speed
convenient, frame mine answer to the same; not doubting, but the Confusion
will be his own, after due examination of the same: And in the interim, let
him this know by the way, and before hand, that his Book is a silly and
doleful thing indeed; O brave defender of Popery.
as which by his own confession here, has no better Authors to rely upon,
then a counterfeite Denis, and a Montanizing Tertullian.

B. C.
In this place I will add the Testimony of his brother Perkins, who in his
Problem confesses, That Purgatory was first received by Tertullian the
Montanist: wherein is one open untruth; to weete, that He was the first; for
he only affirms it, but proves it not; and no marvel, when he can not,
seeing most certain it is, that it came from the Apostles. It is a most
certain Lie, and a shameless untruth.
Non temere. etc. Not without cause (says S. Chrysostom) these things were
ordained of the Apostles, that in the dreadful mysteries, commemoration should
be made of the dead; for they know that thereby much gain does come unto them,
and much profit.

T. B.
I answer: Friar in one place, calls M. Perkins, Page 62. Page 391.
The Puritan of England; and in an other place, obiecteth my Book penned
against them: Howbeit here, he must needs be my Brother, and I oppressed
with his Authority. Friar has no sooner objected M. Perkins against me, but
forthwith he oppugneth his Assertion. Friar, for a most certain and
shameless Lie, for a most notorious Slander, and for an intolerable
Blasphemy against the blessed Apostles of our Lord Jesus. I prove it sundry
ways. S. Chrysostom was one of the chiefest and best Learned Fathers of the
Greek Church; Perhaps S. Chrysostom and the other holy Greek Fathers feeling
Purgatorie-fire, believed it when they were dead.
who, (as my Lord of Rochester has told us very plainly and resolutely,)
never believed there was any Popish Purgatory, while they were living here on
earth; and consequently, that Purgatory can never be truly fathered, upon
that great learned and holy man. Friar would gladly fetch Purgatorie-fire, are
counterfeite and not S. Chrysostomes indeed. Whereof this is an argument
insoluble, that the Greek Fathers did never believe Purgatory. For, if S.
Chrysostom had taught Purgatory in his Books, Bishop Fisher that glorious
so supposed Popish Martyr, could not truly have written, and constantly
avouched to the whole world, as he did, that the Greeks never believed
Purgatory. Greek Church, have been so long time, even till their death,
ignorant thereof. Nay, if the Latin Church in their days, had received
Purgatory, as a tradition Apostolical, they would never have withstood it;
but most reverently have admitted, and most Christianly believed the same.
Friar thus much, to cheer up his spirits a while: viz. that they are S.
Chrysostomes words, which he cites in his name; yet will it not serve his
turn, to build Popish Purgatory thereupon: For, the words do only prove
this, and no more; to weete, that The Apostles taught Commemoration of the dead.
Which my self am so far from disliking, that I have many years ago
approved it in my Suruay of Popery. Yea, Part. 3. Chap. 6. Page 308.
the Papists in their public Prayers, make frequent and usual Commemoration
of their Martyrs; whom they for all that, deny to be in Purgatorie-fire, and
freely grant to be in Heaven: And so they can not infer Purgatory, out of
the Commemoration of the dead. To this I add; that Prayer for the dead (which
is more then Commemoration) may in a godly sort be used: as I have showed at
large, first in my Motives, and afterward in my Suruay. More then which, the
Jesuit can not infer out of his Author, as his Marginall note does declare.
I therefore conclude, that our ^esuite has runge out a notorious untruth,
when he tells his Reader, that Purgatory came from the Apostles.

B. C.
Here the judicious Reader may also note, how the Minister contradicts
himself. In his Suruay, entreating of Purgatory, he says: Thus by little and
little it increased, till the late Bishops of Rome made it an Article of
Popish Faith. Where in the Margent, he notes the time, thus. In the year of
our Lord 250. Here he says, that the Church of Rome believed it not, for the
space of 250. years: After which (as he tells us) it increased by little and
little. And so in this place, he makes the seed of Purgatory not to have been
sown before the year 250. and afterward to have increased till it came to
perfection. These are most notorious and impudent lies: the Deui^l of Hell has
his part therein.
There he affirms, that the seed was sown before, and increased by little and
little, until it became ripe and perfect Popery; which was in the year 250.
And so Purgatory was sown and not sown; grown, and not grown: an article
of Faith, and not an article of Faith, in the same one year 250. I will not
deny but the Minister has some skill in botching together of old ends of
Divinity, gathered out of the Ragge market of Calvin, and such like
Geneua-Merchants; yet I fear me, it will be hard for him so to cobble the
sayings together, that the flaw of a contradiction appear not.

T. B.
I answer: Friar pretends some fear that I can not defend by any cobling,
my contradiction by him so supposed; I am so free from it, that I ween his
heart will pant, so soon as he shall peruse my answer to the same: For so God
help me, I wonder he is not ashamed so to write. O tempora! O mores! I would
not have imagined, that the Master Devil of Hell had so possessed him, as to
make him the instrument of such notorious, Out upon the impudent lying of
Jesuits
execrable, and plain diabolical Lies. Never did any man hear, know, or
read, such shameless, palpable, and gross untruths. Who will not exclaim
and cry out of Popery, that shall read this Friars Answer, and this my Reply
joined with my Trial and my Suruay; in which he would seem to ground his
deuillish and abominable Lies? Fie, fie; how can he think, that any of wit
and judgment, will believe him? He perceives right well, that the truth
published in my Books, can never be truly answered: and therefore silly
Papists, (who dare not for fear of Popish tyrannical censures, read my
Books) must perforce receive and believe his most execrable Lies, for the
truth. Oh, that they would once read my Books! nay but this one Reply, with a
single eye and indifferent judgment, all parcialitie set apart, He knows,
that he falsely accuses me: his own conscience (though never so badde) can
not but condemn him. Every child may easily discern, that the truth is on my
side. The case is so clear, my words so plain, and the truth thereof so
apparent, as every judicious and honest Reader must needs think him worthy to
have a Whetstone tied at his Girdle, O holy Friar! O worthy counselor of the
Popes O noddy! Folly has begotten thee.
a Foxe-tayle in his neck, and a Fooles-bable in his hand. If Popery through
mortal wounds received, were not past recovery; if the truth published in my
Books, were not vnanswereable; if the Jesuit were not at a Non plus, not able
to defend the Pope and his late start-vp Romish Faith, he would never thus
delude the world, with his most notorious Lies and deceitful dealing. Mark
well for Christ's sake.
In my Suruay (mark well for Christ's sake) these are my express words, in the
third part and sixth Chapter. Afterward, Origin being too much addicted to his
allegorical speculation, feigned many odd things touching Purgatory; See
Suruay, part. 3. chap. 6. and mark it well. A.D. 250.
as the Ethnicke Plato (whom he much imitateth) had done before him. After
Origin, others began to call the matter into question, others rashly to believe
it, others to add many things to Origens conceit. Thus by little and little it
increased, till the late Bishops of Rome made it an Article of Popish Faith. In
my Book, See the Trial, chap. 5. and mark it well.
entitled ( The Trial of the new Religion) these are my express words.
First, we see that the Greek Church never believed Purgatory to his days, (I
speak there of John Fisher late Bishop of Rochester,) and so it was vnkowen
to them 1517. years. O brave Purgatory! the Greek Church never believed thee.
Secondly, that the Church of Rome believed it not, for the space of 250.
years: after which time, it increased by little and little. These are my very
words in both my Books ( The Suruay, and The Trial, I mean,) out of which
our Friar Jesuit (who may seem to be begotten of some Fayrie Bratte, as the
Secular popish Priests write of the Jesuit Robert Parsons, the Author of this
scurrilous, shameless, impudent, and lying Libell,) would seem to conclude
and find out against me, a strange Contradiction: viz. that in the one Book
I make the seed of Purgatory not to have been sown, before the year 250. And
afterward, to have increased till it came to perfection. The Jesuit has as
many lies, as words.
And that this notwithstanding, in my other Book, I make the seed sown
before, and to have increased by little and little, until it became ripe and
perfect Popery, which was in the year 250. And thereupon he infers, that
Purgatory was sown, and not sown; grown, and not grown; an Article of
Faith, and not an Article of Faith, in one and the same year.

For this, see the Anatomy of Popish Tyranny.
Now to this lusty Gallant, a poor begging Friar by profession (though as the
Secular Priests their brethren in Popery, tell them, they shame with that
occupation, as who must have their Chambers Perfumed, Gentlewomen to pull off
their Boots, and themselves to trowle up and down from good cheer to good
cheer, at their own good pleasures;) I return this Answer, which (if
nothing else would) is able to strike him dead. His first lie.
viz. That I say in my Suruay of Popery, that the seed of Purgatory was sown
before the year 250. His second lie.
His second Lie is this: viz. That I affirm in my said Suruay, that Popery
was ripe and perfect in the year 250. His third lie.
His third Lie is this: viz. That I make Popery sown, and not sown, in one
and the same year. His fourth lie.
His fourth Lie is this: viz. That I make Purgatory grown, and not grown, in
one and the same year. His fifth Lie is this: viz. That I make Popery an
Article of Faith, His fifth lie.
and not an Article of Faith, in one and the same year: that is to say, in the
250. year after Christ. No untruth, but what proceeds from the Iesui^es
pen.
and more then a little please himself therewith; yet is there no untruth at
all, but those false accusations, which proceed from his own lying lips. No
other proof need be made thereof, but the bare recital of my words: For
doubtless, the Jesuit either speaks against his own knowledge; or else he is
so besotted and blinded with malice, that he can not see Wood for Trees. Friar
shows himself to be a right Jesuit: that is to say, a shameless and
impudent Liar: For, the Letters and Figures in the Margent ( A.D. 250.) do not
connotate the words following, A.D. 250.
but the words immediately afore-going: Which no man of judgment and reason,
can for shame deny. For first, I say plainly, that Origin feigned many odd
things touching Purgatory. Again, I say expressly, that after Origin,
others began to call it into question. Where I wish the indifferent Reader, to
observe seriously these two points with me. Origin; who was living about 250.
years after Christ: And consequently, that the 250. years must needs have
relation to the time of Origin and his immediate followers; as who (all
approved Chronographers testifying the same) lived about that time. And this
is confirmed, because I do not speak of the Bishops of Rome barely and
absolutely, I speak of the late Bishops of Rome.
but with a restriction employed in this word (late.) I in all my Books, do
ever repute S. Austen, S. Chrysostom, and others, that lived 400. years after
Christ; not late Writers, but old and ancient Fathers: which is an evident
argument, that I applied my Marginall note to the time of Origin and of his
immediate followers, and not to the late Bishops of Rome; whom I contend to
be men, not of the Old, but of the late and New Religion. So as every child may
see, O sweet Jesus, who sees not Popery to be the new Religion.
that our Jesuit not able to defend Popery, nor to withstand the truth; and
yet unwilling to yield to the truth and to condemn Popery, in which, and by
which he lives in wealth, pomp, and glory; imployeth himself and his wits
with might and maine, heaping Lies upon Lies, furnished with notorious
coozening tricks every where, so to dazell the eyes of his Reader least he
behold the truth, and so condemn the rotten Rags of Popery for the New
Religion. He is at a non plus, his Back is at the Wall; all his pleading for
late start-vp Popery, is fraughted with nothing else, but coozening tricks,
notorious cauils, impudent calumnies, and false dealing.

B. C.
In the same place he writes thus: Fifthly, that the primative Church was never
acquainted with the Popes Pardons, nor yet with his counterfeit and forged
Purgatory. A notable untruth; for not to speak of Pardons, but of
Purgatory; was it not the primative Church which believed Purgatory, when as
himself confesses, that it was made an Article of Popish Faith in the year
250. at what time, all the Popes were martyred for Christ; and in his Funeral,
he acknowledges the first thirty for godly men, saying, that both they and
diverse others, taught the same doctrine which S. Peter had done before them;
and most certain that one of these thirty, lived in the year 250. and so I
trow, they were of the primative Church? The Minister is full of distinctions,
and his brain a shop of solutions, having many, I-sayes, for the answer of
any Objection: It is already proved, that the Friar is a most impudent liar.
Yet it is to be feared, that no devise will free him from a gross untruth;
affirming here. that the primative Church was not acquainted with Purgatory,
and yet teaching in his Suruay, that Purgatory was made an Article of Faith by
the late Popes of Rome, in the year 250.

T. B.
I answer: Friar is willing here, as before, to pass over in deep silence
the Popes Pardons, as a thing not possible to be defended. Jesuit seems more
impudent, then Impudency it self; as who is not ashamed again and again to
iterate, most gross, palpable, and shameless Lies. The Jesuit snatcheth at
this piece and that piece, but touches not the principal.
I have already refuted him plentifully, and honestly discharged my self of
that untruth, which he would gladly impose upon me, concerning the making of
Purgatory an Article of Popish Faith. Rome; as whom all I honor in mine
heart, and have ever spoken and written reverently of them. Jesuits trowing,
is a mere leasing; while he avouches 250. years, to be within the compass
of the primative Church. I prove it, because all Christ's Apostles (who were
the primative Church,) were dead long before that time, of which our Friar
speaks. Friars fear is a flat Lie, and so not able to kill a Fly; albeit
it be more then Crambe bis posita, and most irksome Tantologie, or rather
plain and mere foollerie.

B. C.
I let pass, how Purgatory must by his own confession, be Apostolical
doctrine, when it was taught by those Popes which he grants to have holden
the Faith of S. Peter; as I have proved against him in the Doleful Knell. I
omit also how falsely and ridiculously he calls the Popes that lived 1450.
years ago, the late Popes of Rome. Verily it should seem by his writing,
that he little cares what passes from his Pen, so it be walking against the
Pope and Popish doctrine.

T. B.
I answer: Jesuit is a most shameless, impudent, and lying Friar; from whose
answer if we shall once take away his notorious calumnies, his miserable
cauils, his coozening tricks, and his deceitful dealing, little or rather
nothing at all, will remain to the Reader, Jesuit himself (if he had not a
face of Brass,) but all other Jesuits and his Jesuited breathren, would blush
to publish so often and so falsely, the same assertions so often confuted and
turned vpside down. Friar does often refer his Reader, to an unknown and
invisible Book, (of which more hereafter,) called by him, The Doleful Knell.
Tantologie, concerning the late Bishops of Rome, as I must needs say, he is
maliciously bent against the truth. Jesuits will publish any thing though
never so ridiculously, if it may any way but seem to save the life of rotten
Popery. Peruse and mark well the Chapter aforegoing, because popish
Purgatory is the Mother of popish Pardons.

The Jesuits sixth Chapter, of Popish Auricular Confession.
OF this Subject, albeit I have disputed sufficiently in my Motives, and more
at large in my Suruay; yet that the Christian reader may the better be assured,
that Popery is the New Religion, I will in this place summarily prove the
same, by such invincible and irrefragable arguments, as every Child with all
facillitie may perceive, that Popish Auricular Confession, is but a rotten
Ragge of the New Religion. Which being performed, the Friars words shall be
examined, and refuted to his confusion.

The first Conclusion.
Whatsoever Christ commanded in the New Testament, the same is comprised and
contained in the Old. I prove it sundry ways: S. Paul says plainly in one
place, Act. 20. V. 27.
That he uttered the whole counsel of God. And because withal he says as
plainly in an other place; Act* 26. V. 22.
That he taught nothing at all, save those things only, which the Prophets
and Moses did say should come to pass. And here if any admire, how S. Paul
could show unto men, all the Counsel of God; Nicolaus Lyranus, and Dionysius
Carthusianus, Lyr. in 20. cap. Act. Apost. Carthus. ibid.
two Learned and famous Papists, teach us thus to answer: That The Apostle
means not simply, of All the Counsel of God; Ioh. 5. V. 47.
but of All the Counsel of God so far forth as appertains to man's
salvation. Jews, That if they had believed Moses, they would also have
believed him. But for that they would not give credit to the Writings of
Moses, neither would they believe his Words: Which illation of our Lord Jesus,
should be frivolous and of no force at all, if the New testament were not
contained in the old. S. Augustine affirms constantly; Aug. contra Adriantum,
cap. tom. ^. page 121.
that the new Testament is so largely comprised in the Old, as no precepts can
be found in the New, which are wanting in the Old: these are his express
words. In eo tanta praedicatio et praenuntiatio noui testamenti est, vt nulla
in Euangelica atque Apostolica disciplina reperiantur, quamuis ardua et diuina
praecepta et promissa, qu^ illis etia^ libris veteribus desint: In the Old
Testament, the New is so largely preached and foreshewed, that nothing can be
found in the discipline or Doctrine of the Gospel and of The Apostles, although
they be hard and Divine Precepts and promises, which are wanting in those old
Books. Thus we see out of this holy Father, that the New Testament is largely
contained in the old.

The Second Conclusion.
Popish auricular confession, is not contained in the old Testament. It is
enough for the proof hereof, that no learned Papist ever did, does, or can
deny the same. Yet will I here add the express words, of a zealous and
learned Papist, whose name is Polydorus. Polydor. libr. 6. cap. 1.
Ante Christ's Aduentum, s^t ^rat mente fateri Deo Commissa. The Jesuit B.C. p.
67. grants, that Scotus is of the same opinion.
Before the Aduent and coming of Christ, it was enough in mind, to confess
our sins to God. Thus writes Polydorus, and it is the General Doctrine of all
learned Papists: And doubtless, the holy Gospel (which is the law of Christian
liberty,) does not impose upon us, an heavier Yoke, then did the old Law,
which was the Law of bondage.

The Third Conclusion.
All things necessary for Man's salvation, are perfectly and plainly contained
in the Holy Scripture. This Conclusion I have plentifully proved, in the
Downfall of Popery. But here I will prove the same, to the admiration of
many, S. R. page 284.
by the express words of a known adversary; even of the Jesuit S. R. in his
pretended answer to the said Downefal. Jesuit has these words. All such
points of Christian faith, as are necessary to be actually believed of every
one, that has use of reason, though he be never so simple, are actually
contained in Scripture, either clearly or obscurely. Thus writes our Jesuit,
affirming the same to be the doctrine of their Cardinal Bellarmine. S.R. page
285.
Jesuit has these express words. For surely, the Prophets and Evangelists
writing their Doctrine for our better remembrance, would omit no one point,
which was necessary to be actually known of every one, especially, seeing
they have written many things which are not so necessary. And this Conclusion
teaches S. Austine, S. Austin. tract. 49. in Johan. to. 9.
when he says: That those things are written, which seemed sufficient for
the salvation of the Faithful. Thus writes our Jesuit, affirming the
Doctrine to be the flat opinion of S. Augustine, that holy Father and stout
Champion of Christ's Church. S.R. page 286.
Jesuit has these express words: Me thinks S. Augustine plainly
avouches, that God has procured every thing to be clearly written, S. Cyril,
lib. 11. in Joan. cap. 68.
which to know is necessary to every man's salvation. The same teaches S.
Cyrill, saying: Not all things which our Lord did, are written; but what the
writers deemed sufficient, as well for Manners as for Doctrine; that by right
Faith and Works, Chrysosto. 2. These. ho. 3.
we may attain to the Kingdom of Heaven. And S. Chrysostom; What things
soever are necessary, are manifest out of Scripture. Thus writes our Jesuit,
in his pretensed Answer to the Downfall of Popery. Which Doctrine to be so
plainly delivered by our Adversaries, may seem a woonderment to the Christian
world: For it clearly turns vpside-downe, the chiefest Bulworke of Popish
unwritten Traditions; and in effect, all Popish Faith and Religion. The common
good which comes to the Church of God, by writing against the Adversaries of
his Truth, is hence apparent to all the World. For, after the swaggering
Jesuit S.R. with the advice of Bellarmine and others, had bickered so long
with the Downfall of Popery, that the fall had almost broken their necks;
then overcome with the dint of Arguments and force of the Truth, he was as it
were violently compelled to write as we here see, in defense and behalf of the
Truth. To which (for the better manifestation of this truth so necessary to
be known, Epiphan. Haeres. 65. nos ^quidem vnius^uiusque quaestionis
inuentionem, non ex proprijs ratiocinationibus dicere po^^imus, sed ex
scripturaru^ consequentia.
) I will add yet an other Testimony of our Jesuit, in these words: Truly
said S. Epiphanius, that we may tell the invention of every question, out of
the consequence of Scripture. He said not, Out of the Scripture: For all cannot
be taken thence; as him self writes: but of the consequence of them. Because
all questions are resolved out of the Scriptures, or out of that which
follows of them, as the effect of the cause. Thus the Jesuit approoueth
unawares, the self same Doctrine, which I in the Downfall do defend. And
consequently, the very weapons which our Adversaries put into our hands, are
sufficient (God be blessed for it) to defend us and our cause against them.

The Fourth Conclusion.
Popish Auricular Confession, is not necessary for man's salvation. For

The Fifth Conclusion.
Popish confession is neither commanded by Christ, nor by his Apostles.
Popish Auricular Confession is neither commanded by Christ, nor yet by his
Apostles. I prove it; because it is not contained in the Old Testament; as in
the second Conclusion: Which Testament for all that, contains all the
Precepts of the New; as may and does appear to the indifferent reader, in the
first Conclusion.

The Sixth Conclusion.
Popish Auricular Confession was instituted and established by the mere Law of
man, grounded only upon a falsely imagined Apostolical unwritten Tradition. I
prove it many ways. viz. Whether one be bound to Confession Auricular, by
Gods law, or by Man's law. Ex Leone Papa, de paenitent. did. 1. cap. quamuis.
These are the express words, as Gratianus has published the same: Quibus
authoritatibus vel quibus rationum firmamentis vtraque sententia
satisfactionis, et confessionis nitatur, in medium breuiter exposuimus: Cuj
autem harum potius adhaerendum sit, lectoris iudicio reseruatur. Viraque. N.
fautores habet sapientes et religiosos viros: Lo, wise and religious Papists
hold, that Confession was ordained by the law of man.
Upon what Authorities or foundations of Reasons either opinion is grounded, I
have briefly showed: But to whether of them it is better to adhere, that I
leave to the judgment of the Reader: for either opinion has Wise and
Religious men, for the Patrons of the same. Behold here (gentle Reader) that
not only the Popes Doctors, but his own Canon Law, and the Commenters upon
the same, do all confess; that Confession after Popish manner, is only and
solely grounded upon Man's law. Yea, the Popish Gloss adds; That both Wise
and Religious men do so think, though some others hold the contrary.
Absolutus Theologus) Syluester Prieras, does deliver his opinion in these
words. Syluest. de Confess. secundo, part. 4.
Quarto, vtrum ad confessionem teneamur diuino iure vel humano? Et dic^, quod
Canonistae videntur tenere, quod sit de iure positiuo. Et ad hoc est Glossa de
paenit. Did. 5. In summa, quae vult quod instituta sit a quadam universally
traditione Ecclesiae. Ideo infert, quam confiteri non tenentur infideles, nec
similiter Graeci; ex quo non acceptauerunt huiusmodi constitutionem, sicut nec
vot^^ castitatis: It is demanded fourthly (says the great Learned Papist
Syluester) whether we be bound to Popish Confession by the law of God, or by
the positive Law of man? And I say the Canonistes hold, that we are bound by
the Law of man. And of this opinion is the Gloss, which is of this mind, that
Confession was instituted by a certain universal tradition of the Church.
Whereupon the said Gloss infers, that Infidels are not bound to Confession,
neither the Greeks in like manner, seeing they did never approve such
Constitution, as neither the vow of Chastity. Martinus Nauarrus, confesses
constantly and plainly, that their solemn Gloss commonly received and
approved of all Canonistes, holds Confession to be commanded by the Church.
most reverend Arch-byshop, and honorable Cardinal Panormitanus, Couarruv.
^om. 1. par. 1. page 155.
was of the same opinion with the Gloss. For Couarruv^as a very learned Popish
Arch-byshoppe delivers his mind in these words: Quam ex nostris plerique
sequuti sunt, maxim Panormitanus; ex ea asserentes, confessionem sacramentalem
quae Sacerdotibus fit, iure humano institutam esse: Which Gloss, many of our
Canonistes have followed, especially Panormitanus, affirming out of that
Gloss, that Sacramental confession made to Priests, was ordained by the law
of Man. Scotus the Popish subtle school Doctor, surnamed for his great skill
( Doctor subtilis,) after he had largely disputed pro et contra of Popish
Auricular confession, concludes in these words: Scotus in 4. libr. sent.
did. 17. q. 1.
Apparet ergo, istud non esse de iure diuino promulgato per scripturam
Apostolicam. Vel ergo tenendum est primum membrum, scilicet quod sit de iure
diuino promulgato per Euangeliu^; vel si illud non sufficiat, dicendum est
tertium; scilicet quod est de iure diuino positiuo promulgato a Christo
Apostolis, sed Ecclesiae promulgato per Apostolos absque omni scriptura: It
therefore appears, that it is not of the law of God published by Apostolical
Scripture. We must therefore either hold the first member, to wee^e, that it is
of the law of God published by the Gospel; or if that will not suffice, we
must say the third: that is to say, that it comes from the positive law of
God published by Christ to his Apostles, but published by the Apostles to the
Church without all Scripture. Thus writes the Popish Doctor subtilis; Lo,
Popish Confession is either one thing, or other: this or that, they can not
tell what.
who with all his subtlety can not tell in the world what to say, in defense
of their Popish Auricular confession. For, after he has discoursed to the
uttermost of his wits, and employed his whole care, industry, and diligence,
to see what help might be had in that behalf; his best resolution is to say,
with the old doting man of Carlton. That it is either one thing or other. For
The Papists cannot endure the written testimony of Gods truth.
viz. that it is grounded upon Unwritten tradition, without all manner of
Scripture. This is it, which our Papists must ever fly unto, as to their best
and last trumpe. For which respect, their learned and canonized Martyr the late
Bishop of Rochester confessed plainly, that the holy Scriptures will not
serve their turn: these are his express words. Roffensis art. 37. ad^. Luth.
Page 11.
Contendentibus itaque nobiscum Hareticis, nos also subsidio nostram oportet
tueri causam, quam scriptura sacra. Therefore when Heretics contend with us,
we must defend our cause by other means, then by the holy Scripture. Thus
writes Bishop Fisher the Popes canonized Saint and glorious Martyr; a
Learned man indeed: who (as we see) for all his Learning, was not able to
defend Popery by Gods word; and therefore he fled from the holy Scriptures, to
unwritten Traditions; as Scotus did before him. And for the same respect,
Couarruuias a famous Popish Bishop and a great learned man, confessed and
published to the whole world; that howsoever the truth was, that which their
Pope did, must of necessity be defended. These are his express words. Couar.
to. 1. part. 2. Cap. 7. Par. 4.11.14. in med.
Nec m^latet, etc. Neither am I ignorant, that S. Thomas affirms after great
deliberation, that the Bishop of Rome can not with his Dispensation, take
away from Monks their solemn Vow of Chastity. what the Pope holds, that
must be defended.
This notwithstanding, we must defend the first opinion; least those things
which are practiced every where, be utterly overthrown. Behold here (gentle
Reader) that howsoever the Popes opinion be (whether true or false, that
skilleth not,) the same we must defend of necissitie. And why I pray you,
must this be done? Because forsooth (says Couarruutas,) otherwise Popery will
be turned vpside down. Caietan. cap. 20. in Johan.
Caietanus affirms roundly, that Auricular and Secret confession, is against
Christ's institution; as also the Precept that urges us to the same: For,
albeit he approve Confession, as instituted by Christ; yet does he add a
double restriction: First, that it was Voluntary: then, Ponder well the next
Conclusion.
that it was neither Secret, nor of All sins. Which twain for all that, the
late Bishops of Rome affirm and urge, as necessary to Salvation. Mark well
the next Conclusion, out of the Popes own Decrees.

The Seventh Conclusion.
A.D. 1215. Ab Innocentio 3 et. ^^is. Angles in. 4. S. pa^^. 1. page 255.
Popish Auricular Confession was not an Article of Popish Faith, for the space
of 1215. years. I prove it, because their famous Friar and reverend Popish
Bishop Josephus Angles, affirms peremptorily and without all Ands or Ifs;
that none were Heretics for the denial of the necessity of Popish
confession, until the Decree of their late Council of Latheran, which was
holden 1215. years after Christ. And the Friar Bishop yields this reason
for the same: viz. Quia nondum erat ab Ecclesia declaratum: Because the Church
(of Rome) had not before that time, declared it to be so. To which I add, for
the complement of this controversy; that the Holy and Ancient Fathers (those
stout Champions and mighty Pillars of Christ's Church, Popish auricular
confession was not heard of in old time.
) were never acquainted with Popish Auricular confession. I prove this, by a
double argument. First, by the fact of the holy Bishop Nectarius: then, by the
ioynt-testimonies of Nicephorus and Rhenanus. Concerning Nectarius that holy
and worthy Bishop of Constantinople, he abolished the Law made for
Confession, so to avoid the great Vices which ensued thereupon. Where the
Reader must observe two things with me: denied the Faith in time of
Persecution. And that some were so zealous, and so highly esteemed the sacred
Ministry, that although they did not deny the Faith publicly, yet for that
they had some doubts therein, and were troubled in their minds, they
voluntarily disclosed their secret griefs to Gods Ministers, humbly desired
their Godly advise, Nicephor. lib. 12. cap. 28. f.
and submitted themselves to do what was thought expedient by those Ministers,
whom the Church had placed to inioyne Penance for public sins. Nectarius
ever have attempted to abolish Confession (if it had been Gods ordinance,)
neither would so many famous Bishops have imitated his fact. And yet is it most
certain, (as shall be seen by and by,) that all for the most part
Easterne-Byshops did follow his opinion. Yea, even S. Chrysostom, who
succeeded Nectarius at Constantinople, that goodly Patriarchall seat of the
World. Concerning Nicephorus and Rhenanus, their own express words shall
here be laid open to the Reader. Nicephorus, after he has told us what
Nectarius did, immediately adds these words: Nicepho. lib. 12. cap. 28.
Quem etiam fere Orientales Episcopi omnes sequuti sunt: Whom almost all the
Bishops of the East did follow and imitate. Again, he adds toward the end
of that Chapter these words. Auricular Confession is not necessary.
Itaque de quorundam, maxim vero Eudaemonis Ecclesiae eius Presbyteri, patria
Alexandrini Consilio, ne postea in Ecclesia Presbyter paenitentiarius esset,
Nectarius statuit; suadentibus illis, vt cuique permitteretur pro conscientia
et fiducia sua communicare, et de immaculatis mysterijs participare: Therefore
Nectarius being advised by sundry, especially by Eudaemon an Elder of that
Church, borne in Alexandria, made a Decree through their persuasion, that from
that day, no Priest should hear the Confessions of the penitentes, but that
every one should be permitted to communicate and to be partaker of the holy
Mysteries, as his own Conscience and Faith did move him. Rhenan. in annot. in
lib. Tertul. de pae.
Beatus Rhenanus, after he had discoursed at large, how the Ancient Church
appointed Priests over the penitent, that they might give them counsel how
to make satisfaction according to the Canons which themselves did not
understand: and withal had proved out of S. Cyprian, S. Chrysostom, S.
Basil, S. Ambrose, S. Hierome, S. Bid, Tertullian, Hesychius, Theodulphus,
Theodorus, Bertramus, Rabanus, and Nectarius, (all which he alleged for his
opinion,) he delivered his own judgment in these words: Non aliam ob causam
complurimi hic testimonijs vsi s^mus, quam ne quis admiretur Tertullianu^ de
clancularia illa admissoru^ confessione nihil loquutum; quae quantum coijcimus,
penitus id temporis ignorabatur: For no other cause have I here used the
testimonies of so many Writers, but least any should marvel, that Tertullian
spoke nothing of that secret Confession, which (as I think) was utterly
unknown at that time. Lo, Auricular Confession not heard of in the ancient
Church
Lo, Tertullian spoke not one word of Auricular confession, as the great
learned Papist Rhenanus tells us: And he yields this reason thereof; viz.
because Auricular or Secret Confession, was wholly unknown in those days. I
further add for the accomplishment of this Conclusion, that which the said
Rhenanus cites out of a famous and learned Papist Geilerius; These are the
words: Popish Confession is impossible, even by the confession of Papists.
Thomas Aquinas et Scotus, homines nimium arguti, confessionem hodie talem
reddiderunt, vt Johannes ille Geilerius grauis ac sanctus Theologus, qui tot
annis argentorati concionatus est, apud amicos suos saepe testatus sit, iuxta
eorum denteroseis impossible esse confiteri: But Tho. Aquinas and Scotus, men
too much delighted with subtilties, have brought Confession this day to such a
pass, that Johannes Geilerius, a grave and reverend Divine, and a Preacher a
long time at Argent^ratu^, said many a time unto his friends; that it was
impossible for a man to make his Confession, according to their Traditions. Out
of these words, I note first; Mark well for Gods sake.
that the vain curious distinctions of the Schoole-Doctors, have brought much
mischief into the Church of God. Which if a Papist had not spoken it, would
seem incredible to the world. Secondly, that it is impossible for a Papist to
make his Confession, according to the Popish Law. And consequently, Who will
not be at defiance with Popery, that deeply pondereth these things.
that all Papists by Popish Doctrine, must perish everlastingly. Mark well my
words (gentle Reader,) as thou art careful of thine own salvation. The
Papists teach us to hold for an Article of our Belief, that we are bound to
make our Confessions as the Popes Law prescribes: that is, as Aquinas (whose
Doctrine two Popes have confirmed for Authentical) and Scotus (the Popes
Doctor subtilis) have set down the same. And for all that, Geilertus a Papist
himself and a great learned man, complained often to his friends; that none
could possibly perform the same. Now then, since on the one side Popish
Confession must be made, and that under pain of damnation: and since on the
other side, none possibly can make the same, as it is commanded; it follows
of necessity, Out upon Popery, it is flat^e Heresy.
by Popish doctrine; that Papists must be damned eternally. Thirdly, that many
living among the Papists, do externally seem to obey the Popes Law; who in
their hearts, detest a great part of their late hatched Romish Religion. This
is evident, by the secret complaint of the learned Papist Geilerius; who told
that to his trusty friends, which he durst not disclose to others. Yea, God
has even among the Papists in Italy and Rome, many thousands, which have
not, or do not this day, bow their knee to Baal. Read my Suruay, Suruay, part.
3. cap. 12.. page 504.
and it will satisfy thee in this behalf. Let us now hear our Jesuit, and
confute his fond cauils and ridiculous sophistications.

B. C.
Scotus enquireth by what Law a man is bound to Confession, and determines
first in general, that the precept must grow from one of these Laws; either
from the Law of Nature, or the Law positive of God, or the Law of the Church:
And descending to particulars, he resolves first, that we are not bound by
the Law of Nature. Nextly, he disputes, whether it grows from the precept
of the Church; and not liking that opinion, he proceeds to the next member,
and says: To be short, it seems more reasonable to hold the second member;
that Confession falls under the positive Precept of God. But then we must
consider (says Scotus) whether it be found explicitly in the Gospel
immediately from Christ, Scotus can not tell what to say of their Popish
Confession.
because it is manifest (quoth he) that it is not in the old Law; or whether
it be from him expressly in some of the Apostles doctrine: or if neither so
nor so; whether then it was given of Christ by word only, and published to the
Church by the Apostles? And having made this triple Division, how Confession
might come by the Precept of God: that is, either first commanded by him in
the Gospel; or else secondly, to be found in some of the Apostles writings;
or lastly, instituted of Christ by word of mouth only. And having disputed of
the first two members, with dislike of the second, he concludes, that we must
either hold the first member; to weete, that it comes from the Law of God
published by the Gospel: or if that be not sufficient, we must say the third,
that it is of the positive Law of God, published by Christ to the Apostles; but
published by the Apostles to the Church, without all Scripture.

T. B.
I answer: first, that albeit our Jesuit uses much babbling, Lay away
unwritten Traditions, and Popery is at an end.
turning himself this way, that way, and every way, to anoyde and cassire (if
it were possible,) the verdict and censure of their subtle Doctor Scotus; yet
is all that he says in this Chapter, as also all that any other Jesuit or
Papist in the world is able to say in the same subject, soundly and most
evidently refuted, in the sixth Conclusion aforegoing. For the last and best
Resolution that Scotus could invent, (after he had disputed the Question pro et
contra, so profoundly as his wits could conceive,) was even this and no
other; viz. that Popish Auricular Confession is not grounded upon Christ's
Gospel or Apostolical writing, but only and solely upon unwritten
Tradition; which is an huge and deep Gulf, without any bottom. If the sixth
Conclusion be duly pondered, and understood aright, the Jesuits back is at
the wall. Yet I will add thereto one other Confirmation, which is deduced and
plainly related in the Popes own Decrees: these are the express words. De
Paenit. Distinct. 1. cap. quamuis.
Quidam Deo solummodo confiteri debere peccata dicunt, vt Graeci. Quidam vero
Sacerdotibus confitenda esse percensent, vt tota fere Ecclesia sancta. Quod
vtrumque non sine magno fructu intra sanctam fit Ecclesiam; ita dumtaxat, vt
Deo qui remissor est peccatoru^ peccata nostra confiteamur: Some say, we must
Confess our sins only to God, as the Greeks do. Other some say, we must
Confess them unto Priests, as does almost the whole Church. Either of which is
done with great good, within the holy Church; so only, that we Confess our
sins to God, who is the forgiuer of sins. Thus are we taught, by the Popes
own sweet dear Decrees, published in print, to the view of the whole world.
Out of which Decree, I observe these memorable documentes for the help of the
Reader. Greek Church never confessed their sins unto Priests, but unto God
alone: Of which Church for all that, the Presidentes and Governors were most
holy and learned Fathers; viz. S. Epiphanius, S. Chrysostom, S. Basil
surnamed the great, S. Gregory Nazianzene, S. Damascene, and many other most
excellent and holy Bishops. saying, that we must Confess our sins to
Priests. Greek Church, should have perished everlastingly. But some will here
demand, how that can be proved? To whom I answer; that the same is plainly
and expressly proved, in the Popes own Decrees: Which is such a testimony
against the Pope and his Popelings, as none greater can be had. The express
words of the Popish Decrees, have already sounded in our ears. De paenit.
did. 1. cap. quamuis.
This mine Observation is confirmed, by the plain words of the same Decrees;
where it is freely confessed, that that opinion, which holds sins only to
be confessed unto God of necessity, is true, lawful, and honest. Let the
words of the Decree be well marked, because it shows all the holy Fathers of
the Greek Church, to confound the Pope, and all his Jesuited Popelings. But
let us hear the verdict of a famous popish Cardinal of Rome. Cardinal
Caietanus (as we have seen already,) avouches constantly, that Auricular and
Secret confession, is against Christ's holy Institution; as is also the
Precept, that compels us to frequent the same. For the better explication of
this famous Cardinals Assertion, (because the Pope and his Jesuits can not
endure to hear the same) I will here lay open before the eyes of the
indifferent Reader, the best answer that the Papists have, or can invent
against the same. Josephus Angles that famous Popish Bishop, (not well
pleased with the Popish Cardinal, as it may seem) writes of his Doctrine, in
this manner. Ios. Angl. in. 4. S. part. 1. page ^54.
Hinc intelliges cauendum esse Caietanum super Joan. cap. 20. vbi duos errores
affirmauit; vnum est, institutam fuisse ^ Christo Confessionem voluntariam, cum
sit ab Ecclesia definitum necessariam esse ad salutem. Nam quod est
voluntarium, vt religionis ingressus, non est ad salutem necessarium. Alterum,
scilicet, modum confitendi ad aurem non esse a Christo institutum. Et hic error
est in Conc. Trident. damnatus: Hence may thou understand, that we ought to
take heed of Caietane upon the 20. of John, where he affirms two errors:
the one is, that Christ instituted Confession voluntary, albeit the Church
defined the same, to be necessary to salvation: The other is, that Christ did
not institute Confession Auricular, which is made in the Priests ear. And in
the next page, the same Angles tells us, Ios. Angles vbi supra, page 255.
that the Council of Trent did of purpose condemn Caietans opinion. By the
doctrine of this great Learned Papist, (who was a Cardinal of Rome and a Friar
Dominican,) we see clearly these three points: First, that the best learned
Popish Doctors condemn Popery, and justify the doctrine of the Church of
England. Secondly, that Auricular Confession was voluntary in the days of
Cardinal Caietane, The best learned Papists, do utterly condemn Popery for
the New religion.
who lived above a thousand years after Christ. Thirdly, that this Cardinal
gave such a deadly wound to Popish Confession, (a Ragge of the New religion,)
that the Council of Trent could find no better remedy, but to condemn his
Opinion as Heretical. Wisely therefore does the Popish Bishop Angles exhort
his Readers, to beware of Caietane, Bonauenture, Hugo, Panormitane, and the
Popish Gloss; because they all with the Popes dear Canonistes tell us
constantly, that Popish Confession has no better ground, then pure Man's
invention. And consequently, all such may justly be deemed as blind as Beetles;
that do not see Popish Auricular Confession, to be a rotten Ragge of the New
religion.

The Jesuits Seventh Chapter, Of Popish Venial sins.
COncerning Popish Venial sins, I will first set down and lay open to the
Reader, the state and truth of the Controversy now in hand: and that done,
refute and refell the Jesuits counterfeite and pretensed Answer to the same.

The 1. Conclusion.
Every Sin is mortal of it own nature. I prove it sundry ways: Ezech.
cap. 18. verse. 4.
Anima quae peccauerit, ipsa morietur: The soul that sins, it shall die.
Paul teaches us, that, The reward of sin, is death. Romans 6.23.
S. John affirms every Sin, to be (...); that is to say, The transgression
of Gods Law: for so does Ben. Arias Montanus that famous Popish Linguist, Ar.
Mont. in 1. Ioh. 3.
translate the Greek word; and therefore, no denial can be made thereof.
Sin, and signifying, a declining or swaruing from the right way, does
emphatically and plainly confirm the same. S. Bid, Dionisius Carthusianus,
and Nicolaus Lyranus, do all three with uniform assent, expound S. John of
Mortal sin. S. Bid (who for his Learning and Virtue, was renowned
throughout the Christian world, and thereupon surnamed Venerabilis) has these
express words: Beda in 1. Ioh. 3.
Virtus huius sententiae facilius in lingua Graecorum, qua edita est Epistola,
compraehenditur. Siquidem apud eos iniquitas (...) vocatur, quod significat
quasi contra legem vel sine lege factum. Siquidem lex graece (...) appellatur.
Sequitur; sed et Latinum nomen eidem rationi congruit, quod iniquitas quasi
aequitati aduersa nu^cupatur. Quia quicunque peccat, contrarius nimirum
aequitati diuinae legis peccando existit: The force and efficacy of this
sentence, is more easily perceived in the Greek tongue, in which the Epistle
was written: for, Iniquity with them, is called (...), which signifies, As
done against Law, or without Law: for the Law is called in Greek, (...). The
Latin word also agrees to the same reason, because it is called Iniquity, as
being against Equity: For every one that sins, is by reason of sin,
contrary to the equity of Gods Law. Dionysius Carthusianus a famous and
learned Papist, has these express words. Carthus. in. 1. John. 3.
Lex autem diuina est aequitas ipsa; sicque mortale peccatum est iniquitas; id
est, non aequitas, vtpote violatio aequitatis: The Law of God is Equity it
self; and consequently, Iniquity, that is, not Equity, as the trangression
of Equity, is a mortal sin. Lyranus an other famous Popish Writer, has
these words. Lyr. in. 1. John. 3.
Peccatum est transgressio legis diuinae. Lex autem diuina est ipsa aequitas;
et ideo in omni peccato mortali est aequitatis corruption, et per consequens,
iniquitas: Sin is the transgression of Gods Law; and the Law of God is
Equity it self: And therefore in every mortal sin, there is corruption of
Equity; and consequently, there is Iniquity. Moses pronounces every one
accursed, Deuteronomy. 27.25. Gal. 3.10.
that keeps not the whole Law. Iacobus Alma^nus, Durandus, Jo. Gersonus,
Michael Baius, and Bishop Fisher,) not able to answer the reasons against
Venial sins, do freely and constantly affirm without all Ands or ^ffes,
that every Sin is mortal of it own nature. Our reverend Bishop Roffensis
has these express words. Roffensis art. 32 aduers. Luther. p. 32^.
Quod peccatum Veniale solum ex Dei miseri o^dia Ventale sit, in hoc tecum
sentio: That a Venial sin is only Venial through the mercy of God, (not of
it own nature,) therein do I agree unto you. Lo, the Popish glorious Martyr
my Lord of Rochester, (who was as learned as any Bishop or Pope of Rome),
confesses honestly and truly, that every Sin is mortal of it own nature.
The famous and great learned man Ioannes Gersonus (otherwise a great Papist)
can not deny this verity: for these are his words. Gers. de vit. spi^. lect.
1. page ^.
Nulla offensa Dei est Venialis de se, nisi tantummodo per respectum ad Diuinam
misericordiam, qui non vult de facto quamlibet offensa^ imputare ad morte^, cum
illud posset iustissime. Et ita concluditur, quod peccatu^ mortale et veniale
in esse tali non distinguuntur intrinsece et essentialiter, sed solum per
respectum ad Diuinam gratiam, quae peccatum istud imputat ad paenam mortis, et
aliud non: No offense of God is Venial of it own nature, but only in respect
of Gods mercy, who will not de facto impute every offense to death, although
he might most justly do it. And so I conclude, that Mortal and Venial
sins as such, Popish mortal and Venial sins, are not distinguished
essentially.
are not distinguished intrinsecally and essentially; but only in respect of
Gods grace, which imputes this sin to the pain of death, and not the other.
Many other like sentences the same Learned man has; but these may suffice to
content any reasonable mind. Jacobus Almaynus, Durandus, and Michael Baius
teach the very same Doctrine, as our Jesuit in this Chapter does freely
grant, not able to gainesay the truth therein. Now, out of the Doctrine of
this great Learned man, (who was of high esteem in the Council of Constance,)
I observe these golden Documentes. iustissime, most justly,) for it confounds
our Jesuited Papists, and strikes dead. Mortal and Venial sins, are the
very same intrinsecally and essentially, and do but differ accidentally: Mark
this point well; for it is of great consequence.
that is to say, they differ in accident, but not in essence and nature; in
quantity, but not in quality; in mercy, but not in deformity; in the
subject, but not in the object; in imputation, but not in enormitie; save
only, that the one is a greater Mortal sin, then is the other: For, (as M.
Gerson avouches learnedly,) God may most justly condemn us, for the least
sin we do, howsoever our Jesuits and Iesuited Papists do flatter
themselves, in their cursed deformed Venials.

The Second Conclusion.
Every Sin is against the Law of God; and not only besides the Law, as the
Popish Thomistes and Jesuits would have it. I prove it by many arguments.
Mat. 12. v. 36.
at the general doom; as our Lord Jesus tells us: which doubtless we
should not be bound to do, if the least idle word were not against Gods Law.
For, how can God a most just Judge, condemn us justly for that sin, which of
it own nature is Venial? He can not do it, for his Justice sake. The Jesuit
S. R. in his pretensed Answer to the Downe-fall of Popery, is bold with God
in that behalf: These are his express words. S.R. Page 268.
He is no wise person, who will fall out, and be offended for ever with his
friend for every triffle; as the taking up of a Straw: nor he is a just
Prince, who should inflict death for stealing a Pin. And I believe Bell would
think himself unjustly handled, if he were so dealt withal: Wherefore, if
God should do this, we should neither account him a wise Friend, nor a just
Prince. O saucy Friar! thy impudency is intolerable.
These are the words of S. R. that shameless Jesuit, whom B. C. our Friar his
brother, calls a Learned man. S. Austin defines Sin thus: Peccatum est
transgressio Legis: Aug. de cons. Euang. lib. 2. C. 4. cont. faust. lib. 22.
cap. 27.
Sin is a transgression of the Law. The same holy Father in an other place,
defines Sin in this manner: Peccatum est dictum, velfactum, vel concupitum
aliquid, contra Legem aeternam: Sin is a word, deed, or thought against the
eternal Law (of God.) And what the eternal Law is, he shows in the words
next following, which are these. Lex aeterna est ratio Diuina vel voluntas Dei,
ordinem naturalem conseruari iubens, perturbari vetans: The eternal Law is the
reason or will of God, which commands the order of Nature to be kept, and
forbids it to be broken. Ambrose defines Sin after the same manner, in
these express words. Ambros. de parad. C. 8.
Quid est. N. peccatum, nisi preuaricatio Legis diuinae, et caelestium
inobedientia praeceptorum? For what is Sin, but the transgression of Gods
law, and disobedience to his heavenly precepts? Lo, Sin (says S. Ambrose)
is nothing else, but the Transgression of Gods law: that is to say, nothing
else but (...), as S. John terms it; and as Arias Montanus does interpreat
it. Josephus Angles that famous Popish Friar and Bishop, teaches the same
doctrine, even in that Book which he dedicated to the Pope himself: these are
his express words. Josephus Angles in 4 S.P. 215.
Omne peccatum veniale est alicuius Legis transgressio. Patet, quia omne
veniale est contra rectam rationem; et agere contra rationem, est agere contra
Legem naturale^, praecipientem, non esse a regula rectae rationis deuiandum.
Every Venial sin, is the transgression of some Law. This is evident, because
every Venial sin is against right reason: and to do against right reason,
is to do against the law of Nature; which commands us not to decline or
swerve from the rule of right reason. The same religious Friar and learned
Popish Bishop, has in an other place, these words. Iose. Angles in 2. sent.
page 249.
Regula qua bonitas nostrarum actionum mensuratur, vel est temporalis, et est
recta ratio nostri intellectus; vel est aeterna, quae est voluntas diuina, cui
subordinatur temporalis. Ideo. N. aliquid est contra rectam rationemque est
contra voluntatem Dei, quae est regula aeterna. Et defectus istarum regularum,
est vniuersa malitia nostrarum operationum: The rule with which the goodness of
our actions is measured, is either temporal; Mark well this Popish Doctrine,
for it confounds the Pope.
and it is the right reason of our understanding: or else it is eternal; which
is the will of God, to which the temporal is subordinate. For therefore is any
thing against right-reason, because it is against the will of God, which is the
eternal rule: And the defect of these rules, is the whole malice of our
actions. This is the constant and plain Doctrine of the Popish Bishop, which
he was bold to present to the Popes Holiness; where it found kind
acceptance, and therefore is, and must be authentical, though it give our
Holy Father a deadly blow. Out of which learned Discourse, I observe these
worthy Lessons. Deuteronomy. 27.25. Gal. 3. v 10. Iacobi. 2. v. 10.
S. James tells us plainly, That whosoever shall keep the whole Law, and
but offend in any one precept, is guilty of all. and all workers of
Iniquity. Odisti omnes qui operantur iniquitatem, perdes omnes qui loquuntur
Mendacium: Thou hate all workers of Iniquity; thou will destroy every one
that is a Liar. Thus says the holy Prophet of God, in the spirit and person of
God. Out of which words, I observe two points of great consequence. First,
that where all are comprised, This Argument strikes dead.
there not one among all, is excepted: and consequently, the sacred Text is to
be understood, even of every least Sinner, and of every least Liar. Secondly,
that where Destruction is for Punishment inflicted, there Gods Law doubtless is
transgressed: and so is every Popish Venial sin, against the Law. in rei
veritate, and in the truth of the matter. Qui non est mecum, contram^ est; et
qui non congregat mecu^, spargit: Mat. 12. v. 30.
He (says our Master Christ) that is not with me, is against me; and he
that gathers not with me, scatters. Durandus a famous and learned Popish
Writer, confuteth the fondly invented distinction, of their Popish Canonized
Saint Aquinas; which the Pope and his Jesuits hold, for the maintenance of
late start-vp Popery: to weete, that Venial sins are praeter Legem, non
contra: Besides the Law, but not against the Law. These are the express words
of Durandus: Durand. in 2. sent. Did. 42. q. 6.
Ad argumentum dicendum, quod omne peccatum est contra Legem Dei, naturalem,
vel inspiratam, vel ab eis deriuatam: To the Argument answer must be made;
that every Sin, is against the Law of God, either natural, or inspired; or
derived from them. And this opinion of M. Durand, is this day commonly defended
in the Schools. So does Friar Joseph tell our holy Father the Pope: these are
his words: Ios. Angles, in 2. sent. page 275.
D. Thomas et eius sectatores tenent, peccatum Veniale non tem esse contra
Legem, qua^ praeter Legem. Sequitur: Durandus tamen et alij permulti hanc
sententia^ impugnant, affirmantes peccata venialia esse contra mandata. Et haec
opinio modo in scholis videtur communion: S. Thomas and his followers hold,
that a Venial sin is not so much against the Law, as besides the Law. But
Durand and very many others impugn this opinion, auouching Venial sins, to
be against the commandments. And this opinion seems now adays to be more
common in the Schools. The Romish religion changes often.
Here I wish the reader to note by the way, out of the word ( modo, now
adays,) the mutabilitie of late start-vp Romish religion; as also the
dissentio^ of popish Schoole-doctors in the mysteries of their faith and
Doctrine. See and note well the Jesuits Antepast, P. 109. et. page 119.
For in that their Bishop the Friar says* ( modo, now adays,) he gives us
to understand, that their Romish Doctrine is now otherwise, then it was of old
time, and in former ages. And, in that he tells us of the great dissension,
amongst their Doctors; he very emphatically lays open to the Reader the
uncertainty of Romish faith and Religion. For doubtless, if their tyrannical
Inquisition, and the daily fear of Fire and Faggot, were taken out of the way,
the Popes ridiculous and plain Heathenish Excommunications, with his Decrees
and Definitions in matters of Faith, would be of small account, and trodden
under foot. This is a most worthy Note, and must be well remembered. For the
Old Roman religion was Catholic, pure, I highly reverence the old Roman
Religion.
and found; and with it, do not I contend. I only impugn the late start-vp
Romish Faith and Doctrine, which the Pope and his Romish Schoolmen have
brought into the Church. Vega a great Learned Papist, very famous in the Church
of Rome, does not only teach every Venial sin to be against the Law; but
withal he constantly affirms, that therefore none living, Away with Popish
works of Supererogation.
can possibly keep the whole Law at once. For, albeit he hold, that every
part of the Law may be kept at some time; yet does he constantly deny that the
whole (...) kept at once: Vide Bellarm. tom. 3.^0 l. 1216.
because one parti^^^^^ broken with Popish Venials against the Law, while an
other is kept.

The third Conclusion.
Albeit every Sin be Mortal of it own nature; yet are not all sins equal
and alike, but one greater then an other. Mat. 5. V. 22.
I prove it Raca,) to be guilty of a Council; him that calls his brother
Fool, to be guilty of Hel-fire. Mat. 10. V. 15. There is great nequalitie in
mortal sins.
that the Sins of the Sodomites and of the Gomorrhaeans, shall be punished more
remissely in the day of Judgment, then the sins of those Citizens, who would
not receive the Apostles, nor hearken to their preaching. Tyrus and Sidon shall
be more remissely dealt withal in judgment, then Corozain and Bethsaida. The
case is clear, Luke 10. V. 14. Note Chap. 28.
I need not stand about it: For, every Child can tell us, that it is a greater
Mortal sin to steal a goodly Gelding, or a great fat Ox, then it is to
steal a fat Calfe, or a fat Hog: Yea, a greater sin to kill a Man,
then to eat an Egg in Lent; though Popish inflicted punishment, does not ever
so insinuate. But hereof more at large, when I come to speak of Popish Lent.

The fourth Conclusion.
Venial sins of their own nature, are against Charity, and do break
friendship and amity with God. I prove this Conclusion, against the Pope,
his Jesuits, and all Jesui^ed Popelinges (whether in England, at Rome, or
wheresoever else*) by manifold and most important arguments, authorities, and
reasons. Esa. 59. V. 2.
that our sins have made a separation between God and us. 2. Cor 6. V. 15.
Righteousness with Iniquity; Christ with Belial. Jesuits, must either deny
that Christ hates Venial sins, which they dare not do: Psalm. 5. V. 4.7.
or else that Venial sins break friendship with him. For doubtless, that
which a man hates, he neither loves, nor is in friendship with it. Yet the
Jesuit S. R. (whom his brother B. C. calls, a Learned man,) is bold thus to
write. S. R. page 270. page 271.
Venial sin destroys not Charity, nor breaks Friendship with God* which
is the end for which the Law was made. Again, in an other place thus: S.R.
page 271.
For Venial sins whencesoeuer they come to be such, break not Friendship
with God. Ioh. 14. V. 23.
he will keep his Word. Again he says; That none can be his Friends, nor
abide in his Love, unless they do keep his Commandments. Again; Ioh. 15.
V. 10.14.
The mark and badge of those that are in Gods Favor, is the keeping of his
Precepts. For, He that has my Commandments, says Christ, and keeps
them; Ioh, 14 V. 21.
he it is that Loves me. And yet (as we have seen in the Second Conclusion)
every Least sin that can be named, is a breach and transgression of Gods Law.
S.R. page 27^.
that do his Will, and conform themselves to his Law. Ioh. 15. V. 14.
Vos amici mei estis, si feceritis quae ego praecipio vobis: You (says our
Master Christ) are my Friends, if you shall do the things which I command
you. Deu. 27. V. 25. Gal. 3. V. 10.
And consequently, every Popish Venialist (even he who commits the Least
sin of all,) breaks Friendship and Amity with God: unless perhaps our
Jesuits will say, (which I trow they neither will nor dare say) that one may be
of God accursed, and still abide in Gods friendship, love, and favor. Mat. 12.
V. 36.
and consequently, every Least sin breaks Friendship with God. Hence
arises an Argument insoluble, which strikes all Papists dead: This is it,
mark it well. All Sins, which must of necessity be confessed, break the
friendship and favor of God: but all Popish so supposed Venials, must of
necessity be confessed; Ergo, all Popish Venials, break the friendship and
favor of God. The consequence is in form syllogisticall and therefore it may
not in any case be denied. It is in the first of the three Figures, and in the
Mode, In prima Figura, et modo (Barbara.)
which the Logicians call ( Barbara.) The Proposition is proved, because no
reason can be alleged, or in truth be pretended, why any man should be urged
to acknowledge Gods disfavor, who is and continues in his favor. For which
respect (as it seems) Martinus Nauarrus (a famous Popish Canonist, and a man
very skillful in Theology, Nauar. in Euchirid. Cap. 21. Nu. 34.
) tells us roundly without blushing, that Popish Venials must not be
confessed of necessity: these are his express words. Quibus consequens est,
posse quem si velit, confesso vno peccato venials, alterum tacere: Upon which
it follows, No sin so small, which breaks not Gods favor. For we must
neither turn to the right hand, nor to the left. Deuteronomy. 5.32.
that one may if he list, confess one Venial sin, and conceal an other. In
which Assertion, he unawares destroys Popish Auricular Confession: For, the
Scripture commands the Confession of all sins alike: and consequently, if
Popish Venial sins be not subject to their Auricular confession, neither are
their Mortal sins subject to the same. No text of the holy Scripture
(neither in the Old, nor in the New Testament) can truly be alleged, which
urges the confession of the one, more then it does of the other. For which
cause, Caiet. in 20. cap. Johan.
Caietanus that famous Popish Cardinal, affirms Popish Confession to be
voluntary, and referred by Christ himself, to the free election of every one.
Josephus Angles and others, are of the same opinion with Navarre. The
Assumption I prove out of Christ's own words, which are these. Mat. 12. V.
36.
But I say to you, that men shall give an account in the day of judgment, of
every idle word they speak. Now every Child knows, that to give an account
of our Sins, is to acknowledge and confess the same. I prove it out of the
Jesuit S. R. his words, whom the Jesuit B. C. will needs have a great
Learned man. This Jesuit fore frighted with the fall he got, while he was
bickering with the Downe-fall of Popery, answers in these terms. S.R. page
271.
I answer (quoth he,) that we must give an account for every idle word; not
because they be against Law, but because they be beside it. And Bell (says
he) will beat his Horse, not only when he turns back, but also when he
starteth out of the way. Thus answers our poor begging Friar, God will beat^
our Jesuits, for starting out of the way of his Commandments.
being at his wits end what to say. He confounds himself, and perceives
it not. True it is, that Bell will beat his Horse, when he starteth out of the
way. And true it is in like manner, that God will beat our Jesuits for their
cursed Venials, when they in committing them, start out of the way of his
Commandments: and he will withal tell them, that he hates all workers of
Iniquity; Psalm. 5. v. ^*
and so them with their deformed Venials. He will also tell them, that he does
not acknowledge them for his Friends; seeing they do not his will, nor walk
in his ways. Ioh. 15. v. 14.
because every Least sin of it own nature, auer^eth from God, and can not
possibly be referred to him: Nullum om^ino peccatum potest in Deum referri.
and consequently, it neither does nor can enjoy the friendship and favor of
God. And our Jesuits blaspheame the name of God, when they most irreverently
and very brutishly affirm; that God should be unjust and unwise, if he should
be offended with them for their so supposed Venials. The Jesuit S.R. has
these express words. S.R. Page 268.
He is no wise person, who will fall out and be offended for ever with his
Friend for every trifle, as the taking of a Straw: nor he is a just Prince,
who should inflict death for stealing a Pin: O horrible Blasphemy! what will
not Jesuits write?
And I believe Bell would think himself unjustly handled, if he were so
dealt withal: Wherefore, if God should do this, we should neither account
him a wise Friend, nor a just Prince. Thus does our Friar in the name of all the
cursed Iesuitical crew, take upon him roundly to censure God Almighty. To
which horrible and blaspheamous Assertion of our presumptuous Jesuit, I
answer to his everlasting confusion (unless he repentin time, Mark well my
words.
) in this manner. Esa. 55. v. 8. Romans 9. v. 20.21.22. Romans 11. v. 33.^4.55.
For, My thoughts (says Esaias,) are not your thoughts; neither are your
ways, my ways, says the Lord. Gods Will, is the Rule, by which all man's
thoughts, words, and works, must be measured: But Man's Will, is no Rule or
Law to measure Gods actions, or to direct his most Just, most Holy, and most
Pure Purposes, Ordinances, and Decrees. Mat. 10. v. 28.
but God can punish both the outward acts, and the inward thoughts. Man can
but punish the temporal injury done to man; but God can punish both that, and
the eternal injury done to his most sacred Majesty, surpassing Omnipotency,
and ineffable Deity. Offense done to Man, is finite and limited; but offense
done to God, is infinite and illimited. And consequently, when we offend God,
whose person is of infinite Worthiness, of infinite Majesty, of infinite
Power; our offense obiectiuely must needs be infinite, howsoever our Jesuits
and Jesuited Papists flatter themselves in their Venials. Jesuits judgment,
are great and heinous Sins, in the tribunal of our Lord Jesus. Genes. 3. v.
6. Genesis 19.26. Limbus Pu^rorum pontifi^ius.
Adams eating of the Apple, was one of our Jesuits trifles. The looking back
of Lots wife, was an other. The sin of Infantes in their nativity, was an
other: For which respect, sundry of their best learned Doctors have invented a
third place beside Heaven and Hell, for those Infantes which die without
Baptism. Superfluous idle Words, an other. All which for all that, Every sin
is of infinite deformity* ^alt^m obiectiue.
are heinous and grievous Sins with God. And no maruayle, seeing the Least
sin that can be named, is against the infinite Majesty of God: and
consequently, of infinite deformity. And our Jesuit S. R. shows himself to
be a very noddie, while he publishes these words. S. R. Page 277.
For who will say, that a little superfluous Laughter, breaks the order of
Nature. Every Child of God will say it, seeing it is against gods Law.
Mark well gentle Reader, and thou shall see Popery stricken dead. When our
Jesuit S. R. was not able to answer the Authorities of the holy Fathers, laid
open by T. B. in the Downe-fall of Popery; which did evidently convince, that
the Breaking of the order of Nature, was against the eternal Law and Will of
God; he was enforced to say, (as there is to be seen in the Page noted in
this Margent, S. R. page 276.277.
) that the Fathers ( S. Austen and S. Ambrose) defined such Sin, as breaks
the order of Nature; which also is Mortal Sin, not Venial. In which words,
he unawares confounds himself: For, The Jesuit confounds himself, while
he grants every sin against the order of nature, to be mortal.
he truly says against himself; That the Sin which is against the Order of
Nature, is a Mortal sin indeed. But withal he says untruly, That a little
superfluous Laughter, breaks not the order of Nature. For if it be true, (as
it is most true,) which Christ himself has told us: viz. That every idle and
superfluous word, breaks the order of Nature, in that it is against the Law
eternal: Mat. 12. V. 36.
it follows by a necessary consequence, that every superfluous and idle
Laughter, breaks the order of Nature; in that it is against the Law eternal,
to which the Law and Order of Nature is subordinate. To which I add to second
my former proof, that the order of Nature as Nature, (to weete, The order of
Nature before Adams fall.
of Nature before, not after Adams fall,) was pure, free, and void of every
spot, bleamish, excess, defect, or other fault whatsoever; and consequently,
of every vain, idle, and superfluous Laughter. But perhaps our Friar will say,
that idle and superfluous Laughter, is besides the order of Nature, not against
the same; as he before affirmed his Venials to be besides the Law, but not
against the Law of God. If he so do, the confutation is at hand. First,
because Christ says plainly, Mat. 12* V. 30.
that, He is against him, whosoever is not with him. Every sin is against
Gods Law.
Again, because Vega, Durandus, Almaynus, Baius, Gersorus, and all the Popish
Schoole-doctors of best esteem, do avouch plainly and resolutely; That every
Sin, even the least that can be named, is against the Law. Whereupon, Vega
that great Learned Papist, (a man of high esteem in the late Council of
^rent*) concluded egregiously and learnedly, Away therefore with Popish works
of supererogatio^.
That the whole Law is impossible to be kept at once. For, albeit he grant,
that every part of the Law may be kept; yet does he withal confess, that
while we keep one part thereof, we can not but break an other. Ninthly, No no
prin^ipaliter. S. R. page 186.
because our Friar S. R. that Learned man, (as his brother Jesuit B. C.
styles him,) confesses lustily (though unawares against himself,) that
involuntarie Concupiscence is naught, evil, and disorderly; because it is
against the rule of Reason: and much more doubtless is superfluous voluntary
Laughter, against the order of Nature, and rule of Reason: and consequently, it
breaks friendship with God, as being quite opposite to the eternal Law,
which is his divine Will and Reason. the same Jesuit freely confesses in an
other place, S. R. page 278.
That the Least Sins want equity and conformity to Gods Law: and
consequently, he must volens nolens confess withal; That his falsely supposed
Venials, are truly Mortals, against Gods friendship and his eternal Law. Now
let us hear our Jesuit speak, for the honor of the Pope.

B. C.
The common opinion most received, and most sound, is, that some Sins of
their own nature be small, or Venial; others great and Mortal. Bishop
Fisher, Lo, the Jesuit unawares grants the truth, against his Pope and
himself.
and some four other, alleged by Bell, think that all Sins of their own
nature, be Mortal; and that it proceeds from the Mercy of God, that some be
Venial; because he would not upon diverse smaller Sins, impose so great a
punishment: But notwithstanding this small difference, neither B. Fisher, nor
any of the others, deny Venial Sins, as Bell and his consorts does.

T. B.
I answer; Jesuit here confesses, to their confusion: Five great learned
Papists are of Bells opinion.
For he freely grants, that the great Learned Papists whom I named, ( viz.
Jacobus Almaynus, Durandus, Gersonus, Michael Baius, and Bishop Fisher,) do
all five constantly hold and defend, that all Sins are Mortal of their own
nature. And withal he tells us, that the Pope and Church of Rome hold the
contrary opinion. Jesuit here teaches us. And my self will not deny, that
some sins respectively are small of their own nature; Note well, that the
Fathers call small sins Venial respectively.
as it is already proved, in the third Conclusion. To which I add, that the
holy Fathers when they speak of Venial sins, do ever understand Small
sins respectively. In which sense, my self do willingly admit Venial
sins; as also, sins Venial by the mercy of God: But withal, I wish the
Reader ever to remember, what Gersonus, Almaynus, Baius, Durandus, and
Roffensis teach us: viz. that every least Sin is Mortal of it own nature;
which is the flat Doctrine I here defend. Roffensis, Baius, Almaynus,
Durandus, and Gersonus, (all being both learned and zealous Papists,) affirm
constantly, the force of truth compelling them, that every Sin is Mortal of
it own nature. Contrariwise, the Pope, his Jesuits, and Jesuited vassals,
affirm, teach, and believe, as an Article of Popish Faith; that many Sins
are Venial, even of their own nature. This notwithstanding, our Jesuit
tells us roundly, See Chap. 2. Conclus. 7.
(though nothing Clerkly,) that the difference is but small. So then, Articles
of Popish faith are small, or great, as it pleases the Pope: His bare Will (as
we have heard and seen,) is a warrant sufficient in every thing; as who can
change the nature of things, (if we will believe him,) and of nothing, make
some thing. Fourthly, that my self hold no Opinion, teach no Article of Faith,
defend no Position; but such Opinions, Positions, and Articles, as the best
learned Papists have holden, The Popes Faith is confuted by Popish Doctors.
taught, and defended, before me: For my woonted manner ever has been, is, and
shall be, to wound the Papists with their own Weapons, and to con^ound the
Pope with his best Learned Proctors.

B. C.
This being so, let us consider, what a notable untruth the Minister offers
to the view of his Readers, when he says; Almaynus, Durandus, Gerson, Baius,
and other famous Papists, not able to answer the reasons against Venial
sins, confess the truth with the Bishop; that every Sin is Mortal: He
does cunningly abuse them in leaving out those words ( of it own nature,)
which ought to be added after their opinion: and himself likewise does add,
in citing of Roffensis immediately before.

T. B.
I answer: Friar speaks of, proceeds from his own lying lips; as by and
by it will appear. Friar does falsely, peeuishly, unchristianly, and
impudently abuse both his Reader and me; Poperi^ without lying, can not be
defended.
when he charge me to abuse my Authors, in leaving out their words. What
words sir Friar, have I left out? These words forsooth, ( of it own nature)
says our Jesuitical Friar. O malicious Jesuit! Where is thine Honesty?
where is thy Christianity? O lying Friar! there is no truth in rotten newly
invented Popery.
where is thy Faith? where is thy Conscience? Art thou become a flat Atheist?
art thou at defiance with true dealing? Thou seems to make thy soul saleable
for the Popes pleasure. Does not thine own Pen condemn thee, when thou
grauntes that I added the same words, in citing of Roffensis immediately
before? Let the indifferent Reader, be an indifferent Judge between us. I
added the words immediately before, as our Friar truly says; it therefore had
been an irksome tantologie, to cite them again in the next words following;
especially, seeing I affirm the Popish Doctors ( Almaynus, Durandus, Gersonus,
and Baius,) to hold and defend the self same opinion, The maine point of the
Controversy.
that Bishop Fisher affirms to be the truth. Again, the Controversy
consists precisely in this special point. viz. Whether every sin be
Mortal of it own nature, or no. I defend the affirmative; the Jesuit, the
negative. And consequently, I must perforce speak of Sins, as they are in
their own nature. O worthy defender, of late start-vp Popery! Thou perceiuest
right well, that Popery is the New religion indeed; and not able to withstand
the truth, nor to answer mine invincible reasons and grounds: Thou fleest
from that which is in question, to impertinent, extrauagant, and frivolous
cauils; so to dazell the eyes of thy Readers, least they behold the newness of
late Romish Religion. Out upon such beggarly Religion, Popery is a beggarly
Religion.
as which can not be defended, but by cauils, coozenage, lying, and deceitful
dealing.

B. C.
After this untruth, immediately follows another: Yea, the Jesuit S. R.
(quoth he) with the advice of his best Learned friends, in his answer to the
Downfall of Popery, confesses plainly and blusheth not thereat, that the
Church of Rome had not defined some sins to be Venial, until the days of
Pius the fifth, and Gregory the 13. which was not fifty years ago. In which
words he blusheth never a whit to slander that Learned man, and wholly to
corrupt his meaning: He says not, that the Church of Rome had not defined
some sins to be Venial, until the days of Pius the fifth, and Gregory the
13. as this licentious castaway corruptly fathereth upon him. For he knew
well, that to believe Venial sins, was an Article long received before the
times of those Popes. But he affirms only, that to hold Venial sins only
to be such by the mercy of God, was censured and condemned by those Popes. O
most impudent Jesuit.
Why did Sir Thomas his sincerity cut away these words ( by the mercy of
God?) Forsooth, because that without lying and corruption, he can object
nothing against Catholic doctrine.

T. B.
I answer; Friar lies egregiously, The Authors Protestation.
when he charge me to slander S. R. his learned Brother: For, upon my
salvation I auerre it, I deal christianly, honestly, and sincerely. I never
change, add, or take away any one jot, of that which I find in mine Authors.
Would to God, our Jesuits did so deal with me. Friar lies impudently, when
he utters these words: ( He says not, that the Church of Rome had not
defined some sins to be Venial, until the days of Pius the fifth, and
Gregory the thirteenth.) For these are S. R. his express words; S. R. Page
281.
True it is, that Bishop Fisher and Gerson were in that error; but that was
both before it was condemned in the Church, as it was since by Pius the fifth,
and Gregory the thirteenth. In which words, the Jesuit S. R. tells us two
memorable points of Doctrine: The One, Mark the falsely supposed error.
that Fisher and Gerson were in an Error: The Other, that the Error was before
the Church had condemned it. So it only remains, duly to examine what the
supposed Error was. The Jesuit B. C. here tells us plainly, if we may
believe him; that the Popes ( Pius and Gregorius) condemned that opinion only,
which holds Venial sins to be only such by the mercy of God. I admit the
Assertion; Sins only Venial by mercy, are mortal of their own nature.
I like the Narration: I only reject the Popes frivolous, unchristian, and
plain heretical condemnation. For I pray you sir Friar, are not those sins
Mortal of their own nature, which are only Venial by mercy and favor*
Does not Venial only by Mercy, exclude Venial by all other ways and
means; For doubtless, whatsoever is Venial of it own nature, can not be
Venial only by Mercy. Only our fond Jesuitical Friar, not able to defend
Popery from being the New religion, is forced for want of matter, to say it.
Nature and Mercy are far differens.
The nature of every thing is intrinsecall and essential to the thing, and
can not be taken away from the thing, without the utter destruction of the
same. But every mean Logitian, every young Gramarian, every witty
Ploughman, and every Boy of discretion, is able to teach and tell our Jesuit;
that Mercy is extrinsecall and mere accidental to the thing, and may be
added or taken away from the thing, without the destruction of the same. This
Ergo, girdeth the Pope.
Ergo, whatsoever is Venial not any other way but by the Mercy of God only,
is undoubtedly Mortal of it own nature. And consequently, seeing all Sins
were Mortal of their own nature, until the days of Pius and Gregorius, as
our Jesuits freely grant; it follows by a necessary and inevitable
illation, that Venial sins of their own nature, were never known to the
Church of God, until the irreligious and plain heretical Decrees of Pius the
fifth, and Gregory the thirteenth: Vixit Pius, A.D. 1565. Vixit Gregor. A.D.
1572.
that is to say, for the space of one thousand, five hundred, threescore, and
five years after Christ. For, the supposed error of Roffensis, Gersonus,
Almaynus, Baius, and Durandus, (who all were very learned Papists; and for
all that, taught and defended every Sin to be Mortal of it own nature,) was
not condemned, (as we see and hear it freely confessed by our Adversaries,)
until the time of Pius the fifth of that name. The truth therefore is this;
viz. that the Church for the space of 1565. years after Christ, believed
every Sin to be Mortal of it own nature. For, (as we have seen already
in the first Conclusion of this Chapter, Concl. 1. huius cap. ex Gersono, et
alijs.
) God may most justly condemn every least Sin to eternal Death and Hell
fire. Yea, as M. Gerson learnedly writes: he that holds the contrary, must
perforce hold withal, that in some case Sin may be done lawfully, and be no
Sin at all. And it is but a very childish and frivolous cavil, to say at our
Friar here does: viz. that it was an Article of Popish Faith long before Pius
the Pope, The Romish Church believes, it can not tell what.
to believe Venial sins. For, such Venialles were of necessity such, either
of their own nature, or else of mercy only. If our Jesuit grant the
latter, I have my desire: it is the truth which I defend. If the former, a
double refutation is at hand. First. because the opinion of Almaynus,
Roffensis, Baius, Durandus, and Gersonus, was very current in the Romish
Church, until the days of Pius and Gregorius, as our Jesuit S. R. affirms,
S. R. page 281.
and the Friar B. C. his dear Brother willingly admits. Again, Venial by
Mercy, can not be Venial of it own nature.
because to be Venial both by Mercy and by Nature, implies contradiction.
The reason is evident; both for that sins Venial of their own Nature, stand
not in need of any Mercy: and also for that Mercy mittigateth that
punishment, which by the Nature of the subject might justly be inflicted. O
miserable Popery! What silly shifts and childish cauils are invented, to
defend thee from being the New Religion. If any shall henceforth call or
think thee the Old Religion, (that shall hear thine age truly discovered,) I
shall think him so wise, as not to know when to come out of the rain.
Thirdly, Tertio Principaliter.
that our Jesuit shows himself more impudent, then Impudency it self;
while he bears his Readers in hand, that I have cut away these words of mine
Author, the Jesuit his Learned brother, ( By the Mercy of God.) For, I
refer my self to the express words of the Jesuit, S. R. page 281.
in his pretensed Answer to the Downe-fall of Popery; which I have truly
recited in the Trial of the New religion, as I will answer at the dreadful
day of doom. Out upon rotten Popery, it consists of lying, and forgerie.
But our Jesuit not able to defend Popery from being the New Religion,
addicteth himself wholly to forgerie, falsehood, and lying: for otherwise,
both he and all his Jesuited crew, are at a Nonplus, and have nothing at all
to say.

B. C.
The same Catholic writer, noted him in the place cited by himself, of two
untruths: The one, for calling Bishop Fisher the Popes Canonized Martyr: the
other, for styling Gerson a Bishop. Neither of which be true: but he skely
passes over them, See and note the trial.
as not knowing (poor wretch) what to say in his own defense: into such
straites does this dominering Doctor drive himself, by his talent of
ouerlashing.

T. B.
I answer; The Jesuit truly is at a Non plus.
whether every Sin be Mortal of it own nature, or no? Our Jesuit being
confounded, and not able to prove any sin to be Venial of it own nature,
answers me thus: That neither Fisher is a Popish canonized Martyr, nor yet
Gerson a Popish Bishop. O worthy defender of the Pope, and of the late
Romish Religion. I demand of our Friar Jesuit, how far it is to London?
He forsooth answers: a Pokefull of Plumbes. I ask him, What he says to
his learned Popish Doctors, ( Almaynus, Baius, Roffensis, Durandus and
Gersonus,) who all with uniform assent affirm resolutely, as the Friar has
confessed, that every Sin is Mortal, A Poke full of Plumbes, is the defense
of Popery.
of it own nature? The Friar almost frighted out of his wits, tells me
roundly, and blusheth not thereat; That neither Gerson is a Bishop, nor Fisher
a Canonized Martyr. Is not this a Learned and Clerkly answer, trow ye? Has
not the Jesuit much to say for the antiquity of Popery, when he flees to
such miserable shifts, pitiful digressions, silly cauils, and ridiculous
euasions? What if Bishop Fisher were not a Popish canonized Martyr? What if
M. Gerson the famous Chancellor of Paris, were not a Bishop? ye know the
Proverb; Cucullus non facit Monachum. Your selves can not deny, that both
Fisher and Gerson were very learned Popish Writers: and so it skilleth not,
whether the one was a Bishop, and the other a canonized Martyr, or no.
Jesuit belieth me here, as his wonted manner is else where; I refer the
censure hereof, to mine Answer in the Downe-fall it self. Gerson was in his
old days the Bishop of Paris; as a little Treatise published by the Doctors of
Paris, and sometime printed or bound in one volume with the Master of
Sentences, plainly avouches to the Reader. Fisher was Canonized privately at
the least; Egomet tum eram testis oculatus.
as Alphonsus the rector of the English College at Rome; did Canonize Campian
in my time, with a White Surplesse on his back; himself then singing a
collect of Martirs, and causing the M. of the Music to sound the Organges,
and all the Students to singe ( Te Deum;) as also, the Archpriest, the
Provincial, the Jesuits, and Jesuited Papists every where, do after their
best manner canonize Sherewin, Nelson, Ballard, and the Gunpowder Iesuited
Popelinges; Their Blood, Bones, Hair, and Apparel, are reserved and honored,
as the Relics of Gods Martirs.
by praying unto them, and by reserving their Blood, Bones, Hair, and
whatsoever once touched them, as the Relics of Gods holy Martirs. Other like
impertinent Vanities he uses in this Chapter: but he ever flees from my
Reasons, and slily passes over the chiefest matters. I have soundly refuted
the Friars Answer, not omitting any thing of moment. See, and note well the
Trial.

The Eight Chapter: Of the Popes Faith.
I Have discoursed of this Subject so largely, See and mark well the 29. and
the. 30 Chapters.
both in my Golden Balance, in the Anatomy of Popish tyranny, in the
Jesuits Antepast; and lastly, in my Christian Dialogue, as more can not be
wished, for the full decision of the truth in that behalf. Howbeit, for the
better contentation of the Christian Reader, I am willing to answer every
point of any moment, through out the whole Chapter.

B. C.
Bell collecteth out of Watsons Books, in this formal manner. First
therefore, if we mean to wring any truth out of the Popes Nose, we must have
recourse to his Holiness, at such time as he is sober, and not when he is
furious, least he become stark mad, and forget the knowledge of the truth.
As though Watson had said, that the Pope is sometime sober, and sometime
furious. He does much wrong him; for his words reported by Bell himself in
this very Chapter, contain no such thing: Only he says; That as the prudent
Greek appealed from Alexander furious, to Alexander sober: so may the
Seculars, notwithstanding any Decree set down by his Holiness by wrong
information, appeal even from the Pope, as Clemens, unto his Holiness, as
Peter. He speaks of Alexander Furious and Sober; and not of the Pope.

T. B.
The appeal of the Priests, is compared to the appeal of Alexander.
Bells Collection, is truly deducted of Watsons words: For, Watson compares
the appealing of the prudent Greek from Alexander furious, to the appealing of
the Seculars from Pope Clemens. Neither can it be thought strange, if Warson
deemed the Popes to be sometimes furious. For first, Pope John was rather
furious then sober, when he kept Women openly to the notorious scandal of the
Church; insomuch, as some of the Cardinals writ to Otto then King of the
Saxons, to come and besiedge Rome, so to afflict him for his sins. Martinus
Polonus, in Chronicho.
The same Pope was rather furious, then sober, when he caused the Cardinals
Nose to be cut off, that gave the counsel; and his hand, that wrote the
Letter. Pope Siluester the second, was furious rather then sober, I ween;
Polonus, vbi supra.
when by covenant he did homage to the Devil, to be preferred to the Popedom.
Pope Formosus was not sober, when wittingly and willingly he committed flat
Perjury. Pope Martin was not sober, when he absolved Formosus of his Oath.
Pope Stephanus the 6. was not very sober, when he caused the dead body of Pope
Formosus to be brought forth into his Consistory, the ornaments Papal to be
taken away, two fingers of his right hand to be cut off, a Laicall habit to be
put on the dead corpse; and all this being solemnly done, the body to be put
into the Grave again. Platina.
Pope Sergius the 3. was not very sober, trow I, Carranza.
when he commanded Pope Formosus (who now had bin dead almost ten years) to
be taken out of his Tomb, and to be set in a Chair with pontifical Attire
upon his back, and then his head to be cut off, and cast into Tyber. Pope
Vrbanus the second, was not sober doubtless, Sigeberius.
when he absolved Subjects from allegiance due unto their Sovereigns;
condemning those that obeyed the King, and absoluing such as took part against
the King, from the crime of Perjury and injustice. Pope Boniface the eight,
was nothing sober, Nanclerus.
when he challenged the right of both Swords; when he deprived Philippe the
French King, and gave his Kingdom to him that could get it. But what need many
words? this point is most plentifully handled in my Christian Dialogue, lately
published: to which I refer the reader for his full satisfaction, concerning
the Popes double person. Read more of Watson in the end of the Second Chapter,
and ponder the same seriously.

B. C.
His rusticall immodestie, and childish scoffing at the Popes Nose, little
becomes the gravity of his Ministershippe: but he that is led up and down
by the Nose like a Buffalo, Mark well the answer.
by the Prince of this world, must to gratify his Master, employ his railing
talent, according to his black inspiration.

T. B.
I answer; Friars black inspiration, may better beseem Pope Benedict the
eight; Petr. Dam. Mar. Polonus.
who (as Petrus Damascenus affirms) was seen riding corporally after his
death, upon a black Horse (the Devil,) and who freely confessed, that
afore-time he was much addicted to robbery and extortion. It may also better
be bestowed on Pope Siluester the second; who (as we have seen) did homage to
the black Devil, and so aspired to the Popedom. Friar makes against the
leading up and down by the nose like a Buffal, will little content either our
Jesuits, or their Pope, after the due recital of the same. This is a true
Narration, of the cruel, The Buffaloes are Beasts, as terrible as Lions.
furious, and raging Buffaloes. My self being student in the English College
at Rome; not long before my arrival in this Kingdom, and on a time walking
abroad to take the air, with many others of the same College; when we came
without one of the Posterne gates of the City, we espied certain Buffaloes
with their keeper at the River side: Which spectacle (as unpleasant to the
eyes, so also most terrible to the heart,) my fellows and dear Contrymen
no sooner beheld, but they betook them selves to their best speed. My self
more bold therein then wise, (for the trust I reposed in the Keeper) would not
at that time amend my pace, and so remained behind alone. Suddenly the
furious, raging, and cruel Buffaloes, brake from their Keeper, and with great
violence came upon me. My Contrymen standing a far off upon the top of
an high Mountain, durst not for their lives aproach, to offer me any comfort,
help, or succor: they neither did, nor could expect any other thing, save
only present and most cruel death. Many yet living, know this to be most true.
Howbeit, the wild, cruel, raging, and most furious Buffaloes, (a thing very
strange, rare, and wonderful; if a miracle, let the prudent and Christian
Reader judge,) did no hurt to me at all; but as it were sported with me, even
as one child plays with another: after awhile, the furious and raging
Buffaloes left me, and in peaceable manner departed from me; at the length, my
fellows beholding the departure of the Buffaloes, and persuading themselves
that I was most pitifully and cruelly slain, came with convenient speed to
visit my dead corpse; but finding me alive, yea, as liue-like as I was before
every whit, (God make me this day and ever thankful for it, and for all
other his manifold mercies and favors toward me) we all returned to the
College, with great joy and speed. The Rector of the College could no way be
persuaded, The Jesuit Alphonsus, was then the Master of the English College.
but that I had received some secret and inward mortal wound; albeit neither
my self felt any, neither could their eyes or wits discern any hurt at all;
save only that my face was something bloody, by reason of the fall I got;
while perceiving the imminent danger, (which before I feared not,) I made haste
to have escaped from the same: for it had never bin known or heard in Rome, A
thing never heard nor known before.
that any man, woman, or child, ever escaped with life, being once in that
kind of danger; to wit, in the courtesy of the furious and raging Buffaloes.
Many gave their censures, concerning the wonderful fact and rare event: the
general resolution was this; Viz. That J might fight with Buffaloes in
England, and have the upper hand. My self did deem their censure to be
probable; and this day (me thinks) the same is brought to pass; though (Gods
name be blessed for it,) in the far different sense and meaning, from that
which either they or my self did then imagine. John. 4 v. 24. 1. John. 5. v.
14.
I sought God then, but found him not; because I sought him not in truth, and
according to his holy will. I thought then (being blinded with late start-vp
Popery,) that I should fight against the true professors of Christ's
Gospel, whom I then reputed Heretics and spiritual Buffaloes. Sap. 8.1.
Ephesians. 1. v. 4.11. Romans 9. v. 11.15.16. etc. Ephesians. 6.12. Act. 9. v. 1.2.3.
etc. Act. 8. v. 1.3.
But our most merciful God (whose wisdom reaches from end to end mightily,
and disposes all things sweetly) ordained me in his eternal purpose, ( a
vosteriori hoc fa ^le infertur,) to a far more honorable and sacred Warfare;
viz. to encounter the traiterous Jesu^tes and ^esuited Gunpowder Popelinges,
and valiantly to fight the battle of Christ's Church, against those most
furious, brainelesse, and cruel Buffaloes of men's souls: Whose legierdemaine,
coozenage, perjury, pride, malice, theft, murders, fraud, feigned miracles,
and infinite cunnicatching tricks, the gentle Reader may find at large,
soundly proved out of the Books which the Semin^rie-priestes have published
to the World, in my Book entitled, See the Anatomy for this point, and note
it well.
The Anatomy of Popish tyranny: Which Book whosoever shall with judgment
and a single eye peruse, can not but perceive the Jesuits to be Firebrands of
all mischief, and most ugly monsters of the World.

B. C.
Not long after, he has these words: For first, it is a constant Maxim
(quoth he,) that the Pope, and none but the Pope, must judge in all
Controversies of faith and doctrine. Nay, it is rather a most constant Maxim,
that Bell seldom writes any thing that is true. Lo, the Friar confounds
both himself and his Pope.
False it is, that the Pope and none but the Pope, is the Judge in all matters
of Faith and Doctrine. For a general Council also is Judge: yea, and by the
opinion of many learned Divines, the Pope judging alone without a general
Council, may err.

T. B.
I answer; Jesuit not able to answer the truth, by me soundly defended,
seeks to get the victory, by crying out against the truth. This is clear,
to every judicious Reader. Friar says truly; That by the judgment of many
learned Papists, the Pope may err without a general Council. To this
Doctrine I willingly subscribe, as which is the very truth that I defend. For,
mine usual manner ever is in all my Books, to confound Popery with the best
Learned Popish Writers. I hold and defend no point of doctrine, but such only,
as great learned Papists hold and defend with me. This my joy, this is my
credit, The Author with the Church of England, defends every jot of the old
Roman Religion.
this the honor of the cause in hand, that I constantly hold with the now
Church of England every Article of the old Roman Religion; only condemning
and rejecting erroneous, superstitious, childish, and ridiculous additamentes,
of late years by little and little crept into the Church. Downe-fall of Popery*
that the Pope only is the Judge of all controversies in Religion; as to say
more in that behalf, may be thought actum agere, and a thing altogether
needless. Three things only will I now point at, Three very Memorable
points.
referring the indifferent Reader for the proof, to the Downe-fall of Popery.
viz, that the Pope staying at home himself, sends his Legates to the
Councels to supply his place; to whom, for all that, ( O monstrum horrendum,)
he can not commit his Authority. viz. that no Bishop in these our days, can
have voices in Councels, See the oath, Infra, Cap. 27.
but such as will swear obedience to the Pope before their admittaunce, and
promise to defend his Canon Law. viz. that it is not in Popish Councels, as in
human affairs and assemblies, where more voices ever do prevail. But all
the force, power, strength, and authority of Councels, do and must depend
upon the Popes will and pleasure: For, after the Fathers there have fasted
long, prayed much, consulted gravely, deliberated maturely, decreed constantly,
All must be as the Pope will.
commanded strictly, and accursed severely; neither can others, nor yet them
selves tell, what shall be of force therein: For, all must be, as shall best
content the Popes humor, sitting right stately in his pontifical Chair at
Rome. See the Oath which Bishops make to the Pope, infra Cap. 27.
To which I add, that the Pope abuses the World shamefully, when he takes
upon him to call together all Bishops in the Christian world, to decide and
determine controversies in Religion; and for all that, will approve nothing
that they decree; unless the same be agreeable to that, which himself
decrees alone in his pontifical Chair at home. As also, in that he
condemns and rejects all Councels, which do not consent in all points to
his Legates; who for all that, The Popes pretended prerogatives, must ever be
defended.
must not yield to any thing, which swarueth from their Charge and Commission
received from the Popes mouth. In which Charge, this is ever the principal and
maine point; that they suffer not the Popes Superroyall power, and falsely
pretended Prerogatives of the Church of Rome, to be any way abased or
gainesayd. This Addition, has a double Confirmation at hand: Rhemistes, in
Act. 15.
the one, from the Rhemistes: the other, from S. R. that great learned Jesuit.
The Rhemistes tell us roundly, and blush never a whit thereat; that general
Councels are not needful, save only for the better contentation of the weak
people: and their only ground which they stand upon, is this; viz. that the
Pope is so divinely priuileadged and assisted by the Holy Ghost, The Pope can
not err.
as he can never err iudicially in any matter of Faith. Which assertion if it
were true, as it is most false, (for which, let the Christian reader duly
peruse my Christian Dialogue,) there were no great need of Councels in very
deed. The Pope in the Church, say the Jesuits.
The Jesuitical Friar S. R. ( Robert Parsons is the man) tells us
peremptorily, that the Popes Sentence, is the Decree of the Catholic Church.
These are his express words: S. R. page 281. mark this well.
True it is, that B. Fisher and Gerson, were in that error: but that was both
before it was condemned in the Church, as it was since by Pius the fifth, and
Gregorius the thirteenth. Lo, our Jesuit in the name of all Papists, (for
all Papists must so believe,) blusheth not to publish to the World in print,
in perpetuam rei memoriam, that Pope Pius was the Church in his time; Pope
Gregory, in his time: and consequently, every Pope in his time. For, what he
affirms of those two, in this kind of subject; When Papists speak of the
Church, they ever mean the pope.
the same perforce he must approve, in all other Popes successively. So then,
this is a constant maxim in the Church of Rome; that whenever our Papists
say or write, That the Church can not err; or, The Church has thus and thus
defined; they ever mean of the Pope, and Church of Rome. I therefore cannot
but conclude, with this inevitable illation; viz. that in true Popish sense and
meaning, the Pope is the only Judge in all controversies of Religion.

B. C.
That their Popes (says Bell) can not err in Faith iudicially, is this day
with Papists, an Article of their Faith. The Jesuit cuts the Popes throat.
Mark well the answer.
An untruth I say, it is: for though the more common and better opinion be,
That the Pope in his judicial and definitive sentence can not err in Faith;
yet false it is, that this is an Article of Faith, when as many Divines both
have and do hold the contrary.

T. B.
I answer; Jesuit; viz. that there is great dissension amongst the Popish
Doctors, concerning matters of Faith and Doctrine. See my Book of Motives.
Cap. 8.
Of which dissension, I have discoursed at large in my Motives. Romish Church,
does not make an Article of Romish Faith. he might be deemed a right wise man,
that could soundly discover the Articles of Popish faith. The Popish Church
holds no points of faith.
For the Friar here tells us lustily; that which is the common and better
opinion, even the opinion of the Pope himself, (for his doubtless is the
best,) proves not an Article of Popish faith. Jesuit does here give us a
general rule* how to discern the Articles of Popish faith: For thus disputes
our Learned Friar; Mark well for Christ's sake, this point of doctrine.
Although it be the more common and better opinion, yet seeing many Divines
hold the contrary; it can not be an Article of Popish faith. This is a golden
and most excellent Rule in deed: for which I thank our Jesuit with all my
heart. For no stronger reasons and proofs can be had in controversies, then
the plain confession of the adverse part. Hence are fitly deduced, sundry
golden and very memorable Corollaries. The first Corollarie.
The first whereof is this; viz. that the Papists this day, have either very
few, or flat none at all, Articles of their Faith. The second Corollarie is
this; viz. that it is not against Popish faith to believe and defend, The
second Corollarie.
that the Pope may err. Iudicially; that Christ's natural body is not in the
holy Eucharist really; that the Marriage of Priests is lawful; that the Pope
is a Tyrant, and Heretic, a Firebrand of all mischief; that a great number
of zealous and faithful Martirs of Jesus Christ, were burnt in Queen Mary's
days, by force of the Popes tyrannical Law; who for all that, held no Article
against Popish faith. Out upon late hatched Popery! Every child may see, that
it is the New religion. The Jesuit with the help of his best Learned
breathren, (for to defend Popery from the note and suspicion of the New
religion, the most Learned Jesuits put to their helping hands, and gave their
best advise,) is not able in truth to say any thing, for the antiquity of the
same. How be it, rather the^ his proud heart shall yield to the truth, and
retract his former ignorance and malice, he wholly consecrates himself to very
childish shifts, and most foolish and ridiculous cauils.

B. C.
He runs upon the Doctrine taught by Soto, and generally holden of
Catholics; viz. that the Pope can not err in Faith; and confidently
avouches, that it was never heard of, till of late days: his words be these.
This only will I say, that this Popist Article (the Pope can not err in
Faith,) was never heard of in Christ's Church, for the space of a thousand and
five hundred years. A gallant untruth, worthy of the reformed Minister. All
this is mere folly.
Thomas Waldensis was long before that time, as also Turrecremata; who both
hold, that the Pope can not err in Faith. And not only late Writers, but the
ancient Fathers have taught the same Doctrine, relying them selves upon the
Promise of Christ in the Gospel. Praecedunt ista in B.C. page, 86. Mark this
confession.
The words of Soto prove very well, that the Pope as Pope, can not err:
which the most and best Divines do also maintain. But no word has he or
syllable, that this is an Article of Faith; which was the point that Bell
should have proved, and for which he pretended to cite his words.

T. B.
I answer; Friar Jesuit, does comfort my heart more then a little: viz. that
the Pope as Pope, can not err. The Pope as Pope by Popish grant, can not err.
For, albeit it be most absurd and false in rei veritato, (as I have
plentifully proved in my Christian Dialogue,) yet is it a Popish truth, or a
flat lie, (which is the same,) and turns Popery vpside down. which the Pope
confirms; Understand this point well, for Christ's sake.
nor those Councels decree a truth, which he rejects and condemns. For
most absurd and execrable it is, to burn with Fire and Faggot zealous Men and
zealous Women; because forsooth they will not believe that, See and note well
my Christian Dialogue. Chap. 2. Page 14.
which the Pope himself does not believe. O tempora! O mores! The Pope
himself does not believe, that he can not err; as this sweet Doctrine, of
our sweet Sir Friar teaches us. And yet must all be burnt with Fire and
Faggot, that say he may err in decreeing matters of Faith. Argumentum ad
hominem.
because they believe not Christ's promise made to Peter and the Bishops of
Rome his successors; as both the Pope and all his devoted Vassals do believe.
For which respect, the Friar in this very place tells us peremptorily, and
blusheth never a whit thereat; that not only Wal^ensis and Cardinal
Turrecremata, but Late Writers and the ancient Fathers also have taught the
same Doctrine. For which respect, the Jesuits and all Iesuited Papists have
ever in their mouths, See and note well the 29. and the 30. Chapters.
and continually object as an argument unanswerable; that Christ prayed for the
Faith of S. Peter and his successors, that it should never fail; that
Hel-gates should never prevail against it. Yet here (God be thanked for it,)
their pride is somewhat abated; Christ never prayed, that the Pope should not
err.
Christ is now either distrusted of them, (which they dare not say,) or at
least suspected not to have promised to the Bishops of Rome, that their Faith
should not fail. For, if they believe not that Christ is faithful in all his
Promises, they are flat Heretics. If they believe him to perform, what he
has promised; then it must perforce either be with them an Article of popish
Faith, that the Pope as Pope can not err: This Dile^ma is insoluble.
or else doubtless, that Christ made no such Promise to the Bishops of Rome.
Vtrum ^orum manis, accipe, good sir Friar; for the better of them is able, to
give the Pope his dinner. For which respect, S. R. that learned Jesuit, (as
his dear brother B. C. calls him,) tells us roundly; S.R. Page 315. Page
417.
that false Faith can have no access to S. Peter's Chair. For which respect,
the same Jesuit tells us in an other place; Lo* we must believe his
doctrine, that is an Heretic
That we must obey what he decrees or defines iudicially, as sitting in S.
Peter's Chair; though in heart he were an Heretic. For which respect, the
same Jesuit tells us in his words following; That Bishops must not examine
the Doctrine, which the Pope delivers iudicially out of S. Peter's Chair, as
supreme Pastor of Gods Church; but only that, wherein he utters his own
private opinion. See and note my Reply to the 29. Chapt.
Thus writes S. R. that great Learned Jesuit, truly telling us the Popish
Faith. Which Doctrine if any but a Papist had delivered it, few or none would
have given credit thereunto. O sweet Jesus! I wonder how any Papist hearing
such Doctrine published in print, by the Jesuits so dear and so near to the
Pope himself, and duly pondering the vanity thereof, and the blasphemy
therein contained; can still be a Papist and not defy the Pope and his
damnable Doctrine. What shall we do with the holy Scripture? Is it the
infallible rule of Faith. S. R. in the name of the Pope, proclaims the Popes
faith and doctrine.
Is it superior to the Popes Judicial sentence? Must the Papists depend upon
it, rather then upon the Popes Decree? No, no; if the Pope define against it,
his Decree must be obeyed; neither may any Bishop (as our Friar here teaches
us,) much less may every Private man examine the same, or once call it into
question. Of which more at large, Inferius, Cap. 27.
when I come to the Oath which Bishops make to the Pope. Ioh. 9.3^.
Scimus, quia peccatores Deus non audit; We know, that God hears not
sinners: that is, Approoueth not sinners, in granting their requests: For God
knows, sees, 1. Ioh. 5. v. 14.
and hears all Petitions vocally; but theirs only with approbation, Psalm.
18. v. 41.
Which ask according to his will. The Psalmograph uses the like phrase, in
these words; They shall cry, but there shall be none to help them: yea, even
unto the Lord shall they cry, but he shall not hear them. The Prophet Micheas
does second the Psalmograph, Mich. 3.4.
in these words: Then shall they cry unto the Lord, and he shall not hear
them. The Prophet Zachary is consonant in these words: Zach. 7. v. 13.
Sic clamabunt et non exaudiam, dicit Dominus exercituum: So shall they cry,
and I will not hear them, says the Lord of Hosts. All which places, and the
like, must perforce be understood, not of bare vocal hearing; but of hearing
with approbation. Which kind of hearing, my self did plainly insinuate to the
Reader, when in my words following, I excepted the Jesuits and Iesuited
Papists: For, if I had meant of bare vocal hearing, I neither would, nor
truly could have excepted the Jesuits, whom I grant to have heard it both
vocally and with approbatio^. Friar obiecteth ridiculously, that Aquinas,
Antoninus, Waldensis, and Turrecremata, taught the same Doctrine within 1500.
years, I answer thus: Canus denies Waldensis to hold that opinion. Friar
desires; yet would it follow of necessity, that Popery is the New Religion.
For, we see here as clearly, as the Sun shyning at noone day; that this
Popish Article (the Pope as Pope can not err,) was hatched a thousand, two
hundred, and forty years after Christ. For the most ancient Father thereof,
Popery is the new religion.
which our Jesuit possibly is able to name, is Aquinas, (as we have seen;)
who for all that, Vixit Aquinas, A.D. 1243.
lived more then 1240. years after Christ. To which I add, that the Church
(as the famous Papists Panormitanus, and Gersonus teach us,) is either the
Congregation of the faithful, or a general Council sufficiently representing
the same. This being so, and my reasons duly pondered, it is very clear and
evident; that this Popish Article of Faith, was never heard of in the Church,
(that is, approved of the Church, For the space of, 1240.
) for the space of 1240. years after Christ. For doubtless, the approbation
of Aquinas, Antoninus, and Turrecremata (the Popes flattering Parasites,) can
not establish the Religion and Faith of the Church of Rome. The Friar dare not
do it for his lugges.
If our Jesuit dare say it; let him publish it in print, and then expect my
Commentary upon the same. See and note well, the 29. and the 30. Chapters; as
also the Christian Dialogue, page 24.27.30.38.41.60.63.65.

B. C.
One maine Lie, with a pretty trick of lieger-demaine: For he is to prove
out of Alphonsus, that the Pope might err in Faith iudicially: for that is the
question, as appears in the Premises; and that this Article was never heard
of 1500. years: and yet in the foresaid words of Alphonsus, no such thing is
contained, seeing he speaks in them not of his judicial Decrees, but of
private Errors, Lo the Pope as Pope by Popish doctrine, can not err.
which may befall him in the exposition of the Scriptures; and that Alphonsus
must needs mean of his private opinions in writing or otherwise, and not of
his definitive sentence, is certain: For otherwise there be and were in his
time, that held the Pope could not be an Heretic iudicially, or err as Pope:
Much less does Alphonsus say, that it was never heard of for the space of
1500. years, that the Pope could not err in Faith iudicially; for of this
point, he has not one word or syllable.

T. B.
I answer thus: Jesuit; viz. while he tells us, The Jesuit how he is
believed.
that his Pope may err in expounding the holy Scriptures. But withal I must
needs tell him, that his Pope may as truly err in his judicial sentence:
The reason is evident, because Christ's Prayer freed S. Peter from both. Luke
22. verse. 32.
And consequently, if Christ's Prayer were as effectual and powerable for the
Bishops of Rome, as it was for Peter, (which the late Bishops of Rome,
Jesuits, and Iesuite^ Papists, would enforce us to believe, Alas, alas,
Popery is wounded unto death.
) they could no more err in the one, then in the other: no more in their
private opinions published to the world, then in their definitive sentences and
judicial Decrees: Nay, it is in the Popes own power, to be as free from the
one, as from the other. For, when he expounds the Scriptures, when he writes
Letters, when he utters his opinion any way; if he do the same sitting in
Peter's Chair, he can not err, it is the undoubted truth. S. R. page 417.
Again, whatsoever he say or write (as we have heard already,) when he
sits in Peter's Chair; that we must obey and believe, Out upon Popery, who
is able to endure it?
though in heart he be an Heretic: For, no Bishop or Bishops in the
Christian world, (how wise, virtuous, or learned soever they be,) may take upon
them to examine that, which the Pope delivers out of Peter's Chair. Thus S.
R. that great learned Jesuit constantly avouches, as we have already seen:
Who doubtless could not be permitted to publish such Doctrine, S. R. page 417.
if it were not the Faith and Doctrine of the Church of Rome. Yea, if any deny
it, where Popery bears the sway, that person must feel the smart of Fire
and Faggot, for his reward. He may be thought to know nothing, who living in
Rome or Spa^ne, knows not this to be so. Alphonsus that famous and learned
Friar, The Jesuit is shameless and impudent.
spoke not of the Popes private opinions, as our Jesuit B. C. more impudently
then Clerkly avouches; who chooses rather to say any thing, then to grant
Popery to be the New religion No, no, Alphonsus utterly detested that Popish
Article, as a most profane, sottish, and ridiculous Position; though this day
of Faith with the Pope, and with all his Jesuits, and their Jesuited crew, I
prove it by sundry testimonies, laid open to the Readers, by Alphonsus his
own pen. First therefore, these in one place are his express words.
Alphons. lib* 3. aduers. haereses, prope finem.
Nouissime fertur de Iohanne 22. quod public docuit, declarauit, et ab omnibus
teneri mandauit, quod animae purgata ante finale indicium non habent stolam,
quae est clara et fa^ialis v^sio Det; et vniuersitatem Parisiensem ad hoc
induxisse di^itur, quod nemo in ea poterat gradum in theologia adipisci, nisi
primitus hunc error^m iurasset se defensurum, et perpetio e^ adhaesurum: Last
of all, it is reported of John the 22 of that name, that he publicly taught,
declared, and commanded all Divines to hold, that the souls of the just
before the day of Judgment, have not the stole, which is the clear and
faciall vision of God: And he is reported, to have induced the University of
Paris to this; that none should take degree in Theology there, but he that did
first swear to defend this Error, and to adhere to it for ever. Thus writes
Adrianus, who himself was Bishop of Rome. And Alphonsus (a man of high
esteem in the Church of Rome*) after he had reckoned up five Heresies, sets
down this for the sixth, (that the souls of the just do not see God, till the
day of Doom;) ascribing the said Heresy to the Armenians, as to the authors
thereof; This is wonderful.
and to the Greeks together with Pope John, as to the patrons and defenders
of the same. Where the gentle Reader must observe with me seriously, least he
be seduced with the colorable gloss of the Jesuiticall Cardinal Bellarminus;
Bellarmine speaks against his own knowledge.
who seeing the force of this Testimony, and well perceiving that it was able
to overthrow the highest point in Popery, bestirreth himself mightily in
defense thereof: He tells us forsooth, (we may believe him, if we lift,)
that Pope John erred indeed; as Adrian and Alphonsus write. But he did that as
a private man (says our Jesuit) not as Pope of Rome. O childish vanity.
This is that never enough detested Popish fallacy, of the Popes double
person; wherewith the Pope, his Jesuits, and Iesuited Popelinges, have a long
time seduced us; even since that cursed Sect was first hatched, A.D. 1538.
and brought into the world; the Sect of Friars, called Jesuits I mean. But
it is a most frivolous, childish, and ridiculous cavil; a very fillie shift,
so sottish and so absurd, Mark well for Christ's sake, if thou love thine
own soul.
as the Pope and all his Popelinges may be ashamed thereof: The reason is
evident, even to every child. First, because it is said, ( Docuit, He
taught.) Secondly, because it is said, ( Public, Publicly.) Thirdly, because
it is said, ( Mandauit, He commanded all Divines to hold it. (Fourthly,
because none could be made Graduates in the Schools of Theology, which held
not this opinion. Fifthly, because every Graduate was sworn to defend it, and
to stick to it for ever, perpetuo. So then, the Pope may err, and, de facto
has erred; and that not only in his private opinion, as a private man; but
even in his judicial and public sentence, as a public person and Pope of
Rome. This argument is insoluble; it will never be truly answered, while the
world stands. This is enough doubtless, Alphons. lib. 1. cap. 4. aduers. haeres.
to every indifferent Reader: yet in way of congratulation to our Jesuit, I am
content to say a little more. These in an other place, are Alphonsus his
express words. Celestinum Papam errasse circa matrimonium fidelium, quor^m
alter labitur in haeresim, res est omnibus manifesta: neque hic Celestini error
talis fuit, qui soli negligentiae imputari debuit; ita vt illum errasse
dicamus, velut priuatam personam, et non vt Papam, qui in qualibet re seria
definienda consulere debet viros dectos: Quoniam huiusmodi Celestini definitio
habebatur in antiquis decretalibus, in cap. laudabilem, titulo de conuersione
infidelium; quam ego ipse vidi, et legi: That Pope Celestine erred about
Matrimony of the faithful, whereof the one falls into heresy, it is a
thing so manifest, as all men know the same. Neither was this error of Pope
Celestine such, as it may be imputed to sole negligence; so as we may think
him to have erred as a private man, and not as Pope, Mark well, this point
strikes dead.
who ought in the decree of every serious matter, to ask counsel of Learned
men. For that Definition and Decree of Celestine, was in the old Decretals, in
the Chapter Laudabilem; which I my self have seen and read. Out of these
Golden words, of the famous and great learned Friar Alphonsus, I observe many
very worthy lessons, for the great good of the thankful Reader. Celestine
erred. Jesuits like Gypsies, The Jesuits are Gypsies.
have invented a trick of fast and loose, assigning to their Pope a double
person; Private, and Public. As a Private man, they grant he may both be
deceived himself, and also deceive others: But that he can err as a public
person, or as Pope of Rome; they utterly deny. For if they should once grant
this point, (which is a manifest and known truth,) Popery would soon be
turned vp-side down. Howbeit, (my salvation I gage for the trial,) Friar
Alphonsus decideth the controversy so plainly, as all the Jesuits and
Jesuited Papists in the world, are not in truth able to withstand or gainesay
the same. Alphonsus says constantly and plainly, without all Ands and Ifs;
Lo, the Pope is wounded at the heart, he can no longer live.
that Pope Celestine erred not as a Private man; but even as Pope and public
person. O sweet Jesus! o merciful God! o most loving Father! how great is the
malice and blasphemy of Jesuits and Jesuited Papists, against thine
everlasting Truth and holy Name? With what face can the Jesuitical Cardinal
Bellarmine tell us, that Pope Celestine erred only as a Private man, and not
as Pope or Public person? When the Papists like the Popes Decrees, then they
say, he defined as Pope and Public person; and that none may withstand his
definitive Sentence, or once examine the same; as is already proved, to their
everlasting shame. But, when their Pope is convinced to have erred so grossly,
that they know not possibly how to defend him; then they are not ashamed to
say, that he erred but as a Private man. viz. that Matrimony was so dissolved
by reason of Heresy, that the faithful man or woman might marry again, the
Heretical party living. Which thing (says Alphonsus,) was manifest to every
one, to be an Heresy: and their late Council of Trent, has defined it to be
so. Celestine, was in those days enrolled in the Popes Decretals. Alphonsus
saw and read the same. A note worthy the remembrance.
Where I note by the way, and heartily wish the Reader to observe the same; that
the decrees of our holy Fathers the Popes, have bin such, and so much against
lately hatched Popery; as they are this day ashamed, to bring the same to
light. But, let this be our comfort herein; that God has at all times stirred
up some learned Papists, otherwise devoted to the Pope, who have boldly used
their Pens and Wits (such is the force of truth,) to discover and lay open
to the view of the world, the deceit, coozenage, liegerdemayne, and
cunnicatching tricks of wicked Popes, Jesuits, and all Iesuited Papists; so
far forth I ever mean, as is necessary for the common good of his Church.
Now, whether our Jesuit, be a most notorious liar, or not, let the Reader
judge: For, if Alphonsus say, that the Pope can not err, as Pope and Public
person; I am content to be the liar: But if he constantly hold and defend the
contrary, as the undoubted truth; then judge and censure our Friar in this,
as in many other things, for a shameless and impudent liar, The Jesuit has
deserved the whetstone.
best worthy of the Whetstone. I wish he may have it, and wear it about his
neck, as a testimony of his condign deserts.

The 9. Chapter: Of the condign so supposed merit of Good works.
FOR the clearer manifestation and illustration of the truth of this
Controversy, I think it not amiss, to proceed therein by way of Conclusions:
Which being soundly effected, I purpose in God, to answer and confute (a thing
very easy to be done,) the childish cauils, ridiculous euasions, and
cunnicatching tricks, which our Friar uses in pleading for the life of their
New Religion.

The first Conclusion.
The Regenerate do Good works; which are acceptable in Gods sight, and
receive reward far above their Condign deserts. This Conclusion is proved
by many textes of holy Writ. Job. 1.8.
Job is enrolled among the Godly and those that feared God, even by the
testimony of God himself. Abel was slain of his brother Cain, 1. Ioh. 3. v.
12. Genesis 6^ v. 9.
because he feared God, and did Good works. The Scripture says, that Noe was a
just man and perfect: who therefore with his Family, found favor in Gods
sight, in time of the general Deluge. The Angel of God saluting the blessed
virgin Marie, Luke. 1.28. Luke. 1.6.
pronounced her holy above all Women. Zacharias and Elizabeth his wife were
both just, and walked in all the Commandments of God. Abraham, Moses, David,
Gedeon, Sampson, Samuel, Heb. 11.
and many others, did Works acceptable in Gods sight. Act. 10. v. 2.
Cornelius is highly commended in holy Writ, for the Good works he did. Thus
much for the former part. And for the latter part, the Scripture is likewise
plentiful. Christ himself promises to reward Good works so liberally; Mat.
10. v. 42.
that he will not suffer so much as a Cup of cold Water given in his name, to
pass without reward. For which cause, Heb. 11. v. 27. Romans 8. v. 18.
Moses is said to have had respect unto reward. And S. Paul teaches us; that
the passions of this life, are not worthy of the glory to come. In brief, the
Popish Friar John de Combis, Io. de Comb. lib. 5. Theol. ver. cap. 11.
(a very learned Papist,) in his Theological Abridgement, affirms it to be a
maxim with God; ever to reward us above our well doings; and to punish us
less then our evil demerites: These are his express words. Et hoc pates,
quod Deus semper remunerat supra meritum, sicut punit citra condign^m: And this
is evident, because God ever rewards above our merits; and punishes us
less, then we be worthy. Where I may not pass over in silence, the blasphemy
of the Rhemistes against the effect of Christ's Passion; Rhem. Romans 8. v. 17.
in annotae.
while they affirm Christ not to have so fully satisfied for our sins, but
that we are still bound to satisfy, each man in particular for his own
sins. For most true it is, (as I have proved in sundry places of this
Discourse,) that Christ has so sufficiently satisfied for all his Elect, and
so answered the justice of God for punishment of their sins, as they are
freely discharged thereof: Yet must they willingly suffer, to be made
conformable to Christ in Suffering, as they look to be like him in Glory.
Their sufferings are indeed a condition required to their Glorification; but
neither a Cause thereof, nor any Satisfaction for their sins. The case is
clear, the Scriptures do every where insinuate the same. They are only,
Conditio sine qua non, of our Glorification, and the necessary and infallible
effects of our Predestination; which they ever follow, as Fruits do the
Tree: for the afflictions of Gods children, though they be a cause working
eternal Glory (in the sense before touched,) as they be the way by which God
has appointed them to pass to Glory; yet neither are they, neither any way
can they, be worthy, condign, or truly Meritorious of eternal Glory. But as
the troublesome way, by which a man passes to possess the inheritance which
his father has freely given him, may be said to work and procure the actual
possession of the Inheritance, not condignely or worthily to deserve the same;
even so may our sufferinges be said to work and procure our Glorification, as
a condition required at our hands, or the way by which we must pass to it;
but never to be condign, worthy, or meritorious of the same. The reward is
freely given by the Grace of our Adoption: but that Grace makes not our Works
meritorious and worthy of Heaven, which they neither do, nor ever can deserve.

The 2. Conclusion.
Good Works follow Justification, but they neither do, nor can go before the
same. The latter part is evident, because, Without Faith we can not please God.
Neither, Heb. 11.6.
Can an evil tree (as our master Christ tells us,) bring forth good
fruit. To which I add with Christ's Apostle; Mat. 7. v. 18.
that Whatsoever is not of faith, is sin. Romans 14. v. 23.
The former part is clearly deduced, out of these words of our Lord Jesus;
Every good tree brings forth good fruit. Mat. 7.17.
S. Austin pithily proves both the parts, in these sweet, short, and golden
words. Aug. de fide ex operib. cap. 14. tom. 4.
Opera sequuntur iustificatum, non prec^dunt iustificandum: Works follow him
that is already justified; but they go not before him that is to be justified.

The 3. Conclusion.
The best Works which the regenerate do, are imperfect, polluted with sin,
and in rigor of Justice, (Mercy set apart,) deserve eternal Death. I prove
it all our righteousness is as filthy cloutes, Esa. 64.6.
(spotted and stained with sin.) Upon which words, holy Bernard yields
this most excellent and Christian Co^mentarie. Bernard. de verb. Esa. Sermon. 5.
p. 405.
Nostra enim (siqua est) humilis iustitia, recta forsitan, sed non pura; nisi
forte meliores nos esse credimus, quam patres nostr^s, qui non minus veraciter
quam humiliter ai^bant; omnes iustitiae nostrae, tanqua^ pannus menstruatae
mulieri^: For our base Justice (if we have any,) is perchance right, but not
pure or perfect; unless perhaps we believe, that we are holier then our
Fathers were; who said as truly, as humbly; All our Righteousness is as
filthy Cloutes. Thus writes the Popish Abbot, an excellent Learned man. Out of
whose words, I observe first, that the best Works we do, are impure and
imperfect. Secondly, that our forefathers were as holy and perfect, as we are;
who for all that confessed, not only of humility, but most truly: that our
best Works are imperfect, and stained with sin. Phil. 3.12.
because S. Paul denied himself to be perfect: Not (says he) as though I had
already attained to it, either were already perfect. 1. Cor. 1.30.
But Christ is our Justice, our sanctification, our redemption: in him we are
perfect and consu^mate. Bernard has these golden words: Bernard. vbi super. D.
Quomodo enim pura iustitia, vbi adhuc non potest culpa deesse: recta quidem
interim videri potest iustitia hominum, si tamen peccato non consentiant, vt
non regnet in eorum mortali corpore: For, how can their Justice be pure, who
can not be without sin? Yet may the Justice of men be right, if they consent
not to sin, nor suffer it to reign in their mortal bodies. In which respect
S. John says, That the faithful sin not; because they suffer not sin to
reign in them. 2. Ioh. 3.9.
The reward of sin is death: Romans 6.23.
and yet do the best lyuers offend in many things. Iac. 3.2.
Fifthly, because the same Bernarde says in an other place, Bernard. de great.
et lib. Arb. p. 1189*
thus: Omne quod natum est ex Deo, non peccat; sed hoc dictum est de
predestinatis ad vitam; non quod omnino non peccent, sed quod peccatum ipsis
non imputetur: All that is borne of God, sins not: but this is spoken of the
Predestinate to life, not because they sin not at all, but for that sin is
not imputed to them. Austen declares this so plainly, as none that ponder his
words seriously, can longer stand in doubt thereof: these are his express
words. Aug. in Ps. 11^. con. 2. in fine.
Ecce, quemadmodum qui ambulant in vijs Domini, non operantur peccatum, et
tamen non sunt sine peccato; quia iam non ipsi operantur iniquitatem, sed quod
habitat in eis peccatum: Behold, how they that walk in the ways of the Lord,
do not sin, and yet are they not without sin; because now they themselves
do not work iniquity, but the sin that dwells in them. This Golden
assertion of S Augustine, Bernardus that learned and religious Abbot,
confirms in these words. Bernar. de aduent. Dom. Sermon. ^. To. 1. See my
Suruay, page 389.
Cupi^bat dissolui, et cum Christo esse, sciens quod peccatum separans inter
nos et Deum, penitus auferri non poterit, donec liberemur a corpore: The Apostle
desired to be dissolved, and to be with Christ; knowing that sin which makes
a division between God and us, cannot wholly be taken away, while we remain
in this body. Out of these Testimonies of these great learned Doctors, I
observe these memorable documentes. 2. Cor. 5. v. 19.
I will allege the very words of the Latin vulgar edition, to which all
Papists are tied by their late council of Trent. Thus writes the holy
Apostle: Vulga^a editio.
Quoniam quidem Deus erat in Christo, mundum reconcilians sibi; non reputans
illis delicta ipsorum: Because God was in Christ, when he reconciled the world
to him self; not imputing their sins unto them. Thus discourses S. Paul;
out of whose words I note two Lessons: viz. the thing that was done, and the
manner of doing the same. The thing done, was the reconciling of the world unto
God. Mark this point well.
The manner thereof was, in not imputing their sins unto them; not in taking
away their sins from them. Sixthly, this Conclusion is proved at large, both
in the Chapter of Venial sins, in this present Triumph; and in the Antepast,
in the Chapter of Original Concupiscence. Note the Seventh Conclusion.
See and note well the 7. Conclusion.

The 4. Conclusion.
Good Works are so necessary to attain eternal life, as the usual,
ordinary, and undoubted way and means, by which God in his great mercy and
love decreed from eternity, to bring his Elect to salvation; as without the
same, none ever were, are, or shall be saved, world without end; when
possibility, time, and place, be correspondent thereunto. I prove it Mat.
7.19.
That every Tree which brings not forth Good fruit, shall be cut down, and
cast into the fire. Ioh. 14. v. 23.
That whosoever love him, will keep his Commandments. Paul tells us in
one place; Ephesians. cap. 1. v. 4. et cap. 2. v. 10.
That God chose us in Christ, before the world was made, that we should be holy
in his sight. And in an other place; That we are Gods workmanship, created in
Christ Jesu unto good works, which he has prepared, that we may walk in them.

The 5. Conclusion.
Good works are the effects of Predestination, depending upon it; not it upon
them. S. Paul proves it in these plain, golden, and pithy words. Romans ^. v.
30.
Whom he has Predestinate, them has he Called; and whom he has Called, them
has he Justified; and whom he has Justified, those has he also Glorified. By
this golden Chain, we may evidently perceive, that Glorification,
Justification, Vocation, and consequently, Good works, are the effects of
Predestination; especially, if we join this, with the other Conclusions before
going. For, if it be true, as it is most true, (else The Apostle should be a
liar,) that we were elected to be Holy, and to do Good works; it is also
true, Esa. 59.2. Ephesians. 2..v. 3.5
(it can not be denied,) that Holy life and Good works, are the effects of
our Election and Predestination in Christ Jesus. For this cause says that
famous Papist Nicholaus de Lyra, in this manner: Lyr. in Cap. 6 Matt.
Dicendum, quod predestinatio diuina est preparatio gratiae in presenti, et
gloriae in futuro. Et ideo, cum sit aeterna, sicut ab aeterno predestinauit
aliquem ad beatitudinem; ita praeordinauit modum, quo daret sibi illam
beatitudinem: I answer (says this great learned Popish Doctor, See the
Conclusion, and note it.
) that Gods Predestination is the preparation of Grace in this world, and of
Glory in the world to come. And therefore, seeing it is Eternal; as he has
predestined any one, from eternity to endless Bliss or Beatitude; Lo,
Good work^ are the way, which lead us to heaven.
so has he also fore-ordayned the mean, by which he would bring him to the
same. For this cause, says the Popish Angelical Doctor Aquinas, (whose
doctrine sundry Popes have confirmed for Authentical,) that Predestination
includes Gods will, of bestowing both Grace and Glory. And this Doctor so
famous and authentical, adds these words: Aquin. p. 1. q. 23. art. 3. ad. 2.
Nam predestinatio est causa, et eius quod expectatur in futura vita a
predestinatis, (scz. gloriae,) et eius quod percipitur in presenti, (scz.
gratiae:) For Predestination is the cause, both of that which is expected in
the life to come, (that is to say of Glory;) and also of that, which the
predestinate receive in this life; (that is to say, of Grace.) For this cause
says our Jesuiticall Cardinal Bellarminus; that Good works follow
Predestination, Bellar. To. 3. col. 627. et col. 628.
as effects follow their causes. These are his express words: Itaque sunt
opera bona, effectus Predestinationis: Therefore Good works are the effect of
Predestination. Again in other place the same Jesuit has these words:
Itaque illa propositio, (Deus ab aeterno predestinauit hominibus dare regnum
per opera bona praeuisa,) potest et vera esse, et falsa. Nam si illud (per
opera praeuisa,) referatur ad verbum (predestinauit,) falsa erit. Significabit
enim Deum predestinasse homines, quia opera illorum bona praeuiderat; si
referatur ad verbum (dare) vera erit. Quia significabit executionem futuram
esse per opera bona, sieve quod est idem, glorificationem effectum esse
iustificationis et operum bonorum; sicut ipsa iustificatio effectus est
vocationis, et vocatio praedestinationis: Therefore that proposition (God
fore-ordayned from eternity, to give to men the Kingdom of heaven, by their
foreseen Works,) may both be true, and false: For, if those words (by their
works foreseen) be referred to the word ( Predestinau^t, he predestined
or fore-ordayned,) the sense and meaning is false: For, it will signify* The
foresight of works, no cause of predestination.
God to have Predestined Men, because he foresaw their Good works; but if
the same words be referred to the word ( Dare, to give and bestow,) the sense
and meaning will be true: For it will signify, that the execution must be done
by Good works; or (which is all one) that Glorification is the effect of
Justification and Good works; even as Justification is the effect of Vocation,
and Vocation the effect of Predestination. Again, Bellarm. To. 3. Col. 628.
in an othor place, he has these words: Non ideo pendet praedestinatio ab
operibus, sed opera a praedestinatione: Therefore Predestination does not
depend of Works, but Works depend of Predestination. Again, in an other
place he says thus: Bellarm. To. 3. Col 626. et Col. 628.
Alia ratio est pradestinationis, alia executionis. Constituit N. in
praedestinatione, regnum caelorum dare certis hominihus, quos absque vlla
operum praeuisione dilexit; tamen simul constituit, vt quo ad executionem via
perueniendi ad regnum essent bona opera: There is one reason of Predestination,
an other of Execution: For, in Predestination God decreed to give the Kingdom
of Heaven to certain men whom he loved, without any foresight of Works;
howbeit he decreed withal, that in respect of the execution, Works are not
the cause of salvation, yet the way by which we must come unto it.
Good works should be the way to come unto the same. For this cause do our
R^emistes tell us; that our first Justification is of Gods Grace, and not of
our deseruinges: because none of all our actions that were before our
Justification, could merit or justly procure the Grace of justification. Thus
discourse these famous and great learned Popish Writers: to whose Doctrine I
subscribe with all my heart. For (as I have often said else where,) I highly
reverence the Old Roman religion; and to the uttermost of my small talent and
skill, I both have done, do, and will defend the same. I defend the old
Roman religion.
Yea, and justify the Doctrine of the Church of England, to be the Old Roman,
Catholic, and Apostolic religion, which S Peter and S. Paul delivered to the
ancient and first Church of Rome. Out of the Doctrine here delivered by these
famous Papists ( Lyranus, Aquinas, and Bellarminus,) I gather many excellent
Notes. God in his eternal purpose, prepared both eternal glory for his elect,
and the way, or means to attain the same.
even before they were borne, or had done any Good works; so did he also
prepare the way and means, by which he would bring them to the same.
Glorification.

The 6. Conclusion.
Good works in a godly sense very usual and frequent in the holy Fathers, may
truly be said to be meritorious: that is to say; they please God, and are so
acceptable in Gods sight, that of mercy he rewards them far above their
deserts. This Conclusion is sufficiently proved, by the reasons alleged in
the first Conclusion. I will here only annexe the testimony of Bernard, that
famous and learned Popish Abbot. Bern. super Cant. Ser. 68.
In one place he has these words: Sic non est quod iam quaeras, quibus
meritis speremus bona; praesertim, cum audias apud Prophetam; non propter vos,
sed propter me ego faciam, dicit Dominus: sufficit ad meritum, scire quod non
sufficiant merita: So there is no cause, that thou should now ask, by what
merits we hope for Glory; Lo, the confession of our unworthiness, is our best
merit.
especially, since thou hear the Prophet say; I will do it, says the Lord,
not for your sake, but for mine own self. It is enough to merit, to know
that our merits are not sufficient. Again in an other place, the same Bernard
has these words: Bern, in Can^^ ser. 67.
Deest gratiae, quicquid meritis deputas. No^^ meritum, quod gratiam excludat.
Horreo quicquid de meo est, vt sim meus; nisi quod illud magis sorsitan meum
est, quod me meum facit. Gratia reddit me mihi iustificatum gratis, et sic
liberatum a seruitute peccati: It degenerateth from Grace, whatsoever thou
ascribest to Merit. I will no Merit, that excludes Grace. I abhor
whatsoever is of mine own, that I may be mine own; unless perhaps that is
more mine own, which makes me mine own. Grace justifies me freely to my
self, and so delivers me from the bondage of sin. In an other place, the
same Bernard has these words; Bern. ser. 1. in Annun^. B.M.V.
Iam vero de vita aeterna scimus, quia non sunt condignae passiones huius
temporis ad futuram gloriam, nec si vnus omnes sustineat. Neque N. talia sunt
hominum merita, vt propter ea, vita aeterna debeatur ex iure; aut Deus iniuriam
aliquam faceret, nisi came donaret. Nam vt taceam, quod merita omnia Dei dona
sunt, This testimony is wonderful: Mark it well.
et ita homo magis propter ipsa Deo debtor est, quam Deus homini; quid sunt
merita omnia, ad tantam gloria^? denique quis melior est Propheta, cui Dominus
ipse tam insigne testimonium perhibet, dicens; Virum inueni secundum cor meum?
Veruntamen et ipse necesse habuit dicere Deo; non intres in iudicium cum seruo
tuo Domine. Now touching eternal life; we know that the sufferinges of this
time, are not worthy of the glory to come; no, not if one endure all. For, the
Merits of men are not such, that for them, eternal life is due by right; The
Popish Abbot wounds the Pope at the very heart.
or that God should do some injury, if he gave it not. For to let pass, that
all Merits are the gifts of God, and so man is rather debtor to God for them,
then God to man: What are all Merits, to so great Glory? In fine, who is
better then the Prophet, to whom our Lord gives so worthy a testimony,
saying: J have found a man according to my heart? howbeit, he had need to say
to God, Enter not into judgment with thy servant, O Lord. Thus writes the
deuote and religious Abbot Bernard: Vixit Bernardus. A.D. 1110.
who though he lived in the greatest mist of Popery, and so was carried away
with some errors of his time; yet did he teach most Christian doctrine, almost
in all his works. And because he was reputed a great Papist, and of high
esteem in the Church of Rome, his testimony is ever most forcible against
Papists, the Pope, and Church of Rome. Out of this his most learned and
Christian Discourse, I observe many godly and memorable Lessons. viz. to know,
that our supposed merits are not sufficient. Mark this well.
And consequently, seeing we may not derogate from the Grace of God in any
respect; it follows of necessity, that we cannot challenge any thing of
Merit. Note this ex iure.
Ex iure; that is to say, Condignely and of right. This reason can not be
answered.
For, to withhold and keep a man's right from him, is a notorious and known
wrong. Bernard, yields for the same; viz. Because Heaven, or Eternal life,
is the free gift of God.

The 7. Conclusion.
Good works (even by Popish doctrine, See and note well the 11. Conclusion,
) without the mercy and promise of God in his Son and our only savior
Christ Jesus, do not condignely merit Heaven. This is soundly proved, by all
the reasons of the third Conclusion. But I will prove it, by other evident
means. S. Augustine has these express words: Vae e^iam laudabili vitae
homi^^m si remotu misericordia ^iscautias ^am: Woe even to the best livers on
earth, Aug. lib. 9. Confess. cap. 13.
if thou extend not thy Mercy to them. For this cause does the holy Prophet
desire God, Not to enter into judgment with him: And he adds this reason;
Psalm. 143. v. 2.
Because (...) m^n living, can (...) justified in his sight. Again, the same
Prophet confesses in an other place; Psalm. 130. v. 3.
That if God deal extremely in punishing what is done amiss, none living*
(no, not the best of all,) i^ ab^e to endure his justice. Abbot Bernard has
these express words: Bern. de adu. dom. sermon. 6. tom. 1.
Peccatum separans inter nos et Deum penitus auferri non poterit, donec
liberemur a corpore: The sin that separateth us from God, can not wholly be
taken away, while we remain in this world. He speaks of Concupiscence and
evil desires. Lo, original Concupiscence, which remains in us till the
hour of death, excludes us from God, and prepares Hell for us. The same
Bernard in an other place, has these words: Bernard in annue. B.V. sermon. 1.
Necesse est primo omnium credere: quod remissionem peccatorum habere non
possis, nisi per indulgentia^ Dei. Deinde, quod nihil prorsus habere que as
operis boni, nisi et hoc dederit ipse. Postremo, quod aternam vitam nullis
p^t^s operibus promereri, nisi gratis detur et illa. First of all, thou must
believe of necessity; that thou can not have remission of thy sins,
unless God will give thee a pardon for the same. Then, thou must believe, that
thou can not have any Good work at all, unless thou receive it at Gods
hand. Last of all, thou must believe* that thou can not merit eternal life
by any Works, No Works can merit Glory.
unless it be freely given (of Mercy.) The famous Papist and great learned
School doctor Durandus, disputes this difficulty so soundly and plainly, as
every Child may with all facility perceive the truth thereof. These are his
express words: Durand. in 2, sent. did. 27. q 2. in medio.
Tale Meritum de condigno inuenitur inter homines, sed non est hominis ad Deum.
Quod patet, quia, quod redditur potius ex liberalitate dantis, quam ex debito
operis, non cadit sub merito de condigno stricte et proprie accepto. Sequitur,
quod si quis dicat, quod quamuis Deus non constituatur nobis debtor ex aliquo
nostro opere, constituitur tamen debtor ex sua promissione, quam exprimit
scriptura; non valet propter duo: Primum est, quod promissio diuina in
scripturis sanctis, non sonat in aliquam obligationem, sed insinuat meram
dispositionem liberalitatis diuinae. Secundu^ est, quod quod redditur, non
redditur ex debito operis, sed ex promissione praecedente; non quod redditur ex
merito operis de condigno, sed solum vel principaliter ex promissu. Et ita non
est illud debitum, de quo loquimur: Et sic patet, quod meritum de condigno
stricte et proprie sumptum, viz. pro action voluntaria, propter quam operanti
debetur merces ex iustitia, sic quod si non reddatur, ille ad quem pertinet
reddere, unjust facit, et est simpliciter et proprieiniustus, non est hominis
ad Deu^. Et ideo propter tale meritum, cum sit homini simpliciter impossible,
non est necesse in nobis ponere gratiam, vel charitatem habitualem: Such
condign Merit is found among men, but is not between God and man. Which
hereby is clear, because that which is rendered rather of the liberality of
the giver, then of debt due to the work, falls not under condign Merit
properly so called. If any say; that though God become not our debtor by reason
of our Work, yet is he made our debtour by reason of his Promise, whereof the
Scripture makes mention; that answer is of no force, for two respects.
First, because Gods Promise in the holy Scriptures does not sound to any Bond,
but insinuates the mere disposition of Gods liberality. Secondly, because
that which is given, is not given for the debt arysing of the Work, but of
promise that went before; not that it is rendered for the condign Merit of the
work, but only or principally for his Promise sake: And so there is not that
debt, of which we speak. And so it is clear, that condign Merit properly so
called, viz. for a voluntary action, for which reward is due of justice to the
worker, so that if it be not rendered, he to whom it apperteyneth to give it,
does unjustly, and is simply and properly unjust, is not between God and man.
And therefore for such a Merit, seeing it is simply impossible to man, there
is no need to put in us grace or charity habitual. Thus disputes M. Durand:
out of whose golden periods, I gather many memorable Observations. First, that
condign Merit can not be between God and man. Secondly, that eternal life
is the free gift of Gods liberality, not proceeding of any debt or duty due
to the best Works which we do. Thirdly, that God rewards us principally for
his Promise sake, and not for any thing we either have done, or possibly can
do. Condign merit is so far above man's capacity, as no man possiblely can
have it.
Fourthly, that condign Merit is so far above man's capacity and reach, that
no man can by any possibility have it. And consequently, that late Popish
condign Merit of Works is ridiculous, absurd, and impossible. Gregorius
Ariminensis, Thomas Waldensis, Paulus Burgensis, Marsilius, and Etkins, five
most zealous Papists, do all with one assent affirm very constantly; that
man's Works are not meritorious of eternal life, how holy soever the man be.
All this is proved at large, in my Suruay of Popery. Dominicus Soto, Survey,
part 3. cap. 9.
a zealous Monk and famous Popish writer, tells the Papists roundly, and
peremptorily, and teaches them gravely, that no pure man is able to make
condign satisfaction for his sins: and so, a fo tiori, against his will and
meaning, that no man can by condign Merit attain eternal life. These are
his express words: Soro de not. et gr. lib. 3. cap. 6. page 138.
Perfect^ satisfactio est ^lla, cuius v^^^r es pratium totum emanat a debitore,
nulla vel prae ^^niente, vel interueniente gratia creditoris; taliter vt sit
redditio aequiu^lentis alias indebi^a voluntar^^: Perfect satisfaction is that,
whose value and price proceeds wholly from the debtour, without either
preventing or interuenting grace of the creditour; so as the voluntary
reddition be of that which is equivalent, and not otherwise due. Thus writes
the Popes zealous and learned Friar Sot^: whose Doctrine I admit for the
truth, and willingly subscribe thereunto. He teach^th us four things. First,
that the satisfaction must proceed wholly from the debtour. Secondly* that
there must be no preventing nor interuenting Grace of the creditour. Popish
satisfaction is impossible.
Thirdly, that there must be equivalent restitution. Fourthly* that that
equivalent reddition must be a work, which otherwise is not due. These four
conditions, (which our Popish M. Soto the Dominican Friar requires in every
Satisfaction,) when any Papist can find in any one of their Merits or
Satisfactions, I will be his bondsman, neither shall the Popes holiness be
excepted. But to come to this Bondage upon this Covenant, I am in no fear at
all: For the Ethnicke Philosopher Aristotle, Arist. in. 8. Ethic. cap. 7.
perceived by the natural discourse of right Reason, that no man can ever make
condign Satisfaction to God, and his natural Parents. For which respect,
Christ himself teaches us, Luke, 17. v. 20.
to acknowledge our selves unprofitable servants; even when we have done the
best we can. Iac 3 v. 2.
For which respect, S. ^amos assures us, that the best livers offend in many
things. For which respect, Aquin. 1.2. q. 114. ar. 1. in corp.
the Popish angelical and chiefest Doctor Aquinas, (whose Doctrine two
several Popes have confirmed for Authentical,) tells both the Pope and us
very constantly; that God is not simply and truly said to be debtour to us,
but to him self and his own Promise, which he freely without all our
deserts, made unto us. These are his express words: Manifestum est autem,
quod inter Deum et hominem est maxima inaequalitas, (in infinitum. N. distant;)
totum quod est hominis bonu^, est a Deo. Vnde non potest hominis a Deo esse
iustitia secundum absolutam aequalitatem, sed secundum proportionem quandam; in
quantum, scz. vterque operatur secundum modum suum. Modus autem et mensura
humanae virtutis homini est a Deo, et ideo meritum hominis apud Deum esse non
potest, nisi secundum praesuppositione^ diuinae ordinationis; ita, scz. vt id
homo consequatur a Deo per suam operationem, quasi mercedem; ad quod Deus ei
vertutem operandi destinauit: It is manifest, that between God and man, there
is exceeding great inequality, (for they differ infinitely:) All the good that
man has, is of God. Wherefore man's justice received of God, can not be
according to perfect and absolute equality, but after a certain proportion;
to weet, in as much as either works according to his condition. Now, man has
the measure and condition of his Virtue from God; Lo, man can not merit any
thing condignely, or properly.
and therefore man's Merit can not be with God, save only according to the
supposall of Gods holy ordinance: so to weet, that man may attain that at
Gods hand by his working, as reward; to which God has appointed his power of
working. Thus disputes the graund Papist Aquinas; whose Discourse does utterly
overthrow all Popish Merit, as the late Popish Council of Trent has defined
the same. For first (mark well my words,) Aquinas teaches us the truth:
viz. that where there is no perfect equality, there can be no Merit properly.
Secondly, he grants, that there is infinite inequality between God and
man. There is no proper merit in man.
Thirdly, he confesses freely, that man's justice is not absolute, but
imperfect. Fourthly, he acknowledges as truly as constantly, that man does
merit nothing in Gods sight, save only by way of his free acceptance. Mark
and understand this point aright.
Mark well, and forget not these words; ( Nisi secundum praesupposuionem
diuinae ordinationis: Save only according to the supposall of Gods
ordinance.) Fifthly, he plainly avouches, that eternal life is not hyre
properly, but as it were hyre. Mark the words ( Quasi mercedem, as hyre;) for
they are emphaticall, and wholly opposite to condign Merit of man's Works.
These arguments do plainly convince; and yet to gratify our Jesuit, (whose
favor I greatly desire in Christ,) I will add for a supplement, a double
testimony of two very learned Friars; the one is Josephus Angles, Angles, in 2.
sent. page 103.
a Popish Bishop and Franciscan Friar: the other is Robertus Bellarminus, a
Jesuiticall Friar and Romish Cardinal. Angles has these express words:
Eodem etiam modo considerantes omnes alij doctores sancti, naturalem solu^modo
bonorum operum valorem, et illum, a valor et iusta vitae aeternae astimatione
longissime distare perpendentes; prudenter dixerunt, opera nostra non esse
meritoria, aut digna vitae aeternae. Ex lege tamen sieve conuentione, sieve
promissione facta nobiscum, opera bona hominis cum adiutorio gratiae Dei fiunt
aeternae vitae digna, et illi aequalia; quae, seclusa illa Dei promissione
(quae passim in sacris literis reperitur,) fuissent tanto premio prorsus
indigna: All other holy Doctors also, considering after the same manner the
natural value only of Good works, and perceiving that it is exceeding far
distant from the value and just estimation of eternal life, said wisely; that
our works are not Meritorious, nor worthy of eternal life: Yet for the
Covenant and Promise made to us, the Good works of man with the help of Gods
grace, are worthy of eternal life, and equal to it: which for all that, the
Promise of God (which is frequent in the holy Scripture) set apart, were
altogether unworthy of so great reward. Thus discourses our Popish Bishop,
our holy Friar, even to the Pope himself, after the humble kissing of his holy
feet, to use his own words: Who though he bestirre himself more then a
little, to establish the condign Merit of man's works; yet does he in his
own kind of dispute, utterly confute and confound himself. For first, he
freely grants, that S. Chrysostom, and all the rest of the holy Doctors
with him, affirm constantly, and uniformly with one voice and assent, (a
testimony almost incredible, to proceed from the mouth of a Papist, so near
and so dear to the Pope,) that Good works neither are meritorious, nor worthy
of eternal life. Secondly, he grants freely, that the best Works,
considered in their own nature and kind, are unworthy of eternal life.
Thirdly, he grants willingly, and tells the Pope roundly, (but after the
kissing of his holy feet,) that Good works, even as they proceed of grace and
assistaunce of the holy Ghost, are altogether unworthy of eternal life, if
Gods Promise and free acceptance be set apart. Lo, the Papists grant as
much as we desire.
Which three points doubtless, are all that we desire to be granted,
concerning the Doctrine of Good works. And consequently, though the Papists
never cease to impeach, accuse, slander, and condemn us in this behalf; yet
do we indeed defend nothing herein, (as is evident to the indifferent
Reader,) but that very doctrine, which their best Doctors in their printed
Books have taught us; yea, in those selfsame Books, which are dedicated to
the Pope himself. The conceits which the Friar Bishop alleges, to make
good the late decreed condign Merit of Works, are very childish, too too
gross, and frivolous. For first, where he affirms the Fathers and Doctors,
to speak of Good works only in respect of their natural value, as he
terms it: I answer, that that silly Gloss and Exposition, is only
invented by him and his fellows; Philip. 3.9. Romans 10.4. Tit. 3.5. 1. Cor.
1.30. 2. Cor. 5.19. Romans 8. v. 1, 2.3.4. Romans 5. v. 14. Reu. 7. v. 14. Reu. 3.
v. 4.
so to salve their beggarly doctrine, if it possibly could be. For, not only
the holy Scripture every where contradicts it, but the Doctors also teach the
flat contrary. For Durandus says plainly, that Meritu^ de condigno, is
properly of the worthy, to which that is simply due, which is equal by virtue
of the work. Yea, he adds; that God gives not eternal life, of justice;
but of mere liberality, in that he freely accepts our works. Aquinas
affirms constantly, that man can not possibly have any Merit with God, save
only according to the supposall of his holy Ordinance. He says further; that
Eternal life is not properly a Reward, but as it were a Reward. Bernard
avouches Christianly; All this is already proved.
that God may justly deny eternal life to the best Works of all, and yet do
no injury to any man; no not to the holiest liver upon earth. Bellarmine
lately made Cardinal for his stout and learned defense of Popery, does not
only quite overthrow the frivolous distinction of Friar Angles, but also
unawares, turns Popery vpside down: For, he approoueth the sentence and
opinion of Durand, and teaches plainly; That the best livers, can not
absolutely and condignely require any thing at Gods hand, seeing all goodness
proceeds only from God; save only in respect of his Promise freely made to
man, without all deserts of man. These are the express words of the
Cardinal: Mark the Cardinals words well, and understand them soundly.
Quod vero attinet ad rem ipsam, Durandi sententia: si nihil aliud vellet, nisi
merita nostra non esse ex condigno, sieve ex iustitia absolute, sed tantu^ ex
hypothesi, id est, posita liberali Dei promissione, non esset reprobanda.
Bellar. de iustif. tom. 3. col. 1296. ct col. 1298.
Sequitur: respondeo, absolute non posse hominem a Deo aliquid exigere, cum
omnia sint ipsius; tamen posita eius voluntate et pacto, quo non vult exigere a
nobis opera nostra gratis, sed mercedem reddere iuxta proportionem operum, vere
possumus ab eo mercedem exigere; quomodo seruus non potest absolute a Domino
suo vllum premiu^ postulare, cum omnia qua seruus acquierit, Domino suo
acquirat; tamen si Domino placeat donare illi opera sua, et pro eijsdem tanquam
sibi non debitis mercedem promittere, iure mercedem pro suis operibus
postulabit: Touching the matter it self, Durands opinion: if he had no other
meaning, but that our Merits are not absolutely just and condign, All the
good deeds we can possibly do, are Gods own; and so we can merit nothing of
God with them.
but only hypothetically in respect of Gods liberal Promise, could not be
rejected. Sequitur. I answer; that man can not absolutely exact any thing of
God, seeing all things are Gods own; howbeit, his Will and Covenant being
made, that he will not exact our works of us freely, but will reward them
according to their proportion; we may truly require hyer of him; like as a
Bondsman can not absolutely require any reward of his Lord, seeing every thing
which the Bondsman gayneth, is gotten and gained to his Master: yet for all
that, if it shall please his Lord and Master to bestow his works on him, and
to promise reward for the same, as if they were not due unto him; then may the
Bondsman justly demand reward for his works. Thus disputes Friar Cardinal
Bellarmine: and consequently, Mark well for Christ's sake for Popery bleedeth
unto death.
this is all that all Papists say, or possibly can say, for the life of their
Pope and Popish doctrine. And yet it is evident to every judicious Reader, that
the Cardinal has unawares quite overthrown Popery, and turned it vpside
down: For, out of his Doctrine, these points are deduced most manifestly.
Durandus his opinion, has put him to his best Trumpe. Durandus his opinion (as
is already proved,) is this: viz. That the Merit of Works in the best liver
on earth, can not truly and properly be called, Meritum ex condigno, Condign
Merit; but only in way of Gods free acceptance, and in respect of his
Promise freely made to man* without all deserts. Durands reasons, (for the
truth will in time ever prevail,) grants his opinion in this sense before
touched. For he says plainly; If Durand admit Merit in respect of Gods
Promise, his opinion can not be reproved. Jesuit Friar Cardinal makes good
that Doctrine, which my self do here defend; as which is the self same,
that Durand holds. And consequently, if Bellarmine and his fellows, with
their Popish followers, would stand constantly to their own Doctrine, which
they publish in printed Books; we and they should soon agree, and these
great Controversies would have an end. Austen says gravely; Aug. lib. 9.
Confess. cap. 13.
Vae etiam laudabils vitae hominum, si remota misericordia discutias eam: Woe
even to the best liue^ upon earth; if thou examine his life, thy Mercy set
apart: Now here I would admonish the gentle Reader by the way, to distinguish
these two words aright with me; viz. Justly, and Condignely. For although the
children of God may in respect of his merciful Promise, require even of
Justice, Mark this well.
reward for their Good works; yet can they not any way, Condignely require the
same. The disparitie consists in this; viz. that albeit Gods Promise be
enough to make the reward Justly given, yet it is not sufficient to make our
Works Condignely worthy of the same. The reason is evident: because Justice
here spoken of, is not absolute, but respective, connotating the free Promise
of God: but Condignitie is absolute, connotating intrinsecally the perfection
and worthiness of the work.

Secondly, Secundo principaliter.
after Friar Angles had disputed this question, pro et contra, both
affirmatively and negatiuely; in the end he plainly confesses (though
unawares) the selfsame Doctrine, which I now contend to prove. Angles in 2.
sent. page 107.
He tells us forsooth, that the price of every thing may be equal to the
value and worth of the same thing, two ways: First (says he) of the Nature of
the thing: Secondly, of the Pact, Covenant and Promise of him, that does
promise the same thing. For (says our Friar Bishop,) if one Penny be the
full value answearable to the work; yet if a greater reward be promised, which
far exceeds the worth and value of the work wrought; then, that reward is
also due by covenant. and hereupon, this great learned Fry^r Bishop
concludes rounly, (I had almost said, learnedly; The Bishop confuteth him
self, he needs no adversary.
) that though our Good works come far short of eternal life, if we respect
the worthynesse thereof; yet do they condignely merit the joys of Heaven, if
we respect the free Promise of Christ Jesus. And this condignitie of Works,
our Friar calls aequalitie of Promise only. But here our Bishop Fryeo,
(by his favor I speak it, A very fond distinction, invented without rhyme or
reason.
) shows himself a very noddie: For doubtless, Promise, albeit it does
truly infer Justice, in respect of him that promises; yet can it never
infer Equality, between the work and the reward. For example sake; If our
Friar should wish me to lend him my Cloak to defend him from a shower of
rain, and withal should promise, Tit. 1. v. 2. Heb. 6.10. 2. Tim. 4.8. Iac.
1.12. Iac. 2.5. Psalm. 130.3 Psalm. 143.2.
to give me an hundred pounds for the loan; then doubtless were it true to
say, that after such loan, an hundred pounds were of Justice due unto me; yet
withal it would be most true also, that such loan of my Cloak were not the
condign Merit of that hundred pounds? I willingly grant; that eternal life
is due to the works of Gods elect, and that it is as well the crown of
Justice, as of Mercy: But withal I constantly avouch, that God bestows it
on his Elect freely for his own names sake, and not for any merit,
worthiness, or condignitie of their Works. S. R. page 257.
And the Friars answer is childish and frivolous; when he denies the loan of
the Cloak, to have such virtuall and proportionate equality to an Hundred
pounds, as man's Merits have to Glory. For first, the Promise is equal, and
holds in both alike. Secondly, the Promise does not add any Worthiness to the
work: and consequently, there is still as great inequality after the Promise,
as was before the same. Thirdly, there is infinite distance between God and
Man; the Work, and the Reward: as their Angelical Doctor has well observed.
But the distance and inequality between the Loan of the Cloak, and the
Hundred pounds, is finite and limited in them both. Thus much for this
Conclusion. Note well the eleventh Conclusion following.
If any desire a larger Discourse; he may peruse my Survey, and the Downe-fall
of Popery; where he shall find soundly answered, what possibly can be objected
against the same. Note well the eleventh Conclusion following.

The 8. Conclusion.
The doctrine of the Popish Schoole-doctors, in which they affirm Charity to
be the form of Faith, is frivolous, ridiculous, false, erroneous, and absurd.
I prove it, first; because in things distinguished intrinsecally, one can not
be the form of another. If our Friar deny this, he will prove him self an
Ass; Si non actu, at saltem in potentia: For an Ass by this grant, may be
his form, and so give him the denomination of that worthy Beast. Now, that
Faith and Charity are distinct Theological virtues; 1. Cor. 13. v. 13.
S. Paul affirms it so plainly, as no denial can be made thereof. Secondly,
because of things in perfect essence and nature, the latter can not possiblely
be the form of the former; and consequently, seeing Faith goes before
Charity, Charity cannot possiblely be the form thereof. The antecedent is
evident; because whatsoever comes to a thing after the essential
constitution thereof, is merely extrinsecall and accidental to the same. The
consequent is likewise evident; because we can neither please God, nor yet come
to God, Heb. 11. v. 6.
but by Faith in him. It is the flat and constant Doctrine, of the chosen
vessel of our Lord Jesus. Augustine proves it, in these golden words: Aug.
in Epist. Ioha^. tract. 10. in initio.
O^us autem fidej i^sa dilectinest: But Charity it self is the work of
Faith. This testimony strikes dead; it plainly conuinceth; it is
unanswerable.

The 9. Conclusion.
Faith though it be a work, Ioh 6. v. 29.
as the Papists truly object; yet does it not justify as a work or quality,
neither yet for any worthiness or condignitie in the same. Romans 3 28. Romans
5.1. Romans 10. v. 3.4. Act. 13.39. Phil. 3 9.
Explico. When we teach, hold, and defend, according to the uniform consent of
the holy Fathers, and constant doctrine of the Apostle, That man is justified
by Faith only, without Works; we neither deny Faith to be a work; nor yet
affirm it to justify as a work. For, Faith being taken two ways; properly,
Fides sumitur dupliciter, proprie et sinapliciter, seu figurate et re. latiue.
according to the nature of Faith; and respectively, as it apprehends his
object: it is said to justify the latter way, not the former; not as it is an
habit in us, but as it apprehends Christ without us. We neither make Faith
a part, nor yet a cause of our justification, either efficient, or formal, or
final; albeit I willingly grant, hold, By Faith, Christ's obedience and
merits are applied to us.
defend and believe, that it is the material cause; that is, (as the Schools
term it,) Causa sine qua non, the cause without which justification shall not
have effect. Which our savior Christ shows evidently, By Faith, Christ's
obedience and merits, are applied to us. Ioh. 3. v. 17. Mar* 16 v.. 7. H^b.
11. v. 7
when he tells us; That God so loved the World, that he gave his only
Son, that none believing in him, should perish, but have eternal life. And
in an other place; That whosoever believe not, shall be condemned. To which the
holy Apostle is consonant, when he affirms it, impossible to please God
without Faith. I grant yet further; that when there be many graduall effects
of one and the same cause, then the former may fitly be tea^med the Material
cause of the latter: and consequently, although Good works can not be any
cause of Justification, Bona opera sunt medium sine quo non salutis.
which goes before them, yet may they be the Material cause, and causa sine
qua non, of Salvation, which follows them: For Good works are in sort
necessary to Salvation; Sup^rius, concl. 4.
as is already proved, in the fourth Conclusion. For, as Vocation,
Justification, Regeneration, and Glorification, are the effects of
Predestination; even so by Gods holy ordinance, See the 5. Conclusion. and
note it.
being Predestinate, we are called by the hearing of his Word, unto Faith:
which apprehending the righteousness of Christ Jesus, is the cause of our
Justification. After we be Justified, of our Justification proceeds
Regeneration; as who having remission of our sins, Romans 5.1. 1. Cor. 1.3. 2.
Cor. 4.16. Gal. 6.15. Mat. 7.17.
and being ingraffed in Christ by Faith, are indewed with more abundant Grace
of his holy spirit: through which we are daily more and more Regenerate, and
made new creatures in Christ. After we be Regenerate, out of our Regeneration,
spring Good works both internal and external; as who being made Good trees,
begin to bring forth Good fruits; and so continuing, are brought at the length
of Gods free Mercy, to the perpetual possession of Eternal life. For the
proof of Justification by Faith without Works, I refer the Reader to my
Suruay: which Book, if he once peruse and ponder it seriously, he can not but
be fully satisfied in this behalf.

The 10. Conclusion.
Good works, though they neither be parts nor causes of Justification, nor
merit eternal Glory condignely, (as is already proved;) yet must we do
them, for these three respects: Gods, Ours, and our Neighbors. In respect of
God, for these three ends: Ioh. 15.12. Ioh. 14. v. 1^.
Again thus; Bring forth fruits worthy of repentance: Every Tree that
brings not forth good fruit, shall be cut down and cast into the fire.
Again thus; Mat. 3. v. 8.10.
Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thine heart, Mat. 22. v. 37.
with all thy soul, and with all thy mind. Again in these words; Be ye
therefore perfect, as your heavenly Father is perfect. Again thus; He chose us
in Christ, Mat. 5.48.
that we should be holy in his sight. Again thus; We are his workmanship,
Ephesians. 1.4. Ephesians. 2.10.
created in Christ Jesus unto good works, which he has prepared for us to
walk in. Mat. 5.16.
that they may see your good works, and glorify your Father which is in
Heaven. Romans 12.^.
S* Paul exhorts the R^manes, To offer up their bodies a lively, holy, and
acceptable Sacrifice unto God. Yea the Scriptures teach us every where, to show
our thankfulness unto God by our holy and godly lives. In respect of our
selves for sundry ends; Trent: 2. Pet. 1. v* 10.
Quapropter fr^tres magis satagite, vt per bona opera c^r^a^ vestra^ vocationem
et electionem fac^utis. Again thus; Whom he has Predestinate, those has he
Called; Romans ^.30.
and whom he has Called, those has he Justified, and whom he has justified,
those has he glorified. as The Apostle teaches us; Romans 6. v. 23.
Death is the stipend of sin: And our M. Christ tells us; That every evil
Tree, which brings not forth good fruit, Mat. 22. v. 13.
shall be cut down and cast into the Fire. Yea, that he which had not on a
Wedding garment, was bound hand and foot, and so cast into utter darkness.
Mat 25. v. 34.
possess the kingdom prepared for you from the beginning of the world: for I
was hungry, and ye gave me to eat; I was thirsty, and ye gave me to
drink. For which respect; Moses is said to have had regard unto reward. Heb.
11. v. 26.
And even so is reward promised to him that gives but a cup of cold Water in
Gods name. Mat. 10. v. 42.
In respect of our Neighbors, for diverse considerations: Mat. 18.7.
you are the cause, that Gods name is blasphemed among the Gentiles. Romans 2.24.
Mat. 5.16.
that they may see your Good works, and glorify your Father which is in
Heaven.

Now because our late Popes, our newly hatched Jesuits, and Jesuite^ Papists,
The sect of the Jesuits began, A.D. 1540.
are so full of Good works, (at least in their own corrupt persuasions,) that
they are able with the same, to merit Heaven and eternal Glory; I am content
to employ my Pen, in speaking a little thereof, that the world may understand
the same, for edification sake. I will say nothing of the outrageous behavior
of the Romish Papists, in time of Carn^uale at Rome; when and where for many
days (or rather weeks together,) men and women gadde up and down in the
streets, and into houses; some on Horseback, and some on foot; transformed
under Vizardes, men into woman's apparel, and women into man's apparel: and
so to the great scandal of all good people that see or hear thereof, work
wickedness (as the same goes, intolerable and odible to God and all good
men. Two kinds of notorious works, I will only touch for the present; the
Stews, and the Hospital De sancto spiritu. The Romans forsooth, are so
mortified and so holy; partly by the Pope for the time being, who (if he be
truly named) is not only Holy, but Holiness it self in the abstract; The
Pope is now called, Holiness.
partly, by the preachinges and other instructions of Jesuits and Iesuited
Popelinges, that the Pope forsooth, must perforce permit them to have common
Brothelhouses or Stews, so to satisfy their beastly and inordinate carnal
lusts. I mean not here to dispute, whether sin in some cases may be
tolerated, or not; In the regiment of the Church.
I have written of that subject, else where at large. But this I mean for the
good of the Reader, and edification-sake; to make it evident to the world, that
the Romish Papists, (who glory in their meritorious works,) are the worst
livers upon earth. The Stews are not sufficient, to bridle the outrage of the
inordinate carnal lust of the Saints at Rome: but they must further have a
second Toleration or Dispensation, for an Hospital of Charity forsooth; The
Hospital of the Holy Ghost.
called for the surpassing virtue thereof, by the name of the holy Ghost. The
end of this Hospital is this, to keep Whores and Whore-maisters, from
villainous and most cruel Murders. Every night, one of that holy Hospital
whatcheth diligently; and turning about a Wheel made for the purpose,
receives newborn Bastardes into their c^stodie. The Wheel is so
artificially contrived, that they can not know or see who brings the said
Infant-bastardes. The Children are courteously received, and have usage and
education as if they were legitimate. The Hospital is very rich, and well able
to maintain all that are brought thither: It finds more, and more able
friends, then any other Hospital: More Lands and Goods are given to it, then
to any other. And no marvel; seeing all that the Romish Saints do give to
it, is given for the maintenance and education of their beloved Bastardes.
When these Bastards come to years of discretion, either sooner or latter, as
it seems good to the Fathers; then they come to visit the said Hospital,
and to see their own Bastardes; and for a work of Charity, they make choice
of those whom they love and like the best. Will not such Holy works of mercy,
merit Heaven condignely? by Popish Faith and Divinity, it is approved with
great solemnity. But how (will some say) do the Fathers know their own
Bastardes? I answer, that it is a thing very easy to be done: For, the
Fathers and Mothers, (or some by their procurement,) do hang about the necks
of their Bastardes, special Tokens or Jewels, by which they may know them an
other day: Which Tokens, the Governors of the Hospital by the Laws thereof,
(which they are sworn to obey, observe, and perform,) must carefully from
time to time keep, and see that they never be taken from their Necks, during
their aboade in the said Hospital. This Story, I have for this end here
inserted, that the world may know the meritorious works of the Pope, Jesuits,
and other Romish Papists. The censure whereof, I leave to the judicious and
honest Reader.

The 11. Conclusion.
As it is true, by the constant Doctrine of best Learned Popish Writers; that
the best Workers are not condignely meritorious of Eternal life, without the
Promise of God made to reward them. So it is in like manner true also; that
albeit by reason of Gods Promise, the Reward be justly both given and expected;
Tit. 1. v. 2. 2. Tim. 4. v. 8. Iacobi. cap. 1. v. 12. Heb. 6.10.
yet neither does nor can the said Promise ( in re^ veritate and true
estimation of the Work and the Reward,) make the work condignely meritorious
of the same Reward; Eternal glory I ever understand. This Conclusion
consists of two parts; the former whereof is copiously proved, in the
seventh Conclusion afore-going. See and note well the 7. Conclusion.
The latter I prove, by many means and invincible reasons. John de Combis, Io
de Combis in compend. theol. verit.
in these very words: Deus nes punit citra condignum, remunerat vltra
condignum: God punishes us less then we be worthy, and rewards us far
above our deserts. So says Abbot Bernard, in these express words: Bern.
ser. 1. in annunciat. B.M.V.
Aeternam vitam nullis potes operibus promereri, nisi gratis detur et illa:
(Thou must believe) that thou can not merit eternal life with any Works,
unless it be freely given (of mercy.) See the 6. Conclusion, and note it well.
See the same Bernard more at large, in the sixth Conclusion. So faith S. Austen,
in these most golden words: Aug. Ep. 105. Tom. ^.
Nec misericordia impedit veritatem, qua plectitur dignus; nec veritas
misericordiam, qua liberatur indignus. Qua igitur sua merita iactaturus est
liberatus, cui si digna suis meritis redderentur, non esset nisi damnatus?
Neither does Mercy hinder the Truth, with which he is punished that so
deserves; neither does Truth hinder Mercy, which delivers him that is
unworthy of it. How therefore can he boast of his Merits, which is delivered;
who, if he were dealt withal according to his Merits, should of necessity be
damned? 1. Cor. 4. v. 7.
which thou have not received? and if thou have received it, why boastest thou
of it, as if thou had not received it? Again, the same Apostle proves
our holy Father Abraham, to have been justified by Grace, not of Works. Romans 4.
v. 2.3.4
If Abraham (says he) be justified by Works, he has Glory, but not with
God. For what says the Scripture? Genesis 1 v. 6. Gal. 3.6. Iac. 2.23.
Abraham believed God, and it was reputed to him for righteousness. But to him
that works, wages is not imputed according to Grace, but according to debt.
Yet to him that works not, but believes on him which justifies the wicked,
his Faith is reputed to him for righteousness, according to the purpose of the
Grace of God. Again in an other place, the same Apostle has these words: By
Grace you are saved through Faith, and that not of your selves, Ephesians. 2. v. 8.
for it is the Gift of God; not of Works, least any man should boast. Again
thus: Not of the Works of justice which we have done, Tit. 3.5.
but according to his Mercy has he saved us. That is it, that S. Austen says
in these most excellent words: Aug. Ep. 105.
Cum Deus coronat merita nostra, nihil aliud coronat quam munera sua: When God
crowns our Merits, he crowns no other thing then his own gifts. Again,
in these words: Vbi supra.
Cui debetur vita aeterna, vera iustitia est; si autem vera iustitia est, ex^e
non est; desursu^n est descendens a patre luminum, vt haberes eam: Eternal
life is true justice to him, to whom it is due: But if it be true Justice, it
is not of thy self; it is from above, descending from the Father of light,
that thou might have the same. Luke 17.10.
which possibly she can do; then have we done nothing in deed, save only that
which we were of duty bound to do. Upon which words, the religious and
learned Friar Ferus gives this commentary: Ferus in Mat. lib. 2. cap. 12. p.
232. Job. 9.
Quantacunque N. bona feceris, semper tamen ma^ora, vel saltem plura committis
mala, vt verissime dicere possis te se ruum inutilem. Hoc sanctus ille Job
inter flagella Dei agnoscens, deplorat; si inquit, iustum me d^xero, os meum
condemnabit me: How good so ever works thou shall do, yet thou always
committest either greater, or at least mo evils; so as thou may truly say,
thou art an unprofitable servant. This holy Job lamenteth, in time of his
afflictions: If, says he, I say I am just, my mouth shall condemn me.
Again, the same Friar Ferus has these express words; Ferus, vbi supra. fol.
231. B.
Non plane interijt Adam ille vetus; vnde fit, vt cum gratia sua Christus ad
bona opera extimulat; ipse Adam, hoc est, peruersa natura, adijcit vel aliquid
propriae complacentiae, vel proprij commodi. etc. Quo fit, vt opus ipsum
nunquam sit perfectum, quamuis ex misericordia Dei non imput^tur pijs: Old Adam
is not yet wholly extinct; whence it comes, that as Christ by his Grace
provoke to Good works; so old Adam, that is, corrupt Nature, either adds
some part of proper complacence, or private commodity, and the like. Whereupon
it comes, that the Work is never perfect, although of Gods Mercy it be not
imputed to the godly. The same Friar Ferus in an other place, has these
express words; Ferus, vbi supra, lib. 3. cap. 16. fol. 290. B.
Ob id Christus toties passionem suam praedixit, vt penitus cordibus
discipulorum infigeret, vnde et ipsorum et nostra falus pendeat; nempe, in solo
merito Christi, non in operibus nostris. Nos. N. etiamsi omnia et faceremus,
aut pateremur, ne pro vno quidem illoque minimo peccato satisfaceremus. E
Christi igitur merito salus nostra pendet; huc igitur nunquam non respiciendu^:
For that end did Christ so often foretell his Passion, that he might deeply
ingraffe in the hearts of his Disciples, from whence both theirs and our
Salvation comes; to weete, from and in the only Merit of Christ, not in our
own Works: For we, although we should do or suffer all things; yet could we
not satisfy for any one Sin, no not for the least of all: Our Salvation
therefore depends upon the Merit of Christ; to which we must ever have an
eye. Again in an other place, the same learned Friar has these words; Ferus
in Mat. lib. 1. cap. 4 in initio.
Quod nostra opera minus habe^t, id supplent opera Christi. Imo sola opera
Christi, merita nostra. Omnes. N. iustitiae nostrae, pannus menstruatae, etc.
What our works want, that Christ's works do supply: Yea, only Christ's
works are our Merits: For, all our Works of righteousness, are filthy
Cloutes. Augustine avouches most constantly; That without Gods mercy, the
best liver on earth shall perish everlastingly. These are that holy, ancient,
and great learned Fathers words; Aug. lib. 9. confess. c. 13.
Vae etiam laudabili vitae hominum, si remota misericordia discutias eam: Woe
even to the laudable life of man, if without Mercy thou examine the same.
Bernard says; That the Sin which makes a division between God and us,
Bern. de adu. dom. ser. 6.
can not be wholly taken away in this life. Aquinas, (whose Doctrine sundry
Popes have made Authentical, Aquin. 12. q. 114. ar. 1.
) affirms resolutely; That all the Good which man has, is of God: and that
therefore man can have no Merit in Gods sight, save only according to the
presupposall of his holy Ordinance. Durandus, Durand. in ^. sent. d. 27. q. 2.
in med.
avouches peremptorily; That condign Merit properly, can not possibly be in
any man. Ninthly, because the Popish Friar and Bishop Angles, even in that
his Book which he dedicated to the Pope himself, Iosep. Angles, in 2.
sentent. d. 27. p. 103.
delivers this position for wholesome and sound Doctrine. viz. That man's
Merits are altogether unworthy of eternal Glory, if Gods Promise be set
apart. Tenthly, because Cardinal Bellarmine (whose Doctrine to the Papists,
is as Oraculum Apollonis,) tells us without stammering; That man can not for
his best Works or Merits, challenge any thing of God absolutely; seeing all
the goodness he has, comes from God: Wherefore he requires Gods Promise to
be added to man's Merit, as Aquinas, Durandus, and Angles, had done before him.
In one place, he has these express words: Bellarm. tom. 3. col. 1285.
At vt bono operi debeatur merces ex iustitia, conuentio vel promissio
necessaria est. Non enim tenetur vnus alterius obsequium acceptare, nisi
conuentio interuenerit. Deus autem non promisit mercedem vitae aeternae, nisi
per Christi gratiam regeneratis et adoptatis: But that reward be due of justice
to good Works, a covenant or promise is necessary. For one is not bound to
accept the service of another; unless there be a covenant: But God promised
not the reward of eternal life, save only to the regenerate through the grace
of God. In an other place; he has these words. Bellarm. tom. 3. col. 13^3.
Sed facilis est responsio. Nam dicitur Deus reddere debita nulli debens, quia
nihil vlli debet absolute, sed solum ex promissione and dono suo. Pari ratione
dicimus Deo, read, quia promisisti; non dicimus, read, quia accepisti;
quoniam fundamentum primum debiti diuini, non in opere nostro, sed in eius
promissione consistit. But the answer is easy. For God is said to pay debts,
though he be debtor to none; because he owes nothing to any absolutely, but
only in respect of his promise and free gift. In like manner, we say to God;
give because thou have promised. We say not give because thou have received.
Because the chief foundation of Gods debt, does not consist in our work, but
in his Promise freely made unto us. In an other place, he has these words.
Bellarm. tom. 3. col. 1300.
Primum igitur, opera iustorum, remoto pacto vel promissione, non esse
meritoria vitae aeternae ex condigno sieve ex iustitia, ita vt non possit Deus
sine iniustitia tale^ negare mercedem, satis probatum est. scriptura siquidem
and patres, vbicunque dicunt Deum fidelem esse and iustum in reddendo praemio,
semper aut fere semper mentionem faciunt promissionis. First, it is proved
sufficiently, that the works of the just, Gods covenant and promise set apart,
are not meritorious of eternal life condignely and justly, so as God can not
deny such reward without injustice. For the Scripture and the fathers,
whenever they say, God is faithful and just in rendering reward, do ever or
almost ever, make mention of his promise. Thus writes Cardinal Bellarmine,
that famous Iesuited Friar. Out of whose doctrine I observe many worthy
Lessons, to the confusion of the Pope and all his Popish vassals. Bellarmine,
but this is sufficient to every indifferent Reader.

The 12. Conclusion.
Condign merit of Works was not an Article of popish faith, for more then a
thousand, five hundred, and forty years after Christ. And consequently it
must needs be a rotten ragge of the new Religion; as which was hatched so long
after, the old Roman, Catholic and Apostolic religion. The proof of this
Conclusion is at hand; An. D. 1547.
because the late popish Council of Trent, made it an Article of popish Faith,
accursing and condemning to hell, all such as deny or not believe the condign
merit of man's works. S. R. p. 224. and p. 231.
The Jesuit S. R. in his pretensed answer to the Downfall of Popery, had no
other shift in the world to save the credit of their Council, and as it were
to hide the nakedness of that unchristian and plain diabolical course; but to
deny the council to have decreed co^digne merit, to be an Article of Popish
faith. For (says he, True merit and condign merit, is all one.
) the Council has no word of condign merit, but only of true merit. And
after he has cited the words of the Council, he adds these of his own.
Here are good works defined to be true merit of Glory, without determining
whether they be condign merit thereof, or no. Thus says our Jesuit; showing
himself to be either too too malicious, or else a very noddie. For to merit
truly and condignely, is all one. Otherwise, our Jesuit must tell us, (which
is impossible to be done;) how one can merit a thing truly, and for all that
not worthily and condignely deserve the same. Well, we have it freely granted,
because it can not be denied; that the Council of Trent defined true merit,
but not condign merit of works, to be an Article of popish faith. And
consequently, the Jesuit must volens nolens confess; that the Council
defined condign merit, under the name of true merit. For better confirmation
whereof I will add a testimony, that wounds the Jesuit at the heart, and
is indeed incurable. S. R. page 224. Note this Prosopopeia.
It is the Jesuits own sword, which he has put into my hands to kill him, as
one weary of his life, because Popery is proved the new Religion. These are
his own express words; I neither add, nor take any word, syllable, or jot
away, as I desire to be saved. Because as I think, (says our Jesuit) only
condign merit is true merit. O sweet Jesus? O heaven, O earth? O all Saints
in heaven, and all creatures on earth? be ye this day judges, between the
Jesuits and me. The Jesuit denies the Council to define condign merit,
but grants it to define true merit. This done, (O wonderment of the world,)
the same Jesuit within two leaves next following, (as a mad man bereeued of
his wits and senses) constantly affirms, only condign merit to be true
merit: but doubtless; Mark this point well.
if only condign merit (mark well my words for Christ's sake) be true merit,
as the Jesuit truly writes against himself, his Pope, and Council; An
Argument unanswerable.
and withal, if the Council defined true merit, as the Jesuit likewise truly
grants, and my self affirm; it follows of necessity, that the same
Council defined condign merit equiualently, and Popery to be the new
Religion. The truth (Gods name be blessed for it) must needs in time prevail,
now (sir Friar) let us hear your goodly sermon.

B. C.
Bell denies the Fathers to have ascribed any Merit to Good works proceeding
from Grace, for any dignity or worthiness in the works themselves, but
only from Gods Promise, and Merits of his Son. This I challenge for a
manifest untruth, when as plentiful testimonies want not, to prove, that
Works proceeding of Grace, are Meritorious, not only for his Promise or
Acceptance, but also for the dignity of the Works: Yea, the Scriptures are
evident in this point.

T. B.
I answer; that I have soundly confuted in the Conclusions afore-going, much
more then the Friar does here, or is ever able to object: Nevertheless, I am
content to answer in particular, to whatsoever seems to carry any color of
truth, though none in very deed.

B. C.
Mat. 20. v. 8.
Call the Worke-men, and pay them their hyre; where Reward is given to the
Works: Whereof it follows, that Works deserved it.

T. B.
I answer; worth half their hyre. Johannes Ferus a learned Popish Friar, in
his Commentaries upon this text, yields the same sense and meaning: these are
his words. Ferus in 20. cap. Mat. v. 8,
Docet haec Parabola, primo gratiam esse, non debitum, quicquid a Deo nobis
datur. Omnes. N. iustitiae nostrae tanquam pannus menstruatae. Imo, ne ipsae
passiones quidem huius temporis sunt condignae ad futuram gloriam. Quodsi
aliquando mercedem audis polliceri, scias non ob aliud esse debitum, quam ex
promissione diuina. Gratis promisit, gratis reddit. Si igitur Dei gratiam et
fauorem conseruare cupis, nullam meritorum tuoru^ mentione^ fac: This Parable
teaches us, that it is Grace, not Debt, whatsoever God gives us. For all our
righteousness, is as filthy Cloutes: Yea, the very afflictions which we endure
in this life, are unworthy of eternal life. If then thou hear Reward sometime
promised, know that it is no otherwise debt, save only for the Promise which
God has made. Freely he promised, and freely he pays the same. If therefore
thou will keep Gods favor and grace, make no mention of thy Merits. Thus
discourses this learned Friar, out of whose words I observe these worthy
Lessons. if we do but make mention of our Merits. But doubtless, if the
mention of our Merits barely made, be of force to take away Gods favor from
us; much more is the relying upon our Merits, and the challenging of Merit
for the same; able and of force to produce the same effect. Again in an other
place, the same Ferus has these express words. Ferus in cap. 9. Mat. v. 4.
Esa. 43.
Non attendebant quod per Propheta^ dicitur; Ego deleo peccata tua propter me;
propter me, inquit, non propter merita tua. Solus Christus remittit peccata, et
quidem gratis; nihil ad hoc faciunt merita nostra. Non quod intermittenda sunt
opera, sed soli Deo gloria danda, iuxta illud; si seceritis omnia quae
praecepta sunt vobis, dicite* serui inutiles sumus: They regarded not what the
Prophet says; Luc. 17. v. 10. Psalm. 113.
I put away thy sins, for mine own sake: He says, for mine own sake, not
for thy Merits. One and sole Christ does forgive sins, and that freely: our
Merits help nothing thereunto. Yet Good works may not be omitted; but the
glory must be given to God alone, according to that saying: If ye shall do all
that is commanded you, yet say; We are unprofitable servants.

B. C.
Likewise, our Savior says; Come ye blessed of my Father, possess you the
kingdom prepared for you, from the foundation of the world: For, I was an
hungered, and you gave me to eat. Mat. 25. v. 34.
Where our Savior signifies, that Heaven was given to Good works: for in
more usual significant words it can not be spoken, that Heaven is given as a
Reward to the works of mercy.

T. B.
I answer; first, that the word (For) is not here taken causaliter, Non
causaliter, sed consequutiue.
but consequatiue, to speak as the Schoole-doctors do; that is to say, it
does not connotate the cause, but the event: so as the sense is not, that they
did merit Heaven for giving Meat to Christ; but that by doing such charitable
Works, (which are the effects of a true justifying Faith,) they showed them
selves to be the Children of God, and the heirs of his Kingdom. And this
sense is clearly deduced out of the very text it self. For, seeing the
kingdom of Heaven (as Christ here avouches) was prepared for them before the
foundation of the world; and consequently, before they were borne, and so
before they could do any Good works; it follows of necessity, that their
Works could not merit Heaven; but only intimate to the world, that the
inheritance of Heaven was due unto them, as to the children of God the heirs
of the same. For (as the Apostle says,) If we be Sons, then are we also
Heirs; Romans 8. v, 17.
Heirs of God, and ioynt-Heyres with Christ. Yea, (as the same Apostle says
in an other place, Ephesians. 1. v. 4.
) As he chose us in him before the foundation of the World, that we should be
holy, and immaculate in his sight through love. Again, in an other place, thus
teaches us our Savior himself, Ioh. 15. v. 16*
Non vos me elegistis, sed ego e^egi vos, et positi vos, vt ^atis, et fructum
afferatis. You have not chosen me, but I have chosen you; I have put you that
ye may go and bring forth fruit. In another place, the Apostle has these
words: Whom he did predestinate, them also he called; Romans 8. v. 30.
and whom he called them also he justified; and whom he justified them also he
glorified* Johannes Ferus, that learned popish Friar writes in this manner.
Ferus in Ioha^ 15. cap. fol. 384 B.
Ego (inquit) elegi vos; potest autem verbum hoc intelligi, vel de electione ad
Apostolatum, vel de electione aeterna ad salutem. Vtrobique N. gratia est, non
meritum, and vtrumque per Christum fit. In ipso siquidem et per ipsum el^git
nos Deus, ante mun^i constitutionem. Sequitur; Ego (inquit) qui Deus sum, ^c
propterea nullius in^igens; ego qui punire et damnare popoteram, non
simpliciter assumpsi, sed elegi vos, multis alijs neglectis, ex massa
corruptionis. Sequitur; docet igitur Christus hoc verbo, quod ipse sit author
nostrae salutis. Deinde, quod gratia est quicquid habemus, sieve sint dona illa
iustificantia, Fides, Spes, Charitas, Spiritus sanctus etc. Sieve externa illa
dona, quae alio nomine dicuntur gratiae gratis datae. I (says he) have chosen
you. This Text may be understood, either of Election to the Apostleship, or of
eternal Election to Salvation. For in both there is grace* but no merit; and
both are wrought by Christ: for, in him and through him did God chose us, even
before the world was made. I (says he) who am God, and therefore stand in need
of nothing, I who can punish and condemn, have not simply taken you; but
rejecting many others* have chosen you out of the mass of corruption. Christ
therefore does by these words teach us, that he is the author of our
salvation. Then, that whatsoever we have, the same is grace; whether they be
those justifying gifts, faith, hope, charity, the holy Spirit, and the like; or
other external gifts which by another name are called graces freely given That
which our Savior says of Marie Magdalene, that many sins were forgiven her,
Luke 7.47.
because she loved much; does serve well to illustrate that* which is here
objected of the kingdom of heaven. For Christ's Argument is not drawn from
the cause but from the effect; as if Christ had said, we may know by her great
love, that great gifts are bestowed on her, that many sins are forgiven her:
for, that not remission of her sins proceeded from her love, but her love
from the forgiveness of her sins; the similitude of the debtors does plainly
insinuate the same unto us. Luke 7 41.
Christ told Peter of two debtors, whereof the one owed five hundred pence, the
other fifty; and that when they had not wherewith to pay, the creditour
forgave them both: he therefore demanded of Peter, whether of the debtours
loved the creditour more? Peter answered, that he to whom more was forgiven:
Christ approved Peter's answer, and concluded thereupon; Mark this discourse
well*
that seeing Marie Magdalene loved more, he might know that she had more
forgiven her Because says Christ, to whom little is forgiven, the same loves
little: neither is it possible, to draw any other meaning out of Christ's
words; The reason is evident, because Christ says plainly; that the debts
were freely forgiven the debtors, who were not able to pay the debts. For
otherwise, Mary's forgiveness could have no coherence, with the similitude of
the debtors. Out of this discourse, these points are evidently deduced. First,
that we are the sons of God, Ephesians. 2. v. 4.
not by nature, (for so we are his enemies, and the children of wrath but by
grace and adoption in Jesus Christ. Secondly, that God chose us to be his
children, before we were borne. Thirdly, that he chose us, not because we
were holy but that we might be holy and immaculate in his sight. Fourthly,
that he predestined us to be his children by adoption; not for any good
works which we either had done, or could do, but for his own good pleasure
to the glory of his grace: for, as to do any works at all before we be
borne, Psalm. 51 v. 7. Ephesians. 2. v. 4.
is altogether impossible; so to do good works when we are borne, (seeing we
are conceived in sin, borne in sin, and by nature the children of warth,)
is impossible in like manner. Fifthly, that all our good Works, are the effects
and fruits of our predestination. For if it be true, as it is most true, (else
the Apostle were a liar,) that we were elected to be holy and to do good
Works; it is also true, Ephesians. 2. v. 3. 5. Esa. 50.2. Psalm. 51.5.
(it can never be denied,) that holy life and good Works, are the effects of
our Election and Predestination in Christ Jesus. For this cause (says the
Apostle that Predestination proceeds freely of Gods eternal purpose; Romans 8.
v. 30. Ephesians. 1. v. 5.
Justification, of Predestination; and Glorification, of Justification: For
first, he choseth us in Christ; then he justifies us in Christ; thirdly and
lastly, he glorifieth us for his own Names sake.

B. C.
And beside in the same place, Damnation is given to had Works. Matt. 25. v.
34.
Get ye away from me ye cursed (says Christ,) into everlasting fire, which was
prepared for the devil and his angels. For I was an hungry, and you gave me
not to eat. Seeing then the Scripture declares plainly, that bad works
deserve damnation, and he the cause thereof; as plainly does it also signify,
that good Works merit heaven, and be the cause thereof.

T. B.
I answer, that there is great disparitie between salvation and damnation; and
therefore that good works can not merit salvation, though evil works be enough
for damnation. The reason hereof is evident, both in Philosophy and Divinity;
because as S. Dionysius Areopagita says, (and the popish angelical doctor
Aquinas approves the same,) Areopag. 2. de diuinis nomin. cap. 4. p. 267.
Aquin. 12. q. 18. a^t. 4.
Bonum ex integra causa existet, malum ex quolibet defectu, Good is of an
entire and whole cause, but evil comes of every defect. Yea, that more is
required to good then to evil, daily experience teaches us; for one may soon
do that hurt to his neighbor, which can not without great cost and long time
be cured again: For every child can tell our Jesuit, that one stroke is
able to kill a man; but twenty potions, and twenty chirurgicall actions, can
not restore him to life again: So one leap is enough, to cast one into the
bottom of a pit or deep gulf; but twenty hops, skippes, or leapes, will
not bring him up again. This Saint Austen well observed, Aug. tract. 72. in
Ioh. t^m 9. p. 262.
when he left in Writing to all posterity; That it is a greater thing to
justify the Wicked man then to make Heaven and Earth. Free Will of it self,
is able to do evil in the highest degree; but of it self it has no power at
all, either to do well, or to will well: For, it is God that works in you,
(says the Apostle,) both the will and the deed, even of his good pleasure.
Philip, 2. v. 1^*
Again, in an other place thus: To will is present with me; but I find no
means to perform that which is good. Romans 7.18.
Again, in an other place thus: No man can say that Jesus is the Lord, but by
the holy Ghost. Again, 1. Cor. 2. v. 3.
in an other place thus; we are not sufficient of our selves, 2. Cor. 3. v. 5.
to think any thing as of our selves; but our sufficiency is of God. All
which, and much more, our sweet Savior compriseth in these few, pethy, and
most golden words: For, without me ye can do nothing. Ioh. 15. v. 5.
Much more I could say to the same effect: but I refrain for two respects.
First, because I have regard to brevity. Secondly, for that this matter is
disputed at large, and soundly proved in the Conclusions afore-going;
especially, in the first, sixth, and seventh.

B. C.
We find also in Scripture, that men are said worthy of Reward; That you may
be counted worthy of the kingdom of God, for which also ye suffer. 2. These. 1.
v. 5.


T. B.
I answer; that it is one thing, to be counted or reputed worthy; an other
thing, to be worthy in very deed. For, God chose us before the world was made
in his son Jesus; Ephesians. 1.4. Ephos. 2.3.
not because we were worthy (as is already proved,) but that we might be
reputed worthy, for the merits of our Lord Jesus. 2. Cor. 5. v. 19.
For God (says The Apostle) was in Christ, and reconciled the world to
himself, not imputing their sins unto them. And this is confirmed in the
words following; which are these: 2. Cor. 5. v. 21.
For he has made him to be sin for us, who knew no sin, that we might be
made the righteousness of God in him. But more hereof, in mine answer to the
Jesuits next Objection: which I wish the Reader to join with this, and to
ponder them both seriously.

B. C.
Apoc. 3.4.
They shall walk with me in whites, because they are worthy.

T. B.
I answer, that they are worthy in deed; yet not for any proper worthiness
in themselves, but for the worthiness of Christ Jesus; which sense and meaning
I have already proved, and S John himself in another place, yields the
self same interpretation, in these words; These are they that came from great
tribulation, Apoc. 7. v. ^4.
and have washed their robes, and made them white in the blood of the Lamb.
Lo as before he called them worthy, so now he terms them white; as having
no spot or blemish in them, but as white, pure, and free from all sin: but
doubtless they were not free from sin, and pure or white in themselves; Iac.
3.2. 2. Cor. 5.
(seeing S. James teaches us, that the best of all, sin many ways) but they
were white and pure in Christ Jesus, whose blood and condign merits were
imputed to them, as if they had been their own: for as our sins were truly
and indeed imputed to Christ; so is his righteousness and his merits, truly
and in deed imputed to us: which the Prophet well considered, Psalm. 32.1. Romans
4.8. Philip. 3.9. Romans 4.3. and 23.24, 25.
when he said; Blessed is the man to whom God shall not impute sin. Which the
Apostle well considered, when he told us, that Abraham's Faith was imputed to
him for righteousness; and that the same was not written only for him, but
for us also that believe in Christ; who dyed for us, and rose again for our
justification: August. libr. 9. confess. cap. 13.
Which Saint Augustine well considered, when he pronounced woe to the best
liver upon earth, if Gods mercy were set apart: all which S. Pau^ knitteth up,
in these pithy and golden words. Christum pro nobis peccatum fecit Deus, eui
reconciliandi sumus; hoc est, sacrificium pro peccatis, per quod reconciliari
valeremus, ipse ergo peccatum, vt nos iustitia; nec nostra, sed Dei; nec in
nobis, sed in ipso; sicut ipse peccatum non suum; Aust. in Euchrist. cap. 41.
tom. 3. p. 118.
sed nostrum, nec in se, sed in nobis constitutum; similitudine carnis peccati,
in qua crucifixus est, demonstrauit. God made Christ sin for us, to whom we
are to be reconciled; that is, a Sacrifice for sins, by which we might be
reconciled. He therefore was made sin, that we might be made justice; not our
justice, but Gods justice, neither in us but in him: as he declared sin not
be his, but ours; not placed in him, but in us, by the semblance of sinful
flesh, in which he was crucified. Here I admonish the Reader, to remember well
these words of S. Augustine, Jpse ergo pec^atum, vt nos iustitia, etc, He was
made sin, that we might be made justice; not our justice, but Gods justice:
neither in us but in him. To remember well (I say) these words, because they
are of great consequence; for they prove evidently, that our formal justice
is not inherent in our selves, but in God. Which testimony of S. Austen, a
Father so ancient, so grave, so holy, so learned, so renowned, both in the
Romish Church, and throughout the Christian world, can not but perforce, it
must confound the Papists and strike them stark dead: for it conuinceth man's
inherent justice to be imperfect and the popish supposed condign merit of
Works, to be plain hypocritical. Iustitia nostra formalis est duplex,
subiectiua, et relatiua: haec perfecta, illa imperfecta.
I wish the Reader likewise to remember well, that man's formal justice is of
two sorts; subiectiue, and relative. This distinction may not be forgotten: Our
formal justice subiectiue, is imperfect; our relative, most perfect. Our
subiectiue and imperfect, is inherent in our selves; our relative and perfect
is in Christ Jesus, not in our selves. This distinction though subtle, yet
most excellent and necessary, is clearly deduced out of S. Austens words; not
formally, I grant, but virtually I constantly affirm; it serves to many
uses, and therefore ought it to be well remembered. Yea, it is Jmplici^e and
virtually comprised in the Doctrine of Saint ^aul, in very many places of his
Epistles. First, he tells us that he who knew no sin, was made sin for
us; 2. Cor. 5. v. 21.
that we might be the righteousness of God in him. Secondly, he plainly
anoucheth; that as by the disobedience of Adam, many became sinners; Romans 5.19.
so by the obedience of Christ, many shall be made righteous. Thirdly, he
constantly affirms; that Gods children have not their own righteousness,
but the righteousness of God through Faith in Christ Jesus. Philip 3. v. 9.
Fourthly, Romans 10.3.
that such as sought to stablish their own righteousness, could not attain
the righteousness of God. Fifthly, he boldly proclaims, that Christ is made
to us Wisdom, 1. Cor. 1.30.
Justice, Sanctification, and Redemption. In all which places, (if due
application be made thereof to the subject now in hand,) the distinction
deducted out of S. Austen will easily appear. For larger discourse whereof,
See the Antepast, in the last Chapter.
I refer the Reader to my Book, entitled, The Jesuits Antepast.

B. C.
S. Hierom not inferior to Bell, in Latin, Greek, or Hebrew, translateth
thus: That we may fight against Gabaa, Benjamin, and render unto it for the
works it deserves. Iudic. 20. v. 10.
And yet the formal word ( Deserves,) is neither in the Greek or Hebrew, but
thus: According to all the foolishness, which they have done in Israel.

T. B.
I answer, that S. Hierome respected the true sense and meaning, rather then
the formal words. Neither skilleth it, that the word ( Deserves) is not
formally expressed, seeing it is virtually employed. I have already proved,
that more is required to Good, then to Evil. In evil factes, condign desert
is never wanting; as which has it perfection, of every defect whatsoever. But
in supernatural and divine effects or acts, it is far otherwise. If the
wicked should not condignely demerite Hell, God were unjust in condemning them
thereunto. Yet if he should deny Heaven to the best liver on earth, (as Bernard
truly writes, and is already proved;) he should thereby do no wrong to any:
For, to punish one more then he deserves, is cruelty; but to reward one above
his deserts, is mercy. This our Savior himself did plainly demonstrate,
Mat. 20. v. 8.9.12.13.14.15.
in the Parable of the Workmen sent into his Vineyard. Friend, (says Christ)
I do thee no wrong; did not thou agree with me, for a Penny? take thine
own, and go thy way: Is it not lawful for me, to do as I will with mine
own? Is thine eye evil, because I am good? I will give to this last, as much
as to thee.

B. C.
S. Austen says, August epist. 105. ad Sixth.
As Death is rendered to the Merit of sin, as a stipend; so Eternal life to
the Merit of justice, is rendered as a stipend.

T. B.
I answer; that our Jesuit is a shameless, impudent, and deceitful dealer:
he both wrongeth S. Augustine, and more then a little abuses his reader. He
clippeth S. Austens words that go before, and cutteth away his words that
follow; and that done, he triumphs before his Reader, as if the victory were
his own: But, when I shall have truly related S. Austens words, as well
precedent, as subsequent; the Friar may return to the Pope with a broken head
and bloody face, and truly tell his Holiness, that Popery is overthrown. In
one place, S. Austen has these words. August. epist. 105. page 530.
Misericordia et veritas obuiauerunt sibi; vt nec misericordia impediat
veritatem, qua plectitur dignus; nec veritas misericordiam, qua liberatur
indignus. Quae igitur sua merita iactaturus est liberatus, cui si digna suis
meritis redderentur, non esset nisi damnatus? Sequitur: Vbi super, page 535.
Quod est ergo meritum hominis ante gratiam, quo merito percipiat gratiam, cum
omne bonum meritu^ nostrum non in nobis faciat nisi gratia; et cum Deus coronat
merita nostra, nihil aliud coronat quam munera sua? Sicut. N. ab initio fidei
misericordiam consequuti sumus, non quia fideles eramus, sed vt essemus; sic in
fine quod erit in vita aeterna coronabit nos, sicut scriptu^ est, in
miseratione et misericordia. Non itaque frustra Deo cantatur; et mifericordia
eius praeueniet me; et misericordiae eius subsequetur me. Vnde et ipsa vita
aeterna quae vtique in fine sine fine habebitur, et ideo meritis pracedentibus
redditur: tamen quia eadem merita quibus redditur, non a nobis parata sunt per
nostram sufficientiam, sed in nobis facta per gratiam, etiam ipsa gratia
nuncupatur, non ob aliud nisi quia gratis datur; nec ideo quia meritis non
datur, sed quia data sunt et ipsa merita quibus datur. Mercy and Verity have
met together; so as neither Mercy hinders Verity, in which he is punished
that is worthy; neither Verity is hinderance to Mercy, which delivers the
unworthy. What Merits therefore has he to boast of in his delivery, who
could not but be damned, if he had as his merits do deserve? What merit
therefore has man before Grace, with which he may receive Grace, seeing all
the good Merits we have, do only proceed of Grace: and seeing God when he
crowns our Merits, crowns nothing else but his own gifts? Like as from
the beginning of Faith, we attained Mercy, not because we were faithful, but
that we might be faithful: even so in the end, that is, in eternal life, he
will crown us, in mercy and compassion. The Prophet therefore says not to
God in vain: His Mercy shall both go before, and also follow me. Whereupon
eternal life, which in the end, shall be possessed without end, Note well the
sixth Conclusion, concerning Merit.
is rendered to precedent Merits; howbeit, because the same Merits to which it
is given, proceed not from any sufficiency in our selves, but are wrought in
us by Grace, it is called Grace for no other end, but for that it is freely
given; not for that it is not given to Merits, but because the Merits them
selves are given to which it is given. All these golden sentences go before
that, which our Friar Jesuit cites for his best ground. Out of which learned
Discourse, I observe these most worthy Lessons. Austen: in an other place he
has these words: Aug. vbi super* page 536.
Et haec, ne praeter mediatorem aliqua a^ia via quaereretur, adiecet; in
Christo Jesus Domino nostro: tanquam dicero* aud^to, quod stipendium peccati sit
mors, quid ^e desponis e^tollere, and contrariam mort^ vitam aeterna^ tanquam
debitum stipendium flagitare? cui debetur vita aeterna, vera iustitia est. Si
antem vera iustitia est, ex te non est; desursum est descendens a patre
luminum, vt haberes eam: si tamen habes eam, profecto accepisti: 1. Cor. 4.7.
quid N. habes, quod non accepisti? quapropter o homo, si accepturus es vitam
aetornam, iustit^ae quidem stipendium est; sed tibi grati est, cui grat^^ est
ipsa iusti^^ae, tibi N. tanqu^m debita redderetur; si ex t^ tibi esset
iusti^^^, cui debetur* Nunc ergo de plenitudine eius accepimus, non solum
gratiam, qui nunc just in laboribus v^que in finem vinimus* sed etiam gratiam
pro hac grati^, vt in requie postea sine fine vinamus. And least Eternal life
should be sought for by some other way, then by the Mediator: he added, in
Christ Jesus our Lord: as if he should say; hearing that death is the stipend
of sin. Why do thou extol thy self and desire as a due stipend,
Eternal life, which is contrary unto death? Eternal life is true justice to
him, to whom it is due. But if it be true justice, it is not of thy self, it
descends from above from the Father of Light, that thou may have it: yet
if thou have ^t, thou have undoubtedly received it; For what have thou, which
thou have not received? Wherefore, O man, if thou shall receive eternal life,
it is the stipend of justice, but to thee it is Grace, Mark well these words,
and the victory is our own.
to whom justice it self is Grace: for it should be given to thee, as due unto
thee, if thou had of thy self that justice to which it is due. Now
therefore we have received of his fullness, not Grace only, with which we now
live justly in travel unto the end; but Grace also for this grace, that we
may afterward live in rest world without end. In an other place, Saint Austen
has these express and golden Words. Aug. vbi. super page 538.
Humana quippe superbi^ tanquam praesumens de viribus liberi arbitrij excusatam
se putat, quando ignorantiae, non voluntatis, videtur esse quod peccat.
Secundum hanc excusatione^, inexcusabiles dicet Scriptura diuina quoscunque
sciences peccare conuincit; Romans 2.12. Cause. 1. q. 4. cap. ecclesia. et cap.
sequen^ (turbatur*) Et did. 38. cap. ignora^tia.
Dei tamen iustum iudicium, nec illis parcit, qui non audierunt: quicunque. N.
sine lege peccauerunt, sine lege peribunt. Et quamuis se ipsi excusare
videantur, non admittit hanc excusationem qui scit se fecisse hominem rectum,
eique obedientiae dedisse praeceptum, nec nisi eius quo male vsus est, libero
voluntatis arbitrio, etiam quod transiret in posteros, manasse peccatum. Neque.
N. damnantur, qui non peccauerunt, quandoquidem illud ex vno in omnes
pertransijt, in quo an^e propria in singulis quibusque peccata omnes communiter
peccauerunt. Ac per hoc inexcusabilis est omnis peccator, vel reatu originis,
vel additamento etiam propria voluntatis, sieve qui nouit, sieve qui ignorant,
sieve qui iudicat, sieve qui non iudicat: quia et ipsa ignorantia, in eis qui
intelligere noluerunt, sine dubitatione peccatum est; in eis autem qui non
potuerunt, poena peccati: Ergo in vtrisque non est iusta excusatio, sed iusta
damnatio. For the pride of man presuming of the force of Free Will, does think
himself excused; when that wherein he sins, seems to proceed of ignorance
rather then of Will. According to this excuse, holy Writ pronounces all those
inexcusable that sin willingly. Howbeit, the just judgment of God spares
not those, which never heard the truth: For, whosoever have sinned without Law,
shall perish without Law. And although they seem to excuse themselves, yet he
admits not this excuse, who knows that he made man right, and commanded
him to be obedient; as also that that sin which infected all posterities,
came no otherwise but by his Free Will, who used it amiss: for they are not
damned that sinned not; seeing that sin passed from one to all, in which, all
commonly have sinned, before they had every one severally any proper sins of
their own, and hence comes it, that every sinner is without excuse, either
through original guilt, or else by the act of his own proper Will added
thereunto; Whether he has known, or is ignorant; Whether it be he that
judges, or he that judges not; because in those that would not understand,
ignorance is sin without all peradventure: but in those that could not, it is
the punishment of sin, therefore in them both there is just damnation, but no
just excusation. Again, the same S. Augustine in an other place, has these
express words. August. in epist. 106. page 550. vbi super page 552. 1. Cor.
2.12.
Qui vero suis meritis praemia tanquam debita expectant, nec ipsa merita Dei
gratiae tribuunt, sed viribus propriae voluntatis: sequitur, nos inquit, non
spiritum huius mundi accepimus, sed Spiritum qui ex Deo est, vt sciamus quae a
Deo donata sunt nobis, ac per hoc et ipsum hominis meritum Donum est gratuitum,
nec a Patre luminum, a quo descendit omne datum optimum, boni aliquid accipere
quisquam meretur, nisi accipiendo quod non meretur. They that expect rewards,
as due to their merits; do not ascribe their merits to the grace of God, but
to the strength of their own will. We (says the Apostle) have not received
the spirit of this world, but the Spirit which is of God, that we may know what
God has given us; and so, that the merit of man is the Free gift of God:
neither can any man receive any good from the Father of Light, (from whom
descends every good gift,) by way of merit; unless he first receive that,
which he does not merit. Thus discourses S. Augustine: Vide super Concl. 6.
et nota valde.
out of whose Words, I observe these memorable Doctrines. First, that
whosoever expects reward as due to his merits, do greatly derogate from the
grace of God. Secondly, that man's merit (improperly so called,) is the Free
gift of God. Thirdly, that no man can merit any reward at all; unless he
first receive that freely of mere mercy, which he can no way merit. To which
I add for further explication sake, S. Austen utterly d^nyeth condign merit,
though he admit merit improperly so called.
that S. Augustine speaks of merit improperly, (as Abbot Bernard and other
Fathers do,) in that sense and meaning, which is plainly insinuated and
clearly proved in the sixth Conclusion, in which sense my self willingly
grant, that every good Work is meritorious: but withal I constantly affirm;
that the best good Work of the most Holy man on earth, neither is, nor can be
properly and condignely meritorious of Eternal glory. This is soundly and
clearly proved, in the seventh Conclusion of this present Chapter. I prove
the same in like manner, out of S. Augustines express Words before going. For
first he calls it arrogant pride, to challenge Eternal life as due to the
merits of any man. Secondly, he flatly denies the best Liver on earth to have
that justice, to which Eternal life is due. Thirdly, he plainly avouches,
that they derogate more then a little from Gods grace, who do but expect reward
as due unto their merits. Fourthly, that all the merit of man, is Gods mere
and Free gift. Fifthly, that when God rewards man's merits, then does he only
reward his own free gifts; and consequently, that when S. Austen speaks of
man's merit, he ever understands merit improperly so called, as also Abbot
Bernard, and other Fathers do: Conclusiones praecedentes praesertim sept. hoc
plano demonstrant.
yea, Gregorius Ariminensis, Thomas Waldensis, Paulus Burgensis, Eckius
Do^^inicus, Soto, Thomas Aquinas, Durandus, and Josephus Angles; do all with
one uniform assent, speak of merit in the same sense and meaning with S.
Austen, and other holy Fathers. Mark well the seventh Conclusion with the
rest, and this truth will soon appear.

B. C.
In this Paragraph he cites Josephus Angles, who says, That good Works
proceeding of grace without the promise of God, are wholly unworthy of Eternal
life. Thus he alleges, as though it were mo^^^all doctrine to us: whereas, if
himself were this day at Rome, and clear in all other things, never would he
be called in question about that point.

T. B.
I answer, First, that if my self were this day at Rome, (as our Friar
seems here to desire and wish;) it is very probable, or rather most certain
and sure, that the Pope and his Jesuits with their accursed Iesuited crew,
would deal with me, as the Philistims did with Sampson, Judge. 16. v. 21.25.
if happily they would afford me so much favor. Secondly, that our Jesuit
gives himself a mortal wound, in that he approves that Doctrine, which
Josephus Angles has published to the veiw of the world. For, whatsoever is
wholly and altogether unworthy, that doubtless can be no way worthy. The case
is clear, but let us hear and seriously ponder Angles, his own words: Ios.
Angles in 2. sent. page. 103.
Eodem itiam modo considerantes omnes alij Doctores sancti, naturalem solummodo
bonorum operum valorem, et illum a valor et iusta vlta ^^erna ^stimatione
longissime distare perpendente^, prudent^r dixerunt, opera nostra non esse
meritoria aut digna vita aeterna. Ex legetamen, sieve conuentione, sieve
promissione facta nobiscum, opera ^ona hominis (...) gra^ia Deo siunt aeternae
vita digna, e^ illi aequalia; quae, seclusa illa De^ prom^ssione, qua p^ss^m in
sa^^is literis reperitur fuissent tanto praem^^ prorsus indigna. All other holy
Doctors also, considering after the same manner the natural value only of
good Works, and perceiving that it is exceeding far distant from the value
and just estimation of eternal life, said wisely, that our works are not
meritorious nor worthy of eternal life: yet for the covenant and promise made
unto us, the good works of man with the help of Gods grace, are worthy of
Eternal life, and equal with it, which for all that, the promise of God which
is very frequent in the Scripture, set aside, were altogether unworthy of so
great Reward. Thus disputes our popish Bishop, our holy Friar, even to the
Pope himself, sitting in his pontifical Chair. Who, though he bestirre
himself more then a little* to establish the condign merit of man's Works;
yet does he in his own kind of dispute, utterly confute and confound himself.
For first, he grants, that not only Saint Chrysostom, but all the rest of
the holy Fathers with him, affirm constantly and uniformly with one voice and
assent; that good Works neither are meritorious properly, nor worthy of Eternal
life* Secondly, that the best Works considered in their own nature and kind,
are unworthy of Eternal life. Thirdly, that good Works proceeding of Grace
and joined with the promise of God, are worthy of Eternal life. Fourthly, and
lastly, that if Gods promise and free acceptance be set apart, the best Works
of all, are altogether unworthy of Eternal glory. Which Doctrine doubtless,
I most willingly embrace: And consequently, though the Papists never cease to
impeach, accuse, slander, and condemn us in this behalf, ye^ do we defend
nothing herein, (as i^ evident to the indifferent Reader,) but even that, which
their own best Doctors in their printed Books do teach us. Yea, in those
very Books; which are dedicated to the Pope himself. The conceits which
Bishop Friar Joseph has coined, to make good his fondly imagined condign
merit of Works, are very childish and too too frivolous. For first, where he
says, the Fathers speak of Good works, only in respect of their natural
value; as he terms it. I answer, that that silly Gloss is only invented
by himself and his accomplices: so to save the life of their rotten and beggarly
Popery, if any way it might serve their turn: For no such thing can be found,
in any of their Books. S. Augustine (as we have even now seen,) does
plainly, condemn their foolish exposition. Nay our Friar Bishop unawares
confuteth himself (of such force is the truth,) while he very honestly
grants; That Good works done in Grace, are utterly unworthy of Heaven,
Mark well this doctrine.
if Gods Promise be set apart. Where I wish the Reader to observe seriously
with me this word ( prorsus, wholly, utterly, and all together;) which is in
deed his own, and most emphaticall against himself. For doubtless,
whatsoever is wholly unworthy, the same can never be condignely worthy. No man
in his right wits, will ever deny this most manifest truth. But say on sir
Friar; let us hear some more of this pleasant melody.

B. C.
Bell having produced Josephus, to show that Works proceeding from Grace, are
not Meritorious of eternal life without the Promise of God, but wholly
unworthy, infers thus. Then doubtless the best Works of all, can no way be
Meritorious: which is a false Conclusion, gathered out of the premises. For it
should have bin thus; Then doubtless the best Works of all, can no way be
Meritorious, without the Promise of God. Why did he perfidiously curtall away
these words, and make Josephus absolutely to conclude against the Merits of
works, Observe well mine answer
when as in that very place, he teaches the Merits of works proceeding of
Grace together with the Promise of God.

T. B.
I answer; Jesuit pours out lies every where in such large measure, that I
am very loath to be teadious to the Reader with the recital thereof. Pude^ N.
me pigetque, bonas horas nugis conterere. O impudent Friar! do I curtall
Josephus his words? It is thy property, (O shameless Jesuit! it is not
mine, to cut or take away any one word or syllable from mine Author. These are
my express words in my Trial, Out upon lying Jesuits.
so God me help. True it is thirdly, that the religious Friar and popish
Bishop Josephus Angles, tells the Pope roundly; that it is the constant and
uniform faith of all the holy Doctors, that the best and holiest man's Works
upon earth, neither are, nor possibly can be meritorious or worthy of eternal
life; if Gods holy and free Promise be set aside. Without the which, (says
Angles in the name of all the rest,) the best Works of all, are altogether
unworthy of so great reward: His express words are these; ( prorsus ind^gna,
wholly unworthy.) Where I wish the Reader to observe seriously with me, this
word ( prorsus, which signifies wholly:) for if our best Works be wholly
unworthy of the Reward or Glory, (as Josephus Angles in the name of all the
holy Fathers and Doctors, tells the Pope both gravely and constantly;) then
doubtless the best Works of all, are no way worthy, save only by, with, and
in respect of Gods Promise freely made unto us. Mark well this discourse.
Mark well (gentle Reader) for Christ's sake, and for the salvation of thine
own soul: For either Popery is hereby proved the New religion, or
doubtless my wits are not at home. Josephus Angles affirms disstantly, and
the Popes Holiness has approved the same; that Good works without the
Promise of God, are wholly unworthy of eternal life. Ergo, say I, (and my life
I gage for the trial thereof,) Good works without Gods Promise, are no way
worthy of the same: For, without all peradventure, that which is wholly and
altogether unworthy, without the Promise of God, can no way be worthy, but by
and with the Promise of God. The Friar says not, that Good works are some
way, and in some sort unworthy; but prorsus, wholly, The Friar is at a non plus.
altogether, and in every respect. If they were any way worthy, without Gods
Promise; then doubtless could they not be wholly and prorsus unworthy, without
the same. It is a thing impossible, none but madmen will affirm it. Jesuits
illation (a falsely supposed correctiue of mine,) is fond, childish, and
ridiculous. Thus the Jesuit disputes. The Jesuit promises much, but can
perform nothing at all.
For (says he) it should have been thus; Then doubtless, the best Works of
all, can no way be Meritorious, without the Promise of God. What a thing is
this? Has our Jesuit lost his wit, because Popery is proved the New
religion? So it seems doubtless: For my illation is the very same in deed,
with that which the Jesuit makes. I grant, that Good works with the Promise
of God, are Meritorious: the Jesuit grants the same. I grant, that Good
works without the Promise of God, are altogether and wholly unworthy of
eternal life: Josephus Angles grants the same: yea the Jesuit himself
grants the very same, even while he desires to impugn the same. I say,
Judge indifferently, between the Jesuit and me: for the victory is on my
side.
that Good works are only one way Meritorious, and no way else; that is, as
they are joined to and with the Promise of God: Josephus, and the Jesuit, say
the very same with me. I say, that Good works are not properly and of them
selves Meritorious; seeing they be Meritorious only for the Promise of God:
Josephus says the same. I say, that Good works of them selves, do not merit
Heaven properly; as whose Merit depends wholly of the Promise of God:
Josephus freely grau^teth the same. I say, that Good works of them selves, are
unworthy of eternal life; as which are wholly unworthy thereof, without the
free Promise of our merciful God: Josephus willingly says the very same*
Mark ever these words, ( prorsus indigna, wholly and altogether unworthy.)
They cut the Jesuits throat, Note well, prors^s indigna.
the Popes throat, and the throats of all Jesuits and Iesuited Papists in
the world: For, that can not have any Merit properly and of it self, whose
Merit depends only, solely, and wholly, of an other. And consequently,
seeing Good works have no Merit at all, save only of, from, through, and for
the Promise of God, as both Josephus and our Jesuit freely grant; it
follows of necessity, that they neither do, nor properly can condignely
Merit eternal life.

B. C.
The Minister mistaketh the matter; the Monster he speaks of, Our Friar does
cut the Popes throat
was borne at Trent in Germany, and not at Rome in Italy, as the beginning of
his words do testify. Besides, it was not in the year, one thousand, five
hundred, and forty; but, one thousand, five hundred, forty and seven; as
appears out of the sixth Session of that Council.

T. B.
I answer; first, that our Jesuit not able in truth, to defend Popery from
being the New religion; flees to impertinent digressions, ridiculous cauils,
and most silly euasions, as a frantic man that has lost his wits.
Secondly, that the Monster which both my self and the Friar speak of, is the
nonage of late hatched Popery. The Jesuit uses two reasons, O brave
defender of Popery.
in defense of Popery: but alas, the Popes cares will tingle, when he
hears them. His former supposed gallant reason, is this; viz. That the
Monster was borne at Trent, not at Rome. I answer, that this reason pleases
me well, as which grants Popery to be a Monster, borne out of time.
Concerning the place; I answer, that I do not mistake the ma^ter, as our
Friar dreameth: For, The beg^tting go^th before the birth.
although the Monster was begotten at Trent in Germany, yet borne was it at
Rome in I^aly. The reason hereof is evident; because the decreeing of the
matter at Trent, was of no force or effect until the Pope had confirmed the
same at Rome. His latter and second reason, is every way as strong as his
former. I keeping my self within my bounds, and speaking sparingly and
favorably of the newness of Popery; Our Jesuit confounds himself.
affirmed the Condign merit of Works not to have been an Article of Popish
faith, for the space of one thousand, five hundred, and forty years after
Christ. Our Jesuit unawares, helps me against his will; by adding seven
years more to the number.

B. C.
Before, he came upon the Council of Trent, for accursing all such as did
deny or not believe the Condign merits of man's works, and inueighed against
that doctrine, as a Monster lately borne at Rome: and yet now, the same
doctrine is against the Pope, and the Jesuit S. R. and it evidently proves
as much as he desires. And so that Doctrine which before was false and
monstrous, is now become sound and heavenly. Was there ever such an other
changeable Camelion, that as it were with one breath, denies and affirms one
and the selfsame thing? Certainly the poor man has more need of a cunning
Surgion to put his brains in joint, then of Incke and Paper to write such
lunaticall Pamphlets.

T. B.
I answer; first, that our Jesuit seems to have lost both his brains, his
wit, and his honesty and that in such sort, as no Surgion is able to remedy
the same. Secondly, that I can not reprove the Council of Trent; unless I
also condemn the Pope the chief Author of the same; as is already proved.
Thirdly, that whatsoever makes against the Council, must perforce make also
against the Jesuits, and all others that approve the same. Fourthly, that the
doctrine which before was false and monstrous, is still as false, bad, and
monstrous, as ever it was; if not rather more. Fifthly, that the change which
the Jesuit speaks of, is in him self, but not in Bell: For, Bell does not
affirm that Doctrine to be found and heavenly, which before he termed false
and monstrous; but he only and plainly shows, that the Jesuit striving
against the truth, does by the force of truth, unawares confess the truth
against himself. And consequently, that he unwittingly and unwillingly
grants the truth against himself: which is as much as I desire. I prove
it briefly and soundly; because the Jesuit having in his second Conclusion,
affirmed Good works done in Gods grace, to be condignely Meritorious of
eternal life: by and by adds in the third Conclusion, this restriction; viz.
that the condign Merit he speaks of, is not absolute, but supposes the
condition of Gods Promise made to reward it. Which doubtless, is the flat
Doctrine that I defend: For if Gods Promise must be supposed, there is no
condign Merit without the same. Let the indifferent Reader be an indifferent
Judge, between the Jesuit and me. I willingly admit his third Conclusion;
and so make an end of this Chapter. For, all that is here said, or possibly
can be said, in defense of Condign merit of Works; is clearly and foundly
refuted in the Conclusions of this present Chapter, if due application be made
thereof. And consequently, this Article of Popish faith; never known for the
space of more then 1540. years after Christ; A.D. 1547.
must of necessity and without all perad^enture, be a rotten ragge of the New
religion.

The Tenth Chapter: of Transubstantiation in Popish Mass.
ALL that the Jesuit says in this Chapter, is pithyly refuted both in the
Downfall of Popery, and in the Jesuits Antepast: And consequently, I have no
need to stand here, upon the same. The Friar freely grants; that
Transubstantiation touching the name, was not hatched till their Lateran
Council, which was holden 1215. years after Christ. But he says withal;
that the point of Doctrine it self, that is, A.D. 1215.
the changing of the substance of Bread, into the Body of Christ, by the words
of Consecration; was taught by the ancient Fathers, and came from Christ
himself, and his blessed Apostles. My answer is this: Survey of Popery,
whatsoever can possibly be alleged or produced out of the holy Fathers,
concerning this Subject now in hand. See the Survey, part. 3. cap. 10.
1.2.3.4.5.
To this Book, in the third part and tenth Chapter, I refer the Reader for
his full satisfaction in this behalf. Lateran. For, no Text in the Law of
Moses, no Sentence in the Prophets, no Word in the Psalms, no Affirmation out
of the Gospel, no Testimony out of the Epistles of the Apostles, no Verdict
out of the holy Fathers, no specialtie out of the ancient Councels, can now,
or ever be found extant; which once makes mention either of
Transubstantiation, or of accidents without subjects. Berengarius. That Real
presence (though most absurd, as I have proved demonstratiuely in the Jesuits
Antepast,) may well stand with Consubstantiation, Mark well gentle reader, and
thou shall see the Friars back at the wall.
and nothing at all change the substance of Bread: For it is a Popish
foundation, (though foolish and ridiculous, as is proved in my Survey,) that
two Bodies may be in one place at once. This Transubstantiation sends the
substance of Bread, neither my self, nor yet the Papists can tell whither.
That Real presence alters not Christ's Body; but this Transubstantiation
changes the substance of Bread, into Christ's Body. That Real presence
causes not accidents without subjects; but this Transubstantiation infers
Miracles upon Miracles, above ten thousand times a day. Popish Real presence
is one thing; of which I dispute not in my Trial: Popish Transubstantiation is
an other thing; which is the subject now in hand. Durand (as I have proved in
the Downfall of Popery,) affirms constantly; that only the form of Bread
is changed, and that the matter of Bread remains still in the Eucharist.
Rupertus the Popish Abbot holds; that the Bread is united Hypostatically to
the Son of God. Cardinal Caietanus, Henricus, and Capreolus, are of an other
different opinion. Johannes Parisionsis held also, that the Bread was
assumpted; See and note well, the Trial.
but in a different manner from the opinion of Rupertus. An other opinion yet
remains, which affirms the Annihilation of the Bread. Yet Cardinal
Bellarmine holds with the Council of Trent, (for he that at Rome holds
otherwise, must be burnt;) that the Bread is transubstantiated into the Body of
Christ. What Child in the fire, would not come forth to hear this harmony?
Will ye hear what the learned Friar S.R. says to this discordant melody?
these are his express words, in his pretensed Answer to the Downfall of
Popery: S.R. page 140.
The first Contradiction, which this contradictions fellow finds in the
Mass, is, that Durand, Caietan, and four Catholics more, before the
Council of Trent did otherwise explicate the manner of Christ's Real presence
in the Eucharist, then was truth, and since the Church has defined and
explicated in the said Council. Thus answers S.R. that Learned man, as B.C.
his brother calls him. By whose learned Assertion, we are given to
understand; that Transubstantiation was not an Article of Popish says
undoubtedly, until the late Popish Council of Trent: A.D. 1547.
that is, 1547. years after Christ.

The Eleventh Chapter: of Popish Invocation of Saints.
B. C.
TV per Thomae sanguinem, etc. By the blood of Thomas which he for thee did
spend, bring us thither, o Christ, whyther Thomas did ascend. I utterly deny,
that any of these words, or altogether, make Thomas a Mediator of Redemption;
or do prove that we invoke him, as the Son of the living God, and the
only Savior of the World.

T. B.
I answer; that this Popish manner of Praying, proves evidently, that Thomas
Becket is to the Papists, a Mediator not only of Intercession, but also of
Redemption. I prove it by sundry means and irrefragable reasons. Act. 4. v.
12.1. Tim. 3. v. 5.
whereby we must be saved. his only Son, and our only Savior. Ioh. 1.29.
not the Blood of any other, is able to bring us to Heaven. Heb. 10. v. 14.
(not the Blood of others,) has perfectly accomplished the salvation of his
Elect; Mat. 1. v. 21.
and that has he done once for all. Deuteronomy. 32. v. 4.
and imposed the name Jesus upon the Son of God; yielding this reason
thereof, for that he should save Gods people from their sins. Beckets Blood
be a cause of our going to Heaven. Aug. lib. 9. Confess. cap. 13.
Austen affirms constantly, that the best liver upon earth, shall perish
everlastingly, if he find not Mercy far above his Deserts. But doubtless,
he that is rewarded above his Deserts, and stands in need of Mercy for his
own Sins; that man's Blood is not a fit cause or mean, to bring others unto
Heaven.

B. C.
The Pope, and many thousands more, use the Roman Breuiarie and Missall;
Mark for Christ's sake.
in neither of which, any such Prayer is contained: and as I suppose, it is not
found but in those of Sarum use, which be now antiquated and out of date.

T. B.
I answer; first, that our Jesuit now begins to tell us wonders, even the
mutabilitie of Romish Faith and Religion; of which I disputed in the Chapter of
Venial sins. Secondly, that as the Pope has reformed the Romish Faith and
Religion, in this and some other points; even so has our English Church
abolished all Popish errors and superstition, whereby we are the true
Reformed Catholics in very deed: For, as your Capuchones are the true
reformed Franciscanes at Rome; so are we the true reformed Catholics in
England.

B. C.
An untruth it is, that Saints merits are joint purchasers of salvation with
Christ's blood, if he mean that the Merits of Christ and his Saints do
alike avail to salvation.

T. B.
I answer; Jesuit not able to defend Popery, nor to answer the reasons by
me produced, does highly blaspheame Christ, and the sacred Merits of his most
precious Blood. For (as we see,) he absurdly and most impiously avouches;
that the Merits of Saints may be joint purchasers of salvation with Christ's
most sacred Blood, so it be not in the same degree. The Jesuit blasphemeth
Christ Jesus.
Let his words be well marked, for they import as much, as I do say* O
monstrum horrendum! What blasphemy, what impiety, what cruelty, what
infidelity, is diabolically employed in rotten Popery? You were not (says S.
Peter) Redeemed with corruptible things, as Silver and Gold; 1. Pet. 1. v.
18.19
but with the precious Blood of Christ, as of a Lamb undefiled and without
spot. Ioh. 1.29.
S. John the Baptist speaking of Christ, admonishes us, to behold the Lamb of
God, that takes away the sins of the world. S. Paul proclaymeth; Act. 20. v.
28.
that Christ has Redeemed his Church with his own Blood, not with the Blood
of Thomes Becket, or of any other. Heb. 9. v. 12.
The Author of the Epistle to the Hebrews, avouches constantly; that Christ
entered in once unto the Holy place, and obtained eternal Redemption for his
Elect. And S. Peter boldly affirms to Annas, Caiaphas, John, Alexander, Act.
4. v. 12.
and the rest; that there is Salvation in no other, save only in Jesus Christ.
Becket, and other Popish supposed Saints, are not Mediators of Salvation in
some lower and inferior degree; but even in the highest, and in the selfsame
with our Lord Jesus. Of Thom^s Becket, besides that which we have heard of his
Blood, In portifo. Saru^, in festo Tho. Cant.
I find in an other Prayer made to him, these express words. Mores, actus, et
vitam corrige; et in pacis nos viam dirige. S^lue gregis tutor egregie, saelua
tuae gaudentes gloriae: Correct our manners, deeds, and life; guide us into
the way of peace. Hail noble Patron of the flock, save them that rejoice in
thine honor. Of S. Paul, I find this Prayer. Orat. ad S. Paul. doct. gentium.
O beat Paul Apostole, te deprecor, vt ab Angelo sathanae me eripias, et a
ventura ira liberes, et in caelum introducas: O blessed Apostle Paul, I pray
thee, that thou will deliver me from the Angel of Satan, and free me from
wrath to come, and bring me into Heaven. Of S. James, this: Orat. ad S. Iacobum.
O faelix Apostole, magna martyr Iacobe; to colentes adiuua, peregrinos vndique
tuos clemens protege, ducens ad caelestia: O happy Apostle and mighty Martyr
James, help them that worship thee; defend courteously thy Pilgrims on every
side, and bring them to Heavenly joys. In transl. S. Martini.
To S. Martin they pray thus: Caecis das viam, mutisque loquelam; tu nos
adiuua, mundans immunda; qui fug^^ daemonia, nos hic libera: O Martin! thou
causest the blind to see, and the dumb to speak; help us, and cleanse the
unclean: thou that castest out Devils, deliver us here. The Papists pray in
this manner, to the blessed Virgin: In Antiph. B. virgin.
O Maria gloriosa, in delitijs delitiosa, praepara nobis gloria^: O Mary
glorious, in dainties delitious, prepare thou glory for us. Again in an other
place thus: In Concept. B. virg.
Maria matter gratiae, matter misericordiae, tu nos ab host protege, et hora
mortis suscipe: O Mary the mother of Grace, the mother of Mercy, defend thou
us from our (ghostly) enemy, and receive us at the hour of death. Again in
an other place thus In Visitat. B. virg.
. Veni Regina Gentium, dele flammas reatuum, dele quodcunque deuium, da vitam
innocentium: Come o Queen of the Gentiles, extinguish the fiery heat of our
sins; blot out whatsoever is amiss, and make us lead an innocent life.
Again, in their old Latin Primers, the people are thus taught to pray.
Deuotiss. orat. ad B. virg. M, fol. 118.
In extremi^ diebus meis esto auxiliatrix et saluatrix, et animam mea^, et
animam patris mei, et matris meae, fratrum, sororum parentum, amicorum,
benefactorum meorum, et omnium fidelium defunctorum ac viuorum, ab aeterna
mortis caligine libera; ipso auxiliante, quem portasti Domino nostro Jesus
Christo filio tuo: O glorious Virgin Mary, be thou my helper and savior in my
last days, and deliver from the mist of eternal death, both mine own soul,
and my Fathers soul, and the souls of my Mother, Brethren, Sisters, Parents,
Friends, Benefactors, and of all the Faithful living and dead; by his help
whom thou did bear, our Lord Jesus Christ thy Son. Again, after two or
three leaves in this manner. Ibid. fol. 173.
Vt in tuo sancto, tremendo, ac terribili iudicio, in conspectu vnigeniti filij
tui, cui pater dedit omne iudicium, me liberes et protegas a paenis inferni, et
participem me facias caelestium gaudioru^: I beseech thee most merciful and
chaste Virgin Mary, that in thine holy, fearful, and terrible judgment, in
the sight of thine only Son* thou will deliver and defend me from the
pains of Hell, and make me partaker of Heavenly joys. These Prayers (if they
be well marked,) will be found to contain in them, every jot of Power, Right,
Majesty, Glory and Sovereignty, whatsoever either is, or ought to be yielded
to our Lord Jesus Christ. Yea, these two last prayers make the blessed virgin
Mary, not only equal with Christ, but far above him. For Mary is desired to
defend us from the tortures and pains of Hell. benefactors, the quick and the
dead: and all this must be done, even by the help of Christ her Son. Now, by
the former Prayers, she is made equal with Jesus Christ; and by the last,
far above him: For, she is the Savior, and he the Intercessour: which I
gather out of these words, ( ipso auxiliante, etc. by the help of our Lord
Jesus Christ.) For by these words, and the rest afore-going, the Virgin Mary
does save us, and Christ is but the instrument that helps her, in the work
of our Salvation. Which how intolerable Blasphemy it is, let the indifferent
and judicious Reader judge; dixi.

B. C.
The Merits of Christ and his Saints, may avail us for the obtaining of
spiritual gifts: the merits of Christ, as the principal cause; the Merits
of Saints, as dependent of his and the secondarie cause.

T. B.
I answer; first, that Popish Saints by Popish doctrine, are not the
Secondarie, but even the Chief and Primarie causes of man's Salvation. This is
already proved. Secondly, that it is intolerable Blasphemy against the Son
of God, to make his Creatures either principal, or secondarie causes of man's
Salvation. This is likewise already proved. Yea, the blessed Virgin Mary, (the
most holy pure Creature, that ever was on Earth, or is in Heaven,) was so far
from challenging to her self, to be either the Principal or Secondary cause
of Salvation; that she in the spirit of true humility, proclaimed the flat
contrary to the world, in these most Christian and golden words: My Soul
does magnify the Lord, and my Spirit rejoices in God my Savior. Luke ^. v.
47.


B. C.
That God and his Creatures may in this manner without any injury to his name,
be joined together, we learn out of sacred Scripture. Jacob desired God and
his Angel, to bless his Children. The Israelites cried out; Genes. 4^. v.
15.16. Judge. 7.20. Exodus 14.31. 1. Tim. 5.^^.
The Sword of our Lord, and Gideon. In Exodus we read thus. They believed our
Lord, and Moses his servant. Saint Paul testified before Christ Jesus, and the
elect Angels. And the Apostles doubted not to say; Act. 15.28.
It has se^med good to the holy Ghost, and to us. If in these, and such like
speeches, God and his Creatures be joined together, without being made joint
purchasers, but as the Creator, and the secondarie cause: in like manner may
the Merits of Christ and his Saints, be conjoined; as has been said.

T. B.
I answer; first, that the more our silly Jesuit strives against the
truth, the more he still wounds rotten Popery. Five examples he here
produces, and never one to the purpose; as by and by (God willing) shall
appear. Popery lies a bleeding unto death.
Secondly, that if Popery were not the New religion in very deed, such paultry
and beggarly shifts would never be used in defense thereof. Thirdly, that the
question is not of those acts, which Gods Saints do alone and of
themselves; but of those effects, in producing whereof, Gods Saints are said
to concur, and to be joined with Christ our Savior. And therefore of the
five Examples, three are altogether impertinent; viz. the first, the third,
and the fourth. For, in the first place, the Angel does not connotate a
Creature, but God himself: which I prove, by a double argument. Angel, which
delivered Israel or Jacob from all evil; which effect can not possibly be
ascribed to any Creature, but, To God alone, Ioh. 15.5. Iac. 1.17. 1. Cor 3.8.
2. Cor. 3.4.
the fountain of all Grace, and giver of every good gift. And it is
confirmed; because the same God, which in the 15 verse is said, To have fed
Israel all his life long; is likewise said in the verse following, To have
delivered him from all evil. the Angel to be God himself; Genesis 31. v. 13.
Genesis 18. v. 15.19.14.
The God of Bethel, and the God that did keep Jsrael whither soever he went.
In the third place, as also in the fourth, the acts are only ascribed to the
Israelites, and to S. Paul: but neither the Apostle nor the Jsraelites, are
said to concur with Christ in producing the same effect. Let the words be
well marked and the case is clear. The second, and fifth or last Examples do
prove indeed, that Gods Saints are joined with Christ in producing the same
effects; but for all that, are as far from concluding the Jesuits purpose, as
Rome is distant from Roan, or the East from the West. For, albeit I willingly
grant, that Gods Saints may concur and be conjoined with Christ, in
producing al those effects to which they are deputed of God, as instruments,
means, and inferior causes under him having to that end received of him
active power in some measure; yet do I constantly deny, Mark well this my
discourse.
and utterly defy, that most unchristian, blasphemous, and heretical Popish
assertion; which brutishly and more then cruelly avouches, that Beckets Blood
and Christ's most precious Blood, concur in working man's Salvation. For, as
the Israelites truly said, that the Sword of God and Gideon destroyed their
enemies; Judge. 7. v. 20.
so may it truly be said in like manner; that God and the Physician cure
inward sores: When God appoynteth his creatures to be causes inferior under
him, then may they be joined with him, not otherwise.
God and the Surgion, external wounds: that God and Masons build Churches:
God and Tailors make Garments: God and Meat nourish men, and so forth. But
we can never truly say, that Christ's Blood and Beckets Blood, do work man's
Salvation. The Sword of Gideon, Masons, Surgions, Physicians, Meat, and
Tailors, have a certain active power inherent in them to produce such
effects: but man's Salvation is such a divine, supernatural, and supereminent
effect, Ioh. 14.6. Ioh. 17.17.
as Beckets Blood has no active power at all, neither more nor less, to
produce the same. For this respect, Aug. ep. 105.
gravely writes S. Augustine, That if the best liver on earth should be
rewarded according to his best deserts, yet could he not but perish
everlastingly. For this respect, wisely says the learned and religious Friar
Ferus. Ferus, in Mat. lib. 3. cap. 16. fol. 290. B.
That our Salvation consists only and solely in the Merit of Christ, not in
our own Works. He adds the reason: because we are not able to make
satisfaction; no not for the least sin we commit. For this respect, says
Abbot Bernard; That the sin which makes division between God and us, Bern.
de. adu. dom. ser. 6.
can not be wholly taken away in this life. This Subject is handled at large in
the ninth Chapter afore-going, Cap. 9. Conclus. 11.
in the eleventh Conclusion: to which place, I refer the Reader, for his
better satisfaction herein.

B. C.
Bell elsewhere tells us, Survey. page 338.
That popish Invocation and Adoration, was not known, until the year three
hundred and seauentie: Yet is it no thing comparable to th^s here uttered,
making that Article a thousand years younger then in his former Book.

T. B.
I answer; first, that in my Survey I have disputed at large, how Invocation
of Saints increased by degrees. For the better clearing of which difficulty, I
there put down many Canons and Conclusions. In one Canon, I affirmed the
Church of God, to have lived unacquainted with the Merits and Intercession of
the Saints in heaven, A.D. 230.
for the space of two hundred and thirty years after Christ. In an other
Canon, I proved soundly; that the first seed of Popish invocation of Saints
began not to besowen, A D. 233.
till about the year 233. after Christ. In an other Canon, A.D. 250.
that about the year 250. after Christ, some of the Fathers held constantly,
that the Saints in heaven did pray for the living upon earth. In an other
Canon, A.D. 350,
that some of the Fathers about the year 350. after Christ, did by Rhetorical
Apostrophes apply their Orations to the dead* Many other things concerning the
Invocation of Saints, I disputed in that Book at large. To which Book,
though published about thirteen years ago; neither this Jesuit, nor any
other, ever had any courage to this day, to frame any answer at all. In my
Trial of the new Religion, (which this Jesuit has taken in hand to confute,)
I constantly affirm, that to Pray to be saved by the Blood of Thomas Becket,
is flat blasphemy against the Son of God. And as I affirmed before in my
Survey, Survey, part. 3. cap. 7.
that Popery sprang up by degrees in such and such years; so now I constantly
avouch, that to be saved by the Blood of Becket was unknown to the Church for
the space of a thousand years and odd. The fault escaped in the printing, is
all the comfort our silly Jesuit can find.
In the Margent, the Printer has negligently set down 1407 for 1047. years
after Christ. I would that were the least, of many schores of faults, which
have escaped in my Books, partly of ignorance, and partly through the
negligence of careless Printers. Now, where I assign diverse times and years
precisely and distinctly, My self am far off from the Press, and so my
Books are not printed as I wish. I want the Jesuits purse.
to the birth of several degrees of Popery; our Jesuit being at a flat
nonplus what to answer, flees maliciously to ridiculous cauils, and most
foolish and false imputations. Yea, the Friar Jesuit B.C. (bloody cut-throate,
if his name so be,) does bewray his own malice unawares. For, these are his
express words. Let him be urged with that which he teaches else where, and
then his refuge will be; that he speaks not of the Invocation of Saints in
general, but of the particular manner of praying by their Merits; or by the
Blood of Thomas. Thus writes the Jesuit, unawares confirming my doctrine
against his will. Magna est veritas, et praeualet. A.D. 1161.
Thomas Becket was put to death, about the year 1161. after Christ. And so I
conclude with this inevitable illation; Ergo, Popish Invocation to be saved by
the Blood of Becket, Champion, Ballard, Sherwin, Watson, and such like, is but
a rotten ragge of the New religion.

The 12. Chapter: of the Communion under one kind.
THE Jesuit prosecuting his accustomed manner of lying, according to his
beginning, spends almost the whole Chapter, in heaping only upon an other.
Nevertheless, I will answer to each thing of any moment, for better
explication-sake.

B. C.
S. Paul (says Bell) urging Chistes Institution to the Corinthians, tells
them plainly and regiously, that they must receive the Holy Eucharist under
both kinds. Which last words, he printeth in a distinct letter, to show that
they be the Apostles words; 1. Cor. 11. v. ^7.
and quoteth accordingly in the margent, the particular place: But view it he
that will, if he find S. Paul to have those words, we will yield him the
victory; if not, let his favorites consider how they venture their souls with
such a Minister, that offers violence to the very word of God; which he would
seem so much to reverence.

T. B.
I answer, that our Friar (ouerlying Jesuit) has in these few words
committed no fewer, then three most palpable and notorious Lies. The first Lie
is this; viz. that I have printed the Last words, in a distinct letter: for
his own conscience tells him, that I am no Printer: Again, I was almost
200. miles from the Press, when my said Book was printed. His second Lie is
this; viz. that I printed the words so, to show that they were the Apostles
words: Yet the truth is, so God save my soul, that I had no such purpose as
the malicious and lying Friar would enforce upon me: And I prove the same by
two reasons, which plainly convince and confound the Friar. First, for that I
was so far from intending any such thing, either by word or writing; that I
was offended thereat, so soon as I read the same: Secondly, because my usual
custom ever has been, (as al my Books will declare and prove,) to say,
These are the express words, when soever I cite any Author. His third Lie is
this; viz. that I have offered violence to Gods word. I prove it two ways:
First, because S. Paul's true meaning is, as I affirm; whereof none can stand
in doubt, that shall duly peruse my Survey: Again, because the Jesuit
grants as much; as by and by will appear.

B. C.
The most that can be gathered out of S. Paul's words truly cited, is; that in
his time, the Eucharist was ministered to Lay people, under both kinds; which
we deny not: but they prove not, that it neither was, nor might be given
under one kind.

T. B.
I answer; Friar confounds himself, while he grants the Eucharist to
have been ministered to the Lay people, in both kinds in S. Paul's time: For, he
consequently must grant, that they minister the holy Eucharist, contrary to
Christ's sacred Institution. All Gods works are perfect. Deuteronomy 32. v. 4.
Ergo the latter, and consequently their Popish administration has so much of
imperfection, as it wants of Christ's holy Institution. Paul does plainly
teach the Corinthians, Romans 15.4. Romans 4.23.
and us in them, that they ought to receive the holy Eucharist under both
kinds: For, in the very beginning of the Chapter, before he come to the
Institution, he gives them this commandment; Be ye the followers of me, even
as I am of Christ. 1. Cor. 11.1.
This done, he tells them; that he received both the kinds of Christ, and
for that end delivered both unto them. And consequently, seeing they must
imitate him, as he did Christ: and seeing withal, that he received both kinds
of Christ and delivered both kinds; to them; it follows by an inevitable
consequence, that the vn-Priested and Layicall Corinthians, ought to receive
the holy Eucharist under both kinds. And our Jesuiticall Friar shows
himself, not only to be malicious, but also too too ridiculous; when after he
has granted the Lay people to have received under both kinds; he labors
to prove that one kind may suffice, in these words. But they prove not, that
it neither was, nor might be given under one kind. For Jesuit freely
grants, because it can not be denied; that in S. Paul's time, the Lay people
communicated under both kinds. Paul. Corinthians. Friar affirming the
contrary, is blasphemous against the Son of God.

B. C.
Prosecuting still the same matter of Communicating under both kinds, he
says: This was the practice of the ancient Church, for the space of one
thousand, two hundred, and thirty years after Christ: About which time, they
began in some odd Churches, to leave off the Cup, and to minister the
Sacrament in Bread only: But this was done, as Aquinas confesses, in some few
places only. An untruth it is that the Communion under one kind was not in
use, till the year one thousand, two hundred, and thirty, as more boldly then
truly be affirms. Sozomenus and Nicephorus report, how a certain woman
infected with the heresy of Macedonius, Out upon lying Jesuits, and rotten
Popery
the better to conceal her Religion, came to the Church, and received the
Sacrament from the hand of S. Chrysostom, as it were with a mind straight
ways to eat it: But she cunningly gave it to her Maid, and received of her
other Bread brought from home: Which when she went about to eat, she found it
straight turned into a Stone. This fact shows, that all then received not the
Chalice; for then this Woman could not have dissembled, both because the
Chalice was not given into her own hands, (as the consecrated Host then
was,) and though it had, no such evasion is imaginable.

T. B.
I answer; Jesuit is so accustomed with lying, that he cannot leave it upon
the sudden: He began with lying, he continues in lying, and with lying will
he end, for ought that can be said. To contradict and deny the Time by me
assigned, he has no other means in the world; but here, as else where to
gain (if he can) by lying, that which he is never able to effect with true
dealing. In this his present lie, he slaundereth two excellent and famous
Historiographers; Nicephorus, and Sozomenus. He falsely fathereth upon them
both, these words, ( The better to conceal her religion. The cause of the
Friars lying.
) Not one of which words, can be found in either of the said Authors. This
egregious and notorious lie, the Friar set abroach, so to maintain (if it were
possible, the falsely pretended Antiquity of rotten Popery. The Friar durst
not cite the words of his Authors, (though my self never fail therein,)
least his cogging, forgerie, and false dealing, should have been discovered by
that means. These are the express words of Sezomenus. Sozom. hist. lib. 8.
cap. 5.
Vir quidam e Macedoniana haeresi, vxorem eiusdem opinionis habebat: Hic cum
Johannem quomodo de Deo sentiendum esset, docentem andisset; dogma illius
laudabat, et vxorem quoque vt secum sentiret, hortabatur. Cum vero illa magis
nobilium mulierum sermonibus, quam illius consuetudini obtemperaret, et post
frequentes admonitiones vir illius nihil effecisset; nisi (inquit) in diuinis
mihi consors fueris, neque in vitae communione posthac eris. Mulier hoc audito
et consensum pollicita, rem eam famulae cuidam communicate, quam sibi fidam esse
iudicabat, illiusque opera ad fallendum viru^ vtitur. Circa tempus autem
mysteriorum, illa quod accepit continens quasi oratura procu^bit; famula astans
clauculum illi dat, quod secum in manu attulerat. Hoc cum dentibus admoueretur,
in lapidem congelascit: A certain man infected with the Heresy of Macedonius,
had a wife of the same opinion: he hearing the doctrine of S. John
Chrysostom, how he ought to think and believe of God; commended his Doctrine,
and exhorted his wife to believe as he did: But when she hearkened rather to
the Tales of Noble women, then to his admonition, so as her husband prevailed
nothing by his exhortations; unless (says he) thou will join with me in
matters divine, I will not henceforth join with thee in secular affairs. His
wife hearing this, and promising her consent, The wife receives the Eucharist,
so to deceive her husband.
imparteth the matter to one of her Maids, in whom she reposed great
confidence, and uses her help to defraude her Husband. While the mysteries
were in hand, she keeping that which she had received, looks down as if she
would pray: Her Maid standing by, gives her privily, that which she brought
with her in her hand. Which when she began to eat, it was changed into a
Stone. Nicephorus recites the same Story, in the self same manner: I have
cited the words at large, that the indifferent Reader may behold the false
dealing of the Friar, and be an indifferent judge between him and me.
Sozomenus and Nicephorus do both jointly and constantly affirm, that the Woman
received the Sacramental bread, which she did not eat, so to defraud and
deceive her Husband. The Jesuit impudently avouches; that she being a
Macedonian Heretic, did so, the better to conceal her Religion. Which
notorious lying of the shameless Jesuit, not only the History it self does
confute, but also the due consideration of the Heresy which the woman held:
For, neither the eating, neither the not eating of the Sacramental bread, did
either further or hinder the Macedonian Heresy. If she had been an Arian, the
Friars assertion might have had some color of truth; but seeing she was a
Macedonian, it is too too foolish and ridiculous: For, the Heresy of
Macedonius consisted in this, that the Holy Ghost was not God. Sozomenus, nor
Nicephorus says, as the Jesuit bears his Readers in hand; viz. that the
Sacrament of our Lords Body and Blood, was then ministered under one kind, but
only this and nothing else; viz. that the Woman deceived her Husband, in
taking the Bread which she did not eat. Jesuit falsely says, that the Cup
was not then given into the hands of the Communicantes; his Authors affirm
nothing less. Friar says, and howsoever he imagine, that the Woman could not
have had the same evasion in taking the Cup, which she had in taking the
Bread; yet do I constantly affirm, and experience will prove the same; that
she might have seemed to drink of the Cup, and yet have tasted no Wine at
all. Gelasius does contest with me, that the Lay people did in his time, A.D.
492.
(which was 492. years after Christ at the least) receive the holy Eucharist
under both the kinds: Geneb. lib. 3. page 618.
yea he affirms it to be Sacrilege, to receive but the one kind alone: These
are his express words. De consecr. did. 2. cap. comperimus.
Comperimus autem quod quidam sumpta tantummodo corporis sacriportione, a
Ca^ice sacrati^ruoris abstineant. Qui procul dubio (quoniam nescio qua
superstitione docentur astringi,) aut integra sacramenta percipiant, aut ab
integris arceantur. Quia diuisio vnius eiusdemque mysterij, sine grandi
sacrilegio non potest peruenire: Lo, the Pope grants, that it is flat
Sacrilege, to receive the holy Bread without the Cup.
We understand, that some receive only the portion of the sacred Body, and
abstain from the Cup of the holy Blood. Who, (for that we know not how they
are taught to be superstitious,) shall either receive the whole Sacraments, or
else be excluded from the whole. Thus writes Pope Ge^asius the first, (whom
Genebrard truly calls, the most learned Pope) That some odd persons in his
time, did not receive the Eucharist in both kinds: whom he therefore
condemns of flat Sacrilege, because the one kind may not be taken without
the other. But I will yet touch and tickle our Jesuit more strictly, and tell
him that which will make his ears to tingle. Gabriel Biel, a very learned
Schoole-doctor, and a religious Popish Friar, Biel in can. Miss. ^ect. 84. fol.
214. D.
in his Commentaries upon the Canon of popish Mass, tells us very
constantly; that it was a right generally used in the primative Church, to
receive the holy Eucharist under both kinds: But withal he affirms very
resolutely; that the Church of Rome in process of time, brought into the
Church an other Custom of receiving, in one kind only. In the end, he
determines and decideth the controversy, in these express words. Olim
quaestio illa poterat esse dubia; sed nunc post determinatione^ concilij
Constantiensis veritate^ catholica determinantis, dicere co^munionem sub
vtraque specie esse de necessitate salutis omni fideli, est haeresis ibidem
public condemnata: In former times, it was lawful to doubt of that Question:
But in these latter days after the Council of Constance, which has
determined the Catholic verity therein; to say, that all the faithful must
upon necessity of salvation, Communicate under both kinds, is a flat
Heresy publicly condemned in the said Council. Thus disputes this great
Learned Papist: out of whose words, I gather these worthy observations.
Constance; A.D. 1414.
that is to say, for the space of one thousand, four hundred, and fourteen
years: For, so long was that Council holden after Christ. Biel, vbi supra.
acknowledging the same for an undoubted truth. And Biel, my Doctor now in
hand, approoueth the same in these express words. Quaedam sunt de necessitate
sacramentorum, et de iure diuino; sic quod nulla authoritate vel consuetudine,
oppositum induci possit: Some things are of the necessity of Sacraments, and
of the Law divine; so that whatsoever is opposite or repugnant to the same, can
never be established by any Custom or Authority. Melchior Canus, in these
express words. Canus de Locis, lib. 3. cap. 4. page 101.
Nec vllas in fide nouas reuelationes Ecclesia habet: The Church has no new
Revelations, in matters of Faith. This is true Catholic doctrine in very
deed; no denial may be made thereof: For, once a matter of Faith, is and must
ever be a matter of Faith. And in like manner; once no Article of Faith, neither
is nor ever can be an Article of true Faith indeed.

B. C.
S. Thomas of Aquine, does not say; That this was in some few places only, as
Bell makes him to speak; but that in some Churches it was so observed; which
might be very many, as well as some few.

T. B.
I Answer; that in my Survey of Popery, I set down Aquinas his express
words, as mine accustomed manner ever has been, though our Jesuit dare not
perform so much. In my Trial, I only gave the true sense and meaning for
brevity sake: His words are these. Aquin. p 3. q. 80. art. 12. in corp.
Ex part quidem ipsius sacramenti conuenit, quod vtramque sumatur; sez. et
corpus et sanguis, quia in vtroque consistit perfectio sacramenti. Sequitur,
ideo provide in quibusdam ecclesijs obseruatur, vt populo sanguis sumendus non
detur, sed solum a sacerdote sumatur: On the behalf of the Sacrament, it is
meet and convenient, that both be received: to weet, both the Body and the
Blood; because in both, consists the perfection of the Sacrament: Therefore
it is prouidently observed in some Churches, that the Blood be not given to the
Lay people, but be only received of the Priest. Thus writes Aquinas; A.D.
1240.
out of whose words, I note two special Documentes. Th^one, that the
perfection of the Sacrament consists in both kinds; and consequently, that
the Communion of the Lay people, Lo, the Sacrament in one kind i^ imperfect.
is this day imperfect in the Church of Rome. This is a note of great
consequence; let it be well remembered. The Other, that both kinds were usually
received, even of the Lay people in the days of Aquinas, both in the Church of
Rome, and in all other Churches, some few excepted. A.D. 1240.
For, if Aquinas should mean ( by some Churches,) very many Churches, as our
Friar would persuade his readers; he should not have said, in some Churches,
but in very many, or in all Churches for the most part: For, two (which are a
few, not very many) may determine some Churches very sufficiently. But to
extend some Churches to very many, is to offer no small violence to the Text.
For example sake; If our Jesuit should promise to give me some Money for my
pains, as I think he will not; if then I did challenge very much Money upon
his Promise, he perperhaps would deny the same; and my self for any help the
words would afford me, should by Law recover the great sum ad Calend^^
Graeta^. In my Survey, this Lay call Communion under both kinds, Survey, part.
3. cap. 10.
is proved at large; out of Origin, S. Cyprian, S. Hierome, S. Chrysostom, S.
Jgnatius, S. Justinus, S. Ambrose, S. Austen, S. Gregory, and Haymo; It shall
now suffice, to cite the testimonies of Justinius and Haymo: Justinius has these
express words. Justin. in. 2 Apolog. 2. page 76.
Qui apud nos voca^tur Diaconi atque Ministri, distribuunt vnicuique
praesentium, vt participet eum in quo gratiae actae sunt, Panem, Vinum, et
Aquam. Sequitur: Nam Apostoli in commentarijs a se scriptis quae Euangelia
vocantur, ita tradiderunt praecepisse sibi Iesum: They that we call Deacons and
Ministers, do distribute to every one that is present, the sanctified Bread,
Wine, and Water, to be made partaker thereof: For the Apostles in their
Commentaries; that is, in the Ghospels, have taught us, that Jesus so
commanded them (to minister the holy Communion.) Haymo an ancient Father and
learned Bishop has these express words. Haymo in 1. Cor. 11.
Ego. N. accepi ^ Domino, quod et tradidi vobis; id est, mysterium corporis et
sanguinis Domini, quomodo debeatis sumere: sicut mihi reuelauit, ita tradidi
vobis: For I have received of the Lord, that which I delivered to you; that is,
the mystery of our Lords Body and Blood, in what manner ye ought to receive
it: Even as he revealed it to me, so have I delivered it to you. Thus write
these holy, ancient and learned Fathers; very resolutely and plainly teaching
us, that Christ commanded all sorts of people to Communicate under both
kinds. I therefore must conclude, with this inevitable illation: A.D. 1414.
That seeing the Communion under one kind, was not an Article of popish Faith
for the space of 1414. years after Christ, as is already proved; it both is,
and must perforce be so reputed, a very rotten ragge of the New religion.

The.13. Chapter: of Popish private Mass.
B. C.
THE Minister speaks of the dreadful Mysteries, as homely, as though he were
talking of the English Communion; which is had in such high reverence, that the
fragmentes remaining, are appointed for the Ministers private uses, and leave
given him to feed with them his Chickens, or to soppe his Pottage.

T. B.
I answer; Jesuit is as vnreuerent in speaking, as he is impudent and
shameless in lying. Romish Church, to their transubstantiated Bread-god.
Petrus Lombardus their reverend Master of Sentences, Lomb. 4. s. did. 3. B.
not able to express what the Mouse does eat, answers to the great
mystical difficulty, in these words; Deus no^u: God knows what the Mouse
does eat. Moses, pronounced to the Is^^e^u^, that the remnant of the
Meat Offering, should be Aaron* and his Sons: Leuit. 2. v. 3.
And the reason is added immediately in these express words; For it is most
Holy of the Lords Offeringes made by Fire, Again in an other place thus.
Leuit. 7. v. 8.9^10.
The Priest that offers any man's Burnt offering, shall have the Skin of the
Burnt offering which he has offered. And all the Meat offering that is baken
in the Oven, and that is dressed in the Pan, and in the frying Pan, shall
be the Priests that offers it. And every Meat offering mingled with Oil,
and that is dry, shall pertain to all the sons of Aaron, to all alike.

B. C.
To the matter: An untruth it is, that private Masses were not before the time
he mentions. The twelft Council of Toledo, almost nine hundred years ago,
reprehendeth those Priests, C^nc. Tolet. 12. can. 5. A.D. 686.
which offering Sacrifice did not communicate. Quale illud Sacrificium, etc.
What manner of Sacrifice is that (says the Council,) of which neither he that
sacrifices, is known to be partaker? Which words do show, that none was
present to communicate, and yet the Council requires only, that the Priest
himself do Communicate. S. Austen also records, how a Priest offered
Sacrifice in a private form, for the freeing of that place from the
molestation of wicked spirits. In so particular and extraordinary a place,
and for so particular a business, no probability that there were any other
Communicantes.

T. B.
I answer; Jesuiticall Friar, to come once to the matter, whose custom is
seldom or never, to be occupied in that honest kind of dealing. Private Mass;
much less does it approve the same. Friars turn: The reason is at hand;
because that which comes almost 700. years after Christ, must needs be the
New religion. To that of S. Austen, the same answer is correspondent; and our
Jesuit shows himself a very silly and ridiculous disputer, while he
seeks to stablish an Article of Faith, upon iciune and barren probabilities.
Jesuit with his private Mass. In the Canons of the Apostles, I find these
express words. Can. 9. et Can. 10. et Great. d. 16. Cap. placuit.
Si quis Episcopus, Presbyter, vel Diaconus, vel ex Sacerdotali catalogo, facta
Oblatione non co^municauerit, causam dicat; et si probabilis fuerit, veniam
consequatur; sin vero minus, segregetur; vt qui populo ^ffensionis causa sit,
et suspicion^^ dedetit aduersus eum qui obtulit, tanquam non dign^ obtulerit:
If any Bishop, Priest, or Deacon, or other of the Clergy, shall not
Communicate in time of the Oblation let him show the cause* or if it be found
reasonable, let him be pardoned: but if otherwise, let him be excommunicate, as
one that has given scandal, and brought him into suspicion which offered, as
if he had done amiss. The Popes own Decrees are so clear and manifest, at
nothing can be more. One Canon commands all such to be put out of the
Church, as do not receive the holy Communion: these are the express words. De
consecr. did. 2. cap. peracta.
Paracta Consecratione, omnes comunicent qui noluerint Ecclesia^tici^ c^re^
^liminibus. Sir N. Apostoli slatuerum, et suncta Roma^^ tinet Ecclesia: Wh^^^
Consecration is accomplished, ^^t all that will not Communicate, be put out of
the Church: For so the Apostles have ordained, and so the holy Roman Church
observes. An other Canon has these words. De (...) did. 2. ca^. si qu^^
Si quis (...) Ecclesiam Dei, (...) sua auertit se a Communione sacramenti, et
in obseruandis ministerijs declinat constitutam regulam disciplinae, istum
talem proijciendum de Ecclesia Catholica esse decernimus, donec panitentiam
agat: If any come into Gods Church, and hear the holy Scriptures, and
superstitiously auert himself from the Communion of the Sacrament, and in
observing the ministeries, Obseru^ gloss.
swerve from the set Rule of discipline, we decree such a one to be
excommunicate, until he repent. An other Canon has these words. De consecr.
Distinct. 1. cap. omnes.
Omnes fideles qui conueniunt in solennitatibus sacris ad Ecclesiam, et
scripturas Apostolorum et Euangelium audiant. Qui autem non perseuerant in
oratione vsque dum missa peragatur, nec sanctam Communionem percipiunt, velut
inquietudines Ecclesiae commouenies conuenit communione priuari. All the
faithful which come to the Church, in the time of sacred Solemnities, must
hear the Scriptures of the Apostles and the Gospel: But they that do not
continue in Prayer until Mass be done, nor receive the holy Communion, ought
to be excommunicate, as disquieters of the congregation. S. Chrysostom is so
far from approouing private Mass, that he calls them impudent and wicked,
that being present, do not communicate: these are his words. Chrysostom. hom.
^. ad Ephesians.
Ista videlicet et nunc ad omnes nos dicit, qui impudenter hic et improbe
astamus. Quisquis. N^mysteriorum cons^rs non est, impudens et improbus astat:
These things verily he now says to us all, which stand by impudently and
wickedly: For whosoever stands by, and does not communicate, is impudent and
wicked. See and note well the Popes funeral, where this point is soundly
disputed, Survey, part. 3. cap. 10. concl. 2
Oh, what would this holy Father say, if he were this day in Rome, and should
see many hundredes standing by gazing, and the Priest only deuowring all? He
would doubtless term them, most impudent and ungracious people. This Subject
is plentifully disputed in my Survey; to which place I refer the Reader.

The 14. Chapter: of Pope Martins Dispensation, for the Brother to marry his
natural Sister.
ALL that our Jesuit says in defense of Pope Martins Dispensation, is plain
silence in very deed. For albeit I soundly confuted the forerunner in my Book,
entitled, The Popes Funera^l, there answering to every sentence, word, and
syllable, which B.C. in his forerunner possibly could devise; yet S.R* that
Learned Jesuit, in his pretensed Answer to the Downefull of Popery, not able
to withstand or gainesay the dint of my Authorities, Arguments, and Reasons,
passed over all the same, (being many, and of great consequence,) in deep
silence. In like manner, this Jesuit fearing to suffer shipwreck upon the
same Rock, is afraid now, either to reply upon mine Answer in the Funeral,
or to answer my Authors plainly named in the Trial. I proved the Question
soundly and clearly in the Popes Funeral, by the Authorities and plain
Testimonies of Siluester Prieras, sometime Master of the Popes sacred Palace,
and a Friar so learned, that he was surnamed, Absolutus Theologus; of
Bartholomaeus Fumus, a religious dominican Friar, a famous Popish summist, The
Popes Dispensations are abominable.
and a man of great Authority in the Holy house of popish Inquisition; of
Angelus de Clauasio, a Papist of great learning and reputation, as who was
Vicar general of the Cismontani-Minors; of Cardinal Caietain, the most
learned Papist of that crew; and of Martinus Nauarrus, a singular Writer, and a
most famous popish Canonist. This notwithstanding, all the answer that can any
way be extorted from the Jesuits Pen, is this, and no other; viz. that he
has answered me in the Doleful Knell. Popery can not be defen^ded, but by
notorious lying.
Which answer, if it be pondered seriously with all the circumstaunces thereto
apperteyning, is able of it self, (if nothing else could be said,) to overthrow
Popery, and to turn it vpside down. Mark therefore (gentle Reader) very
attentively, what I shall here truly relate, as I will answer for it at the
dreadful day of Doom* the Jesuit B.C. in his Forerunner, has these express
words. Forerunner, page 17.
He may very well live to see it, and ye^ die much sooner then he would. Let
him not be dismayed, for I can assure him of mine own knowledge, that our
consciences do not condemn us; This is a tale of Robin Hood and Little John.
neither do we know, that we are not able to perform as great a matter as
that. To give the more credit to my words, and somewhat to revive his dead
spirits, I will here give him a note of the number of the Books, and their
particular contents: they be in all five, written against his Motives and
Survey, five years ago. Thus writes the Jesuit B. C. in his Forerunner. In
his Detection, published Anno. 1602.
To which let us truly add that, which the Jesuit E.O. writes in his
Detection against M. D. Sutcl^ffe, and M. Willet: These are his express
words. But I altered my purpose, partly upon other considerations; but
especially, because the Confutation of his worthy Works is already
undertaken, and to be published, if it shall be thought necessary. Thus
writes E. O. that Learned man, as B. C. his brother Jesuit terms him.

Now sir, (mark well for Christ's sake,) the detector E. O. That coozening
Jesuit tells us mordicus, that the Confutation of my Books, was but
undertaken by his fellows; This is a great wonderment of the world: let it be
remembered.
when he published his Detection; that is to say, it was then concluded amongst
his Breathren, that my Books should be answered. Hence comes it, (it can not
be denied,) that the supposed Answer to my Books, was in the year 1602. (for
at that time was the Detection published) at the most but in fieri, not in
facto esst; to speak as the Schools do: viz. the Answer was then but in
hand, or in doing at the most; not done, or finished in very deed: Nay, it was
but then resolved amongst them, (as I proved in my Counterblast out of the
provincial Garnets Letter,) that some Answer should be made unto my Books.
And therefore says the detector, that he was once determined to have said
something against my Books, but hearing that his fellows were about the same
matter, he altered his purpose. Here is a most coozening legierdemain: here
the Jesuits play their parts, and show themselves not only egregious liars
and most cursed deceivers; but also (as the secular Priests write of them,)
the most wicked men that live upon the earth, It was not without great cause,
that the learned Papists in France, published a Book against them, Lib. 2.
cap. 17.
which they tea^med, The Jesuits Catechism. In which Book, they show at
large, that the further a Jesuit goes the louder he lies. An other Book
called, The frank Discourse, The Frank Discourse, page 98.
affirms resolutely; that the Jesuits never harbored in their hearts any
other project, but the subuertion of States, disauthorizing of Magistrates, and
seducing of Subjects from their natural allegiance. In brief, thus the case
stands. S. R. that learned Jesuit, affirms constantly, that at the
publication of his Detection, A.D. 1602.
(which was in the year 1602.) my Books were not answered, but at the most in
fieri, as is already said. B.C. that famous Jesuit sings an other song, and
avouches peremptorily; Mark, how the Jesuits confute themselves.
that my Books (my Motives and my Survey) were answered, five years before he
published his forerunner: That is in plain English, four years before that
time, in which his brother Jesuit ^elleth us, that his fellows were but above
to answer them. And least it should be objected against B. C. that bloody
cutthroate, (for so may his name be, till he more plainly disclose it,) that
his brother Jesuit S. R. accuses him of a most notorious Lie therein: he to
prevent that Objection, tells us, that the Answer is suppressed, and upon
just occasion stayed and not published. Forerunner, page. 15. cap. 3.
These are his express words, in the Contents of his third Chapter. That
Bells Books have long since received their answer, and though upon just
occasion it has hitherto bin suppressed; yet shortly by Gods grace to be set
forth. Thus discourses the Friar, for the honor and life of his Pope; which
he manageth so gallantly, as if his reward should be a Rope. These Jesuits
their several asseuerations, Iudic. 15. v. 4.
are much like to Sampson Foxes: their Tails are fast tied together, but
their Heads are far asunder. So then; this must needs be the conclusion,
though it imply a flat and plain contradiction; viz. that my Motives and
Survey were answered about ten years ago at the least; and yet unanswered
to this day. This in my conceipte is not only a Riddle, A Jesuits Miracle.
but a plain Jesuiticall Miracle. Yet such a Miracle ever understand, as the
Jesuits wrought upon Sebastian the late King of Portugal. See my Anatomy.
Well, all the world may see by this their dealing, that they are at their
wits end, what to say or write; turning them selves this way, that way, and
every way, by coozening, lying, iugling, and by what other means they possibly
can devise; so to stay the outcries of the people and their Popish vassals,
for being so long silent touching the answer of my Books. Alas, alas; Who
sees not the nakedness of late hatched Romish religion, to what impudent,
desperate, and most damnable shifts, are the Papists driven for the defense
thereof? How dare they confess to the whole world, that they have bin buzzing
about the Answer of my Motives and Survey, for the space of six whole years
or more; and that when they had framed their Answer after their best manner,
they have suppressed the same for the space of five years? The truth is, that
their falsely pretended Answer (which should consist of five Books) can not to
this day befound extant in rerum natura. When the Jesuits and
Semina^ie-Priestes consulted with Garnet their Provincial, what course was
best to be taken in hand for the Answer of my Books; because their silence in
that behalf, was very dangerous to their Pope and Popery: the Father Jesuit
having on his cappe of Consideration, answered very peremptorily, though
neither clerkly nor honestly; That they must either not meddle with the matter
at all, or else deal rather with my Person, then with my Doctrine. Yet he
adds very gravely these words; Lo, a great number, even of the best, have
consulted to answer my Books.
Nevertheless, for this matter, as ye shall all agree: for I doubt not, but
so many, and such, will see what is best. Where we have to observe by the way,
in perpetuam rei memoriam* that not one only Jesuit or Seminarie-priest
writes against me, but even the whole brood, tagge and ragge, have bent
their Bows to shoot their Arrows at me. For, though one odd Companion be
singled out to take the quarrel in hand, and to pen the Answer; See my
Counterblast, for Garnetes Letter.
yet is the same fellow guarded and assisted, with the joint counsel, advise,
judgment, and help of all the rest. But to what end is this my digression?
Doubtless, to insinuate to the Reader; that seeing I can neither see, nor yet
learn who has seen this doleful Knell, Lo, the Jesuits write many Books
against Bell, which they dare not publish.
to which I must resort for Answer; I can not but think, that it is hid under
a Pipkin, so to be kept from Sun-burning; even as the other Five Books are,
prepared so many years ago. Howbeit, if either it, or any other Book shall
happen to come to my hands (while God shall of his great mercy grant me
life, health, and sight, the two last whereof, do in an hie degree begin to
fail me,) it shall (God willing) receive a speedy Answer. Let this Jesuit
and all the rest, so persuade themselves; as also, that God gives me comfort
more then a little, in all my conflictes against them.

The 15. Chapter: of Popish worshipping of Images.
B. C.
SAint Gregory (says Bell) sharply reproved the Worship done to Images. True
it is: But what kind of Worship was it: The Minister would have the Reader
to think, that it was the same, which the Catholic Church allows and
teaches; which is nothing so: For it was passing far different, for as much
as S. Gregory allowed convenient Adoration, as shall straight be said.

T. B.
I answer; Jesuits Answer, while he confesses truly; that Gregory
sharply reproved the Worship done to Images. Gregory's words: For, it is
most clear and evident, that Gregory never approved religious Worship given
to Images. Friar falsely imagines, the Church of Rome to be the Catholic
Church. Of which Subject, I have disputed at large, in my Christian Dialogue.

B. C.
Cardinal Bellarmine thinks, that this erroneous Worship was given by
certain new Christians* (...) surely such were most likely to fall into that
gross sin; of whom it is not so much to be marueyled, if accustomed before
to Idols, they behaved themselves in like manner toward sacred Images, and
adored them for Gods, as in Pagain sin they were taught and practiced.

T. B.
I answer; Bellarmine and his Iesuited accomplices shall conjecture and imagine
to be the truth: Yet is is true, that all must be burnt with Fire and Faggot,
in Rome, Spain, and Portingale, that will not believe, as the Pope and his
Cardinals teach them. Reformed Portesse or Breuiarie, where I find this Prayer
made to the Cross. In Breuiar. Romans hebd* 4. quadr. in sabb.
O Crux, aue spe vnica, hoc passionis tempore; auge pijs iustitiam, reisque
dona veniam: All hayle o Cross, our only hope, in this time of the Passion;
increase Justice to the Godly, and eke to sinners Pardon give. To which I add
the manner of Worship which the Papists do to the Cross on Good-fry day; to
say nothing of other times. Upon that day the Cross is covered; and in time of
popish Prayers, the Priest by degrees does uncover the same: first, on the
right side, with low reverence done unto it. Then on the left side, with the
like reverence exhibited. Lastly, the whole Cross is revealed* and made
manifest to the people. And the like superstitious dotage is used, in the Song
made to the Cross. For, in every of the three degrees, the tune is elevated
and made higher then before. Which being thus done, the Priest puts off his
Shoes, and prostrate upon the ground adoreth and kisseth the Cross. Nadis
pedibus adoratur crux.
After the Priest, follow the rest, as well of the Temporaltie, as of the
Clergy; every one, in his order and degree. And because none may come empty to
the Lords House, many rich Oblations are made even with the good liking of the
Priest. But if any refuse to adore and worship the Cross, he shall be burnt
as an Heretic. If any desire to know the mysteries of Popish worship done
to the Wooden Cross, with the profound significations thereof, Durand. in
rationale diui^. offic. libr. 6. cap. 77.
he may find the same in Bishop Durand, who has bestowed great labor in
that behalf. But say on sir Friar, it is not yet time to go to dinner?

B. C.
Bell quoteth Biel; where nothing is handled of any such Subject. A small
fault, especially in Bell, being one of such known truth, that he never uses
any such sleightes, unless it be for the better passage of the Gospel. To
let that pass; Why has he not cited his Words? He may pretend what reason he
please: but he must give me leave to think, that there is none other, save
only, that he knew not truly where to find them.

T. B.
I answer; Jesuit is so addicted to lying, as the Devil may seem to have
begotten him. If I should stand to examine and refute all the Lies which our
Jesuit pours out in his Pamphlets, time doubtless would sooner fail me,
then matter whereof to speak. Jesuit is condemned in his own Conscience, as
who accuses me of that which is proper to himself, and whereof he knows me
to be innocent. Is this possible to be proved? It is not only possible, but
so easy a thing for me to prove it, that if I fail herein, I will desire no
credit to be given me in other matters. For the manifestation of the truth
herein, I desire the honest and indifferent Reader, to observe two things with
me. The One, that the Jesuit has seen, read, and taken note or notes, out of
my little Book, entitled, The woeful cry of Rome. In the Preface to the
Reader, page 7.
For, so much himself confesses in his Preface to the Reader. The Other, that
in the selfsame Woeful cry, I have both truly quoted the place, and sincerely
cited the express words of Biel: there I write in this manner. Yea, Gabriel
Biel a religious Popish Friar, and a very learned Schoole-doctor, who lived
long after Gregory and Serenus, even one thousand, four hundred, eighty, and
four years after Christ, does sharply inueigh and reprove the Worship
given to Images. He has a large Discourse of this Subject, in which the
Reader may find these express words. Biel in Can. miss. lect. 49. in fine.
Quod vero Christiana religio Imagines sustinet in Ecclesia et oratorijs, non
permittit eo fine, vt ipsae adorentur. Sequitur: Neque adoro Imaginem Christi,
quia lignum, nec quia Imago; sed adoro Christum, coram imagine Christi; quia
scilicet imago Christi excitat me ad amandum Christum: Whereas Christian
religion tolerateth Images in the Church, and in Oratories; it does not permit
them for this end, that they may be adored: Neither do I adore the Image of
Christ, because it is Wood, neither for that it is an Image: but I adore
Christ, before the Image of Christ; because the Image of Christ, does allure me
to love Christ. Thus much, and plentiful other matter against popish Worship
of Images, the Reader may find in that Book. And therefore I must not give the
Friar that leave, which he would enforce me to give; howsoever he think to
deceive others, with his palpable and gross lying. True it is, that through
the negligence of the Printer, Compositor, or Corrector, (whom in this kind of
business, I repute as one man,) the place out of Biel is quoted amiss:
Whereat the Friar for want of other better matter, thought it his best course
to wrangle and cavil; albeit he knew right well (as is already proved,) that
in The woeful cry of Rome, the words are sincerely cited, and the place truly
quoted: Which is an insoluble argument, that our Jesuit has a cauterized
Conscience, and is in semblance much like to Knights of the Post.

B. C.
An other thing here accurreth worth the noting; Bell cites in the Pamphlet
of his Woeful cry, as Gabriels words, those which be not his, but rather
Holcots, though alleged by Gabriel; which also he does interpret to a good
sense, as before was said.

T. B.
I answer; Holcots by invention, so are they Gabriels by approbation: And
consequently, that Holcot an other learned Papist, does oppose himself against
the Worship done to Images. Gabriel has affirmed very resolutely, that
Images are neither to be worshipped as Wood, nor yet as they be Images: that
is, no way at all; as we have already heard. Gabriel. Biel, in can. miss.
^ect. 49. prope finem.
A little after, that same Gabriel propounds the Question; if that act by
which one is carried to the Image ought to be called Adoration. To which he
answers, in these words. Dicitur, quod est adoratio analogice et improprie,
non aute^ proprie; quoniam est respectu creaturae: I answer, that it is called
Adoration analogically and improperly, but not properly; because it is in
respect of a creature. And certes, seeing he will have all proper and true
Worship, to pertain to God alone; he consequently avouches, that no true
Worship is or can be given to any Image whatsoever. Gabriel cites
Damascenus, for the same end and purpose: These are his express words. Quia
non omnes noscunt literas, neque lectioni vacant; patres excogitauerunt velut
quosdam triumphos, in imaginibus hoc describere ad velocem memoriam. Quapropter
multoties non secundum montem habentes Domini passionem, imaginem
crucifixtionis Christi videntes, et in salutaris passionis memoriam venientes,
procidentes adoramus Christum. Ecce, dicit Christum adorari, ad inspectionem
imaginum ducentium in notitiam rememoratinam Christi: Because all can not read,
neither have all leisure to read; the Fathers have invented as it were certain
triumphs, to describe this in Images for the speedy help of Memory:
Wherefore, not having often times in mind our Lords Passion, when we behold
the Image of Christ crucified, remembering his healthful Passion, we falling
prostrate, do adore Christ. Behold, Damascene says; that we adore Christ,
when we behold his Image bringing him to our remembrance. Thus writes Biel out
of Damascene. So then, albeit the best learned Papists, do not deny Christ to
be adored before his Image; yet will they by no means grant or allow, the
Image itself to be adored.

B. C.
What has Bell got by vouching the authority of S. Gregory? About the
retayning of Images in Churches, he is directly against him; as he can not
deny. Concerning their Adoration also, he nothing helps him, but teaches
that, which nothing pleases his reformed spirit; and therefore true it is not,
that he reproved the Worship done to Images, as Bell affirms.

T. B.
I answer; Jesuits usual occupation: For, I am so far from condemning
simply and absolutely the making and retayning of Images for civil use, that I
have plainly and expressly written in defense thereof; constantly affirming
the same, not to be prohibited by the word of God. He that shall duly peruse
my Survey of Popery, Survey, part. 2. lib. r. 1. cap. 6. concl. 2.
can not stand in doubt thereof: And consequently, our Friar knowing that Book
right well, to his grief and sorrow; proves himself to have deserved the
Whetstone, to be hanged about his neck for lying. Friar belyeth both S.
Gregory and my self, while he impudently denies, that Gregory reproved the
Worshipping of Images: These are his express words. Gregor. Sereno episcopo,
lib. 7. ep. 109. cap. 109.
Et quidem zelum v^s, ne quid manu factum adorari possit, habuisse laudauimus;
sed frangere casdem Imagines non debuisse iudicamus. Sequitur: tua ergo
fraternitas et illas scruare, et ab earum cultu populum prohibere debuit: We
truly commend you, as having had zeal therein; least any thing made with
hands, should be adored; yet do I judge, that you should not have broken the
same Images: Therefore your brotherhood should both have kept them whole, and
also have forbidden the people to adore them. Thus discourses Pope Gregory.
Out of whose words, I observe these golden Lessons. Gregory commended the
zeal of the good Bishop Serenus, who breaks Images in pieces, which the
people worshipped. Gregory and Serenus. Serenus thought it time, to break the
Images, when the people began to adore them. Gregory thought, they might still
remain in the Church; so the people were instructed how to use them; and
prohibited to Worship them. And of his opinion, are some reformed Churches in
this age, who still retain Images in their Temples. I neither dare condemn
those, who still keep them in their Churches or Temples; nor yet those, who
have abolished the same. But this I boldly avouch; that Serenus had for his
example, both the fact of the good King Ezechias, 2. Reg. 18. v. 4.
who brake in pieces the Brazen Serpent, when the people began to adore it,
albeit God himself had commanded to set it up: and also the practice of S.
Epiphanius, Epiphan. ep. ad lo. Hierosol. in fine.
who seeing the Image of a Saint hanging in the Church, tore the same asunder,
and advised the Wardens to bury some poor body with the Veil, and to see that
thencefoorth no such Vailes should be hanged up in the Church. These are the
express words of S. Epiphanius, translated by S. Hierome out of Greek into
the Latin tongue. Inueni ibi velum pendens in foribus ciusdem Ecclesia tinctum
atque depictum, et habens Imaginem quasi Christi, vel sancti cuiusdam. Non. N.
satis memini, cuius Imago fuerit. Cum ergo hoc vidissem in Ecclesia Christi
contra authoritatem scripturarum hominis pendere imaginem scidi illud, et magis
dedi consilium custodibus eiusdem loci, vt pauperem mortuum eo obuoluerent et
efferrent. Sequitur: Et precor deinceps praecipere, in Ecclesia Christi
istiusmodi vela, quae contra religionem nostram veniunt, non appendi: I found
there a Veil hanging in the Doors of the same Church dyed and painted, which
had the Image as it were of Christ, or some Saint; for I do not well remember
whose Image it was: Therefore, when I saw in the Church of Christ a man's Image
against the authority of the Scriptures, I tore it in pieces; In villa
Anablatha.
and advised the Keepers of that place, (of the Church in Anablatha) to bury
some poor body with it. I pray you command; that henceforth such Vailes
which make against our Religion, be not hanged up in the Church of Christ. The
same Epiphanius in an other place, has these express words. Epiphan. haeres.
79. page 313.
Re vera sanctu^ erat corpus Mariae, non tamen Deus. Re vera virgo erat ipsa
virgo et honorata, sed non ad adorationem nobis data; sed ipsa ador^ns eum qui
ex ipsa carne genitus est, de caelis vero ex finibus paternis accessit.
Sequitur. Neque Helias adorandus est, etiamst in viuis sit. Neque lohannes
adorandus, neque Thecla, neque quisquam Sanctus adoratur. Non. N. dominabitur
nobis antiquus error, vt relinquamus viuentem, et adoremus ea quae ab ipso
sacta sunt. Sequitur. Sit in honor Maria: Pater, et Filius, ei Spiritus
sanctus adoretur. Muriam nemo adoret, non dico mulierem, imo neque virum; Deo
debetur hoc mysterium. Neque Angeli capiunt talem glorificationem. Sequitur.
Etsi pulcherrima est Maria, et sancta, et honorata, a non ad adoratione^: The
body of Mary was holy indeed; but she was not God. The Virgin was a Virgin
indeed and honorable; but not given to us to be adored: But she adoreth him,
who being borne of her according to the flesh, came down from Heaven, even
from his Fathers Throne. Helias ought not to be Worshipped, if he were this day
living amongst us. Neither is John to be Adored, neither Thecla, neither any
other Saint: For, the old Error may not so far ouerrule us, that we forsake
the living God, and Adore the Workmanshippe of his hands. Let Mary be had in
honor: let the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, be Adored: Let none
Adore Mary, I say not the Woman, but neither the Man; this mystery is due to
GOD alone. The Angels are not capable, of such glorification. Though Mary be
most beautiful, and holy, and honorable; yet is she not to be Adored. Thus
discourses S. Epiphanius, affirming resolutely; that only GOD ought to be
Worshipped and Adored, not any Saints in Heaven, or on Earth; much less their
Images.

The 16. Chapter: of Church service in the Vulgar tongue.
B. C.
TO prove that the Public Service of the Church ought to be in the Vulgar
tongue, he cites the names of many Authors, without ever setting down their
Sentences, thinking it sufcient to refer the Reader (...) his Survey; where
he has laid out their words at large.

T. B.
I answer; first, that our Jesuit is so troubled, with my Books, as he
seems to have lost his wits: For, The Jesuit knows not in the world, how
or what to write.
in his Preface of this present Pamphlet, he obiecteth against me as a fault;
that I iterate some things in one Book, which I have published in an other.
Nevertheless, here he charge me of insufficiency; for that I refer the
Reader to my Survey, where I have handled the controversy at large. What a
fellow is this Jesuisicall Friar? If I iterate that, which before I uttered in
an other Book; he is like a mad man, and cries out; that I trouble him
with often repetitions. If I refer him to that, which I have written else
where; he accuses me as in this place, that it is not sufficient so to deal.
Secondly, that himself in the.14 Chapter of this Pamphlet, yields no other
Answer touching Pope M^rtins Dispensation, See the.14. Chapter aforegoing.
save only, that he refers me to an unknown, and as yet invisible Book;
which he calls, The doleful Knell.

B. C.
This proves not, that the Public Service of the Church was in any other
Language, then in the sacre^ Tongues of the Greek, Latin, etc. For the
Grecians might understand the Priest, though their Service were in Greek,
because that Tongue was to them the vulgar and common.

T. B.
I answer; first, that our Jesuit confesses plainly, that his purpose is
not to examine my whole Trial, and I believe him in this point, albeit this
Chapter consists only of sixteen lines. But those few lines, contain such
sound and pithy Doctrine, as all the Jesuitees in Christendom, are not able
truly to answer the same. Secondly, that I am here content to iterate part
of that, which I have else where set down at large: and yet I can hardly
think, that the same will be to our Friars contentation; Howbeit, volens,
nolens, he must put it up; seeing he has provoked me thereunto. Theodoretus a
great Learned man, and a very famous Historiographer, (who lived almost one
thousand and two hundred years ago,) A.D. 414.
affirms constantly; that in his time, the Scriptures were translated into
all manner of Languages; and that they were not only understood of Doctors and
Masters of the Church, but even of the Lay people and common Artificers also:
These are his express words. Theodor. de Graecar. affect. curat. lib. 5. page
521. to.2.
Hebraici vero Libri non modo in Graecum idioma conuersi sunt, sed in Romanam
quoque linguam, Aegyptiam, Persicam, Indicam, Armenicamque et Scythicam, atque
adeo Sanromaticam; semelque vt dicam, in linguas omnes, quibus ad hanc diem
nationes vtuntur. Sequitur. Fossoresque adeo ac bubuleos inuenias, plantarumque
consitores, de diuina Trinitate, rerumque omnium creatione discertantes: The
Hebrew Books are turned not only into the Greek tongue, but also into the
Roman language, into the Egyptian, Persian, Indian, Armenian, and Scythian, as
also into the Sanromaticall tongue; and to speak all in a word, into all
tongues, which this day are in use amongst Nations. We may find Ditchers,
Deluers, Neatheards, and Gardiners, disputing even of the blessed Trinity, and
of the Creation of all things. Thus discourses this ancient Father and great
learned Writer, showing most clearly unto his Readers; that in the ancient
Church and old time, every Nation had the holy Scriptures in their Vulgar
language: and that in those days, all Christians did read the holy Scriptures
so seriously, that both men and women of all trades and conditions, were able
to dispute of the holy Trinity, and of the Creation of the world: Which two
points for all that, are the most difficult, obscure, hard, and intricate
Articles, in the whole course of Theology. S. Ambrose has these express
words. Amb. lib. 3. hexam. cap. 5. tom. 4.
In oratione totius plebis, tanquam vndis refluentibus stridet; tum
responsorijs Psalmorum, cantu virorum, mulierum, Virginum, parvulorum, censonus
vndarum sragor resultat: When all the people pray together, there is a noise,
as if the Waves of the Sea did beat one against an other; then with the
answering of Psalms, with the singing together of men, women, maids, and
little children; the consonant sound reboundeth, as it were an echo with the
surges of the Sea. Justinius Martyr has these words. Justin. apol. 2. prope
^^nom.
Sub haec consurgimus communiter omnes, et praecationes profundimus, et sicuti
retulimus, praecibus peractis, panis offertur, et vinum, et aqua. Et
praepositus itidem quantum pro virili sua potest, praeces et gratiarum actiones
fundit, et populus fauste acclamat dicens, Amen: These things being done, we
all arise together and make our Prayers; and after our Prayers, the Bread is
offered with Wine and Water; and the Minister as he is able, prays and gives
thanks, and the people with joyful acclamation say, Amen. Philo, a very
ancient and learned Writer awong the Jews, shows this old practice of our
Christian Church, in these words. Apud Eusebius. libr. 2. hist. cap. 17.
Quae omnia supra dictus vir eo ordine, eademque consequentia, qua apud nos
geruntur, expressit. Et vt vnus ex omnibus consurgens in medio, Psalmu^
honestis modulis concinat, vtque praecinenti ei vnum versiculum omnis multitudo
respondeat: All which, the aforenamed man (he speaks of Philo the Jew,)
related in the same order and consequence, in which our selves do them. And
that one among all rising up in the midst, sing a Psalm with tunable voice;
and that so soon as he has sung one Verse, all the people answer him.
Chrysostom. in. 2. Cor. hom. 18. in morab.
S. Chrysostom speaks so plainly of the peoples praying together with the
Priest, and that eue^ in the time of the Liturgis or Mass; as none doubtless
that either read or hear his words, can stand any longer in doubt thereof:
These are his express words. In eisdem iterum horrendis mysterijs been
precatur Sacerdos populo, et been precatur populus Sacerdoti: Nam (cum spiritu
tuo) nihil aliud est, quam hoc: Ea quae sunt Eucharistiae, id est. gratiarum
actionis, communiae sunt omnia; neque ille solus gratias agit, sed etiam omnis
populus: prius. N. accepta illorum voce, deinde congregatis illis vt digne et
just hoc faciat, incipit Eucharistia^. Et quid miraris, si populus cum
Sacerdote loquitur? What can be more plainly told? What more evident to the
reader? nothing in the whole world.
In these dreadful mysteries, the Priest wishes well to the people, and the
people desire Gods mercy to the Priest: For these words, (with thy spirit)
have no other meaning. The things that pertain to the Eucharist; that is, to
the giving of thanks, are common to them all; for he only gives not thanks,
but all the people also with him: For, he first receives their voice; after
that, they being gathered together that he may do this reverently and well,
he begins the Communion. And what marvel is it to thee, if the people pray
with the Priest? S. Cyprian testifies the same practice, to have been usual
in his time; alleging the very words, that the common people answered to the
Priest: Thus does he write, in express terms. Cyprian. in orat. dom. page
316.
Ideo et Sacerdos ante orationem, praefatione praemissa, parat fratrum mentes,
dicendo, sursum corda; vt dum respondet plebs, (habemus ad Dominum,) admoneatur
nihil aliud se quam Dominum cogitare debere: Therefore the Priest after the
Preface before the Prayer, Vide Origin cont. Celsu. lib. 8.9.13.
prepares the minds of the brethren, saying; Lift up your hearts: that while
the common people answer, (we lift them up unto the Lord,) they may be
instructed, to think upon no other thing but the Lord. What need is there, to
stand upon this point any longer? Sozomenus shows plainly in his History;
Sozom. hist. trip. lib. 4. cap. 35.
that in his time, (which was more then 400. years after Christ,) A.D. 424.
the people and the Clergy did sing Psalms in the Church together. So S.
Hierome testifies of the Church of Rome; that in his time, Hier. in prefat.
lib. 2. in ep. ad Galat.
the people sounded out (Amen) with such an echo, as if it had been with an
heavenly Thunder. Nicolaus Lyranus, that great learned popish Doctor, Liar. in.
1. cor. cap. 14.
in his Commentaries upon S. Paul to the Corinthians, affirms to his Readers
very constantly; that in the Primative Church, both the Prayers, and all other
things, were in the Vulgar tongue. Yea, S. Basil says; Basil. ep, ad cler.
that in his time, all the people sang Psalms together in the Church. And he
adds thereunto; Neocaesar* epist. 6 a.
that it was the custom of all Churches so to do. By these Testimonies it is
clear and evident, that in the Primative Church, and many years after, the
Church service was euerywhere in the Vulgar tongue. S. Gregory sometime
Bishop of Rome himself, reports the usual practice of the Greek Church,
(which he approoueth,) to have been as we have already heard out of S.
Chrysostom, and other famous Greek Writers. And that which our Friar says of
the same Gregory, is too too childish and ridiculous; as it is evident by that
which is already said, and shall (God willing) be yet more evident, before the
end of this discourse.

Our Jesuit here by way of a digression more then extrauagant, gives a very
short, but too too sweet an admonition: In which he pleases himself more
then a little, with his old doting foolerie, and rusty rotten Popery. He
tells his Readers, (whom he would gladly persuade to give credit to his
words,) that our Ceremonies are pild patches of Protestanisme, and rusty
rags of the Reformed Congregation: and withal forsooth, that our Communion
Book it self, was never heard of in the whole world, till the late days of
King Edward the sixth. My answer to this extrauagant and foolish admonition, I
purpose in God, to set down in the last Chapter of this Discourse. See my
answer to this, in the last Chapter of this Book.
My reason hereof is this. My scope, intent, and purpose, in this present
Book, is bipartite or two fold. viz. to prove soundly, and plainly to lay
open, to all judicious, honest, and indifferent Readers; that the Religion,
Faith, and Doctrine, of the late Bishops and Church of Rome, is indeed the
New religion, by little and little crept into the Church: and distinctly to name
the time when, and the Authors by whom, every material point and Article of
the new Romish Faith and Religion, did first begin; as also to prove soundly
and clearly, that the Faith and Doctrine this day established in the Church of
England, is Catholic, Apostolical, and the Old Roman religion. For which
respect, I have thought it meet and convenient; first, to accomplish and
finish the former member, in proouing Popery the New Religion: And that done,
to prove the Doctrine and Faith of our English Church, to be the Old Religion.
Which to perform as is said, I have steadfast confidence in my merciful GOD
all sufficient; who woonderfully preserving me from many dangers almost
ineffable, seems to have reserved me to that end and purpose. God make me
thankful, and ever to refer all that I well do, to his most holy name.
Psalm. 115.1.
Non nobis Domine, non nobis: sed nomini tuo da gloriam. Thou o God, who have
chosen the foolish things of this world, to confound the wise; and the weak
things, to confound the mighty things: 1. Cor. 1.27.
thou, who by the mouth of babes and sucklings, have made perfect thy praise:
thou, who have chosen Peter the Fisher, Mat. 21.16.
Matthew the Publican, and Paul the Persecutor, Mat. 4.18. Mat. 9.9. Act. 8.3.
act. 9.1. 1. tim 1, v. 13. Romans 11.33. 1. Sam. 17. v. 4.10.
to be thine Apostles: thou, thou (o God) in thine unsearchable judgments,
have ordained me the meanest and unworthiest among many thousands, to bicker
with the mighty Goliath, and to fight the Battle of thy Church against him,
(the Bishop of Rome I mean;) who would thrust our Lord Jesus thy dear Son,
out of his throne.

The 17. Chapter: of the Antiquity of Popish Mass, and the parts thereof.
B. C.
He falsely and blasphemously concludes every piece of the Mass, to be
rotten Rags. For, are the words of Consecration, the most essential part
thereof, which came not from any man, but from the institution of Christ
himself; as also the Pater noster, rotten Rags? Who durst say it, but Sir
Thomas?

T. B.
I answer; first, that one of the words of our supposed Consecration (which
is, enim,) is no essential part thereof; as your own best learned Doctors
tell us. Secondly, that in your supposed Consecration of the Chalice, sundry
words (as Aquinas and other learned Papists grant,) are not of the Essence
thereof. For the larger discourse of which Subject, I refer the Reader to my
Survey. Thirdly, that the Holy words ( This is my body,) came not from Christ,
Note well the word, (as.)
as they are a part of the late Romish Mass. I prove it soundly, for that our
Savior Christ did not utter them, until he had blessed and consecrated the
Bread. And consequently, they neither are, Mat. 26. v* 27.
nor can be any part of Popish Mass, as Christ ordained them: For, in Christ's
Consecration, Mark well the word. (as.)
many things went before. First, he took the Bread: secondly, he blessed it:
thirdly, he brake it: fourthly, he gave it to his Disciples: fifthly, he said;
Take and eat, this is my Body. Whereupon I conclude, with this inevitable
illation; that either the words of popish Conseceation, do not work
Transubstantiation; or else that that which Christ's Apostles received at
Christ's hands, was not Christ's body under accidents without subjects. For
the larger discourse whereof, I refer the Reader to the Downe-fall of
Popery, and to the Jesuits Antepast. The rest of this Chapter (God willing,)
shall be answered soundly and plainly, in the last Chapter of this Discourse: at
which time (I hope in God,) I shall triumph over Pope and Popery, and give
them both their deadly wounds.

The 18. Chapter: of the profound mysteries of popish Mass.
T. B.
IN this Chapter, our Jesuit being at a nonplus, (as many times before,) does
only charge, mock, and mow, at our Communion Book and the parts thereof.
For his answer, I reserve the last Chapter. His 19. and 20. Chapters require
no answer at all. He can say plain nothing* neither for the Kissing of the
Popes Feet, nor for Praying upon Beads. He freely grants even the
novelty and nonage of them both.

The 21. Chapter: of changing the Popes name.
B. C.
IF our savior Christ constituting Simon Head of the Church, changed his name,
and called him Peter; what inconvenience or absurdity is it, that the Pope,
assumpted to that dignity, should imitate the same, and make choice of some of
his predecessors names, thereby to be stirred up to follow his virtue and
solicitude in governing the Church of Christ?

T. B.
I answer; Jesuit giving power to the Pope, to do what Christ has done
before him; confirms what I have said of the Pope, in the second Chapter;
That he can change the nature of things, make of nothing something, and such
like. Iesuit^ belyeth our Lord Jesus egregiously, while he affirms him to
have changed Simons name: For, Christ changed no name in his Apostle; but added
a new name, for the perfection of the former. I prove it, because Christ even
after his resurrection, called him three several times, Simon the son of
Jona; and once, Simon Peter. Ioh. 21. v. 15.
But with our lying and impudent Friar, an Horse-mill, or a Mil-horse, is all
one: Yet with honest and wise men, it is one thing, to change a man's name; an
other thing, to add perfection to the same. Trial.) it is no marvel, if
Popes be ashamed of Christ's Religion, seeing they are ashamed of their names
given them in their Baptism. To this our Friar is mute, because he could not
answer it. Friar else where, reprooueth scornefully; Cap. 13. of private Mass*
that the Bread remaining after our Communion, is allotted to the use of the
Minister. But here he will have it no irreuerence, to change the name given in
holy Baptism; by which for all that, he was dedicated unto God. Hog-snoute, to
change his name into Sergius: which novelty was brought into the Church, 840.
years after Christ.

The 22. Chapter: of The paschall Torch.
T. B.
THIS Pascall Torch invented by Sozimus, 400. years after Christ, was very
superstitiously used; as I showed in my Trial. But both the newness and the
superstition, our Friar swalloweth up; and his mouth is so full therewith, that
he is become mute.

The 23. Chapter: of the Popish Pax, and the mysteries thereof.
B. C.
THe souls in Purgatory are in mutual peace and charity one with an other,
and without all fear of falling from that happy state; and this signifies the
withholding of the Pax, or kiss of Peace, in a Mass for the dead.

T. B.
I answer; first, that late Popery, is mere foolerie: For, seeing the
withholding of the Pax, signifies mutual Peace and Charity one with an
other; it were expedient to keep the Pax, as well from the living as from the
dead; especially, from the Popes and popish massing Priests: For they
receiving the Pax, (if this great mystery be true,) do thereby insinuate to
the world, that they are not in peace and charity one with an other; no not in
the time of their holy so supposed Mass. For the rest, see the Trial, and it
is enough. Secondly, that our Papists usually grant; that the fire of Hell,
and of popish Purgatory, is all one; save that Purgatory fire shall once have
an end: And yet our Friar here, calls them happy, that are boiling and
burning there. Let such happiness (for me) befall him and his cursed crew.

The 24. 25. and 26. Chapters.
T. B.
FOr these three Chapters, I wish the Readers to observe with me, the Jesuits
free confession uttered in these express terms. The principal cause of our
Salvation is our savior Christ, and his Merits. Secondarie and isntrumental
are many things; as the Sacraments, and Men that cooperate unto our
Salvation. Yea, other Consecrated things, as Holy Water, Agnus Dei, etc. Out
upon rotten Popery.
though nothing comparable to Sacraments, may also in a good sense be said to
help us to obtain Salvation by the Merits of Christ; for as much as all Holy
things, have force to produce supernatural effects; as namely, to chase away
wicked Spirits, and to extinguish the fiery Darts of the Enemy. Thus
pratleth the Jesuitical Friar: the recital of whose words, being naked
without all proofs, is a sufficient confutation of the same. The holy Apostle
of our Lord Jesus, teaches us plainly; that it is, The Shield of Faith,
wherewith we may quench all the Fiery Darts of the wicked: Ephesians. 6. v. 16.
He wills us not to take Holy water, Holy bread, Crosses, Medales, Agnus
Deis, the Bones of Champian, Sherwin, Ballard, Watson, and such like popish
trumperie. No Scripture of the old or new Testament; no holy Father, no
approved Council, no authentical History can be named, which exhorts us
to put any confidence, in such beggarly dotage of late Popish foolerie. For the
rest, peruse the Trial, and it is enough.

The 27. Chapter: of the doleful Oath, which popish Bishops make to the Pope.
B. C.
AS for the Oaths of Bishops made to the Pope, the lawfulness thereof
appears, because it is made with all Catholic Princes consent, and meant
only in just and lawful things, which are according to Gods Law and holy
Canons; and it has been used above a thousand years ago, as it is evident by
the like Oath made by a Bishop unto S. Gregory the great, and S. Boniface
the Apostle of Germany, and worthyest man that ever England bredde, did swear
when he was consecrated Bishop, to concur with the Pope and commodities of
his Church.

T. B.
I answer; first, that all this which the Friar B. C. here tells us, was
objected before by S. R. in his pretensed Answer to the Downfall of Popery.
Secondly, that I have confuted the same so soundly in the Jesuits Antepast, as
whosoever shall with indifferency peruse the same, can not but see the Jesuit
wounded unto death.

Here by the way, I must tell our Friar, that the words of S. R. are by him
quoted in the thirtieth Article and the fourtenth Chapter: and yet are they in
the seventh Article. This I deem to be the Printers fault, and therefore do
not use to reprove him for the like escapes; howbeit, he (for want of better
matter,) rayleth and brawleth like a mad man; if he find never so little
amiss in my Books, through the Printers fault; who usually am almost 2^0.
miles from the Press, when any one of my Books is a printing. All the rest of
this Chapter is soundly refuted, in the Jesuits Antepast, and Downfall of
Popery.

The 28. Chapter: of the popish Fast of forty days, commonly called Lent.
B. C.
MAny mad gambols does the Minister fetch in this Chapter; and among other, he
will needs prove, that the Lenten-fast is hurtful both to the soul and body;
and disputes out of Hippocrates like a pretty Pettifogger in Physic, to
show, Mark well the Trial of the new Religion, for this present case.
That it is hurtful to our health. This, albeit I do not doubt, but it is a
notorious untruth; yet because it is not my profession to argue of any such
Subject, I leave him to the mercy of the Physicians; who (I think) upon the
feeling of his Pulse, are like enough for the curing of such an extrauagant
conceit, to condemn him to Hyppocrates bands.

T. B.
I answer; first, that our Friar by his own confession, reprooueth that as a
notorious untruth, wherein he has no skill; and withal, takes upon him to
censure my condemnation, upon the feeling of my Pulse: which to judge, is a
very hard point in the noble art of Physic. Secondly, that it is the Jesuits
profession, to show himself a notorious liar: which is proved again and
again, throughout this whole discourse. Thirdly, that if my Disputation were
not truly grounded upon the art of Physic, the Jesuit could not have wanted
help, to have confuted the same. Peruse the Trial, and mark it well: for, it
wounds the Friar, even unto death.

B. C.
Omitting this, let us see what follows. The Fast of the ancient Church
(quoth he,) was free, voluntary, and not commanded by any Law. An untruth:
for it was a Tradition of the Apostles to Fast in Lent; and so not free. We
(says S. Hierome,) Epist. ad Marcellam.
in the whole year, do Fast one Lent, according to the tradition of the
Apostles. And S. Austen says, It is sin to break Lent-fast.

T. B.
I answer; first, that I grant the Jesuits antecedent; and yet do I deny
both his consequent, Primo principaliter.
and his consequence. His consequent, because Lent was free, voluntary, and
not commanded by any Law; as I shall by and by (God willing) prove by an
evident demonstration. His consequence, Argmentum ad hominem.
because Lent may be an Aposticall Tradition, and withal remain free and
voluntary still: I prove it by the Jesuits own free grant, and his best
manner of disputing: Supra cap. 12.
For, when I in the 12. Chapter of my Trial, had proved by Apostolical and
plain Divine tradition, even expressed in the holy Scripture; that the Lay
people ought to receive the holy Communion under both kinds; the holy Apostle
affirming, that he delivered what he received from our Lord Jesus: 1. Cor. 11.
v. 23.
the Jesuit answered roundly, in these express words. The Jesuit wounds
himself with his own weapon.
The most that can be gathered out of S. Paul's words is this; That in his
time, the Eucharist was ministered to Lay People under both kinds; which we deny
not: but they prove not, that it neither was, nor might be given under one
kind. Thus disputes our Jesuit, affirming resolutely, that the tradition
received from Christ, and delivered by S. Paul, may be altered and changed; and
consequently, that it is free, voluntary, and not commanded by any Law. For
doubtless, no power upon earth, may alter or change Christ's holy precept. This
is already proved, and is also manifest of it self. For, an inferior has no
power, to change the Law of his superior: which the popish Saint Antoninus,
sometime Archbyshoppe of Florence, does very plainly teach us in these
express words. Antoninus de potest. Papae, part. 4. tit. 22. cap. 3. part. 1.
Quantum vero ad illa quae sunt de iure naturali vel diuino, iurisdictio seu
potestas Papalis non se extendit; sic vero, quod ista possit mutare, vel etiam
dare eis vim obligandi: Et ratio est, quia inferior non potest mutare leges
superioris; Deus autem superior est ad Papam: Concerning those things, which
are of the law of Nature, or of the law Divine, the Popes Jurisdiction or Power
does not extend it self unto them; so to weete, that the Pope can either
change them, or give power obligatorie unto them: And the reason thereof is,
because an inferior can not change the Laws of his superior. Franciscus a
victoria, that famous Popish Schoole-doctor, who first brought Scholasticall
Theology into Spain, is consonant to Antoninus that famous popish Saint, in
these express words. Victor relect. 4. de po^est. papae, propos. 1. Page 126.
In hoc genere Decretorum aut Canonum, Papa nihil potest immutare dispensando,
et multo minus abrogando: Conclusio est omnium Theologorum, absque
controuersia; et potest breuiter probari, quia ius natural est immutabile; et
(vt legitur in decretis,) natural ius semper permanet: In this kind of Decrees
or Canons, the Pope can change nothing by Dispensation, and much less by
Abrogation. It is the conclusion of all Divines, without all controversy: and
it may be proved briefly, because the law of Nature is immutable; and (as we
read in the decrees) the law of Nature is ever permanent. Thomas Aquinas, that
popish Angelical Doctor and canonized Saint, (whose writings are to the
Papists, as the holy Ghospels,) confirms the Doctrine of Antoninus and
Victoria, in these express words. Aquin. in lib. 3. sentent. did. 37. art. 4.
Sed praecepta Decalogi, sunt de iure naturali; ideo nec in eis nec in alijs,
prout vim eorum continent, licet alicui homini dispensare: But the precepts of
the Decalogue, are of the law of Nature; and therefore no man can dispense,
either with them, or with others, that contain and have like force with them.
Thus much for the Consequence. Now to his Consequent, in Gods holy name.

The answer to the Jesuits consequent.
That Lent-fast was in the primitive, as also in the ancient Church, (which
twain our Jesuit does many times fondly confound,) free, voluntary, and not
commanded by any Law, I prove many ways. Eusebius Caesariensis, a very
ancient and most learned Father, and famous Historiographer, has these
express words. Eusebius. hist. lib. 5. cap. 26.
Neque de die tantum disceptatio est, sed et de ipsa specie ieiunij: Siquidem
alij vnum sibi ieiunandum diem esse putant; alij, duos; alij, plures; alij,
quadraginta, horas diurnas et nocturnas computantes diem suum statuunt: The
difference is not only about the Day, but also concerning the Kind of Fast:
For, some think, that they must Fast one day; others, that they must fast two;
others, that they ought to fast more days; others appoint forty days,
reckoning both the hours of the day and of the night for one day. Nicephorus
is consonant to Eusebius, in these express words. Nicephor. ecclesi. hist.
lib. 12. cap. 34.
Romani tres continuas habdomadas, sabbathis et dominicis diebus exceptis,
ietunarunt: Illyrici autem et cuncta Graecia, Alexandria, et Libya omnis,
Aegyptus et Palestina, sex hebdomadibus ante festum Paschae ieiunium
continuarunt, quaedragesimam tempus id nominantes. Alij rursus ante septem
hebdomades ieiunare incaeperunt, sicuti Constantinopoli et circum circa ad
Phaeniciam vsque, tribus tantum hebdomadibus quinos dies ex interuallo, binis
septamanis intermissis, a cibis se abstinentes, itidem quadragesima^ tempus
tale vocarunt. Montanistae vero, duabus: quos mihi demirari in mentem venit,
quomodo omnes isti in dierum numero sic variantes, quadragesimam tamen ieiunij
tempus vocent. The Romans fast three whole weeks; the Saterdayes and Sundays
excepted. But the Illyrians and all Greece, Alexandria and all Lybia, Egypt and
Palestine, continue their Fast six weeks before the Feast of Easter, naming
that time Quadragesima, or, the Fast of Forty days. Others began to Fast
before Seven weeks; as at Constantinople, and other places thereabout until
Phaenicia, They fast fifteen days by interuall.
fasting only Fifteen days in three weeks by interuall, with omission of the
rest; and yet giving their Fast the same name. Cassiodorus in the Tripartite
History, and Sozomenus in his History, Trip. hist. lib. 9. cap. 38. Sozom.
lib. 7. cap. 19.
do relate the same variety in the self same manner. Our latter Papists
perceiving a gross error in the reckoning or supputation of Lent, invented a
new, no fortified Bulwark: For, Pope Gregory corrected the popish Lent-fast.
Pope Gregory added Four days in the beginning, (which they commonly call,
Clensing days,) to supply the want. And yet have they not the number; as they
do desire: For, if the Sundays be not in their computation, (as they neither
are, nor can be in very deed,) then have they but a mingle mangle Lent: If they
be reckoned, they surpass their number by six days; and consequently, their
number no way falls iumpe. These are the Popes express words, as they are
set down in his own Decrees. De Consecra. did. 5. cap. quadragesima
Quadragesima summa obseruatione est obseruanda, vt ieiunium in ea (praeter
dies Dominicos qui de abstinentia subtracti sunt) nisi quem infirmitas
impedierit, nullatenus soluatur; quia ipsi dies decimae sunt anni. A prima ergo
Dominica quadragesimae vsque in Pascha Domini, sex hebdomadae c^mputantur;
quarum, viz. quadraginta dies et duo sunt, ex quibus dum sex Dominici dies
abstinentiae subtrahuntur, non plus in abstinentia quam triginta sex dies
remanent. Verbi gratia: Si per 365. dies annus voluitur; deinde per triginta et
sex dies aflligimur, quasi anni Deo decimas damus. Sed vt sacer numerus
quadraginta dierum adimpleatur, que^ saluator noster sacro suo ieiunio
co^secrauerat; quatuor dies prioris Hebdomadae, ad supplementu^ quadraginta
dierum tollantur: Id est, quarta feria, quae caput ieiunij subnotatur, et
quinta feria sequens, sexta feria, et sabbatum: Nisi istos dies quatuor
superioribus triginta sex adiunxerimus, quadraginta dies in abstinentia non
haberemus: Iubemur aute^ et ab omnipotenti Deo, omniu^ bonorum nostrorum
decimas dare: Lent must be kept with very great observation, so as by no means
the Fast in it be broken (besides the Sundays, which are no part of the
Abstinence,) unless ones infirmity hinder the same; because the days
thereof, are the Tenthes of the year: Therefore, from the first Sunday of Lent
until Easter, there are by computation, Six weeks; in which there are
Forty days and two; from which while six Sundays of abstinence are
subtracted, there remain no more in abstinence but six and thirty. 36. days
in Lent, besides the Sundays.
For example sake, If 365. days make a year, and we afflict our selves six
and thirty days; we then give to God, as it were the Tenth of the year. But
that the sacred number of Forty days, which our Savior consecrated with his
sacred Fast, may be complete; Four days of the week aforegoing, are added
for the supplement of the Forty days: That is to say, Wednesday, Thurseday,
Friday, and Saturday: For, if we joined not these Four days to the other Six
and thirty, we could not have a Fast of Forty days: But we are commanded
of God omnipotent, to give Tithes of all our Goods. Thus discourses Pope
Gregory. Socrates in his Ecclesiastical History, does lively lay open to the
Readers, the variety of Lent-fast: These are the express words. Socrates,
hist. lib. 5. cap. 22.
Ieiunia ante Pascha inuenire est aliter ab alijs custodiri: Romani namque tres
ante Pascha septimanas, praeter sabbathum et dominicam, continuas ieiunant.
Illyrici, et tota Hellada, et Alexandrini, ante sex septimanas ieiuniu^ ante
Pascha ieiunant, illudque quadragesimam vocant: Reliquorum autem praeterea alij
ante septem hebdomadas festi huius ieiunium ordiuntur, ac solos quindecim dies
per interstitia ieiunantes, nihilominus et ipsi tempus hoc quadragesima^
vocant: The Romans fast three whole weeks before Easter, besides the Sabbath
and Sunday. The Sclauonians and all Greece, and the Alexandrians do keep
their Fast six weeks before Easter, and call it Quadragesima. But among
others, some begin their Fast of Lent, before seven weeks, and fast only
fifteen days by intermission; and nevertheless call this Fast Quadragesima,
or the Fast of Forty days. S. Epiphanius expresses plainly and distinctly
the aforenamed variety of Lent-fast: these are his express words. Epiphan.
haeres. 80. libr. 3. in fine.
Porro, Quadragesimam ante septem dies sancti Paschatis similiter seruare solet
eadem Ecclesia in ieiunijs perseuerans, dominicis vero non omnino, neque in
ipsa Quadragesima: Furthermore, the same (Catholic) Church continuing in
Fasting, accustometh in like manner, to keep the Quadragesimall time (or Lent)
Seven days before the Feast of Easter: But she never fasteth on the
Sundays, no not in Lent. Socrates an ancient and famous Historiographer, has
these express words, Socrat. hist. lib. 5. cap. 22.
A.D. 427.
Nam alij omnino animatis abstinent, alij vero ex animatis solos Pisces
comedunt. Nonnulli cum Piscibus etia^ volatilibus vescuntur, et illa, secundum
Mosen, ex aquis prouenisse dicentes. Alij et Baccis et Ouis abstinent, Aliqui
solum aridum Panem mandacant; nonnulli, ne hunc quidem: sunt qui ad nonam horam
vsque ieiunantes varijs cibis vtantur: For some abstain from living things
wholly; othersome, of living things eat Fishes only: others with Fishes eat
also Birds, affirming that they are engendered and live of the Sea: That is,
vsque ad nonam.
others neither eat Berries, nor Eggs: Some eat dry Bread only; others, no
Bread at all: and some fast until three a clock in the after noone, and then
eat sundry kinds of Meat. Cassiodorus in the Tripartite History, Hist.
trip. lib. 9. cap. 38. Niceph. lib. 12. cap. 34.
and Nicephorus in his History, do both testify the same variety of
Lentonmeates. Epiphanius that ancient, holy, and learned Father, (who lived
within 400. years of Christ,) A.D. 373.
makes mention of such a Lent-fast, as our Jesuit and the Pope himself would
be loath to observe and keep, though it abridge the time more then a little:
these are his express words. Epipha^. haeres. 80. lib. 3. in fine.
Caeterum, per sex dies ipsius Paschatis, omnes populi in siccorum esu
perseuerant; pane inquam, et sale, et aqua tunc vtentes ad vesperam: But, six
whole days before Easter, all the people continue in eating dry things; using
nothing until the Evening, but Bread, Salt, and Water. This reason can never
be truly answered.
and constantly avouch; that no Law was made neither by Christ, nor yet by his
Apostles, for the keeping of the Fast of Quadragesima (which we call
Lent-fast.) This argument may be rightly termed, ( Noli me tangere.)
Cassiodorus in the Tripartite History, has these words. Hist. tripart. libr.
9. cap. 38.
Et quia lectio nulla ex hoc inuenitur antiqua, puto Apostolos singuloru^ hoc
reliquisse sententiae; vt vnusquisque operetur non timore, non necessitate,
quod bonu^ est: And because no ancient Writer records this, Iiudge, that the
Apostles referred the matter, to every ones liberty and free election; that
every one might do what good is, without fear or necessity. Nicephorus has
these express words. Nicephor. lib. 12, cap. 34.
Diuersum etiam est cibi capiendi tempus: aliqui namque hora nona, aliqui post
occasum solis, quida^ post diem vnam, sequenti die cibum capiunt: nonnulli vero
ad tres, ad quatuor, ad quinque et ad septem vsque dies, dapibus abstinentes
procedunt; pro eo atque quisque cibo carere vel vult, vel potest. Et alia apud
alias gentes et populos fiunt, apud quos rerum taliu^ innumerae extant causae;
de quibus omnibus nullum praeceptum quod in scriptum relatum sit, ostendi
potest. Vt satis constat, primos illos verbi ministros ab initio obseruationes
eiusmodi arbitrio quorumque reliquisse, vt quisque non metu aut necessitate
quapiam adductus, quod bonum est, deligere et sequiposset: The ninth hour with
us, is three a clock in the after noone.
The time also of eating, is various: for, some take meat at the ninth hour,
some after Sunne-setting; some, continue their Fast until three, four, five,
or seven days; as every one is willing, or able to abstain. Other nations
and people have their customs, having many causes so to do: concerning all
which, they are not able to show any Precept or Law, extant in any History any
where. Whereupon it is evident, that the Ministers in the primative Church,
referred all such Observations to every ones free choice and election; that
every one without fear or necessity, might choose and follow what is good.
Socrates affirms very constantly; that it is not possible to show any Written
law, concerning the Fastes used in the Church: these are his express words.
Socrates, hist. libr. 5. cap. 22.
Et quoniam hac de re nemo seriptum aliquod mandatum ostendere potest, liquet,
quod et illam Apostoli cuiusque sententiae ac voluntati liberam reliquerint, ne
metu quisqua^ vel ex necessitate quod bonum est operetur. Talis per Ecclesias
est ieiuniorum dissonantia: And because no man can show any written
Commandment, it is clear, that the Apostels left the matter, to every ones
free choice and election; that every one without fear or necessity, might do
what good is. S. Austen turns Popish Lent vpside* down.
S. Augustine that ancient Father, that holy and Learned writer, that worthy
Champion of Christ's Church, who for his rare Virtues and Learning, was highly
reverenced throughout the Christian world; is so clear and resolute in this
Controversy, that he wounds the Pope and all his Iesuited Popelings, unto
death: these are his express words. August. ad Catulanum, epist. 86.
Ego in Euangelicis et Apostolicis literis, totoque instrumento quod appellatur
Testamentum novum, animo id reuoluens, video praeceptum esse ieiunium: quibus
autem diebus non oporteat ^eiunare, et quibus oporteat, praecepto Domini vel
Apostoloru^, non inuenio definitu^: I reuoluing and pondering in my mind the
Ghospels and Writings of the Apostles, The Apostles made no Law for fasting
Lent.
with all the new Testament, do find, that we are commanded to Fast: But,
upon what days we must Fast, or not Fast, I find it not decreed or defined,
neither by any commandment of Christ, nor yet of his Apostles. Thus
discourses this holy and learned Father, constantly affirming with other
ancient and learned Writers; that the Quadragesimall fast (which we call Lent)
was free and voluntary in the time of the Apostles, no Law being then made for
keeping the same. Eusebius. hist. lib. 5. cap. 18. ex Apollonio.
Yea, Montanus the Heretic (as Eusebius testifies out of Apollonius,) was the
first that prescribed Laws of Fasting. I answer secondly; that the Lent-fast
is not any Apostolical tradition at all. Secundo principaliter.
I prove it first, because in the Canons of the Apostles, (which Pope
Zepherinus and Pope Leo the ninth have approved,) no mention is made of Lent.
Gratian. did. 16. cap. Apostolorum.
Secondly, because S. Clement (who^ S. Peter a little before his death, chose to
be his successor at Rome, if Popish writings be true,) publishing eight whole
Books of Apostolical Constitutions, does not in any place, so much as once
make any mention of the Quadragesimall fast, or Lent; as it is and has bin
kept in Rome, of the late Bishops there, and their Popish vassals. Apostolor.
Con. 8. constable. Apostol. lib. 5. cap. 16. e^. cap. 21. lib. 7. cap. 24.
Thirdly, because the first four ancient and approved general Councels, do
not once name the said Quadragesimall fast. Fourthly, because The Apostles
setting down a law how to keep Easter, say nothing at all of keeping the
Lenton-fast. Fifthly, because the Apostles have made a flat Law against the Fast
of every Saturday, one only excepted, which was the day of Christ's sacred
Funeral. These are the words of S. Clement so supposed. Sabbathum et
Dominicum diem Festum agite; quoniam illud naturae conditae est Monumentum, hic
resurrectionis. Vnum autem Sabbathum seruandum vobis est in toto anno, quod
pertinet ad Sepulturam Domini; in quo iciunare oportet, non festum agere:
Clemens, lib. 7. c. 24. constable. Apost.
Keep as a holy Feastiuall day, the Saturday and the Sunday; because the one
is the Monument of the Creation, the other of the Resurrection. But one Saturday
only ye must keep, in the whole year, which perteyneth to our Lords
Funeral; in which we must Fast, and not keep it Holy Day.

I answer thirdly, Tertio principaliter.
that the Popish Lent-fast is very Superstitious, plain Heretical, and too
injurious to the sacred blood of Christ Jesus. I prove it first, because they
superstitiously abstain from Flesh, as did the Heretics condemned by S.
Paul. 1. Tim. 4. v. 3.
The Papists Mordicus and impudently deny this; but their own Durand, their
trusty and faithful Bishop shall confound them: these are his express
words. Dur. in rat. dium. offic. lib. 6. cap. 7. prope finem.
Tempore ieiuniorum praetiosae vestes deponuntur, et humiles assumu^tur et
carnes tam solidae qua^ liquidae dimittuntur. Sed cum Pisces sint Caro, quare
hoc tempore comeduntur? Responsio. Deus non maledixit Aquis, quoniam per Aquam
baptismi futura crat remissio peccatorum. Hoc enim elementum dignissimum est,
quod sordes abluit, et super quod spiritus Domini ante mundi constitutionem
ferebatur. Terrae vero maledixit in operibus hominis. Inde est, quod omne genus
carnis quod in terra versatur, tam quadrupedia quam Aues, in ieiunijs non licet
comedere: While we Fast, costly Garments are laid away, and base Attire
assumed, and Flesh as well solid as liquide is dismissed: But seeing Fish is
Flesh, 1. Cor. 15. v. 39. Lo, Fish is Flesh.
wherefore is Fish eaten in Lent? I answer, that God cursed not the Waters,
because by the Water of Baptism, we were to receive remission of our sins:
for this Element is most worthy, as which washes away our filth, and upon
which the Spirit of our Lord was carried before the World was made: But God
cursed the Land, in the works of Man. Hence comes it, that every kind of
Flesh living on the land, as well four footed Beasts, as Birds, may not be
eaten in time of our Lent-fast. Thus disputes our popish Bishop Durand;
auouching plainly, that we may not eat Flesh in Lent, because God accursed
the fruits of the Earth. Which assertion is very Superstitious, and plain
Heretical. For, as well may our Jesuit conclude against Bread and Wine in the
holy Eucharist, unless he deny them to be the fruits of the Earth. Secondly,
because in their holy Lent-fast, (says their so supposed S. Clement,) they
must pray for the damned; which doubtless is a damnable Heresy: These are his
express words. Constit. Apost. lib. 5. cap. 13. in fine.
Ieiunantes in ea omnes cum timore et tremore, crantes per eos dies pro ijs qui
pereunt: All fast Lent with fear and trembling, praying all those days for
them that perish. This has a strong taste of the Original Heresy, that the
Devils shall be saved at the latter day. Thirdly, because the Papists believe
and teach, that their popish Lent-fast does merit remission of sins, increase
of grace, and eternal glory: this is plainly and soundly proved, in my
Survey of Popery. Yea, the Popish Bishop Durand resolutely affirms the very
same in these express words. Durandus, lib. 6. cap. 7. in initio, et nota
cap. 6.
Est autem ieiunium communis omniu^ membrorum satisfactio; vt scibect membra
satisfaciant, secundu^ peccatum quod commiserunt vel gesserunt: vt si gula
peccauit, ^e^unet, et sufficit: Fasting is the common satisfaction of all our
members; so to weete, as our members may make satisfaction, according to the
sin which they have done. As if any have sinned in Gluttony, let him fast,
and it is sufficient. Which is confirmed by that Popish Fast, which they call,
the Fast of Compassion. Thus the same Durandus does deliver it. Dur. lib. 6.
cap. 7.9.10.
Ieiunium compassionis est; vt si Sacerdos alicui dicat; pro hoc peccato fac
cantare duas missas, et ieiuna, et ego pro te cantabo, et tres dies ieiunabo:
Propter hoc tamen debet aliquid recipere, quia Sacerdos debet compati proximo
suo, et orare pro eo: There is a (Popish) Fast of compassion, as if the Priest
say to one, Cause some Priest to sing two Masses for this sin, and fast; and
I my self shall sing for thee; and I shall also fast three days for thee:
Marry, for this compassion, the Priest must have some thing, because he must
have compassion on his Neighbor, and pray for him. Here is a merriment, O
wonderful compassion! O wily Popish faction.
of merry Popery in very deed. The Priest so takes compassion on his
penitent, that he makes him relieve his need. This compassion is coosen
germane to the Jesuits Exercise (of which I have written at large in my
Anatomy of popish Tyranny, See Anatomy. Book, 3. Advise. 9.
) by which while they pretend to send their supplyantes to heaven, they get all
their Lands, Goods, and Money, to them selves. John Gerard caused Henry Drurie
to enter into their Jesuitical Exercise, and thereby got him to sell the
Manor of Lozell in Suffolk, and other Lands, to the value of 3500. pounds,
and got all the money himself. 3500. Pounds*
The same Gerard by the same Exercise, got from Anthony Rowse, above a thousand
pounds: from Edward Walpoole, 1000. Pounds.
(whom he caused to sell the Manor of Tuddenham,) about one 1000. Marks: from
James Linacre, 400. pounds: from Edward Huddlestones, above 1000. pounds.
1000. Pounds.
Much more like stuff the Reader may find in mine Anatomy; which I pass over
for brevity sake. This Jesuiticall Exercise has no small semblance, with the
silver Temples of Diana; which being made by Demetrius, Act. 19. v. 24.
brought great gains to the Craftes-men there.

I answer fourthly, Quarto Principaliter.
that to make choice of Meats for Merit or Religion, is the badge of an
Infidel. I prove it first, because by means hereof, many have believed false
doctrine, to be the word of God; and not only so, but they have also judged
and condemned themselves for transgressing man's Traditions, as if they were
the very words of God. Romans 10.3.
Wherein while they sought to stablish their own Righteousness, they fell
from the Righteousness of God: for, Mat. 15.9.
to put Religion or Merit in keeping men's Traditions, is flatly to abandon the
worship of the living God. Yea, by reason of these Fastes, their souls were
very often in a most dangerous and damnable state: for they persuaded
themselves, that they were as well bound to keep the Popes Laws therein, as
if they had been the flat Laws of God; and consequently, so often as they
brake them, (which was no rare thing,) so often did they commit damnable sin,
Romans 14. v. 23. Hebr. 11.6.
because their acts were not of faith. Secondly, because Popish choice of
Meats, takes away Christian liberty, and makes Christians slaves to man's
Traditions: Tit. 1. v. 15. Romans 14. v. 5.14.17.20. 1. Cor. 8. v. 8. Gal. 1. v.
10. Mar. 7. v. 15.
for, To the pure, all things are pure, by the liberty of Christ's Gospel. I
am persuaded, says the Apostle, that no meat is unclean. Yea, he yields
the reason thereof, because, the kingdom of God is neither Meat nor drink.
Wherefore (says he) we ought not to destroy the work of God, for meats sake.
He says again in an other place; Deuteronomy. 12.8. 1. Cor. 10.31. Romans 14.23. Hebr.
11.6.
That if he should please men, he could not be the servant of Christ. To please
men is good and godly, so long as their pleasure is measured with the holy Will
of God: whose Will, ought to be the rule and squyre of all our thoughts,
words, and works. But when men would spoil us of our Christian liberty;
then must we fight against their wicked pleasures. So does the same Apostle
expound himself, in these words. Gal. 2. v. 4 5. Cor. 7.23,
The false Breathren (says he) crept in privily, to spy out our liberty which
we have in Christ Jesus; that they bring us into bondage: to whom we gave no
place by subjection for an hour, that the truth of the Gospel might
continue with you. For which respect S. Paul circumcised Timothy, Act. 16.3.
Gal. 2. v. 3.4.5.
but would in no case circumcise Titus; although they both were Gricians. This
is a most notable Testimony, which ought to be to us as a general Rule, and
invincible Bulwark; so often as the Pope and his Popelinges urge us to receive
things otherwise indifferent* as necessary and meritorious of eternal life.
And doubtless if things indifferent of their own nature (as the forbearance
of Flesh in Lent, A general rule against the Papists.
) must of necessity be withstood, when they are superstitiously obtruded, and
profanely imposed upon us; much more ought we to resist, and with Christian
courage fight against those Popish execrable Decrees, Constitutions, and Laws,
which are flatly opposite to Christ's holy Will, revealed in his sacred Word.
Which Article, by the power of God, shall yet be made more clear and evident,
when I come to speak of S. Spiridion, that most holy Bishop, how he kept the
fast of Lent.

I answer fifthly; Quinto Principaliter.
that the true Christian and perfect Fast, is this; viz. To abstain from
sin, and carnal pleasures of this world. So are we taught by the Popes own
Decrees; which are in this point correspondent, not only to Gods holy word,
but also to the uniform consent of the ancient Fathers. Yea, my Popish Lord
Bishop Durandus affirms so much; who therefore shall be the foreman of the
Jury: these are his own words. Durand. lib. 6. cap. 10.. 3.
Vnde si ieiunas a cibis corporis, oportet vt ieiunes a cibis daemonis, et
comedas cibos mentis: qui autem sic ieiunat, non nocebit ei ignis
tribulationis, nec ignis mundanus; sicut nec tribus pueris nocuit ignis
fornacis Babylonis: Wherefore, if thou Fast from meats of the Body, thou must
also Fast from the meat of the Devil, and eat the meat of the Mind: for he
that so Fasteth, shall neither be hurt by the fire of Tribulation, nor by the
fire of this World; as neither the fire of the hot burning Furnace of Babylon,
did hurt the three Godly Hebrews. Again, in an other place, the same Durand
has these words. Durand. lib. 6. cap. 30.. 1.
Ostenditur quale ieiunium placet Deo; scilicet, Spirituale, non Carnale. Vnde
Epistola agit de hoc; clama, ne cesses. Esa. 58. et post. Quare ieiunauimus, et
non aspexisti? Et Dominus respondet; Nunquid tale est ieiuniu^, quod elegi?
contorquere quasi circulum caput, etc. Quasi diceret; non placet mihi tale
ieiunium, quod aliquis se cruciet tantum, sed quod dissoluat faciculos
impietatis; id est, ab omni peccato abstineat, quod fit per charitatem: There
is declared, what a Fast pleases God; to weete, a Spiritual, not a Carnal
fast. Whereupon the Epistle entreats of this; Cry and cease not. Esa. 58.5.
Wherefore did we Fast, and thou have not regarded us? And our Lord answers.
Is it such a Fast, which I have chosen; that a man should afflict his Soul for
a day, and wryth his Head about. etc? As if he should say; I am not pleased
with such a Fast, that a man should so afflict himself; but that he loose the
bands of wickedness and impiety: that is, that he abstain from all manner
of sin, which is done through charity. Thus writes Bishop Durand: and an
other learned Papist, Johannes Belethus by name a famous Doctor of Paris, does
confirm his Doctrine in these words. Beleth. in. ration. diu. offic. cap. 8.
Vnde before profecto Augustinus super Iohannem, ieiunium definit hoc modo.
Tit. 2.12.
Magnum et generale est ieiunium, ab iniquitatibus et a carnalibus voluptatibus
abstinere. Hoc enim ieiunium, omnibus numeris est perfestum et absolutum. Cui
non absimile est, quod Paulus ait; sobrie, et pie, et just viuamus, in hoc
seculo. Nam quod vt sobrie viuamus, inquit, ad nos plane pertinet; quod pie, ad
Dominum; quod just, ad proximum. Hinc pietas est cultus Deo exhibitus, cum quo
velut ex aduerso pugnat impietas sieve Idololatria: Wherefore Austen upon John,
defines Fasting more fully, in this manner. The great and general Fast is
this; to abstain from Iniquity, and Carnal pleasures: for this Fast is every
way perfect, and absolute. To which that is not unlike, which the Apostle
says; That we may live godly, soberly, and justly, in this world: For in that
he says, that we live Soberly, it perteyneth to our selves; that we live
Godly, to our Lord; that we live Justly, to our Neighbor. Hence Piety is that
worship, which we give to God: Pietas est cultus Deo exhibitus.
to which, Impiety or Idolatry, is wholly opposite. But that which I find in
the Popes own Decrees, is most excellent, and far surpasses all the rest.
These words I find in one place, taken out of S. Hierome. De consecrat. did.
5. cap. non dico.
Non dico hebdomadas, non dico ieiunia duplicata; sed saltem singulos dies
absque ciboru^ luxuria transigamus: sint tibi quotidiana ieiunia, et refectio
satietatem fugiens. Nihil enim prodest tibi biduo vel triduo transmisso vacuu^
portare ventrem, si post pariter obstruatur: I bid not to Fast weeks, nor to
double Fastes; but at the least, let us keep every day without excessive
eating. Use daily abstinence, and refection without gluttony or excess: for
it profits thee nothing to have an empty Belly two or three days, and after
to fill the Panch while it may hold. Thus the Popes own Decrees teach us, and
it is to be well observed: For doubtless, Popish Fastes have this effect most
usually; the richer sort, stuff their bellies and fill their panches at
Dinner, with great variety of Wines, and delicate Meats: Yea, at all times
they drink Wines, and eat Pears, Apples, Rasinges, Figs, and Simnels;
especially in their Collations at night, they eat conserues of Quinces,
Cheries, Wardens, and like dainties; which far exceed the best Dinners of the
poorer sort. And this I protest, (for edification-sake, I here disclose the
same,) that my self heard one Recusant once say at dinner; that he did eat
the more at dinner on the Fasting day, that so he might put away Hunger until
the next day. What I have heard touching this Subject, if I should here relate
the same, would seem strange to many a one: I speak of things heard by
report; the other I speak of my own hearing, this by the report of others. An
other Decree of Pope Pius, does yield us this instruction: These are the words.
De consecrat. did. 5. cap. nihil.
Nihil enim prodest homini ieiunare et orare, et alia religionis bona agere;
nisi men's ab iniquitate, et ab obtrectationibus lingua cohibeatur: To Fast and
Pray does not profit a man any thing, neither yet to do other duties of
Religion; unless he keep his Mind from iniquity, and his Tongue from evil
speaking. An other Decree borrowed from S. Austen, has these words. De
consecrat. did. 5. cap. ieiunium.
Ieiunium autem magnum et generale est, abstinere ab iniquitatibus, et ab
illicitis voluptatibus seculi, quod est perfectum ieiunium in hoc seculo. Quasi
Quadragesima^ S. abstinentiae celebramus, cum been viuimus; cum ab
iniquitatibus et ab illicitis voluptatibus abstinemus: The great and general
Fast, is to abstain from iniquity, and unlawful pleasures of this world; and
this is the perfect Fast in this world. We keep as it were a Quadragesima or
Lent of abstinence, while we live well and Christianly; while we abstain from
sin, and from unlawful pleasures. But an other Decree borrowed of S.
Hierome, shall be the vpshot of this game: These are the very words. De
consecrat. did. ^. cap. non mediocriter.
Audiant itaque qui ea quae necessaria sunt corpori subtrahunt, illud quod per
Prophetam Dominus loquitur. Ego Dominus, odio habens rapinam holocanstorum: De
rapina vero holocanstum offert, qui temporalium bonorum sieve ciborum nimia
egestate, vel manducandi vel somni penuria corpus suum immoderate affligit: Let
them therefore who withhold or take from the body things necessary for it,
hear what our Lord says by his Prophet; Esa. 61.8.
I the Lord hate the robbery of burnt Offeringes: Now, he offers burnt
Offeringes of Rapine or Roberie, who afflicts his body immoderately, either
with too much want of temporal good things, or of Meats, or with the penury
of eating, or of sleep. This Discourse (if my Trial be annexed to it,) is
enough concerning this Subject. To S. Hierome, this in brief is my answer;
viz. That the Epistle fathered on him, is a counterfeit; as which agrees not
with the true Hieroms Doctrine else where, as is already proved. To which I
add, (which I have also proved,) that if we suppose and admit it to be a
Tradition of the Apostles; yet does mine assertion stand firm and untouched;
viz. That notwithstanding that Tradition, yet was Lent-fast free, voluntary,
and not commanded by any Law. To S. Austen, I answer first, that the Sermon
which our Jesuit cites, is not his, but a counterfeit. My reason is at hand;
because S. Austen (as is already proved, Aug. ad Casulan. epist. 86.
) affirms constantly; that the Apostles made no Law for Fasting: This is
already proved. Secondly, that in things indifferent, (such as I have proved
Lent to be,) every one is bound to obey the Law of that Church, The Church may
appoint Fastes, for special causes, which Aerius denied.
in which he lives: And so, he that keeps not Lent-fast, may truly be said
to sin. Thirdly, that S. Epiphanius and S. Austen did not reprove Aerius,
for denying popish Lent-fast, which was at that time vnhatched; but for denying
the Churches Authority, in appoynting Fasting-dayes upon what cause soever.
Which my self do constantly avouch, to be an Heresy indeed. The Church may
appoint Fasting days.
For when the Church upon special causes appoynteth Fasting days; then all
(that for infirmity may,) ought to abstain, and not to contemn those Fastes,
as Aerius taught. Howbeit I say withal, that the ancient Church condemned it
for an Heresy in Montanus, Eusebius. lib. 5. cap. 8.
to appoint ordinary times of necessary and Religious Fasting, when there was
no special cause so to do.

B. C.
That which he brings concerning S. Spiridion his eating of Flesh in Lent,
all circumstaunces considered, hurts not us, but makes against himself: For
we deny not, but that in some cases, Flesh may be eaten without violation of
that Fast.

T. B.
I answer; First, that S. Spiridions eating of Flesh (all circumstances duly
considered,) makes so much against Popish Lent fast; as will make both the
Jesuits and the Popes heart to pant, when they shall seriously ponder my
answer in that behalf. Secondly, that our Jesuit truly grants, that
Papists may in some cases, eat Flesh in the^^ holy Lent. For Pope can bring
all Souls out of Popish Purgatory. Monk, to become a truly married man.
Plenitidine potestatis. Super, cap. 2. pe^ omnes conclusiones.
change the nature of things, and of nothing, make something, (all which is
already proved;) it follows by an inevitable illation, that by the Popes
Dispensation, all Papists may eat Flesh, as well in the time of Lent, as at
other times of the year. See my Anatomy, in the preamble.
This is confirmed, by the usual practice, as well of Seminary Priests, as of
Jesuits and Iesuited Papists within this Land. For, a famous Jesuit made
offer to a Gentleman; that if he would become a Papist, he should have License
to eat Flesh in Lent among Lollards; that by so doing, he might live without
suspicion, and escape danger of the Laws. Now, let us duly examine the
circumstaunces of S. Spiridions eating of Flesh in Lent. Cassiodorus in the
Tripartite History, has these express words. Hist Tripart. libr. 1. cap. 10.
Instante iam Quadragesima, quidam ex itinere venit ad eum, quibus diebus
consueuer at cum suis continuare ieiunia, et die certo comedore, medios dies
sine cibo consistens. Vide Eseb. hist. libr. 5. cap. 24.
Videns itaque peregrinum valde defectum, perge inquit suae filiae, laua
peregrini pedes, et cibos appone. Cumque virgo dixisset nec panem esse, nec
(...), (quarum reru^ solebat nihil habere reconditum propter ieiunium,) orans
primu^ veniamque petens, filiae iussit, vt porcinas carnes quas domi salitas
habebat, coqueret. Quibus coctis, sedens cum peregrino, positis carnibus
comedebat, et rogabat, vt vna cum eo ederet peregrinus. Quo resutante,
Christianumque se profitente, propterea magis inquit, resutare non debes. Omnia
enim munda mundis, sicut sermo diuinus edocuit: A certain friend of S.
Spiridion came to him in time of Lent; at what time, he with his family were
wont to continue their Fast, and to eat at a day appointed, absteyning all the
mean days, from the first day of their Fast to the last, not eating any meat
at all. Mark this Story well, and never forget the same: for it proves Lent
fast to have bin free and voluntary in the ancient Church.
He therefore perceiving the Stranger to be very weary, willed his Daughter to
wash his Feet, and to set meat on the Table: And when the Virgin answered,
that they wanted both Bred and Meal, (which things they used not to keep in
time of their Fast,) he first prayed, and then commanded his Daughter to
boil the Swines flesh or salt Bacon, which she had in the house: which being
made ready, and set on the Table, S. Spiridion sat down with the Stranger;
and eating thereof, desired the Stranger to eat and take part with him. When
the Stranger refused, saying, he was a Christian: S. Spiridion answered that
therefore he ought not to refuse to eat with him, because he was a Christian;
adding this reason, that Gods word taught, all things to be pure to the pure.
Nicephorus, a famous Historiographer, and of high esteem in the Church of
Rome, reports the same History in the same sense and meaning; using more
plain and evident words in the last periods; which are these. Nicephor. lib.
8. cap. 42.
Ex amicis quidam ad eum ex itinere longinquo venit, et quidem eo tempore quo
ipse ieiunaret. Certis enim quibusdam diebus a cibo omni abstinens, postea
vescebatur: A ceraine friend came from far, even at that time when he kept
this Fast: For he absteyned some certain days from all manner of Meat, and
after his Fast, did eat. Thus writes Cassiodorus; thus, Nicephorus: Out of
whose Narrations, I observe these very memorable instructions. Popish
Lent-fast, is both superstitious and ridiculous.
they by and by added these words; (At which time, S. Spiridions custom was to
Fast.) Whereby they give us to understand, that he Fasted of his own free
accord, not by compulsion of any settled Law: For, if Lent-fast had been under
commandment, and not left free to every ones arbitrament, in vain should
these grave Writers have made mention of S. Spiridions custom in that behalf.
But (as I have already proved,) some fasted a longer time; some, a shorter:
some after one manner; some after an other. And for that end is it, that these
famous Historiographers do so distinctly relate both the time and the manner,
of S. Spiridions Fasting. Spiridion to have fasted but some certain days:
Certis quibusdam diebus.
as if they had said; the Stranger came not only in Lent, but even at that
time of Lent, when S. Spiridion kept his Fast. For, though the time of every
ones abstinence, Note this point well, for it is emphaticall.
were termed Lent; yet was there such difference therein, that some ended,
when others began the same: in so much, that Nicephorus, and other grave
Writers, do more then a little admire, how they all in such and so great
variety, could call their abstinence, Lenton-fast. Spiridion with his whole
Family, (mark the words, Cum suis.
Cum suis) abstain from all kind of Meat, during the whole time of their
Fast: And consequently, S. Spiridion destroys popish Lent.
that S. Spiridions Lent, was not the Fast of forty days: For, neither
himself, (and much less his whole family, some being of young and tender
years,) was able to endure so many days, without all kind of Meat: Mark
well these words, A cibo omni abstinens.
(A cibo omni abstinens.) This is so clear and evident, by usual Popish
practice; that whereas in former times, the Papists did not dine in Lent,
until the ninth hour, (which is with us, three a clock in the after noone,
Vsque ad horam nona^, that is, until three a clock in the after noone.
) they are this day dispensed withal, to shuffle up their Prayers, and so to
dine at noone. And why, I pray you, must this be done? Because, forsooth, their
bodies are not able to endure one days fast, until three a clock in the
after noone. Ergo, S. Spiridions Lent, continued not the space of forty
days: Our Friar Jesuit, volens, nolens, must this confess. Spiridion, nor
any one of his family, did eat any Meat until the end of the Fast: And
consequently, that Popish Lent-fast is nothing correspondent to that Lent-fast,
which S. Spiridion used in his time. Spiridion did not interteine the Stanger
without Bread, S. Spiridion was the Bishop of Cyprus.
albeit he had none in his own house, (for doubtless he had Bread to his
Flesh;) it follows of necessity, that he got Bread of some of his
Neighbors; and consequently, that all his Neighbors did not keep Lent, after
his manner, and at his time: Which yet they ought and would have done, if Lent
had been commanded by any settled Law. Spiridion brake off his Fast, that he
might eat and be merry with the Stranger. Whereby we may learn, that his
Fast was voluntary, not by compulsion of any Law. Spiridion urged the
Stranger, even to eat Flesh in Lent; who doubtless would never have once
moved him, to transgress any Apostolical Law. Ergo, Lent-fast was
voluntary, not commanded by any Law. Spiridion, (when he urged the Stranger
to eat flesh in Lent,) did not allege necessity or want of Meat; but
taught him plainly out of Gods word, that all Meats (as well Flesh as Fish,)
were pure unto the pure. Spiridion told the Stranger plainly and constantly;
that he ought rather to eat Flesh in Lent, then to refuse it, because he was
a Christian. As if he had said; It is the badge of an Infidel (not of a
Christian,) to think he may rather eat Fish, then Flesh. For the complement
of doctrine, concerning Lent-fast, let us hear attentively (I pray you) what
Josephus Angles that famous popish Bishop and Friar tells us. Two memorable
Doctrines does he teach us: The One, that Lent-fast is satisfactorie for our
sins. The Other, that Christ did not institute Lent-fast, as the Romish Church
observes it. In one place, he has these express words. Ios. Angl. in. 4. S.
part. 1. page 379.
Tale ieiunium est proprie, et realiter, et sacramentaliter satisfactorium.
Ratio est, quoniam est pars satisfactionis; aliter enim Ecclesia deciperet
paenitenies: The Church of Rome, has indeed deceived many a man.
Such a Fast (he speaks of the Fastes which Priests enjoin,) is
sacramentally, really, and properly satisfactorie. The reason is; because it is
a part of satisfaction: for otherwise, the Church should deceive the
Penitentes. In an other place, the same Josephus Angles has these express
words. Ios. Angl. vbi supra, page 382.
Ieiunium quadragesimale eo modo quo ab Ecclesia seruatur, nes suit a Christo
institutum, neque ab eo iussum, sed ab hominibus; atque ita non est de iure
diuino, sed humano duntaxat. Christus enim nec tempus talis ieiunij, nec modum,
neque cibos instituit. Mark that popish Lent-fast (...) but an Apish imitation
of Christ's fast.
Statim enim post Baptismum in desertum secessit, et illic ieiunauit. Christus
nullum diem a ieiunio excepit, in illo quadragenario numero; Ecclesia vero dies
dominicos excipit. Christus tunc semel nec pluries commedit, neque bibit. In
Ecclesia vero vna refectio tantum est concessa, et in potatione nulla est
limitatio. Quare cum nec verbo, neque facto hoc ieiunium instituerit, ab
Ecclesia institutum erit: The Lent-fast, as the Church observes it, was
neither instituted of Christ, nor of him commanded, but of men; so as it is
not stablished by Gods Law, but by man's only: for Christ neither instituted
the time of such a Fast, nor the manner, nor the Meats: for, so soon as he
was Baptized, he went into the Desert, and fasted there. Christ excepted no day
from fasting, in his Fast of Forty days: but the ( Romish) Church excepteth
the Sundays. Christ neither eat nor drank more then once; One may keep the
Popish Lent, and be drunk every day. Forget not this point. Ios. Angl. vbi
supra. page 394.
but the Church grants Meat once a day; and for drinking makes no
restraint. Wherefore seeing Christ neither appointed Lent-fast by word, nor by
deed, it must be ordained of the Church. Where I may not forget to add, that
the same Bishop Angles tells us in an other place; that albeit the Apostles
ordained Lent-fast, yet may the Pope free and deliver whom he will, from the
keeping thereof. And he yields this reason for the same; Because, forsooth,
The Pope is equal to the Apostles.
the Pope has as great Power in the government of the Church, as the Apostles
had. Thus disputes our Popish Bishop; telling us plainly, that Christ did not
ordain Lent-fast; which he proves by many reasons. As also, that none are
bound to Fast in Lent, who have gotten the Popes Dispensation to free them from
it; no, not if the Apostles appointed it. Thirdly, he grants freely, that
the Papists Fast, to satisfy God for their sins. I therefore must perforce
conclude; that the Popish Lent-fast, is a rotten ragge of the New religion.

The 29. Chapter: of the annulling of Popish Wedlock.
B. C.
Whatsoever (says Bell) the Bishop of Rome holds and defines, that must
every Papist hold, believe, and maintain, as an Article of his Faith. Though
generally all Catholics do hold the Popes Definitions to be infallible, and
the contrary opinion to be erroneous; ye is it not an Article of Faith.

T. B.
Whosoever shall seriously peruse my Trial, this Answer of the Jesuit to the
same; and this my Reply in defense of my Trial, can not but understand, that
Popery is mere foolerie, and flatly opposite to the sacred Word of God. This
in brief, is my Answer: Trial, (arguing against the annulling of Popish
Wedlock,) conteyne not fully 26. lines; The Jesuit flees from the matter.
yet is the Jesuit so afraid, with the plentiful matter soundly handled
therein, and yet in brief manner; as he dares not once touch or name the
same, for fear of burning him. For proof whereof, I wish the indifferent
Reader, to peruse my Trial of the New religion. Couarrunias, a very famous
popish Bishop and renowned Canonist, has these express words. Couarru. to.
1. cap. 20. par. 11. in med. col. 1.
Nec me later, D. Thomam praeuia maxima deliberatione asserere; Romans Pontificem
non posse propria dispensatione continentiae solemn Monactiorum votum tollere.
Et Paulo Post. oportet tamen primam opinionem defendere; ne quae passim fiant,
euertantur omnino: Mark this point well.
Neither am I ignorant, that S. Thomas (the popish Angelical Doctor, whose
Doctrine sundry Popes have confirmed,) affirms after great deliberation; that
the Bishop of Rome can not with his Dispensation, take away from Monks their
solemn Vow of Chastity. For the marriage of Priests and Monks* see my Survey
This notwithstanding, we must defend the first opinion, least those things
which are practiced every where, be utterly overthrow. The Popish canonized
Saint Antoninus, and Syluester Prieras, Anton. par. 1. tit. 10. cap. 3. Sylu.
de indulg.
(some time master of the Popes sacred Palace, and for his great Learning,
surnamed, Absolutus Theologus,) tell us plainly and constantly; that
whatsoever the Pope does, whether we can prove the same or no^* yet must we
believe it to be so. And, (which passes all the rest, yea, which is
wonderful, if not incredible to proceed from a Papists mouth, S. R. page 417.
) S. R. that Learned man, (as our Friar B. C. terms him,) has these
express words, in his pretensed Answer to the Downe-fall of Popery. See and
mark the eight Chapter.
Because Bishops must not examine the Doctrine, which the Pope delivers
iudicially out of S. Peter's Chair, as supreme Pastor of Gods Churth; but
only that, wherein he utters his own private opinion. Aquinas himself,
shall give the vpshot of this game: these are his express words. Aquinas in
supplem. quaest. 25. art. 1.
Christus poterat relaxare; ergo et Paulus potuit; ergo et Papa potest; qui non
est minoris potestatis in Ecclesia, quam Paulus fuit: Christ could pardone;
therefore Paul could pardone; therefore the Pope also can pardone; as who is of
no less or meaner Authority in the Church, then Paul himself was. Friar
grants all Papists generally, to hold the Popes Definitions to be
infallible, See the Christian Dialogue, page 17.19.
and the contrary Opinion to be erroneous; he shows himself to be a very
noddie, and at a flat nonplus, in denying the same to be an Article of Popish
faith. I prove it, (mark well my words) by a triple Argument. Ioh. 14.6.
Ioh. 17.17.
are bound to believe every truth agreeable to Gods word. And consequently,
that either all Papists believe the Popes Definitions to be infallible, and
the contrary opinion to be erroneous; or else, that the same is not a truth
agreeable to Gods word. See and note well the Rhemists, upon the New Testament.
Mat. 16.17. Luke 22.31.
and damnable Religion; if all Papists generally hold that for an undoubted
Doctrine, which is no part of their Faith and Religion: For all Jesuits and
Iesuited Papists hold, that the Church is built upon Peter and his successors,
and that their faith can not fail.

B. C.
What follows. What, but that Bell has abused the good Reader with an
untruth?

T. B.
I answer; that this in very deed follows, and that of mere necessity;
that our Jesuitical Friar, is a most impudent and shameless liar. Which thing
I have proved again and again, in every Chapter most evidently: I therefore
must perforce conclude; that seeing the late Bishops of Rome, ( Pius, Paulus,
and Julius,) A.D. 1540.
have taken in hand roundly and most Antichristianly, (as I have proved in my
Trial, and more at large in the Downe-fall of Popery,) to dissolve that
Matrimony, which the true Church of God durst never dissolve, Note well the
next Chapter, touching the infallibility of the Popes faith.
for the space of more then fifteen hundred years after Christ: the same can
be nothing else, but a very filthy rotten Ragge of the New Religion.

The 30. Chapter: of the Popes pretended Superiority, over and above a
general Council.
B. C.
BELL beginning with false asseueration, to tell us of the late opinion of the
Popes Superiority over a General Council, interlaceth also an other
shameless untruth against the Rhemists.

T. B.
I answer; that our Friar still continues one and the selfsame man: that is
to say, an impudent and shameless liar, as he first began: For within four
lines, he compriseth and coucheth two most notorious Lies. The former is
touching the late Opinion of the Popes Superiority over a general Council. I
affirm, that the Popish opinion, which holds the Pope to be above a general
Council, is a late vpstart Faith and Doctrine; never known to the Church of
God, for the space of more then fourteen hundred years after Christ. A.D.
1415^
This our Friar calls a False asseueration: but proves it not at all. He
is an honest man; we may (if we will) believe his bare word. But I by the power
of God, shall prove the contrary to be the truth; and that out of hand. The
latter, is concerning the Rhemistes; which shall be cleared (God willing) by
and by.

B. C.
The Rhemists (quoth he) that Iesuited brood, tell us plainly, (if we will
believe them,) that there is no necessity of a General or Provincial
Council, save only for the better contentation of the people. Thus he
charge them; yet not noting any particular place: But I will help him; it is
in their Annotations upon the Acts.

T. B.
I answer; that our Friar shows himself what he is, as well here, as else
where. He is so full of Charity forsooth, that he will needs help me for his
own intended gain, though he be thereby proved a lying swain: for in the
next Page following, he has these express words. This untruth the Minister
had set abroach once before in his Downe-fall, and quoteth the place very
orderly in this manner. Rhemes test. in Act. 15. Lo, in one page our Friar
charge me of purpose, to have omitted the quotation, so to delude and deceive
the Reader. In an other page, he grants freely, that I have set it down
very orderly. Behold this changeable Camelion, who both accuses and acquitteth
me with one breath. Concerning the slaundering of the Rhemists, wherewith he
charge me, this is mine answer; that in very deed the slander fitly
agrees to himself, which he would untruly impose upon me. I prove it;
Rhemists plainly declare their meaning, in this brief Marginall note. Rhem.
test. in Act. 15. v. 28. in marg.
Though the Sea Apostolic it self (say the Rhemists,) have the same
assistance, yet Councels be also necessary for many causes. In which words,
they grant as much in effect, as I either affirm, or require. Rhemists name,
may easily be reduced to that one of mine; viz. For the better contentation of
the people: for the controversy is this; Whether the Popes Judgment be
infallible in it self, without a General Council, or no. The Rhemists
answer, that Papists hold the affirmative; viz. That the Popes Judgment is
infallible, and is assisted of God even as a general Council. But if this be
done, then must Popery be overthrown. See and note well the Rhem. annot. upon
Mat. 16.17. and Luke. 22. v. 31.
and no doubt all Christians in the world, will yield thereunto. But (Sir
Friar,) Hic labor, hoc opus est: For, in these last, and worst days of ours,
the Pope will stay at home; and whatsoever or howsoever the Councelles shall
decree, yet must nothing be of force, save that only, which the Pope likes to
confirm, as he sits in his Chair at Rome. This I have proved at large in
the Downe-fall of Popery, and in my Christian Dialogue, by evident
demonstrations.

B. C.
What can Bell fetch from Alphonsus, to justify his injurious charge of the
Rhemists. Alphonsus was one of those Divines, Lo, not the judgment of the
Pope, but of a general Council, is infallible.
that think the infallibility of Judgment to be in a Council, and not in
the Pope alone: And he brings this reason; Because otherwise it were in
vain, with so great labor to assemble so many Bishops together. This
informs us very well, what Alphonsus his opinion was: But where does he say;
that the Rhemistes teach, that the Determination of a general Council is
needless, save only for the better contentation of the people, because the
Popes Judgment is infallible? He speaks not one word of the Rhemists: and
no marvel; for he could not, being dead many a fair day, before the Rhemes
Testament was published.

T. B.
I answer; that I can fetch so much from the famous and learned Papist
Alphonsus, as is able to kill the Pope, with all his Jesuits and Iesuited
Popelinges. For Jesuits and Jesuited Popelinges avouch most impudently, So say
the Rhemistes: note the places, Math. 16.17. Luke 22.31.
and would enforce all Christians to believe the same; that Christ built his
Church upon S. Peter, and upon his successors the Bishops of Rome: and also,
that Christ prayed for Peter and for the Bishops of Rome, that their Faith
should never fail. But Alphonsus condemns that opinion for Heretical; while
he affirms the infallibility of Faith to rest in a general Council, not
in the Pope alone. Alphonsus confuteth the Rhemists most soundly and evidently,
while he affirms general Councels to be gathered in vain, if the Popes
Determination and judgment were infallible. Alpho^sus is one of those Learned
popish Writers, (even by the Jesuits free confession in this place, which I
wish the Reader never to forget,) who defend the truth with us, against the
Pope, his Jesuits, and all his Iesuite^ Popelinges. For, I do not hold or
defend any Article or point of Doctrine, (as I have often said, and here our
Friar unawares grants the same: such is the force of truth, The learned
Papists hold all points of doctrine, which I defend: which is and will be my
comfort, to the worlds end.
) but the best Learned popish Writers hold and defend the same with me: Which
is to me such a comfort, as neither the Pope, nor all his Jesuits and Iesuited
Popelinges, are ever able to discomfort me; how soever they now, or hereafter,
revile and rail against me. But our Jesuit is bold, and peremptorily
avouches; that Alphonsus could not speak one word of the Rhemistes, seeing he
was dead many a fair day before the Rhem^s Testament was published. To which I
answer; that a living man in his life time, may confute their opinion who are
borne after his death; and that in a double manner. One way formally, A formal
and material confutation.
in respect of their persons and inseparable adjuncts. An other way materially,
in respect of the subject and matter called into question. And consequently,
albeit Alphonsus could not confute or censure the Rhemistes the former way,
save only by special revelation; yet might he, and did he confute them the
latter way, before the Rhemes Testament was published to the world. Yea, See
the Christian Dialogue, page 17.19.
Alphonsus speaks more against the Rhemists the latter way, then I my self
have done: for he affirms, (as our Friar Jesuit grants,) That in vain
were so great labor taken for the gathering of a Council, if the Popes
Judgment were infallible. Lo Alphonsus avouches a general Council to be
altogether needless, if the Popes Judgment be infallible. Which is far
more then that, wherewith I charged the Rhemists; he absolutely rejects all
respects, I made one exception; viz. For the better contentation of the
people. So then, that which to our Jesuit is impossible, is become evident and
easy to the Reader: and the silly Friar is mightily confounded in his own
best manner of pleading.

B. C.
See the dexterity of this Minister in disputing. He pretended to prove out
of the Council of Constance; That the Superiority of the Pope was never
known till that time: and he proves the clean contrary. The Council
defined (quoth he) A.D. 1415.
that a Council is above the Pope. What is this to the Superiority of the
Pope above a Council, The Friar kills himself, with his own sword. Note
well the answer.
which he undertook to justify out of the Council? And not only that, but
also that it was never before. Verily had Bell that care of his credit, which
he ought, never would he suffer his Discourse to pass abroad, with such
absurd and fantastical connection.

T. B.
I answer; Jesuit may well be compared to notorious Thieves and bloody
Traitors, who continually cry out against theft and treason, This is veri^^ed,
in the Gunpowder Iesuited vassals.
that so they may the better avoid the suspicion, and free them selves from the
imputation of those heinous crimes: For, himself being full of nothing but
lying, coozenage; and deceitful dealing; he busieth and bestirreth himself
to charge me therewith, so to free himself (if that were possible,) from the
same. Friar charge me, not to justify out of the Council what I did
undertake; he plainly shows himself to be bereaved of his wits, to be
given up into a reprobate mind, and impudently to defend one notorious lie
with an other. For doubtless, while I proved the Council of Constance to
have defined, that a Council is above the Pope; I proved evidently, that the
Pope is not above a Council. For example: If I prove most noble King JAMES,
being the Sovereign, Mark well this answer.
to be above Robert Parsons, being the Subject, and indeed a nototious Traitor;
I do therewith evidently conclude, that the traiterous varlet Parsons (the
author of this Libell,) is not above our most noble King. If this example
content not our Friar, I am willing (for charity sake) to afford him this
other. See my Anatomy, where this is plainly proved.
If any man shall prove a notorious Horse-stealer, to be more honest then
Robert Parsons, which the secular popish Priests have proved most evidently;
the same man shall perforce conclude, that Parsons is not above or better then
an Horse-stealer, in the way of honesty. Thirdly, that the Popes pretended
Authority above a general Council, was never known to the Church, until
the Council of Constance; that is to say, for the space of one thousand, four
hundred, and fifteen years after Christ, A.D. 1415.
it shall (God willing) be proved out of hand.

B. C.
Cardinalis Cameracensis, (quoth he,) Abbas Panormitanus, Nicholaus Cusanus,
Adrianus Papa, Cardinalis Florentinus, Johannes Gersonus, Jacobus Almaynus,
Abulensis, and other learned Papists generally, (the Jesuits and their
Jesuited crew excepted,) do all constantly defend as an undoubted truth,
that a general Council is above the Pope. In which words for a parting blow,
he clappeth two untruths together. The first is, that the Doctrine of the
Popes authority above a Council, is no older then the Jesuits. The second
is; that none teach it, but the Jesuits and their Iesuited crew.

T. B.
I answer; Jesuit here confesses so much, as is enough to prove Popery to
be the new Religion. For, he can but name two Papists, and one Council, that
held his opinion; viz. Antoninus, Turrecrema^a, and the Lateran Council under
Leo the tenth. O newborn Popery! where is thy mother? where is thy Godfather?
where is thy christianity? None ever heard of thee for the space of 1414.
years after Christ.
Alas, alas, who (though a Papist before,) would not now defy and detest
Popery, seeing the Jesuit can not deny it to be the new Religion. He can not
possibly name one Writer in the whole world, for the space of one thousand,
four hundred, and fifteen years after Christ; who affirms the Pope or
Bishop of Rome to be above a general Council: For, Antoninus and
Turrecremata, were but yesterday men respectively; as who were unborn many a
fair day after the Council of Constance, and so children for Antiquity, and
wholly against the credit of late start-vp Popery. And the Popish Lateran
Council under Pope Leo the tenth, was after the Council of Constance more
then foure-score and eight years: and consequently after Christ, fifteen
hundred years and odd. O Popery! fond and foolish are those simple and silly
Papists, who call thee the old Religion. For, (my life I gage for the trial,)
thou art no older; then I have said. Antoninus, Turrecrema^a, and the Laterne
Synod, were Jesuited materially; that is, qualified like Knights of the Post;
men that would say or swear any thing, for the Popes pleasure, and their own
gain.

B. C.
Bell, when he says, That this Doctrine was not known to the Church, until
the time of the Council of Constance, grants, that then it began at least
to be taught; and so neither proceeded from Jesuits or Iesuited persons, as
being of longer standing, by his own grant.

T. B.
I answer; Jesuit strives to defend Popery, the more he unawares
overthrows the same. He is driven to such a miserable shift, that he seeks
(for want of other grounds,) to relieve Popery with those reasons, which my
self have made against the same. Constance had, to define the power of a
general Council to be above the Pope, was this, and no other; viz. the great
Schism, which John the 23. Gregory the 12. and Benedict the 13. brought into
the Church; while every one of them sought with might and maine, A general
Council is above the Pope
to be the Pope of Rome: For the Council lamenting the Schism, and greatly
desiring to stablish unity and peace in the Church, used the chiefest and last
remedy in that behalf: that is, they deposed the three contentious Popes, (
John, Gregory, and Benedict;) and chosing Martin, made him Pope by their
supereminent power. And to take away al Schism, dissentions, difficulties,
doubts, suspicions, and future garboyles, which might perhaps have insued
thereupon, the Council decreed and constantly defined; that a general
Council in causes Ecclesiastical, had the greatest power upon earth; and
consequently, power and authority over the Pope, even to cite him, to
excommunicate him, and to depose him: And therefore De facto, they deposed the
three aforenamed Popes, and placed Martin in their stead. Master Doctor
Gerson, (a famous and great learned Papist,) makes this case so plain in many
places of his works; as none, that with judgment and indifferency, shall
peruse the same, can stagger or stand in doubt thereof: these are his express
words. Gers. in Sermon. coram council. Constable. V prim. part.
Ecclesia, vel generale Concilium eam reprasentans, est regula a spiritu sancto
directa, tradita a Christo: vt quilibet cuiuscunque status etiam Papalis
existat, came audire ac eidem obedire teneatur, alioquin habendus est vt
Ethnicus et Publicanus: The Church, or general Council representing it, is a
rule directed of the holy Ghost, and given us of Christ; that every one of what
state soever, even Papal, must hear and obey the same; or else, be reputed as
an Ethnicke and Publican. Again, in another place, the same Doctor has these
words. Gers. prim. part. in tract. de appellat. a Papa circa med.
Johannes (Papa) non est accusatus vel conuictus de Heretica prauitate; et
tamen concilium vocauit et iudicauit ipsum, tanqua^ suu^ subditum. vnde et in
toto processu vsque post sententiam definitiuam suae depositionis, reputatus
est ab eodem concilio verus Papa: Pope John was neither accused nor convicted
of Heresy; and for all that, the Council both called and judged him, as their
Subject. Whereupon the Council reputed him the true Pope, in all the time of
their proceeding against him; until after the definitive sentence of his
Deposition. In an other place, the same Learned Writer has these words. Gers.
vbi. supr. in 2. propos.
In causis fidei non habetur in terra Index infallibilis, vel qui non sit
deuiabilis a fide de lege communi; praeter ipsum Ecclesiam vniuersalem, vel
Conciliu^ generale eam sufficienter repraesentans: In matters of Faith, there
is no infallible Judge upon earth, or which can not swerve from the Faith by
the common course of Gods proceedinge; saving the Church universal, or a
general Council representing the same sufficiently. In an other place, he
has these words. Gers. in sermon. coram Council. Constable. K. prim. part.
Ecclesia vel generale Concilium potuit et potest congregari sine expresso
consensu vel mandato Papae, etiam rite electi et viuentis, in multis c^sibus:

The Church, or a general Council, both might and may be called together,
without the express consent or mandate of the Pope; even when the Pope is
lawfully elected, and living. Thus disputes this famous Papist, and great
learned Doctor. Out of whose words, I gather many very excellent documentes,
well worthy to be written in Golden letters. Constance. chosen, and at time
living. To this doctrine I willingly agree.
is either the judgment of the universal Church, or else of a general
Council sufficiently representing the same. This is found and very Catholic
doctrine, though proceeding from the Pen of a great Papist. Which Doctrine,
as the Council of Constience first, and after it the Council of Basil, did
approve by their flat decrees; so do I reverently embrace the same with all
my heart, humbly thanking God, that by the mighty power of his truth, our
adversaries are compelled to confess the truth against themselves. This
Doctrine is confirmed more at large, both in my Anatomy, See my Anatomy, page
137.
and in my Golden Balance; to say nothing of my Christian Dialogue, which
wounds the Pope at the very heart. From hence proceeds that, which will
seem to many, a woonderment of the world. But what is that, will some say?
This forsooth; that all Papists this day living, All Papists are Heretics.
are flat Heretics. Is it so, in deed? Is that possible to be proved? It is
so possible, that I have even now proved the same most evidently. And thus the
most simple Reader in the world, shall easily perceive the same. The general
Council of Constance decreed plainly, that the Popes Judgment is fallible;
and that the Pope is subject to a general Synod, and by the authority
thereof may be deprived of the Popedom: as also that the contrary opinion is
flat Heresy. This is already proved. Now, so it is, that all Papists this
day living upon earth, do hold the Popes Judgment to be infallible, and
himself to be above a general Council: So say the Rhemistes; Rhem. in 16.
Mat. 22. Luke 15. Act. 18.
so says our Jesuit, even in the end of his Chapter next afore-going, being
the 29. in number. Ergo, seeing all Jesuits and Iesuited Papists, do this
day hold and defend that opinion, which a general Council has defined to be
flat Heresy; it follows by a most necessary consequence, and inevitable
illation, that they all are flat Heretics, it can not be denied. All Papists
are Heretics.
Deo gratias: dixi.

B. C.
And before we proved, how Pope Leo irritated and made of no force, a Decree
enacted in the Council of Chalcedon; which argues his Superiority over the
Council.

T. B.
I answer; first, that this assertion and opinion of our Friar, is a flat
Heresy; as it is even now proved, and that most evidently. Secondly, that
this sottish allegation is confuted again and again, in the second Chapter of
this present Volume. To this let us add a most notable testimony of our
Rhemistes, which is comprised in these very words. Rhem. in. 15. Act. v. 28.
ex Aug. libr. 2. de baptis. cap. 4.
Notorious is the saying of S. Augustine concerning S. Cyprian, who being a
blessed Catholic Bishop and Martyr; yet erred about the rebaptizing of such,
as were Christined by Heretics. If he had lived (says S. Augustine,) to have
seen the determination of a plenarie Council, which he saw not in his life
time; he would for his great humility and charity, straight way have yielded,
and preferred the general Council before his own Judgment and his fellow
Bishops, in a provincial Council only. Thus dispute our Rhemistes,
confounding themselves and their Pope, unawares: For first they tell us,
(mark well my words,) that S. Cyprian was a blessed Bishop and Martyr, and
therefore would have yielded to the Decree of a general Council. They tell us
secondly, that S. Augustine was of the same opinion. In which double Narration,
the Rhemistes confound themselves, with their Pope and all his devoted
Popelinges: For, they give us to understand very plainly; that neither the
Pope is above a general Council, neither yet his Judgment infallible. But
how prove I that? This forsooth, is a plain demonstration thereof. Florint.
Cypriau^^, A.D. 250. Aug. A.D. 419.
S. Cyprian and S. Augustine being both of them, very Holy and very Learned
Fathers, could not but know right well for their great Learning, what
Authority, Power, Privileges, and Prerogatives, Christ had given to the
Bishops of Rome. And without all question it is, it can not be denied; that for
their great piety and humility, they would humbly have acknowledged and
highly reverenced, all Power given them by our Lord Jesus: Yet true it is, (sir
Friar, mark well my words,) that Pope Cornelius, together with a national
Synod of the Bishops of Jtaly, had made a flat decree concerning
Rebaptization. True it is likewise, that Pope Stephanus had confirmed the same
Decree, and commanded it to be observed. True it is thirdly, that all Papists
of late days, do obstinately affirm, (as our Rhemistes in the name of all
Papists, tell us;) that the Pope is above a general Council; that the Pope
can not err Iudicially; that the Popes Judgment is infallible. Now, this
Decree made by Pope Cornelius, and confirmed by Pope Stephanus; S. Cyprian knew
right well, neither was S. Austen ignorant thereof: Howbeit this
notwithstanding, S. Cyprian roundly withstood the Decree of Pope Stephanus, and
both sharply reproved him, and utterly contemned his falsely pretended
Authority. S. Austen in like manner held the same opinion with S. Cyprian,
concerning the Popes falsely pretended Prerogatives and infallibility of
Judgment; never excusing any such thing in S. Cyprian as a fault, neither once
saying, that the Pope was Christ's Vicar, Mark well this point.
or that Christ had prayed that his Faith should not fail: but constantly
telling the Reader for his full satisfaction on S. Cyprians behalf; that he
would humbly have yielded to the Decree of a plenarie Council, if any such had
been in his time. In which words, S. Austen gives the Reader to understand,
that though S. Cyprian did contemn both the definitive Sentence of the Pope,
and the Decree of his provincial Council, because neither of their Judgments
was infallible; yet would he have yielded to the Decree of a plenarie Council,
as which he acknowledged to be infallible, and to have the assistannce of the
holy Ghost. Let us add further, that the two hundred and seauenteene Fathers
in the Aphrican Council, (whereof S. Augustine was one,) were so far from
acknowledging the Bishop of Rome to be Christ's Vicar general upon earth, to
be above a plenarie Council, and his Judgment to be infallible; that they all
with one assent refused utterly to grant any such Prerogative or Privilege
unto him; constantly affirming, that he was bound as well as they, to obey the
Decrees of the Nicene Council. For which cause, neither would the said Fathers
grant greater Power and Prerogatives to the Bishops of Rome; neither did the
Bishops of Rome themselves challenge greater Power then the Canons of the
Nicene Synod would affoorde them. Of which point I have disputed at large, in
the second Chapter afore-going: Whosoever shall seriously peruse that whole
Chapter, Supr. cap. 2. prope finem.
from the beginning to the end thereof, will undoubtedly rest satisfied, in
this behalf. Join this with my Trial, and Popery will prove it self the
New religion.

The 31. Chapter, containing (according to my promise,) an Answer to the
Jesuits short admonition, in the 16. Chapter aforegoing; as also to some other
patches, elsewhere dispearsed to the same effect.
T. B.
Having evidently proved, and plainly convinced (by the power of God, and the
assistance of his holy Spirit,) that Popery is the New religion; it follows
consequently, that I prove the Faith and Doctrine this day professed, and by
Authority established in the Church of England, to be the Old Religion. I
therefore heartily crave the gentle Readers attentive hearing, unto the end of
my Discourse. I have not hitherto in any of my former Books, oppugned the Old
Roman Religion; The old Roman religion, was the true Catholic Church.
which S. Peter and S. Paul delivered to the Church of Rome, while they lived
here on earth: Neither do I at this present, or ever intend hereafter, in any
future work to oppugn the same. It is the late Faith, and late Romish
Doctrine, which I contend to be the New Religion: every maine point whereof I
have clearly convinced, when and by whom it first began. Our Church of noble
England, constantly reteyneth every Article and jot of the old Roman
Religion; only rejecting and abolishing of the essential parts of late
Romish Faith and Doctrine, so much as was Heretical, erroneous, or
superstitious and repugnant, to the eternal truth of Gods most sacred word.
And concerning late Romish ceremonies, such and so many, as were either
superstitious, The Papists are the deformed, and we the reformed Catholics
in very deed.
or ridiculous or unprofitable to the Church of God. So that we are this day,
the true reformed Catholics; even as the Friars at Rome commonly called
Capucho^nes, are indeed the true reformed Franciscans. The Church of England
does not this day, hold any Article of Faith or Doctrine, or use any Ceremony;
save such only as we are able to justify, either by the express words of
the holy Scripture, and by the approbation of best approved Antiquity; or
else to deduce the same from thence, by a necessary and inevitable
consequence. Let us now in Gods name hear attentively, what our Jesuit in the
name of all Papists, is able to object, against the Faith and Doctrine of the
Church of England.

B. C.
COncerning Ceremonies, and such like, B.C. page 136. All this is true, but
nothing to the purpose.
Bell in his Regiment of the Church, grants freely; that the Church has
Authority to ordain and abrogate, to make or repeal Laws, as shall seem
most meet for the honor of God, and the edification of Christian people.

T. B.
Bell admits all this. Say on good Friar, if happily thou have any better
Bread in thy Bag, seeing this is not worth a silly Ragge: Howbeit our Friar
for want of matter, has bestowed almost one whole Leaf of Paper, in the
recital of my words. Transeat, It is impertinent.

B. C.
If he infer against our Ceremonies, as he does, B.C. page. 138.
because they were instituted since Christ, though very ancient, That they be
rotten rags of the New religion; What shall become of their Ceremonies, which
either be borrowed from us, or of far latter date? What can they be else, but
pil^ patches of Protestanisme, and rusty Rags of the Reformed congregation?
The Jesuit is full of vanity and lying. Mark well the answer.
Nay, what must their Communion Book it self be; never heard of in the whole
world, till the late days of King Edward the sixth, and drawn from our
Portesse and Masse-bookes; as the thing it self speaks, and their Geneua
Ghospellers often cast in their teeth?

T. B.
I answer; Jesuit unawares gives Popery a deadly wound, while he makes
popish Mass, and the Oath which popish Bishops make to the Pope, to be no
weighty points of Religion: For, they are within the compass of the eleven
Chapters, of which he writes in this manner. B^C. page. 136.
These Chapters I shall soon dispatch, seeing they concern not any weighty
points of Religion; but Ceremonies, and such like. Jesuit is still like
himself, that is, a most notorious liar; while he charge me to term all
Ceremonies instituted since Christ, though very ancient, to be rotten Rags
of the New religion: For, I am so far and so free from this false and plain
Diabolical accusation; as I approve all Ceremonies consonant to Gods word, at
what time soever the Church did institute the same. See the Regiment, cap. 14.
page, 183* 184.185.187* 170.166.200*128.125.155.119.
None that shall duly peruse my Regiment of the Church, can be ignorant
hereof. Nay, I say further; that the Jesuit is not able to bring any one
sentence out of any one of all my Books, which denies Authority to the
Church, to institute new Ceremonies at any time; so the same be consonant to
Gods word, and profitable for the circumstaunces of time, place, and persons.
Yea, the Jesuit confesses within twenty lines before this false and heinous
slander, that this is the very doctrine which I teach. But his wit is so
besotted, in fighting and bickering against the manifest truth, that he
forgets what he writes, so soon as a new reason pricketh him: for he had
rather heap lies upon lies, and slanders upon slanders, then forsake and
condemn their gainefull Popery; which is to him and his fellows, as was the
Temple of Diana to Demetrius and the other Craftes-men. Act. 19. v. 24.25.
that we use no Ceremonies in our English Church, but such as are both
agreeable to the holy Scriptures, and of far greater antiquity, Mark well
this point.
then the time of Popery, which I oppugn. Albeit I do not absolutely
condemn all Ceremonies this day used in the Romish Church; but respectively,
The right end is edification. 1. Cor. 14 v. 14. v. 26.16.
as they are superstitiously used, and too unlawful; or at least ridiculous,
or unprofitable ends: For, I willingly grant, that sundry Ceremonies now used
in the Romish Church, are things indifferent of their own nature; and that
the same were not to be condemned, if the superstitious abuse and wicked
intentes, for which they are done, were wholly removed from them. Where I wish
the Reader, to mark attentively these my words; (Absolutely, See and note my
Regiment, page 183.185.200.198.199.
and Respectively.) viz. the Essential, and the Accidental parts thereof.
Touching the parts Essential, they are all and every of them as old, as is
the written Word of God it self: The Adversaries are not able, to give any
true instance against the same. Touching the parts Accidental; they are all
in like manner old in the thing it self, though of later date in the
modification of the thing. Thus in playner terms: All the accidental parts
of our English Communion book, if we respect the matter it self contained
therein, are as old as the holy Scripture it self; though of far latter
date, if we respect the order and disposition of the same. This my Answer, is
grounded upon this doctrine of S. Paul. 1. Cor. 14. v. 27.40.
Omnia ad aedificationem fiant: Omnia honest et secundum ordinem fiant in
vobis: Let all things be done to edifying: Let all things be done decently,
and according to order. Roman Missals or Communion-bookes, in the Purer age of
the Church; long before the time of idolatrous and superstitious Popery; Mark
well gentle reader.
which I in all my Books oppugn.

B. C.
More then four hundred years before the time of S. Gregory, B.C. page 135.
the ancient Brytaines received the same manner of serving God, from the
blessed Pope and Martyr S. Eleutherius, that is, in the Latin tongue: Which
appears first, Beda lib. 2. hist. cap. 2.
because venerable Bede reports, that there was not any material difference
betwixt S. Austen sent by S. Gregory, and the Brytaine Bishops, save only in
Baptism, and the observation of Easter. Secondly, for that certain it is,
that they had also since S. Austens time, the Mass in the Latin tongue. But to
think, that if they had been once in possession of the service in their own
vulgar Language, that they could have been brought from that without infinite
garboyles; especially, the opposition betwixt them and the English Saxons in
ancient time considered: or, that if any such contention had fallen out, that
it could have been omitted by the curious Pens of our Historiographers, it
were great simplicity once to surmise. Wherefore what follows, but that they
received that custom at their first conversion; which was within less then
two hundred years after Christ? And consequently, that by Bells allowance, and
the common Computation of others; it is sound, Catholic, and Apostolical,
and not any Rotten ragge of a New religion, as this Ragge-maister gableth. And
that on the contrary, to have the public Service in the vulgar tongue, is a
New patch of Protestanisme, fetched from Wittenberge, or that Mart of
Martinistes, the holy City of Geneua.

T. B.
I answer; Super, cap. 16. note the chapter well.
that in the primative and ancient Church, the public Prayers and divine
Service, were every where in the vulgar Tongue. Italy, Spain, Germany,
France, Africa, and other Countries of the West: For in those days, the Latin
tongue was commonly spoken and understood, wheresoever the divine Service was
in Latin: Which is plain and evident by S. Austens Doctrine, in many places
of his works. Brytaines did at their conversion receive the Latin Service,
Aug. confess. lib. 1* cap. 14. de doctr. Christ. lib. 2. cap. 13. de Catechi.
rud. cap. 9. et. in Psalm. 123.128.
first by Eleutherius about the year 179. after Christ; and again by
Gregory, about the 596. year: yet can no more be truly inferred thereupon,
(if we grant the Latin tongue to have been then decayed in Brytaine;) same
only, that the Romans delivered their Church-seruice in the Latin tongue,
(which then was their vulgar Language,) being altogether ignorant of the
Brytaine tongue: Foolish zeal does much hurt to the Church.
and that the Brytaine, for the love they bore to the public Prayers and
Church-seruice, which they received at their conversion to the Christian faith;
did ever after use and retain the same in the Latin tongue, in which they
first received it. 1. Cor. 14. v. 26
All things in the Church, ought to be done to edification; it follows of
necessity, that the Latin usage of the Brytaines in divine Service, was a
Ragge of a New religion; as which was about 179. years younger then the old,
and repugnant to Apostolical doctrine: For, S. Paul spends no less then one
whole Chapter, 1. Cor. 14. per totum.
and that only to prove; that every Nation ought to have their Church-seruice,
in their vulgar known tongue. V. 8.
If the Trumpet (says he) give an uncertain sound, who shall prepare him
self to the War? V. 9.
So likewise you, except ye utter by the tongue manifest speech, how shall it
be known what is sp^ken? for ye shall speak in the air. Again thus. V. 11.
If I know not the meaning of the voice, I shall be to him that speaks, an
Aliant; and he that speaks, shall be an Aliant to me. Again thus: V. 13.
Wherefore, let him that speaks with the tongue, pray, that he may interpret:
V. 14.
For, if I pray with the tongue, my spirit prays; but my understanding is
without fruit. Where I wish the Reader to observe with me; that the Spirit in
this place, is taken for the spiritual gift of Tongues, as S. Chrysostom upon
this place, Chrysostom. in 1. Cor. hom. 35. Theodoretus, in 1. Cor. 14. Pho^ius,
ibide^.
does witness. S. ^heophilact, is consonant to S. Chrysostom. He calls the
Gift, the Spirit; says Theodorus, My Spirit prays, that is, my spiritual
Gift to speak with Tongues, says Pho^us. Again thus: V. 16.
If thou bless with the Spirit, how shall he that occupies the room of the
unlearned, say, Amen, at the giving of thanks, seeing he understands not
what thou says? Again thus: V. 19.
I had rather speak five words with my understanding in the Church, that J
may instruct others, then ten thousand words in (an unknown) tongue. Again
thus: V. 26.
Let all things be done to edification. Jesuit gableth as a lying pratler,
while he impudently avouches; that by Bells allowance, the Latin use in
Church-seruice, (where the people understand it not,) is found, Catholic, and
Apostolical. For, Bell has plainly proved it, to be unsound, Profane, and
Diabolical; as also, that the use of public Service in the vulgar Tongue,
came neither from Wittenberge, nor Geneua; But from, the Primitive,
Apostolical, and succeding Churches, for many hundred years together.
Whosoever shall with a single eye, and sound judgment, peruse the Sixteen
chapter afore-going, Survey part. 3. cap. 10. page 477.
and join my Survey with it, can not but clearly behold as in a Glass of
Crystal, the truth to be as I have written. Lyran. in. 1. Cor. 14.
Lyranus a famous and great learned Papist, in his learned Commentaries upon S.
Paul's Epistles, does so plainly and so constantly affirm; that in the
Primative Church, the public Prayers and all other things, were in the
vulgar Tongue; as none that shall read him seriously, can possibly stand in
doubt thereof. Yea, S. Basil avouches expressly, that the Egyptians, Basil.
in ep. ad cler. Neocaesar ep. 62.
the Lybians, the Thebanes, the Palestines, the Arabians, the Phaenicians the
Syrians, and generally all Christian Nations, of what Language soever they
were, had their common Prayers and Service, in their vulgar Tongue. But our
Rhemishes object S. Paul's words against S. Paul, in this manner. Rhem. in 1
Cor. 14. v. 14.
Also when a man prays in a strange Tongue, which himself understands not,
it is not so fruitful for instruction to him, as it be kn^w particularly what
he prayed: Nevertheless, the Apostle forbids not such praying neither;
confessing that his spirit, heart, and affection, prays well toward God,
though his mind and understanding be not profited to instruction, as otherwise
it might have been, if he understood the words: Neither yet does he appoint
such a one, to get his strange Prayers translated into his vulgar Tongue; to
obtain thereby the aforesaid instruction. To this I answer; Chrysostom, and
other Fathers, Mark well this answer.
( Theodoretus, Theophilactus, and Photius,) that S. Paul does not understand
by the word (Spirit) the Heart and Affection; but the Spiritual gift to speak
with Tongues. Rhemistes absurdly expound it, yet could not that serve their
turn; because S. Paul wills to pray not only with Spirit, but also, with
mind and understanding. V. 15.
As also, for that S. Paul in an other text commands expressly, That all
things ^e done in the Church, to edifying. Which is no other Doctrine indeed,
then Christ himself teaches in his holy Gospel: Mat. 15. v. 8.
This people (says he) draws near unto me with their mouth, and honors
me with the lips; but their heart is far from me. V. 13. et V. 28.
that has the gift of Tongues, to pray that he may interpret his strange
tongue himself, or that some other should interpret it, or else to keep
silence in the Church. For this cause does S. Chrysostom constantly affirm;
Chrysostom. in 1. Cor. hem. 35.
that Prayers not understood of him that utters them, are altogether
unprofitable. Lo, S. Chrysostom does very sharply reprove them, that have
the divine Service in a tongue unknown.
Thou see, (says he) how by little and little he is come to this point, that
he declares him to be unprofitable, not only to others, but also to him
self, seeing the mind of such a man is void of fruit: For, if a man speak
only in the Persians Language, or in any other strange Tongue, and do not
understand those things which he speaks, he shall be to himself, as he that
understands not the meaning of the voice. This, and much more to the like
effect, says S. Chrysostom, of those that had the gifts of Tongues, and
understood not what they spoke.

What think you (sir Friar) would he have said, if he had heard the unlearned
Papists, babbling on their Beads and Primers, what they did not understand?
Nay, if he had heard that, which now adays is very frequent among the
unlearned Papists, both men and women; how they choppe and change, clippe and
mangle the words; so as they either have a contrary or ridiculous sense, or
else plain none at all; but stand as Ciphers and Voces non significatiuae: For
this is a truth so well known, as it can not without blushing be denied; that
many popish Priests have been so ignorant, that they neither understood their
Portesses, nor their Missals, nor their Absolutions; no, nor yet the words of
Baptism. Hence sprang this curious question, even among the Popish
Schoolmen; viz. If the Child were truly Baptized, when the ignorant
Baptizer did utter the words in this manner. Ego to baptizo, in nomine Patria,
et Filia, et Spiritui Sancta: In brief, the Popish Council of Lateran under
Pope Innocentius the third, Conc. Later. sub Innoc. 3. cap 9. A.D. 1215.
decreed flatly, and strictly commanded all Bishops, who within their
jurisdictions had Nations of diverse Tongues, Rites, and Manners under one
Faith, to provide meet men to celebrate divine Service unto them, according to
the diversity of their Rites and Languages. By which Popish Decree, it is
clear and evident, that four hundred years are not yet expired, since the
Pope approved public Service in all vulgar Languages.

B. C.
The Minister very profoundly scoffeth both at other parts of the Mass, and
also at these following; writing thus. Gregory added the Kyrie eleyson;
Telesphorus, Gloria in excelsis Deo; Gelasius, the Collectes; Hieronymus, the
Epistle and Gospel: The Creed was received of the Nicene Council: Pope
Sergius, the Agnus Dei. After this, he concludes both of these and others,
which he there mentions; as the Introite, Halleluia, the Commemoration of the
Dead, Incense, and the Pax, in this manner. This being so, I can not but
conclude; that every patch and piece of the Romish Faith, is but a Rotten ragge
of the New religion. So earnest he is, to make every piece of the Mass a
Rotten ragge, that he has also made many parts of their own Communion-booke
Patches and Pieces, and Rotten rags: In which, Kyrie eleyson, Gloria in
excelsis, the Collectes, Epistle and Gospel, Nicene Creed, and Agnus Dei, be
found no less, then in our Masse-bookes.

T. B.
I answer; first that some of the Patches of the Popish Mass hee^e recited,
are Heretical, some Superstitious, See Survey, et supra, cap. 23.
some Ridiculous, as I have elsewhere proved at large. Secondly, that the
Kyrie eleyson, the Epistle and Gholpell, Gloria in excelsis, Nicene Creed,
Agnus Dei, and the Collects which our Church uses, are all wholly contained in
the holy Scriptures; and consequently, they are damnable in the Popish Church,
though commendable in ours: For, we finding them in holy Writ, use them
according to S. Paul's rule, 1. Cor. 14. v. 26.40.
in that behalf: But the Papists profane them many ways. First, because they
prohibit their use in all vulgar Tongues. Secondly, because they teach the
people erroneous Doctrine, laboring to persuade them every where, Things good
in their own nature, are profaned in the popish Mass.
that they may not have their public Prayers and Service, in their known
vulgar Tongues. Thirdly, because they abuse them superstitiously many ways:
For they must say the Epistle in one corner of the Alter; the Gospel, in the
other; the Creed, in the midst; and so forth. The rest, they may learn of
Bishop Durand, the Patron of all Popish Superstition. To which I add for a
superstitious merriment; That neither the Layicall people, None but popish
Priests may say, Dominus vobiscu^.
nor yet their Popish Deacons in their devout Prayers, may for ten thousand
pounds once say and pronounce these words, ( Dominus vobiscu^:) The words do
signify, The Lord be with you: And for all that, Popish Deacons may not say,
The Lord be with you.
the Pope being as Superstitious as Superstition it self, does strictly forbid
all Deacons to pronounce the said words, until they be made popish Priests.

This in brief is my answer; viz. that Kyrie eleyson, Gloria in excelsis,
Agnus Dei, the Epistles and Ghospels, with the Nicene Creed and Collectes, are
all lawfully used in our Church: but most shamefully abused in the Popish
Church. They are most Christian and commendable, as they are in them selves
absolutely considered; but yet most damnable, while they are superstitiously
abused, and against Gods Commandment by his Apostle given us; 1. Cor. 14. v.
16.40.
which strictly requires all things in the Church-seruice, to be done to the
peoples edification.

B. C.
I omit here, B.C. page. 140.
how falsely and blaspheamously he concludes every piece of the Mass, to be
Rotten rags: For, are the words of Consecration, the most essential part
thereof; which came not from any man, but from the institution of Christ
himself; as also the Pater noster, Rotten rags: Who durst say it, but sir
Thomas.

T. B.
I answer; Mark well this reduplication.
(mark well this reduplication,) is a Rotten ragge of the New Religion. Mat.
26.27. Mar. 14.22. Luke. 22.19. 1. Cor. 11.24.
a word of his own invention; especially, in a matter of so great weight and
consequence? It is a common maxiome received of all Divines generally, as well
of Papists as of others; that no inferior has power over the Law of his
superior: And consequently, that the Pope has no power to add, diminish,
choppe, or change, any word of Christ's sacred Institution; unless he either
be God, or at least equal with him. This is my body,) came not from Christ, as
they are a part of the late Romish Mass. I prove it soundly; Because our
Savior Christ did not utter them, until he had blessed and consecrated the
Bread: For doubtless, if it be true, as it is most true, because the Truth it
self has spoken it; that Christ had blessed and consecrated the Bread, Math.
26.27. Luke 22.19.
before he uttered the same words; it follows of necessity, it cannot be
denied; that they are not the words of Consecration, as the Papists grossly
and fondly do imagine: For in Christ's holy Institution, many things went
before the words of Popish supposed Consecration. First, he took the Bread:
Secondly, he blessed it: Thirdly, he brake it: Fourthly, he gave it to his
Disciples: Fifthly, he commanded them to take and to eat it: All which being
done in order, he uttered the Popish so supposed Consecration words. Mass and
Communion are all one, in the true sense and meaning.
So then, seeing in that Mass which Christ instituted, (for I receive as well
the word ( Mass) with the Latin Fathers, as the word ( Liturgy) with the
Greek Doctors, in their true sense and meaning, these words ( Hoc est corpus
meum) were not the words of Consecration; it follows by a consequence
inevitable, that the popish Mass, in which they are made the words of
Consecration, is a false forged Mass, and the New religion in very deed.

Confirmatio prima.
This Doctrine thus delivered, may be confirmed many ways: First, because the
best learned Papists are at their wits end, and put to their best and last
trumpe; what they shall think, say, or write of the effectiue words of popish
Consecration: For, the famous popish Bishop and great learned Doctor Josephus
Angles, even in that Book which he dedicated to the Pope him self; relates
four several popish opinions, concerning this present Subject: These are his
words, borrowed of Alexander and Aquinas. Joseph. Angles, in 4. sentent. part.
1 p. 102.
Prima est Innocentij, asserentis per potestatem excellentiae, quam Christus
alligatam sacramentis minime habebat, panem in suum corpus conuertisse; deinde
vero dedisse illud Apostolis, dicendo, hoc est, etc. Secunda opinio affirmat
consecrasse quibusdam verbis nobis ignotis, quando benedixit panem, et non
quando dixit, hoc est. etc. Tertia opinio tuetur illa forma Christum
consecrasse, verum occulte, scilicet, quando benedixit panem, deinde public
illa vsum fuisse, vt alios formam consecrandi doceret. Quarta opinio tenet,
quando verba haec, hoc est, etc. protulit, simulque factam fuisse
benedictionem: Pope Innocentius holds the first opinion, that Christ by the
power of excellency, (which in him was not tied to the Sacraments,) converted
the Bread into his body; and then gave it to his Apostles, saying; This is my
Body. etc. The second Opinion holds, that Christ Consecrated the Bread with
certain words to us unknown, when he blessed the Bread, not when he said.
This is my Body. The third Opinion affirms; that Christ did Consecrate with
that form of Words, but secretly, when he blessed the Bread, and after used
the same form of words to instruct others. Mark the uncertainty of popish
Consecration.
The fourth Opinion holds, that Christ did Consecrate, when he spoke these
words, (This is my Body,) and that the blessing was done at the same time*
Behold here the mystery of profound Popish divinity. I would not pity his
case, who being in the midst of a great Fire, would not come out to hear it:
But I pity the case of silly ignorant Papists; who hazard and adventure
their salvation, in believing such a fond and uncertain Religion.

Secondly, because by popish Religion, Confirm. 2.
when the Priest holds the Host over his head, then the silly Papists must
adore the same as the everliving God. And for all that, even by popish Faith
and Doctrine, the popish so termed Host, may only be a piece of mere Bakers
bread. I prove it sundry ways: First, because Sotus that great learned popish
Schoole-man, Sot. apud Angels in 4. s. p. 102.
(surnamed for his deep Learning, Doctor Subtilis,) holds, and constantly
defends; that it is uncertain, whether the Bread be transubstantiated into
Christ's body, or no, by these words of popish Consecration, (This is my Body.
Ios. Angl. in 4. s. p. 103.
) Secondly, because by popish Faith, the Bread is not made Christ's body,
unless the Priest have intention so to make it: But doubtless, sundry cases
and causes may fall out to take away the Priests intention; and so the silly
people shall commit Idolatry, while they adore a piece of Bread for the living
GOD. Thirdly, because Caietanus that famous Cardinal and learned popish
Schoole-doctor, Apud 10. Angl. in 4. s. p. 144.
affirms resolutely and boldly; that no Text in the whole Gospel proves
effectually, that these words (This is my Body,) must be understood properly.
But doubtless, if this be true, which the learned Cardinal of Rome avouches
to be most true; the silly Papists must perforce be Idolaters, while they adore
the popish Host in the popish Mass. And therefore does the popish Bishop
Angles, Iosep. Angles vbi supra.
give his Reader this grave advise; Caut^ legendum esse Caietanum: Caietane
must be read warily. For indeed by Caietanes opinion, the adoring of the popish
Bread-god, Angl. vbi supra. p. 105.
is flat Idolatry. Fourthly, because in the consecration of the Wine, the
Priest (as Josephus Angles tells us,) may have Perue^sam intentionem, a
perverse intention, and so not consecrate at all. For, the Papists agree about
their Real presence in their popish Mass, like Dogs girning and fighting
for a Bone; albeit it be the most essential part of their Mass, and
consequently of all popish Religion. Fifthly, because they have added one word
of their own forge and invention, to the words of Christ's sacred Institution;
to weet, the word ( enim) which signifies, for. S. Matthew, S. Mark, Mat.
26.27. Mar. 14.22. Luke 22.19. 1. Cor. 11.24.
S. Luke, and S. Paul, have all four delivered the express words of Christ's
sacred Institution; and for all that, not one of them does so much as once name
the word ( enim.)

Quarto prin^ipaliter.
Fourthly, that albeit there be some apparent color of truth, in that which
our Jesuit says of the Pater noster; yet will the same after due examination
thereof, tend wholly to the confusion of the Pope, and all his popish Vassals.
I therefore answer, that though the Pater noster in it self, and according to
Christ's Institution, be most holy, pure, and religious; yet is the same by
superstitious abuse in popish Mass, become morally; profane, impure, and
irreligious: I prove it by three several and irrefragable reasons. is
mangled, maimed, and bereaved of a chief part of the integrity thereof. For,
as he that clippeth the Kings Coin, is thereby a Traitor to an earthly King:
even so he that clippeth or curtalleth Gods sacred Word, is thereby a Traitor
to God the King of Heaven. And consequently, seeing the Pope in his idolatrous
Mass, has curtalled the Pater noster, Deuteronomy. 4.2. Deuteronomy. 5.32. Deuteronomy. 12.32.
Revel. 22.18.
taking from God his Kingdom, his Power, and his Glory, (which three are
plainly comprised in that original Pater noster, which Christ did institute;)
it follows by an inevitable illation and necessary consequence; that the
Pater noster, as it is profaned in the popish Mass, is become a Ragge of the
New religion. 1. Cor. 14. v. 27.
contrary to Apostolical doctrine. Pater noster in the popish Mass, (mark
well my words,) is made as it were a slave to Satan, and to serve Idolatry;
even against the everliving God, to wait and attend upon the popish Bread-God:
And so the Pater noster, which before was pure and Evangelical; is now by
popish Superstition, become impure and Diabolical. But some will here demand,
how the Pater noster does serve Idolatry? To whom I answer, that every thing
in popish Mass, is mere accidental, (as the Jesuit has freely granted,)
the popish Real presence only excepted; to weet, the popish so supposed Dagon
or Bread-god. 1. Sam. 5.2.
And consequently, all the rest in popish Mass, must perforce be designed, for
the furtheraunce, honor, and service, of the said popish Dagon or Bread-god.
Which service, See my Survey, the Downfall, and the Jesuits Antepast.
I have elsewhere soundly proved, and plainly convinced, to be very flat
Idolatry. Neither ought this to seem strange to the Reader: for, as holy
Words in Coniurations, Theftes, Robberies, Treasons, and the like, are by the
abuse profaned, and morally become unholy: even so the holy words of the
Pater noster, are in the popish Mass profaned and become unholy. They are
referred to a wicked and idolatrous end: 1. Cor. 10.31. Romans 16.27. Ier. 9.24.
Psalm. 115.1. Gal. 1.5. Ephesians. 1.12.
from whence all moral acts receive their specification; as all learned
Papists grant. But the everliving God is, and ought to be the end of all: and
consequently, whatsoever is referred to any other end, the same is thereby
profaned ipso facto.

B. C.
The Protestants object, how we make the Mass the Sacrifice of the New
testament, B.C. page 140.
to have been ordained by Christ himself; when as Durandus and others, note at
what time, and who they were, that composed the parts thereof: When as neither
Durandus, nor any other make the essential and very substantial part of the
Mass; that is, the words of Consecration, to have come from any other, then
the Son of God. But they speak of the accidental parts thereof; to weet,
either devout Prayers, or Ceremonies; which we willingly grant to proceed from
the institution of Christ's Church.

T. B.
I answer; Friar gives both the Pope and Popery, a deadly wound, while he
tells us, that Durandus and others, note at what time, and who they were,
that composed the parts of their popish Mass. Jesuit makes one only
essential part of their popish Mass; Accidens potest adesse et abesse, citra
subiecti interitum.
that is, the words of Consecration; he grants that all the rest be
Accidental, and so may be taken away from the same. To which Doctrine, I very
willingly subscribe; assuring the Jesuit, that they and we shall soon agree,
if the Pope will thus reform their Mass, in abolishing all the accidental
parts here so named, from the same enim) in the consecration of the Bread, to
be either of Man's institution, or else the Devils* Thomas of ^^quine, Apud
Joseph. Angles, in. 4 ^. part. 1. page 151.
Dur^n^, and other learned Papists, do constantly affirm; that God can not
by his divine power, Act. 3.11.
cause one and the same body to be in diverse places at once. And consequently,
Chistes be dy^ flesh, blood, and bones, in the popish Mass.
that our Jesuits must either deny Christ's body to be in Heaven, contrary to
the express words of holy Scripture; or else, that Christ's body, his flesh,
blood, and bones, can not be in their popish Mass; or thirdly, that the words
of Popish Consecration, came from some greater power then is in God: which for
all that, no Papist dares to avouch. Josephus Angles, that famous popish
Bishop and learned Schoole-doctor, whose express words are these. Ios.
Angl. in 4. s. part. 1. page 104. concl* 1.
Forma consecrationis Calicis, qua Romana vtitur Ecclesia, est sufficiens;
traditur enim ab Euangelistis: et verba qua ab Ecclesia interpo^untur, scilic^t
nou^ et a^erni testaments, misterium fidei, forma qua Christus consecrauit*
sensum handmutan^: The form of the Consecration of the Chalice or Cup, which
the Church of Rome uses, is sufficient; for it is delivered by the Evangelist:
and the words which the Church interlaceth; to weet, of the new and eternal
Testament, the mystery of Faith, do not change the sense of the form, in
which Christ did consecrate. Thus writes Bishop Angles, plainly insinuating
to his Readers; that the Church of Rome uses an other form of Consecration,
then Christ himself did use: And consequently, Lo, Popish Mass is the New
religion
that the words of Consecration used in the Romish Church, came not from the
Son of God: Ergo, the Romish form of Consecration, is a Ragge of the New
religion. Ios. Angles, vbi supra, page 104.
which be the precise words of their popish Consecration, although that be the
most principal and the very essential part of popish Mass; and consequently
of all popish Faith and Religion. I prove it most evidently, because Bishop
Angles rehearses four several opinions, concerning this precise Article of
popish Faith: these are his express words. Ios. Angles, vbisupra, page 104.
Quatuor sunt opiniones: Prima S. Thomae, qui omnia praedicta verba dicit esse
de essentiaformae: Secunda opinio est Alexandri, D. Bonauenturae, et Durand^,
qui affirmant de necessitate consecrationis Calicis esse haec sola verba;
scilicet, hic est sanguis meus: Tertia opinio dicit haec verba, scilicet, hic
est sanguis meus, qui pro ^ultis effundetur in remissionem peccatoru^, esse de
necessitate consecrationis, praetermissis alijs verbis, quae ab Ecclesia Romana
adduntur; qua forma vturtur Graeci: Quarta opinio est Scoti, qui ait de haec
quastione nihil certitudinalitor esse nobis traditum. There be four opinions:
S. Thomas holds the first, who avouches all the aforenamed words to be of
the essence of the form: The second opinion is Alexanders, Bonauentures, and
Durandus; who affirm, that these only words, are of the necessity of the
consecration of the Chalice or Cup; to weet, This is my blood: The third
opinion affirms these words* ( This is my blood, which shall be shed for many
for remission of sins) to be of the necessity of Consecration; not the other
words, which the Church of Rome adds to them. Scotus the popish Doctor
Subtilis, holds the fourth opinion; auouching, that they know not certainly,
what to hold or think of this matter. This is the best popish Divinity, for
the most essential part of all Popery; that the best learned Papists, are
able to afford us; so as every child is well able to discern, that the now
Romish Faith, is the New religion.

B. C.
B.C. page 141.
What does Bell, and such like Ministers, that deride the Ceremonies and parts
of the Mass, but mock and mow at their own Communion-booke and parts
thereof, being borrowed from us, or in what they differ, can show no greater
antiquity, then the late days of Edward the sixth: at what time, diverse
Ministers did hammer them, in the forge of their own invention.

T. B.
Our Church was stained with many errors, until the time of King Edward; when
it was restored to the auncien^ purity of Faith and Doctrine.
This is that, which the Pope and his devoted Vassals, never cease to instill
into the hearts and ears of silly Papists, that so they may falsely persuade
them, that the Popish Faith is the Old, and ours the New Religion. Wherefore,
albeit I have again and again proved most evidently, that the Faith and
Doctrine which the Romish Church this day holds and teaches, is the New
Religion: nevertheless, seeing these words here objected, do in some sort
as it were insinuate to the Reader, the most principal and maine point of the
whole controversy; I am very willing to undergo the pains how great soever,
for the better contentment and full satisfaction of all such as desire to know
the truth. I answer thus; Rome received the true Catholic and Apostolic
Faith, in the days of S. Peter and S. Paul; which S. Paul himself testified,
Romans 1.8.
while he affirmed their Faith to he renowned in the whole world. England
received the same Catholic and Apostolic Faith, from the good Bishops of
Rome, at their first conversion unto the Faith of Christ Jesus. Explico.
Brutani, now called England, first received the Christian Faith, by Faganus and
Deruvianus sent from Elutherius the good Bishop of Rome, at the earnest
request of Lucius then King of Brutani; which was in the year 179. after
Christ. A.D. 179.
After that, Ethelbert the first Christian King of the Saxons, was converted to
the Faith of Christ, by Augustine, Melitus, Justus, and others; sent from
Gregory, an other good Bishop of Rome, in the year 596. after Christ.
Tertio principaliter,
that from that time until these our days, the Bishops of England (now so
called,) have had and kept a continual and uninterrupted succession of
Bishops successively; so sound, firm, and inviolable, as the Church of Rome
is not able to show the like. This succession is so clearly proved in my
Christian Dialogue, See the Christian Dialogue, chap. 4. page 66
as none with right reason can deny the same. England (now so called,) has
ever since the time of King Ethelbert, constantly kept all and every Article of
the old Roman Religion, which she received from the ancient and purer Church
of Rome. No Papist living, is able to give any true instance, against this
irrefragable assertion. Rome: even so has our Church of England through the
sway of the time, been deeply stained and polluted with the same. Henry the
eight, began to be reformed in some Articles of Faith and Doctrine; The
Papists can name no ^ote of the old Roman religion, which is not still kept
in our Church of England.
but the reformation was not perfect, until the reign of King Edward the
sixth: In which Reformation, no New Article of Faith or Religion, is added to
the former; but the former Faith and Religion is only refyned, purged, and
purified; and such Superstition, Errors, and Heresies abolished, as were by
little and little brought into the Church. All and every jot of the old Roman
Religion remains still in our Church permanent and inviolable. See and mark
well my Dialogue chapter, 4. page 92.
But some perhaps will here demand of me, how the Church of Rome did so
degenerate from the ancient Faith, and so foulely corrupt the old Roman
Religion? To whom I answer in this manner. Egesippus that ancient and learned
Father, Apud Eusebius. hist. lib. 3. cap. 32.
that during the life of Christ's blessed Apostles, the visible Church remained
a Virgin, free from all Heresies and corruptions: but after their death,
Errors by little and little crept into the Church, as into a void and desert
House. Franciscus a Victoria, that famous popish Friar and great learned
Schooleman; Victor de potest. Papae et co^c. rel. 4. page 151. et paula^^m. etc.
that by little and little, the Papists were in his time brought to such
inordinate dispensations, and to so miserable a state, that they were neither
able to endure their own griefs, nor remydies assigned by the Pope for the
same. That Clemens, L^nus, and Syluester, were very good Bishops of Rome: but
that the latter Bishops coming after them successively, were wicked men, and
nothing comparable to the old Bishops there. Josephus Angles, that famous
Popish Bishop, Io. Angles, in 2. sent. page 275. part. 2.
even in that Book which he dedicated to the Pope himself; that the Romish
Religion changes every day. Fourthly, with the five famous Popish Doctors,
Johannes Roffensis, Jacobus Alma^nus, Gersonus, Durandus and Michael Baius,
that every sin is mortal of it own nature; and that the old Roman Church
did so believe, until the time of Pope Pius the fifth* that is, See S. R. page
281. et B.C. page 76.
about 1560 years after Christ: at which time. Venial sins were hatched in
the Church of Rome. This is such a constant known truth, as neither the
Jesuit S. R. nor yet the Jesuit B. C. his dear brother, can tell in the
world what answer to frame to the same. Polidorus Virgilius, that famous
Popish Writer; Polyd. lib. 4. cap. 9. page 39.
that the Popish Legistes and Canonistes of latter days, have so wrested the
holy Scriptures to their own sense and liking, as Cobblers do gnaw with their
teeth, and stretch out their filthy skins. Platina the Popes dear Vassal
and trusty Friend; that in his days, the Popedom was brought to that pass,
that who so could go before others in Bribes and Ambition, he only should
have the place. Couarruuias that worthy popish Arch-byshoppe and learned
Canonist; Coua^ruu. to. 1. c. 20. part. 11. in med. col. 1.
that in these days, either the Popes opinion must be defended, or else
Popery can not stand. Lastly, with Josephus Angles, writing to the Popes dear
Holiness; that albeit the old Church of Rome did by the commandment of the
Apostles, Angl. in. 4. s. p. 1. page 133. Conc. Later.
excommunicate all non communicants in the time of the Mass or Liturgy; yet
has the late Church decreed, that it shall be lawful for all Lay persons to
receive the Eucharist only at Easter. Much more I might and could say, Sic
enim Apostoli statuerunt, et sancta Romana tenet Ecclesia.
if I thought not this sufficient. So then, the Faith and Doctrine this day
professed and authorized in this our Church of England, is indeed the old
Roman religion; purged, refined, and restored to the primative and most
ancient purity, in King Edwardes days; in whose happy reign, was the
perfect and complete Reformation: But the Faith and Religion it self, came
from S. Peter and S. Paul; yea, even from Christ himself, their Jesus and our
Jesus, world without end. To whom, with the Father, and the holy Ghost; three
in the distinction of persons, and one in the unity of divine essence, be all
Honor, Majesty, Power, Glory, and Dominion, now and evermore. Amen.

A Caveat to the Christian Reader.
THE masked Jesuit in his Preface to the Reader, Preface, page 15.
labors with might and maine to persuade his Readers, that I dare not
perform that challenge, which I made to the Forerunner: his words are these.
I the meanest of many millions, do accept of his Challenge, and do undertake
to defend, not only these two poynes of Josephus Doctrine, and Pope Martins
Dispensation, which he has singled out as matters important; but also all the
rest, so it may be with that equity and favor, which was granted to the
Protestants in France: Chalenges do occupy no place: they are adjectives,
which can not stand without subjects.
And upon the same conditions do provoke him with a counter-challenge, to the
defense of his Books. And a little after, he tells his Reader, That he
sendes me as many Challenges, as will stand between Charing-crosse and
Chester; and as many Dares, as will reach from Darby to Darington. To which I
answer in this manner. First, that the Jesuits are accused and charged by
their dear Breathren the popish Secular Priests, with Pride, Ambition,
Covetousness, Coozenage, Theft, Cruelty, Murder, Treason, and all
wickedness that can be named: Yea, of Friar Parsons that traiterous Jesuit,
they give this testimony in particular; viz. by Parsons platformes, Secular
Priests must depend upon Blackwell, and Blackwell upon Garnet, and Garnet upon
Parsons, and Parsons the Priests Bastard upon the Devil. Peruse my Anatomy of
popish Tyranny, and there thou shall find this truth, with great variety of
like matter. Secondly, that in all my Challenges, I require but one only
Condition; which the Jesuit passes over in silence, because he means not to
perform the same: The Condition is this; viz. That the Jesuit which shall
accept the Challenge, The Author still so protests that he will perform his
promise.
must put down his name with his addition in print, and send it to me. Which
if it be once performed during my life, I promised upon my salvation, to do
what in me lies, to procure a false conduct, for the safe coming, safe
abiding, and safe departure of him (whosoever he be) that shall accept and
undertake the true performance of the Challenge in manner aforesaid. Thirdly,
that the Jesuit not daring indeed to accept the Challenge, and to encounter
me, seeks by fond cauils and shameless euasions, to instill into the ears
and hearts of their silly devoted Vassals, that I will not, because I dare
not, perform my promise. And for the better effecting of their purpose, they
require of me, that which I never promised; yea, that whereof my self am
altogether ignorant, and no way able to perform. For, The Jesuit dares not
dispute, and therefore requires new conditions.
how can I perform that, which I do not know? I must forsooth procure him a
safe conduct, to dispute with that equity and favor, which was granted to
the Protestants in France. Mark for Christ's sake, how feared our Jesuit is,
to accept the Challenge. First, he dares not put down in print, his name and
addition: A trick of Jesuitical or rather Diabolical policy. I must
procure a safe conduct for B. C. Some bloody cut-throate I think he be. Yet I
must not know whether he be a Man or a Monster; whether Pope John the Woman,
or some Devil incarnate of a Popish Nun. Besides this; I must accept of such
slye conditions, as he adds to my Challenge; so as he may be at liberty, to
slip the Halter when, and as he list: Whereby, who sees not, that by all
means he auoydeth to dispute or bicker with me. Fourthly, that the Jesuit
and his Jesuited accomplices, have a long time intended, and still labor by
ungodly and indirect means, to take away my life from me; and so to stop me
from further writing against their rotten Popery. Preface, page 18.
Yea, in his Preface he protests lustily, that he has provided a
Winding-sheete for the shrowding of my Carcass; and that he will with all
speed, make ready my black Funeral. And it seems so in very deed: For upon
the 13. of June instant 1609. even immediately after I had finished this
Catholic Triumph; there came a friendly Letter (but without name) unto my
hands, and a Packet with Silver in it, which the man namelesse, pretended he
had borrowed of me, etc. The circumstaunces were such, ( quae nunc non est
narrandi locus,) that neither my self, nor others, durst open the Packet; as
having apparent inducementes to suspect Poison, Pestilence, or other like
infection Diabolical.

Thus much I thought good in brief to insinuate to the Readers; that they may
thereby see and perceive, how unable the Papists are, to defend their late
vpstart Popery: as who know no better means, but by seeking most cruelly to
murder all such as stand in their way. God make me firm and constant in the
truth; and God defend me, and all professors of his holy truth, from Popish
savage cruelty: and in the end, bring us to endless felicity, Amen, Amen.

FINIS.

