A SHORT TREATISE OF DEATH IN SIX CHAPTERS.

Together with the aenigmatick description of old age and death written
Ecclesiastes 12 Chap. exponed and paraphrased in English Meetre.

Written by Mr. WILLIAM MORRAY Minister of GODS Word.

PSALM. 90.12. LORD teach us to number our days.

hourglass skull memento mori

Vive memor lethi, fugit hora. EDINBVRGH. Printed by John Wreittoun. Anno DOM.
1631.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE AND WORTHY LADY, DAME AGNES MORRAY, MISTRESS OF
STORMONTH.
MADAME,
AFter that I had received some wounds in^^ the house of my friends, Zach 13.6
I contracted much melancholy, which brought upon me so great sickness and
weakness, 2 Cor. 1.9
that I received in my self the sentence of death: In the which estate your L.
may easily consider, that such a man as I, both should and would have deep
meditation of death, and so indeed I had, being resolved to die at that time:
yet it was the goodwill of GOD to continue my life, which has continued since
that time, some six years or more: therefore I thought it was good for me to
make better preparation against the next assault of that enemy, which to all
true Christians (as witnesses the Apostle) is the last enemy: 1 Cor. 15.26
and so I set my self to recognosce both my terrors and consolations in that
first conflict, for remedy against the one, and confirmation of the other. I
read in Scripture, in good Christian men's works, and in Heathen writers, so
much as could come to my hand concerning death; and gathered the same together
as I thought meet for my purpose mixing them in this treatise, as you may see:
The truth is, my first intention in writing, was only to revise the same for
mine own use: but after that I did let some of mine acquaintance see it, men
learned and fearing GOD, who told me, I did not well to obscure it, seeing it
might do good to others, I gave way to their counsel, and remembered the
common axiom, Bonum quo communius eo melius. The natural gift that I have of
utterance* being more Laconick than Atticke, I have used in writting hereof:
yea, the shortness not only of sentences; but of purpose also I purposely
affectate in treating of this subject Death, yet laboring to be plain: for I
think, if either information, or consolation concerning death might be well
contryved in as few short aphorisms, as there be letters in an A, B, C: it
were the better both for the mind and memory of the patient in that agony.

Now the reasons wherefore I have dedicated this little treatise to your L:
are: first, because I have this honor to be your L. kinseman, and of your
surname. Secondly, because for honor, virtue; viz. Piety, charity,
sobriety, I esteem more of your L. than any one of my kinsfolk and surname.
Thirdly, because your L. is not ashamed to profess, I was the man who first
taught you the rudiments of religion, to make you think of the way how to live
well. Now I pray GOD that the reading, and meditation of this treatise may be a
mean to help your L. to die well, I think it needless to put a longer
Epistle before so little a Book, least the head should be bigger than the
body, and so the birth monstrous. So I rest,

Your H. Cousine to serve you in the LORD, Mr. WILLIAM MORRAY.

AD GVLIELMVM MORAVIVM VERBI DIVINI APVD CARALIENSES PRAECONEM, APPRIME
ILLVSTREM.
BIS denos cum laud gregem, and sex insuper annos
Pavisti, illustris praeco, liquore sacro.
Optima trivisti celebris sic tempora vitae
Iucieio ambiguum major an ingenio.
Nescio quis maeror pullum statione gravisque
Invasit morbus, detinuitque diu.
Hinc excita tibi prodit meditatio mortis
Seria, post cineres non peritura tuos.
Si languor, morbique graves producere fructus
Hos valiant; quales ederet ergo saluit
ROB. CRAFORDUS, alias Lunnaeus.

AD EVNDEM, ET LECTOREM,
HIC liber est cultus labor vtilis, optimus Author,
Sancta verecundo verba lepore refert.
Perlege, and invenies qua tu sis morte beatus,
Morte docet vitam vivere, morte viam.
Si cupias mortis sanctae simulachra tenere,
Quae Domino placeant, collige monstrat iter.
Vt legi, obstupui, perpendens singula mente,
Inveni, Ambrosio rore and odore fragrant.
Et cellas inopum, turres regumque superbas
Pallida mors pulsat, limina nulla timet.
Ast hac morte potes, non mortis vincta timere,
Si been, si sancte singula cord premas.
Vndas majoris somni, stygis atque perennis
Tu fluctus spernes, cum legis hunc Mora vum.
Haec paucis docuit, rimeniur singula, dices
Stigmare quam sancto, condere mente vola.
Macte diu felix, qui vitae limina lustras,
Per mortis varios, per vada pura gradus.
Vade liber Moravi, preconia funde per orbem
Laudis, quae scripsit dicere ne pudeat.
Buccina si Buchanani esset, si vena Maronis,
Encomium nequeo quod meret exprimere.
Quique To^em carpsit, quod tauri cornua fronti
Imposuit, non is quod reprehendat habet.
DAVID MAXUELLIUS.

The contents of this treatise.
CHAP. 1. Of the meditation of death. Chap. 2. What death is, and of the causes
of natural death. Chap. 3. Of the fear of death. Chap. 4. Remedies and
comforts against the fear of natural death. Chap. 5. Remedies and comforts
against the fear of death, which proceeds from ignorance, infidelity, or
despair. Chap. 6. Of the desire of death, and how we may die both peaceably
and well.
A SHORT TREATISE OF DEATH.
The first Chapter, Of the meditation of death.
THE often meditation of death is both necessare, and profitable to make us live
well, and die well. First, because there is nothing more sure than that we must
once die: and it is most uncertain, how, when, or where we shall die. An
Ancient says well, Nemo tam divos habuit faventeis,
Seneca in Traged.
Crastinum vt possit sibi polliceri.


That is to say, The Gods to none such favor give,
They promise may the morn to live.


Therefore we should meditate often of death, always preparing us for it,
according to the counsel of the Poet, Inter spem, curamque, timores inter and
iras,
Omnem creed diem tibi diluxisse supremu^.


That is to say.

Amidst thy hope, Horat. Epist. 1.
thy care, thy fear, thy wrath,
Think every day thy last, look for thy death.
Qui non vult hodie, cras minus aptus erit,
That is, This day who is not ready,
the morn shall less be. Ovid.



In actions which are both of difficulty and weight, we draw to perfection by
often use. It is an hard matter to die either willingly or well: the errors
whereof may turn us to the torments of hels fire, for that which comes last
is everlasting. We ought therefore both tymelie and diligently to search the
step of the dark and stony way of death, that by often meditation of death,
dying often, we may in end die both easily and well.

Cicero says, that the whole life of wise men is the meditation of death.
Somnium Scip.
And it is recorded of the Macedonian King, that he commanded his Page once
every day to come, and say to him. Remember thou art mortal. That holy man
Hieronimus had always in his study besides him a dead man's skull, and running
glass, to keep him in mind of shortness of his life, and certainty of his
death.

Secondly: the often meditation of death is necessare and profitable, to make
us live and die well, because it is a strong bitte and bridle against sin.
Remember thy death, (says Jerome) and thou shall not sin: and GOD speaking
by Moses of his people Israel, says, Deuter. 32.29
O that they were wise, then would they understand this, they would consider
their latter end: and JEREMY, Lament. 1.9.
Her filthiness is in her skirts she remembered not her last end: Eccles. 11.9
and SOLOMON (scorning the folly of youth) says, Rejoice O young man in thy
youth, and let thy heart cheer thee in the days of thine youth, and walk in
the ways of thine heart; and in the sight of thine eyes: then he adds, (as
water to their wine) but know thou, that for all these things GOD will bring
thee to judgment.

Thirdly: often meditation of death causes us to contemn this short vain
life, wherein all is vanity and vexation of Spirit, which is like to a dream,
a shadow, a vapor: like to the way of a ship in the sea, or like to an arrow
shot forth of a bow, which both, when they are past, their trace is no more
seen: and man in this life is like the flower of the field, which sor a time
is green, but afterward withers and falls down: so I may say with one,
Vita quid est hominum, nisi vallis plena malorum.
Principio, medio, fine dolenda suo.


That is to say, What is man's life? a valley full of ill,
Beginning, mids, and end lamenting still.


And with an other, What if a day, or a month, or a year,
Crown thy delights with a thousand wished contentings? Essex lament.

Can not the chance of a night, or an hour
Cross thy delights with as many sad tormentings?


Finally: this often meditation of death prepares us for it, and armeth us
against it, so that it comes not to us unawares, as a thief in the night: but
we look for it, we watch and pray for strength and comfort in the hour of
it: and when it comes, will say with old Simeon, Now LORD thou let thy
servant depart in peace: and also with David and CHRIST, In thy hands O LORD I
commend my Spirit; and with the first Christian Martyr Stephen, LORD JESUS
receive my Spirit.

The second Chapter. What death is, and of the causes of natural death.
IN holy Scripture death is taken in diverse senses: as first, and most
properly for the dissolution of soul and body. Secondly: for the separation of
soul from GOD his grace and favor. Thirdly, for the separation both of body
and soul from GOD his grace and glory eternally.

Death then being taken into the first sense, is commoun to all mankind, since
the fall of Adam and Evah, our first Parents, as witnesses the Apostle,
saying, As by one man, sin entered in the world, Romans 5.12
and by sin death; and so death went over all men, for all men have sinned.

In the second sense, death since the fall of our first Parents is also common
to all mankind, until they be quickened again by the Spirit of regeneration:
as testifies this same Apostle, saying, And you has he quickened, who were
dead in sins and trespasses. Ephesians. 2.1.


In the third sense: Death is only proper to the Reprobate: and it is called in
holy Scripture the second death, as posterior to the first, which we call
natural death, from this death, there is a promise of GOD, that all such shall
be delivered, Revel 20* 6
who are partakers of the first resurrection, that is, of true faith and
repentance.

Now in order of time, death in finne is first, that is to say, the separation
of soul and body from GOD his grace and favor: Natural death which is the
separation of soul and body is next: Everlasting death which is the separation
of both soul and body from the grace and glory of GOD for ever, last. The
first sort of death is very fearful, (but the fear of it apprehended by
few) because it flows from the wrath of GOD, and is a death in sin, a
spiritual death: yet it is not desperate, for Christ died for us, Romans 4.25
and rose again to justify and sanctify us: And GOD for his sake freely
forgiues our sin, who believe in his Son: his Spirit is given us with his
word and Sacraments, to regenerate and quicken, and at last to perfectly
sanctify us. 2 Cor. 3.18


The second sort of death is also fearful, because in the own nature of it,
it is the punishment of sin: Also because in this dissolution of soul and
body, that have been straightly and long joined together, and acquaint one with
other, as two near and dear friends, they are loath to sunder: So nature
abhors and fears this very natural death: but faith and grace overcommeth
this horror and fear, and makes the true Christians to triumph over death. As
witnesses the Apostle, when he said, O wretched man that I am, who shall
deliver me from this body of death! Romans 7 24.25
I thank GOD through Jesus Christ: And in an other place, O death where is thy
sting? 1 Cor. ^5 55.56.57
The sting of death is sin, and the strength of sin is the Law: But ihanks
be to GOD, who gives us the victory, through our LORD JESUS CHRIST.

The third sort of death is most terrible, because from it there is no
redemption, nor delyverie, if once we be plunged therein: It is therefore
called the second death, the wrath to come, everlasting fire, everlasting
pain, everlasting destruction, from the which, both living and dying we
should labor, and pray to be delivered, seeing we are warned to fly from
the wrath to come: Math. 37
And JESUS CHRIST has delivered all true Christians from thence.

This much of the diverse sorts of death, 1 Thessalonians 1.10
whereof the holy Scripture makes mention.

Now I mind chiefly to speak of natural death which I define: The
dissolution of soul and body: The causes there of are these following: First,
the efficient cause of death is sin; for if man and woman had not sinned,
they should not have died: Thus GOD did signify to our first Parents, by the
tree of life, and the tree of the knowledge of good and evil, which grew in
the midst of the Garden in Eden.

The first was to him a Sacrament or sign, that so long as they continued in
GODS obedience they should live happily: The second was to them a Sacrament or
sign, that so soon as they should transgress GODS commandment they should
die: This is evident of GODS own words to them, which contained a command or
permission, when he said: Of every tree in the Garden you shall freely eat:
Genes. 2 16.17
and an inhibition with a threatening, when he said, But of the tree of the
knowledge of good and evil, thou shall not eat of it: for in the day thou
eatest thereof, dying, thou shall die: Also the holy Apostle affirms, sin
to be the efficient cause of death, Romans 5.12
even that which provoked GOD to punish mankind with death.

Material cause death has none, neither properly formal: As no privation
has either matter or form, as darkness is the privation, or absence of
light, sickness the privation or absence of health: so death is the privation
or absence of life from the body.

The final causes of death are chiefly two: The first is, the manifestation of
GODS justice and truth: His justice in punishing sin; His truth in
executing his own threatening. In the day thou eatest thereof, (to wit of the
forbidden tree) dying, thou shall die: Now albeit this death in the same day,
when they eat of the fruit of the forbidden tree, was not consummat: yet that
same very day it seized upon them: Therefore Seneca says truly, Epist. 24
We part this same very day of our life with death: As the last drop spoils
not the running Glass, but that also which run before; so our last hour,
wherein we cease to live, makes not death alone, but perfiteth it alone.

The other final cause of death was to humble man and woman, whose first
principal sin was pride: therefore GOD told them after they had waxed
proud, and rebellious: Genes. 3.19
Dust thou art and unto dust shall thou return: The consideration hereof made
Abraham humble, when he said, Gen 18 27
Shall dust and ashes speak to my LORD? And Job when he said, Job. 17.14
I have said to corruption thou art my father.

The consideration of death, and of the causes thereof, should teach us, first,
not to marvel that death is fearful to all flesh, it being the separation
of the soul from the body: This made our LORD JESUS CHRIST naturally to fear
death, yet without sin* when he prayed: (...)
Father let this cup depart from me: But to us death is the mo^^ fearful,
because in the own nature of it, it is the just punishment of sin, as
testifies the Apostle, saying, The wages of sin is death.

Secondly, Romans 6.23
This consideration of death, and of the causes thereof, should teach us, not
to murmr or grudge against GOD, when our last hour comes, but meditate
upon GODS justice and truth foresaid. And say with David, I was silent because
thou did it, Psalm. 39 9
which words that godly man Mr. Calvin had always in his mouth, Vide Calvini
vitam.
in the extreme pains of sickness and death.

Thirdly: this consideration of death, and of the causes thereof, should teach
us to abhor pride, and to be humble, following the example of Abraham, Job,
David, Hezekiah; and other holy men of GOD.

Fourthly: this consideration of death and the causes thereof should teach us
to follow the counsel of Solomon, Remember now thy Creator in the days of thy
youth, Eccles. 12.1
whiles the evil days come not, nor the years approach, wherein thou shall
say I have no pleasure in them: that is, before sickness, old age, and death
come upon us, as afterward he expounds.

The third Chapter. CHAP. 3.
Of the fear of death.
THere is a twofold fear of death, whereunto we are subject: one natural,
when we abhor the separation of the soul from the body: and this fear of
death may be without sin: for our LORD JESUS CHRIST, who knew no sin, was
subject thereunto, when he prayed sundry times, and said, Father let this
cup depart from me: and he prayed to him who was able to save him from
death, (...)
and was heard in that which he feared, as the Apostle testifyeth. Also when
we fear it, as it is the punishment of sin, that fear is good, that we may
repent, hope for mercy, and be comforted. This fear of death was in Paul,
when he said, (...)
O miserable man that I am! Who shall delyver me from this body of death?
Against which immediately he was comforted, by meditation of GODS mercy in
CHRIST: and said, I thank GOD through JESUS CHRIST our LORD, etc.

We may also lawfully fear death, because thereby we are depryved of comfort,
in Church, or Commonwealth, which, living, we our self had, or did
communicate to others. Thus did David fear death, Psalm. 6.5
when he said, In death there is no rememberance of thee O Lord! in the grave
who shall give thee thanks? And in an other place, Psalm. 30.9
What profit is there in my blood, when I go down to the pit? Shall the dust
praise thee O LORD? Shall it declare thy truth? This same fear of death was
in Hezekiah, when he said, Isa. 38.11
I shall not see the LORD, even the LORD in the land of the living. I shall
behold man no more with the inhabitants of the world: and this much of the
lawful fear of death.

There is an other kind of fear of death, which is unlawful and sinful, and
therefore to be corrected, striven against, and resisted: this fear of death
proceeds of ignorance, infidelity, or of despair.

Ignorance: when a man thinking upon death, knows not what shall become of
his soul, departing from his body.

This fear of death was in Adrian the Empreour, who a little before his death
spoke these verses, Animula, vagula, blandula,
Hospes, comesque corporis:
Quae nunc abibis in loca?
Pallidula, rigida, nudula,
Nec ut soles dabis jocos.


That is to say, Little, vaging, merry soul,
Body's companion, and guest:
Now to what places shall thou go?
Pale, alrish, naked, in this have;
Neither shall any more,
Make sports as before,


The fear of death which comes of infidelity, is, when a man thinking upon
death, or dying; belieues not in GOD through JESUS CHRIST, for remission of his
sins, and deliverance from the second death which is Hell: To this fear the
children of GOD may be, and have been subject; yet it is an unlawful, and
sinful fear, and comes by Satan his tentation, the conscience of sin,
and weakness of faith: This fear was in David, Psalm. 22.1
when he cried out My GOD! my GOD! why have thou forsaken me? And in
Hezekiah, when he said, Isaiah 38 12.13.
From day even to night will thou make an end of me, etc.

To this fear all those are subject who know there is a GOD, a Heaven, a Hell,
ever while they get the saving knowledge of CHRIST, and believe in him, that
he died for them, and rose again to deliver them from the bondage of Satan,
sin, and death: As testifies the Apostle, saying, (CHRIST) He also took
part of the same, (flesh and blood) that through death he might destroy him,
Hebr. 2 14.15
that had the power of death, that is the Devil: And deliver them who through
fear of death were all their lifetime subject to bondage.

The fear of death that comes of desperation, of all sorts of fear of death
is worst, for there is no remedy against it, if it be total: And final:
yea, it is a heinous sin, for it denies both Gods power and mercy to save a
sinner, and the truth of his promises thereanent: And it is a foolish fear
for often times men and women, giving place to this fear, for fear of death and
Hell, precipitate themself in both, as the examples of Saul, Achitophel,
Judas, and many others prove.

The fourth Chapter. Remedies and comforts against the fear of natural death.
ALbeit (as I have said in the former chapter) there be a sort of fear of
death, which may be without sin, yet there is no sort of fear of death with
out pain and trouble to the patient, as witnesses the Apostle John, 1 John
4.18
saying indefinitly or generally of fear, fear has torment: Therefore
consolations and remedies are to be sought against all sorts of fear of death.

Consolations and remedies against that fear of death, which I called
natural, whereunto all mankind have been, or shall be subject, (CHRIST JESUS
our LORD not excepted) are these following.

The first and most sovereign remedy against the natural fear of death, is
to have faith and confidence in GODS love mercy and truth, according to his
promises. Thus did David comfort himself against this sort of fear of death,
when he said, Though I should walk though the valey of the shadow of death,
Psalm. 23.4
I will fear no evil: for thou art with me: thy rode and thy staff, they
comfort me. So did Simeon comfort himself, when he said, LORD, now let
thou thy servant depart in peace, Luke 2 29.30
according to thy word: For mine eyes have seen thy salvation. So did CHRIST
JESUS our LORD, Luke 22 42
when he said, Not my will but thy will be done: And Father in thy hands I
commend my spirit: which prayers of his the Apostle expounds thus: In the
days of his flesh he offered up prayers and supplications, with strong crying
and tears unto him, Heb. 5 7
that was able to save him from death, and was also heard in that which he
feared.

The second comfort and remedy against the fear of death natural, is to
meditate: First, That the day of death is better nor the day of birth, as
Solomon says, For by death sin is abolished, Eccles. 7.10
and after it we shall sin no more. But by birth we enter into a sinful
life: and by death the body is fred from all sense of misery, and is no more
an instrument active or passive of sin: but by birth our bodies are subject
to the sense of many miseries, and the members thereof made weapons of
unrighteousness to serve sin. Romans 6.13
By death our soul enters unto an happy and eternal life: by birth it
enters unto a miserable and mortal life; therefore death not only is not to
be feared by a Christian, but in some respects is rather to be wished, and
hoped for with joy, for by death we go out of this pilgrimage home to our
father in Heaven, from banishment unto a Kingdom, from prison to a palace,
from darkness to light, from death to life, from dangers unto security, from
labor to rest, from all manner of misery to everlasting felicity.

Next: we should meditate, that it is as great folly to fear death, as to
fear old age: for as old age follows after youth, so death follows after
old age, and the failed tabernacle of the body falls: therefore, as they who
dwell in ruinous houses, study not so much upon the falling of the house, as
how with diligence to get out; so we should be always ready to die, and not
stand amazed with the fear of death.

If therefore we will fear death, we must ever fear it, for there is nothing
more certain than that once we shall die: and nothing more uncertain than
how, where, or when we shall die: so it is a great folly to us, to hold our
selves in the continual torment of the fear of death: Things doubtful are to
be feared, but things certain (as death) to be exspected.

Thirdly: we should meditate, that our life is like unto a ship in voyage by
sea, wherein when we have outsailed our bairne-age, our youth, our old years,
and the best years of old age, then the commoun end of all flesh begins to
kyth, which is death: we take it to be a rock to make shipwreck upon, we are
deceaved, it is not so, but a most quiet port, harborough, or haven, therefore
he that dies soonest, has no more cause to complain, then he who has soon
plied his voyage: yea, he should rejoice, for he dies young whom God loves,
says Meander: and the Prophet says, (...) 57.1
Now consider that righteous men are taken away from the evil to come.

Fourthly: we should meditate, that the day of death is the birth day of
eternal life. In our first birth, our mother with great pain and preasing,
put us forth to this life, and we did cry and weep: no mervaile then, though
in this second birth of death, we have grief and pain, but fear we need
not, more than we did at our first birth.

Fiftlie: we should meditate, that death is commoun to all: Heb. 9, 2
It is appointed to all once to die: and the Poet says, Pallida mors aequo
pulsat pede
Pauperum tabernas, regumque turres.


That is to say.

With equal foot, death knocks at doors
Of poor men's shoppes, and Princes towers.
Why then should we grudge, when death comes to our door? Why should we
seek a privilege to our selves that is granted to none? Nay rather we should
consider, that death after old age is the gathering of ripe fruit falling, or
ripe corn, Job 5.26
unto the barn first, and then to the girnall of God: I go out of this life
as out of an Inn, De senect.
(says Cicero) not as out of my house, for it was given me to abide in, not to
dwell in. By death our soul goes out of prison to liberty, In epist.
says Seneca, and whatsoever we leave behind us after death, is as the
Pilgrims baggage, left behind him when he hasteneth home.

Finaly, We should meditate upon the resurrection of our bodies: So did Job
comfort himself against the fear of death, Job. 19.26
when he said, Though after my skin worms destroy this body, yet shall I
see GOD in my flesh. And the Martyrs were tormented, Heb. 11
and would not be delivered from death, that they might obtain a better
resurrection.

Then shall we sing that song of triumph, O death! where is thy sting? O
grave! 2 Cor. 15.55
where is thy vistorie? Seneca also comfort us against the fear of death,
by this same argument taken from the resurrection, saying, The day shall come
again, which shall repone us in light: and the Apostle Paul saying JESUS
CHRIST shall change our vile bodies, Philip. 3
that it may be fashioned like unto his glorious body.

The fifth Chapter. Remedies and comforts against the fear of death,
proceeding from ignorance, infidelity, or despair.
ADrian the Emperor (of whom I spoke in the second Chapter) was affrayed of
death, because he knew not what should become of his soul after death. Clement
the seventh of that name, when he was dying, said, In speculo Pontifie.
He should shortly try that which all his lyfetime he doubted off, whether
there were any life after this: doubtless this doubting was joined with fear,
proceeding from ignorance, if not from worse. Solomon speaking in the person of
the Atheist, according to the judgment of a natural man, said, Who has
marked the Spirit of man, which has ascended up, and the Spirit of the beast,
Eccles. 3.21
which has descended beneath the earth: And a little before he says, As the
one dies, so dies the other.

This ignorance in a man dying, must be joined with fear: the remedies of
this fear, is the certain persuasion of that which is revealed to us in holy
Scripture: namely, that the soul of man is immortal and eternal, and that
the souls of good men go to Heaven, that is so: namely, first that the soul
is immortal, these holy places of Scripture testify: Genes. 1.27. So GOD
created man in his own image, in the image of GOD created he him, which words
put a difference between mankind, and all living creatures mentioned, created
before, as more excellent than they, because of this immortal soul in their
comely bodies, which even the Ethnic Poet acknowledges, when that he says.

Sanctius his animal mentisque capacius altae
Deerat adhuc, and quod dominari in caetera posset,
That is to say, A creature living more holy than the rest,
More capable also of a higher mind,
Was wanting yet, even one to rule the rest.


And again he says, Pronaque cum spectent animantia caetera terram,
Os homini sublime dedit, Coelumque tueri,
Iussit, and erectos ad sidera tollere vultus.


That is to say.

While other living hang down their head to dust,
To man he gave high countenance, and said:
Look up to Heaven, where once abide thou must,
Behold the Stars above, which I have made.
And GOD said to Abraham, Thou shall go to thy fathers in peace: Genesis 15.15
that is to say, Thy Spirit shall go to the company of the Spirits of the
faithful, thy forbears, when it departs from thy body by death. In that same
book it is said after, And Abraham gave up the ghost, Genesis 25.8
and died and was gathered to his people, this must be understood of his
soul, for his body was not buried among his forbears, but in the burial
place, which he bought in the land of Canaan: and so this speech in holy
Scripture, spoken of godly men, that when they died, they were gathered to
their fathers is to be understood. David says, Psalm. 16.10 Psalm. 26.9
Thou will not leave my soul in the grave: And in an other place: Gather not
my soul with sinners: And in an other place, Psalm. 31.6
Into thy hands I commit my spirit: And in an other: Psalm. 49 15
GOD will redeem my soul from the power of the grave, for he shall receive
me.

Solomon speaking of death, Eccles 12.7
says, Then shall the dust return to the earth as it was, and the spirit
shall return to God who gave it, Mat. 10.28
CHRIST says, Fear not them who kill the body, but are not able to kill the
soul: And in an other place, citing this place of Scripture, I am the God of
Abraham, of Isaac, Math. 22.32
and of Jacob: subjoyneth these words, GOD is not the God of the dead, but of
the living: which words import, that although the bodies of these Patriarchs
were dead, and buried, yet their souls were living: And it is said Lazarus
soul when he dyed, Luke. 16
was carried by Angels to Abraham's bosom: And CHRIST said to the penitent
Thief, crucified with him: Luke. 23 33
To day thou shall be with me in Paradise: And a little after, he Himself
dying, said, Father into thy hands I commend my Spirit. Stephen dying said, Act
5.59 Philip. 1.23
LORD JESUS receive my spirit: And Paul said. I desire to be dissolved and be
with CHRIST: And it is said. Heb. 12, 33
Ye are come to the spirits of just men and perfect, these Scriptures and
others, prove the souls of men and women to be immortal.

The immortality of the soul very Ethnicks did acknowledge, Numb. 23 10.
with Balaam, when he said, Let my soul die the death of the righteous, and
my latter end be as his. Socrates being condemned to die, Vita Socra.
before his death disputed much and well of the immortality of the soul,
amongst his speeches, this was one to his friends: My children GOD will care
for, who gave them to me: when I shall go hence, I shall find friends before
me, like unto you, or better. When Crito his friend asked him after he had
drunk his poison, if he desired to be buried. He answered, Alas what labor
have I lost; that could not persuade Crito that I shall flee away from hence
all whole. Plato wrote a book of the immortality of the soul, And he
believed, that after this world ended men's souls should return to their own
bodies. The Stoickes said, this should be after the consummation of the world
by fire. Cleombrotus when he had read over Plato his book of the immortality
of the soul, Cicero Tusculan. quaest. lib. 1
precipitated himself into the sea, being filled with the desire of that
better life after this, Plut. in vita Catonis.
which Plato described. Cato being resolved to slay himself, red all the day
and night before that same book of Plato. Epist. 103
Seneca in one of his Epistles, has many notable speeches concerning the
immortality of the soul: amongst the which the fear: I shall leave the body
where I found it, I shall deliver my self to GOD: A great and generous thing
to the soul of man, it can suffer no bounds to be prescribed to it, but with
GOD. When Socrates had drunk the poison forced upon him, and had delivered his
garment to his servant, as ready to die, jesting with cry to his friend said:
I pray thee remember to sacrifice a cock to Aesculapius: which was then usual
when a man had drunk a wholesome drink; thereby there was in him no fear of
death.

Christians then should be ashamed to fear death through ignorance, What
shall become of the soul after death? seeing death is inevitable: the fear of
it argues want of fortitude. And this much of the fear of death, which
proceeds of ignorance,

Now follow remedies and comforts against the fear of death, which proceed
from infidelity or despair: Let such as fear death, through infidelity or
despair, imitate the counsel following: Acknowledge all good, help, comfort
to come from GOD: Repent, and be sorry for all thy sins in geuerall, and for
every one in particulare, as thou can remember them, confess them to GOD,
and forsake them, Pro 28.19 Psalm. 32.5 Isa. 28.17
then shall thou sind mercy. Be often and earnest in prayer to GOD for mercy
and comfort, and desist not, albeit thou get no answer; but rather insist the
more, Luke. 18
remembering the doctrine of CHRIST by parables that we should do so: James. 5
Desire the counsel and prayers of the faithful; above all things study to
know CHRIST, and the power of his resurrection, Philip. 3.10
and the fellowship of his sufferings: for CHRIST has swallowed up death in
victory, Isa. 25, 8
so that after this digestion of death, it has lost the sting of it against
all true Christians: yea, CHRIST changed the name of death, and called it a
sleep, to teach us that the nature of death is changed to those that believe
in him, John. 11.11
saying to his Disciples, Lazarus our friend sleeps.

In the true knowledge of CHRIST is our comfort, John 17.3 Act. 4.12
both in life and death: The two Cherubims looked to the Mercie-seare: the two
Testaments looked unto CHRIST: He is the propitiatory that covers the Law,
the Pillar of fire to give light in darkness; the cloud to comfort and
refresh in all temptations: Rely upon the mercy of GOD in JESUS CHRIST, and
resolve to say with JOB, in thy greatest terrors, Job. 13.15
Though he slay me, yet will I trust in him. Read often the holy Scripture,
and meditate thereupon: Be never idle, not too solitary. If melancholy
trouble thee, take physic from a skillful and godly physician: read and
meditate upon GODS promises of mercy to penitent sinners; and consider his
dealing with them, how many sinners he has made righteous, and enemies
friends; and often read and meditate upon these places of Scripture. Exodus 34 4.
Deuter. 4.31. Proverb. 28.3. 2 Chronicles. 7.14. Isaiah 1.18.19.20. Ezekiel. 18.27.
Hosea 14.3.4.5. Psalm. 103.13. Math. 5 6. and 11.28. John. 3.14. Romans 5.20. 2
Cor. 12.9 Romans 16.20. 1. Timoth. 2.4.

Meditate likewayes upon the mercy of GOD to penitent sinners: as Moses,
Aaron, Job, David Solomon, Manasses, Hezekiah, Josiah, Marie Magdalene, the
forlorn son, Peter, the thief upon the Cross with CHRIST, Paul: for these
examples may serve to teach us, though we sin, yet not to go on still, and
proceed in wickedness; also not to despair of GODS mercy more than they:
Romans 10.12
for the LORD is rich over all that call upon him, and repent: therefore no man
ought to despair: for this is a true saying, and by all means worthy to be
received, 1 Timothy 1 15.16.
that CHRTST JESUS came in the world to save sinners, whereby many have
obtained mercy, Math. 9.15
unto the example of them which shall in time to come believe in him unto
eternal life. Mark. 2.17


If Satan or thy own conscience trouble thee with these doubts and objections
following, answer thus.

Object. 1.
My sin is so great, that it can not be pardoned.

Answer.
No sin in it self is so great but it is pardonable, to every one that can
repent: No crime so great, but GODS mercy is greater: yea, the sin against
the holy Ghost can not be forgiven, only because these that fall therein, can
not repent. Hebr. 6.

Object. 2.

I sin daily, and often fall in one and the self same sin.

Answer.
If thou sin daily, repent daily: if thou sin once, twice, 100, 1000 times,
repent as often. He who said, if thy brother offend thee seventie times seven
times, forgive him, will forgive thee all thy sins, if thou repent.

Object. 3.
I can not repent, my heart is so hard. An. GOD calls all men to repentance,
so long as they live in this world, so does he thee: and so long as thou
live, (if thou despise not his bountifulness and patience) he will give
thee repentance before thou die. As for the hardness of thine heart, because
thou feel it, it is an argument of spiritual life: for death corporal or
spiritual makes us loss all feeling.

Object. 4.
I can neither believe, repent, nor cease from sin, albeit I would gladly.

Answer.
Pray with the man spoken of in the Gospel. LORD help my unbelief. Know
also that thy desire is acceptable to GOD if it be unfeigned and constant.

Object. 5.
I am forced now and then to think evil thoughts and blasphemies against GOD,
even against my will.

Answer.
These are not from thee, but from Satan: they are his sins, but thy
crosses: thou shall be forgiven, he shall be rebuked, and punished for them.

Object. 6.
I can not be persuaded that I am one of these whom GOD has chosen to life.

Answer.
Far less can thou be assured that thou art a reprobate: for GOD may give
thee assurance of thine election at thy last hour, and we live more by faith
than feeling: therefore say with JOR, Though he slay me, yet will I trust in
him.

The sixth Chapter. Of the desire of death, and how that we may die both
peaceably, and likewayes well.
THere be only two causes for the which we may lawfully desire to die: The
first is, a longing to be with JESUS CHRIST our Savior: this cause moved Paul
to desire to die, Philip. 3.23
when he said, I desire to depart, and that I may be with CHRIST. The other
causes why we may lawfully desire to die, is, that we may cease altogether
from sinning against GOD, which we can not do, so long as we are in this body
of sin, and of death. This also moved Paul to desire to die, when he said,
Romans 7.24.
O miserable man that I am! who shall delyver me from this body of death? All
desire of death, flowing from other causes, as grief, trouble, pain,
poverty, miscontentment, etc. are all unlawful: for GOD has put us in a
warrefare, and has appointed every one of us a station, which we should
keep as obedient Soldiers, until GOD, our great Captain, and commander call
upon us, and remove us. Wherefore are we to follow the example of Elias, 1
King. 19.14
who out of great grief said: Now LORD take away my life: Nor the example of
Jonas, when he said, It is better to me to die than to live: Ion 4.6
But rather the example of David, Psalm. 101.2
who said: I will behave my self wisely, in a perfect way, until thou come to
me: And above al we should follow the example of CHRIST our Savior, Heb. 12
Who for the joy so set before him, endured the cross, despised the shame; and
is set at the right hand of the Throne of GOD.

Therefore those Ethnicks who commonly are accounted magnanimus, that for
miscontentment slew themselves, as Dido, Lucrotia, Cato, and others, are truly
to be accounted very cowards, that left their station, not keeping their
place, until he that had placed them there had called them from it. Albeit
Seneca gives too great way to a man to kill himself; yet he was better
advised when he said: I esteem most of them who come to death, without hatred
of life, and admits death when it comes, but draws it not upon them

Now that we may die peacablie and well: First, let us often meditate upon
death, following the counsel of Seneca: In epist.
Think ever of death, so shall thou not be affrayed of it: the Poet gives a
reason hereof, saying, Nam levius laedit, quicquid praevidimus ante.

That is to say, The less is every sore, that we have seen before.

And Gregory said well: Death when it comes is overcome, if before it come
it be feared: And Seneca, In epist.
No man receives death gladly, but he who has prepared himself a long time
before it. And in an other place: The entry of the door of death is
troublesome. if we make it troublesome with torment of mind, and a troubled
spirit with fleeting thoughts, coming to it without resolution; by the
contrare, if we come with a calm spirit, death is most like to a sleep when
we fear not.

Next that we may die peaceably and well, follow the counsel of Solomon:
Remember thy Creator in the days of thy youth, Eccles. 12.1
before the days of old age and death come.

Thirdly; that thou may die peaceably and well, strive to walk with GOD, while
thou art living, follow the example of Enoch, Noah, Abraham, so death when it
comes shall do no harm; but thereby shall thou be gathered to thy Father
in peace.

Strive to be godly and righteous, and follow the example of Simeon, and the
LORD shall let thee depart in peace.

Be not like Balaam, who wished to die the death of the righteous, but would
not live the life of the righteous: for he received not his wish. But lay thy
account, that thou live now that thou may die, and art content to die when
GOD pleases, that thou may live happily for ever: live now the life of the
righteous, and keep a good conscience so far as thou can, and thou shall die
in the LORD, be blessed, rest from thy labors, Rev. 14.13
and thy good works shall follow thee.

Now if thou sin, (as no man living sins not) and be sensible of thy
sins and manyfold infirmities, and imperfections: then be instant in prayer
to GOD, in the name of his Son JESUS CHRIST that he would forgive thee thy
sins, which thou have committed, supply that which thou have omitted,
restore what thou have lost, heal what is sick in thee, cleanse what is
unclean in thee, inlighten what is dark in thee, assuage that which swells
in thee, inflame that which is quenched in thee, repare that which is broken in
thee, recover what is neglected by thee, amend what is gone astray in thee,
make plain which is rugged in thee, restrain that which is curious in thee,
call home again that which wandereth, place aright all which is out of order,
sanctify that which is whole by his holy Spirit, until he crown grace in
thee with glory hereafter.

To conclude this point, one says truly, Kemps imitation of CHRIST.
he who hates the world perfitely, and follows godliness zealouslie, and
will be admonnished willingly: and indevoureth to mend his life seriously,
and can obey his Superiors gladly, and deny himself thoroughly; and take
affliction for CHRIST JESUS sake patiently, gives notable tokens he will die a
good man.

Finally, that thou may die both peaceably and well: In the midst of the
agony of death, Psalm. 51.5
say with that Princely Prophet DAVID, Into thine hands O LORD 1 commend my
Spirit: Luke 23 46
and with our Savior JESUS CHRIST, Father in thine hands 1 commend my Spirit;
Act. 7.59
and with STEVEN, LORD JESUS receive my Spirit. If at that time Satan, or
thine own conscience trouble thee, in respect of thy guiltienesse of sins,
and of GODS justice, close thine ears at these cries in the agony of death,
and answer nothing, but commend thy cause unto GOD: Close lykewayes thine eyes
in the hour of death, and CHRIST shall send his Angels to convoy thy soul.

This is the counsel of Mr. Luther, If thou feel great pain in thy body
before thy dissolution, then say with the Prophet DAVID, I will hold my tongue
O LORD, Psalm. 36.9
because thou have done it: This was Mr. Calvin's practice, when he was dying.

GOD grant we may so live, that in the hour of death we may rejoice, through
CHRIST JESUS our LORD. AMEN.
olive tree
An Aenigmaticke description of old age, and death, taken out of ECCLESIASTES
12.
The Text.
THe Sun the Moon the Stars darkened.
The Clouds return after the rain.
The Keepers of the house tremble.
The strong Men bow themselves.
The Grinders cease, because they are few.
They that look out at the window are darkened.
The doors are shut in the streets.
The sound of the grinding is low.
He shall rise up at the voice of the Bird.
All the daughters of music are brought low.
They fear that which is high, and fear in the way.
The Almond tree shall floorish.
The Grasshopper shall be a burden and desire (...) fall.
Man goes to his long home.
The mourners go about the streets.
The silver cord is loosed.
The golden bowl is broken.
The Pitcher is broken at the fountain.
The Wheel is broken at the cisterne.
Dust returns to the earth as it was, and the Spirit to GOD who gave it.
The Exposition.
OUR sight fail. Diseases follow, one after another, forrunners of death. The
hands become feeble. The legs bow under the body. The teeth fail, lowsing,
consumng or falling out. The opticke vein fail, ere the eye strings break.
The speech fails. The teeth serve not for chawing of meat. Host, least din,
the crowing of a cock wakens him. The voice is hoarse, the breath weak. They
can not go, and fear at every step to fall. White hairs cover the head.
Appetite or use of lust fail. Man goes to the grave. His friends and
neighbors attend the bringing out of his corpse. All the sinnews of the body
streatched out. Both head and heart have no function. Vena cava which received
blood from the liver has no use. The head draws no exhalations from stomach
or liver. The body made of dust, after death returns to dust The soul
inspired by GOD, returns to GOD.


The paraphrase of this Text, and exposition thereof in Meater.
DEath when it comes, it so benummes, and overcomes,
Our body, and their members every one.
That the Sun bright, Moon and Stars light, do from our sight,
Obscure themselves, and darkened are anon:
The Clouds return again,
Though rain run out,
Upon us meakle pain
Is powered out
And then our hands, with all their bands
That did before our Tabernacle keep:
Tremble and shake, and we do quaike,
For fear of coming of so long a sleep.
Our limbs that bure, our body sure, cannot endure,
But then bow down themselves, though strong before:
Our teeth which were, as Milstones fair, gin then to spaire,
As broken, loose, and in part lost their (...)
Also our Opticke veins,
That looked throw
Our eyes broken with pains,
Leave their window.
Then fail our speech, whereby we teach,
Our hearers for to understand our mind,
That door is close where throw came voice,
And we of dumb men made another kind.
The grinding din, our mouth within, does then begin,
to be so low, that none can hear it, when we seem to eat
For why the crew, of teach to chew, are then so few,
That little they can serve to break our meat,
Then does a little host,
Or pituite:
Or voice of birds bost,
Our sleep so sweet.
And then our voice, which made sweet noise,
And instruments of music every one,
Do hold their peace, and have no grace,
So weak and hoarse they are, and all undone.
He who would gang, does fear the wrang, and the least pang
Of stone, of stock, or block, is in his way:
He is so weak, the smallest straike, makes him to quaike,
Least he should fall, even in the middle day,
Then buds the Almond tree,
With floorish fair:
Man's head then may we see,
Full of white hair.
And even just as the Locust,
Is shaken off for weakness, and down fall,
So filly dust, has lost all lust,
No more desire, nor pleasure for it call,
Man goes home, unto his tomb, the dead among,
Where he must bide for many days and years;
His Kinsfolk dear, and Neighbors near do then appear,
To carry forth his corpse, and then it bears.
The silver cord is broken,
The bodies band,
The sinnews all are stricken,
He cannot stand.
The bowl for gold would not been sold.
The head or heart (I mean) is broken quite:
The liver vain, at his fountain,
Like broken pitchers, skaile; the blood perfect.
And that round Wheel, which once did reele, as we now feel
Is broken down, even right above the Well:
I mean the head, when we are dead, stands in no stead,
To draw up food from livers stell.
Earth does then to earth return,
Even man to dust;
His Spirit to GOD is borne,
Who is most just.
Remember man, thy Maker then,
When thou art young and strong, before these days:
For thou will weary, and cannot tarry,
To serve thy God, and sorrow for thy sins always.
FINIS.
VICISSITVDINI OMNIA SVBIACENT
SOLA VIRTUES CADERE NON POTEST

nine-spoked wheel device


