A CHRISTIAN DIALOGVE, BETWEEN THEOPHILUS A DEFORMED CATHOLIC IN ROME, AND
Remigius a reformed Catholic in the Church of England. Containing. A plain
and succinct resolution, of sundry very intricate and important points of
religion, which do mightily assail the weak consciences of the vulgar sort
of people; penned for the solace of all true hearted English subjects, and for
the utter confusion of all seditious Jesuits and Iesuited Popelings in England
or else where, so long as they shall persist inordinately in their novelties,
heresies, errors, and most gross and palpable superstions.

Ecclesiast. Cap. 4. Ver. 28. Strive for the truth unto death, and defend
Justice for thy life, and the Lord shall fight for thee against thine enemy.

Prou. Cap. 12. Ver. 1. He that loves instruction, loves knowledge; but he
that hates correction, is a fool.

LONDON, Printed by Nicholas Oaks, for William VVelby, and are to be sold at
his Shop in Paul's Churchyard, at the sign of the Gray-hound. 1609.

TO THE RIHGT WORSHIPFUL MY APPROVED GOOD FRIENDS, SIR Steven Procter, Sir
Timothy Whittingham, Sir Vincent Skinner, and Sir Timothy Hutton, Knights;
and his Majesty's most zealous, vp^ight, and painful Justices of the Peace.
Having published many books in defense of the truth, against the adversaries
of the truth, (the Pope, his Cardinals, Jesuits, and Iesuited Popelings I
mean) and perceiving by many arguments, that sundry of my dear Country men
are not yet fully resolved in certain maine points of religion, upon which all
the rest, in some sort, do depend; I have deemed it a labor very necessary for
the common good, to dispute those most intricate points pro and contra
Dialogue-wise; that so all difficulties therein may be cleared, all obscurity
taken away, and the truth plainly laid open, before the eyes of every
indifferent reader.

The Papists most impudently brag and boast, that they maintain, keep and
defend that faith and doctrine which S. Peter and S. Paul, delivered to the
Romans, that neither their Pope, nor their Church can err, that their Church,
and none but their Church, is able to show and truly to prove a perpetual
uninterrupted succession of their Bishops and Priests: that the written word of
God contains not all things necessary to be believed unto salvation, for that
it shows not the holy Bible to be canonical and that original sin
remains only materially in the bodies of the regenerate, and not formally in
their minds, wills, and hearts. All these points, and every of them (though
most difficult and intricate) I have taken in hand to confute, relying upon
Gods holy assistance, who never forsakes the truth. What I have performed, let
your wisdoms and others judge. The work such as it is, I dedicate to your
worships, not only to give as a sign of a grateful mind for your kind
favors to me-ward; but much more to intimate to the world, that inward joy of
mine heart, which issues out of your rare zeal to Gods eternal truth,
constant loyalty to your most gracious Sovereign, and painful labors for
the good of our Church and Commonweal. The almighty give you many happy
years upon earth, and vouchsafe to increase his manifold graces in you, that
you may daily more and more (and others by your Christian example) employ your
painful labors for the advancement of his glorious Gospel, the cutting
down of sin, the extirpation of late start-vp* Popery, and the rooting out
of all traitorous Jesuits, and Iesuited Popelings, which have been, and still
are, too much favored and winked at, by sundry in authority, especially in
these North-parts of noble England. Dixi. March. 21. 1609.

Your worships to be commanded, THOMAS BELL.

A Table of the Chapters contained in this Book.
CHAP. 1. Of the old Roman and ancient Church of Rome. Page 1. CHAP. 2. Of the
false and erroneous faith of the late Bishops of Rome. Page 11. CHAP. 3. Of
sundry important objections, which seem to prove the Popes prerogative of
faith. Page 26. CHAP. 4. Of the Succession of Bishops, in the Church of Rome.
Page 66. CHAP. 5. Of Popish unwritten Traditions. Page 102. CHAP. 6. Of the
state of the regenerate, with the particular adjuncts of the same. Page 121.
CHAP. 1. Of the old Roman and ancient Church of Rome.
Theophilus. GOD bless you Father Remigius, I hope you will this day yield
great comfort to my distressed heart; for I have often heard, that you are both
pro^undly learned, and charitably affected to all your Christian neighbors; so
as for your great learning you are very able, and for your rare charity ever
ready, to give good counsel to such, as stand in need of you: I therefore for
Christ's sake beseech you, to show me the ready way to heaven.


Remig. To believe rightly and live christianly, is Man. v 14^. Luc 13. v. 24.
your very pathway to Heaven: but it is a straight and narrow gate, and few do
find the same.


Theoph. Alas, my good father, then shall more be damned then saved, God
forbid, it should be so.


Remig. That which God has decreed, man cannot Mat. 20. ^* 17. Luc. (...). v.
24.
withstand. Many (says Christ,) are called, but few are chosen. Strive to
enter in at the straight gate; for many will seek to enter in, and shall not
be able. Yet our most merciful and just God, will condemn none to eternal
death; but for their notorious sins, and just deserts.


Theoph. We may exclaim with holy Polycar^e, o God, to what a world have thou
reserved us? etc. Now every one can give good words, both in the Pulpit and
else where; but badder life and wickeder dealing, was never more frequent in
any town or City. The Catholics, for good life and meritorious acts, are
the mirror of the Christian world.


Remig. Whom do you call Catholics? I am a Catholic my self.


Theoph. The Pope, his Cardinals, his Monks, his Friars, his holy Nuns, and
all such as agree in faith and doctrine with the Church of Rome.


Remig. If you speak of Pope Formosus, Pope John degraded him, and brought him
to laicall state again, after he had been the Bishop of Portua. He further
took him sworn, that he neither should be Bishop again, not ever return to
the City of Rome. Howbeit, Pope Martin absolved him from his oath, and after a
few years, he did notonely come to Rome, but there was made the Pope. Pope
Stephanus a cruel Ty^^nt.
If you speak of Pope Stephanus y^ sixth* he persecuted Pope Formosus even
after his death. He called a Council, and disanulled all the decrees of Pope
Formosus his predecessor. He caused his body to be brought into his
Co^sistory, the papal induments to be taken away, a laicall habit to be put
on she dead corpse, two fingers of his right hand to be cut off; and that done,
forsooth, his body to be put again into the grave. Mean you Pope Sergius the
third? he caused Pope Formosus (who now had been dead almost ten whole years)
to be taken out of his tomb, and to be set in a chair with pontifical attire
upon his back; that done, he commanded his head to be cut off, and to be cast
into their^iuer Tyber. Mean you Pope John y^ twelfth? his father Albericus
being a man of great power and might, enforced the Nobles to take an oath, that
after the death of Pope Ag^pitus, they would promote his Pope John a notorious
who* ^* munger.
son Octauianus to the Popedom: The oath was accomplished, and he was named
John. He was a great hunter, and a man of licencious life: he kept women openly
to the notorious scandal of the Church, insomuch, that some of the Cardinals
wrote to O^to then King of the Saxons, to come and besiege Rome, and so to
afflict him for his sins. Which the Pope perceiving, commanded the Cardinals
nose to be cut off, that gave that counsel; and his hand, that wrote the
letters Speak you of Pope Boniface the seventh? he was made Pope by the Romans
after they Pope Bonifacea Church rob^^.
had thr^t^ed Benedictus the sixth: who afterward not able to tarry in the
City, robbed S. Peter's Church of all the ^^asure in it, and fled to
Constantinople. Means you Pope Benedict the eight? he was seen after his
death, as it were corporally riding upon a black horse (the Devil.) he
confessed that he was in great torment, and therefore desired Pope Ben^^ an
extortione^.
some money to be given to the poor, because all that he had given the poor
aforetime, was gotten by robbery and extortion. Mean you Pope John the woman?
she Pope John with child.
belying her sex, and clad in man's attire, was with great admiration of her
sharp wit and singular learning, chosen to be the Pope of Rome. But shortly
after by the familiar help of her beloved companion, she brought forth the
homely fruits of her Popedom. Mean you Pope Boniface the eight? he made a
constitution, in which he called Pope Boniface entered as a Fox, li^ed as a
Wolf, and died as a Dog.
himself both Lord spiritual and Lord temporal of the whole world: whereupon
he required Philip the French King, to acknowledge that he held his Kingdom of
him: which when the King scorned to do, he gave his Kingdom to him
thatcouldget it. This Pope entered as a Fox, reigned as a Pope ^ylu^ster
promised ^omag^ to the Devil.
Wolf, and died as Dog. What shall I say of your Monks or Friars? Pope Siluester
the second was first a Monk, a Fre^chman borne, Gilbe^^us by name: he promised
homage to the Devil, so long as he should accompli^h his desires: who being
very ambitious, did so often express his desire to the Devil, as he made
homage to him. He was first made Archbishop of Rhemes; then of Rauennes, at the
last Pope of Rome: for the Devil knowing his ambitious mind, brought him to
honor by degrees. All this to be most true, these Popish writers of high
esteem even in the Church of Rome (viz. Geniblacensis, Marianus Scotus,
Ba^^holemeus Carranza, Martinus Polonus, Philippus, Bergomensis, Bapt. Platina,
and Palmerius,) have publishes it in printed books to the view of the whole
world, which doubtless they would never have done, if the truth it self had
not enforced their pens thereunte. For the holy life of your Jesuits and
Iesuited br^^d, I will say nothing; their dear breethren the secular Priests,
ha^^ related that matter sufficiently, in many books late extant in print
against them: they charge them with pride, ambition, covetousness, cozenage,
theft, cruelty, murder, treason, and what not? yea, of Friar Parsons, they
give this testimony in particular, viz. by Parsons platformes, secular Priests
must depend upon Blacwel, Robert parsons an holy Friar.
and Blackwel upon Garnet, and Garnet upon Parsons, and Parsons the Priests
bastard upon the Devil. Read If th^^ shall read ^hi^ Anatomy* thou can not
but abho^^e ^a^e ^p^^a^^ Popery.
the Anatomy of Popish tyranny, and there then shall find this truth, with
great variety of like matter. I let pass, what Polidorus Virgilius, Abbas,
Panormitanus. and Pope Pius himself, before called Aeneas Syluius, have
written of the filthy life of Popish Priests, Monks, Friars, and Nuns.
Peruse the survey of popery, and the trial of Aug. Epist. 119.
the new religion; and that done, the truth will show it self herein: For, if
S. Austin said truly that in his time all was full of humane superstitions,
with the servile burdens whereof men were so pressed, as the Jews estate under
their legal ceremonies was more tolerable, then the state of Christians:
Truly may we say much more, A^^st* contra Epist ^^^dam.
of the last and worst days.


Theoph. S. Peter and S. Paul delivered the Catholic says to the Church of
Rome; and the succession from S. Peter and S. Paul, kept S. Augustine in the
unity of the Church. So writes S. Austen of himself.


Remigius. True it is first, Peter and S. Paul preached at Rome, and for the
testimony of Christ's Gospel were there put to death, both on one day, not both
in one year; the one beheaded, the other crucified: none well studied in the
ancient fathers, and histories of the Church, will or can this deny: true it
is secondly, Rome were holy men, who constanly yielded up their lives (as
become holy martyrs,) for the testification of the truth of Christ's Gospel:
true it is ^^irdly, Austen says of himself, that the succession of Priests
from S. Peter, was one thing amongst many that kept him in the Church: true it
is fourthly, Roman Empire, together with the great liberality, which the Romans
exhibited to the Martyrs in exile and otherwise afflicted, yielded no small
honor to the City and Church of Rome: and hereupon (I will it not deny) it
came to pass, that the ancient councels had ever great respect to the dignity
and excellency of Cities, in the distribution of Episcopal and Patriarchall
seats: hereupon it likewise came, that the West and Occidentall Churches (not
so the East-churches) did greatly reverence the Church of Rome; and many times
to appease controu^^sies and dissentions, had recourse unto it, as to the
Mother Church and ancient nurse of the faith: which things S. Augustine
beholding together with the succession, (not barely of place or persons, but)
of Bishops, in faith, ^^ctrine, and holy conversation, was confirmed in the
unity of the Church: for so as then, so now, nothing does or can yield greater
comfort or solace to a Christian heart, then to behold the lines of S. Aus^^^
respected ^uccession, w^^ch was ^oy^^^ with holy ^^f^ and pure ^oct^i^^, the
evil life of Ministe^s does much hurt to the truth.
Gods ministers to be agreeable to their doctrine, and their doctrine to be
consonant to the word of God: for, what man would not rather in any difficulty,
have recourse to that Minister and Preacher, whose life is agreeable to his
doctrine, then unto him, who though he preach pleasantly, yet lives not
accordingly? None doubtless. For this respect said the holy Apostle to the
Romans, that through their evil life, the word of God was blasphemed among the
Gentiles: and for this respect likewise, are the Bere^ms highly commended in
holy writ, in that they examined the Apostles doctrine by the live and rule of
Gods word: yea, for this respect does the holy vessel of Romans 2 v. 14. Act. 27
v. 10 11 (...). Hebr. 31. v. 7.
our Lord Jesus, very gravely admonish the Hebrwes, to consider the end of
their conversation who, have preached Gods word unto them: but for all this, no
ancient council, no holy father, no history Ecclesiastical, did ever Note
that the Bishop of Rome did never aledge for himself that he could not err
because he kn^we no such prerogative in very deed.
ascribe this supereminent prerogative to the Bishop of Rome, that he could no
err in his judicial and definitive resolutions: neither ever was the Bishop
of that Sea acknowledged, for the sole and only judge in controversies of
religion: this is to be so, one only testimony of S. Cyprian will or at least
may suffice: for S. Cyprian a very ancient father, a great learned Bishop, and
amost blessed martyr, although he highly reverenced the Church of Rome, for
respects now related, and consequently the Cyp^^ Epist ad Pompeum.
Bishops thereof, yet was he so far from acknowledging, the falssy now
usurped prerogative of the Bishop of Rome, that his faith could not fail, that
he flatly rejected his opinion, contemned his definitive sentence, and decided
his judicial decrees, calling him blind buzzard, and arroga^t Prelat. The like
I might allege cut of many famous papists; Adrianus, Panormit: nus Alphon^us,
Gersonus, Ockamus and others: but this ^onu^ceth, that neither S. Austin nor
any ancient father in their time, nor the Bishop of Rome, did object against
S. Cyprian, that the said Bishop could not err.


Theoph. This is a wonderment to me, that our Popes, Monks, and Jesuits, have
been so licentious and wicked livers: but seeing so many famous Popish writers
and the late secular. Romish Priests, have in printed books published to the
whole world, testified so much of and against them, it makes me to stagger,
and to doubt of the Romith religion, although informer times, I have high
reverenced the same: for if the Bishop of Rome had been privileged not to
err, not only the Bishop of Rome, but the holy fathers also of that age,
would have objected the same against S. Cyprian, undoubtedly it cannot be
denied.


Remig. You neither are nor ever were, a more earnest and zealous papist, then
my self have been: but I heartily thank God for it, I now behold as clearly
as the noone day, the absurdities and abominations of late vpstart popery, the
case is so clear, as every child of God may with all facility perceive the
same.


Theoph. Why do you call it (late vpstart popery,) it has continued from S.
Peter, and every Pope is his successor.


Remig. This is one mighty point, which has not only seduced and be witched
you, but both many others, and mine own self, as well as you. I truly called
it. (late vpstart popery,) because of ten parts it, scarscely retains The
Jesuits are a now and young ^ecte of Fiyers.
two parts of the old Roman religion, which S. Peter and S Paul by their
preaching, delivered to the Church of Rome: yea since the Jesuits began,
(which was about the year 1537.) popish religion is ten times more absurd,
then it was before.


Theoph. The Catholics hold constantly, that the true faith and religion which
S. Peter and S. Paul preached at Rome, has ever continued at Rome until this
present day; and that no other Church in the Christian world, is able to show a
perpetual and uninterrupted succession of their Bishops and priests, save
only the Church of Rome.


Remig. This is my answer. First, that the word (Catholic) is an holy and
ancient name, given in the beginning to all Christians and faithful people in
the world, and therefore is it this day highly reverenced, and continually
rehearsed in the public prayers of our English Church: but there be two
sorts of Catholics, the one deformed, the other reformed, which reformed
Catholics, The papists are the de^^med Catholic, we the reformed.
are all the true members of our English Church, and all such as consesse and
embrace the same faith and doctrine with them: Secondly, that the faith and
doctrine, which S. Peter and S. Paul preached to the old Rom* 1. v. 8
Romans, remains at Rome indeed: but how? no otherwise, doubtless, then an
old beggars cloak remains still to the beggar, though it have an hundred
clouts of diverse colors, added and fastened one to another: Thirdly, that our
English Church is able to show a better and sounder perpetual and
uninterrupted succession of her Bishops and Priests, then the late vpstact
Church of Rome.


Theoph. What, are you Englishmen Catholics? you are (say we at Rome) flat
heretics and apostataes, as whom, many late Popes of Rome, have accursed to
the deep pit of hell.


Remig. You know there is a sort of Friars at Rome, commonly called the
Franciscans, (which sect was hatched The sect of Franciscans.
and borne in the year 1206.) who have by little and little swarued from their
first institution, and become so licentious and dissolute, that another sect of
Friars commonly Theophilus a Citisen of Rome.
called Capucheenes, (which thing, you being a Citizen of Rome, know as well
as my self.) have accused them to have depraved and fowly perverted the rules
of their ancient order, sect, and profession, in so much, as they cannot this
day with safe consciences embrace the same, and therefore have they reformed
their said sect, and do term themselves the reformed true Franciscans
indeed: this (if it be duly considered,) is doubtless this day our case, in
our Church of noble England, as also of many other reformed Churches, within
the Christian world: for as the Capucheenes hold fast, Let this be well
remembered. our Church reuerenceth antiquity and only rejects novelties.
keep still, and constantly defend, all the ancient rules of the old and true
Franciscans, and duly reject and abandon that, which by little and little
crept into their sect, (supertition abuses, neglect of discipline, and
dissolute life,) even so is it this day in our Church of England. she holds
fast, keeps still, and most constantly deserd^th, The late romish ^aith is
the new religion.
all and every rite of the old Roman religion, highly reuerencing the same, as
Catholic and Apostolic doctrine. She only rejects and abandoneth,
heresies, errors, superstitions, and intolerable abuses, by little and little
brought into the Church, (the enemy the dinel having sown Man. 13. ver. 25.
tares, while the careless pastors were a sleep:) For neither did most noble
Queen Elizabeth in her time, neither does our most pious and religious
Sovereign King we are the true reformed Catholics.
JAMES, (who most happily reigns over us,) set up or bring into the Church
any new religion, but he, as Queen Elizabeth before, only reformeth and
purges the ^. reg. 2. ver 27. 35. ^. par. 1^. 4. reg. 8. 2. 2. pat. 29. par.
2^. 30. 31. 34.
Church, after the holy examples of King David, King Solomon, King Iosaphat,
King Ezechias, King Josias, and other godly and zealous Kings in their days,
and carefully reduces it to the primitive order, and to the purity of the old
Roman religion. This to be so, none can in conscience deny, that will with a
single eye this day behold thegodly settled Canons of this Church of England.


Theoph. If you were able to prove unto me, that the Church of Rome did any
time swarne or revolt from the old Roman religion, I would doubtless forsake
the late romish doctrine (as you term it,) and joyfully yield unto the truth.


Remig. I shall prove it by the power of God, and assistance of his holy
spirit, before the end of this our conference, if you like to stay to the end
thereof, and be not wearied with my discourse.


Theoph. God reward you for your Christian kindness and this paineful travail
for my sake, your talk is so comfortable to mine heart, that I shall not be
weary thereof, though I should stay an whole year in your company: but I fear
me I shall be too chargeable to you, if I tarry long with you.


Remig. I live (as you see) like a scholar, and keep but a sparing diet: if
you can content your self therewith, I shall joy thereat: For I know
assuredly, that our merciful God, who, freely without my deserts, sends me
al things necessary for my bodily sustenance and who has Mat. 10. ^. 12
also freely promised, not to suffer a cup of cold water given in his name,
to pass at any time without reward, will never see or suffer me to want things
necessary to my self, for bestowing Christian hospitality, upon my neighbor
for his sake: yield therefore your serious attention, and ye shall behold these
threes things as clear as the noo^e day: viz.


CHAP. 2. Of the false and erroneous faith of the late Bishops of Rome.
Theophilus. WE at Rome hold it constantly for an article of Luc. 12. ^. 3^.
the Chatholike faith, that our Popes and Bishops are the successors of S.
Peter, and therefore can they not err in faith or doctrine, no more then S.
Peter could; for whose faith Christ prayed, that it should never fail.


Remig. How the late Bishops of Rome are S. Peter's successors, it shall be
showed (God willing) in the chapter of succession. Let us now unfold, and
sincerely examine, the faith and doctrine of some special Popes in particular,
for the view and consideration of a few will be a sufficient trial for all the
rest.


Theoph. I must needs yield thereunto, for we hold it a part of the Catholic
faith, that Christ's prayer was effectual for all S. Peter's successors alike,
so as if any one of them can be convinced to have erred, we cannot safely rely
and ground our faith upon the rest.


Remig. That the Bishops or Popes of Rome (as ye call them,) may become
heretics, yea, that they have been heretics de facto, it is a thing so
clear, as I shall not need to stand long upon the same: for, many popish
decrees and Papal constitutions tell us, that Popes may be deposed, when and
so often as they swerve from the true faith, and become heretics indeed:
which decrees and constitutions must perforce presuppose, that the Popes may be
heretics indeed: for otherwise, they Great did. 4^. chap. (...) Pap^.
should be frustrate and to none end at all: one popish Canon and decree has
these express words, the Pope judges all, and must be judged of none, unless
he swerve from the faith, and be an heretic: another Canon has these words,
sheep which are committed to their pastor, may neither rebuke him, nor in any
wise accuse him, vulesse he depart and forsake the faith: these are the Ans. 2.
q. 7. Cap. ^u^^.
words of the Popes own Canons. I do allege them truly, as I mean to do
all the rest, whatsoever I shall The Author takes it upon his salvation, th^^
he deals truly.
speak of the Popes themselves, or of any popish writer, which I proteste unto
you once for all, as I will answer the saine at the dreadful day of general
doom. Now we see by these Canons, that the Popes may be heretics, and in the
case of heresy be censured, controlled, and condemned.


Theoph. I heartily thank you for this your Christian protestation, it fully
persuades me that I may safely give credit to all your allegations and
asseuerations, whatsoever you say of our Popes, Popish writers, and their Faith
and Doctrine: But can ye name any Pope indeed, that has been an Heretic or
an Apostate from the Faith? our honorable and learned Cardinal, the Jesuit
Bellarmine, statly denies it.


Remig. Pope Anastasius, Pope Honorius, Pope John, and others have been
Heretics. Vignerius. Melchier, Canus, Alphonsus, and Adrianus* all four
famous and (...) dela^i^ vigner d^ ver^. fides.
learned Papists, and one of them ( Adrianils) sometime Pope himself, do
affirm it and defend it for a constant and undoubted truth. Nicholaus de Lyra,
a famous Popish Friar, so learned a man, that Sir Thomas Moore called him a
great Clearke, (as he was indeed) preueth evidently that the Church does not
consist in men, by reason of power or dignity either Ecclesiastical or
Secular: and this is the ground and foundation, upon which he ^^ra, in 16.
cap. Mat.
builds his assertion: because (says Friar Lyra) many Princes and Popes, and
others of the inferior sort, are sound to have swarued from the faith, and to
have been flat Apostataes. Yea Josephus Angles, a famous Popish Bishop, and
religious Friar, in that very book which he ^ose A^^ ^* ^. s. p. 2. q. de
exco^. ar. 4. d^^f. 1.
delivered to the Pope himself, behold the force of truth) confirms this
mine assertion in these expressed words; Papa hereticus aut Apostata, etc. The
Pope being an Heretic or Apostata, may be deposed by a general Council, and
the reason is, because as none can be a Prelate of any religion, which is not
professed in that religion; so neither can he be Pope that holds not the
faith o^ the Church. Thus you see it* clear even by Popish famous Doctors, and
the Popes own decrees (such (...) none can be better) that the Bishope of Rome
may forsake the Christian faith, teach false Doctrine, and become flat
Apostataes: Yea, that, de facto, the same has been verified, of sundry Popes
in very deed.


Theoph. Our Cardinal Bellarmine, and other learned Catholics tell us, that
our Pope is a double person; private and public: that as he is a private
person, he may think, speak, write and hold erroneous opinions, The Popes
double person.
false doctrine, and whatsoever else; yet this notwithstanding, that the Pope
as he is Pope, and a public person can never err in any matter of faith, nor
iudicially define any thing against the truth. This our famous Dominican Friar
Dominicus de Soto, sets down in these express words; quamuis Papa vt Papa
etc. Albeit the Pope, as Soto. in 4 s d. 2. 4. 2. (...). ^.
Pope, cannot err, that is to say, cannot set down any error as an article
of our faith, because the holy Ghost will not that permit; nevertheless, as
he is a private person, he may err even in faith, as he may do in other
sins.


Remig. This indeed is the ground and foundationo? all Popish faith and
doctrine; that the Pope may err as a private man, but not as Pope and public
person: for Qu^dl. ^. ^. 10.
this cause does M. Watson tell us, in the name of all the secular Priests, in
their conflict against the traitorous Jesuits; that as the prudent Greek
appealed from Alexander furious, to Alexander sober; and Bishop Crostrate from
Pope Adrian private, to Pope Adrian public, and as sumus pontifex in cathedra
Petri; so may the secular Priests, the Popes devoted vassals, notwithstanding
any decree set down by his Holiness to the contrary, by wrong information
given, appeal even from the Pope; as Clemens unto his holiness, as Peter for
this cause does, the Jesuit Parsons, or S. R. in his pretended answer to S.
R. page 417.
the down ^all of Popery, proclaim it lustily to the work, that Bishops must
not examine the doctrine which the Pope ^^^inereth i^ditially out of S. Peter's
chair, as suprethe pastor of Gods Church; but only that, wherein he utters
his own private opinion. For this cause do the Popes decrees roundly tell us,
that it is sacrilege to dispute of the Popes power. So then; on the one side,
Lib. 6. de ha^^t. cap qui conque cause 17 ^. 4. cap. si ^u^.
the Pope may be deposed, if he speak, write, or hold heretical opinions as a
private man; but on the other side, whatsoever the Pope shall define or decree,
as Pope and public person, that we must receive, reverence, and constantly
believe; otherwise, we must be adjudged Heretics and be burnt with fire and
saggot at a stake. What a religion eat ye this? the Pope may decree things
Popery is a most meserarable religion*
at his own good pleasure either as a private man, or as a public person;
the one way he cannot err, as Papists do and must believe; but the otherway,
he both may err and has de facto erred in very deed: it therefore stands
with all reason, piety and good conscience, that the Papists shall examine his
decrees, whether they proceed from the Pope as a public person or as a
private man, le^t they receive errors for faith, falsehood for truth, and poison
for wholesome medicine. Howbeit, they must believe all things resolutely; they
may doubt or dispute of nothing curiously, lest they be accused of sacriled^^
or heresy. For, if the Pope when he spoke or wrote sat in S. Peter's chair at
Rome, (an old rotten and worme-eaten thing, which the silly people adore,
reverence, and kiss, as my self sometimes have done, and Saint Peter perhaps
never saw or knew the same) then the case is clear, the Popes decree is as
sound as the holy Gospel, and proceeds from the holy Ghost.


Theoph. All this is very true, and we are taught to believe, that Saint Peter
sat in that chair indeed, and that it has been reverently kept from Saint
Peter's death to this day, insomuch that they are likewise taught to bring
girdles to touch the said chair, which therefore are called Saint Peter's
girdles for the safe deliverance of women which are with child, and do use
them: neither did I ever hear to this day, that any Pope taught false
Doctrine, or decreed any untruth out of Saint Peter's chair.


Remig. Whether Saint Peter ever sat in that chair or not, it is not much
material; this one thing is certain, that it is this day most superstitiously
abused and that the real sitting in the material chair, cannot preserve him
that sits in it, from false doctrine or erroneous faith, whereof more at
large hereafter, as your demandes or difficulties shall minister fit occasion;
that many Popes have been Heretics and flat Apostataes, is already proved
out of your own best approved Doctors. Now will I likewise prove unto you (God
willing) even by the express testimonies of most renowned Popish writers; that
sundry Popes have taught and decreed false doctrine, and that as public
persons sitting in Saint Peter's chair, as they call it, and that done. I will
answer to all your objections against the same. M. Gerson, sometime Gers* in
Serp^. de Pasck. ^. part.
Chancellor of the famous Uniuersity of Paris, and a man of high esteem in
the Council of Constance, writes plainly, and avouches it for a constant
known truth, that Pope John the 22. of that name, taught publicly, that the
souls of the just do not see God till the day of general Doom, as also,
that his false doctrine was publicly condemned with the sound of trumpets,
even before Philip, then King of France. Yea Adrianus (who was Bishop of Rome
himself) does constantly avouch the same truth as testifies Alphonsus a
zealous and learned Popish Writer, in these express words; Nouissime fertur
de Iohanne 22. quod etc. Last of all, it is reported of Pope John the 22. that
he publicly taught, declared, and commanded all to hold The Pope ^rr^d. as
a public person, ie cannot be denied.
the same, that the souls of the just before the day of judgment general,
have not the stole, which is the clear and faciall vision of God: and he is
reported to have induced the university of Paris to this, that none should take
degree of Theology in the same, but those that did first swear to defend this
error, and to adhere to it for ever: Thus writes Adrian, who was himself Pope
or Bishop of Rome: And Alphonsus a man of good credit with the papists, after
he had rekoned up five heresies, sets down this for the ^i^th heresy: (viz
that Alphon. ^ Castrolib. ^. ad verse. h^re ses, ^rop^ (...) (...).
the souls of the just do not see God till the day of doom) ascribing the
said heresy to the Armenians as to the authors thereof, and to the Greeks
together with Pope John, as the patrons and defenders of the same. So then it
is clear as the noone day, that the Bishops of Rome both may err, and, de
facto, have erred, not only as private men, but also as Popes and public
persons in their judicial sentences and decrees. Bellarmine your romish
Bellarm. de ^um Pontifice lib 4. c. 14
Jesuits and Cardinal, seeing the force of this testimony, and ma^king well
that it does overthrow the highest point of their late start up popery, does
bestir^e himself more then a little in defense of popish faith: he would
gladly persuade his reader, that their Pope John erred only as a private man,
and not as a Pope or Bishop of Rome: ^ ^te pope^y i^ not the old but the new
religion.
which is a subtle distinction, but falsely invented to seduce the silly people
therewith, lest they should forsake the Pope and his new religion: I prove it
many ways, first, Adrian himself says, ( docuit he taught) Public
publicly) Mandauit, he commanded all to hold it.) de facto, even in his
public decree of faith, and that even by the Di^it Adrianus, A. D. 1171.
consent of Adrian, who sometime was Pope himself; yea, who for learning and
knowledge, was one of the rarest Popes that ever were at Rome. What say you to
this testimony, M. Theophilus? do ye not see it evidently proved, even by the
testimony of approved Popish writers, that the Pope both may err, and, de
facto, has erred; and that not only as a private man, but also as a public
person.


Theoph. Your reasons are so strong, so pithy, and so plain indeed, that I
know not in the world how in truth to answer them, they make me to stagger in
my old Romish faith, and to doubt of that, whereof I never doubted all my life
before: for, we Catholics have ever holden it for an article of our
Catholic faith, that the Pope as Pope and public person cannot err: and
therefore that they are to be censured for Heretics, whosoever will not
receive and believe, as articles of the Christian faith, whatsoever the Pope
defines iudicially and publicly, as sitting in Peter's chair.


Remig. This lately coined diabolical distinction of the Popes double person,
with the circumstances wherewith it is adorned, may fitly be termed a trick of
Legierdemaine, A trick of Legierdemaine.
wherewith many have been seduced a long time. For, when the Pope is charged
and plainly convicted to have decreed false and erroneous doctrine to be
holden for articles of the faith; then the Pope and his Jesuits, with their
Iesuited brood, tell us peremptorily, and as it were violently enforce us to
believe it, that such decrees proceed from the Popes Holiness, as a private
man, but not as a public person. What a thing is this? if the Pope decree any
thing, how absurd soever it be, and A most blasphemous doctrine.
affirm the same to be his judicial sentence out of Peter's chair, then the
same must be holden and be believed for an article of faith, and to be as true
as the Gospel of Jesus Christ; and he that will not so hold, and so believe,
must be burnt for an Heretic: and for all this, no Scripture, no general
Council, no holy Father, no learned Popish Writer, for y^ space of 1400.
years after Christ's sacred incarnation, (my life and salvation I gage for the
Mark this well.
trial) can be truly produced or alleged for the confirmation and clearing
of such Popish dotage, or rather of such diabolical heresy, and neuer-inough
detested villainy.


Theoph. Your words do penetrate, and touch the very bottom of my heart: but
is it possible, that you can prove and justify this your assertion? if you
can this perform, popery is confounded and stricken dead. I therefore pray you
for Christ's sake, to prove this point so soundly and clearly as I may be
assured of the truth thereof.


Remig. M. Doctor Gerson, Chauncellor of the university of Paris, a famous
papist, and one of the principal deuines in the general Council of Constance,
delivers the truth to the view of the christian world, in these express
words: concluditur ex hac radice duplex veritas: prima, quod determinatio
solius Papae in his quae sunt fidei, non obligat vt precise est talis ad
credendum; alioquin staret in casu, quod quis obligaretur ad contradictoria,
vel ad falsum contra fidem. Out of this root, is concluded Gers. prim. art. de
e^am. doct. consid. 2.
a double truth: first, y^ the resolution or determination of the Pope alone in
things belonging to faith) as it is precis^ly such (not confirmed by a general
council, does not tie or bind a man to believe it, for otherwise, the case
might so fall out, that one should be bound either to believe contradictories,
or else falsehood against his faith. Again, in another place, the same doctor
and great learned man has these express words: in causis fidei, non habetur
in Gers in pripart de appellat. a Papa, in prop^sit.
terra iudex infallibi is, vel qui non sit deuiabilis a fide de lege communi,
praeter ipsam Ecclesiam vniuersalem, vel concilium generale eam sufficienter
repraesentans: in causes of faith, there is no infallible judge upon earth, or
which cannot swar^e from the faith, by the common course of Gods proceeding,
saving the universal Church, or a general council. Many like testimonies
this learned writer has, which I let pass in regard of breuity, for that I
deem these twain so clear and so sufficient, as they will persuade every
indifferent reader: for first, we see This my self admit and believe.
plainly by M. Gersons resolution, that no Christian is bound to believe the
decree, definition, determination, or resolution of the Pope, as he is barely
and precisely Pope or Bishop of Rome* without y^ assistance of a general
council. Secondly that the Pope may err both privately and publickely in the
resolutions of faith, as well as their Bishops and ministers of the Church.
Thirdly, that there are but two infallible judges upon earth concerning matters
of faith, that is to say, the whole Congregation of the faithful, and a
general Council lawfully and sufficiently representing the same: which
resolution of this learned man, I admit with heart and voice, as most
Christian, sound, orthodoxe, and consonant to the holy scriptures, general
Councels, holy fathers, and best learned papists: M. doctor Fisher late Bishop
of Rochester, and a popish canonized martyr, delivers his opinion in these
express words, nec Angustini, nec Hieronymi, necalterius cui^s^^bet auctoris
doctrinae sic Ecclesia subscripsit, quin ipsilocis aliquotab ijs liceat
dis^entire: na^ in no^nullis ipsis locis se plane monstrarunt homines esse,
atque nonnun quam aberrasse: the Church has not se subscribed either to the
doctrine of Austen or of Hierome, or of any other author or writer, but that
she may sometime dissent from their opinions: for themselves have plainly
showed themselves to be men and that they wanted not their errors. The Jesuit
Bella^mine, so dear to the Pope for his writing, that he gave him a Cardinals
hat, wrote in this manner, sine dubio singuli Episcopi errare pos^unt, and
aliquando errant, and inter se quandoque dissentiunt, vt nesciamus Beliarm* de
council, libri. 2. Cap. 2.
quinam eorum sequendus sit: without doubt all Bishops severally may err, and
do sometime err indeed, and do also* sometime so dissent one from another,
that we cannot tell which of them we may safely follow. By the verdit of these
famous and learned papists we see M. Gersons doctrine plainly confirmed: for
albeit they name not the Pope, yet must they confess, perforce, that he is
employed in their words, or else that he is no Bishop at all, which is a thing
not impossible by popish faith, though I affirm it not: Iacobus Almaynus,
Gulielmus Ockamus, Thomas The council of Co^stance deposed Pope John.
Waldensis, Josephus Angles, with many others I might allege, but I deem
these sufficient. Two things I will add for your better satisfaction herein:
the one, that this weighty point of doctrine, was most soundly handled, and
thoroughly debated in the council of Constance, where it was concluded, that a
general council is above the Pope: that a general counsel may depose the
Pope: that the same council, de facto, deposed Pope John the 23. of that name,
and that the Pope as a public person may both be an heretic, and decree
heretical doctrine: The other that the council of Constance was holden and
celebrated, in the year of our Lord God, 1415. and that M Gerson was a famous
divine of the same council, both beholding with his eyes, and hearing with his
ears, (him self not being mute in the interim,) three Popes John the 23.
Gregory the 12., and Benedict the 13.) deposed by the same council, and the
constant resolution of the council against the Popes fasly challenged
privileges: as namely, that the Pope as Pope and as he is a public person,
neither is nor can be an infallible judge in matters of faith.


Theoph. These things are wonderful, which you seem truly and sincerely to
relate. I will think upon them* they enforce me to stagger, and to doubt of
the Catholic says.


Remig. I deal sincerely with the papists, I protest upon my salvation, for I
hold it a great sin to belly the devil of hell: but God forbid that ye should
doubt of the Catholic faith.


Theoph. I remember well your distinction, of deformed and reformed Catholics:
I mean the deformed Catholic faith, which I now suspect to be the romish
faith of our late Popes, I am not able to gainesay or withstand the truth, your
reasons are so strong, your testimonies so plain, your applications so
evident, and your grounds so invincible, that I cannot do withal, but needs
I must give great credit to the same.


Remig. You shall yet hear stranger matters of your Popes, hearken to them
attentively. Pope Celestine the Alphons. lib 1. Cap. 4. aduers. haeres.
third of that name* erred as Pope and public person, in his judicial and
public decree: this to be so, Alphonsus above named, that famous and religious
papist, is a constant witness in these words, Celestinum Papa crasse circa
matrimonium fidelium, quorum al^er labitur in haeresim, res est omnibus
manifesta: neque hic Celestini error talis fuit, qui soli negligentiae imputari
debuit, ita vt illum errasse dicamus velut priuatam personam, and non vt Papam,
qui in qualibet re seria definienda consulere debet viros doctos, quoniam
hui^smodi Celistini definitio habebatur in antiquis decretalibus, in capite,
laudabilem, titulo de conuersione infidelium, quam ego ipse vidi, and legi:
That Pope Celestine erred about matrimony of the faithful, whereof the one is
fallen into heresy, it is a thing so manifest, as all men know the same:
neither was this error of Pope Celestine such, as may be imputed to sole
negligence, so as we may think he erred as a private Celestine erred as Pope
and public person.
man, and not as Pope, who ought in every serious decree to ask council of
the learned, for that decree of Celestine was in the old decretall epistles, in
the chapter Laudabilem, which I my self have seen and read, out of these word
of Alphonsus, who was a man highly renowned among the papists, I observe many
worthy, and memorable points. First that Pope Celestine erred, and that, not as
a private man, but even as Pope and public person. Secondly, that he erred in
a very serious matter, even in a matter of faith, to wit, that matrimony was so
dissolved, by reason of heresy, that the faithful man or woman might marry
again, the heretical party living: which thing says Alphonsus, (a great
learned man, and a zealous papist,) was manifest to every man to be an heresy:
and the popish late council of Trent, has defined so to be. Thirdly, that
this decree and definition of Pope Celestine, was in those days enrolled in
the Popes decretalls. Fourthly, that Alphonsus both saw and read the same
decree. Fifthly, that the said decree cannot this day be found among the Popes
decretall epistles: so then, the Popes use to change, not only their faith,
but also their decrees.


Theoph. I see well, that simple people are shamfully abused, and that the late
Popes have egregiously seduced them: for this is a case so clear, as every
child may perceive the same: that which the Pope and his Jesuits tell us of his
double person, is but atrick of Legerdemarie. For Alphonsus says plainly and
resolutely (I see it cannot be denied) that Pope Celestine erred as Pope and
public person, and not as a private man.


Remig. Let this testimony never be forgotten: for, it overthrows and
beats flat to the ground, the chiefest bulwark, and strongest sort of all
popish faith. It condenmeth the Pope and his doctrine, both affirmatively and
negatiuely. Affirmatively, because it a^outheth the Pope to have erred as Pope
and public person. Negatiuely, because it flatly denies him to have erred as
a private person. But there is another point in this testimony, and that of
great importance, which may not be forgotten: I know not if you have marked
the same.


Theoph. What is the point, I beseech you?


Remig. It is a kind of Iugling and Legierdemaine, where with the Popes and
their denoted vassals, have seduced the world a long time: they alter and
change their Romish faith and doctrine at their own good will and pleasure,
and to hide and cover the nakedness of their Popes public errors, and
heretical decrees; they casheere and make away such former decrees of former
Popes, as they cannot for shame approve, or by any honest means defend the
same. For (as Alphonsus here tells us) this heretical decree and definition,
which Celestine made, as Pope, and not as a private person, was in y^ old
decretall epistles, but this day cannot be found.


Theoph. This point indeed I did not observe, because Alphonsus says he saw
and read the same, but not that it is not this day to be found.


Remig. Alphonsus says he saw the decree, and read it in the old decretals:
and names the chapt eit^ where it was: whereby he gives us to understand,
that in the latter decretals he could not find the same. He further
insinuates to us, that albeit we cannot find the same judicial sentence in
the decretals nowadaies: yet may we assure our selves of the truth thereof, for
that himself both had seen and read the same in the old decretals: for if he
had found the same in the later printed decretals, he would not have given the
reader this cau^at, viz. that it was set down in the old decretals, in the
Chapter Laudabilem, and consequently, that the denial thereof, would not serve
to excuse the Pope. Nay, I will yet show you a cleerer case, if any cleerer can
be.


Theoph. I know not doubtless, how a cleerer case can be found: yet for the
better confirmation of the truth, I pray you withdraw not your pain.


Remig. Saint Cyprian was an ancient Father, alearned Writer, and a glorious
Martyr of our Lord Jesus: and for all that, he both believed, and publicly
declared that the Bishops of Rome might err as well as other Bishops their
brethren, not only in their private opinions, but also in their definitive
sentences, and judicial decrees. For first, Cornelius, then Bishop of Rome,
together with the whole national Synod of all the Bishopps of Italy had made a
slat decree touching rebaptization; and Stephanus had confirmed the same
decree, and stricktly commanded it to be observed: and Cyprian, both
practically and iudicially gives us to understand, that in his time the Bishop
of Rome had no such privilege, as he this day arrogantly and Antichristianly
takes upon him: for we* Cyprian stoutly and resolutely withstood the decree
of* Pope tephanus, who at that time was the Bishop of Rome: yea, he both
sharply reproved him, and scornefully condemned his definitive sentence and
decree.


Theoph. I see not, how this proceeding of Saint Cyprian, can prove that the
Pope may err Iudicially in matters of faith: I beseech you take the pains to
explicate the same more at large.


Remig. Saint Cyprian was ever reputed a learned man, and an holy Bishop in his
life time, as also, a most glorious Martyr being dead. Now, in regard of his
great learning, he could not have been ignorant of the Popes rare privilege
in noterring in matters of faith; if either the holy Scriptures had taught it,
or the learned Fathers of that age had believed or received it: and in regard
of This fact of S. Cypria^, confounds the Pope.
his piety and rare virtue, he would reverently have yielded to such a singular
prerogative, and have given the glory to the son of God, the author thereof,
if any such thing had been done unto him. Yea, if the Bishop of Rome had been
Christ's Uicar general, and so privileged, as our Jesuits and Iesuited crew
bear the world in hand he is, that is to say that he could not err, in his
judicial definitions of faith: then doubtless, S. Cyprian must needs have
been a flat heretic, and so reputed and esteemed in the Church of God: For,
if any Christian shall this day do, or affirm as S. Cyprian did, or publicly
deny y^ Popes said falsely preteded prerogative of faith in any place, Country,
territories or dominions, where Popery bears the sway: then without all
peradventure, he must be burnt at a stake with fire and faggot for his pains.


Theoph. God reward you for your travail: I see it now Other Bishops were of
Cyprians opinion.
as clearly as the noone day: For, S. Cyprian both knew the Scripture right
well, and also what was the public faith of the Church in his time: and so, if
either the Scripture had taught it, or the Church had believed it; he would
never have withstood it, but reverently have yielded thereunto. But sir, our
Doctors have much to say for themselves, would God it might please you to
hear, and answer the same at large.


Remig. I will both willingly hear them, and soundly (by the power of God)
confute the same: For, I know right well, before I hear them from your mouth,
what possibly they are able to say in their own defense.


CHAP. 3. Of sundry important Objections, which seem to prove the Popes
prerogative of faith.
Objection first.
Theophilus. CHrist prayed for Peter, that his faith should never fail; ergo,
the Bishop of Romes faith cannot fail nor the Pope err in his judicial
decrees: for, seeing Christ constituted a Church, which should continue to the
worlds end; he prayed not only for S. Peter's person, but Luke 22. v. 32.
also for all that should succeed him in his Chair at Rome.


Remig. I answer; S. Peter suffered at Rome.
and learned Writers of the ancient Church, do with uniform assent, affirm
Saint Peter to have been Bishop of Rome, I willingly admit the same as a
received truth. Peter's faith, as also appointed his Church to continue to the
worlds end: yet does it not follow thereupon, that what privilege soever he
obtained by prayer for S. Peter, the same must redound to all those that
lineally succeed in his place or chair: for, no Scripture, no Council, no
Father does so write, or so expound Christ's prayer. Peter's faith, as he did
represent the whole church, which is all one in effect: This I prove by sundry
means. First, because Christ himself does so expound himself in these Ioh.
17. v. 9. 20.
words; I pray not for the world, but for them which thou have given me, for
they are thine. I pray not for these alone, but for them also, which shall
believe in me through their word. Christ prayed as well for the rest of his
Apostles as he did for Peter; and a well for all the elect, as for his
Apostles: and consequently, seeing Christ directed not his words to Peter as to
one private man, but as to one representing y^ whole Church; it follows of
necessity, y^ whatsoever Christ did, or said, concerning Peter's faith, the
same, perforce, must be understood of the faith of y^ whole Church, which faith
shall never fail indeed Secondly, because Johannes Gersonus, a famous Popish
Gers. vbi. sup. cap. 2.
writer affirms constantly, as we have seen already, that there is no
infallible Judge upon earth in matters of faith, saving the universal Church,
or a general Council lawfully assembled, and sufficiently representing the
same, which doctrine, though proceeding from a Popish pen, I willingly
embrace and reverence as an undoubted truth. Austen applies Christ's prayer
generally and indifferently to all the whole Church. ^ug. in quaest mixtis, q.
5. t^m. 4.
Quid ambigitur? etc what doubt is there? did he pray for Peter, and did he
not also pray for ^ames and John, to say nothing of the rest? it is clear that
in Peter all the rest are meant* because he says in another place, I pray for
these O Father, which thou have given me, and desire that they may be with me,
where my self am. Lo, S. Austen understands Christ's prayer for Peter, of the
whole Congregation of the faithful: and he proves it by Christ's own
explication, in an other place of the Holy Gospel. Origin, Orig. Hom^^ in Mat.
a very learned and ancient Father, affirms in a large discourse upon Saint
Matthew, that all things spoken of Peter, touching the Church and the keys,
are to be understood of all the rest: and the collection or illation of Origin,
is evident, even by natural reason: for, as that learned father profoundly
disputes, if Christ prayed not as well for the rest as he did for Peter, of
small credit were a great part of the holy scriptures: a reason doubtless,
insoluble for all Jesuits and Iesuited popelings ^a^or. apud Syl^. defido*. 9.
and de conc. 5.
in the world: for, if they could fail in their faith, they could also fail
in their writing, and yet that they could not so fail, was by virtue of
Christ's prayer. Panormitanus the Popes skillful Canonist, his religious Abbot,
his renowned Arche-bishop, and his Lordly Cardinal (for he was all four)
tells us plainly and peremptorily, that Christ's prayer was for the whole
congregation of the faithful: these are his express words; and pro hac tantum
Chrstus in Euangelio ^ruit ad patrem; ego rogaui pro te: and for this (he
speaks of the whole faithful congregation*) Christ only prayed to his
Father in the Gospel, (when he said) I have prayed for thee ( Peter) that thy
faith fail not. Behold Panorm. de elect. cap significati.
and mark well, and then yield your indifferent censure, when Christ (says
the famous papist Panormitanus) prayed that Peter's faith should not fail, he
prayed for the faith of the universal Church, whose faith shall never fail
indeed: and the same Panormitanus proves his opinion directly and strongly by
many textes of the Popes Canon^aw. S. Luke* even as I have proved out of
Cardinal Panormitanus, that is to say that Christ prayed for the faith of the
whole Church, Ap^d. Bell. lib. 4 cap. 3. de romans pontif.
or for Peter's faith as he represented y^ whole Church which is all one in
effect: this, this, is such a deadly wound to the Pope and to all his
popelings, as all medicines in the world are never able to cure the same: this
is it, which M. Gerson Chancellor of the same university, and a famous
disp^ter in the council of Constance, published to the world in a printed
book, (whose words we have heard already) G^rs. (...)
that the Bishop of Rome may err in matters of faith and doctrine, as well as
other Bishops their brethren: and that there is no infallible judge upon the
earth in matters of faith, save only the congregation of the faithful, and a
general council sufficiently representing the same. Here I would have you; M.
Theophilus, to observe seriously these points with me, which if you shall do,
all partiality set a part, you cannot but abhor and detest late start-vp
popery: these are the observations. Austen, Origin, Panormitane, together with
all the great learned divines of the university of Paris, do with* uniform
consent and sweet harmony, expound Christ's prayer to be made for the whole
congregation of the faithful. de facto, have erred in matters of faith, and
that Christ's prayer was only for the whole Congregation of the faithful.
John's public error in faith, and that with the sound of the Trumpets, yea with
the Kings royal assent, and in his presence: their express words, and the
Coram Philip. ^^ge Franc^^, supra cap. 2.
Popes heresy we have heard at large already.


The first Reply.
Theoph. Cardinal Bellarmine (who is as it were the Popes own mouth,) tells
us constantly, that Christ in his prayer obtained two privileges for Peter:
the one, that his faith should never fail, the other, that neither Peter, nor
any in Peter's seat, should ever teach false doctrine: and consequently he
infers, that albeit the Bishops of Rome may err as priuatemen, yet never
iudicially in matters of faith.


Remig. I answer first, y^ Bellarmine brings nothing for his opinion, but
his own bare imagination, and therefore that it is lawful for us barely to
deny it, till he with reason be able to prove it, which forsooth will be, ad
Calendas Bellarm. de verb. de^on script. lib. 4. cap. 12.
graecas. Secondly, that the same Bellarmine tells us elsewhere, that the
word of God is the rule of faith: and that the written word, because it is the
rule, has this prerogative, that whatsoever is contained in it, is of
necessity true, and must be believed: and whatsoever is repugnant to it, is of
necessity false, and must be rejected: wherein he unawares confuteth himself,
and justifies mine assertion: for the Scripture tells us every where, that
all Bishops e^re, and both deceive others and are deceived themselves. The
Prophet David shows it plainly Ps. 116. v. 11. Iere. 16. v. 19.
when he affirms all men to be liars. The Prophet ^eremy cries aloud, that
the Gentiles in the end of the world, shall come and freely confess that their
forefathers inherited lies and vanity. Saint Paul confirms Romans 3. v. 4 Mal.
1. v. 8.
the same when he tells us, that only God is true, and every man a liar. The
Prophet Malachie reproves the Priests of the law, for their manifold errors:
Ye are gone (says he) out of the way, ye have caused many to fall by the law,
ye have broken the covenant of Leui. The Priest and the Prophet (says Esaias)
have erred by strong Esa. 28. v. 7
drink: they are swallowed up with wine: they have gone astray through strong
drink: they fail in vision: they stumble in judgment. They shall seek a
vision of the Prophet Eze. 7 v. (...).
(says Ezechiel) but the law shall perish from the Priest, and counsel from
the Elders. The heads (says Micach) judge for rewards, and the Priests teach
for hire, and the Prophets prophecy for money. Her Prophets Micach. 3. v. 1^.
Soph. 3 v. 4
(says Sopho^e) are light and wicked persons: her Priests have polluted the
Sanctuary: they have wrested the law. What? erred not Terrullian, Montanizing?
Cyprian, Rebaptizing? Origin, Corporizing? Nazianzen, Offe^^is. adu. Luth. art.
32.
Angelizing? Eusebius, Arrianizing? Lactantius, Millenizing? Says not John
Fisher, that famous Popish Bishop, that we may justly dissent from the
Judgment of Austen, Hierome, and whosoever else? and y^ because they ^aue
showed themselves to be men, and not to have wanted their errors? Does not
Cardinal Bellarmine freely grant, that all Bishops do so dissent sometime one
Lege. Ca^eta^. in prefat, in libr. M^^is, and Aug. ep. 11. 19. Eze. 20. 10.
from another, that we cannot tell which of them we may safely follow? All
these assertions are so true, as no one of them can be gainesayd: and
consequently, if the Popes of Rome be men and not women, as Pope John; if they
be Bishops and not Pilates, they both may err, and, de facto, have erred, as
we have seen already. And Cardinal Bellarmine must either bring some
scripture, divine and Canonical, which assures us that the Popes faith cannot
fail, or else to give us leave (howsoever he deal^ with his Iesuited vassals)
to believe him and his Pope at leisure. But indeed, no Scripture, no Council,
no ancient Father, no approved History of the Church, can be produced by any
one, or al Papists in the world, that says the Bishop of Romes faith cannot
fail, or that the faith of him, who succeeds in the seat of Peter, can
never fail.


The second reply.
Theoph. You have said very much against the infallibility of the Popes faith:
howbeit, the learned Papists think they have a reply, which cannot easily be
answered. They hold, that Saint Cyprian affirms resolutely, that false faith
can have no access to Saint Peter's chair, which if it be so, then cannot I
perceive how the Popes can err in matters of faith: for you freely admit, that
the Bishops of Rome Cyprian. lib. 1. epist. 3.
are Saint Peter's successors there, and sit in his seat or chair: and I like
your dispute a great deal the better, because I see and find you willing to
discover every thing truly, and to conceal nothing that seems to make for
their profession and religion. But I greatly desire a sound answer to this
great and mighty reply: for our learned Divines do think it unanswerable,
and altogether insoluble.


Remig. I answer: S. R. or Robert Parsons (if you will) cites this reason or
testimony out of S. Cyprian; but corruptly and falsely, as in the reply to his
pretensed answer to the downe-fall of Popery, it does and may appear.
Cyprians words: ad quos perfidia Cyprian vbi. super.
acces^^m habere non potest: They know not them to be Romans to whom falsehood
or deceiptfull dealing can have He speaks of one Felicissimus and his bad
companions.
no access: or with whom falsehood and crafty dealing can find no place (or
comfort.) Now, this answer is as much to the purpose, for proving that the
Popes faith cannot fail, as if I should demand of M: Friar Parsons, how far
it is to London: and it should please his gravity to answer a poke full of
plums. For first, S. Cyprian S. R. page 31^.
speaks of the Romans indefinite, whom he commends to be so honest, so
sincere, and so upright in all their proceedings, that the false reports, and
unjust allegations of disobedient persons, can find no help or comfort in their
Tribunals or Consistorie-courts. Now, Robert parsons, (to make a show of the
Popes falsely pretended prerogative in, matters of faith) does first of all
corruptly set down these words (to S. Peter's chair) for these words in the
text ( ad q^os Romanos, to which Romans.) then See the ^esuits antepast. page
13^.
he falsely sets down (false faith) for the word ( perfidia) in S. Cyprian,
which there signifies not false faith, but ^^lshood and deceiptfull dealing:
as if S. Cyprian had said* it s^illeth not, for the Romans are so wise, so
sincere, and so upright in all their proceedings, that no false reports, or
deceitful allegations, can have any place, or find any refuge in their
Courts. Now I pray you heartily, The Romans being faithful men* would not give
ear to faithles liars.
to censure the case and cause indifferently: was this honest dealing of your
Jesuit to change the word falsehood) into false faith? as if forsooth, Saint
Cyprian had meant, that the Popes faith cannot fail: when indeed S. Cyprian
(as we have heard) does utterly renounce that heretical and damnable position;
viz. that the Popes faith cannot fail: For, if S. Cyprian had believed that
position, and withal had gainesaid and withstood the Popes definitive and
judicial sentence, he should both in the judgment of other holy Fathers, and
in his own conscience have bin a flat Heretic. But never did any holy
Father, or y^ Church of God so repute him. Pope Stephanus. with a Council of all the Bishops and Priests of Italy, defined flatly against rebaptization: which
decree of Council with the Popes assent thereto, Saint Cyprian scorned and
contemned, still defending his former opinion constantly. Yea, he was so far
from acknewledging y^ prerogative in Popes, which they of latter days
challenge to themselves, that he would not take Pope Stephanus for his
superior, or to have any jurisdiction over him, but termed him proud, ignorant,
blind, and naughty, as is evident to such as read his Epistle to Pompeius. Out
of which proceedings, I note these memorable points


The third Reply.
Theoph. Cardinal Bellarmine tells us that the Pope defined the controversy
indeed: but not as a matter of faith: and consequently, Saint Cyprian could
not be an Heretic, albeit he withstood the decree of the Pope.


Remig. What a Religion is Popery? what a man is Bell knows Bellarmine right
well.
Cardinal Bellarmine? shall we make him another Pope? shall we admit every
thing he says, for and as, Christ's holy Gospel? I knew the man right well
before he was Cardinal, and I think no Angel has spoken to him since. I fit
so be, let him work miracles for confirmation thereof. The Pope utterly
disliking Saint Cyprians opinion, and deeming it repugnant to Christ's Gospel,
did for that end conuocate all the clergy men of Italy, that the controversy
might be derided, and the truth thereof made manifest to the world. And yet,
says Bellarmine, he defined it not as a matter of faith. The controversy was
about rebaptization, and consequently, either flatly with the Gospel, or
flatly against the same. If it were flatly with the Gospel, then erred the
Pope and his Council egregiously: if it were flatly against y^ Gospel, and
the Pope so decreed it, then decreed he against it, as against a matter of
faith, or else opinions and doctrines Mark this point well.
against the Gospel, are not against the Catholic faith: but the truth of the
matter is this, viz. that if the Papists grant, (as of necessity they must
grant) S. Cyprian to have withstood and contemned the Popes judicial and
definitive sentence, and for all that, ever to have been reputed an holy* man
and learned Father: it will fallow of necessity, that the Pope has no such
authority and prerogative as he a long time falsely has usurped, and still
tyrannically pretends to have. And therefore the Iesuited Cardinal* deemed
it the best course for the continuance of his Popes falsely pretended
prerogatines, to tell us, that though the Pope defined the controversy, yet
did he not define it as a matter of faith, and so Saint Cyprian could he no
heretic, because he withstood no decree of faith, as if forsooth it rested
in the Popes power to make matters of faith and herefie at his good will and
pleasure.


Theoph. This your answer does yield great solace to to my heart: for our great
masters bear us in hand, that whatsoever the Pope decrees, the same must we
receive and believe as an undoubted truth, and their daily practice is
correspondent thereto: for whosoever shall deny or gainesay the Popes decree,
(who is with us as another God) shall undoubtedly be burnt as a convicted
Heretic. Bellarmines answer, seems indeed to be nothing else but a plain
trick of Legerdemaine: as is his like conceit and doctrine, concerning his
Popes double person. But good sir, does not the Evangelist tell us, that Christ
built his church upon Saint Peter? and that hell gates shall never prevail
against it: the words seem very plain. Thou art Peter, and upon this rock
will I Mat 16. ver. 18.
build my church, and Hell gates shall not prevail against it.


Objection second.
Theoph. Christ built his Church upon Peter, ergo his faith cannot fail: the
antecede^t is proved by Christ's own words following. For if his faith could
fail, then should hell gates indeed prevail against him.


Remig. I answer, that Christ did not build his Church upon Peter, I prove it.
First because the words are changed, both in the Greek, which is the fountain
ana original As in all assemblies of government, one for order sake and peace
must bed ssigned to end, and to moderate the actions, so was a preminence given
to Peter among the Apostles that all things might be done in peace and order, a
primacy, not of powers as over inferio^rs, but of order, as amongst equals.
and also in the romish approved Latin translation, which only must be
believed and followed, by the decree of their Tridentine Council: for the
alteration of the word, insinuates significantly an alteration in the sense.
If Christ had meant to build his Church upon Peter, he would have said, (upon
this Peter) and not (upon this Rock:) And it is not to the purpose to say,
that Christ spoke in the Hebrew of Sy^^ack tongue: for we have the original in
Greek from S. John, who being full of the holy Ghost would never, have changed
the words, but to insinuate and express a different sense and meaning if as:
Christ had said* thou art a Rock by name, and my self a Rock by nature and
indeed so strong, so permanent, and so invincible, that hell gates cannot
prevail against it: Upon this Rock therefore of thy consession, will I build
my Church: against the faith of which Church, neither hell nor the Devil shall
ever prevail. Secondly, because the Apostle affrmeth constantly, that no man
can lay any other foundation then that which is laid, which is Jesus Christ:
Christ therefore speaking in S Matthew of the Rock of the Church, does by the
word (Rock) annotate himself, not S Peter: for we see that S Paul does so
expound Christ's words, whose interpretation may fitly be gathered out of the
circumstances of the text in S Matthew, either is it to the purpose, to cite out
of the Re^elation of S. John, that the wall of the City which he behold, had
twelve foundations, and in them the names of the twelve 1. Cor. 3. 11. Mat. 16.
18 Apo^. 21* 14.
Apostles of the Lamb, for the Apostles were but partial and mutable
foundations: but Christ is the total and permanent foundation of the Church
neither can any City* wall, or other thing, have mo^ total foundatios then one:
neither yet can the twelve foundations, make for Peter's prerogative ^^y thing
at all: for seeing the foundations were* (...) in number precisely assigned by
ye vision to the twelve Apostles, without distinction o^ limitation: it
follows by^ necessary (...) the (...). (...) for this ^e^pe^^* do the holy
fathers usually write, that what (...) Christ spoke or did to Peter concerning
the Church, he spoke it (...) (...) the (...) in the name of the ^ho^ (...)
con^^^-^^th T^^s Petrus etc. thou art Peter Aug. de. verb. Dom. sermon. 13.
(^uch Christ) and upon this Rock which thou have confessed, upon this Rock
which thou have acknowledged, saying, thou art Christ the Son of the living
God, will I ^uil^ (...) Church^ that is, upon my self the Son of the living
God, will I build my Church, upon my self will I build thee, not my self upon
thee. S. Chrysostom iumpeth with S. Austens interpretation, in these words,
columnae quidem etc the Apostles Chrysostom. sermon. de pent. 10. 3.
are the pillars, because by their virtue they are the strength of the Church:
they are the foundation, because the Church is built upon their confession,
when the Lord says, thou art Peter, and upon this Rock will I build my
Church. S. Hylary is consonant to the other holy fathers: these are his words,
this faith is the Apoc. 21. v. 14.
foundation of the Church: by this faith hell gates shall not prevail against
it: this faith has the Keys of Heaven. Hilarious de trinit lib. ^. p 103.
Pan^rmit. and S^luester.
understands by the Rock, Peter's faith, and the confession which he made.
Seventhly, because Panormitan and Syluester two very famous (...) are both of
the same opinion. Out of this discourse, I observe these points for your better
instruction. First that Christ is the Rock upon which Peter is built: that
Christ is the Rock, upon which the Church is built: that the Son of God is
the Rock upon which the Church is built. Secondly, that the Apostles are
called the foundation, because (as testifies S. Chrysostom) the Church is
built in their confession, when the Lord says, thou art Peter, and upon this
Rock will I build my Church. Thirdly that the confession pronounced for ^^der
sake by the mouth of one (even Peter by name) was the joint confession of them
all (the Church is built in their confession,) mark well these mark this
point well for it is wonderful and kills the papists.
words, of the ^^lded mouthed doctor S. Chrysostom, they are words of great
importance, they prove the controversy so sufficiently, as no evasion can take
place, they prove effectually, that whatsoever was said to Peter touching the
Church, was meant of the whole Congregation of the faithful, for as Peter
spoke and answered Mat. 16. ver. 13. 15. Luke 22. ver. 32. Mat. 18. ver. 15.
18. 19. 20
in the name of the whole Church, so Christ's demands, answers, and promises,
were made and intended for the whole Church: for as S. Chrysostom truly
says, Peter's confession was made in the name of all the Apostles, and
consequently in the name of the whole Church, when he pronounced Christ the
Son of the living God: and even so Christ's answer and promise was made to
Peter (as appears by the circumstances of the text) in the name of the whole
Church, and I may not forget to add hereunto, the ioynt-testimonis of all the
learned divines of Paris who (as we have heard already) understand al things
spoken to Peter in Church matters, to The whole university of Paris teaches
this my doctrine.
be meant of the whole Church: as when he prayed that Peter's faith should not
fail, he then prayed for the infallibility and perpetuity of the faith of the
whole Church: all both the holy and ancient fathers and, also best approved
popish writers (our Jesuits and Iesuited popelings only excepted,) do
willingly subscribe hereunto.


Objection 3.
Theoph. Christ commanded Peter, and only Peter, and that three several times
to feed his sheep. Ergo Peter, and only Peter had the ordinary charge and
government of Christ's sheep, and consequently, all Priests, all Bishops, all
Archbishops, all Patriarchs, receive their authority and jurisdiction from the
Pope, as from Saint Peter's successor.


Remig. I answer that all Christ's sheep, were committed Gal. 2. 7.
to all the Apostles, jointly and severally, as well to Paul and the rest, as to
Peter: yea, rather to Paul, though he were none of the twelve, then to Peter:
for he says of himself that the Gospel of the uncircumcision was committed
to him, even as was the Gospel of Circumcision Mark this point again and
again.
unto Peter: and consequently, since all Christians now were Gentiles then: y^
Pope if he will needs have a superiority over all his brethren y^ Bishops, must
perforce reduce his succession from S. Paul: and for this policy perhaps it is,
that the Pope ever joins Saint Paul and Saint Peter together, whether it be
in giving pardons, or other faculties whatsoever. I prove the proposition. To
avoid ^sme, di Per has primacy of order but not of power.
more or less, to one rather then to another. Peter, in regard of his
threefold negation, left nouises and weaklings should have been scandalized,
understanding that such a notorious sinner without public confession of his
faith, should have any jurisdiction over Mat. 28. v. 19. Mark 16. v. 14. 15.
ioh. 21. v. 14. 15.
them: but not to give any special prerogative to Peter thereby; The reason
hereof is evident, because our Savior had before this charge of feeding, given
a very large commission to all his Apostles of feeding all Nations: and
therefore he can now mean and intend no other thing, but only to move Peter
to walk warily, to be mindful of his infirmities, and to be careful of his
charge. Austen, that mighty pillar of Christ's Church, confirms and defends
this my present doctrine. These are his express words: Ecclesiae Catholicae
personam sust^^^ Petrus and cum ei dicitur, ad omnes dicitur, a^^^ me?
pas^^^ues meat: Peter represented the person of y^ Church Catholic and when it
is said to him it is said to all, Aug. de ogonae Christi cap. 30. Romans 3.
love thou me? feed my sheep. Fourthly, because S. Cyprian decideth this
controversy (...) plainly, as cannot but satisfy (...) indifferent reader^
these are his express words; loquitur Dominus ad Petru^, ego dico tibi; quia
tu es Petrus, Cypr. de simplicit. Prelaetorum p. 113.
etc. and Paulo post hoc era^t vtique and caeteri Apostoli quod fuit Petrus,
pari consortio prediti and honoris and potestatis, sed exord^^ abo^ni^ate
proficiscitur, vt Ecclesia vna monstretur: Our Lord speaks unto Peter. I say
unto thee that thou art Peter, and upon this Rock will I build my Church etc.
the same were the rest of the Apostles doubtless, that Peter was, endued with
equal fellowshippe, both of honor and of power, but the beginning proceeds
from unity, that the Church may be showed to be one. And the same holy Father
confirms this his doctrine in another place in these memorable words;
Episcopatus vnus est, (...) a singulis in solidum pars tenetur, there is but
one Bishoprick^, a part whereof every Bishop possesses Cypr. de vnitate
Ecclesiae, p. 29^.
and enjoys wholly. S. Austen confirms S. Cyprians sentence and judgment,
in these words: Claues non vnus homo Petrus, sed vnitas accepit Ecclesiae; not
one only man Peter, received the Keys, but the unity of the Couarr to 1. part
2, 9. p. 242. col. 4. prope finem.
Church. Fifthly, because two famous popish writers are iump of tho same
opinion, and constantly desend y^ same doctrine: Couar^vi^s a profound
Canonist, and a popish Archbishop of great esteem in y^ romish Church has
these express words; and enim iuxta Catholicorum viroru^ auctoritates, and
communem omnium traditionem, Apostoli parem ab ipso Domino Jesus eum Petro
potestatem ordinis and iuridictionis acceperunt, ita quidem, vt quilibet
Apostolorum aequalem cum Petro habuerit potestatem ab ipso Deo, intotum orbem,
and in omnes actus quos Petrus agere poterat: for according to the authorities
of Catholic writers, and the common tradition of all, the Apostles received
from our Lord Jesus Christ himself, equal power with Peter, both of order and
of iuridiction; in so much, doubtless, as every Apostle had equal power with
Peter from God himself, and that both over the whole world, and to all actions
that Peter could do. Josephus Angles a famous Friar and a very learned popish
Bishop, Angl. in 4. q de clau, di^ fic. 2. Concl. 1. page 6.
in that self same book which he dedicated to the Pope, has by the force of
Gods spirit testified the same truth, both against the Pope and against
himself: these are his own words: si comparemus B. Petri and aliorum
Apostolorum potestatem ad gubernationem omniumcredentium, tantam alij Apostoli
habuerunt potestatam, quantam B. Petrus habuit; ita quod poterant quemlibet
Christianum totius orbis, sicut modo Romans Pont. excommunicare, and in qualibet
Lo, Peter had the primacy of order, as amongst equals, not of power, as over
inferious, for he was the first both in order and calling. Ioh. 1 42. Mat. 10.
2. (...) tollend^ schismata.
Ecclesia Episcopos and Sacerdotes creare: ratio est, quia omnis potestas B.
Petro promissa and tradita fuit, and caeteris Apostolis collata, and hoc sine
personarum, loci, vel fori discrimine: if we compare the power of S. Peter and
of the others Apostles, to the government of all the faithful, other Apostles
have even as much power as S Peter had; so that they could then excommunicate
every Christian in the whole world, and in every Church make Bishops and
Priests: the reason is, because all power promised and given to S. Peter, was
also given to the rest of the Apostles, and that without difference, of
persons, place, or consistory. Thus we have a full and resolute judgment, both
for answer to the objection, and for the supposed prerogatives and privileges
of S. Peter: which resolution is not only deduced out of ye holy scripture,
but plainly contested also by the uniform consent of the holy fathers, S.
^vprian and S. Austen, and in like manner of the famous and learned papists,
Couarruvias and ^osephus Angles, for they teach us many sound points in
divinity; Peter had. Peter, could make and constitute Bishops and Priests every
where, throughout the Christian world. Peter could do, every Apostle had power
and authority to do the same. Mark well that all Writers teach this doctrine.
Peter's was. And this, (says Couarruvias) is the common received doctrine of
all Catholic writers: this is a point of Catholic doctrine so important and
so memorable, as it well deserves to be written in golden letters. Peter in
the singular number, did not argue any superiority of jurisdiction, but only
signify the unity of the Church. Peter's, and that without all difference of
persons, place or consistory. This is another point of great consequence: for
seeing, first, all and every of the Apostles, had equal jurisdiction: Mark
this well, for it strikes dead.
seeing secondly, that their jurisdiction was not limited, but over the whole
world: seeing thirdly, that the whole jurisdiction of every Apostle, ended and
expired with his death: and seeing fourthly, that S. John lived after all the
Mortuus est Ioannes. A. D. 99.
Apostles: it follows of necessity, that the Ecclesiastical jurisdiction of
the whole world, remained in Saint John, after the death of Peter, and the
other Apostles. So then, if the Bishop of Rome, will have indeed any such
prerogative, as he falsely pretends to have, he must bring and show us his
commission from S. John, and not from S. Peter: for S John being the suruiuer,
had all jurisdiction Let this be well marked.
in himself. And if the late Bishops of Rome, can show us such a commission
from Saint John, viz that Saint John translated and committed his whole power,
authority and jurisdiction to the Bishop of Rome, and his successors, I for my
part, will willingly yield obedience to the same, not otherwise. For I require
the Popes charter from S. John.


Theoph. This is wonderful which you say: and yet you prove the same so
pithily, as I must, perforce, yield thereunto. I will proceed, by your favor,
to be resolved in other doubts.


Remig. Leave nothing vnsayd, which possibly can be devised, or advised for
the supposed prerogatives of your Pope.


Objection fourth.
Theoph. The Apostle tells us that the Church cannot 1 Timothy 3. v. 15.
err, and he proves it, because it is the pillar and ground of truth.


Remig. It is true, that the Apostle says so: and my self do willingly admit
the doctrine, and humbly reverence the same. I most willingly grant y^ Christ's
church cannot err in matters of faith, we differ not in the nature we differ
not in the thing, but in the modification thereof.
of the thing (markewel my words) but in the modification and application of
the thing: that is to say, we all grant on all sides, that the Church cannot
err; but we differ in the application of our grant, what Church it is that
cannot err: what Church mean you M. Theophilus?


Theoph. I mean, as all Catholics do, of the Pope and Church of Rome.


Remig. I told you that you are but bastards and deformed Catholics, as your
own Capucheenes do tell your deformed Franciscans: and withal I tell you that
the Pope or Church of Rome (which is with Papists, all one) has, de facto,
erred egregiously as is already proved: Nay, it is impossible that ye Apostle
should mean of your Pope or Church of Rome. I prove it many ways. First
because the famous Popish Doctor, Johannes Gersonus, has freely told us, (as
we have heard already related) ye the Bishop of Rome has, de facto, erred, not
only in his private opinion but also in his public and judicial definitions:
and that therefore we have no infallible Judge upon earth saving these two.
viz. the whole Congregation of the faithful, and a general Council
sufficiently representing the same: where I wish you to mark attentively, the
word ( Sufficiently) because it is very emphatical, ^ of great moment.
Syluester Pryeras, a divine so learned, that he is by them so named ( Absolutus
Theologus) confirms the opinion and doctrine of M. Gerson, the famous
Chauncelor of Paris, in these express words; Et sic intellige glossam Syluest.
de Eccles.. 4.
dicentem, quod Ecclesia quae errare non potest, dicitur non papa, sed
congregatio fidelium, quae scilicet tenet fidem quam Petrus eum alijs populis
docuit: And thus Lo, not the Pope, but the congregation of the faithful is 3.
the church that cannot err.
must the gloss be understood, which says, that y^ Church which cannot err
is not the Pope, but the congregation of the faithful; that is, such as hold
firmly that faith, which Peter with other (godly) people taught. Thirdly,
because Panormitanus, that famous Popish Canonist, Abbot, Archbishop, and
Cardinal, for he was all four, and therefore of high esteem with the Pope
and Church of Rome, iumpeth with the other learned Papists, Gerson Panorm. de
elect cap. significasti. Cers idem. docet. p. 1. de exam. doctrine.
and Syluester, and stoutly confirms their doctrine: These are his express
words: Nam in concernentibus sidem, etc. For concerning matters of faith, even
the judgment of one that is a mere layman ought to be preferred before the
sentence of the Pope: if that layman could bring Better reasons out of the old
and new Testament, then Seo the antepast. page 173. 175* 177.
did the Pope. And it skilleth not, if one say, that a Council cannot err,
because Christ prayed for his Church, that it should not fail: for I say, that
although a general Council represent the whole universal Church: yet in
truth, there is not truly the universal Church, but representatiuely: For the
universal Church (which is it that cannot err) consists of the collection
of all the faithful: Oh that this learned man durst have spoken out.
Whereupon all the faithful in the world, make this Church universal, whereof
Christ is the head. The Pope is the Uicar of Christ, but not truly the head of
y^ Church, as notes the gloss upon the Clementines, which gloss says
notably, that when the Pope is dead, the Church wants not an head, and this
is that Church which cannot err: whereupon it is possible, that the true faith
of Christ might remain in one alone, and so it may be truly said, that the
faith fails not in the Church. Christ before his passion prayed for Peter,
that his faith should not fail: therefore the Church is not said to fail,
neither to err so long as the true faith abides in one only: thus writes
this famous and learned papist. Fourthly, because ^
the Popes own dear gloss upon his own d^^rees, does most lively describe
that Church which cannot err, to be the Congregation of the faithful: for
thus is it there written in express terms; Quaero de qua Ecclesia intelligas,
quod hic dicitur, quod non possit errare? si de ipso Cause. 24. quaest 1.
arecta, (...) glosia.
Papa, certum est quod Papa errare potest: respondeo, ipsa congregatio fidelium
hic dicitur Ecclesia, and talis Ecclesia non potest non esse: I ask thee (O
Pope Leuci,) of what Church thou understand that, which thou tellest us in
this place? to wit, that the Church cannot err? for, if thou understand it of
the Pope himself, it is certain that the Pope may err: I therefore answer,
that the Church is here taken for the congregation of the faithful, and such a
Church can never err (indeed.) Fifthly, because ^
the popish ceremonial practice in the holy week, while they put out all the
candles save one, does lively express unto us, that the Church of Rome, and
Bishop there, may err indeed: for thereby the romish Church does give us to
understand, that the light of faith was extinguished Vide Dur. in ration^.
in all generally, save only in the blessed virgin Mary, (that most holy mother
of true God and true man) and so their usual yearly practice three days
together in the week before Easter, does utterly condemn the faith of the Pope
and of the Church of Rome. Sixthly, because S. Austen and S. Anselme do both
of them so expound ^ Tim. 3. v. 15.
S. Paul's words, the ground of this objection: these are S. Austens express
words; secundum ergo sabbathi etc. therefore we may not understand the second
of the sabbath, to be any other then the Church of Christ, yet the Church of
Christ in the saints; the Church of Christ in those which are not overcome with
the tentations of this wicked Aug. in Ps. 47. in pref.
world, for they are worthy the name of Firmament, therefore the Church of
Christ is called the Firmament, in those that are firm; which is (says he)
the Church of the living God, the pillar and Firmament of truth. The like
saying has the same holy father in many other places, but especially where he
writes against the Donatists. Vide Aug. lib. 7. de bapt. c. 51. tom. ^.
Anselmus an ancient father, and well approved of the papists, does follow
Saint Austens interpretation: these are his words; Domus in qua Deus habitat
etc. the house in which God dwells, is the whole congregation of the
faithful, who are to be taught diversely: and the same Church is in the perfect
a pillar, that is, sublime, straight, inconcussible, supporting and lifting up
the younger sort: and in the same perfect, it is the firmament of truth, Ansel.
in. 1. tim. 3. v 15.
because in words and examples, it confirms in ye hearts of the weak, the
verity of faith, and Gods commandments. Out of this discourse of these holy
fathers, and famous Popish writers, I gather these golden observations. First ^
that a mere lay-mans judgment even in matters of faith, ought to be received
before the Popes resolution, if that Gerson part. 1. de examine doctrine.
layman bring better reasons out of the scripture then the Pope does: and M.
Gerson, that famous Chauncelour of Paris, stoutly def^deth this point with
their Cardinal Panormitanus, where I wish by the way, to remember well, that
hence it is proved, that not only mere laymen may be heard in councels, and
their judgments preferred Jesuits Antepast. page 134.
before the Popes; but also that the scriptures are the rule of our faith; not
partial, as Bellarmine would have it (whose opinion is disproued in the
Jesuits Antepast) but total and in every respect. Gerson, viz. that we have
only two Judges upon earth, which are infallible, that is, not the Pope
forsooth, or the Church of Rome, but the whole congregation of the faithful,
and a general council: but what general council? of Trent? of Lateran? of
Florence? of Rauenna? of Ferrara? of Rome? No, no, such are prouincial, Mark
this point well.
or at the most, national, not any one of them, or such like truly general:
for) as M. Doctor Gerson very learnedly told us) that Council which cannot
err, must not only be general in what sort soever, or sworn to defend the
Popes Cannon-law, after the manner of late start-vp Popery; but it must be
such a general Council as does sufficiently represent the whole Church or
congregation of the faithful: for the word (sufficiently) which I wished you
before to mark, out of M. Gersons doctrine, is very emphatical, and gives
light both to the truth, and to Panormitans doctrine, which word, if it be not
well marked, there will seem a variance between the two learned Papists,
Panormitan and Gerson: for the one of them says, that a general council may
err, and it is true: the other says that a general council cannot err, but
is the second infallible judge upon earth, and this is also true, but in a
different respect: both the learned men agree See the antepast. 172.
in this, and my self with them, that the whole congregation of the faithful
is that Church, which cannot err in faith: for, though the elect may err in
part, and at some time, yet shall they never err, either all generally, or any
one finally: for whom, and in respect of whom, the Church is rightly called the
pillar of truth: this is only it, in which they vary; which is no true
variance indeed, but seems so in show of words: for that Council which
Mark well this point.
sufficiently (mark the word) does represent the whole congregation of the
faithful, (when and where such a one can be had,) may truly be called the
Catholic Church militant here on earth. The body of Christ, which the wicked
are not. Ephe. 2. v. 22 23.
which cannot err, is not the visible company of Bishops and Priests, Pastors,
and Doctors; but the society of the predestinate, which are effectually called
to the knowledge of the truth. M. Theophilus) 1. Tim 3. 15
ye know it right well, that when the papists speak of the Church, and tell
us it cannot err, then do ye mean either your Pope alone, or the Pope with
his Cardinals and others of that crew. Ps. 118. v. 23
for it is his handy work: we have cause to cry a loud with the Prophets; Hoc
factum est a Domino, and est mirabile in oculis nostris.


Oblection. 4.
Theoph. Christ promised to be with his Apostles unto Mat 28. v. 20. Esa. 59.
2^. Iere. 33. v, 20.
the worlds end: which must needs understood of the Bishops of Rome, the
only true successors of the Apostles: for seeing the Apostles departed hence
long sythence, it must, perforce, be understood of some Bishop, which finally
succeed them.


Remig. True it is, and more cannot be inferred of the text, that Christ spoke
not only of the Apostles, but even of them also, who should be living unto the
worlds end. Howbeit, he meant neither the Bishop of Rome, nor his Cardinals,
nor the Church of Rome: what meant he then, (will you say) or of whom did he
speak of, seeing the Apostles, being mortal, were to go the way of all flesh,
and so could not be here on earth till the worlds end? Christ therefore
promising to be with them to the worlds end, must perforce mean of those who
were to succeed after them: but I answer withal facility: to this
invincible so supposed Bulwark, First, with S. Chrysostom Chrysostom. in cap 5.
M^^. hom 15. Tom. 1.
in these words: nam cum dicit, ecce ego vobiscum sum omnibus diebus vsque ad
consummationem seculi; non ad eos tantum loquitur, sed per eos ad vniuersum
prorsus orbem: for when he says; behold, I am with you always until the end
of the world; he speaks not only to them, but to al, doubtless, that are in
the whole world. and the like assertions the same golden-mouthed father has in
many other places of his works. S. Austen in these words; non itaque sic
dictum est Apostolis, eritis mihi testes in Jerusalem, and in tota Iudaea,
Aug. in ep. 90. 4. 23 8.
and Samaria, and vsque ad extremum terrae etc. it is not therefore so said to
the Apostles, ye shall be my witnesses in Jerusalem, and in all Jury, and in
Samaria, Maike well these unanswerable testimonies
and even to the utmost parts of the world, as if they only to whom he theu
spoke, should have accomplished so great a matter, but as he seems to have
said only to them, that which he said in these words: behold, I am with you to
the worlds end: which thing nevertheless every one perceineth, that the spoke
it to the universal Church, which by the death of some, and by the birth of
other some, shall continue to the worlds end; even as he says that to them,
which does nothing at all pertain to them, and yet is it spoken, as if it
only pertained to them, to wit, Mat. 24. v. 33.
when ye shall see these things come to pass, know that it is near in the
doors: for, to whom does this pertain, but to those who shall then be living,
when all things shall be accomplished? Thus writes Saint Austen, out of whose
words with S^int Chrysostoms, I observe this memorable doctrine: viz, y^ this
objection, wherein the papists glory more then a little, makes nothing for
them: for (as say those holy fathers) these words already recited, (...) spoken
to the whole congregation of the faithful, which are or shall be to the worlds
end: and Saint A^ston proves it by two reasons.


The first reply.
Theoph. Christ himself says, that the holy Ghost shall teach the Apostles
all truth; even many things, whereof they were not capable then: and therefore
did he reserve Ioh. 16. v. 13. Ioh. 14. v. 16.
those things, till* the coming of the holy Ghost, who should continue with
them for ever for that end.


Remig. I answer, that the holy Ghost, after Christ's ascension, taught the
Apostles all truth indeed, of such The holy Ghost taught no new doctrine, but
only reucaled the true sense of such things as the Apostles did not understand.
things as he had reserved by reason of their ^udity and imperfection in
conceiving heavenly doctrine: but withal* I say; that those things so reserved,
and the truth so taught, was nothing else but a manifest explication of the
self same verity, which they in brief before had heard: For, the holy Ghost
did coin no new doctrine, nor reveal any new articles of faith; but only
taught the Apostles the true sense of Christ's words, which before for their
dulnes they were not able to perceive: which sense, they being directed by the
instinct of the holy Ghost, delivered to the whole world, First by word, and
afterward by writing. This mine answer thus explicated, I prove by two evident
demonstrations: Ioh. 14. v. 16.
so expound himself, in these words following: ( He shall teach you all
things, and bring all things to your remembrance which I have told you), Which
assertion must be It is the self same doctrine, but more plainly declared.
well noted, because the latter words are a plain declaration of the former:
as if Christ had said, all things which the holy Ghost shall teach the Apostles
after my departure, are no new doctrine, but the very same things which they
heard before of me. This only difference there is, y^ the Apostles do more
plainly understand them, by the assistance of the holy Ghost. Melchior Canus,
has these express words; Nec vllas in fide no^as Reuelationes Ecclesia habet:
For the Church has no new revelations Canus de lec^s. lib. 3. c. 4. page 101.
in matters of faith. Thus teaches Christ himself: and thus their ^^i^e
learned Bishop affirms: and yet will the Papists porfor^e compel us daily to
admit new doctrines from the Church of Rome.


The second reply.
Theoph. Christ promises the continuance of the holy (...)* 14. vet. 16.
Ghost, even after the death of the Apostles. ergo, he means of their
successors as well as of themselves.


Remig. I answer that Christ promises the presence of Mat. 28. ver. ^0.
the holy Ghost here, as he did before, his own presence to the worlds end, and
so one and the same answer may fitly serve to both, to wit, that the holy
Ghost is promised to the whole congregation of the faithful: the Doctors of
Paris are all of the same opinion.


The third reply.
Theoph. Christ commanded the people to do whatsoeeuer Mat. 23. ver. 2. 3.
the Scribes and Pharisees willed them to observe, and this he did for this
respect only, because the Scribes and Pharisees sat in Moses chair: But
doubtless, if they sitting in Moses chair could have erred, Christ would
never have commanded his disciples and the people so strictly to observe their
doctrine: and none will, or can deny, that to sit in Peter's chair, has as
great prerogative every way, as to sit in Moses chair: ergo, the Pope that now
sittes in Peter's chair at Rome, can never teach false doctrine.


Remig. I answer: first, by the Popes own decrees in did. 42. cap. multi
Sacerdotes.
these express words: Multi Sacerdotes, and pauci Sacerdotes, multi in nomine,
and pauci in opere. Videte ergo fratres, quomodo sedetis super cathedram, quia
non cathedra facit Sacerdotem, sed Sacerdos cathedram. Non locus sanctificat
hominem, sed homo sanctificat locum. Non omnis Sacerdos sanctus, sed omnis
sanctus est Sacerdos, qui been sederit super cathedra^, honore^ accipit
cathedrae, qui male sederit, iniuriam facit cathedrae. Many Priests and few
Priests, many in name, and few in work: therefore my brethren, beware how you
sit upon the chair: for not the chair makes the Priest, but the Priest makes
the chair: the place does not sanctify the man, but the man sanctifies the
place: every Priest is not a holy man, but every holy man is a Priest: he that
shall sit well in the chair, receives the honor of the chair: but he that
sits evil does injury to the chair. Thus says the Popes own decree. I ad
nothing, I change nothing: I will deal sincerely, upon my salvation. Would to
God the Pope and his Iesuited Popelings, did this day put this decree The
faithful dealing of the Author.
in practice Christianly. Let not the Popes henceforth, boast of sitting in
Peter's chair. Let them remember that they be many in name, but few in work:
they have not this hundred years, preached an hundred Sermons. What say I? an
hundred Sermons? for so far as I can learn not one at all: therefore as the
Popes own Canons tell us, the Popes did honor Saint Peter's chair. Austen, in
these express words: sedendo Cathedram Moysi, legem Dei docent; ergo per Aug.
tract. 46. in Ioh, an* in medi^ Rom 9.
illos Deus docet: sua vero si illi docere velint, nolite audire, nolite
facere: sitting in the chair of Moses, they teach the law of God; therefore
God teaches by them: but if they will needs teach their own inventions and
fantasies, then hear them not, do not as they bid you do. Thirdly with Saint
Hilary in these words: cum igitur doctrina Pharisaeorum ob id probabi^is esse
docetur, quia ipsi in Moysi Cathedra sederunt, doctrina necessatio significatur
Hylar. in Psalm. 118. Page 698.
in Cathedra: seeing therefore, that the doctrine of the Pharisees is for that
proved probable, because they sat in the chair of Moses; therefore by the
chair, doctrine must of necessity be signified. Thus write these two ancient
and most learned fathers: by whose judgments it is very clear and evident,
that the chair of Moses, and the doctrine of Moses, is all one: and
consequently, Mark this doctrine, and forget it not.
that not they who occupy the room of Moses, or Peter, are to be followed,
but they that teach the doctrine of Moses and Peter are to be heard, and their
commandments must be done: and ce^tes, if ever the Bishops of Rome, (the late
Popes I mean,) shall be able to prove that they preach no otherwise then Saint
Peter did, (if first they preach at all) nor decree or command no otherwise
then Saint Peter or Saint Paul did, I will obey them, I will with a beck, do as
they command me. Fourthly, I answer with popish Friar Lyra, (whom Sir Thomas
Lyr. in cap. 23. Mat.
Moore called a great Clearke, and the Pope so esteems his writings,) in
these express words: omnia quaecunque dix^rint vobis, facite, q uia Praelatis
etia^ malis est obediendum, nisi in his quae sunt manifest contra Deum: do
all things that they shall say unto you, because we must obey even those
Prelates that be evil, unless they teach plainly against God. Dionysius
Carthusianus, Carth in cap 23. Mat.
in these very words: hoc est absolute and vniuersaliter intelligendum, quia
Scribae and Pharisaei multa superstitiosa and falsa docuerunt, corrumpentes
scripturam, and irritum facientes verbum Dei per suas traditiones:
intelligendum est ergo de Predicatoribus eorum, non contrarijs legi Moysimalis:
enim Praeside^tibus obediendu^ est, qua^di^ non docent nec iubent contraria
Deo: this must not be understood absolutely and generally, because the Scribes
and Pharisees taught many superstitious and false things, corrupting the
Scripture, and making frustrate the word of God with their traditions: we must
therefore understand it of their Preachers, which teach nothing contrary to the
Law of Moses: for we must obey evil Rulers, so long as they neither teach nor
command against God. Thus write Lyranus and Carthusianus, two famous Popish
Friars, teaching the self saine doctrine, with the holy Fathers, Saint Austen
and Saint Hylary: viz, y^ we must believe those Preachers and teachers, that
teach the same doctrine which Moses thaught, and that y^ is to fit in the
chair of Moses, but not barely to occupy the place.


The fourth Reply.
Theoph. God commanded to obey the Priests, and Deuteronomy. 17. ^ 9. 10. 11.
not to swerve in any one jot from their doctrine, by turning either to the
right hand or to the left: this argument seems to me to be unanswerable.


Remig. Mark well my answer, and then you will say it is of no force: I
answer thus, that the Priests of Moses law might e^^e, and did, de facto,
err indeed: which conclusion I have already proved, out of the doctrine of
the Scribes and Pharisees: for, they were not only wicked men in life and
conversation, but they also seduced the people, taught false doctrine, and
corrupted Popery is plainly confuted by her own doctors.
the pure word of God: which point, because it is a thing of great consequence,
I will endeavor my self by Gods help, to make it plain unto you. And because
nothing is or can be of greater force against the papists then to confute their
doctrine by the testimony of their own approved Doctors, I will after my
wonted manner, allege the express words of approved papists, who were very
dear unto your Pope: Nicolaus Lyranus, Lyr. in cap. 17 deuter.
(who has written very learned commentaries upon the whole Bible, the old and
new Testament,) a zealous popish Friar, has these words; hic dicit glos^a
Hebraica, si dixerint tibi, quod dextra sit sinistra, vel sinistra dextra,
talis sententia est tenenda; quod patet manifest falsum, quia sententia
nullius hominis cuiuscunque sit authoritatis, est tenenda, si contineat
manifestate falsitatem, vel errorem. Lo, papistry is confuted by Papists even
of the best sort.
Et hoc patet, period quod permittitur in textu Postea subditur, et docuerint
te iuxta legem eius, ex quo patet, quod si dicant falsum, et declinent a lege
Dei manifest, non sunt audiendi. Here says the Hebrew gloss, if they shall
say to thee, that the right hand is the left, or the left hand the right, such
sentence is to be holden, which thing appears manifestly false: for, no man's
sentence, of how great authority soever he be, must be holden or obeyed if it
manifestly contain falsehood, or error: and this is manifest by that which
goes before in the text, they shall show to thee the truth of judgment. It
follows in the Author; and they shall teach thee according to his law.
Hereupon it is clear; that if they teach falsely, and swerve from the law of
God manifestly, then are they not to be heard or followed. Thus writes this
learned Popish Doctor: out of whose words, well worthy to be engraven in golden
letters, I note these memorable observations. First, that our Papists now a
days are so gross, and sens^es, as were the old Jewish Rabbis, as who labor
this day to enforce us to believe the Pope, though he err never so grossly;
telling us that chalk is cheese, and the left hand the right. Secondly, that
Nicholaus de Lyra, a great learned Papist, (whose authority is a mighty
argument against the Papists) does here expressly condemn the gross error of
the Hebrew Doctors, and in them the impudent error of all Jesuits and Romish
Paras^tes, who to satisu^e the humor of their Pope, and to uphold his
Antichristian tyranny, do wrest the holy scripture from the manifest truth
thereof. Thirdly, that we must neither believe Bishop nor the Pope of Rome, nor
any mortal man of what authority soever, if he teach us contrary to ye
manifest truth of Gods word. Fourthly, that this learned Popish Doctor, does
gather out of the text it self, that the high Priest might err, preach false
doctrine, and consequently, that the Jesuit Bellarmine does but flatter the
Popes holiness, when he bestirreth himself to prove out of this place, that
the Bishops ^f Rome cannot err, because the Jewish Bishops had ye like
privilege, and could not teach against the truth. The same Doctor Lyra
delivers the same doctrine in effect in another place, where he has these
words: Ve vobis Scribae: hic ostendit qualiter corrumpebant veritatem
doctrinae, in his quae pertinent ad salutem: Dicebant enim quod obseruare legem
erat necessariu^ omnibus ad salute^, quod falsum est, quia multi gentiles sunt
saluati, vt Job and plures alij: ex suppositione autem huius falsi,
discurrebant alioqui doctores Hebraei per diuersas civitates and castra, Lyra.
in cap. 23. Mat.
vt possent conuertere aliquos de Gentilitate ad Iudaismum: Woe to you Scribes:
here he shows how they The Jewish Church erred in matters of faith
corrupted the truth of doctrine: even in those things which pertain to
salvation: for they said, that the keeping of y^ law was necessary for all men
unto salvation, which is false, because many Gentiles are saved, as Job and
sundry others: by reason of this false supposition, some Hebrew doctors wandered
through diverse Cities and Towns, that so they might convert some from
Gentility to Iudaisine again. The same Lyra has these words: Vae vobis Lyra
vbi super.
D^ces caeci: hic consequenter ostendit, qualiter corrumpeba^t veritatem
doctrinae, in his quae pertinent ad actu^ latr^ae, cuius actus est iurare modo
debito, and iuramentum obseruare: Pharisaei enim and Scribae ex cupiditate
moti, dicebant, quod illi qui iurabant per templum Dei, nec peccabant, nec
erant in aliquo obligati, sed illi qui iurabant per aurum Templi, erant
obligati ad soluendum Sacerdotibus certam portionem auri: Woe to you blind
guides: here he shows consequently, how they corrupted the truth of doctrine,
in those things which pertain to the pure and proper worship of God, the act
whereof is to swear after a due manner, and to perform the oath: for the
Scribes and Pharisees ^^oued with covetousness, said, that they who did swear
by the Temple of God, neither sinned, neither were bound to do any thing, but
they who did swear by the gold of the Temple, were bound to give some portion
of gold to the Priests: Dyonisius Carthusianus another zealous, famous, and
learned papist, defends the same doctrine: these are his own words:
Carthus. 23. cap. Mat.
Non sinitis intrare, quia falsa doctrina and prauis exemplis peruertitis eos:
sequitur, qui dicitis, quicunque iurauerit per Templum, nihil est, id est,
solucre non tenetur, and fi peieret, non erit criminis reus: You do not suffer
them to come in, for you prevent them with false doctrine, and evil example:
you say, whosoever swears by the Temple, it is nothing, that is to say, he is
not bound to keep his o^th, and if he be forsworn, he shall not be guilty of
Calt in cap. 17. deuteronomy. Canus lib. 3. c^p vlt. page 106.
any crime: yea, Caietanus y^ famous* Cardinal of Rome, teaches the self
same doctrine with the other papists: and Melchior Canus a very famous popish
Bishop, and profound school Doctor has these words: Fatemur Sacerdotes n^
esse audiendos, nisi docuerint iuxta legem Domini: We grant (says the famous
and best learned papist of all the rest) that the Priests ought not to be
heard, or obeyed, unless they shall preach and teach according to Gods law:
thus we see or may see if we hide not our eyes, that by the judgment of these
great papists, the Bishops and Priests of the old law, did not only
scandalize the people with their wicked life, but also taught false doctrine,
and corrupted the holy scripture: and it is a wonder to see and consider, the
palp^ble blindness or else malice of our Iesuited papists: for, the very words
of the law, (if we mark them well) do plainly express and lively set
before our eyes, the true sense and meaning thereof, viz, that we must then
obey the Priests, and then hearken to their commands, when they teach
according to Gods law, but not when they wrest and corrupt his holy and sacred
word: the words of the text are these: and facies quodcunque dixerint, qui
praesunt loco quem elegerit Deuteronomy. 17. v. 10.
Dominus, and docuerint te iuxta legem eius: And thou shall do whatsoever they
shall say, which are over that place which the Lord has chosen, and shall
teach thee according to his law. Lo this condition is required, that the
Priests do teach Gods law: for these words are taken out of the Latin vulgata
editio, which the late Council of Trent prefers before the Hebrew and the
Greek* and strictly tieth all papists to the same.


The fifth reply.
Theoph. The words do not import any condition, but a mere assertion and flat
promise, that they shall not err: Mal. 2. v. 7.
for so teaches the Prophet Malachie: Labiae Sacerdotis custodient scientiam,
and legem requirent ex ore eius, quia Angelus Domini exercitnum est: The
Priests lips shall keep knowledge, and they shall seek the law at his mouth,
for he is the Angel of the Lord of hosts.


Remig. I answer: Deuteronomie do plainly insinuate, or rather emphatically
express a conditional precept: for, in the ninth verse, the people are
charged to ask council of the Priests and Judges, and in the tenth verse, the
Priests are charged to teach according to Gods law: as if God had said, in all
Deuteronomy. 17. v. 9. v. 10.
thy difficult and distressed cases, thou shall have re^ourse to my Priests,
because I have given them in charge, to teach and instruct thee in the true
sense and meaning of my law: if there arise, says the text, a matter too hard
for thee in judgment, thou shall come to the Priests, who are appointed to do
justice, and to tell the true meaning of the law. Malachie is not repugnant to
holy Moses, but gives his readers to understand, that the Priests office is
to know the law, and truly to teach the people the same: so as we may
clearly note a condition required at the Priests hand, but can find no
promise made unto him, that he shall accomplish Deuteronomy. 17. v. 8. 9. 10.
and perform the same: nay, it is evident many ways, that the Priests had no
promise made, that they should ever teach the law truly. following in the
text, will make mine exposition good: these are the express words of the
Prophet, but ye are gone out of the way, ye have caused many to fall by the
Mal. 2. v. 8. Note this well.
law, ye have broken the covenant of Leui, says the Lord of hosts. Mark
these words well: so soon as the Prophet has tolo us, that the Priests lips
shall keep knowledge, by and by he adds but the Priests are gone out of the
way, they have scandalized many by the law, they have broken the covenant of
Leui: as if he had said, the Priests indeed should know the law, and teach
the people the truth thereof, but they do nothing less, they have scandalized
Gods people, they are gone out of the Mal. 2. v. 8.
way, they have broken the covenant of Leui. Where we must note seriously,
these words of the Prophet (but ye have broken the covenant of Leui) for, in
that he says, ye have broken the covenant, he plainly gives us to
understand, that the Priests had not performed the condition required at their
hands, and employed in the covenant of Leui. Deuteronomie, speaks as well of
the political and civil Deuteronomy. 17. v. 9. 10. Deuteronomy. 10. 12. Exodus 28. 4
Judge, as of the Priest, which Bellarmine your popish Cardinal cannot deny:
and yet, that the civil Judge may err, all, both Jesuits and other Priests
will confess. Leu. 26. 3. 25. Deuteronomy. 28. 1. Deuteronomy. 16. v. 18.
a condition required and implied in the covenant of Leui) is made generally to
all civil Judges and Officers. These are y^ words: Judges and Officers shall
thou make thee in all thy Cities, and they shall judge the people with
righteous Deuteronomy. chap 16, v 18.
judgment. Where I note by the way, the falsehood of the Latin vulgata editio:
which the late popish Council of Trent extolleth above the Greek and Hebrew:
Deuteronomy. 17. v, 10, 11. Mal. 2. v, 7.
for, in the Chapter next before, the text says thus: Vt iudicent populum, that
they may judge the people: but in the Chapter, which the papists cite for them,
it is thus: and they shall teach the people: and in the Prophet Malachie, thus:
and the Priests lips shall keep knowledge: and yet in the Hebrew text (which
is the fountain and original) the word (and) is in every place: which the
Papists guilefully change into the word (that) in the 16. Deuteronomy. 16. 18
Chapter: so to make their matter good, if it would or could be: but let (v^)
be made (et) as it is in the Hebrew, and the question is at an end. For, as it
is said of the Priests y^ they shall teach the truth, so is it said of y^
civil Judges and officers, that they shall judge the people righteously: and
This point must be remembered.
yet do their adversaries grant that it is a condition in the civil Judges,
and no promise at all: and that therefore they may fail in doing justice, and
swar^e from the truth therein: so then this is the truth of the question, that
where the Scripture says, the Priests shall teach the Law, and the judges
minister justice: it has no other sense and meaning, but y^ their charge and
office requires so Deuteronomy. 16. 18.
much at their hands: there is a condition implied of doing, but no promise
made of performing: and the Latin vulgata edit^o, does plainly insinuate this
interpretation. Though the papists conceive no such thing, these are the
express words: Iudices and Magistratus constitues, etc. vt iudicent populum
iusto iudicio, nec in alteram partem declinent: Thou shall make Judges and
Magistrates in all thy Cities which the Lord thy God gives thee, throughout
thy Tribes, and they shall Judge the people with righteous judgment, says the
Hebrew text: that they may judge the people with righteous judgment, and not
decline into the other part, says the popish Latin text: where every child may
discern a condition implied, but no promise of Deuteronomy, 17, 9 Mal. 2. 8.
performing the same.


The 6. reply.
Theoph. The Apostle tells us, that Christ has put Ephesians 4. v. 11 13 14.
Pastors and Doctors in his Church, unto the end, that henceforth we be no more
children, wavering and carried about with every wind of doctrine, ergo, it
seems that the Pastors of the Church shall ever teach the truth.


Remig. This text (as the others of Deuteronomie and Malachie) insinuates a
condition of doing, but no promise at all of performing.


The 7. reply.
Theoph. God gave Pastors and Teachers to his Church for this end, that they
should not be carried away with false doctrine. But if all persons have erred,
as you affirm, Ephesians. 4. v. 14.
then in vain did God give Pastors to his Church, to preserve his *people in
the truth. For they that should have taught the truth, did even themselves
swerve from the truth; and so they became unfit instruments to do the will of
God.


Remig. I answer: Gods will is his essence.
one eternal and immutable act whatsoever he wills; yet is his will said to
be manifold, as well of the holy Fathers, as of the Schoole-doctors: and this is
done for two special considerations. The former is, by reason of the variety
of the things which God wills. The latter, for the variety of the manner by
which God seems to will things. Here upon arise many divisions of Gods will,
assigned by the learned for explication sake. Some divide Gods will into
antecedent and consequent. Some others divide it into the will of sign, and
will of good pleasure. Others, into the will revealed, and will secret or not
revealed. Others into the will absolute and will conditionate, and the like.
Secondly, that though Gods will consequent, and will of good pleasure, be ever
accomplished undoubtedly; yet is his will antecedent, and will of sign,
oftentimes neglected and left undone. Of the former will, ye Prophet speaks
thus: Whatsoever pleased the Lord, that did he in heaven, and in earth, in the
Sea Psa. 46 80. Ps. 155. 6. Romans 9. 19.
and in all the depths. And the Apostle says: For who has resisted his will?
Of the latter we have many examples in the holy Scriptures: God commanded
Pharao to let his people go, but Pharao would not obey. God would Exo. 4. 22.
23 Mat. 23 v. 37.
have gathered the Jews together, even as the Hen gathers her Chickens under
her wings, but they would not have it so. God would have all men saved, as the
holy Apostle witnesses; and yet we know by the holy Gospel, that the greater
part shall be damned. Thirdly, that Gods will now objected, is only Voluntas
signi (his 1 Timothy 2. v. 4. Mat. 20. v. 16.
will of sign) and not voluntas beneplaciti (his will of good pleasure) and
therefore it can never be effectually concluded out of this Scripture, that
the Pastors of the visible Church do always teach the truth, and never swerve
from the same: for the Apostle speaks indefinitely, and indifferently of all
Teachers, and of all hearers, of all shepherds and of all sheep, neither
excepting one nor other; and yet both you know, and I know, that many Preachers
preach false doctrine, and that many hearers embrace the same: whereupon it
follows of necessity, that if the Apostle should mean as you would have him
to mean; then should Christ's intent and purpose be frustrate in very deed,
which for all that, is it that your selves impugn. The Apostle therefore
means only Genuinu^ loci sensus.
this, viz. that Christ shows, voluntate signi, what he would have his
shepherds and sheep to do, and what is their duty to do, although his
voluntas beneplaciti, do not ever cause the same to be accomplished.


The 8. reply.
Theoph. You have fully satisfied me, and proved very pithyly that the Priests
commonly swerve from the truth. But I think it impossible for you to prove
that the high Priest in the law did err at any time.


Remig. What? impossible say you? it is a thing so far Exodus 32. v 4. 5. 6*
from being impossible, that I am able to effect it with all facility. Aaron
was the high Priest in the law, and yet erred he most grossly and egregiously,
while he taught the people flat Idolatry, telling them that the molten Calves
brought them out of the Land of Egypt.


Theoph. Aaron indeed consented to Idolatry, and made the molten Calfe, but the
text says not, that he taught Idolatry.


Remig. This is Cosen-german to y^ of the Popes double person. Ye have heard
of a Bishop of Rome, that said right learnedly; that he that can hinder sin
and does it not, is as much in fault as he that does it. Tullie that heathen
Orator, knew the same even by the sole light of nature. This being so, which
the Apostle confirms to be Romans 132 Vertually, though not vocally,
true; it follows by a necessary consequence, that Aaron was guilty of the
Idolatry committed: and albeit the text say not that he taught Idolatry
vocally: yet does it plainly insinuate, or rather fully express that he did it
vertually and effectually. For, Exodus 32, v 1, 2. 3. 4. 5. 6, ^5.
roundly consented to them, where, and when he should have vocally told them
the Law, the truth whereof by silence he bewrayed. Again, the people said
openly, these be thy Gods, O Israel, which brought thee out of the land of
Egypt: and yet Aaron was so far from preaching against that heretical
assertion, that thereupon he built an Altar before the Calfe, and proclaimed,
saying, to morrow shall be the holy day of the Lord: as if he had said, your
doctrine is my doctrine, your faith, my faith, your opinion mine opinion: I
practically show it in building this Altar before the Calfe, and in proclaiming
to morrow to be holyday. Aaron made the people naked, and consequently, that
he erred in his doctrine. Deuteronomy. 17. ^. 10. 11.
together with the devil Judges, were assigned to declare the Law unto the
people. Caiphas the high Priest erred perniciously and taught most execrable
blasphemy, when he Mat. 26. v* 64. 65.
denied Christ to be the son of God. A true Messiah of the world: for as
soon as Christ had said (hereafter shall ye see the son of man sitting on
the right hand of the The high Priest, erred most grossly.
power of God, and come in the clouds of heaven) The high Priest rent his
clothes, saying he has blasphemed, what have we any more need of witnesses?
behold, now ye have heard his blasphemy.


Theoph. I am fully satisfied in this point. God, (for whose sake ye have taken
this great labor) give you reward for the same. Now, if it please you, there
is another question or two, which I think unanswerable, I would willingly
propound them, if it may stand with your favor.


Remig. I see you desirous to know the truth, and therefore I am not weary of
any pains taken in that behalf. Let us hear your supposed unanswerable
questions, in Gods holy name: for whose glory and your good, I will answer
sincerely, as before.


Theoph. My first question is, of the succession of the Popes of Rome: for no
Church is able truly to show their succession, (as the Pope, his Cardinals,
and Jesuits tell us) save only the Church of Rome.


Remig. I hope in God (though indeed it be not a thing easily done) to make it
as plain to you, as I have done the other question, or rather God in me, that
our English Church can show a better succession, then can the Church of Rome.


CHAP. 4. Of the Succession of Bishops in the Church of Rome.
Theophilus. NO Church in the universal world is able to show a perpetual
succession of her Bishops, without interruption, save only the Church of Rome:
and therefore, seeing God has appointed and placed in his visible Church
Ephesians. 4. v. ^2.
(as the Apostle teaches us) a co^rinual succession of Bishops unto the worlds
end: the Church of Rome, and none but the Church of Rome, is or can be the
true Church of God.


Remig. This indeed is a reason so strong in the judgment of Papists, that
none living can truly answer the same. Howbeit when the difficulty thereof
shall be truly examined to the bottom, it will be found of no force at all,
but as light as a feather.


Theoph. Will you deny the Apostles doctrine? will you Ephesians. 4. v. ^2.
not grant (as S. Paul tells us) that there must be Bishops and Priests in
the Church, till the worlds end?


Remig. I am very willing to grant every truth: neither will I deny that there
have been, are, and shall be Bishops and Priests, or Pastors and teachers, in
this visible Church militant on earth, until Christ's second aduent, and
general doom of the world.


Theoph. Well, there must be Bishops and Priests, or Pastors and Teachers, (as
the Apostle terms them) even to the consummation of Saints, and end of the
world. Now sir, you are not able (say our Doctors, our Jesuits, our Cardinals,
our Popes) to show or name any Church in the world, but the Church of Rome,
which has always had in it these Pastors and Doctors from Christ's visible
departure to this day.


Remig. I answer, that succession is of two sorts, to wit, material and
formal. Material is of the persons and the places: formal of the faith and
doctrine. Touching the succession formal (which is the principal, and from
whence the denomination must be derived) the Church of Rome cannot challenge
it, as it is already proved: for, The Church of Rome wan* teth formal
succession.
(if ye remember) I have proved both soundly and plainly, that many Bishops of
Rome, have taught false doctrine, and that not only as private men, but even
as public persons in their judicial definitions and decrees: and consequently
that the true, proper, and formal succession, can no way be truly verified of
the Church of Rome.


Theoph. That is very true, which ye now say: it cannot be denied, but still
it seems true that the material succession pertains only to the Church of
Rome.


Remig. Mark well what I shall sincerely deliver in this behalf. Saint
Clement (whose epistles the Papists Clem* ep, 1. Iren. lib. 3. cap. 3. Epi^h
her. 27. ^is seb. lib 3. c. 13. 14. 15.
magnify, when they seem to make for their purpose) testifies for himself,
that Saint Peter appointed him to be his successor. Irenaeus, Epiphanius,
Eusebius, and the canon of the Popish Mass, do all with uniform consent place
Linus and Cletus before the said Clement. But for all this, Sophronius,
Metaphrastes, and the Popish Pontifical* which cannot lie, affirm stoutly and
peremptorily, that Saint Peter was living after Lynus. This variety so troubled
the learned Papist Nauclerus, that he Naucler. pa^ ^ 3^ histor.
was enforced to coin this new and untimely hatched distinction, viz. that
Saint Peter did indeed appoint Clement to be his successor; but the said
Clement perceiving S. Peter's doing is controlled
that it would be a thing pernicious to the Church, if one Bishop should
choose another to be his successor; yielded up his right, and so Linus was
elected in his room. The bare recital of this imaginary solution, is a
sufficient confutation thereof: for (as you see) he takes upon him to
control S. Peter.


Theoph This variety among Catholic Writers is strange; and it is more
strange, that Clement should alter and change S. Peter's constitution. But it
surpasses all the rest, that any thing which S. Peter ordained, could be
pernicious to the Church.


Remig. This is an evident demonstration (that Romish succession is as a nose
of wax, and as uncertain as the wind; but I will show you greater wonders,
and by Gods help so unfold the truth of Popish mangled material succession,
that you will loath and detest the same for ever. The famous Papist Onuphrius
Panuinius reckons up thirty Schisms in the Church of Rome. But I, for the
present, content my self with two; whereof their Carranz. in ^pit. council. p.
370. and p. 373.
own dear Friar Bartholomeus Carranza, can instruct them sufficiently. The
former Schism endured for the space of 64. years: during which time their
godly Popedom was at a union in France, and not one day at Rome, albeit (as
ye know) your Pope, Cardinals, and Iesuited Popelings bear the world in hand,
that God placed their holy, s^ supposed, seat at Rome. In the latter Schism
of the twain, three of their holy Bishops were Popes at one and the self same
time, to wit, John the 24 of that name, Bennet the 13. and Gregory the 12. Out
of which discourse* two things of great moment are to be observed. First, that
it is a mere foolery to challenge any singular prerogative, by Saint Peter's
death at Rome. Again, that that succession cannot but be uncertain; which is
derived from three Bishops, striving and grinning for the Popedom, as dogs
do for a bone.


Theoph. The Popes or Bishops of Rome, challenge S. Peter's privileges, because
he died at Rome.


Remig. What? must Bishops living 64. years in France, be privileged at Rome,
because S. Peter dyed there? better reason it were, to grant the cheekest
prerogative The cheifest Bishop dyed at Jerusalem.
to the Bishops of Jerusalem, because Christ our Lord and master dyed there.


Theoph. Although three did strive at once for the Popedom, yet could there be
but one Pope at one and the same time.


Remig. Two no small absurdities do perforce arise from hence. The one, that
the succession of the Popes of Rome (whereof they glory so much) is very
doubtful and uncertain. The other, that the Church of Rome, was many years
without a head; and so by popish doctrine, without an infalible judge in
matters of their faith. But I will tell you a greater mystery. A woman is not 1 Timothy 2. 1^ (...).
capable of holy orders, (as Christ's Apostle assures us,) nor of any
Ecclesiastical function in the Church; and consequently the Popish succession
which is derived from our holy mistress Pope John, cannot possibly be of
force. Here the Church of Rome has utterly forsaken her succession, and is not
comparable to our Church of England, in that behalf.


Theoph. If it were possible for a woman, to be inthronized into Peter's chair
at Rome: then as you say, popish succession were overthrown indeed, it cannot
be gainsaid. But such a thing neither has been, neither is, neither ever can
be till the worlds end.


Remig. What? do you think it a thing impossible to be done? an huge number
of famous popish writers, do resolutelie contest it for a constant truth.


Theoph. If you be able, this to prove indeed, henceforth popish succession,
shall never come with in my creed.


Remig. Sigebertus Geniblase^sis, Marianus Scotus, Matthaeus Palmerius,
Martinus Polonus, Philippus Bergomensis, Baptista Platina, Bartholomaeus
Carranza, and Ioha^nes Nauclerus, are my substantial witnesses in this weighty
point of Popery, viz that Pope John was a woman, who by the familiar help of
her beloved companion, brought forth publicly the homely fruits of her
Popedom.


Theoph. These writers which you name, were indeed Papists of high esteem in
the Church of Rome, but they lived long after Pope John, and therefore knew
nothing of that matter, but by report of others.


Remig. I answer: Sigebertus Geniblasensis and Marianus Scotus lived after
Pope John. Pope John was a woman.
otherwise of good credit with your Pope, may well be credited of us in a
matter against your Pope; especially since sundry of them be your own holy
popish Friars. Syenna: which painting, our politic newly hatched Jesuits,
sought earnestly to have had it defaced, in the late repairing of that Church;
but the Bishop of ye place, Exodus 8, 19.
( digitus Dei est hic) would not suffer them to prevail. Digitus Dei est hic.
The truth must prevail in time.



Theoph. They say only and barely ( vt ferunt) as the report and fame goes:
and other grave writers that lived before them all, and nearer the time of Pope
John, make no mention thereof at all.


Remig. I answer: ab authoritate, negative, is not holden good in your
Schools; and yourselues do roundly condemn in others that manner of dispute.
would never have published it to the world: and hereof this double reason may
be yielded. First, for that the Popes dear friends, were, no doubt, very
loathto reveal the shame and turpitude of their holy fathers, save only then
and so much, when and how much the very force of truth compelled them to do.
Again, because they being very learned, could not be ignorant, that it was a
great damnable sin to defame so great a man. Palmerius and Sigibertus, both
have these Palmer. and Sigeber. in Chron.
express words: Fama est, hunc Iohannem faeminam fuis^e, and vnisoli familiari
tantum cognitam, qui eam complexus est, and grauis facta, peperit Papa,
existens: quare, eam inter Pontifices non numerant quidam: The fame goes, that
this John was a woman, and not known but to her familiar friend; by whose
familiarity she became with child, Obraue succession of women Popes.
and was delivered even whiles she was Pope: for which respect, some do not
reckon her among the Popes. Marianus, Polonus, Bergomensis, Platina, and
Carranza, (whom I have already named) teach flatly and plainly the self same
doctrine, writing upon the same woman Pope: and here must I put you in mind of
this mackeable point, viz. that Marianus Scotus, affirms the story
constantly, flatly, and simply, without all ands or iffs. The Popes of Rome 4.
can bear children but not preach.
Yea, Martinus Polonus, the Popes own Penitentiary, sings the self same
song. Fourthly, that some Historiographers, favoring the Pope more then the
truth, have of purpose (so to cover the Popes shame) concealed the truth of the
story. To these I may fitly add that which their famous Abbot says; the beast
(says my L. Abbot Bernardus, Bernard. a^ Ganfrid. ep. 12. 5. Apoc. 13. v. 5. 7.
y^ best Abbot that ever I heard or read of) mentioned in the Revelation, to
whom was given a mouth speaking blasphemies, and to make wars with the
Saints, fitteth in Peter's chair.


Theoph. This is wonderful which you say, and I hope I may give credit to your
reports, your protestation has assured me thereof: howbeit for my further
satisfaction, let me tell you that one of your authors Nauclerus, by name,
utterly denies the story, as I have heard.


Remig. I make a conscience, (I thank my Lord God humbly for it) to deal
sincerely in all my writings, and The Authors protestation for his sincere
dealing.
with you in this our Christian conference, wishing heartly, that the papists
would do the like: I have ever dealt so truly and uprightly against the
papists in all my writings, as I now in my old and decrepite age, I am ready to
take it upon my salvation, and to seal the truth thereof with my blood.
Concerning your report of Nauclerus, you shall truly hear his own words and
that done, yield your censure according to the truth: after that this Nauclerus
had told a long tale in the favor of our Woman-Pope, (so to cover and hide the
nakedness of his holiness) at the length he resolves with himself, and
concludes the controversy in these express words: Sed etsi fuit verum, nulli
tamen, ex hoc, salutis eme^sit periculum: quia nec Ecclesia tunc fuit fine
capite quod est Christus, Naucler. page 713. histor.
ait Antoninus: nec enim vltimi effectus Sacramentorum, quae illa conferebat,
deficiebant eis qui debite accipiebant, scilicet gratia, licet mulier non sit
susceptibilis Characteris alicuius ordinis, nec conficere Eucharistiam, etiam
de facto ordinata, possit, nec absoluere a peccato, vnde ab ea ordinati erant
iterum ordinandi: gratiam tamen Sacramentorum Christus supplebat in
recipientibus dign^, ignorantia facti inuincibili eos excusante: But although
it were true, no man for all that sustained any loss of his salvation: because
even then the Church had still an head which is Christ, as Antoninus
witnesses: neither did they, who devoutly preached the Sacraments which he
ministered, want the l^st effects thereof, which is grace, albeit a woman be
neither capable of any Character of order, neither able to celebrate the
Eucharist, or to absolve from sin, whereupon, such as received orders of her,
were to be ordered again, nevertheless, Christ supplied the grace of the
Sacraments in those that received them worthily, invincible ignorance of the
fast excusing them: thus you see the opinion and verdict of your own dear
Doctor Nauclerus that famous papist, who has said for the credit of your Pope,
what possibly he could devise: now deliver your censure in Gods name according
to the truth.


Theoph. I will confess the truth: I observe out of this testimony of our
reverend and learned histriographer, these memorable points of doctrine.
Nauclerus has employed his whole industry, and all his wits, to defend the
Pope from shame and dishonor, if it possibly could be done. Antoninus their
reverend Archbishop and canonized Saint, is of his opinion.


Remig. Non nobis Domine, non nobis, sed nomini tuo Ps. 115 v. 2
da gloriam: it is no small comfort and solace to mine heart, that Gods holy
spirit does so mightily work in you: you have observed well the doctrine of
Nauclerus, though some thing may fitly be added thereunte. Two further points
of great consequence, are implied in the doctrine of Nauclerus: Rome, did for
many years commit flat idolatry.


Theoph. These points could I never have considered in his doctrine, God reward
your pains employed for his sake* but what? are not the Cardinals and Priests
in the Church of Rome, truly and lawfully consecrated in their functions?


Remig. I speak not generally and absolutely, of the consecration of the
Cardinals, Bishops, and Priests in the Church of Rome, fit occasion will be
offered hereafter, to speak more precisely of that point of doctrine: the
question is now, of those particular Cardinals, Bishops and Priests, who were
consecrated for such, in the time of the Woman-pope John, for as the Popes own
dear Doctor Nauclerus tells us, all such as were ordered by the Woman-pope,
were to be ordered again, as being but mere Laymen.


Theoph. I am at my wits end, what to say or think of the Church or Pope of
Rome.


Remig. What? I am sure you remember the old received Maxim; ( Vbi Papa, ibi
Roma; vbi Roma, ibi Ecclesia Catholica) where the Pope is, there is Rome; and
where Rome is, there is the Catholic Church. So, as, the Pope is Rome, the
Catholic Church, Christ himself and all.


Theoph. I cannot indeed but remember the same, it is so frequent and usual in
every learned Papists mouth. But alas alas, the remembrance thereof, does this
day wound me at the very heart: for hitherto I have been taught to hold it for
a constant truth, that the Catholic Church, the Church of Rome, and the Popes
holiness, were all as one, that is to say, that the Popes faith, was the faith
of the Church of Rome, and the faith of the Church of Rome, the faith of the
Catholic Church militant here on earth.


Remig. It is very true which you say, and this approved Romish Maxim
confirms the same: for when the Pope and his Popelings tell us, that the
Church cannot err, then do they mean that the Pope cannot err: and when they
speak of the Catholic Church, then they ever Mark this. The Church cannot
err, that is the Pope cannot err. 1489.
mean of y^ Church of Rome and of such Churches as iump in faith with the
Pope. So then we must iump with the Collier, and say we believe as the Church
believes, and the Church believes as we believe: for, by this learned
answer, (if Cardinal Hosius writ truly) we may overcome the devil; but when
all is said and done, we must believe, we cannot indeed tell what: for when y^
Pope says thus and thus you must believe, if then he speak as a private man,
my faith is wan, and no faith indeed: for as a private man he may err, and so
both deceive himself and me, as we have seen already: and yet (alas for
pity) these two articles I must hold for an undoubted truth, which agree
together as York and soul Sutton. First, that the Pope may err, and become
an heretic. Secondly, that I am an Heretic, unless I believe as he teaches
me, if he speak as a public person. This notwithstanding, I may not, to dye
for it, examine the Popes decrees, whether they proceed from him, as he is
Victor. de potest Pap^, p^o^os. 16. cause. 17. q* 4* cap. qui^.
a private man, or as a public person: for in so doing, I must incur the
crime of sacrilege. What a thing is this? silly Papists are brought into
greater thraldom and perplexity* then ever was Buridanus himself, or the
poor beast his Ass.


Theoph. I have bin too long seduced with paltry popery; I see it is but flat
cozenage, and a mere trick of Legierdemaine. Henceforth I renounce it, and
will only object my difficulties to be better confirmed in the truth. But sir,
I do not yet understand the other point of doctrine, which you observed out of
Nauclerus.


Remig. It is clear out of Nauclerus that the Cardinals, popish Bishops,
Priests, and Lay People of Rome, committed flat Idolatry in the time of their
Woman-pope Flat Idolatry, even by Popish ^a^h.
John, who for the honor of S. Peter (as you have heard already) brought forth
a child in the altitude of her popedom. Thus you shall understand the same
Nauclerus tells us plainly, that their woman-pope could neither make
Priests, nor yet consecrate their Eucharist. To this doctrine, let us add
these points. This woman-pope, lived A. D. 18.
of falling, this high and lofty building, viz that all y^ Cardinals, Bishops,
Prists, and Lay People, who ever heard the Masses of their women-pope, or of
the Bishops and Priests made by her, did commit flat Idolatry at every one of
the said Masses: the reason is evident, because such Priests were indeed mere
Laymen, and so could not change the bread and make it God almighty: and
consequently the spectators and adorers that were present, adored bakers bread
for the everliving God. All this is sound Popish faith and doctrine.


Theoph. It is abomination in Gods sight: but what shall we say to M.
Nauclerus? he seems to purge and free the worshippers, by reason of
invincible ignorance.


Remig. Our Jesuit S. R. in his pretensed answer to S. ^. page 142.
the downfall of Popery, iumpeth in opinion with Nauclerus, he freely grants
in the place quoted in y^ margent, that there is no consecration (and
consequently no God almighty) when the Priest wants both actual and vertuall
intention, or omitteth any essential word of their said consecration; but
withal he excuses the worshippers of bread for God almighty, because of
their invincible ignorance. I return this answer to them both, viz. that this
distinction of ignorance, invented in Popish Schools, has no foundation in
Gods word, neither yet, in the pure Cannens of the Popes law. For the former,
the Prophet Ezechiel, (or rather God by the meuth of Ezechiel) tells us
plainly and in flat terms, that though the watchman give not y^ people
warning, but suffer them to live in ignorance, yet shall they be guilty, and
perish in their sinues. Yea, Christ himself tells us, that who knows the
law and does it not, shall Ezec. 3. 18. and cap. 33. v. 8. Psalm. 79. v. 6 Luke
12. 48. Cause. 17. q. 4 cap. siquis.
not be punished alone, but he in like manner shall be punished for the
transgression that knew it not. This mitigation only is allotted to the
ignorant, that his punishment shall be more tolerable, and he beaten with
fewer stripes. For the latter, the Popes own Canons teach us, that neither the
ignorance of the law of nature, nor of the law divine can excuse us, when we
offend against the Esa. 55. v. 8. 9. 3. Reg. 8 39 Romans 8. 17. 1 Par. 28. 9. ^.
Sam. 16 ^ Psa. 7. v. 10. Mar. 2. 27.
same. Yet true it is, that in humane affairs, and civil judgments,
invincible ignorance will excuse, but Gods judgments and his ways are not
like to man's, they are far different from them: man can but judge the
external act, but God searches the very heart and veins: man is subject to
Gods laws, but God is above both man's laws and his own; and has also full
power to dispense with the same. There yet remains a mortal and incurable
wound in Popish Succession at Rome; which I hold very necessary for you to
know, for your better confirmation in the truth.


Theoph. For Christ's sake take the pains to unfold it to me: for nothing is so
dear to my soul, as the knowledge of the truth.


Remig. The incurable wound, may be reputed the second wonderment of the world:
this is it, mark it well. The general Council of Basil, deposed Pope Eugenius
for his contumacie, and chose Amadaeus (who was named Foelix the first) and put
him in his room: this, notwithstanding, Eugenius crept again into the
Popedom without any Canonical election, and continued in the place as Pope.


Theoph. I do not well conceive or understand, what you would infer hereupon.
I therefore humbly crave your larger explication thereof.


Remig. The Council of Basil was holden in Anno, 1439. and summoned Eugenius
to appear before it, then A. D. 1439.
and there to yield an account of such matters as the Council had to object
against him, but he would not appear: Lo, the Council deposed the Pope for
his disobedience.
and therefore for his contuinacie, disobedience, and contempt of the Councels
summons, he was by the authority of the said Council deposed, and Amadaeus was
made the Pope or Bishop of Rome. The Schism between Amadaeus and Eugenius
continued about nine years, until Foelix was content to resign to Nicholas,
and then it ended. Now sir, all y^ Cardinals, Bishops, Priests, and Deacons,
who afterward sprung of Eugenius (possessing Peter's chair without Canonical
election) that is, of the Church of Rome, are illegitimate, irregular,
schismatikes, usurpers and not lawful gouerners of the Church by popish faith
and doctrine.


Theoph. One refuge the Papists would seem to have herein, viz. that the
counsel could not depose the Pope: which if it once be proved against them,
their backs are at the wall, and their Popish Romish succession.


Remig. It is without all question, that a general Council was and is above
the Pope: no learned papist ever did, or this day does deny the same, the Popes
themselves, the Jesuits, and Iesuited crew only excepted. Cardinalis
Cameracensis, Abbas Panormitanus, Nicholaus Cusanus, Adrianus Papa, Cardinalis
Florentinus, Johannes Gersonus, Iacobus Almaynus, Abulensis, Alphonsus* the
Deuines of Paris and all others, (except ever before excepted,) do resolutely
and constantly defend as an undoubted truth grounded upon the holy scriptures,
that a general Council is above the Pope: the practical proceedings of
papists every where, have yielded us an assured argument thereof: for first,
the Council of Basil (as we have seen) deposed Pope Eugemus, and chose
Amadaeus in his room. Secondly, the general Council of Constance, (which was
celebrated about 15. years before the Council of Basil) did publicly depose
three Popes ( John, 22. Gregory, 12. and Benedict, 13.) and those Martin the
fifth, and made him Pope: which things doubtless, these Councels having many
very learned men in them, would never have attempted so publicly and so
resolutely as they did, if it had not been a resolved and known case and
truth, throughout the Christian world.


Theoph. The case is clear and evident to every indifferent reader: but give
me leave I pray you, to tell what the papists say to this, the Council of
Basil (say they) was not a lawful Synod, because it had neither the presence
of the Pope, nor of his Legates.


Remig. This answer is a new invention of our late A Spaniard being but a
Soldier, was the author of the sect of the Jesuits, A. D. 1540.
strat-vp Jesuits, (who never were heard of or known to y^ Church of God, for
the space of a thousand, five hundred, and forty years after Christ's sacred
Incarnation, and whose first author was one Ignatius Loyola, a soldier and a
Spaniard borne) having neither scripture, Counsel, father, or good reason,
whereupon it may be grounded. For first, the Council was called by Pope Martin
the fifth to be holden at Papias, from whence by reason of the pest it was
removed to Senas, afterward it was translated by Alphonsus the King of Aragon,
and continued at Basil, where were present both Sigismundus the Emperor, and
Iulianus the Popes own Legate, and after him Ludouicus the Cardinal of Arles
supplied his place. Again, not only the Council of Basil, but the Councels
also of Constance, of Florence, and of Lateran, did all constantly and
uniformly define for an undoubted truth, that a A general Council is above
the Pope, by the verdict of best learned papists.
general Council is above the Pope, and has authority to cite him, to
control him, and to depose him: for due proof and trial whereof, the
Council of Constance deposed, de facto, three Popes, viz. John 23. Gregory 12.
and Benedict 13. and chose Martin the first, and made him Pope in his place.
Another or two like mortal wounds I could unfold unto you, but these seem to
me sufficient.


Theoph. For Christ's sake, take the pains to relate them, it is a thing well
worth the labor.


Remig. Pope Sergius the third, caused the corpse of Pope Formosus (who now had
been dead almost ten years) to be taken out of his tomb, and to be set in
a chair, with y^ pontifical attire upon him (O brave Gallant?) and that done,
his head to be cut off, and to be cast into the river Tiber. He disanulled the
acts and orders Carranz^, ^ol. 354. and 355.
given by Pope Formosus, insomuch as all were enforced to take orders again,
who had been made Bishops or Priests by Pope Formosus.


Theoph. Marry sir, the Papists may boast indeed of their Romish succession,
and be derided of all wise men for their pains.


Remig. Amongst the Popes excommunications the 29. is against the College of
Cardinals in the Romish Church, who by Symonie or Symoniacall pacts, procure
themselves to be advanced to the Popedom. By verture of which
excommunication, all such as are made Popes by Symony and Symoniacall pacts,
do, ipso facto, incur the sentence of excommunication, from which they can
never be absolved, but by one that is Pope indeed, Barth fumus A. D 1503.
and Canonically elected thereunto. Upon which excommunication, one of the
Popes inquisitors, Bartholomaeus Fumus, a very learned Dominican Friar, has
published this commentary, for the true sense and meaning of that extrauagant,
which Pope Julius the second diuulged in that behalf: these are his express
words: Nota hic and been, Papa Simoniace electus non est ve^e Papa Note here,
and that to good purpose, that the Pope which is elected by Symonie, is not the
true Pope indeed. Mark well, and let me see what you observe out of this
discourse.


Theoph. I see evidently by the Popes own constitution, and flat decree, (as by
the law of the Medes and Persians) which no papist may withstand or gainsay,
that whosoever is chosen Pope by Simony, is no Pope indeed.


Remig. You have marked the discourse very well, let us now proceed, and look
circumspectly into the matter, as which is of so great importance, as nothing
can be more: Baptista Platina a man very near and very dear unto the Popes,
(as who was by office Abbreuiator Apostolicus, and consequently best acquainted
with the manners and dealings of Popes) tells us roundly and constantly, that
the Popes of latter days crept into the Popedom, by gifts bribes, and Simony:
these are his express words: eo enim tum Pontificatus deuenerat, vt qui plus
largitione and ambitione, (non dico sanctitate vitae Plat* in ^ita Sylues^. 3
and doctrinae valere^) is tantummodo dignitatis gradum, bonis oppressis and
reiectis obtineret, quem morem: vtinam aliquando non retinuissent nostra
tempora: For to that pass was ye Popedom now brought, that whoseeuer was able
to prevail most in giving bribes and in ambition, (I say not in good life and
doctrine,) that many only should have the degree of honor, and good men
should be rejected, which custom would to God our d^y^^ had never known.
Again, that same Platina in another place has these words: Adeo enim
inuoluerat hic mos, vt i^m Platin* in vita Da^^*
cuique ambitioso liceret Petri sedem inuadere: For this custom did so
increase, that now every ambitious fellow might invade Saint Peter's chair.
Gregory the fifth was by sedition thrust out of his throne, and Pope John the
Platin in vita John. 18. Carranz. fol. 355.
18. by tyranny occupied the Popedom: so write both Platina and Carranza, who
were the Popes good friends, albeit they could not conceal the truth hereof:
yea Platina proceeds further, and says: qua quidem beatitudine Johannes
carnit, fur certe in Pontificatu and latro. Non enim The Pope both a thief and
a robber.
vt par fuerat, per ostium intraut: which happy life Pope John wanted, as who
was a thief and a robber: for he entered not in by the door, as he ought to
have done. To be brief, Pope Bonifacius the eight, may sound the Trumpet for
all the rest: for, of him thus writes his dear Carranz. fol. 369.
Feyer Carranza: Intrauit vt Vnlpes, regnauit vt Lupus, mortuus est vt Canis:
he entered as a Fox, he reigned as a Woolfe, he died as a Dog. By this
discourse, two O holy Pope, who would not ^^sl^ thy foote'
things are cleared, which are of so great weight and moment, as they are able
to batter down popery, and to draw it under foot. For first, what Bishop
soever is made Pope, by gifts, bribes, and Simony, that Bishop neither is, nor
can be the true Pope indeed. Secondly, the Bishops of Rome have now ^or a long
time been very wicked men, and have aspired to the Popedom by bribes and
Simony. To which two maine points of popery, this third (as a golden corollary)
is consectary, and cannot be denied, viz, that the Bishops of Rome for many
years, were not true Bishops or Popes in very deed: and consequently, by
popish doctrine, there are no true popish Bishops in the world.


Theoph. All the Jesuits and Iesuited papists in the world, are never able
truly to answer these reasons, for doubtless, they are insoluble.


Remig The 18. excommunication falls upon all those which deny the Church of
Rome to be the head of all other Churches, and the Pope to be the commander of
all people: this excommunication was thundered out, for the establishing of the
Popes tyranny throughout the Christian world: ye 21. excommunication is against
all such as shall boldly affirm either that the blessed Virgin Mary was
conceived in original sin, or not so conceived: and shall thereupon condemn
them of heresy, or of mortal sin, that hold, preach, or defend the
contrary: this excommunication Pope Sixtus the fourth thundered out in his
Extrauagant, in the year 1474. by which practical A. D. 1474.
proceedings and doctrine, we may easily epsy the uncertainty of the Popes
faith and religion, as also his ignorance, in the high mysteries of popish
doctrine: for, though he cannot err iudicially in matters of doctrine, as the
papists must believe, yet can he not decide this easy question, whether the
Virgin Mary was conceived in original sin, or not: but Aquinas the Popes
angelical doctor and canonized Saint, (whose doctrine two Popes, Vrbanus the
fourth, and Innocentius the fifth, have confirms to be sound and true*)
affirms resolutely, that she was conceived in original sin: tell me now,
what ye think of the Popes succession at Rome?


Theoph. I see flatly and evidently, that by popish doctrine, faith, and
religion, we cannot this day tell, who are true Bishops of Rome indeed: and
consequently, that the succession derived from them, is of no credit or force
at all: but yet by your favor, I desire your further resolution to such shows
and colors of succession, as they pretend for the Church of Rome. Saint Austen
says, (say they) Aug. contr. ep. fund.
that the succession of Priests even from Saint Peter to these days, kept him
in the bosom of the Church: so Optatus, Tertullianus, and others, do often
allege, and stand upon the succession of Bishops, as an argument of the truth.


Remig. It is true, that Saint Austen made a great account of the succession of
Bishops in the Church of Rome, and my self (also all learned men I think,)
do iumpe with Saint Austen in that his opinion: for the resolution of which
objection, sundry observations already Proved are to be well remembered. Austens
days and long after. Mark^ well for Christ's sake.
that the latter Bishops of Rome have decreed publickely against the known
faith: in so much, as some of them have been condemned with the sound of the
Trumpets, other some have been convicted of Arrianisme, others of
Nestorianisme others of flat Atheism, others to have crept into Peter's chair,
(as they term it) by flat Simony, others have occupied the place by violent
intrusion, others by homage done to the devil of hell. Carranza and Platina
brought to that miserable estate, that every ambitious fellow might invade
Peter's seat. The old Bishops of Rome, joined formal succession with material.
men: of which point I shall have occasion, to speak of more at large by and
by: my answer therefore in brief is this: viz, that the Bishops of Rome in
Saint Austens time, joined formal succession with material, which if the
Bishops of Rome would this day perform, all godly Christians would now join
with them, as Saint Austen did in his time: for as Saint frene say, we ought to
obey Irenaeus. lib. ^. cap. 43.
those Priests, that with the succession, keep the word of truth.


Theoph. Saint Paul says plainly, that there must be Bishops and Pastors in
the church until the worlds end: whereupon it follows (say the Papists, whom
now I have upon good grounds renounced) that you Protestants have no Church at
all: for before Luther departed from them, all Bishops and Priests for many
years together, embraced their Romish religion. This objection (say our
Jesuits and Iesuited Popelings) does so gall the Protestants, as they cannot
tell in the world, what answer to frame thereunto.


Remig. I answer: Ephe ^. 2. (...).
and Doctors (as S. Paul says) have ever been in the Church, are at this
present, and shall be to the worlds end. Nicholaus de Lyra, after he has told
us that many Popes have swarued from the Lyran in cap. 16. Mat.
faith, and become flat Apostataes, concludes in these express words: propter
quod Ecclesia consistit in illis personis, in quibus est notitia vera, et
confessio fidei and veritatis. By reason whereof, the Church consists in
those persons, in whom there is true knowledge, and confession of the faith and
verity. Thus writes this learned popish Friar, telling us resolutely, y^
though there must be evermore Ephesians. 4. ver. 11.
a visible Church, with visible Pastors and Doctors in it, yet those visible
Pastors and Doctors, both may swerve, and have de facto, swarued, from the true
faith and religion: and Ioh. 10. v. 4. 1^. 16 26. 27. 8 (...) ^. ^5. ^uc.
(...). ^. 2. (...) 2 (...). 1 Ioh. ^. (...).
that therefore the Church indeed consists of the predestinate and elect
children of God, whose faith shall never fail: this point you have heard so
pithely approved, as is able to satisfy every in different reader.


Theoph. The Jesuits say that howsoever you wrangle about your formal
succession, yet it is clear that you have no material succession at all,
unless you term it material succession, when mere Laymen occupy the rooms
of lawful Bishops: for none may take upon them, or intrude themselves into the
holy ministry, but such as are lawfully called thereunto, as Aaron was: and
yet all the world can tell Hebr. 5. 4.
you, that all your Ministers, Bishops, Priests, and Deacons, in the time of
King Edward, and Queen Elizabeth, and now of King JAMES, have no other orders
and consecration at all, but such as they received of our Romish Bishops
indeed.


Remig. Our succession is both material and formal, Christian and
Apostolical: as which is consonant to the holy Scriptures, and to the usual
practice of the primitive Church.


Theoph. Saint Epiphanius inueigheth bitterly against one Epiph. lib. 3. page* 3
^ 5.
Zachaeus, who being but a Layman (as your Puritaines be) presumed impudently
to handle the holy Mysteries. S. Hierome in like manner says of Hilarious the
heretic, that Hier* cont. Luciser.
he could neither baptize nor administer the Eucharist, because he was but a
Deacon when he went out of the church, and what are you but Deacons? nay what
are you but mere Laymen? for you are neither consecrated after the old
manner, nor confirmed by the Pope, as the Jesuits bear the world in hand.


Remig. I answer, Act. ^* 24. Act. 6. 6. Act. 4* 23. 1 ^^Soan^^* 2. 2 ^^m* 1.
6 l^^. 1 5.
that the want of your greasing and other begge^ly Ceremonies, (wherewith the
primitive Church was never acquainted, as holy writ teaches us,) cannot make
the consecration of our Bishops unlawful. Timothy, and else where. For the
confirmation of the Prince, and not of the Pope (which is the second point)
this is 1 T^m. 5 22 2 T^ 1. 6. Tit. 1. 5. Act 6 6. Act. 14 ^ 3. Pela^ (...)*
Seu^^^* Benediciu^.
enough for the trial, viz. that these three Popes, Pelagius the second,
Se^erinus, and Benedictus the second, and all other Bishops of Rome till the
said Benedict, inclusiue were ever elected and confirmed by the Emperors
commandment: which verity is freely confessed in express terms* by four
famous Popish writers; who therefore are and ought to be of more credit and
force against the Papists, then any other authors whatsoever. The names of the
popish Doctors are these: Baptista Platina, Bartholomaeus Carranxa, Anastatius
Bibliothecarius, and Onuphrius Panuinius. Piatina has these words, Ni^ Platin.
in vita ^ e^^^. 2. A. D. 579*
enim tum in eligendo Pontifice actu^ erat* nisi eius electionem Imperator
approbasset: for at that time (which was about the year of our Lord God ^^0.)
nothing was done effectually concerning the election of the Bishop of Rome,
unless the Emperor had confirmed the same. Touching the creation of
Seuerinus, (for the other testimony was of Pelagius) the same Platina writes
in this manner: Vana enim tunc habebatur Cleri ac populi electio nisi
Imperatores Platin. in vita Seueri. A. D. 637. Platin in vita Bened.
aut eorum Exarchi confirmassent: For the election of the Clergy and the
people was of no force at all in those days, unless the Emperors or their
Lieutenants had confirmed the same: this was done, about the year, 637.
Concerning the creation or making of Benedict, Platina has these words; ad
hunc Constantius Imperator sanctionem misit, vt deinceps quem Clerus, populus,
Exercitusque Romanus in Pontificem delegislet, eundem statim verum Christi
Vicarium esse omnes crederent, nulla aut Constantinopolitani Principis, aut
Italiae Exarchi expectat authoritate, vt antea fieri co^sueuerat id enim ratum
erat in creando Pontifice, quod Princeps confirmaslet, vel qui eius vices in
Italia gerebat: The Emperor Constantine sent a decree to this Pope, that
whomsoever the Clergy, people and Roman Soldiers should henceforth choose
for their Bishop, all people should by and by believe him to be the U^car of
Christ, ( scilicet) if they would: A. D. 685. Caaranz. page* 301. apud Onuph. in
Chron.
This was done in anno 68^.

Bartholomaeus Carranza a famous Dominican Friar, has the very same assertion
ad verbum.

Anastasius and Onuphrius have these express words. Pontifices qui deinde
fuerant, creati and con^ecrati sunt sine Constantinopolitani Imperatoris
iussione: The Popes or Bishops of Rome that lived afterward, were made and
consecrated without the Emperor of Constantinople his command: as if they had
said, in the old time and ancient Church, no Bishop of Rome could have bin
admitted at any time, unless he had brought letters patents from the Emperor
though now y^ practice be far otherwise. Now M. Theophilus, tell me what you
gather out of this discourse.


Theoph. Out of this doctrine of this famous papists, I gather to the confusion
of the late Bishops of Rome, their Jesuits, and all Iesuited papists, these
three euidents, golden, and most necessary corollaries. First, that the vulgar
and common sort of people are grossly deceived, when they term popery the old
religion, and repute them for the ancient Catholics: for, we are indeed the
true and Corollari^. 1.
ancient Catholics, (I put my self in the number, because God now has made
me a true reformed Catholic,) and the papists are become flat heretics, in
many points of the true faith, though not apostataes from the whole. For, this
Benedict the second could not be made A. D. 684.
Bishop of Rome, 684. years after Christ's sacred aduent, without the Emperors
letters Patents: so then* the Emperors Lo, Popery is the new religion.
had the sovereignty over the Bishops of Rome, for the space almost of seven
hundren years after Christ, and so long the Popes acknowledged the Emperors
for their sovereign Lords, as without whose letters Patents they could have no
jurisdiction in the Church. I add as consectary hereunto, that as in civil
causes many are debarred from their lawful inheritance, through the violent
dealing of mighty men, even so we, the true reformed Catholics, have been
many years excluded from the free use of our own Church and Sacraments, by
the force, violence, and tyranny, of the blood-thirsty Romish Bishops, and
partly by remissenes of sundry Emperors, who upon a blind zeal not grounded
upon Gods word, yielded up their sovereign rights unto them: and as temporal
men are in time restored to their ancient right, by zealous and godly
Magistrates: even so were we and are we (God make us thankful for it) by the
goodness of God and most Christian Princes, (King Henry the eight, King Edward
the sixth, Queen Elizabeth, and King JAMES our most gracious sovereign now
happily regnant over us) restored to the old Christian, Catholic, and
Apostolic religion, and with all Christian freedom placed again in our own
Churches, the spiritual birthright of our selves and our ancestors. Secondly,
thath our Bishops in England are made and Corollary. 2.
consecrated, according to the ancient, Christian, Catholic, Apostolic, and
old Roman manner, that is to say, Corollary. 3
by the letters Patents of the Prince. Thirdly, that the Emperors of
Constantinople, for the space of 200. years and odd after the dissolution of
the Empire in the west, had still the sovereignty over the Bishop of Rome: for
the west Empire was dissolved in Anno 471, and Benedict the second obtained of
the Emperor Constantine in Anno 684, that the Bishops of Rome might from
thenceforth be chosen, confirmed, and enjoy their jurisdiction, without the
commandment and letters Patents of the Emperor.


Remig. You have marked well the discourse, and for all that, have not observed
one point of great consequence.


Theophilus. What is that I beseech you heartily?


Remig. The late Popes or Bishops of Rome, tell us, that Constantine the great,
at his departure from Rome to Constantinople, gave the Bishop of Rome and his
successors his crown and all his royal dignity, both in the City of Rome,
and in Italy, and in all the west parts: Did. 96. Canon. Constantinus.
which goodly story invented for the Popes advancement, we see by the constant
verdit of these four learned Papists, to be nothing else indeed but a lying
fable: for the the Bishops of Rome were still subject to the Emperors, and Popes
were subjects to Emperors, above 340. years after the departure of Constantine
from Rome.
received their authority and jurisdiction by their letters patents above 340.
years, even until Benedict the second: to which I add, that many of the
popish Cannons are of as good credit as Esops fables.


Remig. This is a point of great consequence, which I should never have espied,
but by your relation.


Theoph. I would wish you likewise to observe, that the Emperors,
Constantinus, Iustinianus, and others, yielding up their sovereign rights to
the Bishops of Rome upon a fond zeal without knowledge, opened the window to
all antichristian tyranny: for in short time after, the Romish Bishops became
so arrogant and Lordly, that they took upon them to dispose Royal scepters,
and to translate them to their pleasures.


Theoph. It is a memorable observation, I shall keep it in remembrance: but let
me still reason for the Papists, as if I were one of them; for when all
difficulties are answered, I shall be the stronger in the truth. The Church of
God cannot be without Bishops and Priests, as the Apostle Ephe. 4. 11.
records, and your self grants: but so it is, that when he first reformed
the Church, as you term it, ye neither had any Bishops, nor any Priests of
your own, neither could ye find any in any other place, but only with us and
in our Church, when Martin Luther went out from us: our Church therefore and
none but ours, is the true Church of God; as which only has the true
succession Apostolical.


Remig. I answer first, that our succession in the Church of England, is far
better then theirs of Rome: for theirs of Rome, (as we have heard and seen) is
most doubtful and uncertain: but ours of England so constant and so assured,
as no denial can be made thereof: I prove it, because in Anno, 596. Gregory
the great A. D. 596.
sent Augustine the Monk, with Iustus, Melitus, and others (as our approved
Cronicles do relate) to preach the Gospel to the Saxons, who were kindly
received of King Ethelbert: and he converted to the Christian faith, gave to
the same Austen the City of Canterbury: since which time our Church of England
is able to prove her perpetual succession of Bishops, without schism or
interruption at all, albeit ye Church of Rome (as is already proved) is not
able to perform hal^e so much. Secondly, that though the visible Churches were
every where greatly stained and polluted with many gross errors,
superstitions, and abuses, at such time as M. Luther began a Mark this well,
that our church received their Bishops from Rome, when that church was in good
case. 596.
Christian reformation: yet for all that, the Bishops and Priests of the popish
Churches were still true Bishops for their calling, albeit otherwise very
wicked men, and consequently, that our Bishops and Priests though descended,
created, and made of such deformed popish Prelates, are true Bishops and Prists
indeed.


Theoph. If our Bishops and Priests were made of theirs, then must either
theirs be good, or ours as bad as theirs: and so we shall have no true Bishops
at all.


Remig. Mark well what I say, that ye may understand the saint. The
Philosopher says, that one may be Ariost in lit. Politic.
a good Citizen, though a bad man: Even so say I, that though the Papists were
wicked men, and the Popish Bishops, that created our Bishops, foully polluted
both in life and doctrine: yet were they still true Christians and true
Bishops, and consequently true members of the visible Church: for they still
professed, held, and maintained the chief fundamental points of religion; of
God of the blessed Trinity, of Christ and his two natures, of his death and
passion: of his resurrection and assention: of the general doom; and of all
the rest comprised in the sum of The Popish church is still a true Church,
though not a godly Church.
religion, which we call the Apostles Creed: and therefore, though they
grievously wounded, and in a manner killed themselves, by their errors,
corruptions, superstitions, and abuses: yet in regard of the truth which they
kept constantly, there remained in them some life of Christianity. They wanted
legs, and arms, and had their bodies and souls corrupted with many
pestilent diseases; but they did still draw breath, and were not wholly dead. We
read in the Apostolical history, that there were some that believed, who being
of the heresy of the Pharisees, did still hold the ceremonies of the law, and
urged others to be circumcised. The Prophet David was sore wounded with
adultery and murder; but yet he still continued the child of God: and Peter
cursed and swear that he Act. 15 5. Ioh. 12. v. 42. 2 Samuel 11. and cap. 12.
Mat. 26. v. 74.
knew not Christ, who for all that, still believed in Christ to the end.


Theoph. How can they be both good and bad Bishops at once? it seems to me a
thing impossible.


Remig. I answer: first, that the same persons may as well be both good and bad
at once, as the same man may be both a father and a son at once: and yet do
all Logicians grant, that this latter may be effected with all facility. For,
one and the same man, may at one and the same time, be both a father in respect
of his own child, and a son in respect of his father, who is Grandfather to
the said Relatiua a^ ctu sese ponunt and an^ f^runt.
child. Secondly, that there is as great disparity between a true Bishop and a
good Bishop, as there is between a true man and a good man: but as he is a
true man, that has the nature of a true man, how bad soever he be in Judas was
a true Apostle, and yet array^or too.
faith, life and conversation, as Turks, Jews, Traitors, Heretics and
Apostataes; even so are they true Bishops of the visible Church, who have their
calling, places, and jurisdiction allotted them by the same Church, how bad
soever they be in other respects.


Theoph. Those Popish Bishops that made and created our Bishops and Priests, in
the beginning of Queen Elizabeth's reign, ordained and consecrated them after
another manner, then they are this day, and ever have been since that time,
ergo, either must their Bishops, or else all our Bishops, the first only
excepted (who were created after the popish manner) be false, counterfeit, and
no true Bishops indeed.


Remig. Neither their Bishops, nor ours, are false and conterfeit, but both
true and perfect Bishops, in every essential and necessary point pertaining to
a Bishop.


Theoph. Theirs were made by the authority of the Pope, yours by the authority
royal of your gracious Princess of famous memory. Theirs with Oil and
Chrisme, and many other ceremonies, which yours do not use at all.


Remig. All the things by you named, are mere extrinsecall and not of the
essence and nature of a Bishop, or of a Priest.


Theoph. Either must they sin in using Oil, Chrisme, and other ceremonies,
or you in rejecting and contemning the same.


Remig. I answer: Anointing is not an essential part of a King.
may be used or not used, as it seems good to the supreme magistrate. For
example sake: whether Kings and Queens be anointed at their Coronations, or
not, it is mere extrin^ecall to their sacred sovereignty, as who are as
perfect Kings before it, as after the same: and consequently, though our Church
have rejected such ceremonies, as unprofitable or not necessary at the least,
yet does she not condemn other reformed Churches, which use and still retain
the same, after the simple use and manner of the first inst tution thereof; all
leuity, superstition, and opinion of necessity set apart. Valide non ^ice^e.
many things, are done valide, which are not done, licite: if the Jesuits and
Iesuited papists deny this, they must condemn many of their Popes, as it is
already proved.


Theoph. All Bishops and Priests made by them, are received as true Bishops of
you; but Bishops and Priests made by you, are but mere Laymen with them;
which seems an evident argument, that true Bishopes are only made by the
authority of the Pope.


Remig. I answer: Commune Nice^ c^n. ^ did 3* cap. ^os ^ntiquus ^ (...).
Co^sta^ti^ n^p. 6. ^an. ^6.
of Rome, is but like the authority of other Patriarchs; as it was defined by
the first famous general Council under Constantine the great. Caput mundi; so
was ye Bishop there for ye honor and dignity of the Empire, (to which all the
world paid tribute in ye days of Augustus Caesar) reputed the cheifest Bishop
of the visible Luke. 2. 1.
Church. A. D. 684.
point of doctrine (which is of great consequence) is already proved; and that,
even by the testimony of many learned and famous Papists. but withal
superstitiously abused every where. Mark this well.
withal reject as mere Laymen our Ministers of ye same. For as they supply
the accedentall ceremonies in the one, so may they do also with as great reason
in ye other. Wherefore I conclude, that as our Church shows both charity and
wisdom, in admitting their Bishops and Priests, so does their Church show
both malice and ignorance, in refusing ours. And that is all indeed, that truly
can be inferred of their senslles and peevish refusal; albeit many silly
simply seduced papists, neither do nor can so conceive the matter. This my
answer is yet confirmed by another Popish practical usage. They reject our
Ministers, Silly ignorant papists are grossly deceived.
because they want their popish beggarly ceremonies: and for all that* they
grant their own Ministers to be true Priests still, even after they have
degraded them, and taken all their ceremonies from them. Mark well, what I
shall relate, for it is a wonderment of the new world. The Papists tell us (and
it is a special article of late popish faith) that if a popish Priest come
into a great market place, where there is great store of wheate-bread, though a
thousand or more loaves in number, and then, and there looking on the same
bread, shall pronounce these This cannot be denied by popish doctrine.
words ( hoc est corpus meum, this is my body) with intention to consecrate the
same: then forthwith every loaf of the said wheat-bread, is made Christ's body,
and per concomitantiam as their Schools term it) God almighty; so as the
people are bound by popish faith and laws to adore the same loaves, every
loaf as the son of the everliving God: trial here of was once made a Rome as
my self being in Rome, heard from the mouth of a Jesuit. For, as the Jesuit
reported to me (and I have reason to credit him in such a case and cause) a
Priest being degraded, and designed to dye for his homely qualities, as he
passed in the street by a bakers shop, beheld a great quantity of wheatbread,
and recited these words ( hoc est corpus meum) and then told the people that he
had consecrated the same bread; Behold here a great Mystery of popish foolery.
so desiring once to be avenged of the Pope, and his godless Popelings:
Whereupon consultation was had out of hand among the learned there, and sentence
resolutely ^^en by the Pope, that every loaf was God almighty. After which
sentence so clearkely pronounced, the bread was carried away with great
solemnity, and such reverence and adoration exhibited to the same, as was due
to the son of the everliving God. Now, if Popish Priests can this do, even
after their anointing and greasing taken from them: yea, after their dear
Pope has degraded, and after his best manner vnpriested them, they have no
reason, doubtless to say, that our Bishops cannot perform the function of
true Bishops, seeing our Bishops Mark well gentle reader.
are consecrated of popish truly made Bishops, though without Popish
unprofitable and superstitiously abused ceremonies. This resolution is soundly
deduced out of the very bowels of Popish faith and religion.


Theoph. What? was not that religion popish, which A. D. 596.
your nation received at their first conversion from Paganism? did not Pope
Gregory affect their conversion, by sending Augustine, Melitus ^ustus, and
others into England? how then can ye for shame (^ay our Popes, Cardinals and
Jesuits) deny that faith and religion which your native country embraced and
believed, at your first receiving of the Christian faith? how can ye contemn
and condemn those Popes, who bestowed such inestimable and precious treasures
upon your country? Would to God I could soundly answer this reason.


Remig. Listen well to my discourse, and you shall (God willing) be able to
confute it with all facility: this is the answer. First that our nation first
received the faith, i^ the time of Vespasian Emperor of Rome, about 70^ years
after Christ's sacred Incarnation, by the preaching of Christ's holy Apostle
Simon Zelotes. Freculphus writes, the Brutans had received the faith of Christ
about the year 6^. by the preaching of those twelve which Philip the Apostle
sent into this land whereof Joseph of Aramath^a was the chief. Elutherius then
Bishop of Rome at the request of King Lucius the son of Co^lis, A. D. 179.
sent Faganus and Deruuianus into Britain to baptize the said King and his
people, and to instruct them in the faith of Christ. Brutanes had been
subjects and tributaries to the Romans, above Note, that Elutherius called king
Lucinus the Vi^ar of God in his kingdom.
600. years, it is no rare thing, that Gregory the chief Bishop of the
Romans, should send preachers into England with the good liking of Ethelbert
then King of Kent: for it is every Christians duty, to do what in him lies in
such a case. Gregory, and long after, the faith and doctrine of the Church of
Rome, was in good case, though in some part steined with some corruptions:
neither is it blame worthy, either in Bishop Gregory, that sent it, or in King
Ethelbert that received it, that our Every child knows romanum eloquium is
the Lattin tongue
nation had then the Church service in the Latin tongue, for (as the proverb
says: necessity has no law) besides that the Roman language was then in the
Latin tongue, (and so to them their vulgar tongue) and they altogether ignorant
of the language of our nation: for of old time, (as Nicholaus Lyranus that
learned popish Friar tells us) every Church had divine service in her mother
and Lyr. in 1, cor. 14.
vulgar tongue: of which subject I have written at large, in the survey of
popery: and no marvel, if our Church receiving the Church service in the Latin
tongue, (though upon necessity, for that the Romans were ignorant of the Saxons
language,) did a long time retain the same: for, though it were a fault,
(comparatively a small one) would to God our Church had never been steined
with greater corruptions: one thousand year are fully expired, since Gregory
was the Bishop of Rome: since which time, most intolerable abuses,
superstitions, errors, and flat heresies have crept into the Church of Rome,
The true member^ of the Church are said to be invisible, not because the men
be not seen, but for that their faith and conscience to Godward is not
perfectly known to us*
which is all that our Church has abolished, still constantly reteining as
pure and inviolable the old Roman faith and religion.


Theoph. You told me that the visible Church both may err, and, de facto, has
erred: and the same (as you have soundly proved by the testimonies of best
approved popish writers) may fitly and truly be verified in many late Bishops
of Rome: but how any Church can be invisible, (which is the Church, say you,
that cannot err) I do not yet understand* I pray you take some pain, for my
better instruction in that behalf.


Remig. True it is that every particular Chuch is visible in it self, for all
men, women, and children, (every one in his corporal consistence) are visible,
as experience teaches us: and for all that, this is a true and most constant
position, that that Church which cannot err, Mal. 1. 2. Ephesians* 1. 4. Romans 10.
12 1 Timothy 2. v. 19. Ioh. 10. 36. Romans 8. 27. ^ere. 17. 9. Apoc. 2. 23.
invisible: for the true and exact knowledge whereof, you must distinguish in
man two things: his external corporeity or corporal consistence, and his
internal election in Christ Jesus. Man considered the former way is visible
indeed, every child can discypher the case but the latter way he is invisible,
and known only unto God, or to those to whom he reuealeth it.


Theoph. I seem now to have a glimmering of the question, though no perfect
insight into the same. I pray you unfold the case distinctly, and declare it by
some familiar examples, if it may be.


Remig. At such time as the Prophet Elias made his complaint in Santaria, that
he only was left alone an 3 Reg. 18. 22 Romans 11. 4.
Oracle from heaven answered him in this manner: I have reserved to my self
seven thousand men; which have not They are visible in themselves, but their
faith and conscience is not known unto men.
bowed the knee to Baal. By which divine Oracle it is evident, y^ seven
thousand persons were invisible to Elias, and all the same visible in
themselves, at one and y^ same time* Do ye now understand the case?


Theoph. I seem to conceive it, by virtue of your former distinction. They
were visible as men, but invisible as the children of God: for that Elias knew
not their faith and election in Jesus Christ.


Remig. You conceive it aright, Judas Iscariot as he was Mat. 10. 4. and 26.
47. and 22.
a man, was visible both to the rest of the Apostles, and to others; who for
all that, as he was a traitor, was visible to God alone: for which cause the
Apostles were astonished, when they heard that one of them should betray Christ
their Lord and Master. The Apostle confirms the same, when he says, the
foundation of God remains sure, and has this seal, the Lord knows who are
his: Mat. 26. v. 22. 2 Timothy 2. 19.
the faith and conscience of the elect to Godward, is unknown to men, and so
to them they are invisible, though visible in their own persons.


Theoph. I must needs yield to this* as to a manifest truth: but are not all
members of the which Church believe in Christ, and hold the catholic faith, as
we do?


Remig. All that profess externally the Catholic faith, are members of the
visible Church, and must be reputed Mat. ^8* 17. 1 Cor. 5. 5. 2 Cor. 2. v. ^.
10.
for such, so long as they are not cut off from the Church, by the just censure
of excommunication. But Gods elect only are the true Church, that is to say,
that mystical body, whereof Christ Jesus is the mystical head, Gods elect
only are that Church, to which Christ promised his invisible presence to the
worlds end. Gods elect only are that Church, which is the pillar of truth* and
cannot err. 1 Cor. 10. 17. Ephesians. 5. 23. 25, 26. Col 1. 18. 24 Ioh. 10. v. 16,
27. 1. Ioh. 2, 19. Mat. 28. ^0. 1. Tim 3. 15.
But the reprobates neither are nor can be that mystical body, whereof Christ
is the head: for our Lord Jesus is so far from being their head, that he
hates all those that work wickedness, and will put them from him with a sharp
ve vobis, at the general doom. Gods elect only are the bride betrothed to
our Lord Jesus ye Bride-grome, between whom there is such an inseparable
union, as no power create upon earth, or in heaven, is able to dissolve Psalm.
5. 7. Mat. 25. ver. 14. 2. Tim 2. 19,
the same.


Theoph. God reward you for your great pains, which you have taken herein for
his names sake, and my good, you have so resolved me in these most intricate
difficulties Our Church does still retain all the old Roman religion.
of christian religion, that I stand at utter defiance with the late start-vp
Romish faith and doctrine, highly reuerencing the old Roman religion, and so
much of late Romish faith and doctrine, as is consonant and agreeable to the
same. But for all this, the Papists seem to have strong reasons for their
unwritten traditions, which indeed are so strong as my self know not how to
answer them.


Remig. Doubt nothing in this behalf: God of his mercy will illustrate your
understanding in this difficulty, as he has done already in the rest: but for
this subject, I have written so largely thereof in two several books, (viz.
the down fall of Popery, and the Jesuits Antepast) that I am altogether
unwilling to handle the same a fresh.


Theoph. I have read both those books, and they do content me exceedingly:
howbeit, some objections may yet be made against the doctrine there delivered,
which my self am not able to confute: I therefore would humbly entreat your
pains, not for a new discourse thereof, (which I hold needless) but for a
fuller and plainer explication of some especial doubts, wherewith our learned
papists troubleme.


Remig. Propound them in Gods name, by whose holy and powerful assistance, I
trust to return them to the Popes utter shame, to the and everlasting
confusion of al Iesuited papists, that shall obstinately believe or defend the
same.


CHAP. 5. Of Popish unwritten traditions.
Theophilus. I will still by your favor argue as a papist on the behalf of
the papists, that so I may more clearly have a sound insight into the truth:
you Protestants (for so we use to term you,) bear us in hand, that the
scripture or written word of God contains all things necessary for man's
salvation: but our learned and religious Cardinal Bellarminus assures us,
that the truth is far otherwise, and that many things necessary for men's
salvation, are only known and received by tradition: and what he writes, is
the Popes ownefaith, and consequently the faith of the whole Church: for he
dedicated his books to the Popes holiness, who highly commended and approved
them, that he made him Cardinal (though before but a poor Friar) for his
pains.


Remig. I answer Act. 9. v. 1, 2 Act. 26. v. 4 5.
as also religious and ^ealous after the manner of his sect, but in such sort
as Paul was before his conversion. Secondly, that your Cardinal does often
acknowledge the truth unawares against himself, as do your other Jesuits: one
only assertion I will now cite, out of the Jesuit S. R. ( Robert Parsons is
the man) in his pretensed answer to the downfall of popery: these are his
express S. R. page 286.
words; where if by diuina eloquia, we understand holy writ, (as Bell
translateth and Saint Austen seems to mean) me thinks he plainly
avouches, that God has procured every thing to be clearly written, which to
know is necessary to every man's salvation: the same teaceth Saint Syril,
saying, not all things which our Lord S. Cyril lib. 11. in Joan. cap. 68.
did, are written, but what the writers deemed sufficient, as well for manners,
as for doctrine, that by right faith and works, we may attain to the Kingdom
of Heaven: and Saint Chrysostom, what things soever are necessary, Chrys^st.
2. These. hom. 3.
are manifest out of scripture: this is our Jesuits own tale, in the best
manner he can utter it, whiles he bestirreth The Jesuits confession.
himself more then a little, to answer my book (the downfall of popery) out
of whose confession and free grant, (such is the force of truth) I observe
these memorable and golden lessons. Mark well for Christ's sake.
coming from a papists mouth) that every point necessary for salvation, is
plainly and clearly set down in holy writ. Augustine, Saint Chrysostom, and
Saint Cyrill, are of mine opinion. Act. 9 5
for, as our Lord Jesus said to Saul, it is hard for him to kick against
pricks.


Theoph. The Jesuit S. R. (when you rightly name Parsons,) grants all
things to be written which are necessary for salvation but not which are
necessary for S. R. p. 285.
faith and doctrine: these are his own and express words: for surely, the
Prophets and Evangelists writing their doctrine for our better remembrance,
would omit no one point which was necessary to be actually known of every one
especially, seeing they have written many things, which are not so necessary:
and this conclusion (...), 49. in Joan, 10, 9,
teaches Saint Austen, when he says, that those things are written which
seems sufficient for the salvation of the faithful: where I note (says S.
R.) that he said not, which seems sufficient to Christian faith, but which
seemed sufficient to salvation: because fewer points suffice to salvation, then
the Christian faith contains, thus writes the Jesuit in flat terms, freely
granting the scripture Lo, the Christian faith is superfluous.
to contain all things necessary for salvation, but not all things necessary
for faith and doctrine.


Remig. I answer: This is all I desire,
in the scripture, it follows of necessity, that no unwritten tradition is
necessary for the same. Lo, no unwritten tradition is necessary for salvation,
noting is or can be necessary for the Christian faith, but the same is also
necessary for salvation: for otherwise it would follow, (which no Christian may
anouch) that a man may be saved without the Christian faith: but S. Athanasius
in that creed or summary of faith, (which the Church of Rome receives and
highly reuerenceth,) affirms Athanasius in symbol,
resolutely, that whosoever believes not steadfastly every jot of the
Christian faith, shall perish everlastingly. replenished, with curious
sophistications, frivolous di^^^^^ns, vain inventions, counterfeit miracles,
gross errors, palpables her^stes, intolerable superstitions, mere
foolishness, and flat leasings.


Theoph. It is nowhere siad in scripture, (says the Jesuit S. R.) that all
the books, chapters, verses, and sentences S. R. p. 292.
which in the Bible are admitted for Canonical, are truly Canonical and Gods
pure word, without the mixture The Papists invincible Bulwark.
of man's word: and yet is this a point of Christian faith, yea, hereupon depend
all the articles which we gather out of the scripture: this is that invincible
Bulwark, (says Parsons) which no Protestant can ever batter down while the
world shall endure.


Remig. I answer: Mark this point well
this point were not known by the scriptures, yet might the scripture contain
all things needful to salvation. David says, it is Ps. 11. v. 105. 2. Pet.
1. 19. Hebr. 4. ver 12. He is a reprobate whole heart Gods word does not touch.
2. Cor. 44.
a Lantern to our feet and a light to our paths, as Saint Peter says, it is
a light that shines in the dark: and S. Paul says. Gods word is lively, and
mighty in operation, and sharper then any two edged sword: it is not incke and
paper, or a bare and dead Letter, but quick and powerable, and shows it
self as light to the children of light. For, (as the same Apostle tells us)
if Christ's Gospel be hid, it is hid in them that perish, in whom the God of
this world has blinded the minds of them which believe not, lest the light of
Christ's glorious Gospel should shine unto them: yea, the self same Apostle
says, that 1. Cor. 2. 15. 1. Ioh. 2. ver. 27. 1. Ioh. 10. ver. 27.
the spiritual man judges all things. Saint John also says, that the v^ction
which Gods children have received, teaches them all things. And what need
many words? Christ himself assures us, that his sheep hear hi^ voy^^* and
that they follow him, because they know his voice* he adds, that they will
not follow a stranger, and he yields this reason there^^, because they know
not the voice of strangers: this is confirmed by an Ioh. 10. v. 3. 4. 5. Ioh.
3. 18.
old received Theological maxim, viz, that when we pray, we speak to God,
but when we read, or hear the holy scripture read, then God speaks to us:
but certes, when God speaks to us, if we be his, we will hear him, if we be
his sheep we will know his voice and follow him. Matthew Mark, Luke and John:
the Acts of the holy Apostles, written by Luke the Evangelist: the Epistle of
the Apostle Paul, to the Romans, Corinthians, Galatians, Ephesians,
Philippians, Colossians, Thessaloniti^ns, Timotheus, Titus and Philemon: the
Epistle of Peter James, Jude, and John, the servants of Jesus Christ: the
revelation of Jesus Christ, which God gave unto John his servant by his holy
Angel. Abraham Luke. 24* ver. 29.
answered the rich glutton in these words; they have Moses and the Prophets,
let them hear them: as if he had said, now the law is not studied now the
Prophets are contemned, and now God is not heard speaking in his holy word:
some would have Angels come down from heaven, some desire miracles, others the
To hear Moses and the Prophets, is to read their books.
dead to rise again: howbeit to hear Moses and the Prophets (which is to
read the scriptured, for Moses and the Prophets were dead many hundred yeeces
before) is the true and only way to attain eternal life: this reason strikes
dead, as which proves the scripture of the Romans 1. v. 1.
old Testament to be Canonical, and the pure word of God: and this reason is
confirmed by Saint Paul, when he tells us, that he was put apart to preach
the Gospel of God which before was promised by his Prophets in the holy
scriptures: and it is further confirmed, because the Act. 26. ver. 22.
same Apostle says in an other place, that he taught nothing, but which Moses
and the Prophets had foretold should come to pass. Fifthly, that these holy
writings Christ confirmed the old Testament to be Canonical.
of Moses and the Prophets, were common among the Jews in Christ's tune, and
yet did Christ never once reprove the Jews for any corruption therein, or
charge them with changing, adding, or taking away of any one jot or title
either of the law or of y^ Prophets: for our merciful Nomb. 23. ver 5. 7. 8.
Act. 9. ver. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 1. Tim. 1. 13. Mat. 7 15. 16. Job. 2. v. 8. 10
11.
and powerable God, who caused Balaam to bless when he entered to curse: who,
when Saul was a cruel persecuter, blasphemer, and ravening Woolfe, made him
with one word as meek as a Lamb: who shut up the Sea with doors and stayed
her proud waves, and appointed her bounds whither she should come, but no
further: enforced y^ adversaries of the truth (the Jews I mean) to preserve
the holy scriptures of the old Testament inviolable and pure from all
corruption, and not to add any thing thereto, Exodus 8. 19 Deuteronomy, 4. 2, Deuteronomy 12.
32
or take ought therefrom, neither to profane the same, with the least mixture
of man's word: our Lord Jesus assured us hereof, when he constantly pronounced,
that it was more easy for Heaven and Earth to pass away, Luke, 2^, 35 Luke,
16, ver, 17, Mat, 5, 10. Mat, 24, 34, Luke 21, ver, 33.
then that one title of the law should fall: thus you see, or may see, I weent,
that the popish invincible bulwark is battered down, and made even with the
ground: for none but God alone, can infallibly foretell things to come.


Theoph. Your reasons are unanswerable in my judgment, and your manner of
disputation so forcible, as it is able fully to persuade any indifferent
reader. Howbeit, I do not yet see how the holy scripture does prove it self
canonical: for if that were possible to be proved, not only our Jesuit
Pars^as, but the Pope, his Cardinals, and all his Iesuited Popelings should be
confounded everlastingly.


Remig. I have proved out of Christ's own words, that whatsoever is contained in
the law of Moses, in the books Luke 24. v. 44* Luke 16. v. 26. Esa. 41. ver.
23. Exodus 8. 19.
of the Prophets, and in* the Psalms, that same must needs be true, and come
to pass: and consequently, whatsoever scripture must needs come to pass, and
cannot but be true, that Scripture doubtless is Cannonicall, and y^ pure word
of God: for only Gods prediction of future things is infallible.


Theoph. Do not many godly people, especially the zealous Preachers of Gods
word, utter many speeches which must needs come to pass, and cannot but be
true?


Remig. I answer with this distinction, that words uttered by men, may be
considered two ways. Moses, as also all the rest of the old and new testament,
Psa. 116. ^1. Psa. 62. 10. Exodus 8. 19 Ier. 17. 5. 1. Reg 13. v. 18. 24. Esa.
41. v. ^2. 23.
this day truly acknowledged for Canonical and holy writ: but words uttered by
man the first way, are fallible, and may deceive both the speaker and the
hearer. For as Gods Prophet tells us, all men are liars: another Prophet
accurseth him y^ puts his trust in man: another Prophet was devoured of a
Lion, for y^ he gane credit, and relied upon the feined revelation of an old
Prophet in Bethel: for none can infallibly foretell things to come, except one
that is Almighty and all-sufficient of himself.


Theoph. Men tell us, that the sun shall rise at such an hour, and go down
at such an hour: as also, that the Moon shall shine at such a time, be dark
at such a time, and so in sundry other things: All which, though foretold Man's
pure word must not needs come to pass.
by man, cannot but be true and come to pass. Semblably may we say, that
though the predictions recounted in the law and the Prophets, must needs come
to pass, and cannot but be true, yet may they be the words of pure man, and
not canonical Scripture.


Theoph. You deceive your self in your own allegations: for neither the
rising and setting of the sun, nor yet the light and darkness of the moon,
must needs come Ios. 10. v. 12 13. 2 Reg. 20. v. 11. Mat. 27. v. 45. Luke 23.
v. 44. Mark. 15 v. 33. Ioh. 18. v. 20. Exodus* 12. 18. ^
to pass, as Astronomers do affirm: for God, all sufficient, the author
thereof, can stay or change their natural courses at his holy will and
pleasure. Joshua in the power of God commanded the sun to stay in Gibeon, and
the moon in the valley of A^alon; and it came to pass accordingly. The sun,
at the request of good King Ezechias, went backward ten degrees. In the time of
Christ's most bitter and sacred passion, darkness was over all the land of
Chanaan, from the sixth hour until the ninth, that is to say, by Theological
supputation, from twelve a clock till three in the afternoon: and yet did
Christ suffer when the moon was at the full, and about noone or midday. For,
he was crucified (oh cruel Jews) even when they kept their feast of the
Passover, which was, and must needs be done in the full moon, according to
the prescript of the law.


Theoph. Your discourse yields great solace to Exo. 8* 19. Psa. 135. 6. Romans
9. 19.
mine heart. I see it as clearly as the noone day, that all creatures are
subject to God their maker, that every word of man is fallible, and that only
Gods will is Canonical, and cannot but be true. But Christ adds a limitation
and restrictio^ to his words, which troubles me more Luke 24: v. 44.
then a little. He says not simply and absolutely, that all things written in
the Law, the Prophets, and the Psalms, must be fulfilled, but that all things
which are there written of him, must of necessity come to pass.


Remig. Though Christ use a restriction, by reason of his occasioned particular
application, yet is his argument general, as which is drawn from the
excellency and infallibility of holy writ: as if he had said, whatsoever is
written in the law of Moses, in the Prophets and in the Psalms, yt same must
needs come to pass, and cannot but be true, and consequently, whatsoever is
there spoken of me, that must needs come to pass: neither is this mine, but
Christ's own exposition, I assure you.


Theoph. If it be possible to prove this, the Papists may O doleful Placebo.
sing this doleful song, The Pope from their royal Scepters, has many Kings
put down, but now his neck is broken, and the Romish faith quite overthrown.


Remig. It is not only possible, but a thing very easy. Mark well, and
understand my discourse aright. Our Savior in the same chapter, reproves his
Disciples as Luke 24. v. 25.
they went to Emmaus, condemning them of folly and infidelity, for that they
did not simply and generally believe all that the Prophets had spoken. Oh
fools (says Christ) and slow of heart, to believe all that the Prophets have
spoken. Again, another text says that he began at Moses, and at all the
Prophets, and interpreted unto them in all Luke 24. v. 27.
the Scriptures, the things which were written of him. This is that
interpretation which the holy Ghost affoordeth us. Out of which, I observe
these memorable docoments. Moses, and of the Psalms, are true, and the
Canonical rule of our faith.


Theoph. Christ indeed speaks simply and generally of the Prophets; but he
neither names Moses, nor the book of Psalms.


Remig. I answer: The figure Synecdoche.
very usual and frequent in the holy Scriptures, it compriseth the whole in the
part thereof. Moses and all the rest of the old Testament: For after he had
reproved his Apostles for Luke 24. v. 27.
not believing all things in the Prophets, the text says plainly in the words
following, that Christ began at Moses, and interpreted in all the Scriptures:
and a little after, in the self same chapter, he makes mention both of v. 44.
v. 45.
Moses, of the Prophets, and of the Psalms: and in the verse then immediately
following it is said, that Christ opened their understanding, that they might
understand the Scriptures: so that Christ undoubtedly means all the
scriptures of the old Testament, when synecdochically he means only the
Prophets: which thing I shall yet Ioh. 5. v. 45 46. 47. Ioh. 7. 38. Ioh. ^ 2.
48.
prove by another scripture more plain then all the rest. Do not think that I
will accuse you to my father, there is one that accuses you, even Moses in
whom ye trust. For had ye believed Moses, ye would have believed me, for he
wrote of me: but if ye believe not his writings, how shall ye believe my
words? These are the very words of our Lord and Master Christ: out of which I
gather these comfortable lessons. Moses accuse the reprobate, and consequently,
that they are Canonical Scripture: for otherwise, neither their condemnation,
nor their accusation should be of force. Moses (mark these words) is to
believe Christ himself. Moses, is not to believe Christ's words, and
consequently, that the writings of Moses are Canonical Scripture, and the pure
word of God.


Theoph. You resolve me so soundly in every point, that I can no way in truth
withstand your doctrine. Howbeit, me think I hear the Jesuit Parsons
whispering in the ears of his silly Disciples, that there is no text from the
first S. R. Page 292. Boasts of this his objection.
of Genesis, to the last of the Apocalips, which says, that all the Books,
Chapters, Verses, and Sentences, which in the Bible are admitted for Canonical,
are truly Canonical, and Gods pure word, without the mixture of man's words: if
possibly you be able to confute this objection, they have no more to say.


Remig. Answer me awhile to my demaundes, and you Ps, 62, 10, Ps, 116. 11,
shall easily find out the confutation, he that says generally without
restriction at all, that all men are liars, does he not affirm old men and
young, rich and poor, learned and unlearned, and every man of what state or
calling soever he be, to be a liar?


Theoph. He so affirms, it cannot be denied.


Remig. Does not he, who says that all things in S. Paul's Epistles, are the
pure word of God, affirm every Chapter, every verse, and every sentence
therein contained, to be the pure word of God?


Theoph. It is most true, it cannot be gainesaid.


Remig. Does not he affirm every Book, every Chapter, every verse, and every
sentence of the Prophetical writings, to be y^ true and the pure word of God,
who says, that al things which the Prophets have written are true, and the
pure word of God? an he deny any particular, that grants all?


Theoph. He cannot doubtless: do it for he that grants the whole must perforce
grant every part of the whole even as he that grants God to have made all
things, must of necessity grant him to have made every particular thing,
whatsoever has any essence or being in the whole world.


Remig. You have granted enough, (though no more then the truth) for the full
refutation of our Friar Jesuit. I have proned (as ye know) out of the express
Scripture of the new Testament, that all things written in the law of Moses, in
the books of the Prophets, and in the Psalms Psa. 35 19 Mat. 5. 17. Mat. 22.
40 Mat. 19. 17. Romans 4. v. 13, 14. 15. 16 Gal 3. v. 24 Heb. 7. 19. Heb. 8 v, 7
9. ^0. 13. Heb. 9. 22. Psa. 35. 19.
(in which three, as also sometime in the law and the Prophets, and other
sometime in the law only, all the old Testament is comprised) are the pure
word of God, and consequently the Canonical scripture: For if we believe not
the books of Moses, neither will we believe Christ's own words, as it is
already proved.


Theoph. But our sesuite perhaps will say, that there are sundry Canonical
books in the old Testament, besides these which you have named.


Remig. What the Jesuitical Friar Parsons will say, See the Anatomy of Popish
tyraany.
small account is to be made: for, (as his dear brethren by popish profession
have written of him) he is a monster of mankind, a notorious liar, the
wickedest man upon the earth, begotten of some^ Incubus, and depending upon the
Devil of hell: this and much more of like homely qualities, the secular
Priests have confessed of Parsons that unfortunate Rector of the English
College in Rome: and this they have done in their printed books lately
published to the view of the whole world: this honest man Parsons, has lately
published the pretensed answer to the Downfall of Popery: but his back is so
pitifully broken with the said Downfall, (alas poor Friar, I am sorry for thy
heaviness) that his neighbors think he cannot live any while: Yet I hope
(which is my small comfort in such a distressed case) that the Popish secular
Priests will sing a joyful dirge (if not a black sanctus) for his soul. But
woe is me, that my native contrymen at Rome, have such a governor set over
them: now to your objection out of Parsons, I answer thus. First, that y^
scripture says plainly, that Christ interpreted all the scriptures which
spoke of him, and consequently all the Canonical books of the old Testament,
for no book Canonical can be named, which makes not some mention of our Lord
Jesus. Secondly, that both our savior, his Apostles, and all the ancient
fathers, did ever comprise all the old Testament* in the law the Prophets,
and the Psalms, it cannot be denied.


Theoph. The scripture says not, that Christ interpreted all the scriptures
that spoke of him, but that he interpreted out of them, those things which they
spoke of him.


Remig. I answer^: pe^ consequens, approving those things which were of and
concerning himself, he did indeed approve, commend, Ioh. 5. v. 46* 47.
and authorize the whole: for* as Saint Austen and other holy fathers tell us,
and the Jesuit does yield S. R.
thereto, if any part of the holy scripture should be false, Page 29 2.
we could have no certainety of the rest, much less could Ioh. 5. v. 47.
we ground our faith upon them.


Theoph. You have soundly proved the scripture of the old Testament to be
Canonical, even by the express words of the new Testament: but what text of
scripture can prove the new Testament to be Canonical, and the pure word of
God without the mixture of man's word? is this possible to be done?


Remig. It is not only possible, but very easy to be done: I prove it. Romans
1. v. 2. 17.
the whole new Testament) is contained in the old Testament, for Saint Paul
plainly testifies, that he was set apart to preach the Gospel of God, which
he before had promised by his Prophets in the holy scriptures. Act. ^0. v.
(...). 27.
the Elders of Ephesus, that he had showed to them all the council of God.
Act. 26. v. 23.
but the law of Moses and the Prophets: nevertheless (says he) I obtained
help of God, and continue unto this day, witnessing both to small and to
great, saying none other thing, then those which the Prophets and Moses did say
should come to pass. 1. Tim. 4. 12. 2. Tim. 3. 15.
Paul testifies to young Timothy, that he kn^w the holy scriptures of a
child, which are able to make him wise unto salvation, through the faith which
is in Christ Jesus. By these testimonies and authorities, two things are
^leered: the one, that all the books of the old testament delivered by Moses
to the Jews, are Canonical and the pure word of God, able to make us wise
unto salvation: the other, that all Saint Paul's doctrine, and consequently of
the other Apostles, (for he taught all the council of God, which was all the
doctrine of all the rest in substance) was contained in Moses and the Prophets:
and this is confirmed by the Apostles words to King Agrippa, which are these: O
King Agrippa, beleeuest thou Act. 20. v. 27. Act. 26. v. 2^* v. 27.
the Prophes? I know that thou beleuest: Lo, Saint Paul knew that Agrippa
believed the law and the Prophets, and commends him for the same: I
therefore conclude, that the holy scripture it self does prove it self to be
Canonical, and the pure word of God.


Theoph. The Papists say, that we received both the old S* R. p. 369.
and new Testament from them, and not from the Jews.


Remig. I answer: Apostles were confirmed in the truth. Fourthly, that Luke,
24. ve^. 27* 4^. Ioh. 16* 13. 4.
the Pope, his Jesuits, and Iesuited Popelings, do enforce^^^ to a^^^^ (...)
the holy Bible, that which is in very many places the pure word of man.


Theoph. How is this possible? have not the Papists the holy Bible?


Remig. The old Testament, which is the pure word of God, is in the Hebrew
tongue, and the new in Greek* but the late popish Council of Trent (which the
Jesuits and all Iesuited Papists have admitted) commands ^^raitly to use
only their Latin vulgata editio, which the Apostles did never read or see,
much less did they authorize it for Canonical scripture* and the pure word of
God: and consequently, albeit they have both the Hebrew and the Greek locked
up in their studies and Libraries: yet for as much as they prefer their own
vulgar Latin translation, (commonly called Saint Hieromes) and cruelly bind and
tie all di^^nes to ^s^ the same in all schools and pulpits, and no textes,
sentences, or allegations to be admitted, save only out of the same: it
follows by an inevitable consequente, and necessary deduction, The Popish
Bible is the word of man.
that their Canonical so supposed Bible is not Canonical, but in very deed
the word of man: this is confirmed, because the Papists this day violently
obtrude for Canonical, sundry books of the old Testament, which are not in
the Cannon of the Hebrews, neither yet delivered to the Church by Christ or
his Apostles.


Theoph. I now remember a strange saying of the Jesuit Parsons, viz, that
many parts of the Bible were doubted of long after the death of the Apostles:
which S. R. p. 387.
argues to me, that their unwritten traditions are fallible, and their
doctrine new.


Remig. The Popes religion Chaugeth every day, by reason of new revelations
made unto his Holiness: but from whence they came, wheather from Heaven or
from hell, that cannot I tell, let the rea^er judge: this I am assured of, that
their own learned masters cannot agree about their revelations: Melchior
Canus a learned Popish Bishop affirms constantly, that the Church has Canus
de locis, lib. 3. cap 4. p. 10^.
no new re^elations in matters of faith: but the Popes minorite Friar
T^telmannus, otherwise a learned man indeed, tells us an othertale, viz.
that many mysteries of divine truth, are daily revealed to the Church, every
T^telm de locis d^alect* cap. 33.
day more and more: and thus by reason of their Popish feined revelations, the
late Romish faith does daily increase above man's expectation, and is as like
the old Roman religion, as York is like soul Sutton: I will now make an end
of this question, referring you for the rest to the Jesuits Antepast, where
you may find at large, concerning this subject, whatsoever your heart can
desire: but before I end the conference, let me ask you a merry question: what
will you say, if (for a parting blow with the Jesuit Parsons) I prove out of
his own printed book, as also out of the Jesuitical Cardinal Bellarmine,
even in that book which he dedicated to the Popes holiness, with which book
he so pleased the Pope, that he made him Cardin^ll for the same, that all the
books, Chapters, verses, and sentences, which are admitted for Canonical, are
actually proved in holy scriptur to be truly Canonical, and Gods pure word
without the mixture of man's word? which for all that, is that mighty point of
faith, which the said two Jesuits and all Iesuited Papists contend with might
and many to be an unwritten tradition of the Church.


Theoph. What will I say? Is that your question? I will tell you both what I
will say and do: I will say you have done that, which to this day was ever
thought impossible: and this I promise to cause the same to be written in
Marble with golden Letters, and to put the stone in Saint Peter's Church at
Rome, In Perpetuam rei memoriam.


Remig. Be attentive, and mark well what I deliver, for I trust by Gods help,
to prove it most substantially: these are the express words of S. R. or of
Robert Parsons that Traiterous and brazen faced Jesuit. First S. R. page 284.
conclusion is: all such points of Christian faith, as are necessary to be
actually believed of every one, that has use of reason though he be never so
simple, are actually contained in scripture, either clearly, or obscurely:
these are Parsons words, I neither add any thing, change any thing, nor take
any thing away: the Jesuit Bellarmine Bellarm. lib. 4. de verb. scripto, c.
11. col. ^ 91* to 1.
has these express words: These observations being marked, I answer, that
all those things are written by the Apostles, which are necessary for all men,
and which the Apostles preached openly to all the vulgar people, but that all
other things are not written: These are the Cardinals words: I cite them most
sincerely. I hold it a damnable sin to belly the Devil. Out of these
testimonies, I gather very plainly, that all things which every one is bound
to believe, are actually contained in the holy scripture: and consequently y^
all the books, chapters, verses and sentences which are admitted for
Canonical, are truly Canonical and Gods pure word without y^ mixture of man's
word: which conclusion, for all that, is it that both our Jesuits and all
their cursed Iesuited brood do violently impugn.


Theoph. The Papists would seem to frustrate your conclusion, because they
only believe it for the testimony of the Pope, and Church of Rome.


Remig. They would gladly seem indeed to do many things which they are not
able to perform. But the truth is as I have said: and thus both briefly and
pithily I prove the same. Whatsoever is necessary for every Christian, the same
is contained in the scriptures of the Apostles: but the knowledge of all the
Books, Chapters, Uerses, and Mark well this my probation.
Sentences, admitted for Canonical to be truly Canonical, and the pure word of
God, is necessary for every Christian, ergo, the same is contained in the
Scriptures Glogismus in prima figura and modo Daril.
of the Apostles. The conclusion of this argument cannot be denied, because it
is a perfect Syllogism, in the first figure, and in the third made called
Darij. The proposition is confessed both by Cardinal Bellarmine, and by the
Jesuit Parsons. You have heard their express words truly alleged, as
themselves in printed books have set them down so then the difficulty (if
there be any at all) rests in the assumption, viz. if to know the holy Bible
to Lo, late Popery is flat heresy
be Canonical and the pure word of God, be necessary for every Christian,
which being a fundamental point of religion, is so clear and so apparent to
every one, as methinkes it is a needless labor to take in hand to prove the
same. But I prove it: Ioh. 10. 22. Romans 16. Rom 14. 23 Hebr ^. 7. Rom 10. 17
Ioh. 3 18.
salvation. Secondly, because the Papists themselves do ever urge the same, as
a necessary point of faith and salvation, so often as it seems any way to
make for their unwritten traditions. Thirdly, because all the articles of faith
deduced out of the sciptures, depend thereupon: for these are the Jesuit S. R.
his own words, yet this is a point of the Christian faith, yea, thereupon
depend all the articles we gather out of Scripture. Thus disputes our Jesuit
in his pretensed answer to the Downe-fall of Popery, after he has bitterly
many times denied* that Note this point well* S. R. page* 292. The Jesuit
plainly confounds himself*
the holy Scripture does show it self to be Gods word: but the force of truth
is so mighty in operation, ye while of malice he strives against it, he
unawares confounds himself, and pleads for the truth in very deed.
Fourthly, because the Jesuit S. R. urged, and as it were deadly wounded with
the sharp pikes of his adversaries arguments, plainly and resolutly confesses
the doctrine which I defend. In one place he has these express words: me
thinks he plainly avouches (he speaks of Saint Austen) yt God has
procured every thing to be clearly written, which to know, is necessary for
every man's salvation. Page 287.
In another place he has these words: what The Jesuit unawares* kills the
Pope and his religion.
things soever are necessary, are manifest out of scripture. Now sir, what man
can think our Jesuit to be in his right wits, that thus wounds himself
with his own weapons? for he does not only grant, that every thing necessary
for every man's salvation, is manifest in ye scripture, but withal, that every
necessary thing is clearly written in the same: and consequently, he grants
unaware and against himself, either that to believe the holy Bible to be the
pure word of God, is a trifle, a thing of small moment, and not at all
necessary to salvation, which if the Papists do, they must perforce condemn
themselves, and utterly overthrow their Romish faith; or else, that the same is
plainly and clearly set down in the holy Scripture; the cause is clear, I
hope I have said enough.


Theoph. All the world knows, old and young, rich and poor, learned and
unlearned, that to know and believe the holy Bible to be Gods word, is so
necessary to salvation, as none without it can be saved.

It now remains for my full satisfaction and resolution in all points of
Catholic doctrine in controversy, that if I know how to answer the Papists
concerning one point of doctrine, wherewith they never cease to charge you and
your profession, I would think my self able to answer and confound all
Papists in the world, and to persuade all indifferently affected persons, to
abhor and detest late start-vp popery world without end.


Remig. Let me know, I pray you heartily, what y^ point of doctrine is,
wherewith our adversaries so surcharge us and our profession, conceal nothing
from me, that any way troubles your conscience: for doubtless I am most
willing to undergo any pains for your instruction in the truth.


Theoph. They charge you to hold and teach, that the best liver among you
sins in the best act he does, which seems a doctrine so strange and
irksome to all godly ears, as my self cannot but detest the same: for if we
can do nothing but sin, we must perforce condemn all good works, all
preaching, all teaching, and all holy conversation.


Remig. I wonder that any living wilcharge our Church with such unsavory
doctrine.


Theoph. Your adversaries affirm with open mouths, (so disgracing you and
your profession, as much as in them lies) that this is a general received
axiom with all your S. R. p. 220.
Deuines: Iustus in omni opere bono peceat: The just man sins in every good
work he does; and that all, even our best works are sin.


Remig. My self, though most unworthy of that sacred name, am one among the
rest. Howbeit, I am so far from believing or defending that doctrine, that I
utterly renounce the same, in the sense formerly by you avouched. For the exact
examination of which proposition, by them te armed our Maxim or Axiom, let us
dispute the question, pro and contra, as we have done the rest.


CHAP. 6. Of the state of the regenerate, with the particular adjuncts of the
same.
Remigius. THis proposition, which seems to trouble you more then a little
(the just man sins in every good work) may admit a double sense and meaning,
viz, a rigorous and a favorable interpretation. I^ we interpret it according
to the rigor of the words, the sense must be this: the just man sins, even
in the best work he does: which sense I willingly grant) is not only
strange, but with all very irkson^^ to all Christian ears: howbeit, if it may
find a favorable interpretation, the sense and meaning will be this: the just
man sins, whiles he Mark well, the just man sineth whiles he does good
works, but not in doing* them.
does the best work he can: which sense is most Christian, sound, Catholic,
Apostolical, and consonant to the holy scriptures. But here ye must mark
seriously, that it is one thing to sin, in doing a good work, an other thing
to some while the same good work is a doing.


Iheoph. This your distinction: as it is very subtle, so is it also right
iovous and comfortable to mine heart: it affords me a kind of glimmering
though no full insight into the question.


Remig. He that will exactly know the truth of this question, must ap^ly
distinguish the quadruple state of man.


Theoph. It seems to me a thing impossible, that man shall be able to do any
good work while he sins damnably?


Remig. It is a generell received axiom with all skillful Logicians, that true
things must be granted, fals^ things denied, and ambiguous things
distingushed: which being true, as it is most true indeed, if we shall
distinguish regeneration aright, the truth of this intricate question will
soon appear: viz. that one may as well both sin and do good at one and the
same time, as he may at the same time be both a father and a son.


Theoph. Our Papists contend with might and maine, that howsoever we
distinguish regeneration, yet shall man in his justification be freed from all
sin, and consequently he cannot sin mortally in the best act he does.


Remig. The Papists err grossly about regeneration, whilst they do not
understand the same aright according to the holy scriptures: or they bear the
world in hand, that every justified person is freed from all sin in his
soul, and only subject to sin materially in his body: which if it were
true, as it is most false, then doubtless could not the regenerate man commit
mortal sin while he does his best works.


Theoph. The Apostle seems to stand on their side, Gal. 5. 17.
when he tells us, that the flesh lusts against the spirit, and the spirit
against the flesh: and it is confirmed by the Romans 7. 25.
same Apostle, in another place, where he affirms himself to serve the law
of God in his mind, but the law of 2. Cor. 4. 16 Ephesians. ^. 2^ 24.
sin in his flesh: which doctrine elsewhere he delivers in other terms,
distinguishing man into the inward and outward man, and in another place into
the old and new man.


Remig. The Pope, his Cardinals, Jesuits, and Iesuited Popelings, for the
maitenance of their false and erroneous doctrine of man's justification, do
shamefully abuse and wrest the holy scriptute to a contrary sense and meaning,
fraudulently persuading their silly devoted vassals, that original
concupiscence remains only in the body, and not at all in the soul, where
as the truth is far otherwise, as holy wridtoth evidently convince.


Theoph. They contend and obstinately affirm, that the inward man does
connotate the soul, and the outward man the body: and the terms of inward and
outward, seem very agreeable to their application.


Remig. The spirit, the law of the mind, the inward, and outward inall, are all
one with the holy Apostle, and do signify the whole man as he is regenerate:
and semblably, the flesh, the law of the members, the outward, and the old man,
are with the same Apostle all one, and do signify the whole man as he is
corrupt by the fall of Adam.


Theoph. If it be possible for you ^oo demonstrate this doctrine out of holy
writ, you thereby give the Pope a deadly wound, and turn his religion vpside
down.


Remig. Mark well my discourse, that ye may understand the same. Saint John
has these express words: which are borne hot of blood nor of the will of the
flesh, nor Ioh. 13
of the will of man, but of God: in which asseueration, the holy Evangelist
understands by the word (flesh) the whole man as he is corrupt and
unregenerate.


Theoph. How can it be proved, that Saint John: understands the corrupt man
by the word (flesh.)?


Remig. These four are distinguished in the Evangelist, blood, the will of the
flesh, the will of the man, and God: by which distinction he gives us to
understand, that the will of the flesh does connotate the whole man corrupt: I
prove it, because the Evangelist distinguishes blood, flesh, and man, one from
another by a particular dissunctiue, and God from them all, by a particular
aduersatiue.


Theoph. Your affirmance of the quadruple distinction, is evident, but how
should flesh connotate the corrup man, it does not so well appear.


Remig. I prove it two ways.


Theoph. What is that adiunct, I pray you.


Remig. The will of the flesh: for will is added unto flesh, not unto blood,
and it is a proper faculty of the soul, but not of the body: for the flesh or
body has no will at all. The body does not count without the soul.
which for all that the Evangelist attributes to the flesh: and consequently,
he means and speaks of that flesh which has a will, and so of the corrupt
man, fitly compared to flesh, as who before his regeneration sauoreth only the
things of the flesh: which sense the Apostle plainly vn^oldeth, when he
affirms the animal, sensual, and natural man, not to perceive the things
of thy spirit of God. This reason or explication is confirmed by an other 1.
Cor. ^. ver. 14.
testimony of the same Apostle, where he avouches the flesh to lust against
the spirit, and the spirit against the flesh, so that the children of God
cannot perform the Gal. 5. v. 14.
things they will and earnestly desire: for this conflict between the flesh
and the spirit, must needs be understood ^ug. de perf. just. r^ tioc. 17.
of the regenerate and unregenerate parts of man: for the flesh lusts not
without the soul, as both Saint Austen and reason teaceth us.


Theoph. The Papists expound the words of the Apostle otherwise, affirming the
cumbat to be between the body signified by the flesh, and the soul signified
by the spirit.


Remig. The Papists say much, but prove little: they strive for life to obscure
the Apostles true sense and meaning, as which turns their faith and religion
vp^idedoune: but I God willing) will prove what I say, by the express words of
holy writ, and by evident reason. S. R. p. 160. P^. 51. 10. 11
gross error, while they peruer^ly and, mordicus auerre, that the soul of
the regenerate is free from all mortal sin, and that original sin remains
only in the body materially: the first text is comprised in these words,
create in me a clean heart, O God, and renew a right spirit within me: cast me
not away from thy presence, and take not thine holy spirit from me. In these
words the holy Prophet shows plainly, that he was regenerate, and yet not
free from sin: for in that he desires his heart to be purified, and his
spirit to be renewed, he gives us to understand, that his soul is not free
from sin, nor himself perfectly regenerate. On the other side, in that he
prays God not to take away his holy spirit from him, nor to cast him away
from his presence; he shows evidently to the indifferent reader, that he is
regenerate, though not wholly, yet in part. The second text confirms the
same, in these words: though our outward man perish, yet the inward man is
renewed daily. The third 2 Cor. 4. v. 16. Ephesians. 4. 23 Col. 3. 9.
text is yet plainer, in these words: be renewed in the spirit of your mind,
and put on the new man, which after God is created in righteousness and true
holiness. The fourth text is as plain, in these words: seeing ye have put off
the old man with his works, and have put on the new, which is renewed in
knowledge after the image of him that created him. The fifth text does further
confirm the same, in these words: night and day praying exceedingly that we
might see your face, and might accomplish 1 These. 3. v. 10. 1 Cor. 13 v 12.
that which is lacking in your faith. By all which texts it is very clear and
evident, that the regenerate man is not wholly renewed in his souls: for which
respect, Saint Apoc. 22. v. 11. Romans 7.
John exhoedeth him that is justified, to be justified more: Qui iustus est,
iustificetur adhuc Yea, S. Paul throughout a whole chapter, does in effect
intend no other thing, but only to demonstrate by many arguments, that man's
regeneration is imperfect as well in the soul as in the body: two verses only
will suffice, for the clearing of our question. The former verse is contained
in those words: v. 14. v. 18.
for we know that the law is spiritual, but I am carnal, fold under sin.
The latter verse, in these words: for I know, that in me, that is in my flesh,
dwells no good thing, for to will is present with me, but I find no means to
perform that which is good. Out of which verses, I observe these memorable
doctrines. 1 Cor. 15. 10. 1 Cor. 6 v. 19. Romans 8. 9. 1 Cor. 13. 12
and consequently, that when he says, no good dwells in him, he means of
the parts unregenerate, which he names his flesh, saying, in me, that is, in
my flesh dwells no good thing. Fourthly, that the holy vessel of our Lord
Jesus, affirms himself to be sold under sin, and to be carnal, and
consequently, that sin is in him formally throughout all his unregenerate
parts, and not only in his body materially, as our Pope and Jesuits would
enforce us to beeeue: for though the regenerate be spiritual in the greater
part, yet are they in part carnal; as the holy Apostle here avouches of
himself, and S. James of himself and all the rest: howbeit, Saint Paul and S.
James were as spiritual as any this day living, if not more: yet the best
livers of all have not so put on the new man, but the relics of the old man
still remain ^ac. 3. 2.
in them, which they must endeavor by the grace of regeneration, daily more and
more to abolish and put away from them.

Secondly, the same truth of man's imperfect regeneration, Secunde princip. ter.
may be proved by evident reason. For the soul which gives life, sense, and
moving to the body, and does inform the same, cannot possibly be an enemy to
the body, anima est forma corporis.
and have continual wars which it. For (as the Apostle teaches us) no man
ever yet hated his own flesh, but nourishes and cherishes the same, even as
Christ does his Church: and it is confirmed, because the flesh coueteth Ephesians.
5. v. 29.
nothing without the soul. These authorities and reasons well considered, this
illation cannot but be clear and Aug. de perf. just. rat. ^6. 17
evident, viz. that the contention, conflict, and rebellion, which is between
the flesh and the spirit, cannot possibly be understood of the soul and the
body, but of the parts unregenerate, as well of the soul as of the body: for
the Apostle by the flesh, every where understands the sensual man, as he is
begotten and borne of his parents: to wit, that old Adam, which is not led by
the spirit of God, neither obeieth the law of God, but his wicked affections:
so does our savior himself call that flesh which is borne of the flesh, and
that spirit which is borne of the spirit: for Ioh. 3. 6. Aug. in Johan. ^r^ctat
80. 2 Cor. 7. 1. Apoc. 22. 11.
(as S. Austin says) the justified man is yet mundus and mundandus, clean,
and to be made clean, clean in part, and in part unclean: and therefore is
he willed to cleanse himself from all filthiness of the flesh and spirit, and
to grow up into all holiness in the fear of God.


Theoph. You have so soundly proved that man's regeneration is imperfect, and
that original concupiscence still remains even formally in the unregenerate,
not only in his body but also in his soul, as it is able fully to persuade
any indifferent reader, and all such as are careful of their salvation.
Howbeit I still stand doubtful, and am at my wits end what to think of this
your received Maxim; Iustus in omni opere bono peccat; the just man sins in
every good act.


Remig. I told you before, that it is one thing to sin in doing a good act,
another thing, to sin while the good act is a doing. The former way no man
sins at any time; but the latter way, the best liver on earth, sins
continually. For of original uncleanness there is that yet sticking in the
best, for the which God may justly condemn them to hell fire.


Theoph. I remember the distinction very well, but there are many texts of holy
Scripture, which seem to make against the same.


Remig. Propound them all one by one, and omit not any that troubles you: for
I hope in God so to answer them, as you shall never henceforth stand in doubt
thereof.


Theoph. God himself says, that the wickedness of man was great on earth,
and that all the imaginations of Genesis 6. 50
the thoughts of his heart were only evil continually. Out of which words
proceeding from the spirit of God, I observe these memorable points of
doctrine.


Remig. I answer: that the text by you alleged, is understood in the corrupt
man before his regeneration, in whom there is no good at any time; not of the
regenerate man, in whom there is much good continually. I prove it many ways:
Genesis 7. 1.
spirit of God pronounces Noah righteous in his sight. Zacharias Luke 1. 5. 6.
and Elizabeth, were both just before God, and walked in all his commandments.
1 Ioh. 3. 9.
holy Apostle of our Lord Jesus, tells us very plainly, that he which is
borne of God sins not: yea, S. John proceeds further, and avouches
resolutely, that he cannot sin, because he is borne of God. 1 Ioh. 3. 10.
by doing of righteousness, the children of God are known and discerned from
the children of the Devil. Caine 1 Ioh. 3. 12.
and of Abel together, affirms the works of the one to be evil, and the
others to be good. John tells us of Uirgins which are not defiled with women,
Apo^. 14. 4.
but follow the Lamb whithersoeuer he goes. Cornelius for a devout man, and
one that feared God, and affirms his prayers and alms to have come up into
remembrance before God. Peter did a good act when he Mat. 16. v. 16. 17.
confessed Christ to be the son of the living GOD: for Christ answering,
pronounced him blessed, affirming, not flesh and blood, but God above to have
revealed it to him. Mat. 5. v. 10
for righteousness. Hebrews) makes frequent Hebr. 11.
mention of the good works which the children of God have done.


Theoph. The Scripture says plainly, that we all are Psalm. 51. 5. Ps. 1 43.
v. 2. Psa 1 30. 3. Iac. 3. 2. Prou. 20. 9.
conceived and borne in sin, that no flesh can be justified in Gods fight,
that if he straightly mark our iniquities, none is able to abide it, that the
holy Apostles offend in many things, that all have sinned and are deprived of
the glory of God: ergo, it seems that the best liver sins, in the best
work he does.


Remig. True it is, that the best livers on earth are great sinners, and that
they may justly be damned to hell Aug. lib. 9. confess. c, 13.
for the same. For as S. Austen says gravely: Woe to the best liver on earth,
if God judge him, his mercy set apart. But hereupon can it never be concluded
that the just man sins in every work he does.


Theoph. The best works of the regenerate are imperfect, and consequently the
regenerate man sins in the best work he does?


Remig. Your consequence does not hold, the reason is at hand, viz. because
every imperfection, neither does nor can make a good act evil: for although
imperfection be so linked and chained with sin in y^ regenerate, that
whersoeuer it be found, there is sin also in the same subject; yet is not
that sin in the act well done, but either in some other act evil done, or else
in the omission of that which ought to be done. Let us take an example for the
illustration of the truth and question now in hand; and let us suppose, that S.
R has lent 40. pounds unto T. B. to be repaid upon May Day next, at which day
y^ said T. B. brings only 30. pounds, being all y^ he possibly can provide.
In this ease, the debtour tendereth an imperfect payment to the Creditour.
Howbeit, he does not wrong the creditour in bringing him 30. pounds, but the
injury is done in not bringing more.


Theoph. He wrongeth his creditor by his unthankfulness, in that he does not
bring him the just sum which he borrowed.


Remig. The Creditor is wronged indeed, yet not in y^ payment of the 30.
pounds, but in the non payment of other ten pounds. Imperfection is ever
cheyned with sin, as is already said, yet the sin or wrong done in this case
to the Creditor, is not in the 30. pounds truly paid, but in the ten pounds
remaining unpaid. For example sake. A servant receiving of his master ten
shillings to be distributed to the poor, gives only eight shillings thereof
to them, and reserueth two shillings to himself. In this case the servant
trespasseth generally: yet not in distributing eight shillings, a part of his
charge, but in keeping back two shillings which he should have given: For when
a servant is commanded to do althing, which he does only in part, but not
wholly, the offense is not in that which he does, but in that which he leaves
undone. Luke 18. v. 13. 14. Exodus 1. 17. Exodus 32. v. 27. 1 Samuel 1. 15. Heb.
11. 31, 2 Samuel 12. v 7. 13. Mat. 26. 75. Act. 10. 2. 1 Reg. 15. 11. 2 Reg. 18.
6 2 Reg. 23. 25. Act. 13. 9. Romans 7. v. 15. 25. Hebr. 11.
Even so is it in the question now in hand. For the lowly Publican sinned not
in smiting his breast, and in asking mercy for his sins. The Mid-wiues,
Shiphrah and Puah sinned not in that they feared God, and disobeyed y^ kings
wicked commandment. Moses sinned not, in s^aying y^ Idolaters at Gods
appointment. Hanna sinned not in pouring out her soul before the Lord. Rahab
sinned not in receiving the spies peaceably. David sinned not in confessing his
sins when Nathan the Prophet reproved him for the same. Peter sinned not in
weeping bitterly for his sins. Cornelius sinned not in fearing God and
praying continually. King Asa sinned not in doing right in the eyes of the
Lord. King Ezechias sinned not in cleaning to the Lord, and in not departing
from him. Josias sinned not in turning to y^ Lord with all his heart, with all his
soul, and with all his might. Paul full of the holy Ghost, sinned not in
reproving Elimas the sorcerer, for perverting the right ways of the Lord:
neither yet in hating the sin which he could not avoid. Abel sinned not in
offering a greater sacrifice then Caine, by which he obtained Gods own
testimony that he was righteous. Abraham sinned Hebr. 11. v. 8. 17. Genesis 22. v.
2. 3. 9. 10. Job. 1. v. 1. 22. Luke 1. 5, 6.
not in obeying God when he was called, neither in offering up his only son
when God commanded him so to do. Job sinned not in being upright and just, in
fearing God, and eschewing evil. Zacharias and Elizabeth sinned not in walking
in all the commandments of the Lord, without reproach. S. Stephen full of the
holy Ghost, and Act. 7. 59.
ready to give his life for the truths sake, sinned not in calling on God and
saying, Lord Jesus receive my spirit. 1 Timothy 2. 7. 2. 3. The regenerate sin not
in walking after the spirit. Romans 8, 4.
Dutiful subjects sin not in praying daily for their Sovereigns: for holy
writ pronounces it to be good and acceptable in the sight of God. All which,
and many other like testimonies (which in regard of breuity, I now omit) do
prove and evidently convince, that though the regenerate sin while they do
their good works, yet do they not sin in doing the same: for it is one thing
to sin in doing the work, another thing to sin while the work is a doing.


Theoph. Your discourse has fully satisfied me in this intricate and difficult
question: I perceive your distinction to be as true, as it is subtle: the
ignorance whereof, has brought no small ruin to the Church of God: howbeit,
sundry mighty objections, may be made against the same: which by your favor I
shall propound as they come to my mind.


Objection first.
Theoph. It seems to many a thing impossible, that a man while he sins,
should do good.


Remig. It is no more impossible, then it is for the same man to be a father
while he is a son.


Theoph. The same man cannot be both a father and a son, at one and the same
time in one and the same respect, but in diverse respects, though at the same
time.


Remig. True that is, and I desire no more: the holy Romans 7. 25.
Apostle decideth the controversy, in these golden words: I my self in my
mind serve the law of God, but in my flesh the law of sin: here the chosen
vessel of God does plainly express, and lively lay open before our eyes,
that himself both did good works, and also sinned while he did the same,
though not in the same respect: for, to serve the law of God, is a right good
work, but to serve the law of sin, is a great offense: yet both these the
Apostle did at the same time, though not in the same respect: for, as he was
regenerate, he served God truly; but in the unregenerate parts both of body and
soul, or flesh and mind, (which with the Apostle are all one) he sinned
damnably.


Theoph. How can the Apostles act be imperfect, and yet without sin?


Remig. I have so plainly unfolded this difficulty already, that I greatly
admire, how you can be ignorant thereof: imperfection, though it be ever
chained with sin in the regenerate, does not for all that connotate his Romans
7, 25.
act well donebu; teither some other act evil done, or else the ^mission of
the act that should be done: For example, Saint Paul, when he served the law of
God in his mind, did a good act, though imperfectly, and sinned not in doing
the same: howbeit at the same time he sinned perfectly, in serving the law of
sin nevertheless his imperfection consisted Psalm. 5. 4. Psalm. 6. 8.
not in serving y^ law of God, which was an act pleasing God, who never is or
can be pleased with sin: but it consisted in serving the law of sin, which
was perfectly an act, no way pleasing God: The imperfection arises not of that
which is well done, but of that which is either ill done, or left undone.
Are^pag. de d^^^nis. nominib. cap. 4.



Theoph. How can the serving of the law of sin, be be perfectly an evil act,
seeing the serving of the law of God is not perfectly a good act.


Remig. The holy and ancient father Dionysius Ariopagita, unfolds this
difficulty, whiles he affirms more to be required to good, then to evil: for
perfect good, requires a perfect and entire cause, but perfect evil, issues
out of every defect: Bonum exintegra causa, malum exquolibet defectu?


Theoph. The Apostle tells us, that al me^ are sinners, that Romans 3. v. 10.
11. 12.
there is none that does good, no not one: how then can the regenerate be
without sin, in the best act he does?


Remig. True it is, that the bestliuers on earth are great sinners, and for
their sins may justly be damned to hellfire: true it is likewise, that none,
no not one, does any 3 There are degrees in keeping Gods commandments.
good perfectly: yet this notwithstanding, true it is thirdly, that the
regenerate does much good imperfectly, and sins not in doing the same: for
doubtless Saint Paul sinned not in serving the law of God imperfectly; albeit
he sinned grievously at the same time, in serving the law of sin: for, (as
the holy and ancient father Saint Austen Aug. de nup* and concup. lib. 1* cap.
29
writes learnedly) Multum boni facit, qui facit quod scriptum est, post
concupiscentias tuas non eas; sed non perficit, quod non implet quod scriptum
est; non concupisces: He does great good, who does that which is written,
follow not thy ^u^tes: but he does not perfect his well doing, because he does
not fulfill that which is written, thou shall not lust. The same father in
another Aug. in psa. 118. conc. ^^fine.
place, has these express words, Ecce, quemadmodum qui ambulant in vijs
Domini non operantur peccatum, and tamen non sunt ^ine peccata* quia iam, non
ipsi operantur iniquitatem, sed quod habitat in e^s peccatum: Behold, how they
that walk in the ways of the Lord, do not sin, and yet are they not without
sin, because now, not they work iniquity, but the sin that dwells Romans
6. 12.
in them: in which words Saint Austen shows plainly, that though the
regenerate do not fulfill the law 1 Ioh. 3. v. 9. 10.
exactly, yet do they good and sin not, so long as they strive against sin,
and suffer it not to reign in them: Ibidem. v. 12.
for which cause says Saint John, that he which is borne of God, sins not,
neither can sin, because he is Genesis 4. 8. 1 Ioh. 3. 8.
borne of God: and in the next verse, he affirms the children of God to be
discerned from the children of the devil: for their good works and
righteousness^: alittle after, he tells us plainly, that Cain slew his
brother Abel, because his own works were evil, and his brothers good: again
in the same chapter, he avouches constantly, that he that commits sin, is
of the devil: I therefore conclude, that the regenerate, as regenerate (mark
well the reduplication) do good and sin not: howbeit, as they commit sin,
so are they of the devil and unregenerate: they keep Gods commandments in
part and some degree, but not in all.


Theoph. If the regenerate, as such be, without sin, then may they merit
their own salvation, as the Papists hold and believe.


Remig. You are greatly deceived in this deep point of divinity: for, though
ye regenerate, as they are regenerate (this reduplication is very emphaticall)
neither do nor can ^ Ioh. 3. 9.
sin, as y^ holy Apostle teaches us, yet do they sin continually in their
unregenerate parts, which is enogh for their ^u^^ comdemnation: for, as in the
regenerate parts they serve the law of God, so in the unregenerate they serve
the law of sin: and consequently seeing (as Saint James says) Iac. 2. 10.
Gal. 3. 10. Deuteronomy. 27. ^6. Psa. 143. 2. Ps. 130. 3. Esa. 64. v. 6.
whosoever keeps y^ whole law, and fails in one point, is guilty of all:
and seeing also as (Saint Paul says) that every one is accursed which
performs not the law: it follows that the regenerate (...) far from
meriting their salvation by their best works, that they might justly be damned
for the same, if God should deal with them in justice and judgment, his mercy
set a part.


Theoph. I cannot yet see, how ^e that sins whiles he does a good work,
does not sin in doing the same: may it please you to illustrate it, by some
familiar example.


Remig. You must either mark the distinction well, or else you can never
understand the same a right. I will give you a very plain example by which you
may easily see the truth thereof. Take one pen full of black incke in your
right hand, an other full of red incke in your left hand; this done, draw with
the said pens two long lines at one and the same time: in this case* it is
very clear and evident, that in making a black line you do not make a red,
neither yet in making a red line, do you make a black: howbeit, while you
make the black line, you make also the red, and semblably, while ye make the
red, you make also the black: but doublesse, in making black you do not make
red, neither yet in making red do you make black: even so may you sin (it
cannot with reason be denied) while you do a good work, and yet not sin in
doing the same.


Theoph. Your example does give me a perfect insight Mat. 6. ver. 24 Luke 3. 16
into the question now in hand: but our savior tells us, that no man can
serve two masters: how then can a man 1. Ioh. 3. v. 8. 9. Ioh. 8 v. 34. Rom 6.
v. 20 2.
both do well and sin at once? for to do well* is to serve the best
master, and to sin, is to serve the worst of all: that is, even God and the
devil.


Remig. I answer: Pe^ 2 v. 19* Ephesians. 6. 5. Genesis ^5. ver. 8. 21 Dan. 2. v. 48.
49.
and subject to the other: for so does Saint Paul teach us in these express
words, servants, obey your masters according to the flesh, with fear and
trembling, in singleness of your hearts, as unto Christ: lo, a servant may
obey his carnal master, and in so doing Christ himself: so did holy Joseph
serve God, and the King of Egypt: so did Daniel serve God, and the King of
Babel. Gal. 5. 17.
that though the regenerate sin daily, and be continually assaulted with the
cumbat of the flesh against the spirit, yet do they not suffer sin to reign
in them, neither do they consent to the unlawful desires thereof, but utterly
hate and detest the same: and consequently, they serve not two masters, but
one only, even our Lord Jesus Cor. 6. v. 11. 1. Ioh 5 v. 4. 1. Ioh. 3* v. 6
ver. 6. 7. 9.
Christ: for, to hate sin, to fight courageously against sin, and to be at
continual destance with it, as the Jews were with the Cananites, is not to
serve sin, but to be a mortal enemy to sin, and rather the master then the
servant thereof: which sense our Savior himself does plainly insinuate, in
these words immediately Mat. 6. v. 24
following: for either he shall hata the one, and love the other, or else he
shall lean to the one, and despise the other: as if he had said, no man can
truly and dutifully serve two masters, as a servant ought to do: for it is not
the part of a servant to hate his master, to withstand his commaundes, and
every hour to fight with him, as the regenerate children of God do continually
with sin: yea, the Apostle confirms the same sense, when he plainly
confesses Romans 7. v. 19. 20.
of himself, that he did not that good which he would, but that evil which he
would not: and thereupon concludes, that he himself did it not, but the sin
that dwelled in him: for albeit sin, against his will remained still in him,
and had daily conflicts and continual cumbats with him, yet had he the victory
and upper hand 1 Ioh. 5. v. 4
over sin, in that he stood constantly at defiance with it, and would never
yield consent unto it. Thirdly, that one may serve two contrary masters
secundum quid, though not simpliciter; in part, but not simply, wholly, or
totally: and this sense does the holy Apostle afford us, Romans 7. 25.
while he confesses resolutely, that he himself served the law of God in his
mind, but in his flesh the law of sin: for, by reason of the relics of the
flesh, and grace of the spirit, he was divided in himself.


Theoph. This seems to smell of Popery: for they teach, that the regenerate
sin only in the body materially, and not at all in the soul.


Remig. I have proved formerly, if you well remember, y^ the Apostle
understands by y^ word (flesh) whatsoever is in man not yet renewed by y^ holy
Ghost to wit* not only Romans 8. ver. 8.
the sensitive appetite, but even (...) (...) will ^^^^nerate: For as the same
Apostle ^ai^h else where (...) They that are in the flesh cannot please God,
which is all one, as if he had said they that have not the spirit of
regeneration, which abolisheth sin in them, though not all at once, but by
degrees, cannot possibly please God: neither can y^ The old man with all his
powers, mind, will, and heart.
Popish sense by any means be true, seeing by it none living, no Pope, no
Cardinal, no Jesuit, can possibly please God: The reason is evident, because
none can live on earth, but which have their souls in their bodies. This sense
the Apostle does plainly deliver in these words immediately following: now ye
are not in the flesh, but in the spirit, because the spirit of God dwells in
you: but if any man have not the spirit of Christ, the same is not his: here it
is clear, that the word (flesh) does connotate Romans 8. v. 9
whatsoever is in man unregenerate, but not the body which the soul informs.
This sense is more plainly confirmed in another place, where it is written;
for we know, that the law is spiritual, but I am carnal sold under sin:
where we see evidently, that the Apostle by Romans 7. 14.
(flesh) means neither the body only, nor the soul only, but both body and
soul, so far forth as they are vngenerate: for the word (carnal) does not
barely connotate any one part, either of body or of soul, but the whole person
of man, not yet purified with the grace of regeneration. The words are very
emphaticall, (for I Gods precepts are kept in some degrees, but not perfectly.
am carnal) S. Paul speaks of himself, being the regenerate child of God,
and for all that freely acknowledges himself to be carnal, and sold under
sin. Which acknowledgement he makes in respect of his imperfect renouation,
as well of soul as of body giving us thereby to understand* that the best
(...) (...) (...) are sanctified but in part, not wholly and perfectly. For
doubtless, if the sanctification of Gods Children were perfect in this life*
S. Paul's should have found no defect: but he that is justified and sanctified,
must continually endeavor to be Apoc. 22. (...).
more and more just and holy. Which precept is given in vain, if
sanctification in this life be perfect.


Theoph. I see it most evidently, that S. Paul and the rest of the Apostles,
were not sanctified wholly, but only in part: and that therefore they both
sinned, and did good works at once* albeit they sinned only while they did
their good works, but never in doing the same. Gods holy name be blessed for
that insight into the Catholic truth, which in great mercy, he has by this
conference; bestowed on me: And I most humbly thank you (Father R^^igi^^) for
your most Christian pains on my behalf; faithfully promising to rest yours
during life, in what I possibly may or can, as one that owes ever himself
unto you.


Laus Deo vni and trino.
FINIS.

