A Short Analysis of a part of the second Chapter of S. James, from the 14.
verse to the end of the same.

With a brief confutation of the Rhemistes Annotations thereupon written.

By John Morgan. 1588.

Imprinted at London by Thomas Orwin, for Edward Aggas. 1588.

To the Right Honorable and Worshipful Ladies, the Lady Walsingham and Lady
Sidney: John Morgan wishes increase of all heavenly and spiritual grace in
Christ.
ELect and Christian Ladies, as nothing is more necessary to our salvation,
nothing more pleasant to the inward man, renewed in knowledge, after the Image
of him that created us, then the knowledge of that high mystery of our
justification by faith only: which doctrine is even the soul of the Church,
against which, as Satan has laid all his engines, that this substantial point
of Christian religion, might either by force be overthrown, or with subtlety
might be undermined; so it has pleased the Lord to rampire in this doctrine:
with such a fiery wall of Scriptures, that all the gates of hell cannot
prevail against it. But as Satan is wont sometime to transform himself into
an Angel of light, so by the Scriptures he seeks to ouerturne the
Scriptures: but yet the sword of the Spirit, which is the word of God, is of
such sharp edge, that it has always and will to the end cut asunder all the
knottie quiddities, which our adversaries (though never so conningly) shall
endeavor to contriue against the plain truth, reueiled in the Scriptures. For
experience whereof, I have here dedicated to your Worships, a little remainder
of my labors, reading in my charge upon the Epistle of Saint James: wherein
as I labored to teach the truth of God plainly for the capacity of the
simple; so likewise, as occasion was offered, according to my poor skill, I
assaied to confute errors of seducing Spirits: which if it shall please you to
accept, as willingly as I do offer the same unto you duetifully, I shall think
the fruit of my labors well bestowed, to be received into the hands, and
perused with the eyes of two so virtuous and religious Ladies: and the rather I
am encouraged hereunto, because I would provoke a fresh the eger appetites of
those which have stayed (too long I am sure, as they think) with a fore-tast
of some little banqueting dish, to make them longue the more for the whole
service, most artificially and richly, I hope, ere it be long, of those to be
brought out, which are able to provide the diet, and furnish the provision of a
Princely table: who (I am sure) will no more be offended with me for shaking a
light Lance against the Camp of Antichrist, then worthy Generals, and
valiant Coronels are wont with their Captains for showing their valor, and
smiting a straggler coming in his way, whose coming might something prejudice
any corner of the host. And now to you, O Romish Rhemists: when will you open
your eyes to see the truth? when will you take that precious Collyrium, Revel.
3.1
a sovereign eye-salue, whereof S. John speaks, that you may once see your
bondage to that Italian Antichrist (...), you know what is meant, when will you
learn to see the glorious liberty of the Sons of God? Will you be more
blind then the Turks, who though they are Agarenes, yet will be called
Saracenes? But you who pretending Catholics, the Mother Church, the sons of
Sarah, will yet for all this, as though you were borne of her womb, join with
Hagar. You will not be justified only by grace, by the free promise only, as
Isaac was borne, but as that lusty yonker Ismael, you will mock Isaac as a
Solifidian, and more then that persecute the lawful heirs with fire and
faggot; you will be borne by the strength of flesh, and not by the power of the
promise, only: A lusty dame must be your Mother, or else you will not have
Abraham to be your Father: you will join nature with grace: O blind
generation; you will not work but for hire: you will do no good deeds, but to
avoid the whot scalding house of Purgatory: O servile brood. If you will not
believe me, I pray you give ear to that old, eloquent, good father Nazianzene.
If thou be a bondslaue, Nazian. de Sancto Bapmate.
then fear the whippe: if thou be an hyreling, then look only for thy
reward: but over and besides this, if thou be a (natural) Child, then
reverence (God) as thy Father: Do well, because it is good to obey thy Father:
yea, and although thou shall have nothing else, yet even this shall be thy
reward: that thou have been obedient to thy Father. Thus leaving these Jesuits
to be schooled of so grave and reverend a Father, till his fatherhood and
their own conscience, better instructed, shall direct them, I commend your
good Ladyships to the fatherly protection of the heavenly Father, who is the
father of all mercies, and the Father of the whole family both in heaven and
earth. To whom be al praise and glory ascribed for his free and undeserved
mercy, both now and evermore.

Yours most bounden to pray for your good Ladyships in the Lord. I. M.

Rhemists Annotations in 2. Chap. of James.
Verse. 13. Judgment without mercy.] Nothing gives more hope of mercy in
the next life, then the works of Alms, charity, and mercy, done to our
neighbors in this life: Neither shall any be used with extreme rigor in the
next world, but such as used not mercy in this world, Aug. de peccat. merit.
lib. 2. cap. 3. which is true, not only in respect of the judgment to
everlasting damnation, but also of the temporal chastisement in Purgatory, as
S. Augustine signifies, declaring that our venial sins be washed away in
this world, with daily works of mercy, which otherwise should be chastised in
the next, See Epist. 29. aforesaid in fine, and lib. 21. De Ciuit. Dei. cap.
27. in fine.

Answer.
COncerning the temporal chastisement in Purgatory, as the Jesuits do place
the principal buttresse of defense thereof in S. Augustine. But how inconstant
Augustine was in this error, appears by this, that sometimes he doubts
whether there be any such matter, other-whiles he seems plainly to deny all
other receptacles of the souls departed, beside heaven and hell: for both in
his Enchiridion ad Laurentia^ 69. cap Et de octo Dulcitij in quaestionibus
quest. ^he says, That as it is not incredible, that such a matter may be after
this life, so it may be doubted whether it be so or no, likewise in his book
De fide and operibus cap. 16. he has these words, speaking of that text of S.
Paul, 1. Corinthians 3, Therefore whether in this life only men suffer these
things, either after this life such judgments do follow, it abhors not, for
as much as I think, from the reason of truth the understanding of this
sentence. Again, in Hypognost. cont. Pelagianos lib. 5, he acknowledges the
kingdom of heaven, for to receive the godly, and hell fire for the punishment
of the wicked, but a third place says he we are altogether ignorant of,
neither do we find it in the holy Scriptures. To the like effect he writes, De
verbis Apostoli, Sermon 14, where he acknowledges the right hand and the left
hand of God, that is, the kingdom of heaven, and the pains of hell, the
middle place he utterly denies, wherein infants might be placed, because there
is no mention thereof in the Gospel. The foundation of Popish Purgatory, is
the distinction of mortal and venial sins, whereas the word of God plainly
determines, that every sin is mortal, and deserves eternal death. Cursed is
every one that abides not in all things that are written in the Law, to
fulfill them, Deuteronomy. 27. The soul that sins shall dye, Ezekiel. 18. The reward
of sin is death. And as for that distinction which S. John makes, cap. 5.1.
Epist. of a sin to death. A sin not to death, has nothing common with that of
the Papists, for all sin that by ye mercy of God is pardonable, he calls a
sin not unto death, for which God is entreated, that gives life to them that
have so sinned: and that sin he counts unto death, which is irremissible,
as obstinate and wilful apostacy. Heb. 6. Blasphemy against the holy Ghost,
Math. 12, for which it is not lawful to pray, thus by the judgments of Gods
word, are all sins mortal, which the Jesuits call venial, and all that they
count mortal, by Gods spirit are counted venial: for by the justice of God all
sins are mortal, but by his mercy they are all pardonable, except that sin
unto death, whereof S. John speaks.

Rhemists Annotat. James 2. verse. 4.
Ver. 14. What shall it profit, if a man say he has faith.] This whole passage
of the Apostle is so clear against justification or salvation, by only faith,
damnably defended by the Protestants, and so evident for the necessity, merit,
or concurrence of good works, that their first Author Luther, and such as
exactly follow him, boldly (after the manner of Heretics) when they can make
no shift, nor false gloss for the text, (...) ^he Book to be Canonical
Scriptural But Calvin and his companions disagreeing from their ministers,
confess it to be holy Scripture. But their shifts, and (...) gloses, for
answer of so plain places, be as impudent, as the denying of the Epistle was
in the other: who would never have denied the Book, thereby to show
themselves Heretics; if they had thought those vulgar euasions that the
(...), and Caluinists do use (whereof they were not ignorant) could have served
in both sorts, the christian Reader may see, that all the Heretics, vaunting
of express Scriptures, and the word of God, is no more but to delude the
world: whereas indeed, be the Scriptures never so plain against them, they
must either: be wrested to sound as they say, or else they must be no
Scriptures at all, and to see Luther, Calvin, Beza, and their fellows, sit as
it were in judgment of the Scriptures, to allow, or disalow at their
pleasures, it is the most notorious example of Heretical pride and misery
that can be: See their Prefaces, and Censures upon this Canonical Epistle, the
Apocalypse, and other.

Answer.
IF the Doctrine delivered by S. Paul, defended by the ancient Fathers be
damnable, of our justification by faith only, we have no skill of such sharp
censures. Was it damnably uttered by Basile, in Homil. de Humilit. This is
sound and perfect rejoicing in God, when as a man is not lifted up with his
own righteousness, but knows himself to be void of true justice, but to
be justified by faith alone in Christ: for verily, to believe alone, is
righteousness. And Nazianzene, Take away your merit, (...)
and as for the necessity and concurrence of good works, we yield that good
works are necessary to salvation, and the fruits of faith, do always
concur, that a good tree does bring forth good fruits. If they be to be
counted Heretics which have doubted of the authority of this Epistle,
Eusebius then lib. 2. cap. 23. counting the same in plain words, a Bastard:
Luther then has a companion with him in this his opinion. The Council of
Laodicea, cap. 59. did leave the book of Revelation out of the number of
Canonical books. Dionisius Alexandrinus writes, as Eusebius reports, lib.
7. cap. 25. that many of his predecessors utterly refused and rejected the
book of Revelation. Now if that which you object against Luther were true, his
error therein, common to him with others, must neither prejudice the authority
of that Epistle, nor the credit of those who reverence the same as a portion of
Gods word, read it, and expound it in their Churches. Who have wrested the
Scriptures, you, or we, might here be at large set down to your shame: the
gloses of the Zuinglians and Caluinists, as you call them, wherein do they
differ from your Angelical Thomas upon this chapter, or the ordinary gloss
upon this scripture, saying that Abraham was justified without works by only
faith, but yet the offering of his some was a testimony of his faith and
righteousness. Nay, it is not Calvin and Beza that sit as Judges upon the
Scriptures, to allow or disalow at their pleasures. Ambrose Catharine upon the
Epistle ad Galat. cap. 2, It is the Popes proper privilege to canonize
Scriptures, or to reprove Scriptures: this indeed is the most notorious example
of heretical pride and misery, that can be: whereas you bid us see the
Prefaces of Luther and others, I refer you to Luthers Preface before his
works, and there you shall see the modesty of Luthers spirit. Before all
things, I pray the Godly Reader, and beseech him, for our Lord Jesus Christ his
sake, that he would read these things with judgment, nay rather with much
pity, and let him know that sometimes I was a Monk.

Rhemists Annotation.
Verse. 21. Abraham was he not justified by works?] It is much to be noted,
that S. Augustine in his book De fide and operibus, cap. 14. writes, that the
Heresy of only faith justifying or saving, was an old Heresy in the Apostles
time, gathered by the false interpretation of some of S. Paul's profound
disputation, in the Epistle to the Romans, wherein, he commended so highly
the faith in Christ, that they thought good works were not auayleable: adding
further, that the other three Apostles, James, John, and Jude, did of purpose
wright so mutch of good works, to correct the said error of only faith,
gathered by the misconstruction of S. Paul's words: yea when S. Peter, Epist.
2. cap. 3. warns the faithful, that many things be hard in S. Paul's
writings, and of light unlearned men mistaken to their perdition: The said S.
Augustine affirms, that he meant of his disputation concerning faith, which
so many Heretics did mistake to condemn good works: and in his Preface of his
Commentary upon the 31. Psalm, he warns all men, that this deduction upon
S. Paul's speech: Abraham was justified by faith, therefore works be not
necessary to salvation, is the right way to hell and damnation. And lastly,
(which is in it self very plain) that we may see, this Apostle did purposely
thus commend unto us, the necessity of good works, and the inanity and
insufficiency of only faith to correct the error of such as misconstrued S.
Paul's words for the same. The said holy Doctor, lib. 83. q. 9. 76. notes
that of purpose he took the very same example of Abraham, whom S. Paul said
to be justified by faith, and declares that he was justified by good works,
specifying the good work for which he was justified, and blessed of God, to
wit, his obedience and immolation of his only Son. But how S. Paul says
that Abraham was justified by faith, see the Annotations upon that place, Romans
4. verse. 1.

Answer.
YOur note out of S. Augustine is not worth the noting, for any thing that our
doctrine can be thereby touched: for S. Augustine in that place writes against
the wicked opinion of those, who mistaking S. Paul's words of justification by
faith without works, do by an evil security neglect to live well, not seeking
by true faith the help of God, to the ouercomming of their own evil
concupiscences, but do despise the works of righteousness, and by a dead faith
do promise to themselves everlasting life: these be S. Augustines express
words in that place truly translated, which you have most untruly and
maliciously alleged against us, and against the heresy (as you term it) of
justification by faith only, and did utterly cast away all care of good works,
and godly life, as they did against whom S. Augustine did write, whereas we by
faith only justifying us, mean not to exclude the doing, but the merits of
our good works. As for the Heretics, which did mistake the Scriptures, and out
of the wholesome words of S. Paul, did like Spiders suck poysonfull juice, the
same being turned into their own infected nature, we accurse them to the pit
of hell: And as for Libertines which turn the grace of God into wantonness,
we say with S. Augustine: How far therefore are they deceived, which promise
themselves life by a dead faith: The vanity and insufficiency of only
faith, as James this blessed Apostle means, we all grant. For, as Augustine
says, De Great. and liber. Arbitr. cap. 7. Men not understanding that which
the Apostle faieth, we deem a man to be justified by faith without the
works of the law: they thought he said, that faith was enough for a man albeit
he live ill, and have no good works. In the same place by you cited, lib. 83.
quaest. 76. he gives righteousness to faith, he takes away the same from
works. Therefore whereas the Scripture in James says, Abraham was justified
by his works, he shows thereby, that he was endued not with a vain and
imaginary, but with a true and sound faith and righteousness, and that by his
deeds he was declared, truly to have been a righteous man: we give unto
works as much as by the Scripture we have learned, ought to be yielded: We do
not of our works frame a new Christ unto our selves, that we should hope by
their merits to be made righteous, and to obtain by them the heavenly life.
These works, this righteousness, this heaven, we willingly leave to you and
your fellows, who seek to be justified. If you had well marked S. Augustine
in his proface upon Psalm. 31. James (says he) in his Epistle, against them,
which would do no good works, presuming of only faith, commended the works of
Abraham himself.

And because the Jesuits refer us to Romans cap. 4. verse. 1. I will set down
their words.
Verse. 1. Abraham] The Apostle disputing in this Chapter, as before, against
them that thought they might be justified by their works, done without the
grace of Christ and faith in him, proposes Abraham for an example, and proves
that he had no justice, nor estimation of justice before God, by any works
done before he had faith, and Gods grace.

Answer.
TO the intent your cauilling may the more appear, you say in this place the
Apostle disputes against them that thought they might be justified by their
works, done without the grace of Christ. But the Apostle in the Epistle to the
Galathians avouches in the 5. Chap. against them, which joined the works of
the law with the faith of Christ. In 4. verse. You are made void of Christ
whosoever are justified by the law, and ye are fallen from grace. And the
Apostle using the testimony of the Prophet Abacuk 2. Chapter verse. 4. Romans 1.
verse. 17. and Galathians 3. verse. 11. to prove that we are not justified by
the works of the law not after faith: for so he frames the argument to the
Galat. That no man is justified by the law with God, it is manifest; because
the just shall live by faith: but the law is not of faith, and so does
Chrysostom interpret Paul in Galat. 3. Ostendit quod fides iustificet,
testimonio Prophetae Abacuk.

Rhemists Roman. 4. verse. 2.
By works.] If Abraham did any commendable works before he believed Christ,
as many Philosophers did, men might count him just therefore: But in Gods sight
(who accepts nothing without faith in him, of that proceeds not from his
grace) he should never have had the estimation of a just man. Therefore God in
the Scripture reputing him as a just man, gives the cause thereof, saying:
Abraham believed God, and it was reputed to him for justice.

Answer.
ALL your shifts cannot elude so plain Scripture, Maledicta glossa quae
corrumpit textum: S. Paul is fittest to expound his own meaning, Galat. 3.
verse. 8. But the Scripture foreseeing that God would justify the Gentiles, by
faith, preached the Gospel unto Abraham before, saying: in thee shall all the
Nations be blessed. verse. 9. Therefore they which are of faith are blessed with
faithful Abraham: Abraham believed God, it was imputed to him for justice.
Ergo, his faith alone did save him, neither his works before, nor after.

Rhemists Annotat. Romans 4. verse. 4.
To him that worketh] That is to say, he that presumes of his own works, as
done of himself, without faith, Gods help, and grace: and saying that grace
or justification, were given to him for his works; this man does challenge his
justification as debt.

Answer.
WHo do presume of their own works: but they which say by their works
proceeding of grace, they do deserve or merit heaven, and that say their works
can be none other, but the valor, desert, price, worth, and merit of the
joys of heaven: as in your Annotat. 1. Cor. 3. verse. 8. you have set down:
who do challenge their justification as debt: but the Popish Divines, whose
general doctrine of their Schools these late years has been: Everlasting
life is a reward due for our merits: everlasting life, except it were a due
debt, it were uncertain; because hire is certain, mercy is uncertain. But
confound grace and works as you will, and compound with S. Paul if you cau,
Romans 11. verse. 6. If it be of grace, not now of works: otherwise now grace is
not grace: but if of works, not now of grace, otherwise the work now were not
work. Thus I have seen a little according to your direction your Annot. Romans
4. verse. 1. Now to follow you in S. James.

Rhemists. Cap. 2.
Verse. 22. Faith did work with] Some Heretics hold that good works are
pernicious to Salvation and justification: other, that though they be not
hurtful but required, yet they be no causes or workers of Salvation; much
less meritorious, but are as fruits and effects issuing necessarily out of
faith. Both which fictions, falshods and flights from the plain truth of Gods
word, are refuted by these words, when the Apostle says, that faith works
together with good works, makes faith to be a coadiutour or Cooperator with
works, and so both jointly concurring as causes, and workers of justification:
yea afterward he makes works the more principal cause, when he resembles
faith to the body, and works to the spirit or life of man.

Answer.
IT were to be wished that you had nominated those Heretics, that we might
have known them by their names. If any have said their works are imperfect,
and so pernicious for any man to place his confidence of everlasting life in
his maimed and stained obedience, they have such partners as you shall not for
so saying be able to attach of heresy. S. Paul when as he abounded with most
excellent works, he denied that he obtained righteousness or life thereby.
1. Cor. cap. 4. verse. 4. Neither would he rejoice in any thing but in the
cross of Christ, Galath. 6. verse. 14. Hieroni. in Esaiam, cap. 64, If we
behold our own merits, we must be driven to desperation. And Origin upon Math.
Tract. 8, Say that you are unprofitable servants (says Christ) for
notwithstanding we have done all things that are commanded, yet have we done
no good thing: for if our doings were good indeed, then were they not
unprofitable: but any good deed of ours is called good, not rightly or duly,
but by abuse of speech. We say flatly, maugre the Devil and Antichrist, that
our works be not causes or workers of our salvation, much less meritorious.
Romans 9. verse. 16, It is not of him that wills, nor of him that runs, but
of God yt has mercy. 1. Tim. 2. verse. 5.6. There is one God, and one mediator
of God and men, the man Christ Jesus, who has given himself the price of
redemption for us: but if our works imbrued and drenched in the blood of
Christ, can pacify the wrath of God, or make perfect our redemption, it is
manifest there is not one mediator and redeemer, when as every man is redeemed
by his own works. What blasphemy is this to say, or once to think, that
Christ suffered death, and poured out his blood, not that he himself should
save us by his blood, but that he should give the same power to our works: that
which you call fictions, falsehoods, and flights, shall be proved to be the
fixed, faithful, firm truth of God. Does not S. Peter in the 15. of the Acts
give this unto faith, to purify our hearts, verse. 9. Does not the same Apostle
2. Epist. cap. 1. verse. 5. make virtue, knowledge, temperance, patience,
brotherly kindness, lone, the fruits and effects of our faith, after that by
the preaching of the Gospel, and the spirit of God, we are made partakers of
the divine nature, verse. 4. The Apostle James does not refute this doctrine by
these words, faith works together with good works, no more then S. Paul does
confute his own doctrine, when he says, Galath. 5. verse. 6. faith working by
love: thereby declaring, that a true faith is effectual, and fertile of good
works. If you remember your marginall note upon the 4. cap. Romans verse. 2.
Justice before man, and Justice before God, we grant faith to be a coadiutor
or cooperator with works, and so both jointly concurring as causes, and workers
of justification before men: but if you come before God, take your answer of
S. Augustine, in Psalm. 94. Si Deus vellet pro merit is agere, non inueniret,
nisi quod damnaret. If God would deal with us according to that we have
deserved, he should find nothing but that he might condemn. In that which you
join afterward, whereas you say: yea afterward he makes works the more
principal cause, when he resembles faith to the body, and works to the life
or spirit of a man. The Lord open your eyes, that you may see this mystery,
and remeur this veil from your eyes, of the confidence of your works. We
protest before God and all good men, that we never meant to make faith the
chief and only cause of our justification, but that the grace and mercy of God
by our Savior Jesus Christ, promised to the faithful in his holy word, is the
principal and original cause, and very fountain of our justification, and
that faith not a dead faith (as they thought against whom S. James wrote) but
a lively faith being wrought in our hearts by the word of God, and by the
operation of the holy Ghost believing Gods promise of his mercy in Christ is the
instrume^tall cause in us, whereby only we receive our justification, without
the merit of out works, and yet being justified we are most hounden in all good
works as much as it shall please God to give us grace thereunto. I can but muze
at your folly, which make works the more principal cause of our justification,
because he resembles faith to the body, and good works to the soul: if
either you had known the true scope of this Scripture, or the weakness of an
argument drawn from likeness, Omnis similitudo claudicat, you would not have
argued so fondly. S. James speaks of a dead faith, which is only an
imaginary, and mathematical fantasy, which is as far different from a
true christian faith, as is a vizard from a man's face, an image from a man, a
painted smoke from a burning flambe.

Rhemists Annotation. Iam. 2. ver. 23.
The friend of God] By this also another false and frivolous evasion of the
Heretics is overtaken when they feine, that the Apostle here when he says,
works do justify, means that they show us just before men, and avail not to
our justice before God, for the Apostle evidently declares, that Abraham by
his works was made or truly called, the friend of God, and therefore was not
(as the Heretics say) by his works approved just before man only.

Answer.
OUr true exposition, howsoever it seem unto you a false and frivolous
evasion, yet I hope all that have used that distinction are not Heretics, for
then is the Angel an Heretic, which so has taught us, Genesis 22. verse. 12.
Now have I tried that thou fear God, when as thou have not withdrawn from
me it (...) only begotten son: as if he should say, by this deed was Abraham
justified, because he testified. that he did truly believe in God, and by that
means as the Apostle faith, the Scripture was fulfilled, and all did perceive
it for to be true, that he did believe in God, and that this was imputed to him
for righteousness.

Rhemists Annotat. James 2. verse. 24.
Not by faith only.] This proposition or speech is directly opposite, or
contradictorie to that which the Heretics hold. For the Apostle says, man is
justified by good works, and not by faith only, but the Heretics say man is
not justified by good works, but by faith only: neither can they pretend that
there is the like contradiction or contrariety, betwixt S. James speech, and
S. Paul's. For though S. Paul say, man is justified by faith, yet he never
says by faith only, nor ever means by that faith which is alone, but always
by that faith which works by charity, Gal. 5. as he there expounds
himself. Though concerning works also, there is a difference betwixt the first
justification, whereof S. Paul specially speaks and the second
justification, whereof of S. James does more specially treat, of which thing
elsewhere there is enough said, see Annot. Romans 2. ver. 13. The Fathers
indeed sometimes use this exclusive Sola, only, but in far other sense then
the Protestants, for some of the^ thereby exclude only the works of Moses law,
against the Jews, some the works of nature and moral virtues, without the
grace or knowledge of Christ, against the Gentiles, some the necessity of
external good works, where the parties lack time and means to do the^, as in
the case of the penitent thief, some the false opinions, sects, and religions,
contrary to the Catholic faith, against heretics, and miscreants: some exclude
reason, sense, and arguing in matters of faith and mystery, against such as
will believe nothing, but that they see or understand: some the merits of works
done in sin before the first justification: some the arrogant Pharisaicall
vaunting of man's own proper works and justice, against such as refer not
their actions and good deeds to Gods grace. To these purposes the holy Doctors
say sometimes, that only faith saves and serves: but never as the Protestants
would have it, to exclude from justification and salvation, the cooperation of
man's free will, dispositio^s and preparations of our hearts, by prayers,
penance, and sacraments, the virtues of hope and charity, the purpose of
well-working, and of the observation of Gods commandments, much less the
works and merits of the children of God, proceeding of grace and charity,
after they be justified, and are now in his favor, which are not only
dispositions and preparations to justice, but the meritorious cause of greater
justice and salvation.

Answer.
YOu would feign make us opposite or contradictorie to S. James, but never
shall you bring it to pass, till you have made S. James contrary to S. Paul:
the principal show of your reasoning consists herein, for though S. Paul
(as you say) do affirm that a man is justified by faith, yet he never says by
faith only. If we can prove that by necessary illation, this word only is
implied in ye Apostles words then either you shall be compelled to confess S.
Paul to be co^tradictory to S. James, or else to accord with S. Augustine, or
rather with S. James himself by his own discourse opening his own words. Now to
prove yt S. Paul did mean faith only, I pray you to consider these reasons out
of yt Apostle himself. Paul does couple nothing with faith in this business,
therefore he teaches that faith alone is sufficient. For if it have nothing
coupled with it, in justifying of us, then it is manifest, that faith alone
does justify us: for whatsoever may seem any thing at all to justify us,
that altogether is removed from faith in justification, for what might a man
think to be joined with faith in this cause: I deem, he will say works:
therefore if works be disioined, it remains, and that necessary, that we are
justified by faith alone. Here therefore Paul speaking in his own words,
Romans 3.28. we gather yt a man is justified (...), without the works of the law.
And again, he which works not, but believes him which justifies the
ungodly, his faith is imputed for righteousness. Romans 4. ver. 5. Again
therefore by the works of ye law shall no flesh be justified in his sight. Romans
3. ver. 20. Again, even as David does pronounce yt man to be blessed, to whom
God does impute righteousness without works, Romans 4. ver. 6. And in another
Epistle more clearly, knowing yt a man is not justified by ye works of ye law,
(...), but by the faith of Jesus Christ: what could be said yt more could
confirm our sentence or meaning: for if not by yt works of the law but by
faith we are justified, then yt must needs follow, yt we are justified by faith
alone: Heereunto may be added, that he writes we are justified freely, and by
the gift of God: for by grace (says the Apostle) ye are saved by faith, and
that not of your selves, it is the gift of God, least any man should boast,
Ephesians. 2. verse. 8.9. And in another place, they are justified freely through
his grace. Gratis eius gratia, Romans 3. verse. 24. It these things do not
satisfy you, then I pray you answer me this argument, If we be not justified
by the works of the law, if to him which works not, but justifies the
ungodly, his faith is imputed for righteousness: If by the works of the law no
man is justified, If righteousness be imputed without works, if freely, if of
grace, if by the gift of God, to conclude, if we are not justified but by
faith: Then we are justified by faith alone: The Antecedent is true, therefore
the consequent we grant, though faith only justify, yet is not faith alone.
But as a Queen accompanied with her maids of Honor, is only Queen, and yet
not alone having her train waiting upon her: and as the eye in the body sees
only, and yet not alone, without the rest of the members, so although faith
only justify, yet she is not alone, but has hope, charity, patience
attending upon her as handmaids, to do the will of her God. Concerning your
first and second justification, S. Paul never knew any such distinction: for
Galat. 2. after his conversion verse. 20. And the life which I now live in the
flesh, I live by the faith of ye son of God, who has loved me, and given
himself for me. As this justification by faith was first, so ye Apostle
makes it ye latter, resting only in that, not seeking any second. It is well
the light of truth has so far-foorth shined unto you, that you could find in
ye Fathers this Exclusive sola only: For otherwise Origin would have convinced
your folly, in Epist. Romans cap. 3. lib. 3. Vbi est gloriatio tua? Exclusa est:
Dicit sufficere solius fidei iustificationem. Likewise Hesychius in Leuiticum.
lib. 4. The grace of God is given only of favor, and is received and embraced
by only faith. Chrysostom upon the Epistle Galat. cap. 3. Illi dicebant, qui
sola fide nititur: execrabilis est, etc. The false Apostles said, whosoever
stays himself by only faith, is accursed: Contrariwise, S. Paul, that
whosoever stays himself by only faith is blessed. These with others are
witnesses of our sound, and Catholic doctrine of our justification by faith
only: as these Fathers are plain in this point, so contrary to their manifest
words, you would forge an other sense. The false Apostles among the Galathians
did not shut out grace nor Christ: but as Chrysostom before alleged
testifies, that the Apostle S. Paul judged them to be blessed which stayed
upon faith only. I allow not your instance of the thief, whom you make empty
of good works, whose faith in that most short time, was vnspeakablie
effectual, in making it self manifest by good works, for he reproved the
blasphemies and wickedness of the other thief, he detested his former
offenses, with an assured and altogether a marvelous faith, in the very
ignominy of the Cross, all the rest of the Disciples holding their peace, he
acknowledges Christ to be an everlasting king, and calls upon him as a
Savior: but the acknowledging of sin, the invocation of God the Father in
Christ, and giving of thanks are most excellent works of the first Table.
Likewise, in-the Pharisie what can you reprove, wherein your selves are not to
be reprehended: he vaunted of his works, you boast of your merits: he bragged
of his keeping of some part of the law, you glory in your works of
supererogation, that you fulfill all the measure of obedience due to God, with
an over plus of righteousness: he ascribed all this to the grace of God: you
arrogate part to your freewill. As in this your gloss you talk of the
cooperation of your freewill. Your preparations, whereas S. Paul 2. Cor. 3.
verse. 5. says: that we are meet it is of God: Philip. 2. verse. 13. For it
is God that works in you, both the will and the deed, according to his free
good will. 1. Cor. 12. ver. 3 No man can say the Lord Jesus, but by the spirit
of God. If the Pharisie were now alive, he would shake you by the hands as his
youger brethren, you Jesuits, hearing you thus to rufflle, not only in your
dispositions and preparations to justice, but much more if the sound of the
meritorious cause of your greater justice and salvation by the Trumpet of your
Annotations might come to his ears.

Verse. 25. Rahab.
This Apostle alleges the good works of Rahab, by which she was justified:
and S. Paul (11. Hebrews) says, she was justified by faith: which are not
contrary one to the other; for both is true, that she was saved by faith, as
one says, and that she was saved by her works, as the other says. But it
were untruly said, that she was saved, either by only faith, as the Heretics
say: or by only good works, as no Catholic man ever said. But because some
Jews and Gentil Philosophers, did affirm; they: yt they should be saved by
the works of Moses law. These, by their moral works Therefore S. Paul to the
Romans disputed specially against both: proving that no works done without or
before the faith of Christ, can serve to justification or salvation.

Answer.
YOur marginall note is the abridgement of your whole Annotation. S. Paul
names faith, and S. James works, causes of justification: but neither the
one, faith only, nor the other, works only. I answer, S. Paul named faith,
as the isntrumental cause of our justification, but the efficient cause he
names the grace of GOD, as he restifieth Ephesians. 2. verse. 8. for you are saved
by grace through faith, and not of your selves, it is the gift of God. And S.
James makes works as the effects of justification. S. Paul disputed not only
against unbelieving Jews, and Gentill Philosophers, but against believing
Jews that believed in Christ, and joined with grace the Ceremonies of the law,
yea and the moral works of righteousness: to whom the Apostle says Galat. 5.
verse. 4. Ye are made void of Christ whosoever are justified by the law, and ye
are fallen from grace.

Rhemists Annotation verse. 26.
Faith without works is dead.] S. James (as the Protestants feign) says that
faith without good works, is no faith, and that therefore it justifies not,
because it is no faith. For he says that it is dead without works, as the
body is dead without the soul; and therefore being dead has no actiuitie or
efficacy to justify or save. But it is a great difference, to say, that the
body is dead, and to say, it is no body: even so it is the like difference,
to say that faith without works is dead, and to say, that faith without works
is no faith. And if a dead body, be notwithstanding a true body, then
according to S. James comparison here, a dead faith, is notwithstanding a true
faith, but yet not available to justification, because it is dead: that is,
because it is only faith, without good works.

And therefore it is a great impudency in Heretics, and a hard shift to say,
that the faith of which the Apostle disputes all this while, is no true, or
properly called, faith at al, it is the same faith, that S. Paul defined, and
commended in all the 11. Chapter to the Hebrews, and the same which is called
the Catholic faith, and the same which being formed, and made alive by
charity, justifies: Mary true it is, that it is not that special faith,
which the Heretics feign only to justify; to wit, when a man does firmly
believe, as an Article of his faith, that himself shall be saved: This
special faith it is not, whereof the Apostle here speaks, for neither he,
nor S. Paul, nor any other sacred writer, in all the holy Scriptures, ever
speak, or knew of any such forged faith.

Answer.
YOu would feign build an argument upon a similitude: but you know such
similitudes do rather illustrate then prove a matter, and such arguments do
either limpe, yea rather halt down right, then run roundly on al four:
Howsoever you please your selves in comparing faith unto the body, and good
works to the louse: yet the wise and learned, have rather likenet true faith
to the soul, and good works to the body: for as the body has no life of it
self, but only of the soul: even so works have no life of themselves, but
only of faith. But a dead faith with you is a true faith, so is a fire without
heat, a true, and a real fire: of such a faith S. James says in this
Chapter. verse. 19. Daemones credunt and contremiscunt: The Devils believe, and
quake for fear, if the wicked without good works have a true faith, then the
Devil likewise has a true and real faith: you say it is great impudency in
Heretics, and a hard shift to say, that the faith of which the Apostle
disputes, all this while, is no true, or properly called, faith at all. Let us
see whether this impudency and heresy may not be cast upon Saint James
himself by the evidence of his own words: What avails my Brethren, if a man
say he has faith, and has no works: Jacob. 2. verse. 14. By this beginning it
is not obscure, what manner of faith Saint James means, placed in a certain
vain vaunt of words, and not approved by any works: For that faith which
has no works, is a feigned faith. But of that faith which wants works James
speaks, as it is clear by the very words: wherefore it is manifest that the
Apostle does speak here of a feigned faith, ye which is more manifest of that
which follows. For he speaks of such a faith, which does not help the
naked and poor, but in words and wishes only: verse. 15. Go in peace, warm
you, and be you filled: and yet performs nothing yt they desire. This is a
feigned faith, the which James also because it wants deeds, he calls it a
dead faith: verse. 16. Then he concludes, that the same is a true faith, which
can be showed by works, when as the same is no such faith: it follows, that
it is no true, but a dead and a sayned faith. But that which he subioyneth,
takes away all doubt. For wilt thon be taught, what faith James does deny to
be effectula to righteousness and salvation verse. 19. You may know that, of
that, of these words: Thou do believe that there is one God. Thou do
well: the Devils believe and tremble. He speaks of that faith, which falls
into the Devils themselves. But that faith is faiued, counterfaite, and dead.
Therefore this is that faith, whereby alone, James does deny us, to be
justified. Augustine in his Book De fide and operibus. cap. 14. James is
greatly against those which are so wife to think, that faith is available to
salvation without works, that he compares them to Devils. Hereby it
appears that Saint Augustine meant, that S. James meant not a true faith,
except the Devils faith be a true faith.

You add further, that it is the same faith that S. Paul defined Hebr. 11.
and the same that is called the Catholic faith. Oh how you mistake the
Scriptures: and being a faithles generation, do not know what a true faith
means. Is this faith without works, a true faith? Is this faith the same
faith, which the Author of the Epistle to the Hebr. does mean: Why then was
not the Devil canonized among the Saints? why was he not reckoned among Abel
and the rest: By the virtue of that faith specified by the Apostle, many were
stoned, cut in sunder, being killed with the sword were slain: they wandered up
and down in sheep clothing, and goats skins, being destitute, oppressed,
and evil entreated: Hebr. 11. verse. 37. Therefore I marvel you are so
shameless, to affirm, that this faith, which S. James affirms to be common
with the Devils, and that faith which in the Epistle to the Hebr. is made only
proper to the Saints, is all one.

Mary true it is (say you) that it is not that special faith, which the
Heretics feign only to justify, to wit, when a man does firmly believe, as an
Article of his faith, that himself shall be saved: this special faith it is
not, whereof the Apostle here speaks; for neither he, nor S. Paul, nor any
other sacred writer in all the holy scriptures, ever spoke, or knew of any such
forged faith.

You bind it solemnly with Mary, that it is not the special faith, which the
Heretics feign only: who be those Heretics: The Apostles trow we which (as
the Creed, which has their name) taught us this special faith: I believe in
God the Father: and not we believe. Or the Prophet David Psalm. 63. verse. 1. O
God thou art my God, early will I seek thee, etc. Or S. Augustine De ciuit.
Dei. lib. 1. cap. 29. Deus meus, vbique praesens est, vbique totus, nusquam
inclusus: My God is every where present, every where whole, no where enclosed,
or shut up. Or it may be S. Paul is that special Heretic, who does specially
countenance this special faith, Galat. 2. verse. 20. I live in the faith of the
son of God, which has loved me, and has given himself for my sake. Hear
whether Chrysostom be not accessarie with him in this heresy (as you call
it) writing upon Genes. Hom. 34. S. Paul says, Christ has loved me: O Paul,
the benefit that is common to all, thou use as peculiar to thy self: yea
verily, says S. Paul, For albeit that sacrifice were offered for all mankind,
yet for the love that I bear toward him, the thing that was done to all, I
accoumpt as proper, and several to my self alone. Thus the manner of the
Prophets is to do, and say: O God my God: notwithstanding he is the God of all
the world: but this is special and peculiar to love, of things common to make
things peculiar. Thou say, Christ has loved me: what say thou: Has
Christ loved thee only, and no man else: No (says Paul) he has loved al
mankind: but I owe him thanks, as if he had loved me alone, and had given
himself only for me. Now by this time I think you see what cause of blushing
you have (which lay impudency to our charge) in saying, That neither S. Paul,
nor any other sacred writer in all the holy scriptures, ever spoke, or knew of
any such special faith, which you call forged: because in your Annotation upon
the 24. verse. of this 2. cap. you refer us to the Romans 2. I will set down
your own words.

Rhemists Annot. Romans 2. verse. 13.
Not the hearers] This same sentence agreeable to Christ's words, (Mat. 7.21.)
is the same very ground of S. James disputation, that not faith alone, but good
works also do justify. Therefore S. Paul (howsoever some peruersly conster
his words in other places) means the same, that S. James. And here he
speaks not properly of the first justification, when an Infidel or ill man is
made just, who had no acceptable works before, to be justified by: (of which
kind he specially means in other places of this Epistle) but he speaks of
the second justification, or increase of former justice, which he that is in
Gods grace daily proceeds in, by doing all kind of good works, which be
justices; and for doing of which, he is just in deed before God: and of this
kind does S. James namely treat. Which is directly against the Heretics of
this time, who not only attribute nothing to the works done in sin and
infidelity, but esteem nothing at all, of all Christian men's works, toward
justification and salvation, co^demning them as unclean, sinful, pharisaical,
which is directly against these and other Scripture, and plain blaspheming of
Christ and his grace, by whose spirit and cooperation we do them. 13. Shall be
iustified] Of all other Articles deceitfully handled by Heretics, they use
most guile in this of justification: and specially by the equivocation of
certain words, which is proper to all contentious wranglers, and namely in
this word Justify. Which because they find sometime to signify, the
acquiting of a guilty man of some crime, whereof he is in deed guilty, and
for which he ought to be condemned (as by man's judgment, either of ignorance
or of purpose, often a very malefactor is deemed or declared, and pronounced
innocent.) They falsely make it to signify in this place, and the like,
wheresoever man is said to be justified of GOD, for his works or otherwise:
as though it were said, that God justifies man, that is to say, imputes to
him the iustifice of Christ, though he be not indeed just: or of favor
reputeth him as just, when indeed he is wicked, impious, and unjust. Which is a
most blasphemous doctrine against God, making him either ignorant who is just,
and so to err in his judgment, or not good, that can love and save him, whom
he knows to be evil. And a marvelous pitiful blindness it is in the Churches
adversaries, that they should think it more to Gods glory, and more to the
commendation of Christ's justice, merits, and mercy, to call and count an ill
man so continuing, for just, then by his grace and mercy, to make him of an ill
one, just indeed, and so truly to justify him, or as the word does here
signify, to esteem and approve for just indeed, him that by his grace
keeps his law and commandments: for that the keepers or doers of the
commandments be just and so reputed, it is plain by the corresponde^ce to
the former words, Not the hearers are just, but the doers, whereupon S.
Augustine de Sp. and lit. ca. 26. tom. 3. has these words, when it is said,
The doers of the law shall be justified: what other thing is said then, The just
shall be justified, for the doers of the law verily are justified, for the
doers of ye law verily are just.

Answer.
YOu err not knowing the Scriptures, for the Apostle in that Romans 2. verse. 13.
applying that universal accusation of mankind, does severally apply the same
both to Gentiles and Iowes, and because the Jews gloried in the law, he uses
a prevention against them, that the same law does not excuse them, but condemn
them, because not to hear the law, but to keep the law does justify. We
confess a righteousness, which he that is in Gods grace, daily proceeds in
according to ye Scripture, 1. John 3. verse. 7. He which does righteousness, is
righteous, meaning, that they are not just, which abstain from vices, but they
whch do righteous things. See also in another place, Apoc. 22. verse. 11. Qui
iustus est, iustificetur adhuc. He which is just, let him be more justified. We
are not ignorant, that there is such a righteousness, but we deny utterly that
by this righteousness we do obtain eternal life, the which, neither Moses, nor
Joshua, nor David, neither any other, has obtained, but by faith embracing
Christ, as the Apostle in the Epistle to the Hebrews, does most manifestly
declare: For by the works of the law, no flesh is justified, Galath. 2. verse.
16. Also in another place he says, Blessed is that man, to whom righteousness
is imputed, without works, Romans 4. verse. 6. If we attribute nothing to the
works done in sin and infidelity, I hope we have the Apostle partner with
us, Romans 14. verse. 23. But whatsoever is not of faith, is sin: and Hebr. 11.
verse. 6. But it cannot be that any man can please him without faith: if to ward
justification and salvation we say Christian men's works are nothing available,
we have S. Paul to hold with us, Gal. 2. verse. 21. For if justice be by the
law, then Christ died without cause. Otherwise we say the works of the Godly to
be the gift of God, to please God, and that a most ample and largere: ward is
promised, and shall be performed unto them. Yet that they are not perfect, as
the law of God requires, neither void of all fault, for that contagion of sin
which has corrupted our nature, neither can be utterly extirped in this life.
But the Lord does so approve the Godly men's works, as he does entertain the
Godly themselves: For although Gods children do labor with many diseases of
sin, notwithstanding God does love them for Christ's sake, so God does allow
our works, albeit not altogether perfect, he rewards them, and testifiech
that they are acceptable unto him. But that any man should say that the works
of the Saints are nothing but unclean, sinful, pharisaicall, we never said
so: for in the Saints and regenerate, there be most excellent gifts of the
holy Ghost, as faith, hope, love, patience, humblenes, meekenes, peace, joy,
tempera^ce, hatred of sin, desire of righteousness: these, and such like, God
does accept of in his children, and of mercy does crown his good gifts in
them, Gregor. Moralium. lib. 9. cap. 14. Omnis humana iustitia, iniustitia esse
conuincitur, si districte iudicetur, All man's righteousness is convinced to be
unrighteousness, if it be narrowly judged. In this article we use no deceit,
neither guile, and are no more wranglers then the holy Scriptures and holy
Fathers. And the God himself of your Schoolmen, Thomas. in Galat. ^. lect. 4.
Opera non sunt causa, canaliquis sit iust^us apud Deum, sed potius sunt
executiones and manifestationes, Works are not the choose why any man is just
before God, but rather the executions and manifestatio^n of justice, see Aug.
de verb. Apost. S^^. 15. Hier. lib. 1. aduers. Pelagian. Bernard in Cantic.
Ser. 73. Si iniquitates obseruauerit, If he shall mark the iniquities, yea
even of the elect, who sholbe able to abide it: And again, Memorabor iustitiae
(...) solius, ipsa enim est mea, nempe, fact us^es mihi tu iustitia a Deo. I
will make mention of thy righteousness only, for that it is mine, to wit,
thowart made unto me righteousness (...) God: The Apostle Acts. 13. verse. 39. he
says that we are iusected by Christ from all those things first which we could
not be justified by the law of Moses. God does not account him just, or impute
righteousness unto him, that still continues in his sins* your blindness is
great that's (...) y^ clear light of ye scriptures. Psalm. (...) thou shall mark
out iniquities, (...) Lord, Lord, who shall be able to abide? and the same
Prophet coueteth the (...) to be blessed, to who^ the Lord does (...) without
works, Psalm 32. (...) Romans 4. verse. 6.

FINIS.

