THE Regiment of the Church: AS IT IS AGREEABLE WITH Scriptures, all Antiquities
of the Fathers, and modern Writers, from the Apostles themselves, unto this
present age.

I. Cor. 14. v. 40. v. 26. Let all things be done decently, and in order. Let
all things be done to edification. I. Cor. II. v. 16. If any man just to be
contentions, we have no such customs, nor the Churches of God. TC



LONDON. Imprinted by T. C. for William Welby, and are to be sold at his Shop
in Paul's Churchyard, at the Sign of the Grayhound. 1606.

TO THE MOST REVEREND FA there, my very good Lord, Richard by Gods holy
ordinance the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury his grace, primate and
metropolitan of all England, grace and peace from God the father, and from our
Lord Jesus Christ.
AS many things (most reverend father,) are both comely and profitable; so
neither is there, neither can there be anything more necessary, in any well
managed church or christian common weal, then godly uniformity and christian
unity in pure Religion, the proper and peculiar worship of the everliving God.
Which unity and uniform conformity for all that, not only the cruel and
blood-thristie Papists in former times, but the Brownists also and the
Martinists, (cursed broodes untimely hatched, detested of God, and irksome to
the world,) have of late days endeavored with might and maine, to disturb,
and extinguish it, and to take it quite out of the way. For the speedy
conversion, or else for the utter confusion, of which professed enemies of the
godly unity and true christian peace of Gods Sion, I deem them right happy,
who can in any small measure concur by way of redress, and put to their
helping hand. Against the former sect, I have published many books, challenging
all English Jesuits, Seminaries, and Iesuited Papists; yea provoking and
adiuring them all jointly and severally, to frame some answer either to all or
to some one of the said books. But will ye have the truth? their hearts fail
them, their own consciences accuse them, they are at their wits end, and know
not in the world what to say or write. They will not answer, and why I pray
you? because forsooth they cannot, but to their own shame and confusion
everlasting. For if they could, they would undoubtedly answer me, so to save
their own credit, and the life of their late harched Romish Religion. About
three years ago, a railing Jesuit, an odd swaggering Divine terming himself
E. O. in his detection against Master D. Sutcliffe, and Master Willet, takes
notice of the books which I have published against them, and tells his
Readers, (if they may believe him,) that the confutation of my works is
undertaken. But what follows? (and the said confutation must be published, if
it shall be thought expedient.) By which words with the circumstances annexed
thereunto, we may easily understand three memorable points. First, that the
Papists are mightily troubled, about the answearing of my books. Secondly,
that they can not tell in the world, how and in what sort to answer them.
Thirdly, that they would have all their Popish Vassalls to think, that they
have already answered them; and that they are not published, because it is not
thought a thing expedient to be done. But I pray thee, gentle Reader; who will
believe these Jesuits? what wise man will ever think that the Jesuits have for
the space of eight or nine years considered how to answer my books, and
after the answer is undertaken, cannot tell if it be expedient to publishe
the same? for as the Philosopher can tell them, Vltimum in executione, debet
primum esse in intention. That which is the last in execution, must be the
first in intention. Yea, the very light of Nature and daily experience
teaches us; that in all our actions we must chiefly and principally respect
the end, for the which we intend to do them. They dare not fight the combat
valiantly, neither with the long sword, nor yet with the short. They dare not
encounter me, and cast me their Gauntlet, No, no, Negry quidem, can be
extorted from their pens. Against the latter sect, because they wholly
dissent from the Papists, and agree with our English Church, in the chiefest
fundamental points of Doctrine, an other manner of method, and a different
kind of proceeding, must be used against them. They exclaim with open
mouths, and cry out against our English Church; flying from our companies,
and detesting us, as profane, polluted, and forlorn people. They use
Conventicles, Whisperings, and meetings, in Woods, Fields, and odd corners.
They bear the simple people in hand, that our Temples are profaned; our
Doctrine corrupt, our Sacraments impure, our Bishops Antichristian, and our
kind of Church-gouernment repugnant to that sacred form and order, which our
LORD JESUS prescribed in his holy word. They say of themselves (but Laus
propriioris sordescit,) that they are inspired of the holy Spirit, that they
are sent from Heaven to reform our Church, and to direct it into all Truth.
With which fair speeches, and sugared words, (alas for pity) they seduce the
rude vulgar sort, steal away their hearts, and make them disobedient to
higher powers. And while these good fellows, (the Brownists and Martinists,)
seek to be reputed the only wisemen upon Earth, they neither know what they
say, nor yet whereof they affirm; but do open a large window to all
disloyalty and sedition every where, and give the Papists some comfort and
hope, once to enjoy their long expected day. In regard hereof (most Reverend
Father, and worthy Prelate,) my self (though the meanest of many thousands
in this our English Church) have thought it operaepretium, to use my Pen in
my plain and simple manner, for the unity and true peace of our English Sion.
and for the manifestation of the lawful government thereof. I have in this
present discourse (most honorable, constant, wise, and christian Patron, of
the Churches liberty, power, freedom, and ancient prerogative, which the
Brownists and foolish Martinists would turn vpside down,) made evident
demonstration of the lawful government of our Church. And that is done in such
compendious manner, as neither the Reading can be thought tedious, nor the
price of the book chargeable, with such perspicuitie, as the most simple, (even
very babes and children,) may with all facility understa^d the same with such
sufficie^cie, as no Brownist, or Martinist, or other malicious adversary of
our churches godly settled government whosoever, shall ever be able while the
world indures: either with Scriptures, Councels, Fathers, or Ecclesiastical
Histories, to gain say or with stand the same. I have succinctly and evidently,
set down before the eyes of the indifferent Reader, that the monarchical
gouerna^ce of our English church, is both the best and the most laudable of all
others. That there is and ever has been in all former ages of the church,
superiority of one church-minister above and over another, and that one may
this day lawfully have jurisdiction over another. That Bishops, Archbishops,
Primates, Metropolitains, and Patriarchs, have ever been in the church: even
from the Apostles themselves. That no church-laws, canons, ordinances, or
constitutions Ecclesiastical whatsoever; either ought to be established, or
can be of force, strength, power, or authority, without the lawful assent of
the supreme civil magistrate. That the church has power, freedom, and
authority, to dispose of all indifferent things, to ordain ceremonies, and
Ecclesiastical rites, to appoint, make, constitute, and establish laws,
canons, ordinances, and constitutions whatsoever not repugnant to Gods holy
word, so that it be done for any one of these three ends, vz. For order, for
comeliness, or for edification sake, that there is gravity, decency,
modesty, and edification; as well in the apparel allotted for the Ministers
and the ministry, as in the other ceremonies of our English Church. That the
government of every particular Church may be altered and changed, as the
circumstances of times, places, and persons shall require. That no charge is so
tied to the practice of the Apostles, but for her necessity she may alter and
change the same. Many other points of great moment, are handled in this
compendious discourse. To which or to some part thereof, all that may be
reduced with facility, whatsoever the adversaries have said or possibly can
say, against the government of our English Church. The work such as it is,
(most gracious Lord,) I humbly dedicate unto your grace, as well to give a
signification of a thankful mind for all your graces favors toward me,
namely, for your great liberality in time of my sickness at my last being at
London, as also for your graces most Christian zeal, singular care, and
painful endeavors, employed for the good and quiet of the Church; both of late
days, about the most profitable and necessary canons of Anno, 1604; and in
former times, even ever since Church-gouernment was first imposed upon you. For
which holy vigilancie and godly care, though the Brownists, the Martinists, and
other envious and malicious malcontents, do both think and speak hardly of
your grace, yet are all that love the common good and peace of our English
Church, bound in the highest degree to be thankful to your Grace for the
same. The Almighty preserve your Grace, confirm your Godly zeal against the
disturbers of the common peace, and give you a long and happy life upon Earth,
(for his own glory, and the Godly government of his Church,) and life
eternal in the world to come.

Amen.
Your Graces most humble and most bounden, Thomas Bell.

THE REGIMENT of the Church.
CHAP. I. Of sundry kinds of government, with the nature, quality, and
condition of the same.
ARistotle, that worthy, learned, and famous Philosopher, showing plainly in a
large political discourse, that there be three kinds of lawful Regiment, and
three likewise of wicked Government, neither more nor fewer. The first lawful
kind is called, Monarchia, a Monarchy, when Monarchia.
one alone does rule and govern. The second is called, Aristocrateia, an
Aristocratie, when a few of Aristocrvteia.
the best in the commonweal do govern it. The third is called Democratia, a
Democratie; when many of the vulgar Democratia.
people do rule. For every state of the Church and common weal, does either
seek the public good thereof, or their own private gain and pleasure. If
the common good be sought and intended, the government is godly; but if private
Aristotel. Lib. 3. Polit Cap. 5. and Lib. 8 Ethic. Cap. 10.
gain or pleasure be either wholly or principally intended, the government is
wicked. If the government be lawful, right, and godly; it is either by one,
and called a Monarchy; or by some few of the best, and called an
Aristocratie; or by many, and called a Democratie. If the King or Monarch
ruling alone, (as our most gracious Sovereign has told us most learnedly in
his Basilico^doron) shall by the making and execution of good laws, acknowledge
himself Basilicon doron. Page 25.
ordained for the good of his people, and thereupon employ all his study,
care, industry, and endeavors, to procure, establish, and maintain their
welfare, and true christian peace, as their natural father, and kindly
master; then is hea King indeed, and his government a true Monarchy. But if
he study to frame the government of the common weal, to advance his private
lucre, to satisfy his own singular contentment, and to serve his inordinate
and sensual pleasure, he is then so far from being a king indeed, that he is
become a slat tyrant, and his government changed into a plain tyranny. If few
do govern well, being of the best and wisest, it is a lawful Aristocratie:
but if these few Tyrannis.
govern wickedly, seeking their own private, and not the common Oligarchia.
good, it is called an ungodly Oligarchie. If many rule well, it is called a
Democratie or popular state, but if they govern naughtily, it is termed a
Timocratie, Ochlocratie, or Anarchy. Timocratia Ochlocratia. Anarchia.
Where the gentle reader must seriously observe with me, that paucitie and
multitude, are not the essential differences of Oligarchie and Timocratie: but
wealth and poverty are the things indeed, which work the intrinsecal
distinction in these defects of policy. These kinds of Regiment may
analogically in some proportion, be applied to the inferior magistrates under
his most excellent majesty; viz. to the LLs. of the most honorable privy
Council, the L. Analogice in suo genere.
Chancellor, the L. Treasurer, the Justices of the Kings-Beneh and Common
place, Barons of the Exchequer, Justices of Peace, etc. and in sundry places
and causes, to the commons of this Realm. Which observation if it be well
remembered. will be a motive to put every one of them in mind of their place and
calling, that they may use their government accordingly. This discourse is so
clear and evident, as I decme it a thing altogether needless to use further
proof therein. For all learned men, both Philosophers and Divines, do with
uniform assent subscribe thereunto.

Objection. 1.
The Law of nature teaches us, that we may love our selves more then our
neighbors. For which respect, God himself appointed man's own love to be the
squire and rule, by which he must measure his love toward his neighbor. The
king therefore is not bound to regard more the good of his subjects, then his
own private commodity, and the contentation of his mind.

The Answer.
I answer with S. Austen, that kings must serve God two ways. First, as men:
which thing is performed, by living August. epist. 50. ad Bonifa^.
godly, soberly, and justly. Secondly, as kings; which they may I say, (by the
making and execution of godly laws,) because it is not enough for Kings to
make godly laws, unless they procure the same to be duly executed. In the
former respect, kings may love themselves more then their subjects; but in the
latter, (viz. as they are kings,) they must have greater care to procure the
welfare and good of their people, then the welfare and good of themselves. And
the same may be said Analogically and proportionally, of all inferior
magistrates. To which I must needs add, that the honor, wealth, and
preservation of a king, is indeed the honor, wealth, peace, and good of his
people. So that every way the kings own love is respected, and his own honor
and good procured.

Objection. 2.
If the king, by his ungodly government, may become a tyrant, then may his
subjects resist his proceedings, then may they depose him from his royal
Diadem, Scepter, and Regalitie.

The Answer.
I answer, that a kingdom may be possessed two ways; viz, by election, and
by succession or descent of blood royal. They that are kings the first way (as
the Emperor of the Romans, the king of Polonia, and if there be any others of
like sort,) if they change their government into tyranny, and violate the
laws, to which by covenant, oath, and promise, they stand obliged in their
election; they (I say,) may be deposed by the same power and authority, by
which they were invested into their throne. The reason hereof is evident;
because the possession, right, and use of their regal authority, is not
independent and absolute, but conditional and relative; and consequently, such
a King degenerating from his oath and promise, stands at the courtesy of his
electors, concerning the interest, possession, and use of his prerogative
royal. But they, who are Kings by descent and succession in blood royal, (as
is our most wise, pious, learned, and religious Sovereign, who happily this
day reigns over us,) have an absolute and independa^t sovereignty over their
subjects, which neither does, nor ever did stand, in the courtesy, power, and
pleasure of their people. For Kings by succession and descent in blood royal,
are Kings Ipso facto, so soon as their ancestors are deceased, even before
the act of their anointing and Coronation, as also before the oathe; which
usually they take for the godly administration of their kingdoms. Such
ceremonies, though they be very comely and expedient for sundry respects, yet
are they not any essential part of their princely Kings by succession, are
Kings indeed, before their Coronation.
rights and royal prerogative, how necessary soever some esteem the same,
deeming them no Kings without them. And consequently, their proceedings may not
undutifully be resisted: much less may their authority begain said; and least
of all may their sacred persons be deposed from their S^^pt^rs and prerogatives
royal. No, no, not though they should degenerate and fall into tyranny, or
flat Atheism and Aposta^^^. And yet I freely grant, that as the king is a^^^^
his Bishops in respect of his royal Regiment, and has power to correct and
punish them; yea, even to depose and displace them, as King Solomon deposed
Abiathar, if the cause so require: So semblably is the Bishops power, 1. Reg.
2. V. 27.
in respect of his Ministry, touching exhortation and rebuking, above the
Princes. In regard whereof, the good Bishop Saint Ambrose is highly commended
for his Godly zeal, and Christian courage, in reprehending the Emperor (...).
But withal, this must ever be remembered, and most loyally Vide in fra, cap.
11. ^^^sp. ad ^ ob^ect in 6. propos.
observed of all Bishops in Christ's Church; that the Prince (though full of
notorious crimes) may never be shunned, neither of the people, nor yet of the
Bishops: because he is appointed of God, to be their governor. Much less may
the people for sake their obedience to his authority, because they must
forsake their obedience to his vices. He may be shunned privately, and his
vices detested generally: but loyal obedience and faithful service, may
never be denied him Hec may be admonished by the Bishops in the court of
Conscience, concerning his public offenses: but he may never be judged in the
court of their Consistory, touching his Royal power, and Princely prerogative.
He may be reproved, if his faults be public and notorious; but his subjects
may never depose him, because their authority stretches not so far. He
has no Judge that can punish him, but the great Judge of all, even the God of
Heaven. Of which subject I have elsewhere disputed more at large. The general
council of Constance (where was present that great In my motiu^^, and golden
balance. Conc. Constan. ses. 15.
learned Doctor, Johannes Gerson, then Chauncelour of Paris,) condemned it for
a notorious heresy, and him for an Heret que that held the same; viz. to hold
and maintain it to be a thing lawful for the subjects to kill every Tyrant
that Mark this well.
reigned tyrannically over them. Where we must observe and mark seriously,
the word (every.) For the Council condemns not the killing of those Tyrants,
which reign tyrannically by violent intr^sion and unlawful usurped
possession; but the killing of those Princes (though reigning tyrannically and
living most licentiously,) who were invested and ^thronized into their
kingdoms, by lawful descent of blood royal, and ancient hereditarie
succession.

CHAP. II. Of the chiefest and best kind of Government.
ARistotle that famous Philosopher, having reckoned up the three former kinds
of Government, adjoyneth forthwith these golden words; Atque harum optima
quidem est regnum, deterrima vero censuum potestas, And the best of these
Gouernements, is a Monarchy Aristot. Ethicor. lib. 8. cap. 10. lib. 3. polit.
cap. vlt.
or Kingdom, but the worst is a Democratie.

The Israelites and people of the Jews, were ever governed by a Monarchy;
even from Adam unto Christ's most sacred Aduent. For Moses and Joshua were the
leaders Gedeon, Iair, Samson, and others, did rule and judge the Israelites.
Fourthly, Kings, Saul, David, Solomon, Iehosaphat, Ezechias, Ioas, and others.
Zorobabel and the Machabees were governors. And this government continued,
even from the Captivity until Christ.

This kind of government to be the best, may easily be proved: as well by
the manner of Man's creation, as by the natural propension given unto him.
Touching the manner, we are all framed of one, not of many. The Protoplast
Adam, of the earth; of him, Eve; of them twain, all the rest. Herevppon Saint
Chrysostom, (who for his great learning and Eloquence, was surnamed the golden
mouthed Doctor,) concludes a Monarchy or Kingdom, to be the best kind of
Government upon earth. His words are these: Equidem si quanquam hoc sint
pacto geniti, primus tamen statim hominum semine parentum procreatus adeo
insaniuit, tantam rixam, tantam inuidiam Diaboltes seminauit; quid put as
fecisset, si non ab eadem prorsus radice pullulasset genus h^marum? deinde,
hunc imperare, illam subesse iussit; esse, n. inter aquales amulationem nouit:
itaque no^uit esse Democratiam, sed Regnum.

For although they be thus be gotten, yet if he that was the first man
produced by the seed of his parents, did so rage, and was so furious: and if
the Devil also did raise up such contention and envy: what think thou
would he have done, if mankind had not issued out of the same ^oote? He
therefore commanded the one to rule, the other to obey. For he knew, that
emulation would arise among equals. He therefore would not have a Democratie,
or popular state, but a Kingdom. Thus writes this learned ^ather.

Touching natural propension, which must needs be referred to God the author
of Nature: it appears by it, that a Monarchy or rule of one, is most
agreeable to nature it self. For first, in every house the Father of the
family Aristocraties, or Democraties. For proof hereof, the only testimony
of she excellent Historiographer Justinius may suffice. These are his words:
Principio rerum, gentium nationumque impe^ium penes reges erant: quos ad
fastigium huius maiestat is, non Justinius hist. lib. 1. in intio.
ambitio popularis, sed spectata inter bonos moderatio prouehe^at.

In the beginning of the world, the government of people and nations was under
Kings: whom virtue, and not popular ambition, advanced to that high seat of
Majesty. Fourthly, the creatures which are without so testify of them, and
experience it self does show it to be so. S Hierome has these words; Nulla
ars absque magistro discitur. Etiam muta animalia and ferarum greges, ductores
sequuntur snos. Hier. ad Rusticum, t^m. ^. ^ol 22. B.
In apibus principes sunt. Grues vnum sequuntur ordine literato. Imperator
vnus. Iudex vnus prouinciae. Roma, vt condita est, duos fratres simul habere
reges non potuit, and parricidio dedicatur.

No Art is learned without a master. Yea, even the dumb cattle, and slockes
of wild beasts, do all follow their leaders. The Bees have their governors;
and the very Cranes follow on in order, in form of a letter. There is one
Emperor. There is one judge of a province. Rome was no sooner built, then it
abhorred to have two kings at once to rule over it; so as without cruel
murder, the dedication thereof was not accomplished. But what need is thereof
further proof in this dispute? seeing it is evident to all that hold the
Christian faith aright, that God omnipotent is the supreme Monarch in heaven
and earth, and governs by that kind of regiment, which is neither
Democraticall, nor yet Aristocratical, but monarchical; and consequently, a
monarchy must needs be the best kind of government. And whosoever can and list
to read that holy, ancient, and learned father S. Ciprian, shall find this
discourse so apparent, as he Ciprian deidolorum vanitate
can never stand long in doubt thereof. I therefore conclude, that whosoever
shall deny a simple monarchy to be the best kind of government, must perforce
fall unawares, into the error of the Marcionistes, of the Manichies, and of the
Ethnickes. For if it be true, as it is most true, as all Christians must
confess, that the world is ruled in the best manner and best kind of government
by God that made it, it must follow of necessity, that neither a Democratie,
nor yet an Aristocrat^e, is the best form of Regiment. For otherwise
doub^lesse, there must be many makers of this world, and many Gods.

CHAP. III. Of the kind of government, of the Church and common weal of
England.
NOw seeing it is true, (as is already proved,) that a Monarchy is the best
kind of government, and that the Church and commonweal of England, is
governed by a most wise, most learned, most vigilant, and most religious
Monarch, Gods saithfull servant, and our gracious and most happy Sovereign,
it follows by a necessary consequence, that the kind of government used in
the Church and commonweal of England, is the best and most laudable of all
other. For (as our gracious sovereign Basilicon doron. Page 41. Chrysostom in
13. Cap ad Roman. Cyprian. libr 1. epis. 3.
writes most learnedly,) paritie is an enemy to unity, and the mother of
confusion. The self same says S. Chrysostom, when he avouches degrees and
superiority to have therefore been appointed, because equality engenders
strife and contention. The same sai h S. Cyprian, when he affirms boldly,
that heresy, or Schism did not rise of any other occasion, but only upon
this, that there was not one Priest and one Judge for the time, appointed in
the Church in the stead of Christ, to whom the whole brotherhood should yield
obedience. The same says S. Hierome, when he avouches one to have been
chosen among Hieron. ad Evagrium. 10. 3. Fol. 150. Chrysostom. in 13. cap. ad
Romans col. 256.
the Bishops to rule over the rest, least every one according to his own
fancy, should tear in pieces the church of Christ. Yea, a Monarchical
government is so necessary every where, and in all sorts of creatures, that S.
Chrysostom acknowledges it amongst the brute beasts: in the Bees, Cranes,
slockes of sheep, and Fishes of the Sea. And therefore after a long discourse,
he concludes in these words, Libertas ^. illa dissolu^a ac moderamine carens,
vbique mala, confusionisque causa est. For dissolute liberty without
government, is every where evil, and the cause of confusion. But because the
excellency of English government, shall be proved by degrees throughout this
whole discourse; thus much shall suffice for this place, because I endeavor to
avoid tautologie, and not to be tedious to the Reader.

CHAP. IIII. Of the supreme government of the civil magistrate over all
persons and all causes, within his Realms, territories, and dominions.
OF this theme I have written more largely in other treatises, and therefore
See the downfall of Popery, and the golden balance of trial.
I purpose now to speak no more thereof, then I deem convenient for the matter
I have in hand. For which purpose it were enough to well effected Readers, to
call to mind that the godly Kings as well in time of the law of Moses, as in
the time of the new testament and law of grace, did manage all matters both of
Church and Commonweal; and therefore Ios. 1. 8. Numer. 27. Verse. 17. 2. par.
23. Verse. 11.
the civil magistrate was commanded to read the book of the whole law, as
well of the first as of the second table, and to study the same night and day.
Therefore was the civil magistrate commanded, to go out and in, before the
people, and to lead them out and in, that the congregation of the Lord, be
not as sheep which have no shepherd. Therefore was the book of the Law,
delivered into the Kings hands, at such time as he received the crown and was
anointed. Musculus a great learned man, and famous writer, affirms
resolutely; that the care of reforming and maintaning religion, does more
appertain to the civil magistrate, then to the Ministers of the Church. His
express words are these; Moses Primus catholicus Israelis magistratus,
personam Musculus de magistr. page 628. and P. 629. and P. 632. and infra, cap.
prope ^inem, nota. Ios. 5. cap.
gerens, non sacerdotis, quae Aaroni imposita fuit, sed superioris potestatis,
similem regiae, omnem in populo dei religione^ constituit, ipsique Aaroni, and
levitarum ordini, facienda and vitanda praescripsit. In quo manifest videmus,
disponendae religionis curam, magis ad superiorem magistratum, quam ad
sacerdotum ordinem pertinere. Sequitur; post mortem Mosis, cura religionis v^a
cum magistratis, devolutae est non ad Eleazarum sacerdotem, sed ad Iehosuah
filium Nun, de triba non Levi, sed Ephraim. Huic mandabat dominus, vt filios
Israel secundo circumcideret. Frat autem circumcisio, signum faederis dei,
omnino ad religionem pertinens. Sequitur; in persona Samuelis cohaesere quidem
and magistratus and sacerdotium, veram moderandae religionis curam sustinuit
ille quoque, non vt sacerdos, sed vt magistratus, quo, tum non erat in Israele
superior: vt magistratus indicabat Israelem, ac disponebat publica omnia, tam
sacrae quam prophana; vt sacerdos sacrificabat, pro populo orabat, illumque
docebat.

Moses the first Catholic Magistrate in Israel, bearing the person not of a
priest which was imposed upon Aaron, but of an higher power like unto a Kings,
appointed order for all manner of Religion in the people of GOD, and prescribed
to Aaron himself and to the order of the Leuits, both what they should do,
and what they should avoid and leave undone. Wherein we see evidently, that
the care of ordering Religion does more pertain to the higher magistrate, then
to the order of the Priests. After the death of Moses, the care of Religion,
together with the Magistracy, was devolued not to Eleazar the Priest, but to
Iosuah the son of Nun, who was not of the Tribe of Leui, but of Ephraim. To
him God gave commandment, that he sho^^^ circumcise the second time the
children of Israel. But circumcision doubtless was the sign of Gods covenant,
which pertains wholly to religion. In the person of Samuel, there did cohere
both the Magistracy and the Priesthood; but he received the charge of
moderating religion, not as he was a Priest, but as he was a Magistrate,
greater then whom there was none at that time in Israel. As a magistrate, he
did judge Israel, and ordered all public affairs, as well sacred as
profane, ecclesiastical as civil; but as a Priest, he offered sacrifice,
prayed for the people, and taught them.

Out of these words of this great learned writer, I note these golden lessons
for the good of the well affected Reader. First, that Moses was a civil
magistrate, having authority Aaron the hie Priest. Thirdly, Moses ordered all
matters in religion, and not Aaron Aaron and to the whole order of the Levites,
both what

Seventhly, that a Bishop may have authority to deal in civil causes, as
Samuel did. Eighthly, that Samuel disposed all Musculus, vbi supra. vide cundem
authorem infra, cap. 11. in resp ad 2. object 6 proposition, and nota valde
va^de, Psalm. 2.
the civil Magistrate. All which observations, this learned writer proves by
the examples of many kings; of David, Solomon, Asa, Iosaphat, Ezechias, and
others. And of King David, he adds this most golden and memorable sentence;
(David) quoniam sciebat hanc primam curam pertinere ad reges and magistratus,
vt religio Deirite disponatur, hortatus cos est ad id offi^ij. David because he
knew this chief care to pertain to magistrates, to see religion rightly
ordered, he exhorted them to that office, saying; Now o Kings understand, be
learned, ye that judge the earth. Whosoever reads this learned writer
seriously throughout his whole discourse, can no longer stand doubtful of the
truth of this question. Zanchius de Religione cap. 16. art. 9


Zanchius a most learned writer, and a man of singular judgment, in that book
which he left, for a testimony of his faith and Christian belief unto the
world, and therefore the more to be regarded, has these express words:
Improbamus and illos, qui authoritatem in religione, necis tantum causa
attribuu^t magistratibus: dum illos negant authoritatem habere convocandi
synodos, deliberandide religione, reformandiecclesias, and quae ad populorum
salutem pertinent, e sacris literis statuends, aliudque eo esse nolunt, quam
eorum quae ab episcopis definiuntur, exequntores.

We reprove in like manner all those, who yield and give authority in
religion unto Magistrates, only in Capital matters touching death, whilst
they deny them authority to call Synodes to consult of religion, to reform
Churches, and to appoint out of Gods word, the things that pertain to the
salvation of their subjects: and will only have them to be the bare
exequutors of those things, which the Bishops do decree.

Thus writes this learned Doctor, a man of as great a judgment, as any is in
the christian world. Out of whose words I note first, that he condemns many,
who now adays

Master Martyr a very learned writer, discourses at large, both of the
authority of the minister and of the magistrate. He shows most excellently,
both how the minister Petrus Martyr, in lib. Iudic. cap. 19. Fol. 161.
ought to exhort and rebuke the magistrate, and how the magistrate ought to
reform, govern, and punish the minister. Some part of his golden discourse I
will briefly set down, referring the reader for the rest to the place quoted
in the margent.

Nihil est in toto mundo, ad quod verb^ dei se non extendat, quocirca long
falluntur, qui clamitare solent; quid conscionator cum rep quid cu^ armis? quid
cum pharmacopolis? quid cu^ cocis? at dicat etc. There is nothing in the whole
world, to which the word of God does not extend it self. Wherefore they are
far deceived, that are wont to exclaim and say; What has the Preacher to
do with the Commonweal? what has he to do with wars? what with the
Apothecaries? what with cooks? but let these good fellows tell us, why the
Minister of Gods word, when he perceives Gods law to be transgressed in these
things, may not rebuke the same out of Gods word? why he may not admonish the
malefactors? why he may not exhort them to desist from sin? it is his part
doubtless to reprove sinners; not with the sword, not with Pecuniarie mulct,
not with imprisonment, not with the sword, not with exile, but with the force
and power of Gods word. Then this learned man proceeds, and tells us, that
the civil Magistrate must see and provide, that the Bishops, Pastors, and
Doctors of the Church, do teach Gods word purely, rebuke sinners fatherly, and
administer the Sacraments reverently. After this, he tells his Reader, that
kings have not charge only of the bodies of their subjects, but of their
souls also. For, (says this great learned Doctor,) we must not make princes
swineheards and heardmen for keepers of cattle, who have care only of the
bellies, flesh, and skins of their subjects; because kings must provide and
see, that their subjects live virtuously and in the fear of God: yea, he says
further, that if the Ministers teach not aright, or do not administer the
Sacraments orderly: the^ the Magistrate must reduce them into order, and see
that they teach sincerely, and do not abuse the Sacraments, nor deliver the^
otherwise then Christ has commanded. And if they live wickedly and disorderly,
he must depose them from the Ministry. Thus writes this Doctor, and much
more he has to the like effect, but I study to be brief. Bucerus de regno
Christi, lib. 2. cap. 1


M. Bucer an other great learned Clerk, in that worthy work which he
dedicated, to king Edward the 6. of happy memory, tells him resolutely, that
every soul is subject to his Empire, as well the Bishops as the rest of the
Clergy: and that therefore he must be the more vigilant, and careful, to
reform them and their Ministry. And M. Calvin Calvin. in Epist. ante Esaiam,
ad Eliza. Angliae, Regina^.
in his Epistle to Queen Elizabeth of happy memory, ascribes unto her the
same prerogative, in causes Ecclesiastical: very earnestly exhorting her
Majesty, in the bowels of Christ Jesus, to be careful in purging the Church
from superstition and popery. See the xj. Chapter in the sixth proposition, in
the answer to the first Objection, and note it well.

CHAP. V.
Of the Degrees of Ministers, Bishops, Archbishops, Metropolitanes, and
Patriarchs, and of their Antiquity in the best and purest times of the Church.

Paragraph first, of the degrees and superiority of one Minister over an other.
SAint Austin that famons writer and Aug. vixit, A. D. 399.
strong pillar of Christ's Church, who lived above 1200. years ago, affirms
resolutely and plainly unto S. Hierome being then an Elder or Presbyter of
Christ's Church: that his authority and degree, was above S. Hieromes, because
he was a Bishop. These are S. Austins own words: Augustine. Epist. 19. to. a
p. 52.
Quanquam. n. secundum honorum vocabula, quae iam vsus ecclesiae obtinuit,
episcopatus presbyterio mayor sit, tamen in multis rebus Augustinus Hieronymo
minor est: licet etiam a minore quolibet, non sit refugienda vel dedignanda
correctio.

For although according to the words of honor, which now are of force by the
custom of Christ's Church, the degree and office of a Bishop is greater the^
the degree and office of a Priest or Elder: yet Austin is in many things
inferior to Hierome, neither may the superior disdain to be rebuked of his
inferior.

Out of these words of S. Austin, I observe first, that to Austins time, (at
which time it cannot be denied, but the Church was in good state and order,)
was an higher degree then to be a Priest or Elder. Secondly, that Bishops were
in those days honorable, and called Lord Bishops; which I gather out of these
words, (secundum honorum vocabula) according to the words of honor. Thirdly,
that this superiority amongst Ministers had been a long time in the Church,
even before S. Austins days, because Saint Austine says, this superiority
came by the custom of the Church.

S. Hierome, who lived in S. Austins days, confirms S. Austins testimony
touching the superiority of one minister over an other: these are his words:
Nam and Alexandriae a Hier. epist. ad Euagr. tom. 3 fol. 150. B.
Marco Euangelista vsque ad Heraclam and Dionysium Episcopos, presbyteri semper
vnum ex se electum in excelsiori gradu collocatum episcopum nominabant: quomodo
si exercitus imperatorem faciat: aut diaconi eligant de se, quem industrium
noverint, and archidiaconum vocent. quid. n^facit excepta ordinatione
episcopus, quod presbyter non faciat? sequitur: presbyter and episcopus, aliud
aetatis, aliud dignitatis est nomen. sequitur: quod Aaron, and filij eius, at
que Levitae in templo suerunt, hoc sibi episcopi, and presbyteri, and diaconi
vendicent in ecclesia.

For at Alexandria, from Mark the Evangelist unto Heraclas and Dionysius being
both Bishops, the Priests did This was A. D. 6. 4. whiles S. Peter, S. Paul,
and others were yet living.
always choose one among them, whom they placed in an higher degree, and
called him Bishop: as if an host of men should make a General over them: or
the Deacon choose one of themselves, whom they saw more vigilant, and should
call him Archdeacon. For what does a Bishop saving the ordination, that a
Priest does not? Touching a Priest and Bishop, the one is the name of age, the
other of dignity. That which Aaron, and his sons, and the Levites were in
the temple, the same may the Bishops, and Priests, and Deacons challenge in
the Church.

Out of these words of this holy Father and learned writer, I note first, that
a Bishop has an higher degree in the Church since the time of Saint Mark the
Evangelist. Thirdly, that the name of a Bishop is the name of dignity Aaron
had a degree above Moses, so have Bishops now a degree above the other
Ministers or Elders. Fifthly, that a

Saint Chrysostom, who lived in Saint Austines time, had very great
superiority over Bishops; for he was not only Bishop of Constantinople, but
also ruled many other Churches, both in Thracia, Pontus and Asia. These are the
express words of Theodoretus in his history, concerning this matter: Atque
hoc modo prospexit non illi solum civitati, Theodor. hist. eccl. lib. 5. cap.
28.
verum etiam tot^ Thratiae quae est in sex episcopatus divisa; and cunctae
etiam Asiae quae vndecim habet antistites. Ponticam praeterea ecclesiam, quae
eundem habet episcoporum numerum quem Asia, eisdem legihus adornavit.

And Chrysostom the Bishop of (Constantinople) did by this means not only
provide for that city, but also, for all Thracia, which is divided into six
Bishoptickes: as also for the whole Country of Asia, which has in it eleven
Bishops. He also ruled Pontus which has the same number of Bishops with Asia,
and beautified it with the same Laws.

Out of these words of this holy Father, worthily surnamed the golded mouthed
Doctor; I observe first, that he Constantinople. Secondly, that he Thracia,
Asia, and Pontus. And that the Reader may fully know what jurisdiction this
holy Father used over these Churches; two things must be remembered, which are
set down in the place quoted in my Margent. The one, that he commanded the
Priests to live after the Laws. The other, that he did ^^ptiue them of their
Priestly function, which did violate and transgress the laws. So then it is
clear and evident, that there are degrees of superiority amongst Ministers;
yea, that one Bishop has jurisdiction over another: as S. Chrysostom being a
Patriarch, had over 28. other Bishops.

S. Ignatius, who was Bishop of Antioch, and S. John's disciple, and lived in
the Apostles time, A. D. 97 shows evidently, An, D. 9. 7.
that in his time one Minister had rule over another, the Bishops over the
Priests. For writing to the people of Smyrna in Asia, he has these express
words; Honorate Deum, vt authorem omnium and dominum, Episcopum autem tanquam
principem sacerdotum, imaginem Des forentem; principatum quidem secundum deu^,
sacerdotium vero secundum Christum. Honor God as the author and Lord of all
things, and a Bishop, as the Prince or chief of Priests, bearing the image of
God; superiority according to GOD. Priesthood according to Christ. And in the
same Epistle he reckons up several degrees: of Bishops, Priests, Deacons,
and Laymen. The same Ignatius, in that Epistle which he wrote to the Church of
Trallis in Asia has these words: Quid est. n. Episcopus, nisi omnem
principatum and potestatem omnium illorum tenens, quemadmodum deceat hominem
tenere imitatione^ des factum secundu^ virtute^. For what is a Bishop, but one
that has power and rule over them all, (he speaks of Priests and Deacons,)
as it becomes a man made according to virtue, to keep the imitation of God.
Thus writes this holy Father, who suffered a most cruel death for the
testimony of Jesus Christ: being cast out to wild beasts, to be torn of
them in pieces for the truthssake. Eusebius lib. 3 cap. 30. Hier. in catal script.
eccles. tom 1. fol. 124. A. Augusti. ac haeresib ad quodvult deum to. 6.
haeres. 53.
Of these his Epistles and Martyrdom, S. Polycarpe, S. Hierome, and Eusebius
Caesariensis, do all three yeede a most lawdable and constant testimony; such
as is able to penetrate any man's heart, that shall seriously peruse the same.

S. Epiphanius, and S. Austin, do both of them enroll among heresies, this
opinion of Aerius: that a Priest, or Pastor, was equal to a Bishop. Cum esset
presbyter, inquit Augustinus, doluisse fertur, quod Episcopus non potuit
ordinari. Sequitur: dicobat etiam, presbyterum ab Episcoponulla differentia
debere discerni. Aerius says S. Austin, being himself a Priest, is reported
to have been very sorry, that he could not be made a Bishop. The same Aerius
held also this opinion, that there was no difference betwixt a Priest and a
Bishop. S. Epiphanius affirming that Aerius held the same Epiphan. cont.
haeres. lib. 3. to. 1. haeres. 75. page 196.
error, confuteth it by many sound reasons, amongst which this is one: Dicere.
n igsum Episcopum and Prosbyterum aequalem esse, quomodo erit possibile?
Episcoporum. n. ordo patrum generator est: patres. n. generat ecclesia.
Presbyterorum vero non potens generare patres, per lavacri regenerationem
generat filios ecclesiae: non tamen patres aut doctores. For to say, that a
Bishop and a Priest are equal, how is it possible? For the order of Bishops is
the begetter of the Fathers: for that order begets Fathers to the Church.
But the order of Priests is not of ability to beget the Fathers: but it
begets sons to the Church by the regeneration of Baptism: yet not Fathers
or Doctors. This ancient Father lived above 12. hundred years ago, at which
time it was holden for a gross error generally, to say, affirm, or think,
that A. D. 372.
a Priest was equal to a Bishop, in degree, dignity, or jurisdiction.

This reason which S. Epiphanius makes touching the begetting of Fathers to
the Church, is invincible, and never can be answered. It is the very same in
substance with that of S. Hieromes, which I have set down alreadly: viz. that
a Bishop differs from a Pastoral Elder, by the power of ordaining and making
Ministers. And, to prove the superiority of a Bishop above a Priest, or
Pastoral Elder: that which Saint Austin tells us of Aerius, is a flat and
evident demonstration. For Aerius being a Priest, sought by all means to be a
Bishop, and was sorry that he could not attain and accomplish his desire. For
grief whereof, he opposed himself against the prudent and godly settled order
of the Church: affirming very desperately as Saint Epiphanius says, that a
Priest was every way equal to a Bishop. Now I pray you who knows not this to
be true? that a wise man will never bes^^^e and busy himself, to attain
that which he has already: Let this p^int be well m^r^ed. (...). 372. (...)
thousand and (...) years. a^^^.
But (...) it is* as you have heard already; that ^^erius being a Priest, (...)
under with might and maine to be made a Bishop: Ergo it must needs be granted:
that to be a Bishop was (...), a degree and d^gnitie above a Priest. But to
that end should (...) point and question, which ^^ is a position to constant,
(...) generally received, in the days of S. Hierome, S. Aust^^e, S.
Chrysostom, S. Epiphani^s, Eusebues, Policarpus and (...), is I have already
prove? (...) Reader shall think better of modern writers, then of these
ancient, holy, and learned Fathers: I am content for his better satisfaction,
to allege the ^l^t testimonies and express words, of the best approved
Calvin, in 2. s^r. 10.
writers in this last age. M. Calvin has these express words. Quamvis. n^
commune sit omnibus verbi ministris idemque officium sunt tamen honoris gradus.

For although there be one Office common to all the Ministers of the word, yet
are there degrees of honor (among Calvin, in cap. 1. (...). vide cund^m ad 2
ga^^t. ^er. 9.
them. Again, in another place he has these words, Di^cimus quidem ex hoc
loco, non eam fuisse tunc aequalitate^ inter ecclesia ministres, quin v^us
aitquis authoritate and consitio praeesset nihil tamen hoc ad tyranmcum and
profanum collationum morem, qui in Papatis regnat. long. n. diuersafuit
apostolorum ratio.

We learn by this place, that there was no such equality among the Ministers
of the Church in those days, but that one was preferred before an other in
counsel and authority. Yet this is nothing like to that tyrannical and
profane custom of ruling in Popedom, which is fair different from the
manner of the Apostles.

The second Paragraph, of the artiquitie of Bishop, Archbishops, Primates,
Metropolitans, and Patriarchs, in the Christian Church of God.
THe truth is, that the Church of Christ was sometime, both without the names
and degrees, of Archbishops, Metropolitans, Primates, and Patra^ches; yet it
did not long so continue, but was altered in the kind of government, even in
the time of the Apostles. This affirmance S. Hierome makes so manifest, that I
cannot but wonder, how any without blushing do deny the same.

These are S. Hieroms own words; Quod autem postea vni^^^ electus est. qui
caeteris praeponeretur, in (...) remedium Hier. ad Euagrium. Tom. 3. Fol. 150.
factum est, ne vnusquisque adse trabens Christi ecclesiam rumperet. Nam and
Alexandriae a Marco Evangelista vsque ad Heraclam and Dionysium episcopos
presbyteri semper vnum ex^e electum, in excelsiors gradu collocatum, episcopum
nomina^bant.

But that afterward one was chosen to bear rule over the ^^est, it was done to
avoid schism, least every one should ^^^aw company to himself, and so break
the unity of the Church. For at Alexandria from S. Mark the Evangelist unto
the Bishops Hera^las and Dionysius, the priests or elders did ever cloose one
among them, whom they placed in an ^agher degree, and named him Bishop.

The same Father in an other place, has these express words. Idem est
presbyter qui episcopus, and antequam diabeli Hier. in. 1. Cap ad T^tum.
i^stinctu studia in religiene sierent and diceretur in populis; ego sum Peuli
ego Apolio, ego vero Cephae; communi presbytererum (...) ecclesiae
gubernabantur. Postquam vero vnusquisque eos quo^ baptizaverat, suos putabat
esse non Christian toto orb accr^^um est, vt v^usde presbyteris euctus
svperponeretur caeteris, ad quem omnis ecclesiae cura pertineret, and
s^^i^matum scmina tellere^tur.

An Elder and a Bishop are all one, and before dissension by the devils
procurement arose in the Church, and the people began to say, I am of Paul, I
of Apolle, and I of Cophas; the churches were governed by the common consent of
the Pastoral Elders, Ministers, or Priests. But after that every one did
think those to be his, and not Christ's, whom he had baptized; it was decreed
throughout the whole world, that one of the ministers or Priest should be
chosen and set over the rest, to whom the whole care of the Church should
appertain, that the seeds of schism might be taken away.

Out of these plain aslertions of this holy, learned, and ancient father, I
observe first, that in the very beginning of viz. when one said he held of
Paul, an other, he held of Peter an other, he held of Apollo: at what time S.
Mark the Evangelist, was made the Bishop of Alexandria. Fifthly, that this
Jrenaus adVers. Here Is. libr. 5. cap. 2. page 589.
by a settled law throughout the whole world. S. Irenaeus has these words;
Omnes. n. hij valae posteriores sunt quam episcopi, quibus Apostoli tradiderunt
ecclesias.

For all these come far after Bishops, to whom the Apostles committed the
charge of churches.

Master Zuinglius a famous and zealous defender of the Gospel, is wholly
consonant to these holy and ancient Fathers. Vide infra, cap. 10. in respons.
ad 2. object.
His words shall be set down at large, when I come to the ordering of
Ministers.

Saint Timothy and S. Titus, had superiority over all other Ministers, both at
Ephesus, and at Creta; and consequently, they were made Archbishops by Saint
Paul himself. This is constantly affirmed. both by Saint Crysostome.
Theodoritus, Oecumenius, and many other famous writers. Saint Chrysostom has
these express words; Vnus ex Paul's socij^ hic fuit vir probatus; neque^n
profecto Chrysostom. ad Titum, hom. 1 in initio.
ills integram insulam permisisset, neque ea quae aeerant praecepisset im^lenda
and tam multorum episcoporum iudicium commisisset, nisi multumilli confideret.

This worthy man was one of S. Paul's fellows; for doubtless, he would never
have committed one whole Island unto him, neither have commanded things wanting
to be accomplished, nor yet have committed the judgment of so many Bishops
unto him, unless he had had great confidence in him. Thus writes this holy,
learned, and ancient father, touching the superiority of Titus.

Of Timotheus the same father writes thus; Quaeri mevito Chrysostom. ad Tim. 2.
hom. 10. inprincip.
potest quomodo Timotheum adse vocet, cui ecclesiae gentisque totius crediderat
gubernacula?

It may worthily be demanded, how he calls Timothy unto him, to whom he had
committed the government of the Church and of the whole nation. Mark well
these words, (gentis totius, of the whole nation;) and these words likewise,
(integram insulam, the whole Island;) and these words withal, (Muitorum
episcoporum iudicium, the judgment of many Bishops.) For out of the said
words it is clearly and evidently deduced, that both Timotheus and Titus were
Archbishops in Saint Paul's time; the one having jurisdiction over all Asia,
the other over all Creta, two great and large countries.

Illyricus a very famous late writer, and a most worthy defender Illyricus in
prefat. ad 1. ep. ad Tim.
of Christian truth, iumpeth with S. Chrysostom in his judgment and opinion.
These are his express words; Harum autem tres priores scriptae ad duos
praestantes doctores plurimarumque ecclesiarum episcopos. Timotheum and Titum,
potissimum informant episcopum aut superintendentem, and per cum etiam totam
ecclesiam ab ipso gubernandam ac instru^ndam.

But the three former of these written to two excellent Doctors and Bishops of
many churches. Timotheus and Titus, do specially inform a Bishop or
superintendent, and by him the whole Church also, which must be governed and
instructed by him. Lo here, gentle Reader; Timothy and Titus were Arch
bishops, that is to say, the Bishops of many Churches. I here let pass the
words of Theodoretus, Oecumentus, and others, in regard of brevity.

Saint Cyprian, that holy, learned, and ancient Father, who Cyprian libr. 4
epist. 8
lived above one thousand and three hundred years ago, was not only the
Bishop of the famous city of Carthage; but he had also the government both of
Numidia and of Mauritania, two goodly regions in Africa. So does S. Cyprian
himself write of himself, and therefore the story is of good credit.

Many Councels, (of Nice, Antioch, Carthage, Mileuitane, Chaic^do^, and others)
make mention of Archbishops, Metropolitans, Conc. Nicae. can. 6 council. 3.
carthag. can. 28. conc Antioch. can. 9. Calvin. libr. 4 institut. cap. 4 sect
4. (...).
Primate, and Patriarchs. It shall suffice in regard of brevity, to relate
only master Calnius testimony of the famous Council of Nice. These are
master Caluins express words, Quod autem singulae provinciae vnum habebant
inter episcopos archiepiscopum quod item in Nicaena synodo constituti sunt
patriarchae quiessent ordine and dignitate archiepitscopis superiores; id ad
a^s^iplinae conservationem pertinebat. Quanquam in hac disputatione praeteriri
non potest, quod rarissimi erat vsus. Ob hanc igitur causam potissimum
iustituti sunt illi gradus, vt si quid in ecclesia qualibet incideret, quod non
posset been a pa^cis expediri, ad synodum provincialem referretur Si^nagnitudo
aut difficultas causae maiorc^ quoque discussio^^^ (...), ad^i^ebantur
patriarchae vaa cum synodis, a qubu^ esset provocatio, nisi ad vniversaie
concilium, (...) sic constitutam non ulli Hierarch^am vocaru^t nomine ((...))
improprio ^ere (...) veteres episc^pos non aliam regendae ecelesiae formam
volnisse fingere, ab ea quam deus verbo suo praescripsit.

That every province had an Archbishop among their Bishops, and that the
Council of Nice did appoint Patriarchs, which should be in order and dignity
above Archbishops, it was done for the preservation of discipline. Although in
this discourse we may not forget that it was a thing of very rare use. For
this cause therefore were those degrees especially appointed, that if any thing
should happen in any particular church, which could not there be decided, the
same might be referred to a general Synod. If the greatness or difficulty of
the cause, required yet greater consultation; then were added Patriarchs
together with the Synodes, from whom there could be no appeal, but only unto
a General Council. This kind of government some called a Hierarchy, a name
improper and not used in the Scriptures, as I think. For the holy Ghost would
not have us to dream of any dominion or rule, when question is made of Church
government. But omitting the name, if we consider the thing it self; we shall
find, that these old Bishops would not frame any other kind of government in
the Church, then that which God prescribed in his word.

Thus writes Master Calvin of the antiquity of degrees and superiority,
amongst the Ministers of the Church. Which whosoever shall ponder seriously,
(all partiality set apart, (together with the constitutions, testimony, and
approbation of the most sacred and renowned general Council of Nice (which
Council was ever to this day highly reverenced throughout the Christian world;)
that man doubtless, cannot but approve and allow our Bishops and
Archbishops with their names and authorities, this day established in the
godly settled government of the Church of England, For first, Master Calvin
grants willingly, the truth it self plainly leading him thereunto,) Nice,
there were both Archbishops and Patriarchs. Secondly, that yt patriarchs
were in order and dignity above the Archbishops; (viz. above one thousand two
hundred and forty years ago,) superiority Episcopal, Archiepiscopall, and
Patriarchall, among the ministers of the Church, one minister having
jurisdiction over and upon an other. More then which doubtless, our Bishops
and Archbishops do not this day challenge, in our Church of noble England.
Thirdly, that this superiority and dignity among Ministers, was ordained
England. Fourthly, that the kind of government I also add, (which the Reader
must observe seriously with me,) that the Council of Nice tells us
plainly, that this superiority of one Minister above and over an other,
(which the Brownists cannot endure,) was not then first appointed, but had
been time out of mind by an ancient custom of the church, which the
Council confirmed and established by her decree. But how do I prove it?
doubtless, by the express words of the Council.

For the Council in the sixth Cannon, has these Conc. Nicae. can. 6.
words; Mos antiquus perduret. Let the old custom continue. And in the
seventh cannon, it has these words; Quoniam mos antiquus obtinuit, and
vetusta traditio. Because Can. 7.
an old custom and ancient tradition has prevailed, etc. Which old custom
had been in the Church, even from Saint Mark the Evangelist, and from Saint
Timothy and Saint Titus, as is already proved. And if any one will yet be
obstinate, and deny that this old custom, whereof the holy, and ancient
Council speaks, began in the Apostles time; let that man or those persons
which so shall say or affirm, name the time before the Nicene Council, when
Archbishops and Patriarchs first began. And if any man can this perform. I
promise to be of his opinion. If otherwise, both reason and true humility
would advise that This can never be performed, while the world endures
man and those persons, who shall so say or think; to yield all due obedience
to their superiors, and willingly to subscribe unto the truth. Which
doubtless they will do, that heretofore have refused to embrace the
ceremonies of our English Church; if this Text of the Gospel, be not truly
verified in them; (for they loved the praise of men, more then the praise of
God.) But how is this possible? I will unfold the case, Gentle Ioh. 12. Verse.
43.
Reader; protesting that I do it of charity, and for edification sake. The
truth I will plainly and sincerely set down, concealing the parties name;
because I love the man, and have regard unto his credit. Talking with a
Preacher of mine acquaintance, (a man otherwise both godly, learned, and of
singular gifts,) concerning the cannons of Anno. 1604. and the kind of
government of this our English Church, when he seemed to me, to have nothing
of moment to say against the same, he answered me thus: that he would
neither loose his living, nor wear the surplesse nor yet make the sign of the
cross in the child's forhead. And when I demanded how that could be; he
answered that he would keep one to do it, but not do it himself. When I
replied, that he might as lawfully do This ought to be well pondered.
it himself, as procure an other to do it; he uttered these words.

How can I do that, against which I have so often preached. I proceeded, and
told him as a friend; that his refusal seemed to taste of the spirit of the
proud Pharise; and not of the humble Publican, etc. Well, I hope the party
will be obedient. But certes, I thought before; that all their proceedings had
been of mere conscience, which now I perceive to be of pride in a great many
of them, through which manner of dealing (I will not say hypocrisy) the simple
sort become disobedient, and are deeply drowned in error; and our Church
pitifully turmoyled, with schisms and dissension.

The godly, learned, and zealous Patron of pure religion, master Bucer,
deriueth the superiority of Archbishops even from the Apostles themselves.
These are his express words; I am ex perpetua ecclesiarum observations,
abipsis Bucerus deregno christ's, libr. 2. cap. 12 in initio.
apostolis videmus, visum and hoc esse spiritu sancto, vt inter presbyteros,
quibus ecclesiarum procuratio potissimum est commissa, vnus ecclesiarum and
totius sacriministerij curam gerat singulare^, eaque cura and solicitudine
cunctis praeerat alij^. Qua de causa, episcopi nomen huiusmodi summis
ecclesiarum cur atoribus est peculiariter attributum.

Now we see by the perpetual observation of churches, even from the Apostles
themselves; that it pleased the holy Ghost, that among the ministers to whom
especially the government of the church is committed, one should have the
chief care, both of the churches and the whole sacred ministry; and that he
in that care and sollicitued, should be above all the rest; for which cause, the
name of Bishop is peculiarly given to such chief governors of churches. Thus
writes master Bucer. Out of whose words I note first, that the superiority
of Archbishops and bishops, proceeds from the holy Ghost. Secondly, that
this superiority was ever in the church, eue^ from the Apostles. The same
author Hieronymie Zanchis Legatur caput integru^.
us, in the confession of his faith grants freely, that there were
Archbishops, Metropolitans, and Patriarchs, before the Nicene Council. These
are his words: Cum hanc co^s^riberem Zanchius de relig. p. 170.
fidei confessione^ omnia ex bona conscientia scripsi; and sicut credias sic
etiam isbere loquutus sum, vt faciendu^ esse docent sacrae litera Fides aute^
mea nititur cum primis and simpl^citer verbo Dei. Deinde nonnihil etiam communi
totius veteris catholica Ecclesia consensu, si ille cum sacris literis non
pugnet. Credo. n. qua a pijs patribus in nomine Domini congregatis, communi
omnium consensu citra vlla^ sacraru^ litorarum contradictione^, definita and
receptafuerunt: ea etiam (quanqua^ haud eiusdem cum sacris literis
authoritatis) a spiritu sancto esse. Hinc fit, vt quae sunt huinscemodi, ea ego
improbare noc velim, nec audea^ bona conscientia, quid autem certius ex
Historijs, ex concilijs, and ex omnium patrum scriptis quam illos ministroru^
ordines, de quibus diximus, communi totius reipublicae christianae consensu, in
ecclesia constitutos receptosque fuisse? Quis autem ego sum, qui quod tota
ecclesia approbavit, improbem? sed neque omnes nostri temporis docti viri
improbare ausi sunt: quippe qui norunt and licuisse haec Ecclesiae, and ex
pietate atque ad optimos fines pro electorum aedificatione, ea omnia fuisse
profecta and ordinata.

When I worte this Confession of my Faith, I wrote every thing with a good
conscience; and as I believed, so I also freely spoke, as holy writ teaches me
to do. My belief is principally and simply, grounded upon Gods word: then,
somewhat also upon the common consent of the ancient Catholic Church, so it
do not swarne from the holy Scriptures. For I bel^eue, that such things as yt
holy Fathers Vide infra, cap. 10. ex Zuinglio and notato valae.
gathered together in Gods name, have with common consent defined and received
without any contradiction of the holy Scriptures: do proceed from the holy
Ghost, though not of the same authority with the holy Scriptures. Hence comes
it, that my self neither will, nor with safe conscience dare, reprove such
kind of decrees. But what is more clear and evident, by Histories, by
Councels. and by the writings of all the Fathers, then yt those orders of
Ministers, (whereof we have spoken:) have been appointed and received in the
Church, even with the common consent of the whole christian Common weal? And
who am I, that I should reprove that, which the whole Church has approved?
yea, which all the learned men of our age, durst never reprove to this day? as
who knew (right well) that both the Church might lawfully do these things, and
also that they proceeded of piety, and that all things were ordained to very
godly purposes, for edefication of Gods elect. Thus writes this learned,
godly, zealous, and judicious Father: who for his rare learning, profound
knowledge, pure zeal, and great judgment, was inferior to none of his age in
Christ's Church, if not superior to all. Out of whose words I observe many more
excellent and worthy docume^ts, for the help of the well affected Reader. First,
that this godly learned man was fully Christ's name, defined by the common
consent of all, and not repugnant to the Scriptures, were not simply the
Decrees of men, but also of the holy Ghost. Fifthly, Christ. Sixthly, that this
great Hoc ego ingenue denuo profiteor, talem esse meam conscientiam, Zanch. de
relig. page 250. Vide infra, cap. 7. and notato.
vt a veteru^ patrum sive dogmatibus, sive scripturarum interpraetationibus,
non facile, nisivel manifestis sacrarum literarum testimonijs, vel necessarijs
consequentijs, apertisque demonstrationibus convictus atque coactus, discedere
queam. Sic enim acquiescit mea conscientia, and in hac mentis quiet cupio
etia^mors.

I again profess freely my conscience to be such, that I cannot easily
depart, either from the Doctrines of the ancient Fathers, or from their
interpretations of the holy Scriptures: unless I be convicted and compelled
thereunto, either with the manifest testimonies of holy Writ, or with
necessary consequences and manifest demonstrations. For so my conscience is at
rest, and in this quiet of mind I desire to die. Out of which words, I note
two things, both memorable and of great importance: wishing the gentle Reader,
to mark them attentively. First, that

Nicolaus Hemingius affirms constantly, that the pure Hemingius in
Enchiridio. Page 368.
church which followed the Apostles-time, ordained diverse degrees of Ministers
for the peaceable Regiment of the Church: as Metropolitans, Archbishops, and
Patriarchs.

The 1. Objection.
Ye know that the Lords of the Gentiles have domination Matthew. 20. V. 25.
over them, and they that are great, exercise authority over them. But it
shall not be so among you: but whosoever will be great among you, let him be
your servant.

The Answer.
I answer, that these words of our Savior Christ, do only condemn
ambitious desire of rule and the tyrannical v^^ge thereof: but not simply all
superiority, and lawful authority of one above an other. I prove it first
because Christ says not, the Lords of the Jews, but the Lords of the Gentiles
bear rule over them. As if he had said: you may not have that tyrannical
kind of government, which the gentiles used; nor such ambitious desire and
sinister affection of rule, as was found among them. And therefore is it
significantly said, (it shall not be so,) He says not, it shall not be at all,
but it shall not be so, as it was among the Gentiles. Secondly, bcause it is
the frequent custom of the Christ Mat. 23. U. 9. 10. 11.
for there is but one your Father, which is in heaven, B^^ not called Doctors:
for one is your Doctor, even Christ* But he that is the greatest among you, let
him be your servant. So Christ forbids to be careful for to morrow, Mat
6. v. 25. 28. 31. Prou. 6. v. 6. 7. 8. 2 Thessalonians. cap. 3. 10.
to be careful for our life, for raiment, for meat, and for drink. And yet
in true sense and meaning of holy writt^ the moderate and honest care of such
things is not forbidden, but only the inordinate and distrustful desire and
can thereof. Nay, nay, the Scripture wills the sluggarde it learn of the
Pismire, who having no guide, governor nor ruler, prepares her meat in the
Summer, and gathethereth her food in harvest. And the Apostle gives
commandment, that if any will not work, the same must no eat. Thirdly,
because both old and late writers of be Matthew, against in ordinate and
ambitious desire of ruling. S. Chrysostom the Chysost in 20. Chap. Mat page
549.
golden mouthed Doctor, for his great learning and eloquence so surnamed, has
these words: It a gentium ^^n esse ostendit, prima quaeque appetere, tyrannica
enim haec passi^^^ and nonnunquam eximios etiam viros perturbat, quapropter ^^
vehementiore castigatione indigent, acrius etiam ipse insurg^ comparatione
gentium, agrotantem ipsorum animum retinem It a horum quidem invidia^, illorum
vero arrogantia^ succidit qua magna voce dicens: nolite tanquam contempti
commoveri: ^^ qui primatum quaerunt, sibijpsis dedecori sunt, ignorantes hoc
pacto in infirma detrudere.

Thus he shows it to be the manner of the Gentile to desire superiority. For
this is a tyrannical passion, and does often trouble excellent men. Wherefore
seeing they have need of vehement castigation, he does sharply reprove the^:
so bridling their sickly mind, by comparing the^ to the Gentiles. And by this
means he takes away envy from the one sort, and arrogant pride from the
other: as if he should cry with a loud voice, be not troubled (with passions
of pride,) as contemptible persons. For they that seek Primacie, do dishonor
themselves: not knowing, that by this means they do abase themselves.

Theophilactus has the same sense and interpretation, which he utters almost
in the very same words. Many Theophil. in 20. cap. mat.
other writers expound this text in the self same manner, neither can any one
ancient father be alleged to the contrary sense and meaning.

Fourthly, because the original word Catacurieuein, does plainly insinuate so
much unto us. Aretius a very learned Catacurieuein. Est dominari cum aliena
tyrannide: Aretius in 20. cap. mat.
Catexousiazein, in potestate violenter tenere. The one Greek word is to bear
rule tyrannically: so is the other Greek word, to have violent power over men.
Erasmus, Musculus, and many other learned writers, are of the same opinion.

Musculus has these express words: Non est autem Musculus in cap. 23. Matthew.
putandum, quod omnino prohibeat, ne quis vocetur inter Christianos pater aut
Magister, aut Dominus; vt illicitum sit liberis, cum vnde sunt gen^ti, vocare
patrem: aut discipulis cum a quo instituuntur appellare Magistri aut
praeceptoris vocabulo: vel servis, heroes suos appellitare Dominos: cum and
sacra Scriptura iubeat, vt filij honorent patres suos, and Apostolus admoneat
servos, vt dominis suis obediant: and dominos vt aequi sint erga servos: and
cum audisset in carcere a custode carceris vocari dominos se and Silam, non
prohibuerit: verum it a vocari patrem and magistrum, vt vocabantur Scribae and
Pharisaei, prohibetur hoc loco. Primum, illi amabant vocari Rabbi: ergo
affectus horum cognominum vetatur. Deinde, ita vocari rabbi volebant, vt ab
ipsis prorsus penderet populus domini, nec vlla in re placitis ipsorum
repugnaret: at hoc pacto vocari patrem and magistrum, nemini mortalium
competit. Est enim vnus verus pater tantum deus, and vnus veru^ magister
Christus, a cuius debemus pendere praeceptis vt non liceat nobis in alterius
cuiuspiam tur are verba magistri. Sequitur; hec satis indicat, quomodo
prohibuerit suos vocari rabbi and magistros; viz. vt dixi contradrim itus
ambitum, dominandique libidinem ista sunt aicta. Alioqui dixisset; nemo inter
vos sit reliquis mayor. I am vero vbi dicit qui maximus est vestrum, erit
vester minister, ostenait se non ita dixisse, vos omnes fratres estis, quod per
omnia voluerit suos esse inter se aequales; sed vt ij qui reliquos ex donis dei
excellebant, ad omnium ministerium sese demitserent.

We may not think, that Christ does altogether forbid, that no christian shall
be called father, or master, or Lord; as if it were unlawful for children to
call him father, that did beget them; or for Scholars to call him Master who
teaches them; or for Servants to call their Masters Lords; seeing the holy
Scripture commands children to honor their Parents, and the Apostle also
wills Servants to obey their Masters, and when he heard the keeper of the
Prison call him, and Silas Masters he did not rebuke him for the same; but so
to be called Father and Master, as the Scribes and Pharisees were called, he
utterly forbids in this place. First, they greatly desired to be called
Rabbi, and therefore the affection of such names is forbidden. Again, they
wished so to be called Rabbi, that GODS people should wholly depend upon them,
and in no respect deny or withstand their ordinances and Decrees. But to be
called Father or Master in this sort and manner, agrees to no mortal man.

For there is one only true Father, which is GOD himself, and one only true
Master, which is Christ, upon whose commandments we must so depend, that
we may in no case swear to the words of any other man. Here we are
sufficiently taught, in what sense Christ for bad his Disciples to be called
Rabbi, and Masters, viz. As I said, against the ambition of Primacie, and
desire to rule, are these things spoken, (and not simply against Rule,
Dominion, or Superiority.) For otherwise, he would have said; let none
amongst you, be greater then the rest. But now, when he says, he that is
the greatest of you, shall be your Servant, he shows himself not to have
said, ye are all brethren, for that he would have them in all things to be
equal among themselves, but that they who excelled others in the gifts of GOD,
might humble themselves to the service of others. Thus writes this great
learned Father, out of whose golden words, we may gather evidently sundry
necessary documents, for a resolute and full answer to the precedent
objection. For first, he affirms constantly, that Christ does not simply
prohibit Christians to be called Rabbis or Masters, but so as the Scribes
and Pharisees desired to be called Masters. Secondly, he tells us, that
Paul and Silas were well pleased to be Infra cap. 12. sect. 4. ex Pe. Marty.
man will hold the contrary opinion. See Peter Martyrs opinion, and note it
well. His express words shall be set down, when I come to speak of the
churchdiscipline.

The Reply.
Master Calvin and many other learned writers, allege this Text against that
superiority, which the late Bishops of Rome do challenge over other Ministers
of the Church: which doubtless they could never truly do, if one Bishop or
Minister may be superior to another.

The Answer.
I answer, that M. Calvin, and other learned men, do truly allege this
Scripture, against the falsely challenged Primacie of the proud and arrogant
Bishop of Rome. And yet for all that, it does not prohibit the moderate and
lawful superiority of one Minister over another: which is both necessary for
the peaceable managing of the Church, and has ever been used in the Church,
as it is already prooved. For the Bishop of Romes superiority, is so far
from heing moderate and lawful: that it may truly be termed tyrannical, and
plain diabolical. Because (as I have proved at large in other discourses,) he
takes upon him to depose kings, to translate kingdoms, and in most brutish
and savage manner, to tyrannize over men's souls and consciences, Idque iure
divino, as he bears the world in hand.

The 2. Objection.
The names of Archbishops, Primates, and Patriarchs, are proud names,
disholy, profane, and not to be found in the holy Scriptures.

The Answer.
I answer: First, that though the names be not expressed in holy writ, yet is
the thing it self sufficiently contained in the same, as is already proved.

Secondly, that the very names are so far from being profane and disholy;
that the most zealovs Patrons of the Presbitery, do allow and approve the
same for lawful and holy, and to have been ordained of the holy Fathers for a
godly end and purpose. Master Caluins opinion is already set down, in this
present chapter. Yet for better satisfaction of the Reader, let him hear what
the same author says in an other place. These are his words; Quod duodecim
vnum habuerint inter se qui omnes regeret, nihil mirum. Calvin. libr. 4 intit.
cap. 6 sect. 8.
Hoc. n. fert natura, hoc hominum ingenium postulat, vt in quovis caetu etiamsi
aequales sint omnes potestate, vnus tamen sit veluti moderator, in quem alij
respiciant. Nulla est curia sine consule, nullus consessus indicum sine
Praetore sen quaesitore, collegium nullum sine Praefecto, nulla sine magistro
societas.

That the twelve Apostles had one among them to govern the rest, it was no
marvel. For nature requires it, and the disposition of men will so have it,
that in every company, though they be all equal in power, there be one as
governor, by whom the rest may be directed. There is no Court without a
Consul, no Senate without a Praetor, no College without a President, no
society without a master. Now it is evident, that neither Bishops nor
Archbishops in our church of England, have greater authority, then master
Calvin speaks of in this place. For to say nothing of the dignity of Consuls
and Pretors, which was very great among the Romans; the master of a College,
(as every Scholar of Cambridge and Oxford can tell, (has a perpetual office;
he is chief governor of that society, and all the members thereof owe
obedience unto him, as to their head; he has authority to punish, and to see
laws executed within his College, as Bishops, and Archbishops have in their
dioceses and provinces. And most certain it is, that no Archbishop in England
has that authority in his province, which the Consul had in Rome. Beza in
confess. cap. 7. Page 257.


Master Beza confesses, that antiquity used the names of Bishops and
Archbishops, and willingly admits of them as holy names. These are his
express words; Nam quod pastores temporis progressu distincti sunt in
metropolitas, episcopos, and quos nunc vocant curatos id est, singulis
paraecijs prafectos, id minime factum est respectu ministerij verbi; sed potum
habita ecclesiasticae iurisdictionis ac disciplinae ratione. Itaque quod
attinet ad verbi praedicandi munus, and sacramentorum administratione^ nullum
est inter archiepiscopos, episcopos, and curatos discrimen. Omnes. n. tenentur
suos greges eode^ ^ibo pascere ide^que communi nomine postores and episcopi in
scripturis passim vocantur. Quae vero istorum impudentia est sacra nomina
vsurpare, and propter ea apostolorum and verorum opiscoporum successionem
iactare?

For that in process of time, pastors were distinguished into Metropolitans,
(or Archbishops,) Bishops, and Curates; it was not done in respect of the
Ministry of the word, but in regard of ecclesiastical iurisdictition and
discipline. Therefore touching the office of Preaching and Ministration of the
sacraments, there is no difference betwixt Archbishops, Bishops, and Curates.
For they all are bound to feed their flocks with the same meat, and therefore
are they called in the Scriptures by the common name of Pastors and Bishops.
But how impudent are these men, which under color of these holy names, glory
in the succession of the Apostles and true Bishops? thus writes master Beza,
iumping, (as every child may see,) with that doctrine which I now defend. Yea,
the same Beza affirms these degrees and names, to have been appointed by the
ancient Church upon a very good zeal. These are his words in an other place;
Neque vero nos ignoramus, quammulia sint a veteribu^ constituta, de
episcoporum, metropolitaru^, and Patriarcharum sedibus idque optimo zelo, and
definitis cuinsique Beza in consess cap. 5. Art. 29.
limitibus, certaque attributa authoritate. Neither are we ignorant, how many
co^stitutions the old fathers have made concerning the seats of Bishops,
Metropolitans, and Patris arches; and that upon a very godly zeal, assigning
to every one his bounds and authority. Thus the Reader seeeth, how Calvin,
Beza, Bucer, Zanchius, and Hemingius, do hold the same opinion, which I now
defend.

The Reply.
The Bishops, Archbishops, Patriarchs, and such like, of which Beza, Calvin,
the Council of Nice, and other councels make mention, were not such as our
Bishops in England, Prelates of the Garter, high Commissioners, Justices of
Peace, and Quorum.

The Answer.
I answer, First, that the same superiority of one minister England never had
a Patriarch in it. Secondly, that Archbishops, See Hemingius in enchirid, Page
368 and. p. 372. and. p. 373. and infra. cap, 10. verba eius habentur. conc.
Antioch. can. 9
our bishops have this day in England. That is to say, a superior charge and
solicitude, of all Churches within their provinces. Which thing, (though it be
already proved sufficiently to all well affected Readers,) may yet be
further confirmed, with such a plain and manifest testimony of the ancient
Council of Antioch, (which was holden above a thousand and two hundred years
ago, as every child may behold the truth thereof. These are the words,
Persingulas regiones episcopos convenit nosse, Metropolitanum episcopum
sollicitudinem totius provincia gerere. Propter quod ad metropolim omnes
vndique, qui negotia videntur habere, concurrant. Vnde placuit eum and honor
praece^lere, and nihil amplius praeter eum caeteros episcopos agere, secundum
antiquam a patrio bus nostris regulam constitutam, nisi ea tantum quae ad suam
diocaesim pertinent possessionesque. It is meet that the Bishops of every
country do know, that the Metropolitan has the charge of the whole province.
For which respect, all the Bishops round about him, which have any business, must
have recourse unto yt city, (where ye Archbishop or metropolitan does reside.)
Wherefore we have decreed, according to the ancient Law of our Fathers, both
that he shall excel in honor, and also that all the other Bishops shall do
nothing at all without him, saving those things only, which appertain to
their own diocese and possessions. Thus decreeeth this ancient and famous
Council, out of which doctrine, I observe these worthy lessons. First, that an
Archbishop or Metropolitan had in old time, the charge of the English church,
have no new Ministry, nor other authority; then was had and practiced by the
holy Fathers in ancient time, even in the primitive church. Secondly, that
this authority of an Archbishop Caluins testimony is already known,
touching the authority of Archbishops in foreign countries, but I will allege
and set before the Readers eyes, his plain testimony for our Bishops here in
England. These are his own words, in his Epistle to Archbishop Cranmer.
Calvinus Cranmero Calvin. epist. 127.
Archiepiscopo Cantuariensi, S. D. sequitur; su^ma est in te authoritas, quam
non magis tibi honoris amplitudo conciliat, quam concepta pridem de tua
prudentia and integritate opinio. Calvin to Cranmere the Archbishop of
Canterbury, sends salutations. The supreme and highest authority rests
in your self, which your great honor did not more procure, then the opinion
lately conceived of your prudence and integrity. The same Calvin in his
Epistle to Doctor Grindall the Bishop of London has these words; Quod tamen
curam popularium nostrorum qui in praecipua episcopatus tui vrbe habitant,
suscipere dignatus es, non solu^m vt libertas illis daretur reginae beneficio
dei pure invocandi, sed vt pastorem fidum hinc accerserent, nisi hac de causa
me tibi obstrictum faterer, stullitiae and inhumaintatis essem damnandus. Yet
that you have vouchsafed to take care of our vulgar countrymen, which reside
in the chief city of your bishopric, not only that by the Queens favor
they might have freedom to serve God aright, but that also they might call
from hence a faithful pastor; if I should not confess my self bound unto you
herein, I might justly be condemned both of folly, and of nhumanitie.

Out of these words, I observe these corollaries. Frst, that heecalleth the
Bishop of Canterbury, Archbishop; London. For he says (in the chief city
of our Bishopric.) and that it may appear yet more evidently, that he
grants the charge of a whole province to one only Archbishop; I will
allege some part of that his Epistle, which he addressed to the Potent Calvin.
ad seren. regem Poloniae, epist. 190.
and mighty king of Polonia. Thus does he write; Que admodum si hodie
illustrissimo Poloniae regno vnus praeesset Archiepiscopus, non qui dominaretur
in reliquos, velius ab illis ereptumsibi arrogaret; sed qui ordinis causa in
synodis primum teneret locum, and sancta^ inter collegas suos and fratres
vnitatem foveret. Even as if this day one Archbishop should be the president
of the most honorable Kingdom of Polonia; not as one that should have
dominion over the rest, or should challenge to himself the right taken from
others; but as one who for order sake, should have the chief place in synodes,
and should preserve holy unity, among his sellowes and brethren. I he^e are
the words of this great learned man who was the greatest and chiefest patron
of their presbiterie, and the first man in the world that set it abroach, and
brought it into the Church. And yet does he grant plainly, as much as our
Bishops will require. For he grants, (as we see,) that one Archbishop may
have a superiority, over all other Bishops in the large kingdom of Polonia.
The exception that he makes, I willingly admit, and so will all our Bishops
likewise do. As who neither do nor ever did, once make or give the least
sign of any such superiority, over their fellows and loving brethren. No,
no, no such thing can truly be imputed to them. For with us every minister in
his Parish, and every Bishop in his Diocese; has the charge of their own
flocks and Parishes, to Preach the word, and to administer the Sacraments unto
them, in as ample and large manner, as Master Calvin here requires. Which
his words immediately Calvin. vbi supra. epist. 190.
afore-going do declare, being these. Vetus quidem ecclesia patriarchas
instituit, and singulis etiam provineijs quosdam attribuit primatus, vt hoc
concordiae vincu^o melius inter^e devincti manerent episcopi. The ancient
Church did const^^ate Patriarchs, and assigned for every province one prim^^e;
that by this bond of concord, the Bishops might be more firmly united among
themselves. Like as if one Archbishop should be the chiefetaine, of the whole
Kingdom of Polonia; and so forth as is already said. Where we see, or may
see, if we will; that Master Calvin acknowledges the same superiority, both
in the ancient times of the Church, and more lately in the Archbishop of
Polonia, which is this day given and allotted to the Archbishop of
Canterbury, over the other Bishops and Ministers in England. Now, for answer
to the other part of the objection, touching high Commissioners, Justices of
Peace and Quorum, I have referued the next Chapter.

CHAP. VI. Of civil offices, in Ecclesiastical persons.
THe authority in civil matters committed to the ministers of the Church, is
not made a thing intrinsically incide^t to the Civil offi^^s; are not in
trinsecally incident to the ministry. Vide infra, cap. 11. ex. Musculo, prope
finem cap. and nota valde.
ministry, or as a part thereof, but it is committed to them by the Prince,
(whom his subjects are not to limit what persons he shall use in counsel, or
to whom he shall commit the execution of his laws,) and it is added to their
ministry, as profitable and necessary for the present state and good of the
Church. Which good to be procured by that means, rather then by any other
employment besides; it may appear both by experience, and practice. By
experience, for that we see those Kingdoms, Princes, and people, most blessed
of God, where learned and godly Bishops have been received into the Princes
Counsel. By practice, because I have both heard and read, that master Calvin
and master Beza were admitted to be Counselors of the seat at Geneua, being
thought sit men for that place. Who doubtless would never have yielded
thereunto, if they had thought it a thing either unlawful in it self, or
incompatible to their function. No, no, it is neither ungodly, nor yet
unseemly, for a Minister to come from the Pulpit, to the correction of vice,
sin, and wickedness. But contrariwise, it is so godly, so comely, and so
necessary: that it ever has been usual, both in the Law of nature, in the
Law of Moses, and in the Law of grace: for First, in the law of nature,
Melchisedech was both King and Priest. So reports holy Moses in his book
Genesis, and Saint Paul to the Hebrews. And Saint Hierome In lege natura. Genesis
14. Hebr. 7. Hier. in trad. Hebr. in Genes. tom. 4. Fol 95.
tells us, that all the eldest sons of the holy Patriarchs, were both
Kings and Priests. Aiunt hunc esse Sem filium Noe, and supputantes annos vitae
ipsius, ostendunt eum ad Isaac vsque vixisse, omnesque primogenitos Noe, donec
sacerdotio fungeretur Aaron, fuisse pontifices.

The Hebrews (says Saint Hierome,) affirm this (Melchisadech) to be Sem the
son of Noah, and reckoning the years of his life, they show us that he
lived until Isaac: and that all the first begotten of Noah, until Aarons
Priesthood began, were Bishops. Yea, whosoever will deny, that Noah, Abraham,
Isaac, Jacob, and others, did rule over those who were committed to their
charge, as well in ecclesiastical In lege Mosis.
as civil causes, they may truly be said to know nothing in the scriptures.

Secondly, in the Law of Moses, Moses himself Moses Exodus 18. 13. Exodus 32.
Verse. 27. Leuit. 8. Exodus 40. 1. Sam. 2. Verse. 11. and. Cap. 4 18. 1. Sam. 8.
Act. 13. 21. 2. Paral. 19. Verse. 10.
judged the people from morning unto even. He put the Malefactors to death,
who had committed Idolatry. He consecrated Aaron and his sons, and burnt
sweet incense on the golden Altar.

Heli was both the high Priest, and judge of the people, for the space of 40
years together.

Samuel likewise was both a Priest and judge over the people, for the space of
30. years together. The good king Iosaphat made the Priests judges, both in
ecclesiastical and civil causes. And after the captivity of the Jews, the
Machabees, were rulers, as well in civil as in ecclesiastical causes. Read the
books of the Machabees, Josephus, and Egesippus. and this truth will soon
appear. But what need many words, in a case so clear and evident? God
himself made a general law, yt the priests and the civil magistrate should
iontly determine, judge and decide, all controversies. These are the express
words of the Law; if there rise a matter too Deuteronomy. 17. v. 8. 9.
hard for thee in judgment, between boold and blood, between plea and plea,
between plague and plague, in the matters of controversy within thy gates:
then shall thou arise, and go unto the place, which the Lord thy God shall
choose. And thou shall come to the Priests of the Levites, and to the judge
that shall be in those days, and ask, and they shall show thee the sentence
of judgment. These words are so plain, as all interpretation may be thought
needless.

Thirdly, in the Gospel, and new Testament, we In lege gratiae.
have a plurality of examples in this behalf. S. Paul, when he made his abode
at Corinthus, with Aquila, and Prescilla, whom Claudius the Emperor had driven
from Rome: he Acts 18. v. 2. 3.
wrought with his hands, being of the same craft with them, and made tents as
they did.

S. Augustine, thought it a thing so lawful, for a Bishop to be judge in
causes Ecclesiastical; that I wonder, how any man hearing or reading his own
words, can any longer stand in doubt thereof. Thus does he write: Quis August.
de opere mon. cap. 29. tom. 1. Cor. 9. v. 7.
plantat vineam, and de fructu eius non edit? Quis pascit gregem, and de lacte
gregis non percipit? Tamen Dominum Iesum, in cuius nomine securus haec dico,
testem invoco super animam meam, quoniam quantum attinet ad meum co^modum multo
mallem per singulos dies certis horis, quantum in been moderatis monasterijs
constitutum est aliquid manibus operari, and caeteras horas babere ad legendu^
and orandum aut aliquid de divinis litteris agendum liberas; quam
tumultuosissimas perplexitates causar u^alienarum patide negotijs secularibus,
vel iudicando dirimendis, vel interveniendo praecidendis; quibus nos molestijs
idem affixit Apostolus, non vtique suo, sed eius qui in eo loqu^batur arbitrio,
quam tamen ipsum perpessum fuisse non legimus. Aliter. n. se habebat
apostolatus eius discursus. Sequitur: quem tamen laborem non sine consolatione
domini suscipimus prospe vitae aeternae, vt fructum seramus cum tolerantia,
Servi n sumus cius Ecclesiae, and maxim infirmioribus membris, quanta libet in
eodem corpore membra sumus. Omitto alias innumerabiles ecclesiasticas curas,
quat for tasse nemo credit, nisi qui expertus est. Non ergo alligamui onera
gravia, and humeris vestris imponimus, quae nos digito non attingimus:
quandoquidem si officil nostri sarva ratione possemus, videt ille qui probat
corda nostra, mallemus haee agere, quae vt agatis hortamur, quam ea quae non
agere cogimur.

Who planteth a vineyard, and eats not of the fruit thereof? who seedeth a
flock, and receives not of the milk of the flock? Yet I call the Lord Jesus
to witness upon my soul, in whose name I boldly utter these words: that
touching mine own commodity, I had much rather every day to work some thing
with mine hands, as it is appointed in well governed Monasteries, and to have
the hours free, to read, and to pray, and to do some exercise in the holy
Scriptures: then to suffer the tumultuous perplexities of other men's causes
touching secular affairs, either in determining the^ by judging, or in cutting
the^ off by entreating: to which molestations the Apostle has tied us, not by
his own judgment, but by his judgment who spoke in him; which troubles for all
that himself did not undergo, because his course apostolical had an other
respect. Which labor notwithstanding we endure with consolation in the Lord,
for the hope of eternal life, that we may bring forth fruit with patience, for
we are servants of the Church, and especially to the weaker members, how mean
members so ever we are in the same body. I let pass innumerable other
Ecclesiastical cares, which perhaps none will believe, but he that has tried
the same. We therefore do not bind grievous burdens together, and impose them
on your shoulders, which we do not touch with our finger: seeing we had rather
do those things which we exhort you to do, then which we our selves are
compelled to do; if we could so do with the discharge of our duty, as
knows God the searcher of our hearts. Thus discourses this holy, ancient,
and most learned Father. Out of whose doctrine, I observe many golden, worthy,
and very necessary documents, for the instruction of all indifferent Readers.
First, Austin did undergo Peace, or of Quorum: and yet cannot any learned
writer be named, for the space of a thousand and two hundred years, who
reputed not S. Austin for a very holy man, and a most grave and learned writer.
Let all such persons therefore consider better of the matter, and either
wilfully condemn that holy Father, and mighty pillar of Christ's Church; or
else let them henceforth be more sparing of such savage loquacitie, and approve
the Christian and laudable offices of Justice of Peace and Quorum, in the
reverend Fathers, the Lord Bishops of the English Church. For Saint Anstin was
both a Lord bishop, and as it were a Justice of Peace, as is apparent by that
which is already said, since the beginning of this discourse.

The same Saint Augustine in the presence of Religian^ and Martinianus, his
fellow bishops, and Saturninus, Leporius, Barnabas, Fortunatianus, Ructicus,
Lazarus, and Eradius Augustine (...) Epist. 110.
Priests, declaring to the people what pains he had taken many years for
them, being greatly occupied, molested, and troubled in their secular affairs,
earnestly required of them for Christ's sake, that now in his old age they
would be content, that he might commit some part of his secular care, unto
one Eradius, a young man, but a virtuous Priest? to which request when the
people had yielded, Saint Austin added these words; Ergo fratres, quicquid est
quod ad me perferebatur, adillu^ perferatur, vbi necessariu^ babuerit,
consilium meum non negabo, auxilium absit, vt subtraham. Therefore brethren,
whatsoever was wont to be brought to my hearing, let it hence-foorth come to
him and when he shall have need, I will not deny my counsel God forbid, I
should with-drawe my help. By which words of this Holy father, it is most
apparent to every child, that he was very much encombred with secular business,
both in the foore-noone and in the afternoon; and yet for all that, he durst
not wholly withdraw himself: no not with the consent of the people: least in so
doing he should of fend God. And therefore he said; Absit, God forbid. Let the
word (absit) be well remembered.

Saint Epiphanus the Bishop of Salamina, a City of Cyprus, behaved himself so
worthily and Christianly, while he was occupied in politic and civil
affairs, that is short time he became famous among many Nations.

Hermias Sozomenus in his Ecclesiastical History, writes Sezom lib. 6.
of the said Father in these words: Nam cum in multit^dine cap. 32. Hist.
eccles.
hominum, and in vrbe ampla, eaque maritima, sacerdot^ fungeretur, ob
praestantiam virtutis, qua etiam negotijs civili^^ occupatus vsus est, bre^i
cum civibus, tum peregrinis cuius^^^ nationis notus factus est; illis quidem,
vt qui eum coram vidissent, eiusque piae vitae fecissent periculum: his autem,
vt qui i^^^ idem de eo narramibus fidem adiunxissent.

For when he executed his priestly function in a most populous and large
city, which was an haven town near unto the Sea; in a short space he was
famous among all Nations, for his great virtues which he made use of, while he
was busied with secular affairs. To the Citizens he became famous, because
they knew him familiarly, and had made good trial of his holy life. To the
Strangers, in that they believed the constant report of the Citizens. Lo, this
ancient writer, holy Father, and learned Doctor, (who lived above one thousand
two hundred years ago,) was either a Justice of Peace, when he was the Bishop
of Cyprus; or else had some other civil office, equivalent to the same.

Dorotheus a virtuous and learned Priest of Antioch did serve the Emperor in
civil affairs. Eusebins Caesariensis writes of this ancient Priest (who
lived more then one thousand three hundred years ago,) in these words;
Dorotheum dignitate sacerdotali tum Autiochiae donatum, Eusebius. lib. 7. cap. 26.
virum sane disertum cognovimus. Hic in sacris literis exquisite eruditus fuit;
linguae hebraicae diligenter navavit operam, adeo vt scripturas hebraicas
scienter posset intelligere. Erat honestis ac liberalibus parentibus prognatus,
humanioris literaturae neutiquam expers; eunuchus reveranatus, vti illum
imperator propter incredibilem eius naturam in suam familiam a sciverit and
praefectura purpura tingendae, quae apud Tyrum est, honorifice donarit.

We know Dorotheus a Priest of Antioch, an eloquent man in deed. He was very
skillful in the holy Scriptures; he had profited so in the Hebrew tongue, that
he could perfectly understand the Scriptures in Hebrew, he was descended of
honest and liberal parents, not unseen in humane literature. He was indeed
an Ennuch borne, so that the Emperor ravished with his excellent nature,
received him into his Court, and gave him an honorable charge to ouersee his
house, where his purple was dyed at Tyrus.

Nicephorus Callistus in his Ecclesiastical History, tells us of one
Philaeas, a famous Bishope and blessed Nicephor. lib. 7. cap. 9.
Martyr; who (as he reports,) got great credit for his dexterity in
deciding civil causes committed to his charge. But to let others pass, let us
hear, what a famous late writer says: who favored the presbyteriall
Discipline, so far forth, as either by learning or safe conscience he could
agree thereunto. These are his express words: Zanchius de religione, Page
176. Uide supra cap 4 ex Mus^ulo, and notato. Et infra cap. 11. ex eodem. and
nota valde resp ad. 2. obuct.
Interim non diffitemur episcopos, qui simul etiam principes sunt praeter
authoritatem ecclesiasticam, sua etiam hebere iura politica seculare sque
potestates, quemadmodum and reliqui habent principes: ius ^^perands secularia;
ius gladij; nonnullos ius eligendi confirmandique reges and imperatores,
aliaque politicae constituends and administrandi, subditosque sibi populos ad
obedientiam sibi praestandam cogendi. Ac proinde jatemur politicis horum
mandatis, quae sine transgressione legis divinae servari possunt, a subditis
obtemperandum esse non solum propter timorem, sed etiam propter conscientiam.

Nevertheless, we do not deny, that Bishops which are also Princes, may
besides their authority ecclesiastical, have also political right and
secular power, like as other Princes have: right to command secular matters;
authority to use the sword; authority to choose and confirm Kings and
Emperors, and to constitute and administrate, other civil affairs, as also
to compel their subjects to yield obedience to them in that behalf. And
therefore we grant, that their subjects must obey their civil commandes,
which may be kept without offense of Gods law: and that not only for fear,
but also for conscience sake.

The same Zanchius in an other place has these words: Quis autem illis omnino
obediendum esse, quo iure, Zanch. vbi supra, Page 274.
quaque iniuria principes suerint creats, ex testimonijs a me allao us non
videat aperte demonstrari? cur. n. qui subdits sunt Moguntino, Colontensi,
Trevirensi, principibus imperij simul and archiepiscopis, in rebus cum pietate
christiana non pugnantibus non obtemperent? seditiosorum certe fuerit, non
obtemperare. Quodsi istis, cur non etiam Romano ijsdem in rebus and candem ob
causam, qui sub eius vivunt imperio? eadem. n. horum omnium est ratio.

And who cannot see it evidently proved, by the examples which I have alleged,
that they must be obeyed undoubtedly, whether they be by right, or no right
created Princes. For why shall not subjects obey in things not against
Christian piety, the Princes of the Empire being also Archbishops, of
Moguntia, Colen, and Trevers? it is doubtless the properietie of sedicious
persons, not to yield obedience unto them. And if these must be obeyed, why
not also the Bishop of Rome, in the same matters and for the same cause, of
those that live within his Empire? for there is the like reason of them all.
Thus writes the famous and great learned Doctor Zanchius. Out of whose
resolution, I observe these points, for the good of the gentle Reader.

First, that Ecclesiastical and Civil jurisdiction are

Secondly, that Bishops which are also Princes, may

Thirdly, that the people within their dominions

Fourthly, that they must obey not only for fear, but

Fifthly, that whosoever shall disobey such Bishops professor of Christ's
Gospel) does flatly confound, and even strike dead, pronouncing a sharp vae
vobis to all such, as shall obstinately refuse to obey our Bishops and
Arch-byshops here in England. For whatsoever can be objected against our
Bishops, why we shall not obey them: the same may be alleged against those
Bishops, of which Zanchius speaks in this place. Yea our Bishops, are as
lawfully created Barons, and do this day as lawfully enjoy their temporal
Baronries (for ought I know,) by the free donation of the Kings of this Realm
of famous memory, as do the Bishops of Germany. I therefore conclude, from a
good foundation surely laid, that Bishops and Archbishops, as well concerning
their names and titles, as their authority, jurisdiction, and superiority
over other Ministers, are both lawful, necessary and agreeable to the
practice of the Catholic Church in all Ages: and consequently, that none will
or can deny the same, but such as are either wholly ignorant, in the ancient
Councels, holy Fathers, and ecclesiastical histories: Calvin in harmon.
evangel. page 263.
or else maliciously bent to speak against their own knowledge, and wittingly
and willingly to oppose them selves against the known truth. Yea, Master
Calvin grants freely, that he which is Lord of a Village or City, may
exercise the office of teaching.

CHAP. VII. Of the Churches authority, in things indifferent.
The first aphorism, of things de facto altered in the Church.
MAny things being in their own nature indifferent, have been changed in the
Church by her authority, as the circumstances of times, places, and persons
did require. First, our Lord Jesus did celebrate the holy Communion and
memorial Mat. 26. V. 20. Mar. 14 v. 23. Luc. 22 v. 19. I. cor. II 23. exodus
12. 18. numb. 28. 17. luc. 22. 14 mar. 14. 18. mat. 26 v. 20 John. 13. v. 14.
15.
of his sacred passion, in the evening after Supper. Yet the Churches custom
this day is and ever was, to celebrate the same in the morning before Dinner.
Secondly, Christ did celebrate the same, using unleavened bread therein, but
the reformed Churches do this day use leauened bread without offense in so
doing. Thirdly, Christ's Apostles received the blessed Eucharist fitting: but
the custom of the Church has ever been, to receive the same kneeling. And
they that would seem to have most spiced consciences, will not stick to
receive it standing or walking. Fourthly, Christ washed his Apostles feet,
willing them to follow his example, and to wash one another feet. Fifthly,
the Apostles made a solemn Decree, Act. 15. v. 29.
affirming it to proceed from the holy Ghost, to abstain from blood, and that
which is strangled. And yet the church many years ago, have wholly altered
that holy ordinance and Apostolical constitution. Sixthly, Saint Paul, after
he had willed the Corinthyans, and us in them, to be followers of him, even as
he was of Christ, tells them and us plainly, that every man praying or
Prophesing having any thing on his head, dishonors his head. And yet at this
day, Vide infra, Cap. 14. membro. 7.
smalaccount is made thereof. This point will be made more plain, when I come
to speak of the oath Ex officio.

The second Aphorism, of things not expressed in the Scriptures, and yet
decreed by the Church to be observed and kept.
IN the church of the Hebrews, we read of many approved constitutions, for
which there was no warrant in the written word. First, King Solomon appointed a
solemn festiuitie, for the dedication of the Temple, which continued for 1.
Reg. 8. 2. par. 7.
the space of seven whole days. Secondly, Queen Hester and Mordicai appointed
the Jews to keep a solemn feast, for the remembrance of their happy
deliverance from Hamans cruelty. Thirdly, the Machabees, Judas and his
brethren, ordained that the dedication of the Altar should be kept from year
to year, by the space of Hest. cap. 3. and cap. 9. 1. match. 4. V. ^9.
eight days with mirth and gladness. Fourthly, in the days of Nehemiah the
Captain, and of Ezra the Priest, the Jews were appointed to keep the
dedication of the wall at Jerusalem, with thanksgiving, and with songs,
Cymbals, Violes, and Harpes. Concerning which dedication instituted Ez. 616.
Ne. he. 12. v. 27.
by Judas Machabaeus, Christ himself honored it with his presence, and master
Calvin affords it this explication. Ac si diceres, innovationes; quia templum
quod pollutum fuerat, Joan. 10. v. 22 Calvin. in 10 Johan.
de integro consecratum fuit auspicijs Iudae Machabaei; ac tunc institutum fuit
vt quotannis festus ac celebris esset dedicationis novae dies, vt dei gratiam
quae finem Antiochi tyrannidi imposuerat, memoria repeterent. Tunc autem in
templo Christus promo^e apparuit, vt in frequenti hominum conventu vberior
esset praedicationis suae fructus* As if thou should say, innouatio^s;
because the Temple which had been polluted, was consecrated a fresh by Judas
Machabaeus his authority, and then was it ordained, that there should be
yearly a feast and a solemn day of the new dedicatio^ that they might
remember Gods grace and mercy, which had made an end of Antiochus his tyranny.
At which time, Christ was present after his manner in the Temple, that in so
great a concurse of people, his Preaching might have the better effect. Yea,
master Calvin grants that the Jews instituted their Sanhe^rim after Calvin
sup. 18 mat.
their return from Captivity.

This liberty the Church has this day, as may appear by the freedom in
altering the Saboth-day. For, as I have In my survey
proved at large, by the testimony not only of the ancient Fathers, but also
of the best approved late writers, Philippus Melanction, Erasmus Roterodamus,
Johannes Caluinus, Petrus Vide infra, cap. 10. ex Bucero.
Martyr, Pellicanus, Bullingerus, and Vrsinus, in my book of Survey; though it
be constant and perpetual, to have one day in the week assigned for divine
service, that being the moral part of the Sabbath and unalterable; yet,
whether this or that day ought to be appointed for that purpose, it is a thing
that respects the time, and may be changed by the church. If any shall hold the
contrary doctrine, he must perforce fall into flat iudaisme, and tie himself
to the obserua^ce of days, months and years, against the Apostolic doctrine
For to be tied of necessity to the time, is a flat Jewish Gal. 4. v. 10.
superstition, and intrinsecally ceremonial; as all the aforenamed learned men:
do and will testify with me. yet I neither wish, nor deem it a thing
convenient, to change the Lords day or Saboath.

The third aphorism of the rules which the Church must observe, in all her
constitutions, ordinances, and decrees.
THe first rule, which the Church must observe in her laws, decrees, and
constitutions, is this; viz. That she prohibit nothing which God commands,
neither command Regula.
any thing, which God prohibiteth. Ye shall Prima.
put nothing to the word which I command Deuteronomy. 4 2.
you, neither shall ye take ought therefrom. Take heed therefore, Deuteronomy. 5. 32.
that ye do as the Lord your God has commanded you: turn not aside to the
right hand, nor to the left. Let not this book of the law depart out of thy
mouth, but meditate therein day and night, that thou may observe and Ios. 1.
8.
do according to all that is written therein.

The second rule is this; that the decrees and constitutions of the Church, be
not made a part of Gods worship, Regula. Secunda. Mat. 15. 9. Coloss. 2. V. 23.
nor holden as necessary unto salvation. For as our Savior says, they worship
him in vain, who teach for Doctrines, the precepts of men. And therefore does
the Apostle condemn Ethelothresceian all voluntary worship devised by man.

The third rule is this; that the decrees and constitutions Regulatertia.
of the Church, be only made of things indifferent, and for one of these three
ends; viz. either for edification, or for decency and comeliness, or for
order sake, and peaceable government of the Church. Of these ends speaks the
Apostle, where he wills all things to be done unto edifying, and to be done
decently, and orderly. These three Aphorisms 1. Cor. 14. v. 26. 40.
seriously observed, and duly pondered, all Ceremonies, Ordinances, Decrees,
and Constitutions of our English Church, will find ready and sufficient
approbation.

The Demonstration.
The corollarie and illation deduced out of the precedent Aphorisms may be
made clear and evident, by three invincible and irrefragable reasons. Whereof
the first is taken, from the authority of the holy Scriptures; the second,
from the practice of the Catholic Church. The third, from the uniform
consent of best approved late Writers.

The 1. reason drawn from the holy Scriptures.
HOly Writ teaches us, that the Church De facto has Vide infra, cap 14
membro, 2. in resp. ad 2 object. ex Zuinglio.
altered many things, which Christ himself did both institute, and put in
practice. That the Church ordained and Decreed many things, whereof the
Scripture makes no mention. And that the Church may make decrees, Laws,
ordinances, and constitutions, in all things Adiaphorois which are of their own
nature indifferent; so the same tend to edification, comeliness, or peaceable
government of the Church. This reason is proved, throughout, all the Vide
infra, ca. 9. ex Calvino and Beza
precedent Aphorisms. And it will be more plain, when I come to speak of the
election of ministers.

The 2. reason, drawn from the practice of the ancient Church.
IF the gentle Reader shall call to mind, what I have in this discourse
already set down, out of the Decrees of Supra, cap. 4: 5. and. 6.
the ancient and holy Councels; out of the holy Fathers, and best approved
late Writers; he cannot rest doubtful, or stagger any longer in this behalf.
Saint Austen writes so gravely and so copiously of this matter, in many of his
books extant in the world; as he is well able to satisfy every one, that
will be persuaded with reason. In his Epistle to Ianuarius, (to omit all other
his manifold testimonies,) he tells us, that yt Catholic Church by her
freedom and authority, has instituted certain solemn feasts, of the
passion, resurrection, ascension of Christ, Aug. in epist. ad Ianuar. epist.
118. vide Calu. lib. 4. instit. cap. 10.. 19.
and descending of the holy Ghost, to be yearly observed throughout the
Christian world. He adds these most golden words; Nec disciplina vlla est in
his melior graui prudentique christiano, quam vt eo modo agat quo agere viderit
ecclosia^ ad quamcunque forte devenerit. Quod. n. neque contra fidem, neque
contra bonos mores iniungitur, indifferenter est habendu^ et pro eorum inter
quos vivitur societate servandum est.

Neither can there be any better discipline in these matters for a grave and
discrete christan, then to do so as he shall see that Church do, to which
he has occasion to come. For, that which is neither against faith, nor
against good manners, may be indifferently observed for their society, amongst
whom we do converse. In the same Epistle the same holy Father tells us Saint
Ambrose his judgment, August vbisupra.
concerning the variety of fasting. These are his words; Cum Roman venio,
ieiuno sabbato, cum hic sum, non ieiuno: sic etiam tu, ad quam sort ecclesiam
veneris, eius morem serva, si cuiquam non vis esse scandalo, nec quenqua^ tibi.
When I Vide supra cap. 5.. 2. ex zanchio, and nota valde.
come to Rome (says Saint Ambrose,) I fast on Satterday; when I am here at
Millan, I do not fast. Even so must you do, when you come to any other
Church, you must do after the manner of that Church, if you will neither
scandalize others, nor have others to scandalize you. Here is a most golden
rule, how to behave our selves in things indifferent. viz, to conform our
selves to the time, place, and persons, when, where, and with whom we do
converse. If our brethren would seriously ponder, and duly weigh this golden
advise of this holy Father, they would abandon all contention doubtless, about
the sign of the Cross, the Surplesse, and such like indifferent things; and
for that duty which they owe unto the magistrate, whom they are bound to obey
in all lawful things, even for conscience sake; they would conform themselves
to his laws and Romans 13.
their brethren, and not to scandalize the whole Church as they do.

To this grave testimony of Saint Austen and Saint Ambrose, it shall suffice
for the second reason, to add this memorable observation, viz. that our
brethren, who labor so busily to enforce us violently, to receive their new
discipline; are not able to make demonstration to us, either out of the
Scriptures, or general Councels, or the holy fathers, Vide Calvin. and nota
val d. lib. 4. instit cap 2.. 11.
or ecclesiastical histories; that any Church in the Christian world, from two
hundred years before the famous Council of Nice, until master Caluins days
that is, for the space of a thousand four hundred years together to say
nothing of former times, had either the same new 2. Tim. 1. Verse. 6. vide
Calvin. lib. 4. instit. cap. 3.. 16.
discipline in practice, or any pastors made after their manner. Which if it
cannot be done, they will (I doubt not) after mature delibration had therein,
confess willingly and truly at least in their hearts; that in this Church of
England, there is this day a lawful ministry, consisting of lawful
Ministers and Bishops, according to the practice of the Church in all ages.

The third reason, drawn from the uniform consent of best approved late
writers.
Master Calvin has a very large and learned discourse Calu. libr. 4. instit.
cap. 10. 5. 30. vide. Zanchiu^ in compend. ipsissima. n. habet verba. page 641.
of this question, some part whereof shall suffice at this present. These are
his words. Quia autem in externa disciplina and ceremonijs, non valuit
sigillatim praescribere quid sequi debeamus, quod illud pendere a temporum
condition provideret, ne que iudicaret vnam seculis omnibus formam convenire,
confugere hic oportet ad generales quas dedit regulas, vt ad ea^ exigantur
quaecunque ad ordinem and decorum praecipi necessitas ecclefiae postulabit,
Postremo quia ideo Nihil expressu^ trae^ didit, quianec ad salutem haec
necessaria sunt, en prc moribus vniuscuiusque gentis ac seculi vary
accommodari debent ad ecclesiae aedificationem, provt ecclesiae vtilit as
requiret, tam vsitatas mutare and abrogare, quam novas instituere conveniet,
Fateor equidem, non temere, nec subinae, nec levibus de causis, ad novationem
esse decurrendum. Sed quid ^oceat vel aedificet, charit as optime iudicabit,
quam si moderatrice^ esse patiemur, salva erunt omnia.

But because in external discipline and ceremonies, he would not particularly
prescribe what we ought to follow, Notato cap. 10. ex Bucero Zuinglie,
Hemingio, nota valde.
because he foresaw that this depended upon the state and condition of the
time, and did not deem one manner to be agreeable to all ages; here we must
have recourse to his general rules given us, and make trial by them of what
things soever, the necessrie of the Church shall require for order and
comeliness. Lastly, because he therefore delivered nothing expressly, for
that they are not necessary to salvation, but must be applied diversely to the
benefit of the Church, as the manners of every nation do require, it shall
therefore be convenient, as well to change and abolish the old ceremonies, as
to institute new, as the good of the Church shall require. I confess freely
that we must not use innovation, neither rashly, nor often, nor upon light
occasions. But what shall be hurtful or profitable, charity shall best
discern; which if we shall suffer to rule us, every thing shall be well.

The same author in an other place, has these words; Calvin. in. 1. cor. 11.
v. 2.
Ego autem non nego, quin aliquae fuerint apostolorum traditiones non scriptae;
sednon concedo fuisse doctrinae parts, nec de rebus ad salutem necessarijs.
Quidigitur? quae pertinerent ad ordinem Vide infra, cap. 10. per totum. and cap
14. ex Hieron. notetur loeus in membro. 4.
and poluiam. Scimus. n. vnicuique ecclesiae liberum esse, politiae formam
instituere sibi aptam and vtilem quae dominus nihil certipraescripserit.

But I deny not, that the Apostles delivered some traditions, which are not
written. Yet I do not grant, that they were either parts of doctrine, or
necessary to salvation What were they then? doubtless, such as pertained to
policy and order For we know, that every Church has her fredome and
liberty, to institute and ordain such a kind of policy (and discipline) as
shall be thought meet and profitable for the same; because our Lord prescribed
no certain rule therein.

The same author in an other place, has these words; Altos Calvin in ar^ gum
ad gal.
omnes ritus illic non vsitatos, no^ tantum restuebant sed andacter etiam
damnabant. Talis morosit as deterrima est pestis, quum morem ecclesiae vnius
volumus provnivsrsali lege valere.

They did not only refuse all other ceremonies not used Vide infr^ cap. 9. and
nota vaide,
in that place, but did also malepertly condemn them. Such Morositie is a most
noisome plague; when we will make the manner and discipline of one only
Church, to be a general rule for all. Thus writes this learned Doctor. Out of
whose words I may truly gather so much, as will evidently make good the
question I have in hand.

For First, he tells us plainly, that the holy Apostle did

Secondly, that he lest that freedom and liberty to forsooth; he foresaw in
his wisdom, that such things depended upon the condition of times: and that
one manner of discipline, was not convenient to all places and persons.
Thirdly, that every Church may either change her old Augustine appointed
before him, as I have proved already. Fifthly, that the Church has received
Jesus has prescribed no settled law therein, but has left all indifferent
things to the liberty of his Church. Seventhly, Zanchius teaches the self
same doctrine, even in Zanch. vbi supra.
the same words.

Petrus Martyr, after he has distributed traditions into three orders, showing
one kind to be expressed in the Scriptures: an other plain repugnant to the
same; the third neither contrary to the word of GOD, neither necessarily
affixed unto it: adds these express words: Martyr in 1. Cor. 1. 10.


Sunt nonnullae traditiones, quas neutras appellare libuit, quod verbo deinec
adversentur, nec illinecessario cohaereant, inquibus mos ecclesiae gerendus
est, tribus interposit is cautionibus. Primum videndum est, ne obtrudantur,
quasidei cultus and deculiar is quaedam sanctimonia; quandcquidem potius
recipiendae sunt adordinum conservandum, and civilem ecclesiae commoditatem,
Vide infra, cap. 14. membr 2. and 3. per totum.
atque sacrarum actionum decorum: alioquin in sacris literis luculenter habemus
descripta, quaead sanctitatem and cullum dei co^ducunt Praeterea cavere
oportet, ne quaesic tradu^tur, it a putemus necessaria, vt pro tempore amoveri
non possint, Servetur ecclesiae suum ius de his medijs, vt quoadilla statuat,
quicquid viderit magis adificationem credentium promovere. Consideretur demum,
saepius nimijs traditionibus and ceremonijs in immensum auct is populum Christi
sic gravari, vt tantum non obruatur.

There be some traditions, which may be termed uentrall or indifferent, for
that they neither are against Gods word, neither do they necessarily cohere
with it. In which ceremonies, the Churches constitution must be obeyed, if
three cautions do concur. First, that they be

M. Beza, has these words: Quoniam multitudo plerumque and impirita est, and
intractabilis, and mayor pars saepe meliorem Beza, in conses. cap. 5. Art. 35.
vincit, ne in democratia quidem leguime constituta omnia permissa sunt
^ffraeni vulgo; sed constituti sunt ex populi consensu certi magistratus, qui
plebi prae^ant, and inconditam multitudinem regant. Quod sihaec prudentia in
negotij^ humanis requiritur, multo sane magis opus est certa moderatione in ijs
rebus, in quibus homines prorsus caecutiunt, neque causa est, cur quisquam sani
iudi^ij homo clamitet, nullum hic esse prudentiae locum, nisi hanc prudentiam
de qua loquor, ostendat cum deiverbo pugnare, quod sane non arbitror. Neque. n.
simpliciter spectandum quid sit ab Apostolis factum in politia ecclesiastica,
quum diversissimae sint circumstantiae, ac proinde absque Cacozelia non possint
omnia omnibus locis ac temporibus ad vnam cande^que formam revocari: sed potius
spectandus est eorum finis and scopus invariabilis, and ea deligenda forma ac
ratio rerum agendarum, quae recte eo aeducat.

Because the multitude is for the most part ignorant and intractable, and the
greater part does often times prevail against the better; all things are not
even in a popular state lawfully appointed, committed to the unbridled
multitude, but certain Magistrates are appointed by the peoples consent, to
guide, rule, and govern them. If this wisdom be required in wordly affairs,
much more is a moderation to be had in those matters: in which men are
altogether blinded. Neither is there any cause, why any man of sound judgment
shall exclaim, that in such matters, there is no place for policy; except
he can show this policy whereof I speak, to be repugnant to the word of
GOD, which I am persuaded he can never do. For we must not simply look, what
the Apostles did in ecclesiastical policy and Church-gouernment, seeing
there is so great variety of circumstances, that a man cannot without
preposterous zeal, reduce all things in all places and times to one Vide
Bezam, cap. 5. Art. 17.
and the same form in doing things, which leads the right way to the same.
Thus writes Master Beza, who has many like periods to the like effect, which
I omit in regard of brevitie.

Out of these words, I note first, that the Church is not Adiaphorois Secondly,
The authority of the Church is very great.
power to make any Laws, which are not repugnant to the word of God. Which
point I would have the Reader to ponder seriously, because it is very
emphaticall and of great moment. Thirdly, that all Churches cannot have

Hieronymus Zanchius is consonant to the other Doctors, while he writes in
this manner: De ritibus and ceremonijs in Zanch. de relig. Page 183.
ecclesia servandis, eadem pietas and eccle siarum aedificatio flagitat; ne
nimis acriter, quasi pro aris and focis, vt dici solet, sit aimicati^,
disceptetur, sed singulis ecclesijs l^beri relinquantur; quemadmodum ettam in
veteri ecclesia factum fuisse, apud Socratem and alios ecclesiasticos
scriptore^ legimus. Quibus ae rebus in genere, probamus atque amplectimur
vtramque epistolam Augustini ad Ianuarium. Haec. n. faciunt ad ecclesiae
aedificationem.

Touching Rites and Ceremonies to be observed in the Church, the same piety
and edifying of the Church requires, that we contend not too biterly, as if
it were for matters of great moment: but that every Church have her liberty
therein, as we read in Socrates and other ecclesiastical writers, that it was
the old custom of the Church. Of which things in general, we allow and
embrace both the Epistles which Austin wrote to Ianuarius. For these things
tend to the edification of the Church.

The same Zanchius in an other place, has these words: Zanch. de religi Page
169.
Interea tamen non improbamus patres, quodiuxta variam tum verbi dispensandi,
tum regendae ecclesiae rationem varios quoque ordines ministroru^
multiplicaverint; quando id eis liberum fuit, Vide eundem Zanchium in compend.
Page 641. and page 636.
sicut and nobi^, and quando constat, id ab illis fuisse factum honestis de
causis, ad ordinem ad decoru^, and ad aedificationem ecclesiae, pro eo tempore
pertinentibus.

In the mean while we blame not the Fathers, that for the diverse manner of
dispensing the word and governing the Church, they have also multiplied diverse
orders of Ministers; because they had liberty so to do, as our selves also
have: and because it is evident, that they did that upon honest causes, which
pertained at that time, to order comeliness, and edification of the Church.
Thus writes the most learned Doctor, Master Zanchius; who (if I be judge,)
was a man of as rare learning and profound judgment, as ever was any in the
Church. Out of whose words I of serve; First, that we should not move
contention in the Church, for any rites and Ceremonies in the same. Secondly,
that every Church has her liberty therein, Zanchius approves S. Austins rule
herein, Calvin did before him. Fifthly, that it was lawful for

The Corollarie of the Chapter.
FIrst, the church may change Christ's own practice, Hester and Mordecai,
Calvin. in 18. mat. notetur.
the festivitie of their deliverance: Ezra and Nehemias, the dedication of the
wall at Jerusalem: Judas and his brethren, the dedication of the Altar for
eight days. Thirdly, the Jews instituted their Sanhedrim, after their
Babylon. Fourthly, the S. Austins judgment may make any Laws, which are
neither against faith nor good manners. Fifthly, Calvin,) has authority left
her in things indifferent, either to make new laws, or to cassiere and
change the old; so often as the necessity of the church does so require.
Sixthly, the church received many unwritten Calvin. in 1. cor. 11.
Church. Seventhly, the church, says Zanchius, has authority to constitute
more orders of Ministers, when it is says M. Beza, telling us plainly, that we
must not so much respect what the Apostles did, as what the peace and good of
the church requires. Much other like matter, the same Beza, together with
Calvin, Martyr, and Zanchius, have deliuerd unto us: as may appear by this
present Chapter. I therefore conclude, that the authority, which this our our
English church does this day challenge unto her, in her ri^es, ceremonies,
ordinances, laws, and constitutions, is grounded upon the holy Scriptures,
the practice of the Catholic Church, and the best approved late writers. Al
objections, that possibly can be made against the laws and constitutions of
our English Church, may be answered with all facility, by that which is
plainly delivered in this Uide infra, cap 9.
present Chapter, whosoever shall mark it well, will (I think,) be of mine
opinion, see the ninth Chapter, and mark it.

CHAP. VIII. Of things indifferent in particular.
The first Aphorism, of Chruch-holy days.
THe vulgar people for a great part, what through indiscreet zeal in some, and
tootoo rash preaching (Ne quid gramu^ d^^a) in othersome, are so persuaded, or
rather bewitched and blinded; that they Uide infra, cap. 14. membr. 7.
think they serve God better, (alas for pity) if they be quaffing in the
Alehouse, or sleeping in their chambers, or gazing in the streets; then do
their honest neighbors, in going to the church on holy days, there to join
with the faithful in hearing divine service and godly prayers. They are not
abashed to say for their unchristian excuse; that no power upon earth can
appoint an holy day, and that it is great superstition to observe the same. But
certes, none that are well studied or read, either in the holy ecclesiastical
histories, or in general Councels, or in the ancient Fathers, or in the best
approved late writers, can ever without great blushing, avouch or defend that
untimely hatched doctrine, and unsoundly conceived opinion.

Queen Hester and godly Mordecai, appointed an holy Hest. 3. and 9.
day; for the remembrance of Gods great benefit toward them, in delivering them
from Hamans cruelty.

King Solomon ordained a solemn festivitie, for the space 1. reg. 8. 2. par 7.
1. math. 4. see Chap 7. Aphor. 2.
of seven days: in the dedication of the Temple.

The Machabees instituted an holy feast, to be kept from year to year, for
the space of eight days; for the dededication of the Altar. Which feast Christ
vouchsafed to honor, with his corporal presence at Jerusalem.

The Jews instituted their new Sanhedrim Synedrion, or Calvin in 18. cap.
matt. sect. 16. in confess. Helvet. Page 174.
Presbiterie, after their return from their captimitie in Babylon, as master
Calvin records, in his Harmony upon Saint Matthew.

The reformed churches in Helvetia, do right well allow the feasts or holy
days: of the Nativitie, resurrection, and such like.

If I should endeavor my self to recount all that, which may easily be
collected out of the ancient councels, and the holy-fathers, for the
approbatio^ and allowa^ce of holy days, after the custom at this day, and of
ancient time used in this church of England: time would sooner fail me, then
matter whereof to speak. I will in regard to brevitie, content my self only
with one or two testimonies of councels, as also of the grave, holy, ancient,
and most learned father, S. Austin: and then proceed to the testimony of late
writers, because in this dispute, they who^ it chiefly concerns, either have
not seen or read the councels and the fathers, or else more rashly then
wisely, contemn their degrees and judgments, and without all rhyme and reason
prefer their own opinions before them. The council holden at Granado, or
Elebertine, above 1200. years ago, (such is the antiquity of A. D. 325.
holy days in the Christian Church,) reputed the practice of the Church in
former ages, to be of such force in that behalf; that they deemed them
Heritiques, that would not obediently yield unto the same. These are the
express words of the Elebertine Council: Pravam institutione^ emendari
placuit, iuxta authoritatem scripturarum; vt cuncti diem Council. Elebert. can.
43.
Pentecostes celebremus. Quod qui non fecerit, quasi novam haresim induxisse
notetur.

We have decreed, that the depraved institution be amended, according to the
Scriptures: that we may all keep the day of Penticost, (and the feast of
Whitsonday.) Which whosoever shall refuse to do; let him be noted as one
that has brought a new heresy into the Church. Thus writes this holy
Council, which for antiquity sake ought to be reverenced, seeing Popery long
after that time had no footing in the Church. And yet (as we see by their
Decrees) he was in those days to be holden for an heritique; that would appose
himself against the Holidays, then observed by the Laws and ordinances of
the Church. For, no Scripture prescribes unto Christians, the observation of
Pentecost, which we call Whitsontide. For though the holy and ancient
Council, speak of amending according to the Scriptures; yet is it not that
Councels meaning that the Scripture appoints that festivitie to be observed
in the Christian Church: but that it is therefore according to the Scripture,
because the Scripture in general terms, has given authority to the Church,
to make Laws in all such indifferent things. Let this point never be forgotten.

The Council of Arles, of Antioch, and many others, Cone. Arel. Can. 1.
have made the like decrees.

Saint Austin (whom for virtue, antiquity, and learning, Co Antioch. Dan. 1.
the whole world has reverenced,) has written so plainly and so effectually,
for the Churches authority in making Vide Calvin. de. Aug. lib. 4 Instuit. cap
15. in fine.
Laws for Holy Days; that his Epistles to Ianuarius, may suffice all such, as
can read them, and will be satisfied with reason. His words are already
alleged, in the seventh Chapter, and third Aphorism. To which I am content
for the better satisfaction of the Reader, to add the same holy Fathers words
elsewhere. Writing purposely of keeping holy days against Adimantus a
Manichee, he has these express words; Nam nos quoque and dominicum diem and
pascha solenniter celebramus, and quastibet alias August. contra Adima^t. cap.
16. tom. 6
christianas dierum festivitates. Sea quia intelligimus quo pertineant, non
tempora observamus, sed quae illis significantur temporibus. Haec anglice
redduntur postea.

The same holy father in another place, has these words; Aug. in prefat in
epist. Iohannis. tom. 9.
Meminit sanctitas vestra, evangelium secundum Iohannem ex ordine lectionum nos
so^ere tractare. Sed quia nunc interposita est solennit as sanctorum dierum,
quibus certas ex evangelio lectiones oportet in ecclesia recitars, quae ita
sunt annuae vt aliae esse non possint; ordo ille quem susceperamus, necessitate
paululum intermissus est non omissus.

Your holiness remembers, that we were wont to entreat upon the Gospel of
S. John, according to the order of the lessons. But because at this time there
is interposed the solemnity of Saint-daies, upon which days certain lessons
taken out of the Gospel must be read, which are so yearly done, that they
cannot be changed; that order which we had taken in hand, is through necessity
somewhat intermitted, but not omitted. For we also do solemnly Hac pracedunt
latin.
celebrate, both the Lords day, and Easter, and all other festival days of
Christians. But because we understand, to what end they are referred, we do
not observe times, but the things signified by the times.

Out of these words, I observe first, that in S. Austens time, the Church
observed and kept many festival or Saints Vide Aug. de ciuit. lib. 10. cap. 4.
and therefore ought to be well remembered.

Matthias Flacius Illyricus, after he has distributed the observation of times
into four orders; natural, civil, ecclesiastical, and superstitious, he
adds these words; Ecclesiastica, Illyricus in. 4. cap. ad gal.
quae etiam decoro and bono ordini servit; quo facit quoque dies dominica, and
tempora precipuarum historiaru^, aut factorum Christi quae prosunt ad
aedificationem rudium; vt rectius meminerint, quando sit dominus natus, passus,
and quando in coelum ascenderit ae de singulis illis historijs suo tempore
ta^to commodius instituantur, quod valde rudium memoriae prodest.

The ecclesiastical is that, which served for comelinesle and good order; as
is also the Lords day, and other feasts, wherein we celebrate the memory of
the chief histories Vide infra, cap. 14. membro. 2. per. totum.
or Acts of Christ, which be profitable for the instruction of the simple; that
they may the better remember, when the Lord was borne, when he suffered, and
when he ascended up into heaven, and be more fitly taught in due time,
concerning every several history pertaining thereunto. In which place, the
same learned Writer affirms, that obscruation only to be superstitious;
when we put a necessity, worship, merit, or righteousness, in the observing
of time.

Out of these words I observe first, that the keeping of Saints-daies in the
Church, serves for order and comeliness Austen delivered before Illyricus was
borne. Thirdly, that seeing we put neither necessity,

The reformed Churches in Germany, in their Articles Confess. Augartic. 15. page
6. In apolog. page 192.
which they exhibited to the Emperor, do allow the festiuities of Saints and
other holy days. And the famous Doctor Philippus Melanthon, in his Apology of
the said Articles, has these words. Item, vt ordo and politia ecclesiae
doceat impersios, quid quo tempore gestum sit, hinc sunt feriae natalis
paschatis: pentecostes, and similes, hoc est, quod Epiphanius ait, politiae
causa institutas esse traditiones viz. ordinis causa, and vt ordo ul^ aamoneat
homines de historia, and beneficijs Christi. As also that order and policy in
the Church may teach the ignorant, what things were done, and at what time:
hence come holy days of the nativity, Easter, Pentecost, and the l^ke. Which
is it, that Epiphanius says; that traditions were ordained for policy sake,
viz. for to keep order in the Church, and that that order might admonish the
people, of the history and benefits of Christ. Behold here, how all Writers
agree one with another: affirming uniformly, that holy days are lawfully
ordained and kept in the Church: and that for signification sake, and
instruction of the people. Bulling. de precept 4. dec. 2 sermon. 4. and in epist.
adrom. cap. 14.


Master Budinger a famous Preacher of the Church of Tigwie, holds the self
same opinion, both in his Decades, and in his commentary upon the Epistle to
the Romans. Where he allows the keeping of the holy days and festiuities,
of the nativity, circumcision, and ascension; the feasts of the Virgin Marie,
John Baptist, and many others.

Master Zanchius is consonant to the former Writers, Zanch de relig. page 182.
delivering his opinion in these words: Post diem domini^um non possum non
probare illorum quoque dierum sanctifi^aitonem quibus momoria recurrit,
celebrataque in veteri ecclesia fuit nativitatis D. N. I. C. circumcisionis,
passionis, resurrectionis, ascentionis in coelum missionis speritus sancti in
apostolos. Reliqui diebus provt quaeque ecclesia expedire indicaverit, sic
etiam sacrum caetum convocet ad verbum, ad sacramenia, ad preces, ad collectas.
Semper vero absit, omnis dierum superstitiosa observatio.

Next after the Lords day, I cannot but like and allow the sanctification of
those days also, in which the ancient Church did celebrate the memory, of
the nativity of our Lord Jesus Christ, of the circumcision, passion,
resurrection, ascension, and the coming down of the holy Ghost upon the
Apostles. Upon all other days, as every Church shall think it expedient, so
let them call together the congregation, to Sermons, Sacraments, prayers, and
collections. But ever all superstitious observation, must be quite laid away.

Out of these words of this zealous Christian, and most learned Father, (whose
authority, if I had nothing else to say, would weigh deeply with mine own
conscience,) I note first, that Zanchius does highly reverence the constitution
of the Church, concerning holy days. Secondly, that every Church has free
liberty to appoint such holy days, as are most convenient for themselves.
Thirdly, that no Calvin. in. 4. cap. ad gal. in 2. cap. ad colos. inst. lib. 2.
cap. 8. s. 34.
such constitution of days is unlawful, but that only which tends to
superstition. And master Calvin himself agreeeth unto Zanchius, in many
places of his works.

The second Aphorism, of kneeling at the holy Communion.
THeir opinion, who hold it unlawful to receive the holy Communion, kneeling
on their knees; seems to me so rediculous, senseless, and void of all
Christian modesty; that I deem it needless, to use many words for the
co^futation thereof. King Solomon the wisest King that 3. Reg. 4. v. 29. 2. par.
6. Verse. 13. 1. reg, 8. v. 54. 2. par. 6. v. 13.
ever lived in the world, used to kneel upon his knees, and to stretch out his
hands, when he offered up his prayers unto God. For thus says holy Writ of
him, in that behalf; When Solomon had made an end of praying all his prayer
and supplication unto the Lord, he arose from before the Altar of the Lord,
from kneeling on his knees, and stretching of his hands to heaven.

Ezra when he prayed to the Lord, confessed his sins Ezra 9. 10 V. 1. cap 9.
v 5. dan 6. 10. mat. 26. v. 29. mar. 14. 32. luc. 22 41. act. 9. 40 act. 20. v.
36. Act. 7. v. 60. ephesians. 3. 14.
with tears, and feldown before the house of God, and prayed to God, upon his
knees, and Daniel prayed upon his knees three times a day. Christ our savior
himself fell down on his face, when he prayed to his father. And Saint Luke
says, that when he was drawn aside from his Disciples, he kneeled down, and
prayed. S. Peter prayed kneeling, after the example of Christ his Lord and
master.

Saint Steven, when the cursed Jews gnashed their teeth against him, and ran
violently upon him, and stoned him to death, fell to his prayers, and kneeled
upon his knees. And Saint Paul bowed his knees unto God, when he prayed for the
people, These testimonies drawn from the holy Scriptures, and from the very
practice of Christ himself, and his faithful servants, were able to satisfy
every well disposed mind; nevertheless, to take away all contention and
wrangling, if it may be had and obtained of the adverse part; I am content to
allege Master Caluins opinion, whose authority with them may not be gainsaid
or withstood. These are his express words; Hic testarioperae Calvin. lib. 4.
instit. cap. 10.. 30. See the seventh chapter pertotum.
praetium est, eas demum humanas constitutiones me probare, quae and dei
authoritate sundatae and ex scriptura desumptae, adeoque prorsus diuinae sint.
Exemplum sit in geniculatione, quae fit dum solennes habentur precationes,
quaeritur sitne humana traditio, quam repudiare vel negligere cuivis liceat.
Dico sic esse humana, vt simul sit divina: a^i est quatenus pars est decori
illius cuius cura and observatio nobis per apostolum commendatur; hominum 1.
Cor. 14. Verse 40.
autem, quitenus specialiter designat, quod in genere fuerat iudicatum magis
quam expositum.

Here it is worth the labor to testify, that I do allow and approve those
co^stitutions of men, which are derived from Vide infra, cap 14. memb. 2. per
totum membr. 3. and. 7. and nota.
Gods authority and the holy Scripture, and so are altogether become divine.
Let us take example in kneeling, which is done in time of solemn prayers. The
question is, if it be such a tradition of man, as every one may refuse and
contemn the same, as he list. I answer, that it is so the tradition of man,
as it is elso a tradition of God. It is of God, as it is a part of that
comelines, the care and co^servatio^ whereof is commended to us by the Apostle.
But it is of man, in respect that it designeth out in specialty, yt was
generally insinuated, rather the^ expounded. Thus writes M. Calvin, out of
whose England, is a divine tradition; and therefore must every one reverently
and obediently receive Note well hi^ doctrine.
the same, as the ordinance of Almighty God. If this doctrine of M. Calvin's
were deeply in printed in every English subjects he^^^, there would not one
English subject be so and in the ^and, who would kick, sp^^^e, or once in
utter, against the least ceremony in the English Church. For every child
sees; that by M. Calvin's doctrine every Ceremony pertaining to comeliness,
Est de iure di^^^o, grounded upon the general rule of Gods law. And
consequently, he that will deny any ceremony in the English Church, A general
groun^^er all our English ceremonies. out of M. Calvin's doctrine.
to be divine and not approved by Gods word* must prove out of Gods word which
he will never do,) that ye ceremony does no way pertain to comeliness in the
church. For, no wise man can think, that yt is rather to be accounted comely
or uncomely which a few yonglings of late days have esteemed so; the^ that
which was ever reputed so throughout the Christian world, of al learned men
generally for 1000. years together. Nay, for one thousand four hundred
years: that is, from S. Mark the Evangelist, until a thousand and some
hundred years were expired, and if no one learned writer can be sound, for
the space of so many hundred years, that will avouch any one Ceremony in the
Church of England this day used, as kneeling, the sign of the Cross, the
Surplesse, and such like, to be an uncomely Ceremony; then doubtless, such
ceremonies by Master Calvin's doctrine, are grounded upon Gods word, and must
be obeyed, and received accordingly. I wish the Reader to mark these words of
Master Calvin: Dei est, quatenus pars est decori: It is of God, as it is a
part of comeliness. I wish I say, the Reader to mark them well: because they
are of great importance, and do prove them ^tter in controversy most
evidently. To which former words of M. Calvin, let us now add the words,
which follow immediately in the same place. Thus does he write: Ab hoc vno
ex^mplo estimar^ licet quid de toto hoc ge^ nere sit sentiendum, By this one
example (of kneeling,) we Calvin. lib 4 instit cap. 10. 30.
may easily judge, what is to be thought of all other ceremonies. Lo, thus the
case stands; this ceremony the church has ordained, judging it to pertain
to comeliness: Ergo, it is of God. No answer can be made, or denial to use
the some ceremonies: unless the party so refusing can prove Vide infra, cap.
14 and notato valde per totum.
for his excuse, that such a ceremony pertains not to comeliness, which can
never be prooved till the worlds end. For all antiquity all Councels, all
Fathers, all Histories, are of the contrary opinion.

The third Aphorism of the Surplesse and other apparel of the Ministers.
THat which is already said in the former Aphorism, is a sufficient
demonstration of this question, to all well affected Readers. Yet I am content
to add a word or two for the help of the simple vulgar sort.

Saint John the Baptist did wear an unwonted kind of apparel, so to set
forth his extraordinary Ministry, and the rather to move the people to
enquire of his office. And no sound reason can be yielded, why the same use can
not this day Mat. 3. Uerse. 4.
be made of the distinct kind of apparel in the Ministers of the Church.

Samuel the Prophet had a distinct kind of apparel, from all the other
people. For Saul was persuaded, that he 1. Sam. 28.
whom the Witch had raised up, was Samuel the Prophet. Which opinion, Saul
conceived only upon this ground, because the Witch named his attire. Yea, the
Prophets were ever known from other men, by a distinct and peculiar kind of
apparel. This to be so, the words of the Prophet Zach. 13. Verse. 4.
Zachary will declare, which are these; in that day shall the Prophets be
ashamed every one of his vision, when he has prophesied; neither shall they
wear a rough garment to deceive. The Gloss in the Geneva Bible, yields us
this exposition. They shall no more wear Prophets apparel, to make their
doctrine seem more holy.

Master Calvin grants freely, that the Prophets were distinguished from the
people, by a peculiar kind of garment. Calvin. in zachar. cap. 13. 4.
These are his express words; Haec summa est, non reprehendi in
pseudoprophetis vestem ipsam, quemadmodu^ quidam parum considerate arripiunt
hunc locum, vt damnent and vestes oblongas, and qui^quid displicet eorum
morositati.

This is the sum, that this kind of garment was not reproved in the false
Prophets, as some men do rashly wrest this place to condemn long gowns, and
whatsoever else does not please their way wardnesse.

The same Master Calvin in an other place, has these words -Sedex Z^charia
apparet prophetas certa pally forma a Calvin in harmon. page 296.
reliquis fuisse distinctos. Nec vero ratione caruit, doctores it a vistiri: vt
in eorum hal^tu plus gravitatis and modestiae, qua^ in vulgari, extarct. But by
Zachary it is apparent, that the Prophets were distinguished from the rest of
the people, by a certain kind of cloak. And it was not without reason that
the doctors were so attired, that in their habit there might be more granitie
and modesty, then in the vulgar people. Out of this doctrine thus delivered by
M. Calvin I observe these worthy docume^ts First, that it is expedient, y^ the
ministers be known by their apparel. 2. that they are way-ward fellows, that
speak against variety of garments, in the ministers and people. Thirdly, that
there is gravity, and modesty, and consequently comeliness, in the apparel
of Ministers. This is a point of great importance, it may not be Note this
point well.
forgotten. It is of such moment, that it strikes dead, and can never be
answered.

S. Hieromie makes this question plain and clear these Hieroni lib. aduers.
pclagiam fol. 124. tom. 3.
are his words; Quae sunt rogo inimicitiae contra deum, si tuni came hobutro
mundiorem: si episcopus presbyter, and diaconus, and reliqui^s ord^
eccusi^sticus, in administratione sacrificicrum candida vest processerint?

What emnitie (I pray you,) is there against God, if I do wear a more cleanly
garment? if a Bishop, a Priest, or Deacon, and the rest of the Clergy, be
attyred with a white vesture, in time of devine service? Vide infra, ca. 10. ex
Bucero.

Again in an other place, the same ancient, holy, and learned Father, has
these express words; Porro religio divina Hier. in Ezechiel. cap 44. fol. 257.
tom. 5. Vide Ambr. de ijsqui misterijs imetiantur, cap. 7. tom 4.
alterum habitum habet in ministerio, alterum in vsu vitaque communi.

Furthermore, divine religion has one habit in the ministry, an other in
common life and use thus writes S. Hieromie: whose words in both the places,
(if they be aptly joined together,) will make it evident to every indifferent
Reader; that in S. Hieroms time which was above one thousand and two hundred
years ago,) the Ministers of the Church did wear a Surplesse. For, in the
former place he affrmeth, that the Ministers of the Church did wear a white
garment; and in the latter he says, that they used one kind of garment in the
time of Gods divine service, an other in their common conversation.

M. Bucer, that famous, godly, and learned writer, in his resolution to M.
Hopper, concerning the wearing of garments in time of divine service and
Sacraments, has these Buterus de re vestiaria in sacris, in epist. ad Johan.
Hopperum.
express words: Constat dominum nostrum Iesum Christu^ substantiam tantum
ministerij, cum verbi tum sacramentorum suis verbis nobis praescripsisse, and
caetera omnia quae ad decentem and vtilem administrationem mysteriorum eius
pertinent, ordinanda permisisse ecclesiae, Unde sacram laenam nos nec vesperi,
nec in domo privata, nec discubendo, nec cum viris tantum celebramus. Sequitur;
illa autem ae loco, ae tempore, de habitu corporis, ad sacram caenam vel
cerebrandam vel sumendam; de admittendis and mulierculis ad sacrae caenae
communionem; de modo precum atque ^ymnorum ad deum ita att^m de vesiuis and
alijs rebus ad externum decorum pertinentibus: non dubito deminum ecclesiae
suae liberam fecisse potestatens statuendi de his rebus and ordinandi quae
indicaverit quaelibet ecclesia apud suum populum maxim collatura, ad
sustinendam and augendam reverentiam erga omnia domini sacra. Si itaque aliquae
ecclesiae ex hac liberate Chirsts and ad hunc finem adificandae plebis Christi
ministros suos vellent in sacris ministerijs aliquibus singularibus vestibus
vti remota omni superstitione omni levitate, omnique etiam inter fratre:
dissensione, id est, abvsu; tales cer^e ecclesias non video quis possit iure ob
hanc rem condemnare vilius peccati, neaum communionis cum Antichristo Quid si
ecclesia aliqua ^uro and sancto suorum consensu eum morem haberet, vt s^nguli
etiam ad caenam sacram, sicut olim re^ens baptiza^i agebant, vest alba
vterentur? eam, n. l^bertatem, si quis contendat nul^ ecclesiae Christi esse
permittendam, oportebit sane faters vnum ex his; aut nihil omnino circa caenam
domini ordinandum ecclesiis esse concessum de quo non habeant expressum Christi
mandatum quo pacto, condemnabuntur cunctae ecclesiae impiae audaciae. Nam omnes
and tempus and locum, and habitum corporum in sacrae caenae celebratione
observant, admittunt que ad sacrae communionem mulieres: de quibus omnibus
rebus, non so^um ^u^^um habent domini mandatum, sed etiam contrarium exemp^^m.
Dominius, n suam caenam celebravit vesperi non mane; in demo privata non
publica, d^^umbens cum suis and sumpta caena paschait? non siant; and hanc
solam sui communionem e^hibens; denique exclusis mulieribus, quas habuit tamen
inter ^s cipu^as suas sanctissimas Aut fieri non posse, vt siut ecclesiae, quas
domin^^^ v^que omni liberet suspu tone and al vsu bonarum ertaturarum suarum,
vt puris per veram fidem in nomen eius sint omnes Dei ^onae creaturae, and vsu
significationis purae: quod qui dicat, is certe nagabit eo ipso Christum
dominum esse omnibus hominibus eum quem se promisit futurum omnibus liber
atorem ab omni immunditia. Aut posse impios abvsu suo bonas dei creaturas per
seita v^^tare, vt nemini pio ad ^^^m vsum queant deseruire, quod aper^e
adversatur testimonio spiritus sancts Romans 14. 1. cor. 8. and 9. 1. tim. 4. aut
cerie non li^ere Christianis res quastibet di ponere and ad admonendum
creatoris sui, and nostri, etusque in not benefictorum atque nostrorum erga cum
efficiorum; id quod pugnat cum eo quod spiritus sanctus passim docet de
agnos^e^ao and colendo deo in omnibus operibus suis, and faciendo omnia in
nomine domini nostra Jesus Christi ad gloriam Patris.

It is avident, that our Lord Jesus Christ has prescribed to us in his word,
the substance only of the Ministry, both of the word, and of the Sacraments;
and has permitted his Church to order all other things, concerning the decent
and profitable administration of his mysteries. Whereupon we celebrate the holy
supper, neither at night, neither in private houses, neither sitting down at
the Table, nor with men only, but touching the time, place, and habit of the
body, either for celebrating or for receiving the Holy supper: touching the
admission of women unto the Communion of the sacred Supper, and the manner of
singing and praising God: touching apparel also, and other things pertaining
to external comeliness: I doubt not, but our Lord has given free power to
his Church, to order and dispose of those things, as every Church shall judge
it to be most profitable for her people, to support and increase reverence
toward all the holy mysteries of God. If therefore any Churches, upon this
liberty granted by Christ, and for this end of edifying Christ's people,
would have their Ministers to use in time of the holy Mysteries, some special
kind of apparel: all superstition, levitie, and dissension or abuse being
taken away: doubtless. I see not, how any man ca^ justly condemn such a church
of any sin in that behalf, much less of communion with Antichrist. What if
any Church with a pure and holy consent of her children had such a custom,
that every one should use a white vesture in time of the holy Supper, as the
newly baptized ought in old to do? for, if any will contend, that yt liberty
may not be granted to Christ's Church, he must doubtless confess one of
these: either that the Church has no authority at all, to ordeine any thing
touching the Lords Supper, whereof they have not the express commandment of
Christ, and so all Churches shall be condemned of impious audacitie, for all
Churches observe in the celebration of the holy Supper, both the time and
place, and the attire of the body, and do withal admit women to the holy
Communion. Touching all the which, they have not only no commandment of the
Lord, but have also a contrary example, for our Lord celebrated his Supper at
night, not in the morning; in a private house, not in a public place; sitting
at the table with his Apopostles, and eating the Paschall, not standing; and so
exibited the holy Communion. Yea, the women were excluded, whom he reputed
among his most holy servants. Either that it can not be, that there be any
Churches, which our Lord does so free from all suspicion and the abusing of his
good creatures, that to the pure all the creatures of God be good through right
faith in his name, and pure in the use of signification; which whosoever shall
say, he doubtless must thereupon deny that Christ our Lord is the deliverer
of all men from all uncleanness, as he promised to be. Either that the wicked
can by their abuse so pollute the creatures of God, which are good of their
own nature, that no godly man can use them to a godly end; which saying is
evidently, against the testimony of the holy Ghost. Or certes, that Christians
can not lawfully dispose of all creatures, to put them in mind of their maker,
and of our selves, and of his benefits toward us, and of our duties toward him:
which makes against that, which the holy Ghost teaches every where, for the
acknowledgement and worship of God in all his works, and for the doing of all
things in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, to the glory of his father.

Again, in an other place he writes thus; Porro, dicere Bucerus vbi supra.
has vestes per Antichristiabv^um sic esse contaminatas, vt nulli ecclesiae,
quantumvis aliqua Christum suum and rerum ominium libertatem nosset et coleret,
sint permittendae religio sane mihi est, nec vllam video scripturam, qua possim
ist^m bonae dei creaturae condemnationem tueri. Seqnitur: ritum aliquem
Aaronicum esse, vel Antichristianu^ in nullis haeret dei creaturis, in nulla
veso te, in nulla fioura, in nullo color, aut vllo des opere; sed in animo and
professione, bonis dei creaturis ad impias significationes abvtentium.

Furthermore, to say, that these garments and vestures are so polluted by the
abuse of Antichrist, that they may be permitted to no Church, although such a
Church did both worship Christ, and know the liberty of all things, it is to
me doubtless a great scruple of conscience: neither do I know any Scripture,
by which I may defend this condemnation of the good creature of God, that any
rite becomes Aaronical or Antichristian, it is not grounded in any of Gods
creatures, in any vesture or garment, in any figure, in any color, or in any
work of God: but in the mind and profession of them, who abuse the good
creatures of God to wicked significations.

Thus writes M. Bucer in this place, as he does elsewher Vide Bucer. In 4 cap.
ad Ephesians.
to the same effect. Out of whose words, I observe,

First, that Christ has only prescribed in his word, the substance of his
holy worship. Secondly, that he has nor yet they justly accused of any sin,
who appoint them to be worn, Sixthly, that no abuse of man, Antichrist, or

The ancient Council of Carthage, (which was holden Conc. Carthag. 4. ^. ^14.
about the same time, and at which S. Austin was present,) has these express
words; Vt diaconus tempore oblutionis tantum vel lectionis alba induatur. Let
the Deacon wear a white ga men: only in the time of oblation and reading. Do,
the Deacons did we are Albes, Surplesses, or white ves^ores, name them as ye
list, so you agree in the thing it self) above a 1200. years ago: and that,
in the time of divine service. At this council were present 214. Bishops, of
which S. Augustine was one, and yet all these holy men, living in those days
when no corruption of Religion had crept into the Church, affirm constantly
with uniform consent, that it was the custom of the Church, to wear white
garments in time of divine service.

M. Beza, in his Epistle to certain Englishmen, demanding his opinion
touching the wearing of cappes and Beza in epist. 12 page 107. Vide cundem in
confess. cap 5. art. 17. in fine.
garments, as well in the common use as in the Ministry and Church service,
answered in these words: Respondemus, etsi ista nostro quidem iudicio non
recte revehuntur in ecclesiam, tamea quum non sint ex earum rerum genere, quae
per se impie sunt, non videri nobis illas tanti momenti vt propterea vel
pastors i^is de^crendum sit potius minislerium, quam vt vestes illas assumant
vel gregibus omit endum publicum pablnum, potius quam ita veslitos pastores
audiant.

We answer, that albert as we think, these things are not well brought into
the Church again; yet seeing they be not wicked or evil of themselves, and of
their own nature, they seem not to us to be a matter of so great moment, that
therefore either the Pastors should forsake the Ministry, rather then wear
them, or the sheep want their public forage, rather then hear their
pastors so at^yred.

The same Beza, in another Epistle to M. Grindal, then Bishop of London, being
demanded, whether the Pastors ought rather to refuse the Ministry then to
wear caps and Beza in Epist. 8. page 85. Vide infra, cap. 10. ex Bucero and
Zuinglio and nota valde.
surplesses, this cautele being added, that they are not made for any
holiness, Religion, or worship, but for order and policy, answers in these
words: Respondeo, minime mihi videri deserendas ecclesias propter vestes aut
pileos, aut aliquid eiusmodi vere medium, and indifferens.

I answer, that in my opinion they ought not to forsake the Church for cappes
and garments, or for any like thing, which is indifferent of it self indeed.
Thus writes M. Beza, when his counsel and opinion was required, concerning
the wearing of the surplesse, and other Ceremonies in our English Church. Out
of whose words, I note; First, that Beza did not fully understand the state of
our Church: which I gather by the word, (Revehuntur) are brought into the
Church again. Where indeed, if true information had been given, (let them
look unto it, that report to foreign countries, so sinisterly of their
Sovereign and native countries) he would have judged better of the case.
Secondly, Epist. 12. page 112. Vide infra, cap. 14. membr. 2. per totum. and
membr. 3. and 7. notentur Ualde.
the use of al ceremonies in our English church. To conclude, M. Beza, in the
end and closing up of his Epistle, exhorts our English brethren to obey the
Q. Majesty, and all the Bishops in the land. Idque ex animo, and that
sincerely. Which counsel they neither followed then, nor yet do now follow the
same; they seemed then willing, to reply upon his resolution. But no man can
please them, that speaks not Placentia, and as they shall appoint him to say
and do.

The Surples, Tippit, Cappe, and the like, are popish ceremonies, 1. Objection.
and have been profaned by the papists, and therefore may not now be used.

I answer both with S. Austin, and with M. Calvin to this in soluble so
supposed objection; wh^h indeed is The answer.
of no force at all, to move any man to disobey the laws of the Church. S.
Austin writing to Publicola, who desired to be resolved in such kind of
questions, has these words; August ad publicol. Epist. 154. Page 453.
Cum templa, idola, luci, and si quid huiusmodi data potestate evertuntur,
quamvis manifestum est cum id agimus, non ea nos honorare sed potius detestari:
ideo tamen in vsus nostros privatos duntaxat and proprios non debemus inde
aliquid vsurpare, vt appareat nos pietate ista descernere, non avaritia. Cum
vero in vsus communes, non proprios ac privatos, vel in honorem dei very
convertuntur, hoc de illis fit quod de ipsis hominibus cum ex sacrilegis (...)
impijs in veram religionem mutantur. Hoc deus intelligitur docuisse illis
testimorijs quae ipse proposuisti cum de luco alicnorum deorum iussit ligna ad
holocaustum adhiberi. Et de Hiericho, vt omne aurum, argentum, and aeramentum,
inferretur Iudic. 6. ver. 25. 26. Ios. 6. 24.
in the sauros Domini.

When temples Idols, groves, and such like things, are by authority
overthrown, although it be manifest, that when we do that, we honor them
not, but detest them; yet for all that, we may not therefore convert them to
our own private uses only and commodity, that it may appear that we destroy
them for Religion-sake, and not for covetousness. But when they are not
converted to our own private uses, but into common uses, or to the honor of
the true god; then that is done in them, which is done and brought to pass in
them, which is wrought in men themselves, when of idolaters and wicked persons
they are changed into true religion. This God himself taught in those
testimonies, which thou thy self have used; when he commanded, that the wood
of that grove which was dedicated to str^nge Gods, should be taken and used for
his sac^^tices. And of Hiericho that all the gold, silver, and brass, should
be brought into the treasury of the Lord.

M. Calvin is of the same judgment, whole words are Calvin in (...) cap 23.
verse 24.
these; Neque. n. nobis hodie religio est templa retinere quae polluta fuerunt
^delis, and accommodare in meliorem vsum; quae nos non obstringit, quod propter
consequentiam legi additum est. Fateor quidem, quaecunque ad superstitione^
fovenda^ spectant, e medio tollendaesse; modo ne praecise vrgendo quod per se
medium est, simus in nimio rigore superstitiosi.

For we this day make no scrupulositie of conscience, to retain still those
Churches which were polluted with Idols: and to apply them to a better use,
because that which is added to the Law by way of consequence, does not bind
us. I grant willingly, that all those things which tend to the planting of
superstition, ought to be taken away, so that by precise urging of that which
is of it self indifferent, we be not in too much rigor superstitious. Thus
writes Master Calvin.

Out of these words of these two great learned Fathers, I note these worthy
lesso^s, First, that things superstitiously Hiericho, should be brought into
the treasury of the Lord. Fourthly, that our own practice does approve the
same to be lawfutl, while we retain Temples abused by the Papists. I add, the
keeping still of Bells, Pulpits, Wine, strong drink, and good cheer. For all
these have been, and this day are abused; not only by the Papists, but even
by those who live among us, and profess themselves to be of us. And therefore,
if we will reject the one sort for abuse, we must also reject all the rest
for the same Vide infra, cap. 10 ex Bucero.
respect. Unless perhaps it be a sufficient answer, that our own conceits
neither grounded upon authority nor reason, must teach us what to do in all
respects.

The Reply.
Wine, strong Drink, Bells, Pulpits, and the like, are things of necessary
use, so are not Tippets, Caps, and Surplesses. Therefore the case is not like.

The Answer.
I answer: first, that we may live without all those things, which in the
prepositio^ are holden for necessary. Secondly, Calvin and S. Austen speak
indefinitely viz. the things objected are not necessary, and therefore they
meet in woods, fields, and odd corners. Thirdly, that Non sunt facienda mala,
vt jude Romans 3. v. 8.
eveniat bonum. We must not do evil, that good may come thereupon. But if
the thing before indifferent in it own nature, do still remain indifferent,
notwithstanding the abuse, (as I have already proved it;) then may the lawful
magistrate, and much more the Church with his authority Vide infra, cap 14.
propofine.
and assent concurring, retain still some thing, and reject other some, as it
shall seem most expedient, for the quiet and peaceable government of the
Church. For the Church has free liberty and power to dispose of all things,
which are Adiaphora, indifferent of their own nature.

The 2. Reply.
It is against my conscience to wear a Surplesse, to make the sign of the
Cross in the child's forehead, and so forth. Ergo I may not do it.

The Answer.
True it is, that whosoever does any thing against his conscience, sins,
though the thing he does, be otherwise lawful to be done. Wherefore his only
remedy is this: either to reform his erroneous conscience, or else peaceably,
to give place to the law, and not contentiously to withstand the law of his
superiors, (to who^, under God he owes obedience) and so to raise up schism
and contention in the Church. But it is to be feared, that some pretend
conscience, where only pride bears the sway. Because forsooth, they have
more rashly then wisely, Preached against the same ceremonies informer times?

The 3. Reply.
The reformed Churches in other countries, have abolished such Popish
ceremonies. Why therefore should we keep them still in our Churches?

The Answer.
I answer; 1. that as some other Churches have rejected Vide infra, cap. 10.
ex. Bucero.
thereof. This assertion is proved at large in the Seventh Chapter, throughout
all the Aphorisms thereof. To which place I referie the reader, for better
satisfaction in this behalf.

The 2. Objection.
The graven Images of their Gods shall ye burn with Deuteronomy. 7. Verse. 25.
fire, and covet not the silver and gold that is in them, nor take it unto the,
least thou be snared therewith, for it is an abomination, before the Lord thy
God.

The Answer.
I answer; first, with S. Austen in these words; Satis apparet, Aug. in ep.
154. page 453.
aut ipsos privatos vsus in talibus esse prohibitos, aut ne sic inde aliquid
inferatur in domum vt honoretur Tunc n. est abominatio and execratio, non cum
talibus sacrilegijs honor apertissima destructione subvertitur. It appears
sufficiently, that either private uses be forbidden in such things, or else
that nothing should so be brought into thine house, that it be honored. For
then is it abomination and execration, not when together with the Idolatry,
the honor is also evidently over thrown. Secondly, that this was a political
I therefore note here by the way, for the benefit of the well affected and
thankful Reader, that the Law of Moses was threefold. viz. ceremonial,
judicial, and moral; whereof the moral part does this day only remain in
force with us Christians, as which is indeed the very Law of nature, imprinted
in every man's heart in his nativity, and so cannot be altered or changed. But
the ceremonial part was ordained, to prefigure the ministry of Christ then
to come; and the judicial part was semblably appointed, for the conservation
of justice among the Jews. And consequently, as they both pertained to that
time and that people only, so were they both expired by the aduent of our Lord
Jesus. This Saint Paul teaches to be so; where he tells us, that the
Priesthood being translated, the Law must also of necessity have a change.
Hence Hebr. 7. Verse. 12.
comes it first, that where one could not by that Law, be condemned upon the
testimony of one man, but of two at I cannot but greatly admire them, who
seem Deuteronomy. 19. Verse. 15.
to condemn such Laws, by virtue of the judicial Law of Moses. For the
moral part only being now in force, the other can have no place. But the
moral and natural Vide infra, cap. 15. and notato.
part, (mark well my words,) does only require this, viz. that great care
and circumspection be had in judgment, and that none be condemned unjustly.
Touching the number of witnesses, the Law of nature is silent, and leaves
that point as Arbitrarie to the of man. Hence comes it. Secondly, that
blasphemers, adulterers, and such like viz. that sin be so punished, as
stands best with the peaceable government of the commonweal. Touching the
quantity and kind of punishment, it says nothing at all. Hence comes it.
Thirdly, that the intailing of lands is lawful this day among Anno. 1604. that
none shall be permitted to Preach without License. Hence comes it. Fourthly,
that the true owners may for good causes and considerations it fifthly, that
Fathers may give their lands lawfully to any of their children; either to the
youngest, or to any of the rest, viz. where brethren inherit together as
sisters at the common law, and the youngest son before the eldest, are not
unlawful, the like may be said of many other points in the judicial Law,
and to this present objection. For the natural part of this judicial Law,
does only require this of us: viz. that we keep our selves from Idolatry, and
from doing any honor or worship to the same. Master Calvin does not dissent
from this mine exposition, concerning the text alleged in the objection. These
are his express words, Quamvis autem politicum hoc fuerit praeceptum, and
tantum veters populo ad tempus datum, ex co tamen colligimus quam detestabilis
sit idolatria, quae ipsa etiam Calvin, in. 7. deuteronomy. v. 25.
dei opera sua soeditate inficit. Although this were a political precept, and
given only to the Jews for a time, yet may we gather thereof, how detestable a
thing Idolatry is, which with the silth thereof infecteth the very works of
God. Lo, this precept was only given to the Jewish people, and endured but
for that time; and so, as it is judicial, it does not this day touch us that be
Christians at all.

Master Musculus iumpeth with M. Calvin, for the truth of this question. These
are his express words. Hactenus ostendimus abrogandam fuisse legem Mosaicam
per adventum Musculus de legib. Page 140.
Christ's, and nova legis introductionem, iam consequenter videndu^ est,
quatenus sit abrogat? Sequitur quaern^t, an tota sit abrogata? respondemus; si
totus Moses cessit Christo, vtique tota illius lex cessit legi Christi.
Hitherto we have showed, that the Law of Moses must be abrogated by Christ's
aduent, and by the introduction of the new law. Now we have to consider
consequently, in what sort it is abrogated. The question is asked, if it be
wholly abrogated, (or only in part?) we answer, that seeing Moses himself
gave place wholly unto Christ, the Law doubtless of Moses must likewise give
place wholly to the Law of Christ.

The Reply.
But master Calvin says plainly, that Idolatry infecteth the very works of
God with the filth thereof. Therefore things once applied to Popish
superstition and Idolatry, can never thenceforth be lawfully used.

The Answer.
I have proved already, out of M. Caluins own words; Supra, in 1. Object.
that we may use things lawfully, which have bin abused to Idolatry; as
Temples, Pulpits, and such like. Neither does master Calvin say here, that
such things are polluted in themselves; but that they are so called in respect
of the people, so to terrify them the more from Idolatry. For these are his
words immediately going before; Respondendum est, anrum vel argentum impio
abusu minime fuisse vitiatum, sed quamvis omns macula in se careret, populi
respectu fuisse poliutum. Talis suit animalium immundities; non quod in se
qui^quam baberent inquinamenti, sed quoniam deus eorum esu inter dixerat. I
answer, that the gold or money was not defiled with the impious abuse thereof;
but albeit it was without all blemish in it self, yet in respect of the people
it was polluted. Such was the uncleanness of the beasts (in the law;) not for
that they had any pollution in themselves, but because God had forbidden to
eat them. Lo, M. Calvin grants freely, that they are still indifferent in
their own nature, as they were before.

The 3. Objection.
There is no order in them, but confusion, no comeliness, Vide infra, cap 8.
per totum.
but deformity; no obedience, but flat contempt of God and his word.

The Answer.
I answer; first, that I have already proved sufficiently,

The 4. Aphorism, of ceremonies used id Wed. lock or marriage.
IN the solemnization of Matrimony, two things are much reproved; viz the
Ring, and the simbolicall signification. To the former I answer, that seeing
Wed-locke is a vassible civil contract, there is great reason, that it should
be assured with some civil, permanent, and external sign. Hereupon the
Church, (which has authority to ordain ceremonies, as is already proved,)
does appoint a round Ring, as a ceremony best beseeming such a contract. For
the Ring being round and without end in it self is very fit and meet to
signify to the married couple; that they ought to be joined in the perpetual
band of love, the one to the other.

To the latter I answer semblahly, that S. Paul may as justly be reproved
therein, as the Church of England. For Ephesians. 5.
after he has discoursed at large, of the high mystery of matrimony,
assuming the husband and the wife to be one flesh; he forthwith adds, that
he speaks of the great mystery between Christ and his Church. Which
symbolicall signification. ^s approved by Saint Austin, Ambr. in 5. cap ad
Ephe, Vide Aug. tract. 9 in Ioha^ Page 58. tom 9.
S. Chysostome S. Ambrose, S. Hierome, and many others. It shall suffice in
this so clear a case to allege S. Ambrose his words for all the rest. Thus
does be write; Mysterij Sacramentum grande in vnitate viri ac foeminae esse
signifi^at, sed aliam causam quae non discordet a memorato mysterio flagitat,
quam scit ad prosectum humani generis pertinere, hoc est ecclesiae and
salvatoris: vt sicut relictis parentibus home vxori suae adhaerdt, it a and
relicto omni errore ecclesia adhaereat and subijciatur capiti suo, quod est
Christus.

He signifies, that there is a great mystery, in the unity of the wife and
her husband. Neither does he reveal this only, but he also requires an
other cause, which differs not from the said mystery, which he knows to
appertain to the profit of mankind; that is of the Church and of our Savior.
That as man forsaking his parents, Bucerus in censura minister. eccles.
Zanchius us 5 cap. ad ephesians. page 416. Note well the next Aphorism, ex Bucero.
adhaereth to his wife, so the Church leaving all error, must adhaere and be
subject to her head, which is Christ.

M Bucer, approves and highly commends every ceremony, which our church
uses concerning holy wedlock.

Hieronimus Zanchius a most zealous and learned writer, sings the same song
with Saint Ambrose. These are his words; Talis fuit eductio Evae ex latere Adae
dormientis. Item, coniunctio Evae cum Adamo in matrimonium. Res in se fuit
visibilis and sub sensum cadens, sed aliam occultam representabat, eductionem
and creationem ecclesiae ex latere Christi in cruco mortui, and vnionem
ecclesiae cum Christo.

Such was the eduction of Eve out of the side of Adam, when he was a sleep. So
also was the conjunction of Eve with Adam, in the matrimonial contract, the
thing in it self was visible and subject to our sense; but it did represent
another secret thing, even the eduction and creation of the Church out of
Christ's side being dead upon the Cross, and the union of the Church with
Christ.

The fifth Aphorism, of the Symbolicall sign used in the confirmation of
Children.
IT is greatly disliked and highly reproved, that our Bishops do lay their
hands upon children, to certify them by this sign of Gods favor toward
them. To which I answer, that the fact and usage of our Bishops in confirming
children, is according to the practice of the church in all former ages; and
therefore ought it not, either to be so lightly rejected, Eusebius lib. 6.
Hist. cap. 35.
or so rashly condemned. S. Cornelius, writing to his brother Fabius, shows
evidently, how one Novatus being baptitized in his bed, regarded not after his
recoverie the rest of the ceremonies, whereof he should have been partaker
according to the rule of the Church; no, not so much as to be sealed or
confirmed by the Bishop, and for that cause did he not receive the holy ghost.
Now, this Cornelius lived above Cornelius vixit. An. 454.
1100. years ago, at what time the church was free from all herisies,
errors, and superstition. And yet did the church even then use to confirm
children, in the self same manner now used in our English Church.

S. Augustine delivers the custom of the Church in his time, in such golden
and excellent words; as I verily think he is able to satisfy every one, that
shall with a single eye and upright judgment, all parcialitie set apart, duly
ponder the same. These are his words; Numquid modo quibus impenitur August. in
Epist Iohannis tract. 6. tom. 9. Page 422.
manus vt accipiant spiritum sanctum, hoc expectatur, vt linguis loqua^tur? aut
quando imposuimus manus istis infantibus, attendit vnusquisque vestrum, vtru^
linguis loquerentur? and cum videre^ cos linguis non loqui ita perversocorde
aliquis vestru^ fuit, vt diceret; non acceperunt isti spiritum sanctum; na^si
accepissen^, linguis loquerentur qu^aamodum tunc factum est? si ergo per haec
miracula non fiat modo testimonium praesentiae spiritus sancti vnde fit, vnde
cognoscit quisque se accepisse spiritum sanctum? interroget cor suum, si
deligit fratrem spiritus Deimanet in illo.

Is it this day expected, that they speak with tongues, upon who^ the Bishop
has laid his hands, that they should receive the holy Ghost? or when we
imposed hands, upon Infants, did every one of you mark, if they spoke with
tongues? and when he saw they spoke not with tongues, was then any of you so
way wardly affected, as to say; they have not received the holy Ghost; for if
they had, they would speak with tongues, as it came then to pass. If
therefore we have not the testimony of the presence of the holy Ghost by
miracles, how knows every one, that he has received the holy Ghost? Let him
dispute the matter with his own heart, and if he love his brother, the spirit
of God abides in him. Thus write these holy Fathers, Vide infra, cap. 14.
memb. 2. in fine ex Zuinglio.
showing plainly unto us the practice of the Church in their days, and that
the holy Ghost is given in confirmation; as also that the imposition of hands
is a sign thereof in Gods children, though not given in such miraculous
manner, as in the Apostles-time.

Saint Hieromie teaches the self same doctrine, which Cornelius and Saint
Austin have delivered. These are his words: Quod si hoc loco quaeris, quare in
ecclesia baptizatus, Hierony adversus Lucifer. tom. 3. fcl. 63. B.
nisi per manus episcopi non accipiat spiritum sanctum, quem nos asserimus in
vero baptismate tribui; disce hanc observationem ex ea authoritate descendere,
quod post ascensum domini spiritus sanctus ad Apostolos descendit. Et multis in
locis idem factitatum reperimus, ad honorem potius sacerdotij quam ad legis
necessitatem.

If thou here demand, why he that is baptized in the Church, receives not
the holy Ghost but by the hands of the Bishop, which we say is given in true
baptism; learn this observation to descend of that authority, because after
our Lords ascension, the holy Ghost came down upon the Apostles. And we find
the same observed in many places, rather for the honor of Priesthood, then for
necessity of the Law.

M. Bucer, that great learned Doctor, is very consonant Bucerus in 4. cap. ad
Ephesians.
to the ancient fathers herein. These are his express words; Signum
impositionis manuum etiam episcopi soli praebebant, and non absque ratione.
Sive n. sit foedus domini baptizatis confirmandum; Sive reconciliandiij, qui
grauius peccarunt; Sive ecclesijs ministri ordinandi; haec omnia ministeria
maxim decent eos, quibus summa ecelesiarum cura demandata est.

The sign also of imposition of hands, was given by Uide infra, cap. 10 and
nota resp. ad 2. object.
the Bishops only, and that not without reason. For whether the baptized were
to be confirmed with the covenant of the Lord: or they who had sinned
grievously, were to be reconciled; or Ministers were to be ordained unto
Churches: all these Ministeries do especially pertain unto them, to whom the
chiefest charge of the Church is committed. Thus writes learned Bucer, showing
most evidently unto all indifferent Readers: that imposition of hands in the
confirmation of children, was an ancient and laudable ceremony, and that it
pertained only to the Bishops to administer the same, and that upon great
reason. Let these words of M. Bucer, (and non absque ratione, and not without
reason) be well marked, and never forgotten.

M. Fulke, a late famous writer, (who was a great favorer Uide Ambros. de
sacram. bibr. 3. cap. 2.
of the Presbytery, and of good credit with the chiefest Patrons thereof,)
has these express words: The ancient ceremony of imposition of hands,
which is nothing else (as S. Austin says,) but prayer over a man to be
strengthened and confirmed by the holy Ghost, or to receive increase of the
gifts of the holy Ghost, (as S. Ambrose says,) we do not in any wise mislike,
but use it our selves. Lo, this godly, zealous, and learned writer grants
freely, that confirmation is an ancient and godly Ceremony: which to be so,
he proves out of S. Austin and S. Ambrose. Yea, he adds the approbation of
this Church of England reckoning himself for one of the number and members
thereof. We do not (says he,) in any wise mislike it, but use it our selves.
What then may we, or can we say or think, of the proud Brownists, sa^cie
Barrowists, and arrogant Puritan^? Who, either through ignorance of the
practice of the ancient Churches, and for want of knowledge in the
ecclesiastical Histories and Councels; or else (which is far worse,) upon a
singular Philautia, and fond admiration of their own fancies and conceits; do
most arrogantly and rashly censure and condemn all others, both old and
modern writers, which will not embrace their fantastical imaginations, and
receive the same as the decrees of the holy Ghost. Certes, I wonder, that they
are not ashamed of themselves. For, it can with no reason be denied; that God
by the hearty and earnest prayers of his Church, does work those effects in
those children which be his, whereof the impositions of hands is a sign.

The Reply.
The Church has not authority to institute, either Sacraments, or
sacramental signs.

The Answer.
I answer; First, that our Church does neither ordeine Sacraments, nor yet any
sacramental signs; but does only explain and declare the effect, purport,
and true meaning Uide infra cap. 14 and nota memb. 2. and 3. 2
of that sign, which the Apostles used in that behalf. Secondly, that the
Church has power to ordeine Ceremonies in things indifferent, for edification,
order, and comeliness; and consequently, to express and declare the same by
fit significant words. Which thing I have proved at large in the seventh
Chapter, by the vnitorme testimony of S. Ambrose, whose words are these:
Accepisti post haec vestimenta candida, vt esset indicium quod exueris in
volucrum peccatorum indueris innocentiae casta velamina.

Afterward thou did receive a white vesture, to signify that thou art
delivered from the snare of sin, and art clad with the veil of innocence.
Bucerus, Zuinglius, and Homingius, do all 3. approve this custom of the
Church. Master Bucer has these words; Et hic admodum commodus ritus esse
videtur, si modo quid ista omnia significent, populo subinde explicetur. This
also seems to be a very fit Rite, Bucerus in censura minist^cc^l.
so the people be sometime taught, what all these things do siginfie. Here he
grants, that Ceremonies may be appointed for signification sake. Let this
be remembered well, and not forgotten.

The sixth Aphorism, of the sign of the Cross, used in Baptism.
IT is a thing so clear and evident by all ecclesiastical Histories, that the
heathen objected to the Christians in reproach, that the God in whom they
believed, was hanged on the Cross; as none but either tootoo wilful, or
tootoo ignorant, will or can deny the same. In regard whereof the church in
all ages, even in the Primitive and Apostolic time, so to nourish and keep
among them the memory of their redemption wrought upon the Altar of the
cross, and to make it known to Jew Gentile, and all the world, that they were
not ashamed of the true humility of their Savior in that most ignominious
kind of death, which he voluntary suffered for their sins; did institute,
and ordain the comely and most christian usage of the sign of the Cross, and
that all christians in their first ordinary and usual union with Christ by
holy Baptism, should receive for that end and purpose, the sign of the
Cross in their foreheads. Hereupon the holy Fathers of best approved
antiquity, S. Cyprian. Saint Basil, S. Augustine, S. Hierome, S. Chrysostom,
and all the rest, make mention of the like usage of that most comely christian
badge, every where in their most learned works. Yea, the most holy and best
learned fathers, do prove the same use out of holy Scriptures. Saint Cyprian
has these express words; Omnem autem super quem signum scriptum est, Cyprian
ad ad Demetrianum, (...).
ne tetigeritis. Quod aute^ sit hoc signum, and qua in part corporis positum,
manifestat alio in loco Deus, dicens; transi per mediam Jerusalem, and notabis
signum super frontes virorum qui ingemunt and maerent ob iniquitates, quae
fiunt in medio ipsorum.

Every one upon whom the sign of the Cross is made, shall be free and
untouched. And what sign this is, and in what part of the body it is made, God
shows in another place, saying; Pass through the midst of Jerusalem, Ezech.
9. Verse 4. Exodus 13. verse 12. Uide cunde^ Cyprian. libr. 4. epist 6
and make a sign upon the foreheads of them that mourn, and cry for all the
abominations that be done in the midst thereof. In which place, the same
holy Father and Martyr of Jesus Christ, proves that sign to pertain to the
future passion of Christ Jesus, out of another place of holy writ. These are
his words; Quod autem occiso agno praecedit in imagine, impletur in Christo
secuta postmodum veritate.

That which went before in figure, even the Lamb which was slain: is
fulfilled in Christ, the verity that followed after the same.

S. Austin, in the disputation betwixt the Synagogue and Augst. de altere.
eccles. and synagogae. tom. 6. page 57
the Church, alleges against the Jews, this very Text of Ezechiel, for the
confirmation of making the sign of the Cross in the foreheads of Christians.
Vellem addiscere, vbi signum frontis acceperis, vel quis propheta signum istud
quod dicis, hoc est, signu^ frontis signacuso sanctificationis inciderit. I
would learn says the Synagogue, where thou receiuedst the sign of the
fore-hed, or which of the Prophets makes mention Ezech. 9. v. 4.
of that sign of which thou speak, calling it the sign of sanctification
in the forehead. To this question S. Austin answers in the person of the
Church, proving it out of the 9. of Ezechil as S. Cyprian had done before him;
as also out of the Revelation, in the 14. Chapter, he uses an excellent and
large discourse against the Synagogue; to which for brevitie-sake, I refer
the Reader.

The same S Austin in an other place, has these express August. in ps. 141.
page 1125.
words; Insultet ille Christo crucifixo, videam ego in frontibus regum cruce^
Christi. Sequitur; vsque adeo de cruce no^ erubesco, vt non in occulto loco
habea^ cruce^ Christi, sed in front portem.

Let the Pagan deride Christ crucified, but let me behold his Cross in Kings
foreheads. I am so far from being ashamed of Christ's Cross, that I keep
it not in a secret place, but do bear it in my forehead. Mark well, gentle
Reader, this godly period of this ancient, blessed, and learned Father.

S. Hierome in like manner proves the lawful making of Hier. in cap. 9.
Ezech. tom. 5.
the Cross in the foreheads of the Christians, out of the same words of the
Prophet Ezechiel. Thus does he write; Et vt ad nostra veniamus, antiquis
hebraeoru^ literis quibus vsque hodie vtuntur Samaritani, extrema Than litera
crucis habet similitudinem, quae in Christianorum frontibus pingitur.

And to come to our own, in the old Characters and Letters of the Hebrews,
which the Samaritanes use to this day; the last Letter which is Than, has the
image or similitude of the Cross, which is made in the foreheads of
Christians.

S. Beda likewise gathers the same conclusion, out of diverse Beda, in apo.
calip. cap. 7.
places of the scripture. These are his words; Ad hoc. n. gentium confractum
est imperium, vt signo fidei cui restiterant, facies sanctorum libere
notaretur. Sequitur; neque n. frustra in front pontificis nomen domini
tetragrammaton scribebatur, uisi quia hoc est signum in front fidelium. For in
this sign the dominion of the Gentiles was overthrown, that the faces of
Saints might be marked with the sign of Faith, which the Gentiles had resisted.

Thus write the ancient and holy Fathers; out of whose words, I observe;
First, that the making of the sign of the Origin and of Tertullian; that is,
almost 1400. years ago. And no marvel, seeing it was an Apostolical
tradition. If any hold the contrary, let him name the time, and the Author; and
if I cannot prove a further antiquity, I will be of his opinion. Thirdly, that
those holy Fathers, (Saint Cyprian, Saint Austen, Saint Hierome. Saint Beda)
did rejoice to bear the sign of the Cross in their foreheads. Master Bucer
in censura grants the use to be most ancient, and to be both comely and
profitable.
And consequently, that a Christian needs not be ashamed now adays, to bear
the same badg in his forehead. If I should stand to recount the testimonies of
the holy Fathers, for the confirmation of the lawful use and making of the
sign of the Cross; I should both weary my self, and be tedious to the
Reader. I will therefore conclude with the judgment of Master Zanchius, whose
only verdit me thinks, should be sufficient in this behalf. These are his
express words. Alia vero traditiones non sunt necessario retinendae in
ecclesijs, etsi vetustae and a patribus commemoratae; Zanchius in compendio,
page 654.
vt quod christianum oportet signo crucis frontem munire, diebus veneris and
sabbathi ieiunare. Nam etsi servari possent, si absque superstitione
exercerentur, tamen conscientiam non obligant. Sequitur summa igitur and
conclusio haec sit, eas traditiones, quae dei verbo conformes, and ad vsum
ecclesiae animosque hominum ad pietatem and verum dei cultum excitandos
accommodatae sunt, Ibidem, page 657.
etiamnum retinendas and vsurpandas esse, citra tamen superstitionem and
opinionem meriti.

The Church is not bound of necessity, to retain still. Other traditions,
although they be ancient, and mentioned Vide infra, cap. 10. ex Bucero,
Zuinglio, and Hemingio, prope finem capit is.
by the Fathers: as that a Christian must make the sign of the Cross in his
forehead, and fast upon Friday and Saturday. For although these ceremonies and
traditions might be still retained and kept, if that were done without
superstition, yet for all that, they do not bind a man's conscience to keep
them. Let this therefore be the sum and conclusion that such traditions as
agree with the word of God, and serve for the Churches use, and to stir up
men's minds to piety and the true worship of God, may this day b^ still
retained and used, so it be done without superstition and opinion of merit.
This is the conclusion of the most learned Doctor, Master Zanchius, and I see
no reason, why it should not be my conclusion also. And consequently, I do
constantly affirm with him, that the sign of the Cross may this day be used
lawfully; so it be not Vide tu Hemingium, in syntagm in. 4 lege decalog^, and
notate.
joined with superstition, and opinion of merit. Let this be well observed;
that Zanchius grants freely, that the sign of the Cross may be made, and
that even in the forehead. For, it is the very case now in question, and
constantly affirmed by Zanchius; that it may be well used, though it may also
be laid away. To which latter, both I and the Church of England do willingly
agree Vide infra. cap. 10. ex Bucero, and nota valde.
with him. But withal I say, that seeing it is a ceremony indifferent, and
may lawfully be used; it is not in the power of a private subject, to appoint
or command to lay it away; but peaceably, lovingly, and obediently, to admit
and receive the same; knowing and ever Rom 13. Verse. 1
remembering, that in all things lawful, higher powers must be obeyed.

CHAP. IX. Of the Election of Ministers.
I Have proved already, that the church Supra, cap. 7.
has authority to make decrees, laws, ordinances, and constitutions, in all
things which are Adsaphora indifferent in their own nature, and tend to the
peaceable government of the Church. for the church of God may safely admit,
diverse forms and orders whereby it may be governed; according to the
diversity of the state thereof, and variable circumstances of times, places,
and persons. The same liberty and freedom is granted to the Church, in the
Election of her Ministers. This verity may easily be proved, by four reasons
of great importance viz. By apostolical practice, decrees of ancient
Councels, the testimony of the holy Fathers; and the consent of best approved
late Writers.

The first Reason drawn from the practice of Christ and his Apostles.
CHrist himself, as his holy Gospel teaches us, did of Mat. 10. Uerse. 1.
Luke. 10. Uerse. 1.
himself alone without the consent and voices of his people, both call and
choose his Apostles. And in like manner, himself alone did call and choose his
disciples, who^ he sent abroad to Preach the Gospel, into every city and
place, whither he himself should come. But most certain it is, that we are
bound to imitate Christ's facts and deeds, before all other men's. For every his
action, is and ought to be our instruction. For this cause does the Apostle
exhort the E: Ephesians. 5. Uers. 1. 1. Cor. 11. 1.
phesians and in them all other Christians, to be followers of God, as dear
children. And the same Apostle wills us to be followers of him, even as he
followed Christ.

The Apostles themselves in their Elections of ministers, did not ever observe
one and the same manner. For, in one Act. 1. 26.
place we read, that they presented two, Barsabas and Matthias whereof the one
was chosen by Lot. In an other place, Act. 6. 3.
we find that this course was altered. For the people presented seven to the
Apostles, who all were chosen without Lots, and upon whom the Apostles also
laid on their hands. We read in an other place, that this form was like wise
Act. 14. V. 23.
changed, and that the Apostles Paul and Barnabas, ordained ministers in every
city, in which ordaination they neither observed casting of Lots, nor yet any
presentment by the 1. Tim. 5. 2. tom. 1. v. 6. Tit. 1. 5.
people. We find in an other place, that S. Paul Elected and ordained both
Timothy and Titus, and gave them authority to ordain others. Hereupon I
infer this evident conclusion, that there is no certain form prescribed for
the Election of ministers, which is to be observed for ever in the Church, but
that every Church is free to change the same, according to the circumstances of
times, places, and persons. Which doctrine will better appear, when I shall come
to the fourth Reason.

The second Reason drawn from the Decrees of ancient councels.
THe Council of Laodicea, holden in the year of our Council. Laodicen. can. 13.
Lord 370. has these words, Non est permittendum turbis electionem eorum
facere, qui sunt ad sacerdotium promovends. The people may not be permitted, to
have the Election and choice of them, who are to be preferred, to the
Ministry of the Church.

The Council of Cabilon has these words. Si quis episcopus Council Cabilon.
can. 10.
de quacunque civilate fuerit defunctus, non ab alio nisia comprev^ncialibus,
clero, and civibus suis, alterius habeatur electio. Sin autem huius ordinatio
irrita habeatur. If any Bishop shall dye, of what city soever he be, let not
an other be chosen by any other, save only by the Citizens, Clergy, and
bishops of the same province, If it be done otherwise, Conc. autich. can. 19.
the ordination shall be of no effect. The Council of Antioch teaches the
self same Doctrine.

The council of Nice, after it has pronounced the Election of the people to
be void and of none effect, adds Conc. 2. Nicen. can. 3. and nic. 1. can. 4.
these words. Oportet. n. eum qui est promo vendus ad episcopatum, ab
episcopis eligi. For, he that shall be made a Bishop, must be chosen of the
Bishops. And this second Council of Nice alleges the first Council of Nice,
upon which they ground this their Decree. This reason therefore is consonant to
the former, that there is no certain prescript rule, for the Election of the
Ministers of the Church.

The third Reason drawn from the Testimony of the holy Fathers.
SAint Hierome in his Epistle to Evagrius, has these express words: Nam and
Alexandriae a Marco evangelista Hierom. ad Evagr. tom. 3. Fol. 150. A.
vsque ad Heraclam and Dionisium episcopos, presbiteri semper vnum ex so
electum in excelsiori gradu collocatum, episcopum nominabant. For at Alexandria
from Mark the Evangelist until the Bishops Heraclas and Dionisius, the
pastoral Vide infra, cap. 14. memb. 2. and 3. per totum.
Elders did always choose one among them, whom they placed in an higher
degree, and called him Bishop. Mark these words well. Saint Hierome says
here, that the Priests or Pastoral Elders did in Saint Marks time, (which
was in the time of the Apostles,) choose one of themselves to be their Bishop.
He makes no mention at al, of any interest that the people had in that
Election.

He that can and list, may read in the Ecclesiastical Histories, that when
Anxentius the Arian was deprived of the Bishopric of Millan, then
Valentinianus the Emperor called the Bishops together, and willed them to
place such a one in that Bishopric, as was fit for the place. Which motion of
the Emperor did no sooner sound in the ears of the Bishops, but they
forthwith humbly requested the Emperor, that he himself would choose one whom
he thought most meet in that behalf. Yet the Emperor both gravely,
prudently, and most Christianly answered, that it were much better for them to
choose one, for that they were best able to judge and discern, of his
meetnesse for that place. In the end, the good Emperor seeing the people
tum^^tuously divided abo^t the Election, was content to interpose his
authority, and to command Ambrose to be ord^ined Bishop there. These are the
words of Theodoretus. Hac dissensione cognita Ambrosius vrbis praefectus,
Theodor. lib. 4. hist. cap. 6.
veritus ne qui ^novarum rerum molirentur prop^re ad ecclesiam co^tendit. Illi
sed^tione compressa vno ore omnes postulant, vti Ambrosius. qui adhuc sacris
Baptismi m^sterijs non erat initiatus ipsi^ designetur episcopus Quare audua,
(...) iubet illum egregium virum extemplo and initiari, and episcopum ordinari.

So soon as this dissension was known. Ambrose the governor of the City,
fearing least they should (...) some new tumult, comes with speed unto the
Church. The people beholding him made an end of their variance, and all with
one assent desired, that Ambrose not as yet Baptized with the holy Lauer, might
be designed their Bishop. Which when the Emperor heard, he commanded, that
forthwith that worthy man should be Baptized, and then created their Bishop.
Thus writes this ancient and learned father.

Out of these words I observe first; that in the time of Theodoret, (who lived
almost 1200. years ago) the people had voices in the Election of the
Ministers of the Church. Secondly, that such usage of popular Election,

Eusebius Caesariensis affirms constantly, that two Eusebius. lib. 6. cap. 7.
hist. eccles.
excellent Bishops in Palestine, Theoctistus Bishop of Caesarea, and Alexander
Bishop of Jerusalem, did of themselves make the famous Doctor Origin Minister
of the Church. Many like testimonies, are every where to be found in the
history of the Church, but I study to be brief.

The fourth Reason, drawn from the uniform consent of late Writers.
Master Calvin, whose only testimony were sufficient in this dispute,) is so
plain and resolute, that whosoever shall with judgment and indifferency
peruse his Doctrine, cannot but yield unto mine opinion in this behalf. These
are his express words; Est quidem and il^ud (fateor) optima ratione sancitum
in Laodicens^ consilio, ne turbis electio permittatur. Uix. n. vnquam evenit,
vt tot capita vno sensu rem aliquam been Calvin inst. lib. 4. cap. 4 ^. 1^.
componant.

This I confess, was with very great reason decreed in the council of
Laodicea, that the Election should not be permitted to the common people. For
it is very seldom or never seen, that so many heads can agree to conclude any
matter well. Lo, this great learned man, (who was the greatest patron of the
new discipline,) grants freely and roundly, that the Church may change the
manner of election, and consequently, that no one certain kind of election, is
de iure diuino, decreed by Gods law to be perpetual.

Again in an other place, the same Doctor has these words; Verum in caeteris
consentanea fuit ipsorum observatio; Calvin. inst. lib. 4. cap 4.. 10.
cum Pauli descriptione. In eo autem quod tertio loco posuimus, quinam scz.
ministros instituere debeant, non vnum semper tenerunt ordinem. But in all the
rest, their observation was agreeable to the discriptio^ of the Apostle. And
touching the third point, who ought to choose the Ministers, they did not
always observe the same order. Lo, the manner of choosing Vide supra, cap. 7
per totum.
the Ministers, was not the same in every place, but varied according to the
circumstances of times and places, as seemed best to every Church.

Master Beza is so plain in this controversy, (though he be deemed one of
the chiefest patrons of the Presbytery) Beza in confession. cap. 5. art. 35.
and art. 17. in fine.
that I think his words indifferently po^de^ed, will sufficiently confirm
mine opinion, and the Doctrine I defend. These are his express words; Quoniam
plerumque multitudo and imperita est and intractabilis, and mayor part saepe
meliorem vincit, ne in democratia quidem legitime constituta, omnia permissa
sunt effrent vulgo; sed constituti sunt ex populi consensu certi magistratus
qui plebi praeeant, and inconditam multitudinem rega^t. Quod sihaec prudetia in
negotijs humanis requiritur, multo Vide infra, cap. 14. per tota, and notum
valde, membr. 2. and 3.
sane magis opus est certa moderatione in ijsrebus, in quibus ho-mines prorsus
caecutiu^t. Neque causa est, cur quisqua^ sani iudicij homo clamitet nullis hic
esse prude^tiae locu^, nisi hanc prude^tia^ de qua loquor, ostendat cum dei
verbo pugnare, quod sane non arbitror. Sequitur: neque. n. simpliciter
spectandu^, quid sit ab apostolis factum in politia ecclesiastica. quum
diuersissimae sint circumstantiae, ac proinde absque Cacozelia non possint
omnia omnibus locis ac temporibus ad vnam eandemque formam revocari, sed potius
spectandus est eorum finis and scopus invariabilis, and ea deligenda forma ac
ratio rerum agendarum, quae rectaeo deducat.

Because the multitude is for the most part ignorant and intractable, and the
greater part does often prevail against the better; there cannot be found
even a popular state lawfully appointed, where all things are committed to the
unruly multitude, but certain magistrates are appointed by the consent of the
people to rule them. If this prudence must be had in humane affairs, much more
is a moderation required in those matters, wherein men are altogether blinded.
Neither is there any cause why any man of sound judgment should exclame, that
in such a case there is no place for policy; unless he can show this
policy whereof I speak, to be repugnant to the word of God, which I think
he can never do. For we must not always look, what the Apostles did in
Church government, seeing there is so great diversity of circumstances, that a
man ^ Absque (...).
cannot without preposterous zeal reduce all things in all places and times,
to one and the self same for the; but it is sufficient, if respect be had to
their end and purpose, which Vide supra, cap. 7 aphor. 3. ^at. 3.
is not variable, and that manner and form in Churchmatters be used, which
leads directly thereunto. Thus writes Master Beza.

Out of this Doctrine, which master Beza has freely delivered to our
consideration, I observe these worthy documents; which I wish the gentle
Reader, to keep always in his good remembrance. First, that the common Church
must use great policy in these affairs. Fifthly, that Bezas Vide supra cap. 7.
doctrine. Who, I verily think, if he were here and did behold the same, would
with applause subscribe thereunto.

M. Bullenger, a man of high esteem in Christ's church, has these words;
Quamobrem hinc efficitur, ecclesiam habere Bullenger. aaversus Anahapt. libr.
3. cap. 4.
potestatem and mandatum eligendi ministros. Hoc autem facere potest vel tota
ecclesia vel fidi homines ab ecclesia ad hoc elects, provt commodius, vtilius
and ad pacem conscrvanaam aptius videtur, pro locorum, personarum and temporum
ratione. Nam cuncta haec ad Pauli regulam dirigenda sunt vt omnia decenter and
ordine fiant. Sequitur^ ita Paulus and Bernabas presbyteros seu ministros
elegerunt in ecclesus Asiae. Et Titus in Creta, and Timotheus in Ephesi,
ecclesiarum ministros ordinarunt. Habent aut^mi^^ ^uam potestatem, ex eo quod a
tota ecclesia delecti sunt, quae ex verbo dei potestatem and mandatum habet
eligendi ecclisiae ministros.

Wherefore hence it comes, that the Church has power Vide cap. II. ex
Musculo, and nota valde
and commandment to choose Ministers. And this commission may be performed,
either by the Church her self wholly or by some faithful persons chosen by the
Church, to this end and purpose; as shall be thought more convenient,
profitable, and sit for the peace of the Church, regard being had to the
places, persons, and times. For all these things must be referred to Saint
Paul's rule, that all things may be done decently and in order. So Paul and
Bernabas, choose Ministers in the Churches of Asia. So Titus choose Ministers
in Creta, and Timotheus choose pastoral Elders at Ephesus. And these persons
have authority so to do, because the whole church has chosen them there
unto; which by Gods word has power and commission, to choose the ministers of
the Church. Thus writes this famous Doctor. Out of these words, I observe
these golden Lessons. First, that the authority to choose and elect Paul,
Bernabas, Titus, and Timotheus, did of themselves choose the ministers of the
church; and consequently, that the manner of electing church-ministers this day
used in the church of England, is agreeable to the word of God, and also to the
Apostolic practice of the Primitive church. For our Bishops do not exercise
any authority at all, save that only, which the whole church assembled in
Parliament, did by uniform assent committed unto them.

The first Objection.
S. Cyprian tells us, that the people have interest in the Election of
Ministers, which was given them by divine Cypr. lib. 10 epist. 4.
authority. Ergo, it is not in man's power, to take away that freedom from
them.

The Answer.
I answer; First, that S. Cyprian means nothing else by divine authority,
but divine examples; not any divine Uiz. that there are examples in the
Scripture, by which we may learn, that the common people were present at the
election of the Ministers, to give testimony to the church of their life and
conversation; as witnesses of their honest behavior, not as Judges of the
Election. This my answer is grounded upon S. Cyprians own words, which I
prove sundry ways. Number. 20. 1. v. 2. 7. Act. 1. act. 6.
First, because he proves his assertion only by examples; viz. For that
Eleazar, Matthias, and the 7. Deacons, were chosen in the sight and presence of
the people. Now we know, that examples only show what may be done; but they
are not a law, which do or can command a thing of necessity to be done.
Christ ministered the holy Eucharist after Supper, but we do it before dinner.
The Apostles received it sitting but we take it kneeling. Christ ministered it
in unleavened bread, but we in bread that is leauened.

So we see a great disparitie, betwixt examples and precepts. The former do
instruct us, but not compel us; the Vide inferius, cap. 14. memb 2. and 3. and
nota valde. cap. totu^.
latter do not only teach us, but they also command us. Again because S.
Cyprian, has these words; Quod and ipsum videmus de divina authoritate
descendere, vt sacerdos plebe praesente sub omnium oculis deligatur, and dignus
atque idoneus publico indicio ac testimonio comprobetur.

Which thing we see descends from divine authority, that the Priest may be
chosen when the people are present, in the eyes of them all; that he may be
proved worthy, by public judgment and testimony. And a little after, he
shows more plainly the cause, why the people are present at elections. Et
Episcopus deligatur plebe praesente, quae singulorum vitam plenissime novit.
And that the Bishop may be chosen in the presence of the people, who know best
what every man's life has been. Thirdly, because S. Cyprian confesses in that
very place, that some Provinces had an other custom, whom he reproves not.

I answer secondly, that if the Antecedent be admitted, and we also grant
the peoples interest to be, De iure divino; yet can nothing be inferred
thereupon, against the practice of the Church of England. The reason is
evident, because nothing is done in our Churches of England, to which the
people have not yielded their assent, as is already proved.

The 2. Objection.
The example of the Apostles, says M. Calvin, is to us Uice praecepti. Ergo,
we may not change, or depart from their practice in any wise.

The Answer.
I answer; first, that I have proved the contrary, both out of Master Calvin
and M. Beza: yea, M Calvin himself grants freely, that Christ's own
practice may be changed: and that in a matter of greatest moment, even in the
blessed Eucharist. These are his own words: Nihil a Christ's consilio ac
voluntate alienu^ facere videri, qui non contemptu neque temeritate sed ipsa
necessitate adacti, provino aliua in ijs regionibus vsitatae potionis genus
usurparent. Hoc domini Calvin, epist. 25 apud Bezam. Page 167.
Calvini responsum, vt optima ratione nixum, and Christi consilio consentaneum,
noster catus adeo comprobavit vt eos superstitiose sacere censuerimus, qui a
vini symbolo vsque adeo penderent, vt alter a^ caenae partem omittere mallent,
qua^ Analogon aliud symbolum ita cogente necessitate, vsurpare.

M. Calvin (says M. Beza,) answered to his brethren in America which have no
wine, that they should not do contrary to Christ's will and meaning, who not
upon contempt, but constrained with necessity, would use insteede of wine,
some other kind of drink usual in that countery. Which counsel of M. Calvin
our congregation did so well like, as grounded upon good reason, and agreeable
to Christ's counsel, that we judged them to be superstitious, which did so
depend upon the Symbol of wine, that they had rather omit the one part of the
Supper, then to use upon necessity, an other Symbol proportionable unto wine.
This was M. Calvin's opinion, in this important and most weighty affair.

M. Beza likewise delivers his judgment, in another subject of like moment.
These are his express words;

Secundi generis sunt ipsa signorum materia, and nonnullorum r^uum a domino
institutorum forma; vt exempti gratia, panis and vinum sunt caenae signa ex
Domini institutione. Ubi igitur panis aut vini, vel nullus est vsus, vel nulla
certo tempore copia, number caenae Domini nulla celebrabitur? Imo rite
celebrabitur, si quod panis aut vini vicem, vel ex vsu communi vel pro temporis
ratione supplet, panis aut vini loco adhibeatur. Haec. n. men's fuit Christi,
quum panem ac vinum ad haec mysteria deligeret, vt propositis earum rerum
signis quibus corpus nostrum alitur, veram alimoniam spiritualem velut ob
oculos representaret. Itaque a Christi sententi a nihil aberrat, qui nullo
prorsus novandi studio pro pane and vino substituat, quae etsi non parem,
similem tamen alimonia analogiam habeant. Desie etiam aqua and tamen baptismus
alicuius differri cum adificatione non possit, nec debeat; ego certe quovis
alio liquore, non minus rite quam aqua baptizarim.

Of the second kind are the matter of the signs, and the form of certain
Rites which our Lord ordained; as for examples sake, bread and wine, are the
signs of the Supper, by our Lords own institution. Where therefore there is
either no use at all of bread and wine, or else great want for a time, shall we
celebrate no Supper of the Lord? Yea, it shall be celebrated aright, if that
be taken in the place of bread and wine, which either by common use, or in
regard of the time, is used in the stead of bread or wine. For this Christ
intended, when he chose bread and wine for these mysteries; that by proposing
before our eyes, the signs of those things with which our bodies is nourished,
he might represent the true food of our souls. Therefore he swarueth not at
all from Christ's meaning, who having no desire of innovation, uses in stead
of bread and wine, those things, which though they have not equal, yet have
they like proportion of nourishment with bread and wine. There wants also
water, and yet Baptism neither ought nor can be differed with edification; my
self doubtless would baptize in any other liquor, no less lawfully then I
would in water. This is master Bezaes judgment, even in the essential parts
of the Sacraments.

Out of this doctrine thus delivered by these two learned Doctors, M. Calvin,
and M. Beza I observe these most important documents. First, that the
authority of

Secondly, that the use of the Lords Supper and of Baptism

Thirdly, that neither the practice of the Apostles, nor Christ, nor yet
Christ's own institution: No, not in the matter of Sacraments, is of such
force and moment; but that the church upon good and necessary cause, may alter
and change the same. And consequently, it must needs be granted, neither can
it with any color of reason be denied; that the Church may change the manner
of choosing her ministers, as necessary circumstances of times, places, and
persons shall require. Especially, seeing there is neither example,
commandment, or institution of Christ to the contrary.

CHAP. X. Of the ordeining of Ministers, and the Ceremonies thereto
apperteining.
THat Bishops have and ever had authority, to make, order, and admit Ministers
of the Church; it is so clear and evident, by the Scriptures, Councels,
Fathers and continual practice of the Church, that I cannot but admire their
audatious temeritie, that do oppugn the same. Mark well the answers, to all
the Objections in this Chapter.

Saint Paul charge. Bishop Timothy, not to lay his 1. Tim. 5. V. 22. 2 timothy
1. 6. tit. 1. 5.
hands rashly on any man. And the same Saint Paul tells us, that he left
Bishop Titus at Creta, that he might order and make ministers in every town.

Now, that Timothy and Titus ordained Ministers, it is clear by the Text it
self. But two doubts remain; Vide supra cap 5.
The one, whether Timothy and Titus had more authority then other common
Ministers, or not. The other, whether they alone ordained Ministers or with the
ioynt-authoritie of others.

Touching the former, I have proved already by many testimonies, that both
Titus and Timotheus were Archbishops, and had superiority over many other
Bishops.

I will hear adioyne the testimony of Hemingius, Hemingius in enchir. page
367. p. 372. p 367. p. 373.
whose words are these: Attamen Paulus gradu digns tatis and ordine Timotheo
and Tito erat superior. Timotheus gradu and ordine excelluit reliquos Ephesmae
vrbis presbyteros. Et Titus Cretensihus praecrat. Sequitur, inter hos ministros
agnoscit etiam ecclesia nostra gradus dignitatis and ordines, pro diversitate
donorum, laborum magnitudine, ac v^cationum dignitate ac iudicat barbaricum
esse, de ecclesia hunc ordinem tollere velle. Iudicat caeteros Ministros suis
episcopis oportere obtemperare in omnibus, quod ad adificationem ecclesiae
faciunt, iuxta verbum dei ac vtilem ecclesiae oeconomium. Iudicat episcoposius
habere in caeteros ministros ecclesiae non despoticum sed patrium.

But Paul in deegree and order of dignity, was superior to Timothy and
Titus. Timothy in degree and order, excelled all other Presbyters or Priests
of Ephesus; and Titus was governor over the Cretions. Among these Ministers,
our Church also acknowledges degrees of dignity, and orders, according to the
diversity of gifts, labors, and calling: and deemeth him to be a plain
rudes be, that once has but a mind to take this order out of the Church. Our
Church also judges, that all other Ministers must obey their Bishops, in all
things which pertain to edification, according to the word of God, and the
profitable dispensation of the Church. She judges that the Bishops have a
sovereignty over all other Ministers of the Church; yet not despoticall, but
paternall.

Touching the latter, the scripture is plain, that none Act. 1 act 6. act. 14
tit 1. 5. 2. tim. 1. 6.
but Bishops did ordain Church-ministers at any time. And these Fathers of the
Church affirm constantly, that this was a special and known prerogative of
Bishops; that they, and none but they, could order and make Ministers of the
Church. S. Hierome has these evident and express words; Quid enim facit
excepta ordinatione Episcopus, quod presbyter Hieron. epist. ad Evagr. tom 3.
fol. 150 B.
non faciat? For what does a Bishop, which a Priest does not, the ordering of
Ministers excepted? Lo in this one thing, does a Bishop differ from Priests
and inferior Ministers; because no other Minister, save only a Bishop, can
ordain and make Ministers of the Church.

Saint Epiphanius, (who lived above one thousand and two hundred years ago,)
affirms plainly, that Bishops Epiph. cont. haer ab. 3. to 1. haer. 75. Page
296.
only make Priests, that is, begets fathers to the Church; and both he and
Saint Austin enrolled the contrary opinion among flat heresies, censuring all
them for Heretics, that held or defended such absurdities.

Saint Irenaeus, (who lived next to the Apostles, and Irenaeus, lib. 3. cap 3.
libr. 5. cap. 2. page 589.
so could not be ignorant, what was the Church practice in their days,)
makes this my doctrine without question, and beyond all exception; that
Bishops even in the Apostolic time, were different in degree from Priests,
and did create and make Priests, but never were created of Priests.

No, no: if Priests could make Priests: or if it were not an Apostolical
tradition, that that charge does appertain only to Bishops, (as it is this
day laubably observed in the Church of England, then doubtless. Aerius could
never have been censured for an Heretic. Add hereunto, that which I have
already delivered, in the fist Chapter, in the first and second Paragraph; and
thou shall find this Doctrine, to be agreeable to the practice of Christ's
church in all former ages. See Zanchius, and note well his words. Note well
also the Answer to the second Objection. Supra, cap. 5. ^. 2.


The first Objection.
It appears by Saint Hierome in his Epistle to Evagrius, that one minister
was made superior to an other, only by the ordinance of men.

The Answer.
I answer; First, that Saint Hierome calls that man's ordinance, de iure
divine, a divine institution or ordinance, two ways. First, because it is of
God immediately. Secondly, for that it is of them, who are so directed by Gods
holy spirit, that they cannot err. This phrase of speech, Saint Paul uses in
these words, to the remnant I 1. Cor. 7. Verse. 12:
speak, and not the Lord. Where we may not doubt, but all that Saint Paul
spoke, was from the Lord, and that his ordinance was divine, and not mere
humane. And in this sense, the superiority of Bishops over other inferior
Ministers of the Church, may be called De iure divine, or an ordinance divine.
Saint Hierome calls it an humane ordinance, rather then Divine; because it
was De iure divine only in genere, and mediately, and De iure humano in
specie, and immediately.

The second Objection
In the primitive Church, there was neither Archbishop, Patriarch, nor
Metropolitan, and yet no Church did or can excel the same, in government,
beauty, or perfection,

The Answer.
I answer; First, that though in the very beginning of Vide and nota
Bullinger. supra cap. 9. p^^^ante object. I.
of the church, for the common good, unity, and peace of the same. Whosoever
shall read attentively, Master Bullingers words against the Anabaptists of
his time, shall find and perceive very evidently, that he constantly
defends this my opinion and doctrine.

Master Bucer makes this case most evident, whilst Bucerus in 4. cap ad
(...) c. p 8. and (...) val. ac.
he shows the liberty, freedom, and authority of the Church, in these
most pithy and golden words; At vero de ^aeteris signis quae in sacris
adhibita sunt a veteri^^^, ve^ hodi^ adhibentur a multis, vt sunt ignis ad
oxorcijmes and catechi, mos, and alba vestis baptizatorum, sacer panis qui
dabatur catechumenis, and pleraque alia, sic sentio. Siquae ecclesiae essent,
quae puram Christi tenerent doctrinam, and sinceram servarent disciplinem,
hisque signis vterentur simpli^iter and pure, absque omni superstitione vel
levitate. praecise ad pias admonitiones easquo probe ommbus intellectas; eas
ecclesias non possem equidem propter signorum talem vsum condemnare. Sequitur;
hinc fit, vt homines sicut in privatis and publicis actionibus faciunt, ita
vtiliter etiam pleraque signa adhibeant sacris ceremorijs. Iterum ibidem;
signum impositionis manuum etiam episcopi soli prabebant, and non absque
ratione. Sive. n sic faedus domini baptizatis confirmandum^ sive
reconciliandiij, qui gras viu^ peccarunt; sive ecclesijs ministri ordinandi
haec omnia ministeria maxim decent eos, quibus summa ecclesiarum cur a
demandata est.

Touching all other ceremonies, which were used of ancient time in the holy
mysteries, or are this day in use with many; as fire to Exorcismes and
Catechismos, the white garment of the Baptized, holy bread given to the
Catechumenes, and many other things, my opinion is this, if there were any
Churches, which retained pure doctrine and sincere discipline, and did use
these signs and ceremonies simplely and purely, without all superstition or
leuitie, precisely to godly admonitions well understood of all the people; I
verily could not condemn those churches, for the use of such signs or
ceremonies. Hence it comes, that as men do in private and public actions,
so also may they add many signs unto their holy ceremonies, and that not
without profit. The sign also of imposition of hands, was given by Bishops
only, and that Note well this point and doctrine, dels. uered by this great
learned man.
not without reason. For whether the baptized were to be confirmed with the
covenant of the Lord, or they, who had sinned grievously, were to be
reconciled, or Ministers were to be ordained unto Churches, all these
ministeries do especially partaine unto them, to whom the chiefest charge of
the church is committed.

Out of these golden words of this great learned Doctor, and renowned Writer,
I observe these worthy lessons. First, that in the ancient approved Churches
were many English Church does this day lawdably observe, howsoever some
mal-contents, more rashly then wisely impugn the same. Fourthly, that the
Church has authority to constitute symbols, signs and ceremonies, and to
add them English Church.

Master Zuinglius a very learned and famous Writer, and a most zealous
professor of Christ's Gospel, is able to Zuinglius in eccles. page 48
satisfy all indifferent Readers. These are his express words: Simul and
illud notari debet, quod apostolorum nomen deposuerunt, vt primum vni alicui
ecclesiae affixi, illius curam continuam habuerant, cum nimirum vel senecta
impediti, vel morbis afflicti, peregrinationum molestijs and periculis amplius,
sufficere non potuerunt. Tunc. n. non apostoli amplius, sed episcopi dicti
sunt. Possumus autem huins rei exemplum, imo testem adducere D. Iacobum, quem
nos minorem ab atate dicimus. Hunc. n. Huronimus and omnes simul vetusti
patres, Hierosolymitanorum episcopum nominant, non aliam ob causam, quam quod
ea in vrbe sedem fixam posuisset. Cum, n. antea, vt and reliqui apostoli,
peregrinationibus deditus fidem vbique terrarum docuisset, tandem abipsis
apostolis constitutus est, qui Hierosolymitanae ecclesiae cura^, ceu diligens
aliquis speculator, ageret: idem de Iohanne euangelista and christi discipulo
dicere possumus. Cum. n. multis and varijs periculis obiectus apostolieam
functionem longo tempore administravisset, tandem Ephesiorum episcopus factus,
in ea vrbe anno ab ascensione domini sexagesimo octavo e vivis excessit.

This also must be marked, that they laid away the name of Apostles, so soon
as they were tied to any one church, and had the continual charge thereof. To
wit, when they being either hindered with old age, or afflicted with diseases,
were no longer able to endure troubles and molestations of travail. For then
they were no longer called Apostles, but Bishops. We may bring Saint James the
younger, for an example, or rather for a witness of this matter. For Hierome
and all the ancient Fathers, call him the Bishop of Jerusalem; and for no
other cause, save only that he had placed himself in that city. For when in
former times, he as the rest of the Apostles, being given to peregrination,
had taught the faith every where, the Apostles made him, as a diligent
watchman, the Bishop of Jerusalem. The same we may say of Saint John the
Evangelist, and disciple of Christ. For when he being exposed to many dangers,
had executed the apostolical function a long time, he was at length made the
Bishop of Ephesus, and died 68, years after our Lords ascension.

Out of these words of this excellent discourse, I note first, Note this point
wel^ for it is of great moment.
they ceased to be called Apostles, and were named Bishops. And this their
ordinary calling, remains this day in the Church, and shall continue until
the worlds end. Hence comes it, that all the holy Fathers affirm with
uniform consent, that Bishops this day succeed the Apostles in their
ordinarily calling.

This grave Writer delivers his opinion for ceremonies, Zuinglius in
acclesiaste, page 20.
most plainly and prudently in these express words; Iam obijciebant odiose
nimis, salem, butyrum, salivam, lutum, and alia id genus, imo ipsas quoque
orationes quae super infantibus fiunt, quod neque Johannes, neque apostoli
legerentur orationibus baptismo praeivisse. Ad quae sic respondimus, primum ad
ceremonias; Christum interim caecos quosdam visui restituisse mediantibus tactu
aut luto, interim solo verbo (respice,) neque tamen eos minus vidisse, qui
tactu vel luto mediante aciem recepissent, quam qui solo verbo, at nihil morari
nos externa ista, si ecclesia iubeat res^indi factumque est, vt protinus
iuberet, non ignorantibus nobis qui verbo praesumus, iam inter exordia
ecclesiae horum fuisse vsum tametsi eis non tantum tribueretur, atque his
nostris temporibus, vnde and citra negotium recidimus. Now they objected too
odiously, Butter, Salt, spittle, Cley, and such; like, yea the very prayers
made over infants, because neither John, nor the Apostles are read, to have
prevented baptism with prayers. To which we answered, and first to the
ceremonies, that Christ sometime cured the blind by touching and Clay,
sometime by his word only, neither for all that did they see less, who
received sight by Clay and touching, then they which saw by his only word:
but we make no reckoning of these external things, if the church command them
to be taken away, and we obe^ed, as she appointed, albeit we ministers are
not ignorant, that in the beginning of the church these ceremonies were used,
though not in such sort as now adays, and therefore without contradiction we
reject them.

Out of this dicourse we may learn sufficiently, how to behave our selves
touching ceremonies. viz. to use or refuse signs and ceremonies, as being
things indifferent, as the church shall think it expedient and appoint to be
done.

Hemingius an other famous late writer, has these words; Augustinus and
Ambrosius non offenduntur, ex coque aliae Remae, Hemingius in syntagm. in. 4.
lege decalogi.
aliae Mediolani essent ceremoniae. Nam inter se iunguntur pij spiritis
Christi, non humanis ceremonijs. Vt pios gubernatores ecclesiarum velim magno
studio cavere, ne ceremoniae scandalo sint infirmis; it a privatos nolim
quicquam mutare in ceremonijs, gravi authoritate a maioribus institutis and
approbatis. Neque est, quod exactissima ratio singularum ceremoniarum
inquiratur, modo non manifestam superstitionem and impietatem redoleant. Quidam
offenduntur ceremonijs nostris, quas clamitant papisticas esse. Dicunt nos
habere sacerdotes, altaria, vectes, candelos, imagines, exorcismos, signationes
crucis, plane papistico more. His ego respondeo, ecclesiam veram a falsae
dictingunendam doctrina and cultu, non ceremonijs quae per se adiaphorae sunt.
Neque. n ceremonias adiaphoras tanti momenti esse indicamus, vt propter illas
schismata moveantur in ecclesia. Retineatur doctrinae sinceritas, retineatur
purus dei cultus. Alia serviant partim tranquillitati, partim infirmitati
hominum; and relinquamus prudentia quberuatorum, and de his rebus dispiciant.

Austen and Ambrose are not offended, that Rome had one kind of ceremonies, and
Millan an other. For the godly are lincked together by the spirit of Christ,
not by humane ceremonies. As I wish the godly governors of Churches to be very
circumspect, that ceremonies do not scandalize weakelings, so would I not have
private persons to alter Vide supra, cap. 9. per totum, and infra, cap. 14
any thing in ceremonies, which our ancestors with grave authority have
ordained and approved. Neither is there any cause, why we should require an
exact reason of every ceremony, so that they imply not any manifest
superstition and impiety. Some are offended with our ceremonies, crying out
that they are papisticall. They say, we have Priests, Alters, Vestures,
Candels, Images, Exorcismes, Crossings, even after the Popish manner. To these
good fellows I answer, that the true Church is distinguished from the false,
in doctrine and worship; but not in ceremonies, which are of their own nature
things indifferent. For we think not ceremonies indifferent to be of such
moment, Mark this learned, wise, and goaty counsel
that for them we may make a Schism in the Church. Let us retain the
sincerity of Doctrine, and hold fast the pure worship of GOD. Let other things
serve partly peace and tranquillity, partly the infirmity of men; and let us
leave these things to the prudent consideration of our superiors, and let them
dispose thereof.

Out of these words of this great learned Writer, we may gather all things
necessary, for the decision of all controversies about rites and ceremonies of
the Church. For first, he tells us, that the variety of ceremonies at Rome
Millan, did not offend Saint Austen and Saint Ambrose. Secondly, that private
persons must be obedient to Bucer and Zuinglius teaches the same doctrine, as
is already proved.

The third Objection.
Now the Church is troubled with Chauncellours Commissaries, Officials, and
such like; for defense whereof, no reason can be yielded.

The Answer.
The antiquity of Chauncellours and Officials, or of the Substitutes and
Vicars of Bishops, (which is all one in the thing it self,) is such and of so
great authority in Gods church, that both old and late writers of best
judgment, moderation, and learning, have acknowledged and approved the same.
The ancient Council of Ancyran, (which was before Conc. Ancyr. Can. 13.
the Nicen council, even almost 13. hundred years ago,) has these express
words: Vicarijs Episcoporum (quos graci corepiscopos voca^t,) non licere vel
presbyteros vel diaconos ordinare; sed nec presbyteris civitatis sine episcopi
praecepto amplius aliquid imperare, nec sine authoritate literarum eius in
vnaquaque parochia aliquid agere.

We decree (says this council,) that it is not lawful for the Vicars or
Substitutes of Bishops, (whom the Greeks call fellow-bishops or coadiutors,)
to order either Priests or Deacons; neither yet to be lawful to the Priests
of the City, to command any thing else without the Bishops authority, or
without the authority of his letters, to do any thing in any parish. The
ancient council of Neocaesarea, Conc. Neocae. can. 13. Con. Antioch. can. 8.
and the Council of Antioch, being likewise of great antiquity, do
acknowledge and approve the said Vicars or Substitutes of Bishops.

Hemingius agrees with the Canons of the aforementioned councels, delivering his
opinion in these words: Hac potestate Hemingius in syntagm. de gubernat.
eccles.
ecclesia ordinat ministros pro commodo suo, vt omnia ordinate fiant ad
instaurationem corporis Christi. Hinc ecclesia purior sequuta tempora
Apostolorum, alios patriarchas, alios episcopos, alios corepiscopos, alios
pastores and catechistas instituit. Sequitur decori parts sunt duae. Prior, vt
excitemur ad pietatem illis adminiculis. Posterior, vt modestia and gravitas in
pietatis tractatione eluceat.

By this power the Church orders Ministers for her own good, that all things
may be done in order, for the instauration of the body of Christ. Hence the
pure church, which followed after the days of the Apostles, appointed some to
be Patriarchs, some to be Bishops, some Coadiutors, Vicars, or fellow-bishops,
othersome Pastors and Catechists. Comeliness, has two parts; the first, that
we may be drawn to piety by these helps; the other, that modesty and
gravitie may shine, in the ordinance of piety.

Out of these words, I note first, that the Church may

M. Bucer, M. Zanchius, and M. Calvin, the greatest Patrons of Presbiterie, do
all agree unto this my doctrine, acknowledging it for the doctrine of the best
and purest Churches, next after the Apostles-dayes. In regard of brevitie, I
surcease from recital of their words.

The Reply.
The Church of Geneva, where M. Calvin was the chief in his time, has neither
Patriarchs, nor Archbishops, nor Suffragans, or substitute vicars.

The Answer.
I answer with M. Calvin himself, whose words are these; Talis morositas
deterrima est pestis, quum morem ecclesiae Calvin in in arg in ep. ad gal.
vnius volumus pro universally lege valere. Such morositie is a pestilent
mischief, when we will have the manner of one Church, to be in place of an
universal law. Yea, if M. Calvin, were this day living, he would not affirm
the usage of Geneva, to be a fit pattern for the government of our English
Church. Many Ceremonies and constitutions agree well to our Church, which were
nothing convenient to some other. Hence comes it, that the Church has
authority, as I have already proved,) to constitute, make, and publish, such
Canons, Rules, and Ordinances, as tend to the common good and peaceable
government thereof.

The 4. Objection.
The Bishops take upon them to give the holy Ghost, when they ridiculously make
Ministers. For they say, Receive ye the holy Ghost.

The Answer.
I answer, that the manner of ordering Ministers used in our English Church,
descended by tradition from the best, most ancient, and purest Churches. Which
thing Saint Ambrose, Saint Augustine, Saint Hierome, and all the holy Fathers
do constantly affirm with uniform assent. Neither does the Bishop take upon
him to give the holy Ghost, but humbly and reverently pronounces Christ's
words, according to the usual practice of all Churches in best approved
times; thereby signifying unto the newly ordered Ministers, their principal
charge and duty, and assuring them of the assistance of Gods holy Spirit, if
they labor in their calling as they ought to do. Which usage of our English
Church, is consonant as well to the practice of ancient Churches, as to the
doctrine of Saint Paul himself to Timothy, when 2. Tim 1. Uer. 6. Vide Calv.
libr. 4 instit. cap. 3. in fine and notato.
he says; Wherefore I put thee in remembrance, thou stir up the gift of
GOD which is in thee, by the putting on of mine hands. For albeit all things
necessary for our salvation, be contained in the Scriptures, either expressly,
or by neceslarie consequence, yet are many other things very profitable for the
external government of the Church, which are partly received by tradition from
the Apostles, and partly added by the authority of the Church, as
circumstances of times, places, and persons did require. Of this point of
doctrine M. Zuinglius disputes very learnedly, in a large Zuinglius part. 2.
De baptismo, page 87.
discourse against the Anabaptists. His words are these; Apostolos baptizatos
fuisse nusqua^legimus, nisi quod de duobus tantum mentio fiat, Johan. 1. Vbi
tamen idem hoc non diserte expressum est, sed obscurius innuitur. Quod si ergo
vestro more nihil eorum factum esse dicemus, quae scripturis sacris non
continentur; iam and D. virginem Mariam, and ipsos quoque Apostolos, baptismi
signo nunquam inauguratos fuisse fateri cogemur; quoa ab omni pietate and
religione est quam alienissimum. Sequitur: caeterum quod ad dogmata fides
spectat, and eas res quae fidem nostram and internum hominem informant perpetuo
hoc ce^ presenti antidoto vtendum est, quod Deus non praecepit credere, vt
credamus adsalutem necessarium non est. Cultum hunc non descripsit, nec
iniunxit Dominus, ergo illi placere and acceptus Vide supra cap. 7. ex calvino,
and nota.
esse non potest. Ceremoniarum autem ratio long alia est. Nec enim dicere
licebit, de ceremonijs istis in Scriptura nihil proditum est, ergo ceremonijs
istis vsi non sunt; quod ipsum in exemplo divae virginis and Apostolorum abunde
satis demonstratum est.

We read in no place of the holy Scripture, that the Apostles wear baptized;
save only, that mention is made of two in S. John. Where for all that, the
same is not plainly expressed, but obscurely infinuated. If therefore we
shall follow your manner, and deny all things, which are not contained in the
holy scriptures; then certes, we shall be compelled to grant, that neither
the blessed Virgin Marie, nor the Apostles them selves were ever baptized;
which doubtless is a strange assertion, and far from all piety and
religion. But touching doctrines of Faith, and those things which inform our
faith and the inward man, we must ever use this as a present preservative; what
God has not commanded us to believe, to believe that is not necessary to our
salvation. Our Lord neither appointed, nor enjoined this kind of worship;
therefore it can neither please, nor be acceptable to him. But touching
ceremonies, the case is far different. For we may not say; there is no
mention made of these Ceremonies in the Scripture, therefore the Apostles used
them not; which thing is proved abundantly, by the example of the blessed
Virgin, and of the Apostles. Out of this must excellent discourse, I observe
these worthy documents. First, that all things necessary Austins rule, who
August. in Epist. ad Ianuar. 1. Cor. 11. 16.
calls it insolent madness, to withstand and contradict that, which is
received by the custom of the whole Church. Yea, it is consonant to S. Paul's
practice, against the malapert sauciness of contentious persons.

CHAP. XI. Of the Presbytery, and Seignorie.
SOme otherwise learned, do this day labor with might and maine, to prove
that our English church ought to be governed See the 12. chap. sect. 4. ex
Bullingero, Gualtero, and alijs.
with a Presbytery; that is, with Pastors, Teachers, Laicall vnpriested
Elders, and Deacons, These 4. (as they contend) are the lawful Governors of
every particular congregation. Pastors and teachers, for procuring the
advancement of the faith of the Church; Elders, for the censure of their
conversation and life; and Deacons, for the comfort of the poor. That that the
truth of this controversy, (of which many talk, but very few understand it
aright,) may be laid open to the indifferent Reader, I have thought it good to
proceed therein, by way of Propositions.

The 1. Proposition.
THat kind of government, which may be altered for the circumstances of
times, places, and persons, is neither necessary nor perpetual. But the
government by Pastors, Doctors, Elders, and Deacons, (if ever there were any
such kind of government in the Christian world,) may be altered and changed;
Ergo, it is neither necessary, nor perpetual. the Argument is in form, and
the Proposition most clear and evident to every child. The difficulty or
Supr^ cap. 7. pertotum.
doubt (if there be any,) rests in the assumption. But I have proved it at
large, where I disputed of the Churches authority, in things indifferent. Yea,
there was a time, even in the days of the Apostles, when the Church had no
Act. 6. Acts 14. Vide infra, cap. 12 sect. 4.
Deacons. There was also a time, even in the days of the same Apostles, when
the Church had no vnpriested or unpreaching Elders. Who so reads seriously,
the Acts of the Apostles and S. Paul's Epistles, can not be ignorant in this
behalf.

The 2. Proposition.
CHrist did not translate the Sanhedrim, Synedrion, or Consistory of the
Jews, unto his Church in the new Testament. I prove it first, because both
their viz. First at Sylo, then at Jerusalem their chief city, until the
worst and last alterations therein; but the seekers of the new English
Presbytery, would have the like, (if not the very same,) to be erected in
every congregation.

Again in both Consistories of the Jewish Sanhedrim, Vide infra. ca. 12. sect.
4.
as well in the greater of the 70: as in the lesser of the 23. they were all
either Priests, or Doctors of the Law, the ^sa^. 10. v. 8.
then Sanhedrim had partly political partly eclesiastical jurisdiction both
together; but our Presbyters have only ecclesiastical, seeing (as they
grant,) to be Judges in civil places, is only the Office of the civil
Magistrate.

The 3. Proposition.
THe English supposed Presbytery, is not compatible with a Christian
Monarchy; but must perforce despoyle Vide infra, in sexta proposition in resp.
ad 2. object.
her, and bereave her of her royal soueraignitie. I prove it, because the said
Presbytery challenges unto her self, all authority in causes
ecclesiastical; the supreme ouer-sight of which causes, pertains to the
civil Magistrate, as is already proved.

The 4. Proposition.
THE English desired Presbytery, is not grounded upon the word of GOD. I prove
it, because the Scriptures alleged by the Patrons thereof, do conclude no
such matter. The Textes are five in number, being all that any way seem to
make for their purpose. The first is out of the Gospel, (tell the Church). To
this Text I Matt 18. ver. 17. 1
answer in this manner; First, that we for the true meaning of this portion
of Scripture, will give credit to Saint Chrysostom, and the rest of the
ancient Fathers; The Church to which this complaint must be made, does
signify the Bishops and governors of the Church; who, according to all
general Councels, ancient Canons, and the continual practice of the Church;
were ever to this day reputed, acknowledged, and taken for the Church
representiue. Secondly, that if we will be ruled by M. Calvin's Calvin in
harmonia evang. 3.
of the New Testament, but alludeth to the order of the Church of the Jews.
Thirdly, that by the judgment of the grave and learned writer M. Bullinger, a
great Patron of the Presbytery, Christ speaks here of the whole
congregation; and not to a few persons, of whom consists Calvin in harmonia
Evang.
the supposed Presbytery. And this exposition is so agreeable to the Text, as
none with right reason can deny the same. Yea this sense is indeed agreeable
to the verdict of S. Chrysostom and of all the ancient Fathers, and to the
continual practice of the Church in all ages. These are Bullingerus advers.
Anabapt. lib. 3. cap. 4 Vide infra, cap. 12. sect. 4. and no. ta valde.
M. Bullingers words; Quamobrem, hinc efficitur, ecclesiam habere potestatem
and mandatum eligendiministros. Hoc autem facere potest, veltota ecclesia, vel
fidi homines ab ecclesia, ad hoc electi, prout commodius, vtilius, and ad pacem
conservandam aptius videtur; prolocorum, personarum, and temporumratione. Nam
cuncta haec ad Pauli regulam dirigenda sunt, vt omnia decenter and ordine
fiant. Wherefore, hence it comes, that the Church has power and
commandment to choose her Ministers. And this may be performed, either by
the whole Church, or by faithful men chosen of the Church for this end and
purpose; as shall be thought more commodious, profitable, and fit for the
conservation of peace; respect being had to places, persons, and times. For all
these things must be reterred to Paul's rule, that all things be done decently
and in order. And a little after, the same Writer has these words: Habent
autem istisuam potestatem exeo quod a tota ecclesia detecti sunt, quaeex verbo
Deipotestatem and manda^n^ habet eligendi ecclesiae ministros. But these men
have their authority, for that the whole Church has chosen them, which by
Gods word has power and commandment, to choose the Ministers of the Church.
Thus writes this learned man.

Out of whose words it is most apparent and clear, that all power is granted
unto the whole Church, who to avoid confusion and for order sake, commits
her authority to certain chosen persons. Which persons are the Bishops and
Prelates of the Church, say I, and all antiquity will confess the same with
me. For neither Councels, Fathers, nor ancient Canons, do make any mention of
the late vpstart presbytery.

The Second text is fathered upon Saint Paul, where he says; let him that
rules, do it with diligence. The third Romans 12. Verse. 8.
text is drawn from the same Apostle, where he tells us, that God has
ordained in the Church, some Apostles, some Prophets, some teachers, some
workers of miracles; 1. cor. 12. Verse. 28.
after that, the gifts of healing, helpers, governors. To these two texts,
which are of one and the same effect, for the establishing of the presbytery,
I answer in this manner; First, that the Apostle in both places may be
understood (Cubernesejs) signifies governments, not governors. So that
thereupon cannot be inferred necessarily, any distinct governor from the
aforementioned Apostles, prophets, and Doctors. For diverse offices may be and
often are, coincident in one and the same officer. And for this respect, when
the Apostle comes to the repetition Mark this point well.
of his former assertions, and should by order have mentioned the gift of
governance; he passes it over in silence, albeit he reckons up the other
severally. Whereby he gives us to understand, that he contains the same,
either in all, or in some one of the former offices or gifts. Thirdly, Calvin,
master Bucer, and master Martyr, do extend these places to all kind of
government. The fourth text is taken from the Ephesians. 4.
Epistle to the Ephesians, which proves nothing at all, because there is no
mention made in that place of any governors, save only of Apostles,
Evangelists, Prophets, Pastors, and Doctors. None of which doubtless, can be
their vnpriested Elders.

The Fifth text is borrowed from Saint Paul to Timothy, ^. Tim. 5.
where he says, the Elders that rule well, are worthy of double honor:
specially, they which labor in the word and Doctrine. This text I grant, has
some color (though no truth) of that, which is in question. But I answer,
that the Apostle understands by Elders, such as are ministers of the word, or
else of the Sacraments. I prove it first, because Hierome, Saint Chrysostom,
and Saint Ambrose, yea and master Calvin himself, (where he speaks
purposely of Seniors,) do so understand the word (Elders.) Secondly,
(Coptontes) Calvin. libr. 4 institut. cap 4. 2.
which signifies to labor painfully, does argue a difference between Elders
of the same calling, whereof some labored more painfully then others did, the
meaning of the Apostle is this, and no other: that laborious and painful
Elders, are so much the more worthy to be graced with greater honors: by how
much greater pains and troublesome turmoyles, they undertake in their
ministry. For by the word (labor,) Saint Paul understands no ordinary,
vulgar, and mean exercise; but an extraordinary, vehement, and most painful
labor; such as Timothy, Titus, Luke, Mark, and others, were well acquainted
withal. Thirdly, because the Apostle, if he had meant that some (Coptontes)
which labor painfully, to distinguish them from such as labored in the same
kind and office, though not in so laborious and painful manner.

The fifth proposition.
THe constitution of the earnestly wished, and long expected English
presbytery, does overthrow it self, and can no way be defended. I prove it
first, because 1. Tim. 5.
more extraordinary or temporary, then are the other. And consequently, the
frame or building of the presbytery is not perfect, seeing it consists only
of these four; Pastors, Teachers, Elders, Deacons. And to answer as some do,
that there must be godly poor widows when they can be gotten, is not to the
purpose. For if Gods appointment and order may be altered in widows, because
sit women cannot be gotten; even so may we excuse, the want of their ruling
vpriested Seniors, as also the want of their Preaching Ministers. For the
necessity and want of sit persons, Writ for one and the same. For Saint Paul
having severed Apostles, Prophets, and Evangelists, Ephesians. 4. Verse. 11.
adds to them Pastors and Teachers by a conjunction copulative; which hoe
would not have done doubtless, if he had deemed them to be different orders.
Saint Hierome is iumpe of mine opinion, and reasons Hier. in hunc locum.
after the self same manner. And Saint Austen being demanded of Peulimis,
what difference was betwixt Pastor and Doctor, a pastor and a Teacher, answered
Aug. apud Haymonem, in 4. cap. ad ephesians.
in this sort; viz. That they were all one, because he cannot be a pastor,
who has not Doctrine, wherewith he may feed the flock committed to his
charge.

Master Bullinger decideth the controversy in plain terms, writing in this
manner; Nemo autem est, qui non vi^ deat hac vocabula invicem confundi and
alterum accipi pro altero. Nam apostolus etiam propheta, doctor, evangelista,
presbyter, atque episcopus est. Et episcopus evangelista and propheta est.
Propheta doctor, presbyter, and evangelista. Proinde apostolus paulus, varijs
hisce vocabulis varia illa dona significavit, qua dominus ecclesiae suae
importijt ad salutem.

Every man sees, that these words are confounded, and that one of them is
taken for an other. For an Apostle is also a Prophet, a Doctor, an Evangelist,
a Priest, and a Bishop. And a Bishop is an Evangelist and a Prophet. A Prophet
is a Doctor, an Elder, and an Evangelist. Therefore the Apostle Paul, by these
diverse names signifies those diverse gifts, which our Lord bestowed on his
Church unto salvation. I therefore conclude, that the pillars whereupon the
presbytery is builded, are sandy, rotten, and unsound; and consequently, that
that building which is reared upon them, cannot but be unstable and ruinous.

The sixth Proposition.
THe new English presbytery, was not known or heard of in the Christian
world, for the space of fifteen hundred years together at the least. This
proposition is sufficiently proved, by this precedent discourse; if it be well
marked from the beginning. Yea, my bare assertion is a good proof thereof;
until the patrons of the contrary opinion, can and shall name the time and
place, when and where such a presbytery was to be found.

The seventh Proposition
ALL Ministers created and made by the new presbytery, are mere lay-persons,
and cannot lawfully, either Preach Gods word, or administer the sacraments.
This is already proved. I will therefore salute our Brownists, Barrowists, and
such like, as the learned and famous Writer Master Bullinger did the
Anabaptists. His Bullinger. aduers. Anabapt. libr. 3. cap. 7.
words are these; Quod si dicitis, vos instar apostolorum peculiarem
vocationem habere, probate eam signis and miraculis, dono linguarum, doctrina
apostolica, quemadmodum apostoli fecerunt. Hoc autem nunquam facietis, ideoque
vocatio vestra nihili, imo pernitiosa est ecclesiae Christi.

Now, if you say, you have a special and peculiar calling, as the Apostles
had: then must you prove the same, by signs and miracles, by speaking diverse
languages, and by doctrine apostolical, as the Apostles did. Hier. adver.
Lucifer. tom. 3. fere in fine.


Saint Hierome says; Ecclesia non est, quae non babet sacerdotem. Where there
is no priest or minister, there can be no Church.

The first Objection
That not Kings, Monarchs, and other independent civil magistrates, have the
supreme and highest authority in causes ecclesiastical, but that Bishops and
Priests have that charge committed to them, as their proper and peculiar
function, it may appear evidently to all indifferent readers, by the facts and
proceedings of Bishops in the old testament. Ieroboams hand dried up; Ozias was
smitten with the leprosy, and thrust out of the Temple, king Saul deposed 1.
Reg. 13. 2. par. 26. 1. sam 13. 2. reg. 11. 2. par. 19.
from his kingdom, and all this befell upon these kings, because they took
upon them, the supreme authority in causes ecclesiastical. Yea, Iehoiada the
Priest commanded to put Queen Athalia out of the ranges, and to execute the
judgment of death upon her. And king Iehosaphat affirms plainly, that
Amariah was chief ruler in all matters of the Lord, as Zebadiah was the civil
governor of all the kings affairs.

The Answer.
This objection contains a question of great moment, and is very obscure,
intricate, and difficult. Wherefore I admonish and advise the gentle Reader, to
read my answer again, and again, and to ponder it seriously, before he
give his judgment therein. My answer stands thus, First, that Ieroboams
hand was dried up, and Saul deposed Vzziah or Ozias was smitten with the
leprosy, John the Baptist afforded Herod the Tetrach; when he told him, it
was not lawful for him, to have his brothers wife. Thirdly, Mat. 14. Verse. 4. 3
that the fact of Iehosaphat, proves evidently the Kings supreme power over
all his subjects, as well in causes ecclesiastical, as civil. The reason
hereof is evident, because King Iehosophat by virtue of his prerogative royal,
placed both Amariah and Zebadiah in their several functions, and prescribed
the limits of their jurisdictions. Neither will it help to say, that Amariah
was ruler in the matters of the Lord, and Zebadiah in the Kings affairs. For
Supra. cap. 4. note the whole chapter.
the meaning is not, that the Kings affairs are not the matters of the Lord;
seeing (as is already proved,) that the King at his inauguration, receives
the whole book of the law, and charge to see Gods true worship and service
every where maintained. But the true sense of the text is this, and no other,
viz. that those things, which the King in his own person may execute, are
precisely called the Kings affairs; to distinguish them from his other
affairs, which himself cannot put in execution. For, albeit in the preaching
of the word and administration of the Sacraments, the chosen minister has
only the charge and authority to execute them; nevertheless, Gods anointed
Prince has the supreme charge and sovereign authority, to command the
execution thereof; as also to correct and to punish the Minister, for the
neglect of his duty in that behalf. Of which point I have spoken sufficiently
in my other books, and therefore deem it a thing needless now to stand long
upon the same. Fourthly, touching the fact of Iehoiada the Priest, I answer,
that it can no way, prove the superiority of Priests over kings. For first,
Iehoiada Iehoiada Athalia of himself, but with the advice, assent, and help,
of the Centurions and Peers of the Realm; all which were bound by the law of
Deuteronomie, to defend the kingdom from strangers. Thirdly, Dent. 17. v. 15.
Iehoiada was bound by the right of affinity; to defend king Ioas, and to
establish him in his Kingdom. For his wife David. Now Athalia was not of the
stock and Progeny of David, but a stranger to the Kingdom. For her mother
was a Sydonian, and her father an Israelite, more addicted to idolatry, then
were the Gentiles. Besides this, the wicked pretensed Queen Athalia, had
traitorously murdered and wholly extinguished, all the lawful royal blood,
(the young child king Ioas only excepted, whom God contrary to her knowledge,
had miraculously preserved,) and withal she had set up the worship of Baal.
Wherefore, it was the parts of the Priests and Peers of the Kingdom, to
protect the King, to defend his royal right, to suppress the usurped power of
Athalia, and to deliver the King, his kingdom, and themselves, from the
confused Ataxia Idolatry, and bloody tyranny, which she had brought upon
them by her violent intr^sion, and unjust usurpation of the royal right of
Ioas, their Lawful King and undoubted sovereign. So then, albeit the
Ministry of feeding, of Preaching Gods word, and of the administration of his
Sacraments, pertain only to his ministers, neither may the mere civil
magistrate in any wise intermedle therewith; yet for all that, most true it is,
that the provision for the food, the over sight that the children of God be
duly fed, and that the ministers do exercise their functio^s in vigilant and
dutiful manner, belongs to the civil independent, and absolute princes. For
this respect is it, that Kings and Queens Esa 49. Verse. 23.
have the names of nurses, not for that they nourish their children in civil
matters only, but as in civil, so also in spiritual, that is to say, in lacte
verbi dei, in the milk of the word of God. For though the execution pertain
to the ministers yet the provision, direction, appointment, care, and
ouer-sight, (which is the supreme government indeed,) belongs only, soly,
and wholly to the prince. For this cause is it, that King Ezechias highly
renowned in holy Writ, 2. par. 29. Verse. 5. 11. 15
though he were but young in years, did for all that in regard of his
prerogative royal, and supreme authority in causes ecclesiastical, call the
Priests and Leuits his sons, charging them to hear him, and to follow his
direction, and commandment, for so are the words of the text. This
notwithstanding, I grant freely and willingly, that ministers in the action of
their ecclesiastical function and church-ministerie, are above all christians,
above Queens, Kings, and Monarchs, representing God unto them, teaching,
admonishing, and rebuking them, even as all others: following the godly example
therein, of S. John yt Baptist. Yea if need so require and that the vices of
the princes, kings, and monarchs, be notorious, and scandalous to the whole
church, Mat. 14. Verse. 4.
the Bishops may denounce such potentates, to be enemies to the truth,
adversaries to GOD, and no true members of the Church; but forlorn people, to
be reputed as Ethnicks and publicans, until they give true signs of unfeigned
repentance. But withal, this must ever be remembered and most loyally observed,
of all Bishops in Christ's Church; Mat. 18.
viz. that the prince, (though full of manifest vices, and most notorious
crimes in the world,) may never be shunned, neither of the people, nor of the
Bishops; seeing God has appointed him to be their governor. Much less may
the people forsake their obedience, to his sacred prerogative royal and
supereminent authority. And least of all, (for it is most execrable, damnable,
and plain diabolical,) may either the people alone, or the Bishops alone, or
both jointly together, depose their undoubted sovereign, though a Tyrant,
Heretic, or Apostata. For all loyal obedience Vide supra, ca. 4. and ca. 1.
in resp. ad 2. object.
and faithful service in all civil affairs, and whatsoever else is lawful,
they must ever yield unto him. He may be admonished by the Ministers in the
Court of conscience, concerning his public offenses: but he may never be
judged in the court of their Consistory, touching his power royal and
princely prerogative, their power is only to admonish and rebuke him, and to
pray to God to amend that is amiss. He has no judge that can punish him, but
the great judge of all, even the GOD of heaven. Note the answers to all the
objections following, and mark them seriously.

The 2. Objection.
Great learned men do hold, that there were vnpriested Seniors in the
Primitive Church, who together with the Pastors did govern the Church. And the
same is this day practiced, in many reformed Churches.

The Answer.
I answer: First, that I do not condemn the practice of other reformed
Churches, but teach plainly and Christianly, that every Church has freedom,
liberty, and authority, to make such canons, orders, ordinances, and
constitutions, as shall be thought most meet, fit, and convenient, for the
external government thereof. Which thing I have already proved; not only by
the practice of the Church in all ages, but also by the uniform assent and
constant verdict, of best approved Patrons of the reformed Churches in this
age. Secondly, that those great Patrons of the reformed Gualter, M. Hemingius,
M. Bucer, and of many other famous late Writers; But in regard of brevity,
only M. Musculus shall content me for the present. These are his express
words; Principio, vt constituat ecclesiarum ministres, Musculus in locis, titul
de magistr. Page 632.
vbi illi desiderantur, sive eligat eos ipse, five ab alijs iussu ipsim electos
confirmet. Neque. n. convenit, vt praeter authoritatem potestatis publicae
public a quisqua^ numer a in ecclesia obeat. Dices; at secus factu^est in
primis ecclesiis, in quibus a ministris ac plebe eligebantur ecclesiarum
antistites. Respondeo; talis tum ecclesiarum erat status vt aliter non essent
eligendi ministri, propterea quod Christiano magistratu destituebantur.
Sirevocas temporum illorum mores, primum conditiones ac statum quoque illorum
revoca.

First, it is the duty of the civil magistrate, to constitute the ministers of
the church, where they be wanting; whether he choose the^ himself, or confirm
those which others by appointment have chosen. For it is not meet, that any
minister execute any function in the Church, without the authority of the
public Magistrate. You will say; But it was otherwise in the Primitive
Church, where the Ministers and the people did choose their Governors. I
answer; the state of the Church was then such, that the Ministers of the
Church could not be chosen otherwise, because then they were destitute of a
Christian Magistrate. If thou will use the manners of that time, thou must
first call again the condition and state of that time.

Out of these words, I note many golden observations. First, that the civil
Magistrate may appoint and elect the Musculus truly says,) does properly
pertain to the civil Christian Magistrate.

I say thirdly, that it cannot be concluded out of the holy Tertio
principaliter.
Scriptures, that any annual vnpriested Elders, had the rule of the Church
with the Pastors and Bishops.

I say fourthly, that for want of Christian Princes, laicall I further grant,
that the said Elders may remain under a christian prince so it be with his
assent, good pleasure, and moderation. But I constantly deny, that such kind
of government must of necessity be had, in and under a Christian Monarchy.

The first Reply.
S. Ambrose writes plainly, that the Synagogue, and after, Ambros. in prior.
Epist. ad Timoth. cap. 5.
the Church had Seniours, without whose counsel nothing was done in the
Church. The which says he, by what negligence it was left of, I can not tell;
except happily it were through the sloth, or rather the pride of some pastors,
because they alone would seem to be somewhat.

The Answer.
I answer; first, that S. Ambrose did not think those Elders, of whom he
speaks, to be necessary for the government of the Church. I prove it,
because he being a most learned, zealous, and godly Archbishop, would for his
zeal and piety have labored to restore them: and could for his great
authority, have effected the same. Secondly, Ambrose speaks of Elders in
years, not of Elders in Office: that is, of wise, grave, and old men of great
experience, whom the Bishops in former times took in counsel with them, as
did also the ancient Synagogue. Our Churchwardens in this age, do in some
sort resemble them.

It something grieved holy Ambrose, that grave men, ancient in years, whom
the Apostle would not have reproved roughly, did not remain in like esteem
with the pastors of the Church, as they were of old. This is the true meaning
and sense of S. Ambrose, concerning those Elders he speaks of. I prove it
out of S. Ambrose his own words, which are these: Nam apud omnes vtique
gentes, honorabilis est senectus. For among all nations old age is honored.
For which cause, both the Synagogue of old, and the Church afterward, had
always certain old men, without whose advise nothing was done in the Church.
Lo, he speaks of honoring Elders and ancient men, in regard of their
years. But he never meant to equalize them with those, who were Elders in
calling, and governed the Churches under him. No, no: the blessed man Ambrose,
that grave and holy Bishop of Millan, never dreamed or once conceived in mind,
that any order of the Ministry, set down by Christ's Apostles, was worn out
of use in his time.

The 2. Reply.
S. Hierome who followed S. Ambrose immediately tells us most plainly, that
in his time the Presbytery or Eldership was in the Church.

The Answer.
I answer; first, that if we suppose your Presbytery Hieroms time, and not
in the days of Saint Ambrose; it will favor us, and wholly make against your
helps. The reason is evident, because that which Note this well.
may be used at some time, and be wanting at other times, is not of necessity
to be urged at all times; and this is all that we desire. Secondly, Saint
Hierome speaks of Priested Hier. in Esa. to. 5. lib. 2. cap. 3.
His words are these; Et nos habemus in ecclesia senatum nostrum, caetum
Presbyterorum. And we have in the Church our Senate, a company of Elders or
Priests. Lo, he speaks of Priests, and of Colleges of Cathedral
Churches. I prove it by two reasons; First, for that himself tells us, in
his words afore-going; that he speaks of those Elders, whose election Saint
Paul describes unto Timothy. Again, because it is impossible, that those
vnpriested Elders should be in Saint Hieromes time, who were worn out in
Saint Ambrose his time; because Saint Austin, S. Ambrose, and S. Hierome, were
all at one and the same time.

The 3. Objection.
The long expected Presbytery, is no way prejudicial to the Christian
Monarchy, but gives to him so much as the Scripture allows.

The Answer.
M. Gualter, a zealous, virtuous, and learned Writer, of high esteem in the
reformed Churches, shows plainly unto the world, what right and authority
the new presbytery Gualter. in I. cor. II.
ascribes unto Princes. These are his words; The Donatists of our time ought
to consider these things more diligently, which do over rashly condemn whole
Cities, and Countries, where the word of God is preached, the sacraments
rightly administered public prayer celebrated, the poor sufficiently provided
for, and vices, by good and godly laws for bidden and punished. All these
things they esteem as nothing, except there be a certain new magistracy
appointed, which should have authority over Princes also. The same learned
writer in another place, discourses in this manner: There be sundry that will
needs institute Gualter. in 1. Cor. ca. 12.
Elders, or an ecclesiastical Senate, according to the example of the
Primitive Church, which also should have authority over the Magistrates
themselves, if at any time they did not their duty. But it behooves them
first, to show, that those their Seniours have this power, whereof Paul does
presently speak: which thing seeing it does by no means appear, and yet they
deliver unto Satan whom they will; they do like, as if some would go about
to cleanse the leaprous, raise the dead, and work other miracles, because
these things were usually done in the primitive Church. The same learned Doctor
in another place writes thus: Their ambition is reproved, which go about to
Gualter. in 1. Cor 14.
bring all Churches to the form of their discipline and government, and cry
out that there is no discipline there, where all things are not agreeable to
their traditions and orders. But these me^ receive a just reward of their
arrogance, when they that come from them to other countries, go beyond all men
in fancinesse, and bring nothing from home, but a vain and intolerable
contempt of all good men, neither can they abide to be corrected by any
admonition of others.

The zealous, godly, and learned Doctor Musculus, has these express words. We
think otherwise then they, Musculus in locis, de magistr. Page 631.
who deny to Christian Magistrates, authority to make ecclesiastical Laws.
We boldly affirm, that all power of making authentical Laws, which bind the
consciences of the subjects, whether they be civil or ecclesiastical: do
neither pertain to the multitude of the faithful, nor to the Ministers of
Gods word, but properly to the Magistrate only, to whom more power is given
over his subbiects. Whereupon they are called in the Scripture, Gods, who do
execute the Magistracy: which name of honor, we do not read that it was
given unto the Priests. The very reason and nature of governing can not
suffer, that there be 2. authentic powers in one people, two diverse
law-makings and dominions, unless it be by subordination; even as there is no
place, for two heads in one body.

The same Musculus in another place, has these golden Vbi supra, Page 630.
words: but we without dissimulation think thus. Like as the Christian Prince
has chief power and care in religion, so has he also power to constitute and
make ecclesiastical laws, and to reform abuses in religion. The very nature
of making laws does not suffer, that they command and make Laws, who have not
power to defend the Laws, and to take punishment of the transgressors: and
that the Magistrate should protect the laws, and punish the offenders, who
shall not have power to make the laws, which he does defend. But Certes, among
men he that has power to command, has also power to take revenge. I know it
appertains to the magistrate, to punish not only the transgressors of his
own commandments, but also of Gods. But the case is altered, if the question
be made of laws ecclesiastical, neither divulged by God immediately, neither
yet by his Apostles, but by men within the ministry of the Church. Here
doubtless it is not sit, that they which are of meaner authority, shall make
Laws: and they who are of higher power, must see them kept. Men of meaner
degree, may cause laws to be observed: but superiors only can make laws,
whose authority co^pelleth to obey them, and who have power given the^ of God,
to punish the disobedient. While therefore they ascribe the constitution and
promulgation of ecclesiastical laws to those, whom they call governors of
the church, (to wit, the presbytery,) and leave only to the magistrate, power
to see them kept, and to punish the offenders: what other thing do they, but
gives that to inferiors being subjects, which of right belongs to higher
powers; and takes it away from superiors, to whom every soul must be
subject. And so they perverting the ordinance of God make of subjects
Lawe-makers, and of Lawmakers subjects. Thus writes this learned man.

Out of these learned discourses of these two most learned and famous Writers,
I note these worthy documents. First, that under most Christian Princes, where
the Presbytery Bazilycon Doron. Page 42.
To which the Doctrine of our gracious sovereign in his Bazilycon Doron, is
right consonant; when he tells us very gravely, (besides many other vices
which

The 4. Objection.
The government of the church in the time of the Apostles, was the best and
most perfect. Ergo, no reason why it should be changed.

The Answer.
I answer; First, that the Church in the Apostles time Calvin has these
words; Scimus autem politiam pro varietate temporum recipere, imo Calvin. in
inst. lib. 4. cap. 7.. 15.
exigere varias mutationes. We know that the policy (of the Church)
receives, yea requires diverse alterations, according to the variety of time.

Master Musculus, a man of great zeal, singular learning, Musculus in locis,
page 633.
care and gifts, confirms Master Caluins opinion in these words; The state
of the Church was such at that time, that the ministers could not be chosen
otherwise; because they then were without a Christian magistrate. If thou will
call again the manners of those times, thou must first call again their state
and condition. Again, in an other place Vbi supra, page 631.
the same author writes thus; I answer, that the Churches of God were at that
time, destitute of a Godly and faithful magistrate. Wherefore all judgments
between brethren and brethren, were then exercised by the Seniours in the
ecclesiastical senate; as the custom also was in those christian churches,
which the Apostles planted. But the condition is far otherwise in those
Churches, which by the benefit of God have christian Princes and Magistrates,
in whom rests authority, power, law-making, and governance, not only in
profane, but in holy things also. It is a most pestilent error, that some
think no otherwise of the christian magistrate, then of a profane governance,
whose power reaches only to things profane. Haec ille.

Master Beza has these golden words, We must not Beza in confession. cap. 5.
sect. 35.
simply look or regard, what the Apostles did in the government of the Church,
seeing the circumstances are most diverse and variable, and therefore without
preposterous zeal, Cacozelia all things cannot in all places and times, be
called to one and the same form or order, but rather the end and inuariable
purpose of them must be looked unto, and that manner and form of doing things
must be chosen, which tends directly thereunto. Haec Beza.

Out of these most excellent and golden discourses of these great learned men,
who were very famous and highly renowned in the best reformed churches. I
gather these memorable observations. First, that the Church is not fixed

CHAP. XII. Of the discipline of the Church.
The first Section, of the multiplicitie of Church Discipline.
THe Authors, Patrons, and seekers of the new English presbytery, reckon up
three parts of church discipline; viz, 1. ye election and abdication of
ecclesiastical officers, 2. the excommunication of the stubborn, and
absolution of the repentant. 3. the decision of all such matters, as rise up in
the church, whether it be touching corrupt manners, or perverse doctrine. For
answer whereunto, mark the next Section.

The second Section, containing an answer unto the former.
There is but one only kind of public church discipline, which is called in
the new testament, by the name of excommunication. I say (public,) because I
grant private admonition and reprehension, to be a certain kind of private
discipline. I say (church discipline,) because I acknowledge also civil
discipline. Discipline consists intrinsecally, in the punishing and
correcting of vice. It is one part of the churches policy, far different,
from the election of ministers, and decision of controversies.

The third Section of the essence, nature, and condition of church discipline.
The Patrones of the English presbytery, do make it an essential part of the
Gospel, so necessary to salvation, as no Church can be without it, but the
truth is otherwise. I prove it first, because S. Paul gives a singular
commendation to the Church of Corinth; although it wanted at 1. Cor. 1.
that time the Church Discipline, which is excommunication. 1. cor. 5.
Secondly, because we may stay and continue in that Note well the next Section.
doubtless we could not do, if excommunication were a part of Christ's
Gospel, and necessary unto salvation. For we must flee from that Church,
which wants any thing necessary to salvation. This notwithstanding, many
learned men, eue^ of best account in the reformed, churches do think Bull adver.
Anabapt. ^b. 6. cap.
it lawful to remain in those Churches, where excommunication is not in use.
Master Bullinger writing against the Anabaptists, has these words; This the
Anabaptists urge, that there is no true Church acceptable unto God, where there
is no excommunication. To whom we answer, that the Church of Corinth was a
true Church, and so acknowledged of Paul, before there was any use of
excommunication Gualter. in 1. cor. 5. v. 4.
in it. The same doctrine is taught uniformly, of master Calvin, master
Gualter, and others. Thirdly, wheresoever Calvin. lib. 4. instit. cap. 1. 9. S.
10.
lawfully administered, there is Christ's Church undoubtedly. For these are the
true marks, by which best learned Writers discern the Church of God. The case
is evident enough, it is needelesse to spend much time about it. Vide
sententiam Gualteri, in fine sectionis subsequentis.

The fourth Section, of the persons that must excommunicate.
Excommunication precisely and chiefly pertains to the Church; and secondly
to those to whom the Church has committed the execution thereof. I prove it by
Christ's Mat. 10. V. 15. 16. 17 mat. 5. v. 29. 30.
own words in his holy Gospel, where he wills his Disciples to tell the
faults of their brethren, if they will not hear them unto the Church, that is
to say, unto the whole congregation. And forthwith Christ adds these words,
Verily I say unto you, whatsoever ye bind on earth, shall be bound in heaven;
and whatsoever ye loose on earth, shall be loosed in Mat. 16. Verse. 19. John.
20. Verse. 23.
heaven. Again, in an other place, he gives the same authority of binding
and loosing unto Peter alone, which he gave in the other place to all the
Apostles jointly. Thirdly, in an other place he gives power to remit and
retain sins, unto his Disciples only and soly. Out of which three several
commissions of our Lord Jesus, I gather and conceive two general rules and
settled laws. The one, that only The 1. rule.
the successors of Christ's Apostles and Disciples, have the keys of the
kingdom of heaven; that is, of opening and shutting, of binding and loosing,
of remitting and retaining sins; as also the power of excommunication,
touching the use and execution thereof. I say (touching the use and execution
thereof,) because it is one thing, to execute excommunication, and the keys of
heaven; an other thing, to commit the execution thereof to others. The other,
that The 2. rule.
the whole Church has authority, to commit the execution of the keys and of
excommunication, to some special persons fit for that purpose; for comeliness
and order sake, and for avoiding of confusion. This my resolution I Two things
must be proved.
will prove to be grounded upon the doctrine of great learned men, highly
renowned in the reformed Churches, two things I have to prove; first, that the
whole Church has power to commit the keys and excommunication, to some
certain fit persons chosen for that end and purpose. Secondly, that only the
Ministers of the word and Sacraments, can denounce the sentence and put the
same in execution. Concerning the former, Master Bullinger has a long and
learned discourse, which is able to satisfy any indifferent Reader. These are
his express words; caeterum video controversum inter quosdam nostri aevi
homines, etc. But I perceive it is a controversy among certain men of our
age, Bullinger. in 1 cor. 5. page 47.
who should have power to punish sin, and to execute the discipline of the
Church; some ascribing it to the whole Church, other some to special men
chose^ for that purpose. Doubtless, I cannot perceive, that they offend, who
give this power to certain men chose^ for that end, without doubt, they do not
offend against Gods word. But they object, if he shall not hear you, tell it to
the church. Now some chose^ men are not the church. But these men perceive not,
that Christ and his Apo. used the figure Synecdoche. For Paul says you being
gathered with my spirit. And in the latter Epistle, he says; it is sufficient
to the same man, that he was rebuked 2. Cor. 2. Verse. 6.
of many. If they will stand upon Christ's words (literally) we will see when they
will bring the whole church together. But we speak, (say they,) of the
particular Church. We therefore have the victory, who say that Christ used the
figure Synecdoche. We grant, that this power is given to the whole Church, but
we call the congregation of good men the Church. For it follows forthwith, in
the very words of our lord; where two or three are gathered together in my
name, there am I in the mids of them. Therefore, if Christ, as they grant,
committed the ecclesiastical discipline to a particular church, and two or
three, and much more eight or twelve, make a particular church: what lets,
that christ committed not the same to chosen men, who are consecrate to Christ's
name? seeing the authority of ecclesiastical discipline, is more intiere and
renowned among chosen godly men, then among the confused vulgar sort, who as
they lack judgment, so are they often carried away with affections. Haec
Bullingerus.

Master Gualter has these words, potestatis christi meminit Gualter in 1.
cor. 5. v, 4.
alludeut ad mat. 18. ne ille ecclesie sententia^ co^temneret et hoc iubet,
quiatunc non erat alia tales coercendi, qua^do magistratus non erant
christiani, ali^ qui iste paenas dedisset secundum legem. Neque Leu. 20.
Pauius obstitisset, vt apparet ex Rom 13. quia vero duru^erat, homines
christianos Ethnicis obijcere, recurrit ad remedium quod christus dedit quoad
iniurias privatas, mat. 18. sequitur potestas illa penes q^os erat? penes tota^
ecclesia^, quae tame^ (ne co^fusio fieret) per delectos agebat ex senioribus.
Sequitur; excommunicatio. n. non est ex necessarijs illis, sine quibus ecclesia
non consistit.

He made mention of the power of Christ alluding to his words in Matthew, least
he should contemn the sentence of the church. And he commands this to be
done, because they had no other means at that time, to correct the
disobedient, when there were no christian Magistrates. Otherwise this fellow,
should have bin punished according to the law. Neither would Paul have bin
against it, as appears by his doctrine to the Romans. But because it was a
very hard case to send Christians to Ethnickes, he has recourse to that
remedy, which Christ appointed for private injuries and in whom was that
power? in the whole Church, which for all that, (to avoid confusion,) did
execute the same by chosen seniours. For excommunication is none of those
necessary things, without which the church cannot consist.

The same Doctor in an other place, has these express Gualter. in 1. cor. 12.
hom. 104 in fine.
words; Hodie non, opus proprio seuatu ecclesiae. Agnoscamus beneficium dei,
Esa. 49. vicissim hi aguoscant se quoque me^mbra esse ecclesiae. Sequitur,
nobis sufficiat habere pastores, scholas, magistratus pios, qui cuitum dei
tueantur pauperes curent.

We have this day no need at all of the senate of the church or presbytery.
Let us acknowledge the goodness of God, and let them likewise acknowledge
themselves, to be the members of the church. Let it suffice us, to have
Pastors, Schools, godly Magistrates, that will defend the worship of God, and
take care of the poor.

Master Martyr delivers the same doctrine in substance, Martyr in. 1. cor.
16 page 239.
in these express words; fatemur deinde, claves ecclesiae vniversae datas,
caeterum ne confusio accidat; convenit, vt aliqui ex omnibus deligantur
quivtantur clavibus, quarum vsus in omnes redundet qui christo credun^t.
Prepositos vero ecclesiarum habent des monet Paulus non semel, et christus non
prohibuit, qui cum iussit ne magistri et Rabbi vocaremur, ambitione^ repressit,
voluitque, vt nemo nostrum haec affectaret. Sed non interdixit, quin habeamus
in honor, et appellemus honorifice, quos dominus nobis praefecit: imo Paulus
ad Timotheum scribit, se positum esse magistrum gentium. We likewise confess,
that the keys 1. Tim. 2. Uers. 7.
are given to the whole Church. But, to avoid confusion; it is meet, that
some out of all be chosen, who may putt the keys in use: whose use re
doundeth to all that believe in Christ. Now, that we must have governors of
Churches, Paul admonishes more then once, and Christ did not forbid it; who,
when he commanded us, not to be called Masters and Rabbis, repressed
ambition, being desirous, that none of us should hunt after these things. But
he never forbad us, to reverence and give honorable names to those whom our
Lord has placed over us. Yea, Paul writes to Timothy, that himself was made
the master of the gentiles.

Master Musculus is consonant to the rest, whose express words are these;
denique curabit vt plebs ipsa viros graves, Musculus in locis, de ministris
ver. dei, Page 204.
timentes dei, ac boni testimonij deligant, quorum cura et vigilantia
disciplina ecclesiae administretur, et si quid grauioris momenti accidat, ad
ipsam ecclesiam referatur. Haec tamen omnia, quae ad indeterminatam potestatem
referimus, ad illas tan tum pertinent ecclesias, quae christianum magistratum
non habent, quales erant olim, priusquam principes christiani fierent.

Finally, he shall provide that the people choose grave men, which fear God
and have a good report, by whose care and painful labors the Church
discipline may be executed, and if any thing of greater moment fall out, that
the same be referred to the Church. Yet all these things, which we refer to
the power undetermined, pertain to those Churches only, which have no
Christian Magistrate, such as they were sometime, before there were Christian
Princes.

The same Doctor in an other place, has these words; Hanc cuiusvis.
Particularis ecclesiae potestatem, reprobos scilicet excommunicands, Romanus
pontifex irritam reddidit, and e medio Musculus de eccles. page 311.
sustulit.

This power of excommunication, which pertained to every particular Church, the
bishop of Rome made frustrate, and took it quite away.

Out of these most learned discourses of these grave Writer, I observe these
memorable lessons for the benefit meet for her good. Thirdly, that the Church
for avoiding of confusion, did ever commit this jurisdiction, to some special
viz. of the power of the whole Church. Let us proceed to the latter part; viz,
to whom the church has committed this power.

Concerning this Latter member, it is to be holden for an undoubted truth, and
most Catholic doctrine; that none save only lawful Ministers of Gods word
and Sacraments, can lawfully denounce the sentence of excommunication. For this
cause was it, that when our Lord Jesus gave this authority to his whole
church; he gave it always Mat. 16. Mat: 18. John. 20.
in the name, either of all, or of some one of his Apostles. And for the same
cause was it, that the Church has ever since committed the same, unto her
lawful Bishops and Ministers of the word. The practice of the Church is most
clear and apparent, both by the councels, and by the uniform verdict of the
holy fathers.

Ex concilijs.
This case is most apparent by the old canons, como^only (for their antiquity)
called the canons of the Apostles. There I find these express words; siquis
presbyter, Can. 32. Apostol.
aut diaconus, ab episcopo suo segregetur, hunc non licere ab alio recipi, sed
ab ipso quieum sequestraverat; nisi forsitan obierit apiscopus ipse, qui eum
segregare cognoscitur,

If any Priest or Deacon be excommunicated of his Bishop, it shall not be
lawful for any other to receive him, but only the party who separated him;
unless perchance the Bishop die, that did excommunicate him. By this canon it
is evident, that none but the Bishop used to excommunicate, and yet the same
Canon is confirmed, as very authentical, both by the council of Antioch, and
by the Conc. nican. can. 5. conc. antioch. can. 6 Conc. Sardic. can. 16.
first council of Nice, celebrated in the time of Constantine the great.

The ancient and famous council of Sardica, has these words; Hoc quoque
omnibus placeat, vt sieve diaconus, sieve presbyter, sieve quis clericorum ab
episcopo suo communione fuerit privatus, et ad alterum perrexerit episcopum, et
scierit ille ad quem confugit, cum ab episcopo suo fuisse abiectum, non
opertere vt ei communionem indulgeat.

Let us all agree hereunto, that if a Deacon, or a Priest, or any of the
Clergy be excommunicated of his own Bishop, and shall flee to an other
Bishop, then he may not give him the communion, if he knew that his own
Bishop did excommunicate him.

The second council holden at Carthage, has these words; Conc. Carthage. 2.
can. 8.
Placet, vt si presbyter excommunicatut, aut correctus a suo episcopo,
sacrificare praesumpserit, anathematizetur.

We agree, that if a Priest being excommunicated, or punished by his own
Bishop, shall presume to celebrate, accursed be that man. And the self same
decree is to be read, Conc. carthage. 6. can. 10.
in the sixth council of Carthage.

Ex Patribus.
Saint Ambrose that grave, learned, and holy Bishop, did alone excommunicate
the Emperor Theodosius.

Theototus Bishop of Laodicea, did himself alone excommunicate two
Apolli^aries, the father being a Priest, and Sozom libr. 6. cap. 25.
the son being a Reader. The cause thereof was this; viz. because they kept
company with a profane Sophister Epiphanius, and heard his ungodly rimes,
which he had made in the honor of Bacchus.

Alezander that godly and famous Bishop of Alexandria, did by himself alone
excommunicate Arrtus, as both Sozomenus Sozom. L. 1. cap. 14. Nice phor. libr.
8. cap. 5.
and Nioephorus do contest in their stories. Nicephorus has these express
words; Alexander illum, et cum eo qui parts cius sequere^tur, clericos omnes
exco^munie avit.

Alexander did both excommunicate Arrius, and all the clerks that held his
opinion. Yea this was a rule so received, and a practice so common in the
ancient Churches; that when a controversy arose about the celebration of
Easter. A. D. 183.
Victor that zealous Bishop of Rome about one thousand and four hundred years
ago, would have excommunicated all the Bishops of Aus^; if Irenaeus the good
Bishop of Lions, had not dissuaded him from that attempt.

The first Objection.
Saint Paul did not alone excommunicate the incestuous 1. Cor. 5. v. 4.
Corinthian, but together with the whole congregation. For he says, when ye
are gathered together, and my spirit.

The Answer.
I answer, first, that though Christ gave the keys, and Mat. 16. Mat. 18.
Mat. 28. Ioh. 20.
the power of remitting and retaining sins unto the whole Church: yet did he
commit the use and execution of that power, unto his Apostles and their
successors til the worlds end. Secondly, that the Apostle himself alone did
excommunicate the Corinthian, and required the presence of the people no
otherwise, then the same is this day required in our English Churches, viz that
the sentence be pronounced in the hearing of the congregation, that they may
thereby avoid his company that is excommunicated, and be terrified from the
like offense. I prove it, because Saint Paul's words are these; for I verily as
absent in body, but present Vbi supr. Uers. 3.
in spirit, have determined already as though I were present. By which words
it is most apparent, that the determination of the matter rests only in
himself, and not in the people. For otherwise, he could not have dicided the
matter in their absence, and without their assent. And it is confirmed 2. Tim.
4. Verse. 14. 15. 2. Tim. 2. 17.
to be thus, because he alone excommunicated Alexander the Copper Smith, and
the same may be thought probably, of Hymeneus and Philetus.

The second Objection.
Theodosius confessed his fault before the congregation, and asked forgiveness
of the same, and thereupon was obsolued. And so it appears, that Ambrose
alone did not excommunicate the Emperor.

The Answer.
It is the usual practice in our English Church, that no excommunicate person
be received into the Church again, until he have made public confession, and
asked pardon for his offense. And this notwithstanding, the Bishop alone does
excommunicate, as S. Ambrosius did the Emperor.

The Reply.
You say, that the execution of excommunication, pertains only to the
successors of the Apostles; and so consequently, it must pertain to all
Ministers of Gods holy Word and Sacraments; and not only to your lordly
Bishops.

The Answer.
I answer; first, that no such consequence can be inferred upon my grant. For
though I grant, and that truly, that I give the same power to every Minister
in general. For it is one thing to say, that none but Ministers can do it; an
other thing to affirm, that every Minister Promiscue may do it. Secondly,
that All ministers have habitual, but not actual power.
those Ministers only have actual power to do it, to who^ the Church has
committed that jurisdiction. For seeing the Church has all the power granted
to her dispensation, she may give to this or that Minister more or less, as
shall be thought convenient in her discretion.

CHAP. XIII. Of Preaching and other things coincident.
The first Section, of the vocation of Ministers, which cannot Preach.
ALthough it were to be wished, that all Ministers of Gods word and
Sacraments, should be able to Preach, and to divide Gods word aright unto the
people, yet where and when sufficient men of that ability cannot be had,
others of meaner talents and honest behavior may not be rejected. And to hold
that none may be ordered and admitted, to administer the Sacraments and to
read the Scriptures and godly Prayers in the Church, for the comfort and
edisication of the people, is not only against Christ's institution, but also
against the usual practice of the church in all ages. Neither is it possible,
to allege for the ground of the contrary opinion, either any sound reason out
of holy Writ, or any one testimony of any of the holy fathers, or any canon
out of any ancient council. The latter member, viz. that it is against the
continual practice of the church, is as clear as the Sunneshning at noone
day; and therefore I deem it a thing needless, to spend words in that behalf.
The former member, viz. that it is against Christ's holy ordinance, I prove out
of Christ's own words in his last supper, when he said to his Disciples; Hoc
facite in mei memoriam. Do this in my remembrance. Luke. 22. Verse. 19.
By these words, as all the holy fathers and Doctors affirm constantly,
Christ made his Apostles Priests or Ministers, giving them power and authority
only to consecrate the blessed Sacrament of his body and blood, and to deliver
the same unto his people. Neither could they lawfully, have either baptized, or
preached, remitted, and retained sins, until they had received further
authority so to do; which was not granted to them indeed, until Christ's
glorious resurrection. Whereupon it follows by a necessary and inevitable
consequ^tion, which never can be answered; that the Mat. 28. V. 19. John. 20.
V. 22.
Preaching of GODS word and the administration of his holy Sacraments, are not
so inseperably united and linked together, but that the one may stand intiere
and pe^fect without the other. For Christ's will and holy ordinance is that
only rule, by which and after which, all the actions, policy, and government
of his Curch, must be measured, ordered, and disposed.

And this reason ab authoritate legislatoris, is confirmed by an other argument
drawn ab exemplo. Wedlock or Marriage instituted for a triple end; viz. for
procreation of Genesis 1. 28. Genesis 2. 18. 1. Cor. 7. 2.
children, for the avoiding of fornication, and for mutual help and society,
is perfect and lawful for the secondarie ends, though the first cannot be
achieved. For marriage is lawful in old women, quib, desinunt muliedria,
which Genesis 18. 11.
are past the date of bearing children, as all learned men do grant. Ergo,
the institution and ordering of Priests or Ministers for a triple end; viz. for
Preaching of Gods word Luke. 22. 19. Mat. 28. 19. Act. 13. 15. Iac. 5. 14.
for administration of his holy Sacraments, and for reading of the holy
Scriptures and godly prayers, for the comfort and edification of the
congregation, is godly perfect, and lawful for the last and second ends,
albeit the first cannot be attained.

The same argument is further confirmed, by the testimony Confess helv sect.
11. cap. 18. page 38.
of the reformed churches in Helvetia; whose judgment I think, the patrones of
the English desired presbytery, will not easily reject or condemn. Their
expres words are these; domnanius ministros ineptos, and non instructos donis
pastori necessarijs. Interim agnos^omus quorundam in veteri ecclesia pastorum
simplicitatem innocuam, plus aliquando profuisse ecclisiae, quam quorundam
eruditionem variam, exquisitam, delicatamque sed paulo fastuo siorem. Vnde ne
hodie quidem reijcimus simplicitatem quorundam probam nec tamen omuino
imperitam.

We condemn unmeet Ministers, which are not indewed with gifts necessary for
a shepeheard. Howbeit, we acknowledge, that the harmless simplicity of some
shepherds in the old Church, did sometime more profit the Church, then the
great, exquisite, and delicate, but a little to proud learning of some others.
Wherefore we reject not now adays, the good simplicity of certain Ministers,
so that they be not altogether ignorant. Lo, the great learned men, the
masters and rulers of the reformed Churches in Helvetia, allow and approve as
much as we desire. The cass is clear, it cannot be denied.

The first Objection.
Saint Paul commands expressly, that every Bishop 1. Tim. 3. v. 2. 3. Tit.
1. v. 7. 8. 9
or pastor should be able to teach, and to convince the gainsayers; Ergo, no
mortal man can dispense with unpreaching Ministers.

The Answer.
I answer; first, that if every pastor must of necessity be Paul's canons
Paul's words are as plain for the one, as they are for the other, me orgilon,
not angry. But if all be unlawful Pastors, that be angry; how can we be
assured to find any lawful Tit. 1. 7.
Pastors, either in the presbytery, or else where? Many other conditions does
Saint Paul require in pastors, which will hardly be found in the elders of the
Presbytery. The true sense and meaning of Saint Paul's words is this, and no
other; viz. that it is meet and convenient, that a Pastor of the Church have
those qualities and conditions which he reckons; but withal he means
nothing less, then that he is no lawful Pastor, which wants some of the
said conditions. Yea, the original Greek word, does confirm this mine
exposition. For, deioun ton Episcopon does only signify unto us, that a
Bishop or Priest should of congruitie, and if it may be, have such conditions
and qualities, as the Apostle reckons up to Titus and Timothy; not, that none
can be true and lawful pastors of the Church, which 1. Tim. 3. 2.
are not indewed with all the aforenamed qualities. No, no, the latin word,
(oportet,) and the Greek word, (dei) have no other sense and meaning; but that
it behooves, or that it is meet and convenient; not, that it must of
necessity be so, or else no lawful ordination.

The second Objection.
Christ sent his Disciples forth to preach the kingdom of God, and to cure the
sick. Luke. 9. 2.


The Answer.
I answer, that this was a special charge given only to the Apostles, and
that it proves as well, that all Ministers must be curers of diseases, as
Preachers and conuincers of gainsayers.

The second Section, of Preaching without license and authority.
The patrons of the Presbytery affirm those canons, ordinances, and
constitutions, to be ungodly, wicked, and plain diabolical; which prohibit
all Ministers to preach Gods word, that are not lawfully licenced thereunto.
And they cry out against the most reverend Fathers; because they put some to
silence, whom they had licenced to preach in former times.

But I answer to these unworthy complaints, and unchristian Romans 10. 15. Hebr.
5 4.
him the ministry, but he only that is lawfully called thereunto. Secondly,
that the Church, to whom this authority Solomon Depose Abiathar the high
Priest, and placed Sadock in his 1. reg. 2. v. 27.
room. But doubtless, he that has power to displace the Minister, which is a
greater thing; has power, a fortiori, to suspend the Minister from execution,
or to prohibit him Vide sect. 4. ex council. Vasensi, et notato. Vide supra,
cap. 12. sect. 4. ex. Musculo.
to Preach; seeing that is a thing, that requires less authority. Again, if
the Church had not power to displace, suspend, and prohibit Ministers from
Preaching, as their demeanours, and circumstances of times, places, and persons
shall require; then doubtless would the Church abound, with schisms,
confusion, and all ataxia contrary to the Apostolic canon, which prescribes
all things to be done decently and in order. Yea, I protest unto the world,
that I deem the prohibition of Preaching without license, to be 1. Cor. 14. v.
26, 40.
one of the most necessary and profitable Canons, that ever were ordained,
constituted, and established, by this our English Church. For since every man
took upon him to Preach at his own pleasure, and was permitted to do it when
and where he would; lawful authority has binso impugned, new-sangled
conceits so usual, unsound doctrine so common, and the text it self either
scantly touched or so rawly and vnclerkly handled; that the auditors were as
ignorant of the true meaning of the text in the end, as in the beginning of the
sermon. Hereupon it followed of necessity, that some for want of skill, (who
ever were most desirous to have the place,) some for disdain of superiority
in their betters; and others upon licentious sauciness; did destroy more, and
withdraw more people from liking of the Gospel in one moves, then grave
Preachers of great learning and rare gifts, were able to build up again in
one whole year. I will not disclose all I know in this behalf, for that I
have no pleasure therein. Only I wish, that all Preachers will hereafter
study seriously how and what to Preach, before they take in hand that most
excellent and heavenly exercise. And so I will conclude this section, with the
grave censure of Master Musculus. His Musculus de ministris verbi dei, page
202.
words are these; Habent ministri Christi indeterminatam quandam potestatem,
quam in ijs rebus esse dicimus, de quibus nihiless expresso verbo determinatu^a
domin^; and tamen aliqua ratione ad hoc conducunt, vt ministerium ipsorum
velco^modius, vel vtilius impleatur.

The ministers of Christ have a certain undetermined power, which consists
in those things, of which our lord has determined nothing expressly in his
word; and yet the same things serve to this end, that their Ministry may be
either more commodiously, or more profitably accomplished. Lo, the Church has
power and freedom to order Vide supra. cap. 12. sect. 4. ex eodem.
those things, which our Lord has not expreslely determined in his holy word.
Now, it is most evident and apparent, to all that read the Scriptures, that our
Lord has not expressly appointed this minister, and that minister, when
where, and in what habit he shall preach, and consequently, the disposition and
ordering thereof, pertains to the governors of the Church.

The third Section, of reading of Homilies in the Church.
The reading of learned Homilies in the Church, pronounced by unpreaching
Ministers, (so termed scornfully) are vehemently impugned, by the patrons of
the long expected presbytery. To whom I answer; first, that father Lati^^r
that blessed Martyr, compiled a whole book of godly and learned Sermons, (my
self have seen the same) which he would never have done, if he had thought
it a thing unlawful, to read or pronounce his Sermons in the Pulpit. The like
may be said of Saint Augustine, Saint Ambrose, and many others, whose Sermons
are this day extant in print, in the greater part of Europe. Secondly, that the
distinct reading, of one of the godly and learned sermons Philantia, and love
nothing better, then to hear themselves talking. For which end they wander
abroad many times, leaving their own charges either distitute, or only
supplied by unpreaching Ministers, whom otherwise they condemn. And this they
effect with desire, even in those places, where their presence is neither
necessary, nor yet much desired. I speak not this, either in defense of
unpreaching ministers, (for I wish with all my heart, that every church in
England, were furnished with a godly learned preacher) or in dislike of their
zeal, who endeavor themselves to preach often; so that be done with eutaxia,
and obedience of higher powers, and with such reverence, ripenes, and due
preparation, as appertains to that heavenly exercise. Thirdly, that one of
the homilies or sermons aforenamed, I prove it, because to be uttered with a
shrill or mean voice, with this or that gesture, upon the book or without the
book, and other like circumstances, are all and every of them mere accidental
and extrinsecall to a Sermon, Whosoever shall hold the contrary opinion, must
perforce admit gross absurdities, flat contradictions, and plain
impossibilities. Fourthly, if an unlearned Minister shall receive a learned
Sermon, learnedly and orderly pe^ned by his learned friend, and shall cunne the
same without the book, and after the rehearsal of his text, shall pronounce
the same distinctly and orderly in the Pulpit; all the learned that hear him,
and know not the truth of the matter, will say, (and that truly) that he made a
learned Sermon, although he were but calvus comatus, in rei veritate. And even
so say I; that he preaches in the Pulpit, who reads Homilies penned to his
hand. Howsoever that be; this is out of doubt; that many reading the Homilies
do more edify the congregation, then many others that preach their own
collections, (I will not say inventions and fancies,) and think themselves no
fools. It is likewise out of doubt, that the same Ministers do preach
Theologica, though not theolagice; and consequently, that is accomplished by
them, which is principally Aristotel. ethic lib. 2. cap. 4.
intended by their adversaries. Homelies be pith^e and sound, but Sermons are
often unlearned and errors.

The fourth Section, of reading of the Apocrypha in the Church.
The patrons of the presbytery make most bitter exclamations, against the
reading of the Apocryphal books in the Church, and they have prevailed so
far with some of the simple sort and vulgar people, that they will not once
vouchsafe to read or look upon those Bibles, which have the Apocrypha in
them. To whom I hope in God so to answer, as shall be able to satisfy them,
if they will be satisfied with reason. I Therefore say first, that the word
apocryphos in the original Greek tongue, signifies hid or secret; and
thereupon certain books contained within the corpse of the holy Bible, and
delivered to the primitive and ancient Churches succeeding, were called
Apocrypha, for that they were not acknowledged of the Church to be canonical,
that is to say, to be the canon or rule of faith, as the other Scriptures are.
Secondly, that these Apocryphal books were ever in high esteem in the Church
of God, as the holy wrytings of holy men; and were also thought meet to be
read in the Churches, as containing sit and necessary matter, as well for the
knowledge of the hystories, as for the instruction of Godly manners. This to
be so, will be clear and evident to all those, that can and (...) to peruse
seriously, the ancient Counsels, the holy Fathers, Iunius does think the
Apocrypha to be very profitable to the churchs.
and the histories of the church. Whereof I shall here in brief recounte some
s^we, for the help of the simple and thankful Reader. And hereby the way, the
gentle Reader shall understand, that master Iunius a great learned man, and of
high esteem in the reformed churches, has published notes upon the
Apocryphal books.

Saint Hierome has these express words: Si^utergo Hierom epist. ad Chromat.
and Heliod de lib. Solomon.
Judith and Tobyae, and Machabaeorum libros legit quidem Ecclesia, sedinter
Canonicas scripturas non recipit: sic and haec duo volumina legit ad
aedificatitonem plebis, non ad authoritatem Ecclesiasticorum dogmatum
confirmandum.

As therefore the Church reads the books of Judith, and of Tobye, and of the
Machabees, but receives them not amongst the Canonical Scriptures: so does it
also read these two volumes for edification of the people, but not to confirm
any Ecclesiastical doctrine.

Saint Augustine is of the same opinion, and delivers the matter in these
express words: Hanc Scripturam quae August. co^tra 2. Gaudentij. epist. libr.
2 cap. 23. to. 7
appellatur Machabaeorum, non habent Iudaei sicut Legem, and Prophetas, and
Psalmos, quibus Dominus testimonium perhibet tanquam testibus suis, dicens,
oportebat imp^eri omnia quae scripta sunt in Lege, and Prophetis, and in
Psalmis de me. Sed recepta est ab Ecclesia non invtiliter, si sobrit legatur,
vel audiatur, maxim propter illos Machabaeos, qui pro Dei Lege, sicut very
Martyrs, a persecutoribus tam indigna atque horrenda perpessi sunt.

The Scripture which is of the Machabees, the Jews repute not as they do the
Law, and the Prophets, and the Psalms, to which the Lord gave testimony, as
to his witnesses, saying, It behooued all things to be fulfilled, which are
written in the Law, and in the Prophets, and in the Psalms of me: but the
Church has received it not without profit, if it be read or heard soberly:
especially for those Machabees, who for the Law of God, as true Martyrs,
suffered of their persecutors so unworthy and horrible torments.

Saint Cyprian, Saint Ambrose, and other Fathers, teach the same Doctrine; and
the continual practice of the Church in all ages, does yield a constant
testimony thereunto.

Now, seeing the Church of God has thought it meet and profitable, to have
the Apocryphal books read in the Church; and seeing withal, that Saint Austen
Saint Hierome, and other holy Fathers, do commend the same, I see no reason,
why a few young heads without gray beards, (whose authority is no way
comparable with the practice of the Church neither their reading, experience,
and judgment, to be equalized with the ancient and holy Fathers) should take
upon them so rashly to control the Church of England, and to condemn her
for following the practice of the Church in all ages. Let these men weigh well
with themselves; what the holy, most reverend, and learned Father, Saint Austen
says, to this and the like questions. These are his express words; In his. n.
rebus de quibus nihil certi statuit Scriptura Diuina, mos populi Dei, vel
instituta maiorum pro lege tenenda sunt. For in those things, Augustine. ad
Con^ulan. Episto. 86.
touching which the holy Scritpure has left no certain rule; the custom of
Gods people, and the ordinances of our ancestors, must be holden for a law.
Behold here (gentle Reader,) a most excellent rule indeed, given us by this
holy Father and great learned Doctor. Which, if they, who this day impugn the
government of our English Church, (the Prownists and their ^^herents I ever
mean,) would duly ponder and regard; they would doubtless surceasse to vex
and distourbe the peace of our Church, and receive the ordinances of their
ancestors, with all reverence and humility. For the Church of England does
make a flat separation, in which it does in plain and express terms, sever
and divide the Canonical books from the Apocryphal; so as no simple Reader,
can but perceive and understand the same. And it is not to the purpose, to
object as some have done: that the Rubricke in the book of common prayer,
calls the Apocryphal books holy Scripture. For first, when the Rubric
says (the rest of the holy Scripture,) it may be understood fitly, of the
books Canonical following; especially, seeing it names not the Apocryphal
expressly, but quoteth some of them afterward. Secondly, the Apocrypha may
truly and lawfully beecalled holy Scripture Analogice, though Analogice no^
aute^ vnivoce.
not Univoce; that is to say, the wrytings of holy men, or books containing
holy and good matter. And in this sense speaks the Rubric, as I judge; and
sundry of the holy Fathers, I am well assured, do so term the books
Apocryphal. Howsoever the Rubricke be expounded, or wrested, two things are
apparent. The one, that the Rubricke does not call them Canonical scripture.
The other, that the Church means not to equalize them, with the Canonical
books of holy writ. I prove it, because she has plainly distinguished the
one from the other, and preferred the authority of the Canonical. Neither
will it serve their turn to say, as some have done; viz. That nothing may be
read in the Church, but only the Canonical scriptures. For first, no text of
holy writ does so affirm; 1.
and consequently, the Church has power to determine thereof, as is already
proved. Secondly, the ancient 2.
council of Uasco, (which was holden above one Cont. Uascense. can. 4.
thousand and one hundredth years ago,) decreed plainly in their public
assembly, that the Deacons should read the Homelies made by the holy Fathers.
These are the express words of the Council; Hoc etiam pro aedificatione
omnium Ecclesiarum, and pro vtilitate totius populi nobis placuit, vt non solum
in Ciuitatibus, sedetiam in omnibus parochijs verbum faciendi daremus
Presbyteris Potestatem: ua, vt si presbyter aliqua infirmitate prohibente, per
seipsum non potuerit praedicare, Sanctorum Patrum Homiliae a Diaconis
recitentur.

We have also decreed for the edification of all Churches, and for the good of
all the people, that the Priests should be licenced to preach, and not in
Cities only, but Behold here license granted to preach.
also in every Parish Church; so that the Deacons may read the Homilies of the
holy Fathers, if the Priest cannot preach himself, by reason of some
infirmity. Thirdly, it is void of all reason, and far from all
Christianity, to.3.
affirm it unlawful to read testimonialls, made to signify the distress of
our honest Neighbors; that thereby we may be styrred up, to relieve them
more bountifully, Yea, (if it be true that some have written,) it is a law
amongst them of the Presbytery, to have their orders for governing the Church,
read publicly once every quarter. And I know Expropria scientia, that some
of them, have done more. Well, now-adayes every vpstart yongling, that can
rawely pronounce some Texts of the holy Bible (though he but meanly conceive
the true sense,) will roundly take upon him (I warrant you) to revile our most
Reverend Fathers, the Archbyshops and Bishops, and to control the
government of our Church, as if he had a Commission from Heaven to do it.
If I should disclose, what my self have heard herein, and how I have been
saluted sometimes, for speaking my mind in the defense of the Reverend
Fathers, and of the Godly settled Laws of this Church of England: time would
sooner fail me, then matter whereof to speak.

CHAP. XIIII. Of certain extrauagants very offensino to the Patrons of the
Presbytery,
The first member, of Christ's Baptism, and the circumstances thereof.
IT is sharply reproved, that the book of common prayer, has in it these
words; that by the Baptism of his well-beloved Son, God did sanctify the
flood Iordane, and all other waters, In the first prayer of Baptism.
to the mystical washing away of sin. By these words, (say they) the
Minister is caused to testify of God, that he has done that which he never
did. For answer hereunto, I say first, that I.I.
wonder at the temerarious audacitie of these men, who presume to set abroach,
Quie quid in buccam venerit. Truly says the Apostle of such qualified people;
they would be Doctors of the Law, and yet understand not what they 1. Tim.
1. 7.
speak, neither whereof they affirm. Secondly, that if.2.
master Calvin say traielie, as he says most truly in deed; Calvin. in
arg. in Epist. ad Galaethat.
that it is a pestileut mischief, when the manner of one church, must be made a
Law to all the rest. Then doubtless may I say truly; that it is a mere
pestilent mischief, when the government of all the Churches in a whole
Monarchy; must be squared and measured by the fancy and conceyte of every
private man. Thirdly, that when our Savior Christ was baptized in Jordan, of
his precursor Saint John:.3.
then did he sanctify all waters, for the mystical washing away Mat. 3. v. 13.
of sin. Neither is this mine opinion only, neither yet the Doctrine of the
Church of England only; but it is the constant and uniform affirmance of the
holy Fathers. Tertullianus, (whose rare learning Saint Cyprian admyred, and
therefore was daily conversant with his works,) gives this censure of Christ's
Baptism in Jordan. Baptizato. n. Christo, idest sanctificante aquas in suo
baptismate, omnis plenitudo Tertullianus aduers. Iu-daeos pa. 134.
spiritalium retro Charismatum in Christo cessauit. For when Christ was
baptized, that is to say, when Christ sanctified the waters in his Baptism,
then all the fullness of former spiritual gifts ceased in Christ.

Saint Hylarie has these words: Non ille necessitatem habuit abluendi sed per
illum in aquis ablutionis nostrae erat sanctificanda purgatio. Sequitur. Atque
ita and Prophetae testimonio Hylarius in matt. can. 2.
lauacro non eget, and exempli sui authoritate Humanae salutis Sacramenta
consummat, hominem and assumptoine sactificans and lauacro.

He stood in no need of washing; but in the waters of our washing, he was
to sanctify our purgation. And so both by the testimony of the Prophet, he
needs no washing: and by the authority of his example, he does consummate
the Sacraments of Man's salvation, sanctifying Man both in his assumption, and
in his washing.

Saint Ambrose is consonant to the rest, and delivers his mind in these
words: Baptizatus est ergo Dominus, non mundaeri volens, sed mundare aquas, vt
ablutae per carnem Ambros. in Luc. lib. 2. cap. 2.
Christi quae peccatum non cognouit, baptismatis ius haberent.

Our Lord therefore was baptized, not desiring to be purged, but to cleanse
the waters, that they being washed by the flesh of Christ, which knew no
sin, might enjoy the right of baptism.

Saint Hierome has these words: Ipse Dominus noster Jesus Christus. qui non
tam mundatus est in lauacro, quam lauacro suo vniuersas aquas mundauit, statim
vt caput extulit de fluento spiritum sanctum accepit, non quod vnquam sine
spiritis Hieron. aduer. Lucifer. tom. 3.
sancto fuerit, quippe qui de spiritu sancto in carne natus est; sed vt illud
nobis monstraretur verum esse baptisma, quo spiritus sanctus adueniat.

Our Lord Jesus Christ, who rather cleansed all waters by his washing, then
received any cleansing, came no sooner out of the flood, but he received the
Holy Ghost: not that he was any time without the Holy Ghost, who was conceived
by the Holy Ghost in the flesh: but that we should understand that to be true
baptism, in which the Holy ghost is given.

Saint Bede, (who for his great virtue and rare learning was surnamed
Venerablis, Venerable or Reverend,) has Beda in Luc cap. 3.
these express words; Baptizatus est Dominus, non ipse aquis mundari, sed
ipsas mundare cupiens aquas, quae ablutae per carnem eius peccati vtique
nesciam, Baptismi ius iuduerent, and quod tam innumera sub lege baptismata non
poterant, contra prauaricationis malum vim regeneratiua sanctificationis coni
ciperent.

Our Lord was baptized, not for desire to cleanse himself, but to cleanse the
waters, that they being washed by his flesh which knew no sin, might put
upon them the right of baptism, and receive the power of regeneratiue
sanctification against the evil of preuarication, which all the washings under
the Law could not perform. Thus write the holy Fathers. For the better
understanding of whose words, three things must be seriously observed, touching
the sanctification they speak of; viz. The time, the manner, and the end. The
time when they were sanctified, the manner how they were sanctified, and the
end for which they were sanctified.

Concerning the time, we must know, that Christ instituted holy Baptism two
ways. First, exemplarilie by fact; then expressly by word. Examplarilie, when
he was baptized in Jordan, about three years and a half before his Passion,
at what time he was about 30. years of age. Matt. 3. 13.
Expressly, after his Resurrection, about thirty days before his Ascension
up into Heaven. At which time Christ gave commission to his Apostles, that they
should teach Mat. 28. 19
and baptize all Nations.

Concerning the manner, he did not instill any inherent sanctimonie or
holiness into the waters, but only did consecrate and depute them unto an
holy end; viz. To be the fit and ordinary matter of holy baptism; like as
God is said to have sanctified and blessed the seventh Genesis 2. 3. Exodus 20. 11.
day, not by putting any holy inherent quality into it, but by deputing and
ordeyning it to his own service and holy worship. Now, that he ordained
exemplarilie both the water of Jordan, and all others, to be the usual matter
of the Sacrament of Baptism; it may appear by many circumstances of the
Text, as well for the matter of Baptism, as for the form and effect thereof.
First, he determined water to be the matter of baptism, when he touched 1.
it with his own most pure and holy flesh, and yielded to be Baptized
therewith. Secondly, he determined the form of Baptism, when in his Baptism
the whole Trinity 2.
appeared sensibly; for, the voice of the Father was heard from Heaven; the
Son was present in our flesh Mat. 3. v. 13. 16. 17.
assumpted; and the Holy Ghost appeered in the shape of a Dove. And (as Saint
Hylarie says,) the effect of Baptism was declared, for that the Heavens were
opened in the celebration thereof.

Concerning the end, Baptism is affirmed of Christ himself, to be our
second birth. In another place it is Ioh. 3. 5. Act. 22. v. 17. Tit. 3. 5. Rom
6. 4. Chrysosto. in cap. 3. mat. hom. 12. col. 114.
said to wash away our sins (Sacramentally.) In another place, it is called
the lauer of Regeneration, and Renouation of the Holy Ghost. And in another
place, it is made the seal of our justification by faith, of remission of our
sins, and sanctification in the Holy Ghost. To this effect writes the golden
mouthed Doctor Saint Chrysostom, in these golden words; Neque ideo solum, sed
vt and tu disceres, quontam super te quoque cum Sacro Font dilueris, Sanctus
Spiritus veniat; iam vero non visibils specie, qua vtique non egemus, cum nobis
pro cunctis sola fides sufficiat. Nam signa non credentibus, sed incredulis
dantur.

Neither did the Dove appear only for that end, but that thou also may
learn, that the Holy Ghost comes upon thee, when thou art washed in the
holy Font; bu that appearance is not now adays in any visible shape, whereof
we have no need, seeing sole faith suffices for all. For signs are not
given to the faithful, but to the incredulous persons. These things well
pondered: the objection against the book of Common prayer, will be to no
purpose: unless perhaps it will be a caveat for the Author, (which I
heartily wish,) to write and speak more circumspectly in time to come. For I
verily am persuaded, that all things contained in the book of Common prayer,
are agreeable to the holy Scriptures, and the practice of the Church in the
purest times, and composed with such Judgment, Piety, Learning, and Religion:
that all the wisdom in the world, is not able justly to control the same.
In so much, that I wonder, and greatly admire the audacious temeritie of many:
who being of small reading and learning, (and of no judgment and experience, if
they be compared to those ancient, grave, Godly, wise, and learned fathers,
that compiled the book of common prayer,) dare presume to condemn the same,
with their bitter invectiues, untimely censures, and unchristianlike
Anathematizations. True it is, that Saint Hierome says: Nec sibi blandiantur,
si de Scripturarum capitulis videntur Hier. aduers. Lucifer: tom 3 in sine.
sibi affirmare quod dicunt, cum and Diabolus de Scripturis aliqua sit locutus,
and Scripturae non in legendo, sed in intelligendo consistunt.

Neither must they slatter themselves, if they seem in their own conceits to
prove so much as they say: seeing the Devil himself alleged Scripture
(against our Lord Jesus,) and the Scriptures do not consist in bare reading,
but in true Sense and meaning. Would God this grave advise given by this holy,
ancient, and learned Father, might be a president and constant rule in this
doleful age, to all nouices, superficial divines, and young students in
Divinity, (who more rashly then Clerklie take upon them to control not only
our most Reverend Fathers, the grave, wise, and learned Bishops, but even the
whole Synod assembled in the Convocation house, yea and the King himself) to
walk circumspectly, to live obedientlie, to think modestly of their own
gifts, and not to esteem better of themselves and their judgments then there
is cause: but to think that a learned Synod can see as far as they, and
would as gladly go to Heaven as they: and consequently to ponder with
themselves seriously, that it is a too too malepeart sauciness for young
heads and superficial Divines of slender Judgment, and less reading of the
holy Fathers, ancient Counsels, and Ecclsiasticall hystories; to censure and
control not only the Godly settled Laws of our Christian Kingdom, but even
of the continual practice of the Church in all ages. I my self am about
three score years of age; I have endeavored by Prayer and painful Study to
attain good literature, ever since I was five years of age; I have lived,
conuersed, studied, and disputed in many famous Universities, as well in
England as in foreign Countries; I have employed my whole care, industry, and
diligence, now for the space of thirty years and odd, to understand Gods word
aright, and to know what has been the practice of Christ's church in all
former ages: and for that end and purpose, I have for the space of thirty
years and odd, provided all the ancient Fathers, Counsels, Hystories
Ecclesiastical, and Chronographycall, so far forth as my ability was able to
extend and reach; and that nothing should be wanting in this behalf, I have
borrowed books where I could, and have also had recourse to the best
Libraryes, both in the Universities and else where; to the end I might gather
notes out of such books, as I was not able to buy and provide. In which
behalf, not my self only, but all such as reap any commodity by my
painful labors, are more then a The L. Bish. of Cant. and the L. Bishop of
Dur. have goodly Libraries.
little beholden to these most Reverend Fathers; John the late Arch-byshoppe of
Canterbury, Richard now the L: Arch-byshoppe of Canterbury, and Tobye the L:
Bysh. of Durham; who have for themselves and the good of others, most
excellent, costly, and goodly Libraries: to which I have found free access, at
all times when I desired. All this being performed I have very seriously
weighed, pondered, and considered, what the Papists, Arrians, Macedonians,
Eutichians, Nestorians, Donatists, Carpocratians, Ebionites, Tatians,
Manichees, Brownists, and other Sectaries, do and can say for their opinions;
and this notwithstanding, I find the Doctrine and the Godly settled Laws of
this Church of England, (amongst which I place the late Canons of Anno. 1604.)
to be consonant to Gods word, and to the usual practice of the Church in all
former ages. These things I utter in these terms, because I heartily wish to
persuade all such as are careful of their salvation, to yield obedience to
higher Powers, and not to be Romans 13. 1. Pet. 2. 1. Sam. 15. v. 22.
carried away with the Sugared words of superficial Divines, but to learn
that obedience is better then Sacrifice. I am now likely even by the course of
Nature, shortly to forsake this world; and therefore I do not seek any
preferment for my pains, (which I never to this day hunted after,) and much
less do I seek to draw men into errrours, and so to make shipwreck of mine
own Soul. No, no, my purpose, (God is my witness, is far otherwise; as who
am persuaded so fully of the Doctrine which I deliver, that I am not affrayde
to end my life in the same.

The second member, of certain Rites and Ceremonies used in Baptism.
Newfangled and oddely conceited persons, do scornfullie inueigh against
interrogatories ministered at Baptism; against Godfathers, Godmothers, Fonts,
and otherlike Ceremonies, as things unknown in the time of the Apostles. To
whom I answer in this manner; First, that many things are this day lawfully
done in the Church, which were not in use in the Apostles time. This is already
proved. 1.
Secondly, that the custom of the Church, in things indifferent, is to be
esteemed among Christians for a Law, This 2.
is likewise proved. And let him that holds the contrary opinion, tell me
by what law he can justify, that formal conjunction of men and women in
holy wedlock, which is used not only in our Church of England, but also in
purest reformed Churches every where. He shall never be able to allege any
ground in that behalf, but the unwritten traditions of the Church. Of which
traditions the Apostle spoke, (as learned interpreters tell us) when Uide sup.
ca. 10. per totu^, and ex Calus. cap. 7.
he said, he would set other things in order at his coming. Yea M. Calvin upon
that Text admits unwritten Traditions, in things not necessary to
Salvation. Thirdly, that Saint Austen, Saint Ambrose, and other ancient
Fathers, 1. cor. 11. v. 34.
(who lived in the pure ages of the Church,) make mention of Godfathers, and
Godmothers, and of the interrogatories Austen being demanded, how they that
being an infant to baptism, are bold to answer that he believes, and so to
all other demaundes, seeing they dare promise nothing of his behavior when he
comes to man's state, answers in these express words; Si. n. Sacramenta
quandam similitudinem earumrerum quarum Sacramenta sunt, non haberent, omnino
sacramenta non essent. Ex Aug in epist. ad Bonssac. ^p. 23. page 57. 58.
hac autem similitudine, plerunque etiam ipsarum rerum nomina (...). Sicut ergo
secundum quendam modum sacramentum corpor^s Christi, corpus Christi est,
Sacramentum sangumis Christi sanguis Christi est, ita sacramentum Fidei, Fides
(...) aliud credere, quam fidem habere. Ac (...) credere, qui fidei nondum
habet (...) habere propter fidei Sacramen^^^ Uide (...) page 31^.
(...) propter conuersionis sacrament^^, (...) Celebrationem pertinet
Sacra(...) nondum fides illa quae (...) tamen ipsius fidei Sacra(...) facit.
Nam si^ut credere respondetur, ita etiam (...), non (...) annu^ndo, sed ipsu^
rei (...). For if Sacraments had not a certain similitude of those things
whereof they be Sacraments, they were no Sacraments at all. And by reason of
this similitude, they are often called by the names of the things themselves.
As therefore after a certain manner of speaking the Sacrament of the body of
Christ, and the Sacrament of the blood of Christ, are the body and blood of
Christ; so the Sacrament of faith, is faith. Neither is it any other thing to
Believe, then to have Faith. And therefore, when answer is made, that the
infant believes, which as yet has not faith in deed; it is answered, that he
believes, for the Sacrament of faith: and that he does convert himself to
God, for the sacrament of conversion, because the answer it self, perteyneth
to the Celebration of the Sacrament. Therefore, although that faith which
consists in the will of the believers, does not make the child faithful:
yet does the Sacrament of that Faith make him faithful. For even as it is
answered that he does believe, so is he also called faithful; not by
signifying or granting the thing it self in his mind, but by receiving the
sacrament of the thing. Thus writes S. Austen, that ancient and learned
Father, out of whose words I observe against rash heads, and young Divines,
these most excellent instructions for the humble and Godly readers. First, that
this holy and learned father, (whose virtue and learning all.1.
the Christian world has hitherto honored, and admyred.) relyeth and stays
himself upon the practice of the Church, which now adays every proud
Brownist, and unlearned Martinist, contemns at his pleasure. Secondly, that
it was the custom of the Church in S. Aust. time, (which custom he
reverenced,) even as it is this day, in our Church of England, 2.
to propound interrogatories to the suerties, or Godfathers and Godmothers in
the behalf of the child: as also they did lawfully and truly answer and
promise, as the manner is now in our Church, and that their answers were to
be justified, by virtue of the Sacrament.

The first Objection.
The suerties which you call Godfathers and Godmothers, cannot perform that,
which they promise in the name of the child. ergo it is a vain and rediculous
exercise.

The Answer.
I answer, that the suerties are well able to perform all that they promise,
as who promise nothing absolutely, but with a condition usually understood in
all such kind of promises; viz, if we live, if Gods will be so, to the utmost
of our power and so forth. And so much may be gathered, out of the express
words in the book of common prayer.

The second Objection.
Not the infants, but the Godfathers and Godmothers are baptized, and so
rebaptization is admitted. For not the child, but they say, I renounce the
devil, that is my desire.

The Answer.
I answer; first, with the ancient father Areopagita, in Dionisius Areopag.
de eccles. hierarchia prope finem.
these words, Non. n. hoc ait, ego pro puero abrenuncio, aut promitto, sed puer
abrenuntiat and profitetur: id est, profiteor me huic puero suasurum, cum
intelligere sacra per aetatem poterit, diuinis meis institutionibus, vt and
nuntium remittat adversarijs, atque ab eis deficiat, and profiteatur exolvatque
diuina promissa.

Secondly,mwith Saint Austen in these words: Miror sane quod ita volueris, vt
de his quae vary per diversa loca observantur, tibi aliqua conscriberem cum
and non sit necessarium, and vna August. ad Iamar epist. 119.
in his saluberrima regula retinenda sit, vt quae non sunt contra fidem, neque
contra bonos mores, and habent aliquid ad exhortationem vitae melioris,
vbicunque institui videmus, velinstituta cognoscimus, non solum non improbemus,
sed etiam laudando and imitando sectemur, si aliquorum infirmit as non ita
impedit, vt amplius detrimentum sit.

I marvel why you would have me write to you, touching those things which are
diuersely observed in diverse places, seeing that it is not necessary, and that
in these things we must hold this for a constant and sound rule, that what
things soever are neither against faith, nor against good manners, and are some
help to the furtherance of honest life, whersoeuer we see such things to be
ordained, we must be so far from reproving them, that we must praise and
imitate the same; unless some weaklings be so scandalized, that hurt comes
thereupon.

Thirdly, with the zealous and learned Writer master Zuinglius, in these
express words, Hic vero singulis videre li^ cet, quaenam sit contentiosi
istius Satanae caliiditas, qui huiusmodi Zuingl. us Prrt. 2. debaptis. Fol. 87.
rixis propter externa quaedam institutis, papatui amplissimas fenestras denuo
aperire voluit. In huiusmodi vtique rebus Pauli Apostoli regula nobis
obserua^da est. 1. cor. 14. sequitur, quoru^ vsum and administrationem in
nostro arbitrio and potestate sitam esse ait, sic tamen ne quid cum dei
instituto pugnans committamus, and ne pacem publicam, cuius nobis praecipua
cura esse debet, propter externa haec interturbare libeat. licet ergo vel hodie
quoque paedobaptismun (etiamsi hactenus in ecclesia vsurpatus non esset,) de
novo instituere si aliquod inde commodum, and pacis concordiaeque frustus inde
promanaret.

Here every man may see, what subtlety and crafty dealing contentious Satan
uses, who goes about by these dissentions in external matters, to make again
a most ready way and passage, for Popery to enter into our gates. But in such
matters doubtless, the Apostles rule must be observed. Whose use and
administration he says, is in our arbitrament and power: yet so, that we do
nothing against Gods ordinance, neither have any desire to trouble the public
peace, whereof we must have an especial care, for these external matters. It
is therefore this day lawful for us also, to institute and ordain a new the
baptism of infants, (although it had not hither to bin used in the church) if
any commodity, or good success of peace and concord, might ensue thereupon.

Out of these learned discourses of these grave and learned Writers, I observe
these memorable rules for the benefit of the gentle Reader. First, that the
ceremonies this a fortiori, to set down orders and laws for the apparel of
Ministers, for surplesles, square Caps, interrogatories in baptism, and bowing
of the knee at the name of Jesus, for kneeling at the holy Communion, for
giving thanks of women for their deliverance from the peril of childbirth,
for prohibiting to Preach without license, for Reading of Homilies, and the
like. Which rules and observations, if they were well remembered, and duly
observed, all schisms, (...)
dissension, whisperings, and mutinies, would wholly sur^^ase in this Church of
England.

The third member of Deacons, and their office in the Church.
In the book of orders, there is an office called the Deacon whose description
is not to be found in Gods book. namely consisting in helping the Priest in
divine service, especially when he ministers the holy Communion, in reading
holy Scriptures and Homilies in the congregation, instructing the youth in the
Catechism, in Baptizing and Preaching, if he be admitted thereunto by the
Bishop. Thus Write the patrons of the Eldership, and earnestly wished
Presbiterie, to whom I answer in this manner. First, that if it were true
which they say, (as it is not indeed;) yet would it not follow, that the
office of a Deacon this I have already proved,) the Church has authority to
constitute, make, and ordain, any laws ceremonies, canons, ordinances, and
orders, Vide supra, Cap. 5.
which are for the good of the Church, and not against the word of God. for the
better confirmation whereof, let us hear the verdict of master Zanchius, that
most famous Writer. These are his express words: interea tamen non improbamus
patres, quod iuxta varia^tu^ verbi dispensandi, tum regendae Zanchius de relig.
Page 169.
Ecclesiae rationem, varios quoque ordines ministroru^ multiplicarint, quando
id eis liberum fint, sicut and nobis, and quando constat, id ab illis fuisse
factum honestis de causis, ad ordine^ ad decoru^ and ad aedificatione^
ecclesiae pro eo tempore pertinentibus.

Nevertheless, we do not discommend or reprove the add huc membrum precedens
fathers, because they did multiply and increase the orders of the ministers,
according to the various manner of dispensing the word, and of governing the
Church. Seeing that was in their liberty and power, as it is also in ours; And
seeing also it is evident, that they did that for honest causes, for order,
comeliness, and edification of the Church, as that time did require. Out of
these golden words, I observe first, that the holy fathers in former ages Nota
membrum praecedens valde.
of the times, places, and persons do require.

I answer secondly, that the office of Deacons is no otherwise this day in our
English Churches, then it was of Conc. Nicen. can. 14. Conc. Carth. 4. Can. 37.
Justin. Apol. 2. in fine.
prove it, for that both ancient counsels, of Nice, Carthage, and others, and
also the holy fathers, do testify the same so copiously, as none but
younglings of no reading, can be ignorant thereof.

Thirdly, that Deacons in the Apostolic time and primitive Church, did not
only serve the table, and minister Ephesus, at Philippi, and in Crete; as may
evidently be gathered of the Epistles, which were written to Timothy, Titus,
and the ratio. 1.
Philippians. And for all that, there was in those places at that time such
paucitie of Christians, as there could be either small need or none at all,
for Deacons to attend upon the tables. Secondly, because the solemnity of
imposition of hands, used in the ordering and consecration of Deacons, then the
bare and sole ministry of the table. This was well observed by the great
learned Doctor Illyricus, whose Illyricus, in 1. Tim. 3. 9.
words are these; Hinc autem apparet eos non tantum ad dispensationem
elemosynarum alimentorumque, sed etiam ad institutionem auditorum fuisse
adhibitos, sicut and illi Act. 6. etiam simul docuerunt, non tantum aeconomiam
administrarunt; sed nimirum munus illorum fuit tantum rudiores instituere, seu
catechismum tradere, dum presbyteri omnibus sufficere laboribus nequeunt. Hence
it is apparent, that the Deacons were ordained, not only to distribute alms
and relief to the poor, but also to instruct and teach their auditors, as
they also, of whom mention is made in the acts, were occupied in teaching, and
not only in houshold-businesse. For their office was to instruct the ignorant,
and to Catechize, while the pastoral Elders could not undergo all the
labors. Lo, Illyricus (who understood the Scriptures, as well as our
Brownists and Martinists,) affirms plainly and constantly, that the office
of Deacons, even in the Apostles time, was not only to attend on the poor,
but also to instruct and Preach the Gospel.

I prove it Thirdly, because Philippe the Deacon did not only attend the
poor, but was also occupied in Baptizing Steven another Deacon, made a long,
learned, and most godly Sermon, unto the obstinate and stiff-necked Jews; in
which he proved at large, that he did serve and worship the everliving Act. 8.
v. 35. 38. Act. 7. Vsque. v. 53.
God aright, even that God who chose the fathers before Moses was borne, and
before their Temple was built.

The first Objection.
Steven the Deacon did not preach at all, but only defended himself in a long
Oration, against the wicked and slanderous accusations of the stiff-necked
Jews, which to do is lawful, not for Deacons only, but also for all other
Christians.

The Answer.
I answer first, that Saint Steven answered in the way Cap. 7. 51. Cap 6. 9.
them, terming them stiff necked, and of uncircumcised hearts and ears.
Secondly, he was in the sinagogue of Steven made a godly Sermon. This my
answer is confirmed by Illyricus in 6. cap. act. v. 8.
the verdict of Illyricus, whose words are these, Videtur autem hic Stephanus
egressus esse metas suae vocationis, qui magis apostoli, quam diaconi munus
vsurpaverit, docendo, disputando, and miracula edendo. Sed sic deus solet suam
quandam viam libere ingredi spirando suo spiritu vbi vult.

Steven seems here to have passed the limits of his calling, in using the
function rather of an Apostle, then of a Deacon, teaching, disputing, and
working miracles, But thus God will use his own ways, breathing with his
spirit where he lists.

Again in another place, the same Illyricus has these words: primum, est
longa concto Stephani, vsque ad 53. Versum. ibidem cap. 7. v 1. Aretius in act.
7. Gual. in act. 6.
de^^de, est glortosum martyrium eiusdem. First, there is a long Sermon which
Steven made, until the 53. Verse then follows his glorious martyrdom. M.
Aretius and M. Gualterus does both of them affirm constantly, that Saint
Steven used to preach vsualy. I answer secondly, that if it be true, (which
the objection thereof supposes,) that an Apology cannot consist with a true
and godly Sermon: then will it follow of necessity, that Saint Paul did not
Preach before Foelix the governor of Jury, which to Act. 24. v. 10. etc.
hold, is against M. Calvin and all learned Writers. It will also follow
thereupon, that Saint Peter did not Pre^ch, when he answered to those that
accused the Apostles of Drunkenness, before the Jews, and all the strangers
that Act. 2. v. 15.
did inhabit Jerusalem.

I answer thirdly, that the custom of the church is of 3.
great authority, for the true sense and meaning of the doubtful texts of
Scripture. By which custom it is evident, that Deacons did Baptize and preach
in the primitive church: and that both Steven and Philip did the same, although
they were but Deacons, Saint Hierome has these words, Hieron. adu. Lucifer.
tom. 3. fol. 3. c.
Non quidem abnuo hanc esse Ecclesiarum consuetudinem, vt ad eos qui long in
minoribus Vrbibus per Presbyteres and Diaconos baptizati sunt, Episcopus ad
inuocationem Sancti spiritus manum impositurus excurrat.

I do not deny, that this is the custom of the church, that the Bishop
should go to those, which in Villages a far of were baptized by the Priests
and Deacons, and lay his hands upon them with invocation of the Holy Ghost.
Lo, the custom of the church approved the baptism of Deacons, which shall
be made more apparent, in answer to the next objection.

The second Objection.
Philip that baptized the Eunuch, was Philip the Apostle, Act. 8. v. 35 38.
not Philip the Deacon: Besides, he was then an Evangelist, and so baptized
and preached as an Evangelist, and not by virtue of his Deaconshippe.

The answer.
I answer: first, that this Philip, (whereof the controversy Act. 8. v. 1. 14.
Act. 8. v. 1.
The reason hereof is evident, because all the Apostles (as S. Luke writes,)
remained (...) at Jerusalem and consequently it must needs be Philip the
Deacon, who was dispersed with the rest, and came to (...), where he now
preached and baptized. The words of the text are these, they were all scattered
abroad through the Regions of Iudaea, and Samaria, except the Apostles. Again;
then came Philippe, Act. 8 v. 5. Act. ^. 14.
into the City of Samaria, and preached Christ unto them. Again thus; Now,
when the Apostles which were at Jerusalem, heard say that Samaria had received
the word of God, they sent unto them Peter and John. By these several Texts,
it is most apparent to all indifferent readers, that Philippe which baptized
the Ethiopian, was none of the Apostles; but was that Deacon which came into
Samaria, Philippe the Apostle being still at Jerusalem. But the Patrons of the
Eldershippe, use to shuffle up Scriptures, they care not how, so they may
seem to conclude their intent and purpose. Let us hear what Master Calvin
says, Calui. in. 21. Act. v. 7. 8.
whose words are these; Caesareae vsos fuisse dicit hospitio Philippi, quem
Euangelistam vocat, licet vnus esset e septem Diaconis, vt visum est capite
sexto. Diaconiam illam fuisse temporale Uide Beza^. in ^^ses. ca. 5.
munu^, hinc conijcere promptum est; quod Philippo alioqui liberumnon fuisset,
relicta Ierosolimae Caesaream migrare. He tells us, that they lodged with
Philippe at Caesarea, whom he calls Evangelist, although he were indeed one
of the seven Deacons. Hence we may gather, that his Deaconshippe was but a
temporary office; for otherwise he could not have left Jerusalem, and have
gone to Caesarea. Where I must needs wish the Reader to observe by the way,
that seeing the office of Deacons was temporary and mutable; much more may the
same be said of vnpriested Elders, if anic such were in any age, place, or
time.

I answer secondly, that Philip which baptized the Ethiopian Eunuch, was not
only once a Deacon, but still remained Bullinger, and other learned writers
grant. This to be so, the very express words of the text do prove it so
plainly, that no denial can be made thereof. Thus writes Saint Luke,
Eiselthontes eis ton ^icon Philippou tou Euangelistou ontos Act. 21. v. 8.
ec ton hepta emeinamen par auto. Entering into the house of Philip the
Evangelist, being one of the seven, we aboade with him. Lo, S. Luke speaks
not in the preterperfect tense, or preterplusperfect tense, who has or had
been one of the seaue^ Deacons; but he says in the present tense, who is even
now one of the seven; For so the Original Greek word (ontos), must needs be
expressed, seeing it is a participle of the present time, or time even now
being. And the holy Fathers together with the practice of the church, have
ever so understood this text of Scripture.

Saint Epiphanius delivers his mind in these plain Epipha. li. 1. to. 2.
haeres. 21. page 18.
terms; Omnes vero praeter ipsum susceperunt magnorum A. postolorum
praesentians, and per impositionem manuum ipsorum acceperunt Spiritum sanctum.
Nam quum Philippus Diaconus esset, non habebat potestatem imponendi manus, vt
per hoc daret Spiritum sanctum.

They all, he only excepted, received the presence of the mighty Apostles,
and by imposition of their hands, they enjoyed the holy Ghost. For Philip being
a Deacon only, had not power to impose hands, thereby to give the holy Ghost.

S. Austen has these express words; Iterum, multum distare inter Diaconum and
sacerdotem liber approbat, que^ dicimus August. in quaest. ^^xtim, quaest. 101.
tom. 4 Hier. i would docet aduersus Lucifer. tom 3 fo. 63. B
actus Apostolorum. Cumn. ex Samaria credidissent, Philippo praedicanti Diacono
ab Apostolis ordinato, miserunt, inquit, ad eos Petrum and Ioannem, vt
venirent, and his qui creder^t darent spiritum sanctum, per manus impositionem.
Again, the book which we call the Acts of the Apostles, proves that a
Deacon differs much from a Priest. For when they of Samaria had believed the
preaching of Philip the Deacon, ordained of the Apostles; they sent (says the
book) Peter and John unto them, that they might give the holy Ghost, by
imposition of hands, to those that did believe. Thus we see the judgment of
S. Epiphanius and S. Austen, who both jointly affirm Philip to have been but a
Deacon, and yet to have baptized and preached. Yea Master Gualter, Master
Aretius, and the Magaeburgenses, do all constanthe Gualter, in 8. Act. Aret.
in cap. 8. Act. Magdeb. cent. 1. lib. 2. ca. 7. p. 508.
and uniformly contest the same truth, with the ancient Fathers and
continual custom of the Church in all ages. They write plainly, that
although Deacons were chiefly occupied about the dispensation of the churches
goods! yet did they employe their labors so far forth as they might, in the
other ministeries of the church.

The fourth member of Deacons promoted to Priesthood.
The Church of England is charged to do against the word of God, while she
uses to make one and the same person, first a Deacon, and afterward a Priest.
To which calumny, I answer in brief in this manner. First, that it is not
against the word of God, but very consonant and altogether 1.
agreeable to the same. For no Scripture can be alleged, to prove that a
Deacon may not become a Priest. Master Calvin affirms constantly, that
Philippe was first a Deacon, and afterward an Evangelist, Priest, or Caluian
cap. 21. Act.
pastoral elder. Secondly, that the church of England using the Deaconshippe,
as a step or degree unto Priesthood, 2.
does nothing against the judgment of the ancient Fathers, but follows the
usual practice of the church in all ages. The reason hereof is, and ever was
this; viz. that there might be some time of try all, of their behavior in the
Deaconshippe, before they were or could be admitted to the order of
Priesthood. No Council, no Father, no history Ecclesiastical, no time, no
place, no person, since the Apostolic age, can be named to the contrary. To
the continual practice of the Church from age to age, the Apostles words may
sitly be applied, when he says: the deacons that 1. Ion. 3. v. 13
have ministered well, get themselves a good degree. For sun (...) writer; of
high esteem in the church, do (...) the word (Degree) a step unto the (...)
or Priesthood. This notwithstanding, it is not of necessity, that every Deacon
become a Priest, by any canon or constitution of the church. For his behavior
in the Deaconship may be such, that the church will deem him unmeet to be
preferred unto Priesthood. And therefore I conclude with these words of S.
Hierome, Et si scripturae Hieron. adv. Lucif. tom. 3. fol. 63 c.
authoritas non subesset, totius orbis in hanc parte^ consensus instar
praecepti obtineret. Na^ and multa alia quae per traditione^ in Ecclesijs
obseruantur, authoritate^ sibi scriptae legis vsurpauerunt.

Although they were no authority in Holy Scripture; yet should the consent of
all the Christian world, have the force and strength of a law in this behalf.
For many other Uide supra, ca. 7. per totu^.
things, which the church observes by tradition, are become equivalent to the
written law. Lo, S. Hierome affirms boldly and constantly, as do also S.
Augustine. M. Calvin, and others, (as I have already proved,) that the custom
and tradition of the church must be in steed of a law unto Christians. Which
ever is to be understood, in things not repugnant to the word of God, (or as M.
Calvin. speaks) Calvin in 1. cor. 11.
which are neither parts of doctrine, nor necessary to salvation.

The fyfth member, of the general confession made by private persons in the
Church.
The Patrons of the expected Eldership or Presbytery, exclame against the
book of common prayer; because it gives liberty to the Laycall communicants,
to make a general confession of their sins, before the congregation then
present; as if thereby the Laicall communicants, should presently become
public ministers of the church. To these men I answer in this manner; first,
that they seem to to condemn all the ancient Bishops, (those glorious martyrs
of our Lord Jesus,) the most famous Bishop of Sarisburie, (the Jewel of
England in his time) the Bishops that now live, (who are both wise, virtuous,
and learned,) and all the residue of the learned Clergy of this our English
Church. Secondly, that by their gross assertion, joined with a most Luke. 18.
v. 13.
in the Gospel, should be made a Minister of the Church, or have intruded him
himself into the function of public Ministry, when he knocked upon his
breast, and said; O God be merciful to me a sinner. Thirdly, that by England,
Augustine, ad Ianuarim epist. 118.
but also in all other reformed churches wheresoever. I therefore conclude this
member, with this Golden sentence of S. Austen; if any thing be observed
universally of the whole church; then not to observe that, or to call it into
question, is mere madness, and desperate folly.

The sixth member, of praying to be delivered, from Lightning, Plague, and
sudden death.
It is scornefully objected against the prayers of the church, that when we
pray to be delivered from plague, famine, and from other adversity, we pray
without faith, because we have no promise to receive the things we pray 1.
for. To whom I answer; First, that our Savior Christ taught us so to pray,
when he delivered to his Church the form of that prayer, which we should
daily use; Being the most exact, and most perfect prayer, that ever was, or can
Mat. 6. v. 13.
be made. Where the Notes of the Geneua Bible expound it, to be delivered from
all adversity: And consequently, 1. Ioh. 5. 14. Luke. 11. 9. Mat. 7. 7. Ioh.
16. 24. Apoe. 3. v. 20.
that we pray. Secondly, that we have promise to receive that we pray for, so
far forth as stands with Gods glory and our souls health. For Christ
himself wills us to ask, and we shall receive; to seek, and we shall
find; to knock, and it shall be opened unto us. Yea, he stands knocking at
the door of our hearts, and if we will open the do^e to him, he will enter
into the house of our hearts, and dwell with us, and give us all things
necessary, both for our bodies, and for our souls. And to assure us thereof,
Christ wills us to believe that we shall have our Mar. 11. v. 24.
request, it shall be done unto us. And if any will reply, that many ask
many things in prayer, and yet do not attain the same: to such I answer with
Saint James, in these Iac. 4. 3.
words; ye ask, and receive not, because ye ask amiss, that ye may lay the
same out on your pleasures. Thirdly, In Dom. Trioration. Genesis 22. v. 11.
she has both the example and advise of most holy men. The holy Patriarch
Jacob, fearing to receive some bodily harm and adversity of his brother,
prayed to God in this manner; (O God) I pray thee deliver me from the hand of
my brother from the hand of Esau; for I fear him, least he will come and
sinite me, and the mother upon the children King David, fearing to receive
bodily harm of his son Absalon, fled away from him, and prayed God to turn
the counsel of Achitophel (who conspired with Absalon) into foolishnes. The
whole congregation prayed to 2. Sam. 15. v. 31 psa. 20.
God, to prosper their King, when he went forth to battle against the
Ammonites. And I deem them no good subjects, to our most gracious Sovereign
King James, who will not pray to God vnfaynedlie, to defend him from all
adversity; Neither yet those persons who refuse to pray with our church; for
all happiness as well corporal and temporary, as spiritual and Eternal, to
our most virtuous Queen Anne, the noble Prince Henry, and all the rest Mat.
24. v. 02.
of that most Royal progeny. Yea, Christ himself forewarning his disciples,
of external future adversity, wills them to pray to be defended from the
same. Pray says Christ, that your flight be not in the winter, neither on the
Sabbath day. And besides the sixth petition of the Lords prayer (which teaches
us to pray) to be defended from all adversity, (as S. Cyprian, Ursinus, and
Illyricus with many other learned writers expound it,) and besides the fourth
Cyprian. in orat. dom. page 313.
petition also, which teaches us to pray for all things needful for this
life, (as the same writers tell us,) many examples of the new Testament do
make it clear and evident, Vrsin. par. 4. page 422.
that Christ was well pleased with their prayers, who prayed for things to this
life appertaining. The Ruler prayed for the life of his Daughter, and Christ
performed his desire. Mat. 9. 22. Mur. 10. v. 51 52. Mat. 9. 30. Mat. 15. v.
22. 28.
Bartimaeus the son of Tymans desired to receive his sight, and obtained his
request. Two blind men followed Christ, and requested to receive their sight,
and he yielded to their petitions. A woman a Canaanite desired Christ to help
her Daughter, who was miserably vexed with a Devil, and Christ cured her
daughter presently. Many other like examples I might allege; but in steed
thereof, this only golden sentence of S. Augustine shall suffice. Cum dicimus,
libera nos a malo, nos admonemus cogitare nondum nos esse in eo bono, vbi
August. epist. 121. pa. 403.
nullum patiemur malum. Et hoc quidem vltimum, quod in Dominica oratione
positum est, tam late, tamque enidenter, and manifest patet, vt homo
Christianus in qualibet tribulatione constitutus, in hoc gemitus edat, in hoc
lachrymas fundat, hinc exordiatur, in hoc immoretur, ad hoc terminet orationem.

When we say, Deliver us from evil, we admonish ourselves to consider with
our selves, that we are not as yet in that good estate, where we shall suffer
no evil. And this which is last placed in the Lords Prayer, is extended so
far, and so plainly, that a Christian man moved with any kind of tribulation
may in this petition sigh, in this shed his tears, begin herein, continue
herein, and end his prayer herein. Thus writes this holy father. And now,
where it is wont to be objected against the custom of our Church, that we know
not that God will deliver us from all such adversity: as from lightning,
thunder, fire, water, sudden death, and such like. I answer that we are not
to command God, or to appoint him an hour, but to expect his good time, and to
refer every part and parcel of our petitions, to his holy will and pleasure
ever implied in all our prayers. And again, that if we must pray for nothing,
but that only which we know God will grant, we shall seldom or never pray
for any thing at all. No, we must not say to our neighbor ryding toward
London, God speed you well: nor to the sick persons, GOD help you, nor for
the preservation of his Majesty, GOD save the King. How absurd these things
are, every child can discern: and yet the patrons of the Presbytery condemn
our Church, for Preaching to be defended from all adversity, upon such silly
fancies and slender grounds.

The seventh member, of the oath ex officio.
It is thought a very heinous offense, that the Church does sometime require an
oath, whereby certain persons are constrained to accuse themselves. Which
oath, because some do offer it by virtue of their place and charge committed
to them, is by some malcontents ironically termed the oath ex officio. But I
answer: first, that honorable Counsel in the North of England. Which usage
though of great antiquity, has for all that ever been approved and deemed
lawful, as well by the wisest and best learned of the church, as also of the
commonweal of England, until these last and worst days, in which some few
young Doctors of small reading, have audaciously taken upon them, to censure
both our church and Kingdom in that behalf. 2. that it is noe small sin I
am content to allege their testimonies, whose judgments the malcontents
themselves will easily admit. Master Beza has these express words; Res
alioqui per se mediae Beza, in epist. 24. page 155. Vide supra, cap ^. and
notat^.
mutant quodammodo naturam, quum aliquo legitimo mandato vel praecipiuntur vel
prohibentur, quia neque contra iustum praeceptum omitti possunt, si
praecipiantur, neque contra interdictum fieri, si prohibeantur. Sequitur, and
si. n. conscientias proprie solus deus ligat, tamen quatenus vel magistratus
qui dei minister est, iudicat interesse reip. vt quippiam alio qui per se
licitum non fiat, vel ecclesia ordinis and decori, adeoque aedificationis
rationem habens, leges aliquas de rebus medijs rite condit; eiusmodi leges pijs
omnino sunt observandae, and eatenus conscientias liga^t, vt nemo sciens and
prudens rebellandi animo, possit absque piece cato velfacere qua it a
prohibentur, vel omittere quae praecipiuntur.

Things otherwise of themselves indifferent, do after a sort change their
nature, so soon as by any lawful precept, they are either commanded or
prohibited, because they neither can be omitted against a just mandate, if they
be commanded: neither yet be done against an interdict, when they are
forbidden. For albeit God alone does properly bind the conscience, yet for all
that, when the Magistrate Behold order and comlines do edify. Let this be
well marked.
being Gods minister, judges it expedient for the public weal, that a thing
otherwise of it self lawful, be not done, or the Church having respect to
order and comeliness, and consequently to edification, ordains laws touching
things indifferent, then such Laws must be altogether observed of the godly,
and they so far bind the consciences, that no man can wittingly and willingly
with a rebellious mind, either do the things so forbidden, or omit the things
so commanded, but he shall thereby become guilty of sin.

Master Martyr has these words; Quare hand nos latere Pet. Mart. in. 1. cor.
1. sol. 8. a.
oportet etc. Wherefore we must not be ignorant, that in the church there be
three virtues of traditions. Some of them are evidently deduced and gathered
out of the Scriptures. And touching this kind, all the faithful are bound to
communicate together. Other some are wholly repugnant to the word of God, and
they must be rejected, by what authority so ever they be obtruded. And there
be a third sort of traditions, which we may call neutrall or indifferent;
because they are neither contrary to Gods word, nor yet necessarily joined
thereunto. In which last kind we must obey the church, three cautions being
observed. First, that they be not obtruded as a part of Gods worship, or
peculiar holiness, but as pertaining to order, and the civil commodity of
the church, and to comeliness in divine actions: for all things are contained
sufficiently in the holy Scriptures, which pertain to Gods worship and
holiness. Secondly, that they be not reputed so necessary, but that they may
be changed, if time so require. Let the church keep her interest in these
indifferent things, to appoint what shall be thought most necessary and meet
to edify the faithful. Last of all, let not Gods people be burdened with too
great a multitude of them. Thus writes this learned man.

The Churches in Heluetia in their confession of their faith, after a long
discourse of rites and things indiffe^^nt, Confess Hell ^et. Page 211.
added these words; Semper vero ecclesiae in huiusmodiritibus, sicut medijs,
vsae sunt liberate, id quod nos quoque facimus. The Churches in such rites, as
in things indifferent, have ever used their liberty, which liberty our selves
also challenge.

The Churches in Svevia: in their confession have Confess. Svevica. Page 230.
these words; Tales multas sane ecclesia hodie iure obseruat, and pro
occasion quoque condit novas, quas qui reiecerit, is non hominum, sed dei
(cuius traditio est, quaecunqus vtilis est,) auctoritatem contemnit. Many such
traditions the Church this day observes aright, and as occasion requires, she
appoints and makes new ones, which new orders whosoever shall reject, he
contemns the authority not of men, but of God.

Out of these testimonies, of these famous, godly, zealous, and most learned
writers, I observe these golden lessons. First, that things of their own nature
indifferent, do

I answer thirdly, that the Church has authority to Tertio Principa^^ter.
impose every lawful ordinance and constitution, which she deemeth profitable
for the Church, upon every person subject to her jurisdiction. This point is
sufficiently proved already, both in this present Chapter, and in many others
throughout this discourse. So that henceforth, one only thing remains for me
to prove; viz. That to minister the oath ex officio, whereby one is bound to
accuse himself is either a thing lawful of it self, or else Adiaphoron and a
thing indifferent of it own nature. I attempt the proof. Every thing is
either good of it self, as God the author and giver of all goodness, or evil
of it self, as the blaspheming of God; or indifferent of it own nature, as
gold, money, oil, wine, and such like. Now if the oath ex officio be good in
it self, then doubtless, the Church may minister it to her subjects with out
offense. None that has sense or reason, will or can for shame deny the same.
Again, if it be Adiaphoron, a thing of it own nature indifferent, then it is
likewise in the power and liberty of the Church, to impose the same upon
every member within her jurisdiction.

This is so sufficiently proved, as no denial can be made thereof. It is
therefore either evil of it own nature, or else doubtless it may not be
withstoode or gainesaide, that it is not ill of it own nature, I thus prove
it, and I wish the reader to mark well my words. If it be evil, it is
either evil simply and absolutely considered, as it is an oath: or else, as it
is ministered to such a person. Not the former, because every magistrate may
lawfully minister an oath, so often as due order of justice does require.

For as the Apostle says, an oath for confirmation, is among men an end of
all strife. Yea, Gods name is confessed by true and lawful oaths. For as holy
Moses Hebr. 6. Verse. 16.
says, thou shall fear the Lord thy GOD, and serve him, and shall swear by
his name. And the Prophet Ioremiah tells us, that it is ever lawful to Deuteronomy.
6. Verse. 13.
swear for the advancement of GODS glory, and the profit of others, so these
three conditions, justice, Iere. 4 v. 2
judgment, and truth, be always annexed unto it viz. if we swear truly,
reverently, and justly. Not the latter.

First. for that it may be, and often is ministered to many

Secondly, for that it is no sin at all, for a sinner to accuse himself of
the sin he has committed. But it is a singular Joshua right well, when
speaking by the spirit of God he 1. Ioh. 1. v. 9.
willed Achan to acknowledge his sin. My son says he, I beseech ye give
glory to the Lord God of Israel, and make Ios. 7. 19.
confession unto him, show me now what thou have done, hide it not from me.
Lo, to confess our secret sins to Gods minister, is to glorify God and to
honor his holy name. And therefore says the note of the Geneua Bible, that
God is glorified, when the truth is confessed. This knew Saint Matthew right
well, when writing the Gospel of Jesus Christ, and reckoning up the names of
the Apostles, Mat. 10. Verse. 3.
he terms himself Matthew the Publicane. This knew S. Paul right well, when
he left it written to all posterities, that he had bin a blasphemer, a
persecuter, and an oppresser. This Saint Austen, Saint Hierome, and many 1.
Tim. 1. Uers. 13.
other holy men knew right well, when they enrolled their peculiar sins in
their own books, which they divulged to the view of the whole world.

Thirdly, because the rule of charity does teach the same. How prove I that?
forsooth, because our adversaries herein Mat. 22. Verse. 39.
selves is that rule, by which our love toward our neighbor must be squared,
it follows of necessity, that it is as lawful for us to accuse and testify
against our selves, as it is to accuse and testify against our neighbor. This
reason can never be answered. And it will not serve to reply, that it is a
cruel part to cause a man to accuse himself. For First, viz. He in both cases
pla^eth the part of Gods anointed and lawful minister. Secondly, it comes
not of the nature per accidens that the party sworn does accuse himself.
For, if he were innocent, as he is nocent; he could not be accused, by virtue
of the oath. For, the oath is as free to commend him, as to condemn him, and
as indifferent to acquit him, as to accuse him. If it were otherwise, all that
take the oath, should be accused by virtue thereof. Which how false it is, all
the Christian world can witness. Thirdly, it is a virtue justly to punish him,
who unjustly Mat. 5. Uers. 24.
oath does only induce iurantem to that by way of justice, which he is bound
to do by Gods law of his own accord viz. to confess the injury he has
done, and to be recociled Romans 13.
to his brother. Lastly, he sins grievously, whoso^euer Uers. 2. 5. 1. Pet.
2. 13.
refuses to confess the truth, when his competent and lawful Judge demands
it iuridically at his hands. I therefore conclude that albeit the competent
judge cannot lawfully and iuridically exact an oath, for the manifestation of
sins secret and altogether unknown, (because such secret sins are reserved
only and solely to the indgement of GOD,) yet when there goes a common fame,
or when there is a vehement suspicion, or semiplena probatio (as the Canons
term it,) of such a fact committed by such a Person: then the Judge may
lawfully by iuridicall process, exact a corporal oath of every suspected
person. In which case only (as I conceive it,) the oath ex officio is
ministered, and in no other. In regard whereof, I would wish all inferiors to
be more obedient and circumspect in future times, and not to be carried away
headlong with audacious temeritie, peremptorily to censure and condemn the
Laws of their superiors, the true nature whereof, many of them do little
understand. Let them remember, what the wise man says, be not just overmuch,
neither make thy self ouerwise. And Eccles. 7. Uers. 18. Romans 12. Uers. 3.
as Saint Paul advises us, let no man presume to understand, above that which
is meet to understand, but that he understand according to sobriety. Which
holy counsel if it were pondered aright, and deeply fixed in all men's hearts,
many too too forward young Divines, would more sparingly censure the laws of
their superiors, and follow Iac. 1. 19.
Saint James his precept, in being swift to hear, and slow to speak.

CHAP. XV. Of the punishing and pardoning of male factors.
THe patrons of the new English long wished presbytery, are so sharp,
forward, and rigorous, in the punishing of sin and sinners, that in effect they
spoil all magistrates of their lawful authority, and make them guilty of
sins more then a few. For they write resolutely (I will not say,
audaciously,) that the civil magistrates cannot save the lives of any
blasphemers, murderers, adulterers, and such like. Which how unsound a doctrine
it is, I purpose in God to make it manifest, by way of conclusions.

The first Conclusion.
No Christian Magistrate is this day bound to observe, either the Ceremonial,
or the Judicial Law of Moses. I prove it briefly. The Law of Moses was
Tripar^ite: Uide su. ca. 8. aphoris. 3. in resp. ad 2. object.
Ceremonial, Judicial, Moral. Of which three, the Moral part only is this
day in force with Christians. The reason hereof is this; because it is in
deed the very law of Nature, imprinted in every man's heart in his Nativity,
and so cannot be altered. The Judicial part was properly, and peculiarly
appointed of God, for conservation of Justice, among the Jews, in the land of
promise, the land of Canaan, the land of Iewrie. The whole order of which
government ceased long fithence: viz. Ever since the people of Israel were
expelled out of Iudaea, and began to dwell amongst the Gentiles: living without
Governors, without a King, without a Priest, and without a Law. The
Ceremonial part was ordained, to prefigure Christ's future Priesthood; and
therefore was it wholly abrogated, Ioh. 19. 30. Romans 10. 4. Luke. 24. Heb. 7.
v. 12.
by Christ's most blessed and Sacred Aduent. For Christ was the end of the
Law; in whom were fulfilled as well the figures as the promises contained in
the Law, and the Prophets. All which Saint Paul compriseth pithily, in these
golden words. For, if the Priesthood be changed, then of necessity, the
Law also must be changed. Yea, Christ himself seemed to insinuate no less,
when he refused to condemn the adulteress to death, according to the
Judicial law of Moses; albeeit the Scribes and Pharisees did even then urge
him with the constitution of that Law. And S. Austen does conclude no less out
of Christ's words, if he be rightly understood. But, for the Aug ad Poll. de
adult. coniugijs, tom. 6.
true sense and meaning of S. Austens discourse, his two books written to
Pollentin, must be well pondered and aptly matched together. For I stand not so
much of Christ's freeing the adulteress, from the punishment of the Judicial
law of Moses; as of that other ground, upon which S. Austen stays himself.
viz. That adultery does not dissolve the bond of holy Wedlock. For albeeit
sundry late Writers, otherwise of great learning and rare gifts, do
constantly teach (which some of our men have also put in practice) that when
the husband is divorced from his wife, being an adulteress then he may
lawfully marry an other: yet Saint Austen grounding his opinion, upon the
words of Christ, and of S. Paul; concludes constantly that whosoever shall
marry another wife, during the life of his former wife divorced for adultery,
does himself commit adultery. Which (if it be true, which I leave to the
judgment of the Church,) proves evidently that the Judicial law of Moses is
not of sorce. These are S. Austens words: Haec verba Apostoli tot^es repetita,
toties inculcata, vera sunt, viua sunt, sana sunt, plana sunt. Nulltus viri
posterioris mulier August. ad Pollen. lib. 2. ca. 4. tom. 6.
vxor esse incipit, nisi prioris esse desiuerit. Esse autem desinet prioris,
simoriatur vir eius, non sifornicetur. These words of the Apostle so often
repeated, so often inculcated, are true, are quick, are sound, are plain. A
woman begins not to be the wife of any later husband, unless she first
cease to be the wife of the former. But she cease to be the former
husbands wife, if her husband die, not if he commit adultery.

Hemingius a great learned man, and a zealous professor of the Gospel, has
these words; Est and lex Iudicialis, quae Heming in enchirid page 156.
cessante republica Mosis expira^nt: it a vt non necessario vllum hominem
obliget in specie, nisi quaetenus portio cius aliqua, aut part est legis
naturae, vt lex co^traincoestas nuptias, Lev. 18. aut a Magistratu propomtur
politico fine. There is also the Judicial law, which expired with the
commonwealth of Moses: so that it does not bind any man of necessity, but so
far only, as some portion of it, partaineth to the law of Nature, as the
law against incestuous marriages: or so much of it, as the ci^^le magistrate
shall admit for policy.

Saint Cyrill has these words; Sacundum legem adulter cu^ Cyrilius in Leuit.
ab 11. Lev. 20, 10 Deuteronomy. 22, v. 22.
adultera moriebatur, nec potera^t dicere, poenitentiam petimus and ven^a^
deprecamur. Sequitur apud Christianos vero siadulterium fuerit admissum, nonest
praeceptum, vt adulter. vel adultera corporal (...) puniantur.

In the Law, both the adulterer and the adulteress were punished by death;
and they could not say, we are penitent, and desire pardon for our sins. But
among Christians, there is no commandment to punish them with death.

M Musculus that most zealous Christian, and great learned Doctor, has these
express words: Quaerunt, an tota sit abrogata? respondemus, si totus Moses
cessit Christ, vtique tota illius lex, cessit legi Christi. Sequitur: in lege
sunt mandata, promissa, and figurae. Perveritatem Christi, cessarunt promissa
and figurae. Mandata legis sunt moralia, iudicialia, coeremontalia.
Caeremo^ialia cessasse, ex eo patet quod ipsum Sacerdotium legis, cuiannexae
fuerunt caeremoniae, per sacerdotium Christi secundum or dinem Melchisedech est
abrogatum, and iam olim re ipsa cessauit. Iudicialta quoque cessasse in eo
declaratur, quod tota Israelis oeconomia qualem terrae promissae inhabitatio
requirebat, ab eo tempore cessauit, quo exdulsi inter gentes, sine Rege, sine
Ducibus, sieve Sacerdote, and sine lege habitare coeperu^t.

They demand, if the whole Law be abrogated? we answer, if whole Moses gave
place to Christ, then has his whole law given place to the law of Christ. In
the Law are commandments, promises, and figures. The commandments of the law
are moral, judicial, ceremonial. That the ceremonialls are ceasled, it is
thereby evident; for that the Priesthood of the law, to which the ceremonies
were annexed, is abrogated by the Priesthood of Christ, according to the order
of Melchisedeth, and was long since expired. And that the iudicialls are also
ceased, it is herein manifest; for that the whole order of the government of
Israel, which was requisite unto the inhabiting of the land of promise, has
from that time ceased, when they being expelled, began to dwell among the
Gentiles, without a King, without governors, without a Priest, and with out a
law.

Master Calvin has a large and most learned discourse of this question, which
is able to satisfy any indifferent Musculus in locus de legib. page
Reader. Some small part thereof I will here set down, referring the Reader
unto the place for the residue. Sunt qui recte composita^ esse remp. negent,
quae neglectis Mosis politicis, communibus gentium legibus regitur. Quae
sententta Calvin. in instit. lib. 4. cap. 20. Sect. 14. 15. 16.
quam periculosa sit and turbulenta, videriut alij, mihi falsam esse ac
stolidam, demonstrasse satis erit.

There be some which deny that common weal to be well governed, which
omitting the politic laws of Moses, is ruled by the common laws of the
Gentles. The which opinion how dangerous and seditious it is, let others
judge; it is enough for me to have showed it to be false and foolish.

Out of these large and learned discourses, it is most apparent to all
indifferent Readers; that the law of Moses is wholly expired, and that
Christians of necessity are bound to no part thereof.

The Second Conclusion.
Although the law of Moses be wholly expyred, so as of necessity Christians
are not bound to the punishment therein prescribed against sin and sinners,
yet is sin this day as odious in Gods sight, as ever it was, and remains
punishable by the law Moral, (which is the law of Nature) more fully
explained in the Law of the New Testament; but the quantity and kind of
punishment therein omitted, by reason of the mutabilitie of times, places, and
persons, is wholly referred to the discretion of the wise and Godly Magistrate.
This conclusion contains in it three parts: the expiration of the Mosaicall
law: Gods wrath and indignation against sin, and the quantity and kind of
punishing sin, which is committed to the Magistrate. The first part is
sufficiently cleared, by the context of the former conclusion. The second part
may be proved by many places of holy writ. For as the Apostle says:
Tribulation and anguish shall be upon the soul of every man, that does evil: of
the Jew first, and also of the Grecian. Again, in another place, the wages of
Romans 2. 9. Rom 6. 23.
sin, is death. Again, therefore shall her plagues come at one day, death and
sorrow, and famine, and she shall be burnt with fire; for that God which
condemns her, is a strong Apoc. 17. 8.
Lord. And Christ himself shows his general hatred against sin, when he
pronounces life eternal to Mat. 25, v.
be prepared for the righteous, and everlasting pain Paul, when he tells
us, That the Magistrate Romans 13. v. 3
is not to be feared for good works, but for evil. Peter, when he affirms
the magistrate to be appointed of God, for the punishment of evil doers, and
for the praise of them 1. Pet. 2. v.
that do well. Touching the latter there is no part 14.
in the whole corpse of the new testament, or of the old this day in force,
which determines either the quantity or kind of punishment, with the which
male factors are to be punished. This negative assertion is proof sufficient,
until some instance can be given for the affirmative. Again, as the Prophets
contain nothing, but an explication of the Law; so the New Testament
contains nothing but a clear explication of the law and the Prophets. This
I have elsewhere In the downfall of Popery.
proved at large, where he that lists may read the same: for all the kinds
of punishment expressed in the Mosaicall Law were mere judicial, and are
already expired, as is proved in the former conclusion. The law Moral, (which
is the law of nature) teaches us that Vide supra, cap. 8. aphor. 3 ob. 2.
sin ought to be punished; but for that no one kind of punishment, not
quantity in punishing, can be meet and agreeable to all nations, all times, all
places, and al persons; it leaves the quantity and kind of punishment to be
determined by the godly and prudent Magistrate, as shall be thought most fit
and commodious for the peaceable government of the common weal, the
circumstances of times, places and persons, ever duly considered this is
evident, by the practice of Calvin. in. in st^t. lib. 4. cap. 20. secti. 16.
all nations; for (as M. Calvin writes truly,) where Gods law (the law of
nature,) forbids to steal, the ancient laws of the gentiles punished theft
with double; others condemned thieves with exile and bannishment; others
adjudged them to be whipped; others to be put to death. False witness was
punished in some places only with infamy, in other places with hanging. All
laws do revenge murder with blood, but yet with diverse kinds of death. In
some places there are grieuouser pains appointed for adulterers, in other
places those that are more easy; yet we see, how they all by this diversity
of punishment, tend to one and the same end. For they all with one consent,
give sentence of punishment against those offenses, which are condemned by the
eternal law of god; to wit, murder, theft, adultery, false witness; but they
agree not all; in the manner of the punishment: neithe truly is it necessary
or expedient, that they should agree therein. Their is a country which should
out of hand be destroyed with thieves and slaughter, if it did not with horible
example deal very sharply with murderers. There is also some time, which
requires the enlarging of the sharpnes of punishment, and some people very
prone to some certain sin, unless they be with great rigor kept in awe, he
is then very evil affected and enuieth the public commodity, that is
offended with this diversity, which is most meet to retain the observation
of the law of God. Thus writes M. Calvin, adding much more to the like 1.
effect; which I omit in regard of brevity, referring the Romans 1. v. 31.
reader to the place; out of whose words I note first, that all nations who
have (as S. Paul records) the law of Romans 2. v. 14.
nature ingrafted in their hearts, did not agree in the kind of punishing sin,
but used some one kind, some another. 2.
Secondly, that theft, murder, false witness, adultery and such like, have
not one and the same kind of punishment, in every people and nation. Thirdly,
that addultery is punished in some places sharply, in other some 3.
places more gently. Fourthly, that his diversity of the 4.
kinds of punishment, is not only godly and lawful, but also expedient and
necessary. And so, I conclude, that the law moral, (which only law is now in
force) does leave the quantity and kind of punishment, to be determined by
the civil Magistrate.

The third Conclusion.
Emperors and Empresses, Kings and Queens, absolute Princes and independent
Magistrates, may lawfully in certain causes, upon good and godly
considerations, either tolerate sin unpunished, or pardon male factors. For
the exact handling of this conclusion, (because it is a matter of great
importance, and very necessary for many respects.) I deem it operapretiu^ and
agreeable to the time in which we live, to lay down some strong the first.
foundation.
foundations in that behalf. First, this is a constant Axiom, approved by
uniform assent of al learned divines Cess inte fine legis, cessat lex ipsa.
When the final cause or end for which the law was made, cease, then does the
law of necessity also cease. This foundation is grounded upon the holy
scripture; where by the flat act. 15. v. 28. 29.
decree and settled law of the apostles, we are bound to abstain from blood
and strangled meats. This notwithstanding, no man has this day any scruple
of conscience to eat the same; and yet hereof no other sound reason can be
yielded, save only that the end for which that law was made, did long sithe^ce
cease. For eue^ at that time was no precise necessity, to abstain from blood
and strangled meats; But this law was only made, in respect of the state of
that time; that the Gentiles and the Jews might live more peaceably together,
and there let this point be well marked.
by avoid all occasion of contention and quarreling. And I therefore so soon as
that end ceased, the law also ceased with it, and so we are this day freede
from the same, yea, this Axiom is evident lumine naturali, even by the light
of nature: for every law is made for some end, which end how often soever it
may be accomplished without the law, so often the execution of the law is
needeles.

Secondly, we must hold this for a constant foundation, The second foundation.
that albeit the civil Magistrate be commanded to punish malefactors, yet is
neither the kind of punishment, nor the quantity thereof taxed by the law of
God, but it still abides indifferent, to be determined by the supreme civil
Magistrate: (for as I have Uide praeced. conclus. Vide supr. cap. 8. aphor. 3.
in resp. ad 2 obiectionem
already proved,) although there were special punishment prescribed in the
judicial law of Moses, for transgressors of the Sabbath, for adulterers, for
false witnesses, for murderers, thieves and such like, yet neither by the Law
moral, nor by any Law in the New Testament, (to which laws only we
Christians are this day bound,) is any such punishment determined, and
therefore may the civil Magistrate, (if it so seem good unto him.) change
the usual punishment of thieves, (which with us is to be hanged,) and cause
them to be cast into the sea with milstones about their necks: and the same
may be said, of the punishment for other malefactors.

Thirdly, we must repute this for an undoubted foundation; vz. that the end,
for which Gods Law appoints The third foundation.
malefactors to be punished, is the public peace and good of the whole
commonweal: for this is so evident by the course of the whole scripture, as
it can neither with learning nor reason be denied. Deuteronomy. 19. 20 1. Cor. 5. 13.
1. Tim. 5. 20 1. Cor. 8. 13. Mat 18, 6. The first correla^^e.


Out of these three foundations, thus firmly stablished, these two
Corrolaries, may evidently be inferred. First, that whenever, any member of
the common weal commits any capital crime, for which he ought to die by
the law, whose life for all that is more profitable to the weal public then
his death; in such a case the Prince may pardon such a malefactor, and not
thereby sin at all: which thing christian Princes seem to respect, when in
the time of wars, they set such felons at liberty, as are able to do
service in defense of the Realm. Secondly, that when any malefactor The second
Corollarie.
is so mighty, or so strongly seated, or otherwise so unfit to be dealt
withal, that the Prince cannot without probable danger of his royal person,
or great damage to the commonweal, punish the said malefactor; then in such a
case, the prince may tolerate such a malefactor unpunished, and not thereby
sin at all. These foundations and illations being once well understood and
remembered, the conclusion (though of great moment,) cannot but be manifest and
clear. Nevertheless, I will adioyne some sound reasons hereunto, for the
better confirmation of the same.

The first reason.
It is a common and generally received Maxim, as well of all Ciuilians as
Divines; vz. Lex non obligat vltra intentionem legis-latoris. The law does not
bind a man beyond the intention of the Lawmakers. Whereupon I infer first,
that the civil magistrate may dispense 1.
with his own Law. Secondly, that the Prince being 2.
Gods Minister, may tolerate or pardon malefactors, when, and so often as such
tolleration or pardoning tends to the common good of the publike-weale, the
reason is evident, because the intention of God the supreme Lawmakers, was even
that and none other, when he appointed his ministers to punish malefactors.

The objection.
The Prince pardons many times, when he little regards the common good;
nay, when his pardoning does great harm to the public weal, and Church of
God.

The Answer.
I answer; first, that he has received his authority to profit the Church
and commonweal, and 1.
not to do hurt unto the same. Secondly, that it is sufficient to satisfy the
consciences of subjects, (who 2.
have not to examine their Sovereigns secret affairs, and to enquire what
causes he has to deal thus, and so in matters of State) that the Prince may
in some cases upon some causes, either tolerate sin unpunished, Mark this
point well.
or pardon malefactors. If the case were otherwise, every subject might soon
take occasion to rebel If the Prince abuse his authority, he must render an
account to God for the same.

The second Reason.
Prodigality is a great sin, condemned as well in Philosophy, as in
Divinity; it neither will nor can be Christian Kings.
denied. It is the exceeding extreme of the virtue liberal^tie. This
notwithstanding all Christian Kings (for ought that I can learn) have ever
tolerated the same unpunished at least in some degree; neither were they for
such tollerations reproved at any time by any ancient approved writer, or
learned Father whatsoever. Which doubtless is and ought to be so reputed an
argument of no small importance, For although Emporour, Kings and Monarchs,
may and do sin as well as others of meaner calling; yet neither did they,
neither ever can they live unreproved; if at any time they sin notoriously,
either by stabilishing wicked laws publikly, or by suffering their subjects to
make hauock o^ Gods laws dissolutely. For God can raise up children of stones
to Abraham; and neither is he, nor ever Mat. 3. 9.
will he be destitute of faithful courageous servants, who will constantly,
and without all fear, reprove all such as contemn his holy laws. He has
watchmen on the walls of his Jerusalem, who will cry out against sin Esa. 62. 6.
continually, and never keep silence day nor night. He is not without his
Elias, that will stoutely reprove all wicked Achabs, He has in store a
Daniel, to condemn 1. Reg. 18.
all naughty Judges, and to acquit his faithful Susannes. He will find a
Prophet to exclame against Dan. 13. 16.
idolatry, and to teach every Jeroboam his duty. He can and will provide an
other John Baptist, to speak boldly 1. Reg. 13. 2.
to all bloody Herod's. And yet in so many hundred years, such tollerations
have never been reproved to my knowledge by any ancient Father, or other
learned Writer. The reason hereof I take to be this; because if this sin
were punished, there would rather hurt then benefit ensue therevppon.

The third reason
It is a general Maxim received not only in Divinity, but in Philosophy
also; Ex duobus malis, minus eligendum. Of two evils the lesser is to be
chosen, that is to say; when two evils concur, so that both cannot be avoided,
but that necessarily the one must happen; then it is not onclie not sin, but
godly Wisdom, and Christian Policy, to prevent, and avoid the greater
evil, with permission and tolleration of the less. For example sake; it is
evil for a man to cut off his own arm or leg, if the thing be
absolutely, and simply considered in it self, yet to cut it off least the
whole body putrify or perish; is a very lawful act. Which thing all Christian
Princes, and Monarchs seem to respect, when they in sundry cases do
tolerate sin unpunished. The blessed man Moses, so highly renowned in holy
writ, pardoned great malefactors in the heinous crime of divorce, and this
tolleration he granted to avoid a greater evil; that is to say, least the
Jews upon every light cause should poison those wives whom they did not love,
for that such light diuorcement was only permitted, but neither by God, not by
Moses approved; I will demonstrate by these 1.
important and insolluble reasons. First, because these are Christ's own
words; Moses because of the hardenesse of your hearts, suffered you to put
away your Mat. 5. 31. Mat. 19. 7.
wives, but from the beginning it was not so. Secondly, because the marriage was
indeed after suchlight diuource, 2.
unlawful by the law. For thus writes Saint Paul; know Deus. 24. v. 1
ye not Brethren (for I speak to them that know the Law) that Romans 7. v. 1.
the law has dominion over the man, as long as he lives; for the woman 2. 3.
which is in subjection to a man, is bound by the Law to the Man, while he
lives; but if the man be di ade, she is delivered from the law of the man: So
then if while the man lives, she take an other man, she shall be called an
adulteress. Out of these words I note first, that marriage cannot be
dissolved, during 1.
the life of the former husband. I note secondly, that this was so even in
Moses law; because Saint Paul says 2.
he speaks to them that knew the law, I note thirdly, 3.
that to be married after divorce for a light cause, during the life of the
former husband is plain and flat adultery. I therefore conclude, that to
tolerate sin unpunished upon good cause, is no sin at all. This mine
assertion of diuorcement is not only grounded upon the Scriptures, but also
confirmed by the holy fathers, and best approved writers of this our age.

The 4. Reason.
We have many examples in the holy scriptures of blessed me^ that often
pardoned Malefactors, and to this day were never reproved for the same. King
David pardoned 1. Sam. 25. v. 35. 2 Samuel 3. v. 6. 22. 28. 31. 2. Sam. 3. 1.
Reg. 2. v. 8. 9. genesis 34.
wicked Nabal at the peticion of his virtuous wife Abigal. The same king David
pardo^ed Abner, who rebelled against him for the house of Saul. The self same
king tolerated Ioab in his naughty dealings, albeit he was more then a little
offended with his manners. The same king tolerated cursed Shemei, though he
commanded his son Solomon to do execution on the^ both, after that him self
was dead. The holy Patriarch Jacob did not punnish his sons Simcon and Levy
with death, for their cruel murder done upon the Sechemites; though vided
August. epist. 119.
he had plain regal and supreme authority over the^ S. Austen did very
often entreat the Emperors most earnestly and humbly, not only to pardon
heretics, but also the Circumcellions most naughty people and cruel
murderers. The blessed virgin Mary was found to be with child by the holy
Ghost, before S. Joseph and she came together. Whereupon Joseph, because he was
mat. 1. 19.
a just man, and would not put her to open shame, was minded to put her away
privily, thus reports holy writ. Out of which words I note first, that
Joseph knew the holy virgin to be with child. Secondly that 1.
he knew him self not to be the father of the child. 2.
Thirdly, that Joseph knew no other, but that Mary his 3.
wife was an adultresse. Fourthly, that he thought to have 4.
put her a way secretly, so to keep her from shame and punishment. Fifthly,
that Joseph was even then deemed just, when the sought and thought to keep her
from 5.
shame; although in his judgment, she deserved death by the law. Yea, S. Paul
him self made intercession to Philemon for his servant One simus, though he
had been in epist. ad philem.
a vagabond and theuish fellow.

The first objection.
No inferior has power to alter the law of his superior; and consequently,
man cannot pardon or tolerate malefactors, who^ god appoints to be punished

The answer
I answer; first that precepts delivered to us in holy writ vide. D. Zanch in
4. cap. ad ep^es. Page 338. et Martyr. in 2. lib. Samuel. cap. 3. page 200.
Aquenatem. 2. 2. q. 3. art. 2. cap. Romans 10. v 9. 10. Mat. 7. 6.
are of two sorts. Some affirmative, other some negative. The negative bind us
at all times every hour, and in every place; but the affirmative, though they
be very apt to bind, yet do they not actually bind us, save then only, when
the due circumstances of times, places, and persons occur, hereupon it
comes that it is never lawful to steal, never lawful to commit addultery,
never lawful to bear false witness, neither at any time, nor in any place.
the reason hereof is this, because these precepts be negative. This
notwithstanding, it is sometime lawful to omit the precepts affirmative. For
example it is necessary unto salvation, to make confession of our faith; and yet
we do and may often omit the same, for that it is an affirmative precept. And
therefore Christ wills us not to give that which is holy to dogs; neither to
cast our pearls before swine; least they tr^ad the^ under their feet, and
turn again and al to rentus. But we are then bound to confess our faith
when either it tends to the glory of God, or to the good of our neighbor;
so that if such confession were not then made, either god should be
dishonored, or our neighbor scandalized. So it is Gods commandment to give
him thy cloak, that will sue the at the law, and take away thy caate; and yet
may thou at sundry times Mat. 5. v. 40
for sundry respects, deny him both thy coat and thy cloak. So it is Gods
commandment to go with him miles twain, that will compel the to go one;
and yet may thou sundry times deny lawfully, to Mat. 5. v. 41
go with him either more or less so it is Gods commandment, never to turn
away from him, that would Mat. 5 v. 42.
borrow money of the, or any other goods; and yet may thou sundry times for
sundry respects, deny to lend either thy money or other things. All which and
other the like have this only ground and foundation; vz. That they are
precepts, affirmative, which neither bind at all times, nor yet in all places.
For precepts affirmative, modus loquendi. Scholarum.
to use schoole-tearmes; obligant semper sed non ad semper.

Secondly, that the civil magistrate had authority, to mitigate many
punishments ordained for malefactors, Secundo. Principaliter.
even in the time of the old testament. For though he were appointed to punish
them that used false weights and measures; yet was that punishment to be
determined Deuteronomy. 25. v. 2. 3. 13. 14.
according to the quantity and quality of his trespass. The party that was
worthy to be beaten, received many or few stripes, at the descretio^ of the
magistrate. M. Calvin a most zealous patron of pure religion, has Calvin. in
leu. 18. v. 6. Page 345.
these express words; Impune quidem vt liceat statui potest, sicut in arbitio
Principis est panas remittere. Verum vt vitiosum non sit, quod vitiosum esse
natura dictat, nullus legislator efficiet

A law may be made, that he which does it shall not be punished; even as it is
in the princes pleasure, to pardon and releasse the punishment. But that that
be not sinful, which nature it self shows to be sinful; no law maker can
effect or bring to pass. Thus writes this learned man, granting freely as we
see; that the magistrate may sometime upon good causes, tolerate those sins
unpunished, which gods law does sharply reprove and speak against, where the
reader must observe with me, that Master Calvin speaks of the most notorious
sins of incest; and consequently that he grants power unto the
magistrate, to pardon what Malefactors or sins, so ever: For though the
magistrate can never make that to be no sin, which Gods law prounceth to be
sin; yet (says M. Calvin) the magistrate may make a law, that the same sin
shall not be punished, Which doubtless is the self same doctrine, that I do
teach for the present.

Thirdly, that by the law of the New Testament, the Prince is only charged in
general terms to punish Tertio principaliter.
malefactors, and that for the common good of his faithful people, in regard
whereof, he may lawfully cease from punishing them; when the common intended
good of his subjects, either can not, or will not ensue thereupon. For if
Kings should at all times punish all malefactors; the Church of God would
often be deprived of most excelent and profitable members. For which respect
our Savior himself tells us, that when the tares cannot be severed from the
good corn, Mat. 13. v. 3^.
unless both be pulled up together; then may they tolerate the tares or
weeds with the good corn, until the time of haruell. As if he had said:
when the wicked cannot be punished, but with great damage to the godly; then
may the Magistrate tolerate such malefactors Aug. ut ep. 110. tom. 2.
unpunished, and not thereby sin at all. Therefore says the holy father S.
Austen; that Christ's Church does tolerate many things, which he neither does
nor can approve. And the same holy Father in a large and learned discourse
against Parmenianus, show eth plainly unto the Reader; that the notorious sins
must then be anathematized, when there is no danger of schism to enfue
thereupon, not otherwise; least that turn to the churches harm, which was
intended for her good. Amongst many other godly sentences, (which for brevity
I here omit, these are his express words. In hac velut angustia
quaestionis, non aliquid nou^m aut insolitum dicam, sed quod santas obseruat
ecclesiae, August. cont. epist. Parme. lib. 3. cap. 2. tom. 7.
vt cum quisque fratru^, id est, Christianoru^ intus in ecclesiae societate
constitutorum, in aliquo tali peccato fuerit deprehensus, vt anathemate dignus
habeatur, fiat hoc vbi periculum schismatis nullum est. Sequitur nam and ipse
dominus cum seruis volentibus zizania colligere, dixit, sinite vtraque crescere
vsque ad messem, praemisit causam dicens, neforte cum vultis colligere zizania
eradicetis, simul and triticum: Vbi satis osteudit, cum metus iste non subest,
sed omnino de frumentorum certa stabilitate certa securitas manet, id est,
quando ita cuiusque crimen notum est omnibus, and omnibus execrabile apparet,
vt velnullos prorsus, vel non tales habeat defensores per quos possit schisma
contingere, no^ dormi^t seueritas disciplinae. Sequitur, cum vero idem morbus
plurimos occupaucrit, nihil aliud bonis restat, quam dolor and gomitus.

In this intricate question, I will say no new or strange thing, but even that
which the soundenes of the church observes; that when any Christian, which in
the society of the church, shall be taken with any such offece, as shall deserve
an anathematization, the same be done where there is no peril of schism. For
our Lord himself, when he said to those that would gather the tares,
suffer them to grow until the harvest; premised the cause, saying, least while
ye desire to gather the tares, ye pluck up also the wheat. Where he
shows sufficiently; that when there is no such fear, but there abides
security enough of the stabilitie of the corn, that is, when every man's
crime is so apparent and execrable to all, that either it has none at al, or
no such patrones as are able to raise up a schism, then may not the severity
of discipline be a sleep. But when many have the same disease, there rests
nothing for the godly, but sorrow and lamentation. Thus writes this holy
Father; Out of whose words we may gather evidently, that the magistrate may
lawfully tolerate sin and sinners unpunished, when by their punishment more
hurt then good would ensue to the Church. Which self same doctrine, King
David full of the holy Ghost, delivered long before him, when he uttered these
words; Know ye not, 'that there is a Prince, and a great man fallen this day
in Israel? and I am this day weak and newly anointed King, and these men the
2. Sam. 3. v. 38. 39.
sons of Zeruiah be too hard for me; the Lord reward the doer of evil,
according to his wickedness. Loc, the blessed King spared two most cruel
murderers, Ioab and Abishai his brother; and this he did only for this end,
least by their punishment, greater hurt should have come unto his Kingdom.

The 2. Objection.
Achab the King of Israel was punished with death because he granted pardon to
Benhadad King of Aram. 1. Reg. 20. 1. Sam. 28. 1. Sam. 15.
So King Saul was deposed from his kingdom, for that he spared Agag king of
the Amalekites.

Answer.
I answer; first, that Achab was precisely designed 1.
by God himself, to do execution upon Benhadad. And so was also Saul
appointed in precise terms, to put 1. Reg. 20. 42. 1. Sam. 15. 3
King Agag to death. Secondly, that in the New Testament, Princes have no such
special commandment, 2.
but are only charged in general to punish malefactors. Thirdly, that they were
extraordinary precepts, given 3.
to these Kings extraordinarily, not to be done generally to all
malefactors, but to two notorious persons in special; and consequently, that
no general Law can be grounded thereupon. Fourthly, that affirmative precepts
bind not in every season, but when the due 4.
circumstances of time, place and persons, and the common good of the
faithful, shall so require, as is already proved. For otherwise, I see not how
Saint Paul can be excused, who made earnest suit to Philemon, to pardon In
Epist. ad Philem.
his wicked servant Onesimus, who unjustly had gone away out of his service.
And the like may be said of Saint Austin, who so ofie^ made intercession to
the princes of Africa, to pardon the Donatists and Circumcellions; who did not
only disturb religion, but also spoiled the Christians of their lawful
goods. Yea, it was the usual custom of the Jews, (as the holy gospel Luke
23. v. 17.
bears record,) to see some one Prisoner at liberty every Easter; which
custom is not reproved in Mat. 27. v. 15.
any place of holy writ. Fifthly, that it is a case so clear by Saint Paul,
that male factors may sometime be pardoned, Mar. 15. 6.
as it is without all rhyme and reason to denic the same. For what can be a
greater offense, then such fornication, as is not once named among the
Gentiles; 2. Cor. ^. v. 8. 9. 10.
to wit, that one should have hi fathers wife. And yet when the party that did
this horrible fact, seemed to give signs of true remorse; Then Saint Paul
himself pardoned him, and willed the Corinthians to do the same. So did the
Fathers of the Elebertine Council, pardon the usurers of the Laical sort; when
they promised Conc. Elebcr, can. 20.
to surcease from usury, and to deal no longer therewith. And this Counsel
was celebrated above one thousand and two hundred years ago. Yea, the most
famous Council of Nice gave pardon to such malefactors, Conc. Nicen. can. 11.
as scarce deserved the same any way. I therefore conclude, that it is lawful
for Kings, Emperors, and other independent Magistrates, to tolerate or
pardon malefactors unpunished, when and so often as the same shall tend to the
good of the common weal; wherein Subjects are to obey, and not peremptorily to
judge, or curiously to examine, and enquire.

Soli Deo gloria.
FINIS.
A TABLE CONTAIning the chief and principal matters of all the Chapters
throughout this Discourse.
Of the sundry kinds of government, Chapter, 1. Of the chief and best kind
of government. cap. 2. Of the kind of government of the English church. cap.
3. Of the supreme authority of the Prince in all causes. cap. 4. Of the degrees
of Ministers, and the antiquity thereof cap. 5 Of civil offices in
Ecclesiastical persons. cap. 6. Of the churches authority in things
indifferent. cap. 7. Of things indifferent in particular; cap, surples, etc.
cap. 8 Of the election of church-minister, cap. 9. Of the ordering of
ministers. cap. 10. Of the Presbytery. cap. 11. Of the church discipline. cap.
12. Of Preaching, and other things coincident. cap. 13. Of certain
Extrauagants; ceremonies in Baptism, etc: cap. 14. Of the punishing and
pardoning malefactors. cap. 15.
FINIS.

