A TREATISE of the threefolde state of man wherein is handled, 1 His Created
holiness in his innocence. 2 His Sinfulness since the fall of Adam. 3 His
Renewed holiness in his regeneration.


Ephesians. 4. 22. 23. 24. 2 You have been taught in Christ to put off the Old
man, corrupt according to the lusts of error:

3 To be renewed in the spirit of your minds and to put on the New man,

1 Which was Created according to God in righteousness, and the Holiness of
truth.

Printed at London for Robert Dexter and Raph Iackeson. 1596.

To the godly, wise, and virtuous lady, the Lady Elizabeth Carry, wife to the
right worshipful Sir Robert Carry, Knight: temporal and eternal happiness in
the Lord Jesus.
AS the writing and publishing of books for the good of the whole Church, so
the intituling or dedicating of them (Right worshipful Lady) to some notable
personage in particular, is grounded upon many just causes, and great
commodities which it brings: commended unto us by the continual practice of
the Church from time to time: and warranted by pregnant examples in the word of
God. For by this means it comes to pass, that both the favor of men
(whereby the building of Gods Church is greatly furthered) is procured for the
maintenance of the truth and the proffessours of it, and also their graces,
virtues, and Christian lives, not only crowned with due and deserved praise (a
thing righteous and acceptable in the sight of God, yea a notable
encouragement, and spur to good works, and therefore carefully performed by
the Apostle Paul. Romans 16. and in many other places) but also propounded for
imitation to the whole Church, as cities set on the tops of hills, and as a
candle not covered with a bushel, but set in a candlestick, in the light
whereof men may see, enter, and follow on the way leading to eternal life.

Thus the Evangelist Luke writes the story of the life and death of Christ, to
one Theophilus, and John that divine Apostle, inscribeth one of his Epistles to
a certain faithful and elect Lady: and thus as infinite others have written
public arguments to private men, so we do now presume to prefixe your
Ladyships name to this simple treatise, written of a matter worthy to be
handled after a better manner, to wit, of the spiritual state of man, or of
the holiness and sinfulness, the purity and corruption of the soul.

It is not needful, unless perhaps in regard of them who are unacquainted
with the state of that country, to rehearse the reasons moving me so to do. To
let pass the earnest desire of them who might command me in any lawful
matter, but especially in this it is well known, that in the town and country
where you dwell, as in worldly dignity God has given unto you an high place
and calling, so you have returned thankfulness to him, and been in the
profession of the Gospel of Christ, not the last, or lowest, but forward and
zealous and that not only in serving God your self, but also in procuring the
salvation of others, by setting up and maintaining the ministry of the word,
and favoring the sincere preachers and professors of it. As I my self, (who
being in some sort astraunger in those parts know not much of the affairs of
them) know in diverse of my friends, for whose good I have good cause to
rejoice, and to give your Ladyship hearty thanks for great favor showed unto
them. Yea I am persuaded, that many in that country (the good whereof
especially we intend in this action) will, to let other reasons pass, even for
that love which they bear unto you, more heartily favor, and more willingly
take the pains to peruse this treatise.

Neither do I doubt, but that God will accomplish that notable work, which he
has begun in you, and by your means: and so enlarge that fountain of
spiritual grace which he has put into your heart, that the streams thereof
shall ouerflow that dry and barren contry, and water that tender plant of the
true knowledge of Christ, so lately set, and so seldom to be seen in it, yea
refresh the bowels, and rejoice the hearts of all that fear God.

Considering that for the effecting hereof, God has given unto you many
singular means, which he has denied unto others of his servants: as namely,
worldly honor and power, the which meeting with the unfeigned love of God, and
of his glory, does as a mighty gale of wind set forward the gospel of Christ
in a speedy and happy course: purchasing unto it friendly entertainemet and
favor at the hands of many, who otherwise would perhaps not greatly regard
it. For then the state of the Church is most flourishing, when as Kings and
Queens, Lords and Ladies, and all degrees of honorable men and women are
nourse-fathers, and nourse-mothers unto her.

But then especially this comes, to pass, whenas wisdom sits at the
helm, guiding worldly power and spiritual zeal in the right course. As
touching the which virtue, if I should here mention that which is constantly
reported of you, I should seem to many, even to all that know you not, to do
that which I would be loath to do, even to flatter: and that not only your
self but also your sex: the which, if that be true, which is generally thought
and spoken, may by your example wipe away that blot of silly simplicity and
want of deep reach in matters of importance, wherewith it is usually stained
and debased.

But I must be sparing in this behalf least that I seem to mind and admire
your wisdom so much, that in the mean time I forget and offend your modesty,
the most proper and precious jewel of your sex. Only I desire God to
increase this and all other his good graces in you, and so to guide you by them
in the whole course of your life, that they who have occasion to try, may have
good cause to say, as the prophet David does of and to Abigal, 1. Sam. 26. 33.
Blessed be thy wisdom: you know the story. Thus being loath to be tedious and
troublesome unto you, I commend this silly present to your gentle acceptance,
and your Ladyship to the gracious protection of God.

Written in Cambridge this xxx. of March, in the year of grace revealed. 1596.
Your Ladyships to be commanded in all duetifulnesse Thomas Morton.

To the reader, increase of all spiritual understanding and everlasting peace.
WE do here offer, to thy christian consideration and courteous entertainment
(gentle reader) a rude description of the spiritual state of man. The which if
perhaps thou desire to have for shortness, plainness, memory, and fashions
sake comprised in some one memorable word, may not unfitly be termed Adam in
whom only all these three estates did concur and may be seen, or an
anatomy of the soul. A matter of all other most needful to be known and
learned: yea most worthy to be handled, explaned, dilated, and illustrated with
all care and diligence, it being that wherein the happiness of man does wholly
consist. For this is eternal salvation to know God, to wit, the father
creating us according to his own image in perfect purity: the son redeeming
us by his precious blood from sin and misery: the holy spirit sanctifying
and renewing us by his grace to eternal glory. In the which respect we have
thought that our time and labor, the which it has pleased God in mercy to ty
to the study of his holy word, could not be better bestowed then in commending
this saving knowledge unto others: and that by this means which now we use,
being thereunto moved by some urgent reasons, wherewith it is not needful
that either we should trouble you, or you your self. Our purpose, or rather
our desire and endeavor is, to make an anatomy of the soul of man, to lay
open before thy eyes the several parts and faculties of it, together with the
natural and supernatural holiness and sinfulness of them.

Wherein we have endeavored to use as great brevity and plainness as we
could, and as the great variety and difficulty of the matter, which often
is very intricate, would permit: avoiding both loathsome tediousness and
unprofitable obscurity, as thinkeing it much better not to speak then not to
be understood, and to lay open dark matter in rude and homely terms, then
with enigmaticall parables to amaze and mock the reader. We have rather
applied our style to the capacity of the simple, and the good of all, by
insisting most in those things whereby we may be edified in the knowledge and
obedience of Christ, then affected the curious scanning of subtle questions,
serving rather for the whetting of the wit, then the saving of the soul. And
yet as they have their use, which is not to be neglected, so we do breifely
touch them as occasion is offered. Desiring the readers, especially those who
do not profess learning, to pick out of this treatise some matter of
edification rather then of contention, and with me to leave needless
controversies to scholasticall exercises, and men of nimble wites.

But what needs all this, will some man say: this labor might very well
have been spared, and much better bestowed: considering the abundance of
knowledge, the daily and continual preaching, the superfluity of books
written of all arguments both divine and profane, in such swarms and huge
multitudes, that men have no leisure to look on the fair inscriptions, much
less to peruse the tedious and irksome bodies of them. Yea men are so cloyed
and deceived with vain repetition of old matter glosed over with new words,
and so amazed with strange doctrines lately devised, that they have in a
manner given over the buying and reading of books, esteeming it a fruitelesse
and foolish mispending of money and time, both which ought to be reserved for
necessary uses, and a needless disquieting of their minds being already
sufficiently grounded and settled in the truth. How just and true this
complainte is in some respect we are not now to discuss: but for this matter
whereof we speak, it were to be wished if so it pleased God, that it were true
indeed, and that we had as great plenty of the true knowledge of God and of
sound teachers of the truth, as of the stones in the streets, and in one
word, that all the people of God did prophecy.

But is it so indeed? does knowledge, religion, godliness, and all the means
thereof, or not rather palpable ignorance, atheism, and superstition abound
in most places? Yea surely, the complainte of the Prophet Hos. 4. 1. is more
true, There is no knowledge or fear of God in the land.

But what of this? is this to be attributed to the want of books and other
means of knowledge? Surely there is no cause why either some places should
complain of want, or any loath their plenty in this behalf. We have more
books learnedly and godlely written, then we do use well, and yet we might
use more well then we have. There is and will be as long as the church remains
here on earth a needful use of new tracttates, comments, sermons,
catechismes, and determinations, as new reasons, illustrations, and methodes
are invented: as new doubts, controversies, errors, and hereses do arise:
as this or that vice does reign: and as men give themselves diversely to the
studying of particular heads of doctrine, and parts of the word of God. All
is not to be expected at any one hand: where one sleeps, another waketh: one
is concise and dark, another large and plain: one dry and barren, an other
full and pithy. Yea in diverse writers thou shall see the admirable variety of
spiritual gifts, and so be stirred up to praise the great bounty of God
toward his church, The doctrine according to godliness (as the apostle
defines divinity) is a large feilde, wherein ten thousand may labor
continually, and all have elbow room: yea each one differ from the rest, not
only in manner but also in matter and argument, howsoever all do handle the
same doctrine in general. As for diversity of opinions in some cases, it
ought not any way to trouble or offend any man, seeing that it is the will of
God, that while we remain here on earth, we should both know and prophecy
whether by speaking or by writing, not perfectly but only in part. A few
contradictions do not, as it may seem, either impair the credit of the
teachers, or shake the faith of the hearers of Gods word, but rather
strengthen and uphold both. For hereby it appears, that men do not (as the
prophet compalineth. Iere. 23. 30.) steal the word of God one from an other,
delivering for sound doctrine, whatsoever the most do hold and teach, rather
then what they themselves do think: and so conspiring together in a compact
form of doctrine, are not many but only one witness: but are in their
consciences before God persuaded of the truth of the gospel of Christ, which
they profess and teach. It is but folly to look for in mortal and earthly
men, a heavenly and angelical harmony void of all iarring. It is rather our
parts to labor in repressing that pride and selfel-oue of our corrupt
natures, whereby men carnally minded and affected, are made to swell in anger
and hatred against those who do not in every respect dance after their pipe:
being more alienated from their brethren for some few contradictions, then
joined together in Christian love, by their consent in all the points of
religion beside. Mild and modest dissenting works out the truth, as the
striking of flintes together does sparks of fire: and that often comes to
pass errando via reperta: Try all and keep the best.

But we trust that no man will make these objections which we imagine, or
think, much less speak evil of that which is intended for his good. That
which one misliketh, another perhaps will approve: and if students waste their
ink and we are their pens, and printers venture their pains and paper, they
for their own exercise, or in any other good intent, these in hope of some
honest advantage, and both of them in a Christian desire of profiting others,
let not that trouble thee. The loss is their own, and it is lawful for them
to do with their own what they list (we speak of private censures not of
public restraint) use men's writings and gifts, if thou think them for thy
purpose: otherwise, take their good meaning (and ours among the rest, not the
worst of all others in good part, and so leave them to their likers or to their
loss.

Lastly we desire the friendly reader to put to his helping hand to this work
which we have taken in hand to amend what soever is any way amiss, to add to
this imperfect and light delineation of man's soul, not only the essential
parts which are wanting, but also the sinnewes of strong proofs and
arguments, yea the clear colors of examples and other illustrations: and
Lastly to further our endeauours if he think them any way profitable for the
Church of Christ by hearty good will and earnest prayer.

But especially I do intend, and commend this treatise unto you (my beloved
countrymen, and kinsfolk, the inhabitauntes of the town of Barwicke, even to
all that in the said town do call on the name of the Lord Jesus, being
there unto moved by nature it self, which would wringe even out of a flinty
heart special affection and hearty love to the native soil. Yea what is more
meet or more needful in all reason and equity then that we should return
the first fruits of our labor thither from whence we came, and where we had
our first being and beginning. Accept I pray you at my hands this poor mite
in stead of some rich pledge of unfeigned love. Who knows, but that by the
blessinge of God, this small grain of mustardseed, the simplest of a thousand
books every where extant, being carefully received by you into your minds and
hearts, as into good ground, may send forth plentiful fruit of spiritual
knowledge, and unfeigned obedience unto eternal life: and may grow to that
bigness, that the birds of the air, may build their nestes in the branches
of it? for so I hope, that you acknowledging this simple and unlearned piece of
work, to be the fruit of your own feilde, will even in that respect the more
willingly eat of it, and perhaps the more happily digest it, to the increase
of that stature, and strength whereunto you have already attained in Christ. In
whom I do earnestly desire that you may grow from grace to grace, laboring
to glorify him by a holy and unblameable life, as he has showed himself most
merciful and bountiful unto you.

He has powered forth his blessings both temporal and spiritual upon you
with a full hand: he has given unto you greater plenty of things needful
for the preservation of the body, then to any other place in the land beside:
he has freed you from the dregs and relics of popery, wherewith the whole
country far and near even a hundred miles from you, is infected as with a
common plague: you have godly and learned preachers of the word of God,
although not many, yet more then some scores of miles in the country will
afforde: and lastly you have leisure and opportunity of serving God, and using
all the means of your salvation greater then any other has, as all men know.
What wants then, but only this, that you be not wanting to your selves, but
careful in using these singular blessings to your own edification and
eternal salvation? That so your Church may be renowned in all places, as
flourishing in the multitude, not of verbal professors mocking God and
deceauing themselves with an outward show of religion, but of sincere and
sound Christians serving God in spirit and truth, and laboring to keep a
good conscience in the wholl course of their lives, both toward God and
toward their brethren. Thus craving pardon of you for my boldness in this
behalf, I commend you to God, and to the word of his grace which is able to
build you further and to give you an inheritance among those that are
sanctified. The lord be with you all now and evermore. Amen.

Written this first of April. 1596 your hearty well-willer and countriman T. M.

The argument of the treatise following.
THE last and chief end why God in the beginning made the world with all
things therein contained* was the setting forth of his glory: the which
before the creation did shine in and to himself only: whereas now all the
creatures do praise his holy name. For the effecting whereof, it was needful
that the creature should be endued with a kind of excellency so great, as
that it might manifest the glory of the power, wisdom, and goodness of God,
and yet so mean, that it should not in any respect be comparable to the
excellency of the creator. Hence it is, that the state of all things in the
world, even of the most excellent creatures, is kept down and debased from
the state of God, as in many other respects, so especially in this, that the
one is momentanie, variable and diverse, the other being eternal, constant,
and the same for ever. So we read, Exodus 3. 14. whenas God would even paint out
the excellency of his own nature, and distinguish himself from all other
things whatsoever do any way exist, he says that his name is, I will be who
I will be or who I am, that is, I am not a changable creature, but the Almighty
Iehoua, in whom there is no shadow of change. But it is far otherwise with
the creature, wherein there is no permanent state to be found. And to let pass
the baser sort of them, which are made for corruption, and to be consumed in
the use, let us consider the state of the most excellent creatures, even those
which being endued with reason, were made according to the image of God, to
wit, Angels and men: of whose estate the scripture witnesses, that it is not
only chaungeable, but also straungely changed. For it being in the first
creation most happy, glorious, and holy, became afterward most impure,
wretched, and vile. Neither does it stay here, but by the mercy of God man is
restored to his first excellency. So we read, Job. 4. 18. 19. behold in his
servants he will not trust, no not in his Angels will he put any confidence how
much less in men dwelling in howses of clay whose foundation is in the dust
etc? Neither can it be otherwise, for God has his being from himself, but the
creature depends on God, by whom it was made, and therefore can neither
exist nor continue in any estate longer then the good pleasure of God does
permit. This mutability of the creature appears chiefly in man, whose diverse
states being three in number, we do endeavor to lay open in this treatise. The
first is the state of the first creation, of holiness, of life, and all
happiness. The second is the estate of the fall, of sin, of death, and of
all misery. The third is the state of regeneration, of righteousness, of
salvation, and of eternal glory. These three estates, we desire to declare out
of the word of God, which entreats plentifully of the two latter, but more
sparingly of the first, for that it continued a very short time. Yet we may
learn the doctrine of it also out of the scripture, especially by these
means: first out of the example of Adam, Eua, and Christ, the which three
only of all mankind lived in this estate. Secondly out of the state of the
Angels which agrees with the state of man in many respects, and therefore we
do often in the two first estates speak of the Angels, not of set purpose,
but as by the way and for the further illustration of the state of man, who in
his creation agrees with all the Angels, and in his fall with the reprobate
sort of them. Thirdly we may consider the innocence of man in those things
which the scripture speaks of God, to whom it often gives the person of man
not polluted with sin but remaining in his first purity: and lastly we may
gather what was the state of the first creation by the state of regeneration,
the which being nothing else but the renewing of the first estate, will give us
great light for the understanding of it. Further, this is to be marked that by
the state of innocence we do not mean those few days only wherein Adam did
continue innocent, but also the whole progress and course of this state, as it
would have been if man had not fallen at all, the which supposed continuance
of the state of innocence differs much from that actual estate, wherein
Adam was before his fall: for he was not at the first endued with any such
actual perfection of holiness and happiness, but that he was daily to
increase in both these respects, as God should reveal himself more and more
unto him. Lastly this treatise is divided into three parts, each part into
diverse chapters: which in the two former parts have each of them three
Sections according to the three diverse states of man, the which may be
considered in the table following, either severally by the reader going down
in the several columns or in comparison with the other two, in the
ouerthwarte lines.

The first part.
Ch Section. 1. Section. 2. Section. 3 1 Of the state of innocence and life.
page ^ Of the state of sin and death. page 5 Of the state of r^^generation
and sa^^uation. page 1^ 2 Of the happiness wherein man was created. page 29 Of
his miserable estate since the fall page 41 Of the eternal happiness of man
page ^ 3 Of created holiness. page 38 Of the sinfulness of man. page 41 Of
renewed h^^linesse. page ^ 4 Of faith in general and of legal faith. page 59
Of infidelity. page 70 Of euangelical^ faith. page* ^ 5 Of hope. page 106. Of
desperation. page 108 Of renewed (...) hope. page ^ 6 Of the fear of God. page
122. Of the want of the said fear. page 126 Of renewed (...) page ^ 7 Of
filial subjection. page 133. Of the want of filial subjection. p. 139 Of
filial subject (...) renewed. page ^ 8 Of servile subjection. page 160. Of
seru^le rebellion. page 163 Of servile subiec^^ renewed. page ^ 9 Of man's
subjection to God as to his teacher. page 171. Of man's rebellion against God
his teacher. page.175 Of man's subie^^ to God his tea^^ renewed. page* ^ (...)
subjection of the creature* page 185 Of man's rebellion against his creator.
page 189 Of man's subjection to his creator, renewed. page 192 (...) (...) Of
man's subjection to God as to a husband. page 195

The second part.
Section. 1 Section. 2. Section. 3. Of the image of God in man in his pure
estate. pa. 202 Of man's deformity or unlikeness to God. page 213 Of the
renewed image of God in man page 215 Of the created holiness of the mind.
page 217 Of the sinfulness of the mind. page 238 Of a renewed mind. page 248
Of man's conscience in his pure estate. page 252 Of a corrupt conscience. page*
254 Of a renewed conscience and certenty of salvation. page 263 Of the
holiness of man's memory page 270 Of the sinfulness of the memory. page 274
Of a renewed memory* page 276 Of the created holiness of the will page 279 Of
the sinfulnes of the will. page ^93 Of the renewed will of man page 311 Of the
affections specially of love and hatred. page 318 Of corrupt affections. page
326 Of renewed love and hatred page 330 Of holy joy and sorrow. page 336 Of
corrupt joy and sorrow. page 342 Of renewed joy and sorrow p. 345

The third part.
Of the chaunges happening in the three estates. page 349 Of the changes of
created holiness. page 353 Of the natural decrease of sinfulness* page 358
Of the supernatural decrease of sinfulness, page 363 Of the particulars in
this supernatural decrease of sinfulness* page 374 Of the natural and
supernatural increase of sinfulnes* pa. 380 Of the decrease of renewed
holiness* page 388 Of the increase of renewed holiness page 414 Of celestial
holiness* page, 424
OF THE THREEfold state of man.
The first part of this treatise, wherein is handled the first part of man's
holiness and sinfulness, to wit his due subjection to God with the contrary
rebellion.
CHAP. I.
Section. 1. Of the state of innocence and life.
FOR the enlarging of Gods glory (the which is the end of the creation of the
world) it was needful, that of the creatures some should be endued with
understanding. For even as the strength, wisdom* and beauty of a man cannot
purchase unto him any commendation or credit, unless some others besides
himself do mark, know and acknowledge those excellent parts of nature and
industry: in like manner the heavens, Of the state of innocence and life.
the air, the water, and the earth, although they be decked and replenished
with stars, birds, fishes, beasts, and many other admirable creatures, and
do contain in them infinite matter of Gods glory, yet they could not any jot
increase that glory which God had before the creation, unless there were some
other creatures able to observe, conceive, declare, admire, and extol the
power, wisdom, and goodness of God shining in these things. For this cause,
God after that he had made the higher and the lower world, the one consisting
of the heavens, the other of the elements, he saw it needful for the
illustration of his glory, to create Angels and men to be the inhabitants, and
as his tenaunts of these glorious palaces, yea to behold and confess the
excellency of his workemanshippe in themselves, and in the rest of the
creatures. For the which purpose he gave unto them, faculties of understanding,
and speaking, with many other, which he denied to the rest.

Thus we see the excellent state of Angels and men, being made to be
witnesses, and preachers of the glory of God, and so being admitted into the
presence of God, are there to behold his glory: yet with this difference,
that the Angels do behold it more clearly in heaven, and man more obscurely
in earth. Herein consists the good estate of these creatures in that they
are thus made partakers, of the glorious presence of God, and so joined to God.
For hereof it comes that they are both happy and holy, it being impossible
that any thing which is joined to God, who is happiness and holiness it
self, should either lack any good and pleasant thing, or be any way
polluted, so that this conjunction of the reasonable creature with God, wherein
the excellency of this first estate consists, is of two sorts: the first may
be called external, personal or local, whereby Angels and men enjoying the
presence of God, are in place and after an outward manner joined to God: this
kind of conjunction is perfect happiness, the other kind is inward and
spiritual, when as the inward faculties of the creature, as his mind and
will, do wholly cleave to God alone. This kind of conjunction is perfect
holiness, and it is the means or the condition of the former conjunction: for
as soon as the creature cease to be holy, in the same moment it cease to
be happy, and is straight way cast out of the presence of God. So that the
goodness of this first state consists in two things, happiness and
holiness, from both which it has the denomination: from the first, it is
called the state of life, for the scripture speaking to man speaks after the
manner of men, unto whom nothing is so acceptable as life, because in it all
pleasures are enjoined. From the second it is called the state of innocence,
because in it man stood righteous, and free from all guilt of sin before God.

Sect. 2. Of the state of sin and death.
IN the next place we are to consider the second state of man, as far
different from the first as is death from life, sin from innocence,
darkness from light, wretchedness from happiness, usually and fitly called
the fall of mankind. Forvnto the absolute perfection o^ the aforesaid
felicity, this only was wanting, that it was mutable: First of the causes,
authors, and workers of this lamentable ruin, secondly of the manner of it.
The actors in this tragedy, are three, God, Satan, and Man, all which have a
stroke in this action, yet after a far diverse manner, even as their natures
are diverse. For the first, as the holy, glorious, and happy state of man; so
this sinful, vile and miserable condition comes from God: yet not after the
same sort; for the good estate is properly, directly, immediately, and wholly
wrought by God, but he does only suffer the evil state to be brought to pass
by evil instruments: yet this his permission is not idle, but effectual and
working: for God is not an idle looker on, as if he had cast off the care of
the world and of his creatures, Of the state of sin and death.
and left all at six and seven (as we use to speak) but he has a part in
this work in that he did in his eternal counsel make an immutable decree of
this fall of man, and the means thereof, and that for the setting forth of his
glory, which is the end of all his decrees and actions whatsoever. For
howsoever it may seem to derogate from the glory of God, that the reasonable
creature, being the fairest flower in his garden, and the most excellent part
of his workmanshippe, should so soon be trodden under foot and brought to
naught; yet in truth GOD is greatly glorified by this means, for hereby it
appears, first, that God only is constant, eternal, and the same for ever
in that his most excellent creatures are so variable: Romans 3. 4. Let God be
true, and every man a liar, as it is written, Romans 3. 4.
that thou might be justified in thy sayings, and overcome when thou art
judged.

For the which purpose the consideration of the shortness of the first state
makes very much, for although it cannot be certainly defined how long it
continued, yet this is agreed upon by all, that neither the Angels themselves,
nor yet man continued many days in their innocence, but fell away from God
soon after that they were created. Secondly the fall of these creatures does
show that God is just in punishing sin. Thirdly it makes a way for the
state of salvation, and so does illustrate the mercy of God, whereby he is most
of all glorified; yea the power, wisdom, truth, patience, and in brief the
whole glory of God is by this means set forth and enlarged. Thus much of the
first actor. The other two are the instruments whereby God brings his
eternal counsel to pass, and yet to all reason of man considering the whole
story of man's fall and the particulars thereof, they are the only agents, the
first authors, and chief workers of this woeful state, God having no hand or
dealing in this matter, but only barely permitting them to do what they list.
For the further declaration whereof it is needful that we make a narration of
the particulars of this action, and that by supposing GOD to speak to his
reasonable creatures, to wit, Angels and men, in this manner.

You see how that I have made you the most excellent of all my creatures,
indueing you only, with a reasonable mind and will, whereby you may know,
love, obey, and honor me, and so consequently enjoy my presence wherein
happiness does consist. As long as you continue holy by obeying my word, so
long shall you continue happy by enjoying my presence. But if at any time you
do by disobeying my commandment loose this your holiness, you can no longer
have any place in my presence, or any fellowship with me, no more then
darkness and light can be together, but shall incontinently be cast out of my
sight, and so become most wretched and miserable. And therefore look unto your
selves and to your own estate, believe these my promises and threatenings to be
true, content your selves with that state and degree wherein I have placed you,
obey all my commandments, for the perfourmance whereof, you are endued with
all graces and faculties needful, so shall you be happy: otherwise you shall
die for ever. In this most loving and fatherly counsel, which God in the
beginning gave to his children, being created after his own similitude, the
reasonable creature rests for some short time, but afterward makes this
reply, although not in word yet in mind and heart, yea in deed and in outward
action; We having considered your words, and our present state, do see and
find that neither the one is wholly true, nor the other so happy as you do
make it: we confess that we are in betrer state then other creatures, yet we
cannot herein rest: for we see a higher degree of honor, glory, pleasure and
happiness, yea a greater measure of knowledge, whereof we know that our
nature is capable, and whereunto we willby all means aspire, notwithstanding
your commandment to the contrary: not doubting but that by our own strength,
wit, endeauours and inventions, we shall become far more happy then we are by
this your creation. Upon this resolution the creature disobeyeth the express
commandment of God, and so falls from God into extreme misery.

Now whether the blame of this fall be to be imputed to God, or to the creature
it self, let any reasonable creature judge: for God did neither command nor
counsel it, but did carefully forewarne them of it: yea he did neither put any
evil motion into their minds, nor yet withdraw from them any natural grace,
whereby they should have been vpholden: but left it to their free choice
whither they would be clean and obey him or else rebel against his word. If
it be objected that the necessity of Gods decree did compel the creature to
fall, we answer affirming that to be utterly untrue. For God did decre that
the fall of man should com to pass by his free will, and therefore his decree
did not take away, but establishe man's free will.

If it be thought impossible that the same action should be both necessary
and contingent as we make this action to be: we answer, that to man it is
impossible, but not to God. For man cannot bring any thing certainly to pass
by uncertain and contingent means: but God can work necessarily by those
means which to man's reason fall out by chance and at hap hazard. For there is
no thing contingent or uncertain to God, whodoth foresee all the events of
things, and so does build his immutable decree upon the euentes themselves
which are necessary, not upon the contingencie of the causes. As in this
instance; how easy a thing was it for God foreseing that man being endued with
free will (whereby he might do either good or evil) would choose the evil
part, to decree the fall of man by his freewill, and yet to leave man in the
very action, free either to stand or to fall? Again if it be objected that God
might have vpholden man by some extraordinary grace: we confess that to be
true, but yet it does not thereof follow, that God was the cause of this fall:
for the natural grace wherewith man was endued, and which was inherent in
himself was sufficient, if he would have used it aright: and for
supernatural grace, God was neither bound to give any, neither did he think
the creature worthy of any new supply of grace, which did so unthankfully
abuse his former bounty, or that the continuance of this pure estate would
illustrate his glory so much as would the fall of man.

Lastly it may be thought that God might and ought to have made these his
exellent creatures in a firm and permanent estate, and that by taking from
them all possibility of falling, and all freedom of will in respect of evil,
as he does to the elect Angels and men, and as his own nature is incapable of
evil. Whereunto we answer, that this which is alleged is a thing altogether
impossible, for the fredome of will does not derogate any thing from the
perfection of the creature the which could not have been made excellent without
it. For where no will is, there is no understanding: As for the elect, both men
and Angels they are vpholden by the supernatural grace of God, not by any such
natural strength and disposition of will as cannot choose evil: the which if they
had, they were not reasonable creatures but either as brute beasts and
senseless trees, or else as God himself, who only cannot be tempted with any
evil. So then the cause why the wicked angels and man kind fell from their
first state, was their own free will, choosing sin, and refusing life offered
by God: but God is no other ways the cause of this fall, then he is the cause
of all actions in the world both good and evil* namely in that he is the cause
of the cause. For in that he made the freewil of man, he did in some sort make
the fall which came of it, and secondly in that he gave an effectual occasion of
it. But that is not the question, for we enquire the true and proper cause of
this fall.

The whole matter may not unfitly be declarred by this similitude: A wise father
purposing to let his son see his own wilfulnes and inte^perancie, together
with his love and fatherly affection toward him, resolves with himself to
make him fall into some mortal sickness, out of the which he knows himself
to be able to recover him. This he will effect not by giving him poison to
drink, for the^ he should be the cause, and bear the blame of that evil, but
by laying it in his way, as it were a bait in some sweet meat which he
knows that his son loves, and will eat as soon as he sees it. And least
that he should plead ignorance, and so avoid the blame of wilfulness, he
forewarneth him of that kind of meat, charging him very instantly to abstain
from it, as being unwholesome, and hurtful unto him: yet he does not tell him,
what he intends. This young man coming where this pleasant meat is,
reme^breth his fathers counsel, and commandment, yet is by the entisement of
evil companions, and his own appetite moved to eat of it, persuading himself
that there is no such danger in it as his father would make him believe: and
therefore no cause, he should obey him in that matter. So he eats of it, and
poysoneth himself: now no man can deny, but that both the father and the
son have a hand and play their in this tragedy; yet not the father who gives
the occasion only, but the young man himself who does willingly, or rather
wilfully take that hurtful meat, is to be blamed, and counted the cause of
this evil.

In like manner God deals with man, he decrees his fall, yet does not throw
him down but only lays a stumbling block in his way. He does not infect man
with the poison of sin but puts it into a goodly apple, which he knows
that man will devour greedely whenever occasion is offered: this he did by
forbidding man to eat of that fruit: by the which means he made the eating of
it to be sin, that is, deadely poison, which otherwise was good and pleasant.
So then God is the cause of man's fall, so as he who lays a bait for fish is
the cause of their death: he using no violence toward the^ but only suffering
them to follow their natural appetite: But Satan, who is the second actor
plays a far diverse part, laboring by promises, pretenses, entisements,
persuasions, and by all means possible to bring man into the state of sin
and death: God sits still on the bank holding an angle rod in his hand with
bait and hook hanging at it, waiting til man come of his own accord and
bite. But Satan pursues man up and down with a net to entangle him: man
flies from satan's nett as from a most hurtful thing in that he resists his
temptations for a while. But he comes willingly to Gods bait yea not only
uncalled, but also flatly forbidden, and eats of it greedely: for he being
once caught and entangled, changes his mind and will, thinkeing that to be
good and wholesome, which before he knew to be hurtful and by all means to be
avoided.

So that the fall of man came as has been declared of the freedom, or rather
of the preuersnesse of his own will, according to the eternal decree and
purpose of God, by the malicious instigation of satan: who having before
fallen himself, did vehemently desire the fall of man, and that for these
reasons; First for that he had now conceived a vehement and desperate hatred of
God, having justly for his sin cast him out of his presence, the which before
his fall he enjoyed in heaven. And for so much, as he did easily see that his
malice could not reach to God himself, therefore he thought that the next way
was to despite and dishonor him in his creatures, by defacing man who only of
all the creaturs in this world, was made according to Gods own image, yea
further, to deprive god of all that glory and ship that man should perform unto
him. Secondly, Satan desired to effect the fall of man, that so he might have
the more company both in his sin and in his punishment. He being thus
affected toward Gods glory and man's salvation, ceased not till that by his
fair promises and plausible pretenses he brought man out of the true paradise
into a fools paradise, making him believe that the ^ransgression of Gods
commandment was the only way for him to become a God, and so he persuaded
Eua in the form of a serpent, and Adam in the form of Eua, to eat of the
forbidden fruit.

It is doubted how Adam, being in the state of innocence and knowledge, could
be so palpably deceived, as to believe such a notorious lie, especially seeing
the Apostle says, that Adam was not deceived but Eua. But he means that Eua
was first, yea more easily and grossly deceived, for as her knowledge was less,
so we must think that her infidelity was greater then was Adams, who,
although he was made to distrust (in part) the word of God, yet he was not, nor
could be so blinded by Eua as she was by the delusion of the devil: and
therefore he sinned more of wilfulness, then of blindness, choosing rather to
disobey God, then to displease Eua, by rejecting her importunate request, and
refusing to take such part as she took, who being his wife, yea his only
companion, was no doubt a great pleasure, joy, and delight unto him. Thus much
of the fall of Adam, which is the fall of all mankind: For Adam being the
father of al men, did sustain the public person of mankind, both in his
innocence and also in his fall, in his happiness and in his misery. If it be
asked why all mankind fell, seeing not all but some of the Angels did fall: we
answer that all men were in the very moment of the fall, in Adams loins, and
therefore did both stand and fall with him: but the Angels do not be get one
another, being all created immediately by God himself, and therefore the sin
of one Angel does not take hold of another, unless that one by consenting to
the sin devised by another, do make himself sinful: as it was in the fall of
the Angels, wherein one or some few were the chief and authors of this
conspiracy, the rest approved it and took part with them, as may be gathered by
that distinction which is made of them one being made chief, Mat. 25. 41.
or head, the rest his inferiors. Mat. 25. 41. Go ye into eternal fire
prepared for the Devil, and his Angels.

Sect. 3. Of the state of regeneration and salvation.
THE third state follows, which is the recovering of the first state of life,
wherein man was created in the beginning. For God in suffering man to fall, did
not purpose the final overthrow and destruction of so excellent a creature,
but rather the illustration of his own unspeakable mercy and goodness toward
man, in pardoning his sin, and in restoring him to life. This state we call
the state of salvation, for that man in it, is not only endued with life, as
he was before, but also saved and delivered from eternal death, whereunto he
fell by his sin. Yet not all mankind is restored to life, but only a few,
that it might appear both how unapt man is to do any good, how incapable of
salvation he is made by sin, in that he cannot attain unto it, no not now,
when as God has appointed the means and the way of it, and as it were setting
heaven gates wide open does offer salvation to all men: and lastly that the
justice of God might be declared in punishing the reprobate for their sin. Of
the state of regeneration and salvation


And yet the state of mankind is happy in respect of the Angels which fell; for
none of them are, or shall ever be restored to their former state, and that for
these causes. First and chiefly because their fall was so great, as that it is
impossible that they should recover their first estate: the greatness of
their fall comes of that great measure of knowledge, light and grace
wherewith they were endued: and the which they did tread under their feet and
despise: for if they had fallen only from some small measure of grace, a
greater measure would have recovered them: but they having already rejected,
and made of no force so much grace as any mere creature is capable of, have no
remedy left for their salvation. And as they fell from the highest degree of
grace, so they fell into the lowest sink of sin, even to the highest degree
of sin that can be imagined, which is a most desperate, deadly, cruel,
fierce, contumelious, shameless, open, professed, wilful and spiteful hatred
against God and all goodness, yea against all his creatures both good and
evil. This came of the exceeding great strength of their nature, which being
once let loose to sin, could not stay or rest but in the highest degree of
it. Like unto this remediless fall of the wicked Angels, is that sin which
is in the scripture called the sin against the holy Ghost, when as one being
endued with a great measure of grace, does fall into this fearful and
desperate hatred of God, and of all goodness, for as he who falls from a
steep and high rock into a deep pit or gulf, can not possibly escape death,
whereas one whose fall is less, may have hope of life: so it is with these
wicked Angels whose sin we may truly call that unpardonable sin committed
against the holy Ghost. Further, the sin of the Angels deserved more severe
punishment, in that they were better able to resist it, seeing the glory of God
in heaven, and therefore having greater means of knowing, believing and obeying
God then man had on earth: yea their sin came from themselves by the
suggestion of their own minds, and the inclination of their wills, but man
sinned by their provocation, temptation and delusion; who as if they had
committed a small offense in sinning themselves, did add to their own sin
the sin of mankind. Moreover, it was not needful that God should restore
these rebels to their former state, for the illustration of his love toward
this creature: for so much, as there are yet in heaven in the state of
happiness, many thousands of holy Angels which are so many witnesses and
preachers, of the endless love of God toward them. Again it was needful for
the working of the salvation of the elect, that there should be some
aduersarye power opposing it self and laboring by all means to hinder it,
that so both the graces bestowed on men might be stirred up and exercised, and
the power of God preserving them from so great danger, made manifest. Lastly by
this incurable state of these Angels it appears, that there neither is, nor
yet can be in any creature any such absolute perfection, as that it might be
able of it self by any proper, inherent and natural virtue and strength,
(being not supported by the grace of God) either to keep for ever, or to
recover any good and happy estate. If it be objected that the Angels may
repent and so obtain salvation: we answer, first that it is impossible by
reason of the nature of their sin, being the sin against the holy Ghost,
that they should ever truly repent: and secondly that if they could after
some sort repent, yet they are altogether incapable of salvation, because God
has not taken unto himself the nature of Angels, as he has done the nature
of man, and so by joining it to himself, who is life it self, made it a
living and holy nature: the which is needful for salvation, as will appear
more at large in the treatise of justifying faith, Chap. 4. Sect. 3.

But to leave these foul spirits in the bottomless pit of hell, let us
return to the consideration of this third state of man, the which although in
substance it be nothing but the first estate restored, yet it is to be
preferred before it in these respects. First because it is certain, immutable
and eternal, it being impossible that any who is once brought from death to
this state of salvation, should return back again: but the first state of
man was not only variable, but very short and momentanie, as has been
declared. This arises not of any natural and inherent strength of man, but of
the mere grace and love of God supporting all his elect servants in this
state, and watching over them least at any time they should fall away. Secondly
both the parts of the goodness of this estate, which are the outward and
inward conjunction of man with God, or more plainly, his happiness and
holiness, are greater then they were before* The increase of happiness the
next section does declare, and for the other we cannot doubt but that the love
of man, yea all the other parts of his holiness are increased and doubled
toward God, who now is not only his Lord and creator, but also his savior
and redeemer. As he must needs love more to whom many sins are forgiven,
then he who is saved by his own holiness: for life is not of it self so
acceptable at any time as it is after death. Whereof more at large in the last
Chapter of the third part of this treatise.

CHAP. II.
Sect. 1. Of the happiness wherein man was created.
Happiness is the enjoying of the greatest, highest and chiefest good, to wit
that which is fully, perfectly, primarely, eternally, essentially and only
good, as is God only. Math* 19. 17. There is none good but God only: Thus do
the Angels in heaven enjoy God, Mat. 19. 17.
whose face (or more plainly) whose glory shining as clearly, as the grace of
a man does in his face, they do continually behold. Likewise man before his
fall lived thus happily in the presence of God, with whom he had daily, and as
we may say, familiar conversation: yea God did many ways reveal himself and
his glory to him, especially in the garden, wherein he placed him. This is
perfect felicity, for he who has God who is the fountain of all blessings,
joy and pleasures, has all things belonging to happiness. Psalm. 16 11. Psalm.
16. 11.
Thou shall make me know the path of life, for there is fullness of joy in thy
face or presence, and in thy right hand there are pleasures for evermore.

From this fountain of happiness there flowed many streams, Of the
happiness wherein man was created.
even all blessings, whatsoever the preservation or dignity of the body, soul
or of the whole person of man did any way require: first for his body it was in
respect of the outward form and proportion maiesticall, beautiful, gracious,
purchasing fear and reverence of the other baser creatures, and favor even in
the sight of God, for whose glory makes whatsoever is any way commendable in
the creature: 1. Chro. 12, 8*
this remaneth in part even in the corrupt estate. Acts. 7. 10.
1. Chro. 12. 8. David's men of war had faces like Lions Act. 7. 20. Moses
being newborn was gracious in the sight of God. Secondly the body of man was
immortal: whereof there is no question to be made, seeing that the scripture
does every where teach us that death came in by sin 1. Cor. 25. 56. the sting
whereby death kills is sin. 1 Cor. 15. 56
Romans 5. 12. by Adam sin came into the world, Romans 5. 12.
and by sin death.

If we should examine this doctrine by natural reason, it would be found
very doubtful: for it may seem that the body of man, being made of earth,
should of necessity at length be resolved into earth again, as well as the
bodies of all other cretures: yea that it consisting of contraries continually
fighting, and consuming one another, could not possibly but be at length
destroyed. For nothing that is divided in it self can continue for ever. Yea
besides this natural death, man's body may seem to have been subject to
outward violence: as if it should have been pierced with a sword, or thrown
down from a high rock, no reason can show how the immortality of it should
be preserved. Whereunto we answer, first that we are not to doubt of the word
of God, howsoever our shallow heads are not able to sound the depth of it.
Secondly that we may as well suppose man to be immortal, as to live almost a
thousand years, as we read Genesis 5. 27. that Methusela^ did: for we may well
think that those long lives of the fathers before the flood, Genesis 5. 27.
were even the relics of that immortality wherewith Adam was endued at the
first: neither are we to think it impossible to God, to endue man's body with
such an exact and equal temperature, as should continue for ever. As for
violent deaths, although we cannot deny but man was subject to them, if
violence had been offered, yet there could none happen in this pure state. For
then there were no wild beasts to devour and tear in pieces, no evil
constitution of the aier to distemper or infect, no inordinate affections in a
man's mind, whereby he himself might be the cause of sickness, hurt or death
to himself, but all the creatures were so disposed as that they should every
way further, and by no means impair the good estate of man. Lastly if it be
granted that Adams body had no such strange temperature, which could continue
for ever, no one quality getting the upper hand ouer-any other, neither any
such immunity against violent deaths, but that he might by oversight,
forgetfulness or some humane infirmity, be overtaken with hurt, sickness,
age and death, the which opinion is rather to be received; yet he had this
supernatural privilege of immortality granted unto him by the word of God,
and confirmed by the tree of life, the fruit whereof being taken and eaten had
this virtue in it (not by nature, but by the miraculous and extraordinary work
of God) to make man live for ever, by freeing him from all dangers, hurts,
wounds, sickness and age.

Likewise this happiness was in regard of the soul of Adam exceeding great, he
having not only a mind illuminated with the true knowledge of God, and of all
other things which did any way belong unto him, but also his will and
affections free from al immoderate desires, or greiuous passions, which might
any way molest or trouble him. The which state of the soul as it is a part of
man's holiness in that it is agreeable to the will, word and image of God, so in
regard of the incomparable pleasure and joy, arising of the true contemplation
of God, of a quiet conscience and orderly affections, it contains in it a
great part of man's felicity. Likewise the whole person of man was adorned with
this crown of glory, that he was a monarch here on earth, having the
Lordshippe and dominion of these inferior creaturs given unto him. So that to
conclude this point, the happiness of man was very wonderful in that he
enjoyed all good things whatsoever, even God himself with all the creatures

This was the happiness of man's first estate: whereof this question may be
asked, whether it was appointed by God to continue for ever, or else to be but
an entrance to a greater happiness in heaven: whither some do think that man
should at length have been translated, although without death, yet not without
some change of his earthly body. But hereof we cannot say any thing, haueing
learned nothing in the word of any other happiness of this first estate then
this which has in some sort been described, and which although it may seem to
come much short of true happiness, and to be rather a terrestrial then a
celestial, yet in truth it was perfect happiness (although not absolute:
because it was mutable;) for wheresoever God vouchsafes to the creature the
fruition of his presence, there is full and perfect happiness; whether it be
in heaven or on the earth.

Sect. 2. Of the miserable state of man since the fall of Adam.
MAn by his sin did separate himself from God, lost the conjunction which he
had with him, both spiritual which is perfect holiness, and personal or local
which is happiness* and was cast out of the presence of God, and out of
paradise, in the which place, being a terrestrial garden, God did reveal
himself and his glory to man after a special manner, and so he loosing the
fountain of happiness, he did withal loose all the streams which flowed
from thence belonging either to his body or soul: his body which was before
beautiful and maiesticall, became deformed and contemptible, Of the miserable
state of man since the fall of Adam.
being, as the experience of all ages does teach us, often many ways crooked,
ridiculous, foul, yea sometimes horribly monstrous and ugly. For continual
health he has infinite diseases, infirmities, sickenesses and sores. For his
former felicity he is subject to as many dangers as there are things in the
world, there being almost nothing, which may not become mortal unto him by
some means or other: his immortality he has changed with death, often dying
before he be borne to live: sometimes in the flower of his age; and if he live
many years, yet al his life is nothing but misery, yea even death it self, it
being the beginning of eternal death. Likewise in regard of his soul, he is
most miserable: his understanding, which before was as clear as is the sun at
noone day, is now ouershadowed and filled with palpable darkness, gross
errors, blockishe ignorance, and an accusing conscience. His will is become
perverse, abhorring whatsoever is good, and cleaving to that which is evil.
His affections are raging and in ordinate lusts: and in brief there is nothing
in the whole nature of man, but horrible confusion. For the outward dignity of
his person, he is now cast out from the company of God and of his holy angels,
who before were his familiar friends, but now are armed with a sword against
him. Again he is not now Lord of the creatures; for they do oftener tyrannise
over him, devouring him and tearing him in pieces, Genesis 31. 24.
the^ perform any service unto him, unless they be constrained. Yea he is and
that by his own judgment, more base the^ the earth, and therefore is often sold
to perpetual slavery for a little gold, silver, brass or any baser metal,
yea he sets his whole mind, and bestows al his labor upon them: he
prostrateth himself before the wedge of gold, as before his God, he loves it
as his life, and accounts al his happiness to consist in it. Besides many
miseries do happen in this life, which might becounted a kind of happiness, if
that they might have an end with death, but how can we look that, that should
be the end of it, which is but the beginning of that unspeakable misery which
has no end, but shall continue for ever. For all the miseries of this life,
whatsoever, and death it self, are but an entrance to that eternal misery
which is prepared for sinners. The greatness whereof consists in ^ things:
first in that intolerable grief which is conceived by the lack of the contrary
happiness prepared for the faithful: in which respect it is called utter
darkness, and the lowest pit. Secondly in the sustaining of those pains where
with the wicked shall be tormented in body and soul the which are usually
compared to a burning fire, or Furnace, because there is no thing so fearful
to man, as is fire: which consumes all things where of it can get hold;
but in truth there is no fire, yea although it be augmented by infinite rivers
of brimstone, that burns so hot, and is so unquenchable as is the anger of
God, which in the day of wrath shall be powered forth upon the wicked.

Sect. 3. Of the renewed happiness of man.
THe renewed happiness of man is partly in this life, and partly, or rather
perfectly and wholly, in the world to come: for howsoever it may seem an
impossible thing to find any felicity in this vain and transitory world,
especially in the godly, who of all men are most miserable, yet God in his
mercy vouchsafes to his servants the beginning, and as it were, a taste of
that endless joy which is laid up in store for them in heaven, by the which
they may be comforted and vphelde in the mids of those infinite miseries, which
accompany them whiles they abide in this world. Of the renewed happiness of mn.
This happiness is not outward and apparent to men's eyes, but inward and
spiritual: for the bodies of Gods elect are as much subject to sores,
sicknesses and to death it self as are the bodies of the reprobate, yea in
their wives, children, friends, kinsfolk, goods, posterity and in all outward
respects they are no less, yea usually much more miserable then the reprobate
(although if we speak properly, these outward evils do not make them
miserable, but do make for their good and eternal salvation) and therefore
we are to seek for this beginning of our happiness in the souls of Gods
children: and chiefly in their minds and understandings. For if happiness
do consist in seeing God, and in beholding his glory, Math. 5. 8*
as Christ teaches us, Math. 5. 8. Then we are not destitute of a great part
of it even in this life, in the which we do many ways see God, although not
so fully as we shall do hereafter. 1. Cor. 13. 12. 1. Cor. 13. 12.
For heaven and earth, even all the creatures of God are full of the glory of
God. Romans 1. 20. The invisible things of God, Romans 1. 20.
to wit his Godhead and his power are seen since the creation of the world
being considered in the creatures. If by natural men, of whom the Apostle
speaks, how much more by spiritual? For howsoever carnal and worldly minded
men, beholding the glorious creatures of God, are no more affected then are the
brute beasts, which never once lift up their eyes to heaven: yet the godly do
hereof conceive matter of great joy. Besides, we see God daily in his actions,
in his judgments powered on sinners, in his mercies showed toward the godly;
yea in his patience and goodness toward all men.

But besides all this, we have yet another means of seeing God, so far
excelling the former, as the beholding of the kings own person is more
joyful to his natural subjects then is the sight of his stately palaces. For
we have the word of God, even the doctrine of the Gospel, wherein we see God
in his mercy, that is, in his greatest glory: yea we see God in Christ his
only natural son, in whom the glory of God shines more clearly then in
the heaven of heavens. For he is the express and lively image of the Father,
Heb. 1. 2.
the brightness of his glory, and the engraven form of his person: and thus
we see God plainly as in a clear cristall glass, with his face open or
uncovered: yea by this sight we are transformed into the same image from
glory to glory, even as from the spiritte of God. 2. Cor. 3. 18. 2. Cor. 3.
18.
Thus all the faithful beholding God in Christ are truly happy, howsoever
they do not with their bodily eyes see the heavens open, and the son of God
standing at the right hand of the Father as Steven did, Act. 7. 56.
Act. 7. 56. To this felicity of the mind is to be referred the peace of
conscience, the which being a continual feast, makes a man happy and joyful
in the midst of the greatest sorrows and miseries. And, to be short in the
rest; answerable to this state of the mind is the will with the affections, by
the which he cleaving to God, loving him above all earthly pleasures, and
delighting in him, is replenished with unspeakable joy.

This is the happiness whereof we may be made partakers in this life; the
which eternal happiness follows, so called because all the parts of it
which are now to be mentioned* continue and endure for ever without any
change or alteration whatsoever. It consists in these things.

First in immunitye or freedom from all dangers, troubles, miseries,
calamities, crosses, sorrow, sin, wants, imperfections and infirmities
whatsoever can be named or imagined. The body shall not be pinched with hunger,
thirst, nakedness, or disgraced with any deformity, or wearied with labor,
the darkness shall not shut up our eyes and hinder them from seeing, for there
is continual light: health shall not be impaired by sickness, or beauty and
strength with age, the body shall not be inflamed by choler or lust; or
distempered with surfitting and drunkenness, or yet preserved by the
corruption of the carcasses of dead beasts. It shall not be as it is now of so
lumpish and heavy a mould, that we cannot without weariness and trouble, lift
up our hands or eyes to heaven; but it shall be a spiritual body, that is
endued with such perfect strength, beauty, agilitie, lightness,
impassibilitie, soliditie and incorruption, as if it were a spirit rather then
a sensible substance: and yet it shall be still a sensible substance endued
with the same form which now it has, but of far diverse qualities. Likewise
the mind being free from al ignorance, error and doubting, shall see God
clearly, and in him all things: there shall be no perverseness of the will or
any inordinate desires, no such uncertain freedom of will, as might endanger
our estate by drawing us from God. To be short, we shall have daily
conversation in the presence of God, Who shall be all in all unto us, Revel.
21. 3. 23.
we shall be glorious in body and soul, 1. Cor. 15. 28.
even as are the holy Angels, yea even as is Christ the son of God according
to his humanity, Ioh. 3. 2.
although not in the same degree: Phil. 3. 21.
but we are not able to declare the particulars of this estate, the which then
shall be revealed unto us: and therefore we must conclude this matter with that
saying of the Apostle, 1. Cor. 2. 9.
1. Cor. 2. 9. Neither eye has seen, nor ear has heard, nor the mind of
man once conceived or imagined, those* joys which God has prepared for them
that love him: Revel. 21.
Yet we have a typical description of this happiness. Revel. 21.

CHAP. III.
Sect. 1. Of the holiness wherein man was created.
THus much of that happiness wherein man was created, the which was not
absolute but conditional: for it was given to man with this condition; That he
should live in perfect holiness, conforming himself to the will of God in all
things: in the performance whereof, if he did fail at any time, he was
forthwith to be wholly deprived of the said happy estate for ever. Where we are
not to imagine that God did deal hardly with man in imposing so strait a
condition: for he could not possibly have done otherwise, as we will easily
confess if we consider, that happiness is nothing else but the enjoying of
Gods presence and company, into the which it is more impossible for any to
enter, who is not perfectly holy, then it is for palpable darkness to be
there whereas the sun shines clearly at noone day: and therefore seeing
holiness is tied to happiness by such an unspeakable bond, it is needful
that we do here speak of holiness, Of the holiness wherein man was created.
wherewith as with a wedding garment, every one must be clothed who desires to
enter into Gods paradise. Holiness therefore is as has been before touched;
The spiritual conjunction of the reasonable creature with God, 1. Cor. 6. 17.
as happiness is his personal or local conjunction with him. For then either
Angel or man is perfectly holy, when as in his spirit or soul, in his
understanding, will, affections and all the actions proceeding from them, he
cleaves to God in perfect obedience knowing, believing, choosing, loving,
fearing and obeying him above all things, so as not only the outward actions,
but also the inward faculties; yea the whole nature be pure in the sight of God
without any spot or blemish of sin.

Both which, to wit, the holiness of the natural faculties, and of the outward
actions, we will join together in this treatise, for the greater evidence of
the doctrine. This holiness, although it might be handled according to the
order of the several parts and faculties of man's soul, yet we will rather
distinguish it into these two parts; Subjection to God, and Conformity to God:
whereof, the first contains all those parts of man's holiness which he owes to
God as to his superior, and which have no resemblance to any part of Gods
nature, for that God is in no respect subject to any* the other, those wherein
man is like to God* resembling some part of Gods nature, so as that he may be
said to have those faculties in common with God: although after a far diverse
manner: for man is then truly holy, when as he is subject to God in
conformity, and like to God in due subjection. For so it pleased God to put in
man his own image, or the similitude and resemblance of his own nature, yet
not making him his mate or equal, but every way subject and inferior to him.
Mich. 6. 8.
Mich. 6. 8. O man, God shows thee what is good, that is, wherein thy
holiness does consist, namely in this, that thou humble thy self to walk
with thy God. For the first, the subjection which man owes to God is not of
one kind, but general containing in it all kinds of subjection whatsoever: to
wit that which the loyal subject owes to his prince, the son to his father,
the servant to his master, the scholar to his teacher, the creature to the
creator: in all which respects man ought to be subject to God, performing all
those duties to him which any inferior owes to his superior, as in
particular consideration will more plainly appear.

Sect. 2. Of the sinfulness of man.
MAn by that one offense committed against God, in eating the forbidden fruit,
did wholly loose both the justice of his person, and also the inherent purity
of his nature. For the first, we know that disobedience and rebellion against
God appears as well in one wilful transgression as in many: for no man is to
be counted just and innocent, who is stained with any one grievous crime, and
therefore as we read Iam. 2. 10. Ia. 2. 10*
whosoever keeping the whole law beside, transgresses any one part or
precept, he is guilty of the breaking of the whole law. But the resolution of
the other question is much harder, for it is not so easy to show, how that one
sin did clean take away the holiness which was inherent, infixed and even
engraven by the finger of God in the nature of man, as we know that the
transgression of Ada^ deprived both him and his posterity, of that light of the
mind, of the actual in clmation of his will to good only, and of whatsoever
else was good in him. Of the sinfulness of man.
For as the Poets do fable of certain men who by drinking a charmed potion,
were made of reasonable men, brute and savage beasts, so we know that the
eating of the forbidden fruit, did make as great a metamorphosis or change in
Adam: who by this means was stripped naked of all and every part of that
holiness wherewith he was before endued.

But whence came this wonderful altertion, whether from God, spoling man of
all those holy garments wherewith he had decked him before, or from man
himself, making a total apostasy from God? Not from God, whose gifts are
without repentance, and whose nature is far from any such inconstancy, but
from man. Yet not from any wilful desire or purpose of renouncing God and all
holiness, but by the craft of satan, and the nature of sin which as leaven
once getting place, never rests till that it sour the wholle lump be it
never so great: So man after that he had once inclined his will to disobey God,
and admitted unbelief into his mind, could not keep his affections and
actions from the contagion of sin. Adam perhaps thought that to eat the
forbidden fruit, was but a single and small offense, but satan knew very
well, that it was a grievous and an universal Apostasy from God, as it
proved in the events.

For whilst the sweetness of the fruit was yet in the mouth of Adam, the
venim and poison of it did pierce into the most secret parts of his soul,
leaving no part uncorrupted or free from the filthynesse of sin. For when as
once the light of his mind was darkened by the delusion of the devil, in
so much that he thought evil to be good, and the way leading to extreme
misery to be the only means of the greatest happiness, it could not be
but that his will, affections, actions, and all the faculties both of body and
soul should be corrupted, for that one of them does follow the disposition of
an other, so that a corrupt mind brings a perverse will, and a sinful
will makes inordinate affections, both which increase the darkness of the
mind, and also defile all the outward actions. Thus Adam lost the purity of
his nature by continuing in his sin whereinto he had fallen, and adding one
measure of sinfulness to an other, till at length he came to a constant habit
and natural disposition of sinfullnesse. And as he was himself sinful, so he
left his sinfulness to his posterity, the which in respect of him is called
original corruption. Ps. 51. 7. I was fashioned in sin, ^^salm. 51. 7.
and in inquitie did my mother conceive me. This original sin is that
corrupt estate of man's nature, wherein all the faculties and powers of it are
altogether unapt and impotent to the doing of any good, and wholly disposed and
inclined to the committing of sin, or more briefly, the spiritual separation of
man from God, whereby it comes to pass that he neither does nor can, either
know or believe, either love or fear, either obey or honor God, or be in any
respect so affected toward him, as he ought to be. This spiritual separation
has tow parts, Rebellion and Deformity, in the which tow things the whole
sinfulness of man consists, being nothing else but a defection from all
subjection due to God, and from that image of God wherein he was created.

Sect. 3. Of the renewed holiness of man.
AS God has in great mercy decreed that man should not utterly perish by Adams
fall, but rather by his mercy recover that happiness which he both had, and
lost, so he has in wisdom and justice appointed the same means of attaining
it, to wit, the perfect holiness of man, without the which it is impossible
that any creature should see God. And therefore as god did in the beginning
create in man perfect holiness, as the means of attaining happiness; so he
does for the same end recreate holiness in him. This action of God is called
in the Scripture regeneration, and the holiness it self, the new man, or the
new creature: because the former holiness is so clean decayed and abolished,
no one part of it remaining, that the restoring of it again does make man to
be a new, yea almost another creature, working in him a total change of his
nature, and giving him a new mind, a new will, new affections, and a new
course of life, not that this change is in the substance of the soul or body,
of the mind or will of a man, for that is the same both in a carnal and in a
regenerate man: Of the renewed holiness of man.
but only in quality and condition: and yet it is truly called a second
creation, because there is no root left in man from the which holiness might
be produced, no in clination to good, whereby it might be furthered, no
faculty remaining in him, whereby it might be effected. For howsoever some do
erroneously think and teach, that some part of regeneration is to be ascribed
to the natural faculties of man's soul, as if men did of themselves see,
choose, embrace and love the truth: yet the scripture teaches us to think
far otherwise, to wit, that man has no hand in this work, but only the
spirit of God. For even as in the natural generation of any living creature,
there must two things concur, first the agent or worker, the which the
philosophers call principium actiuum, (and it may be resembled to the workman
in artificial things) the which gives the form, and being to the creature:
secondly the matter whereof the thing is made and framed called principium
passiuum, the which cannot be said to work, but only to suffer the operation
of the other: so it is in regeneration. First the spirit of God is the workman
in it, he is the begetter of this newman, the fashioner of this new creature.
Secondly the mind and will of man are the matter whereof this new creature is
made, not working together with the spirit of God, but only suffering the
working of it. For regeneration is nothing but a sanctified or renewed mind
and will.

The begetter of this new man is God himself, even the holy spirit of God
changing our minds and heartts, and framing in them all holiness. Ioh. 3. 6.
Ioh. 3. 6. That which is borne of the flesh, is flesh, and that which is borne
of the spirit, is spirit. And that although by the ministry of man and the
preaching of the word of God (as it is 1. Pet. 1. 23. Being borne again not
of corruptible seed but of incorruptible even of the word of God which
abides for ever) yet by a strange and supernatural work, 1 Pet. 1. 23.
which no wit, eloquence, devise, strength or power of man or Angel, but
only the finger of GOD himself is able to bring to pass, Math. 19. 26. Mah.
19. 26.
With man it is impossible, but not with God: it being not in the power of any
creature to change in one moment the mind, will, affections and the whole
nature of a man, espceially to that state which is repugnant, and clean
contrary to his natural disposion, as regeneration is to the nature of a
carnal man, for it is not so in this spiritual work as it is in the carnal
generation, wherein one thing begets another like to it self by a natural
virtue and power which God has put into each living creature, without any
extraordinary work or blessing from God. And therefore it is able (being in
the natural disposition) whenever it lists, to bring forth the effect
without failing. But no minister of the word, although endewed with most
excellent gifts, can beget this new man by the sole virtue of his mimisterie;
for then regeneration, would be a common and an ordinary thing, as is the
preaching of the word. But we know it to be far otherwise, and that usually
of a hundred hearers, there is scarce one truly converted. So that in the
begetting of this new man, the ministry of the word is but the instrument,
whereby the spirit of God works, without the which it is no more able to
form this new creature, then the tools belonging to any work, are able to
bring the same to pass without the hand of the artificer: And therefore as the
first creation, so also the regeneration of man's holiness ought to be
acknowledged, to be the hand, and work of God, yea in truth an immediate,
supernatural and miraculous work: we say immeditate, not that he uses no
means in regenerating the faithful, but for that the force, virtue, and
ability of working, is not any jot in the means, but wholly and only in GOD.
Again it is a supernatural work, for even as sin, yea the retayning,
exercising, and increasing of it, is natural to man, so the resisting,
renouncing and forsaking of it, and especially the seeking, attaining, keeping,
exercising and increasing of the contrary holiness, is no less contrary to
the nature of man, then it is for him to fly up to heaven. Hence it follows
that this regeneration is a miraculous work: for whatsoever is so contrary to
the natural disposition and ordinary course of things, as that the reason of
man can not find out and comprehend the cause of it, that drives men to
admiration and astonishment, and so becomes a miracle unto them. If it be
here objected that regeneration is an ordinary matter, which comes to pass
daily and usually in the Church, and has done in all ages, and therefore is no
miracle: we answer confessing that it is not so much wondered at as it ought to
be. For carnal men do not believe that there is any such matter, as we may
see in the example of Nicodemus, ^^hn. 3. 4
John. 3. 4. How can a man be borne which is old? can he enter into his
mothers womb again and be borne? And therefore do not wonder but rather
laugh at it: and they who by experience know it, are not for the most part so
affected with the serious cogitation of it as they should be. Yet this does not
change the nature of it, for if God should often raise up men from the dead,
men would at length cease from wondering at it. But notwithstanding the opinion
of men, it is a great miracle, yea in truth greater then is the raising of the
dead to life: for God has often given to mortal and sinful men the glory
of restoring the dead to life, but he never gave to any of his prophets or
Apostles, the power of regenerating men. So that to conclude this first point,
as the first, so the second creation of man's holiness, ought to be
acknowledged the proper work and action of God, as the scripture does plainly
teach us in many places, Gal. 2. 8.
Gal. 2. 8.

Now we are to consider other points in this wonderful work of God, as
namely these. First the means which God uses. Secondly the manner of working.
Thirdly the time. Fourthly the differences of regeneration. Lastly the signs
of it. The means is either ordinary or extraordinary: the ordinary means, is
as has been touched; the ministry of the word of God, appointed by God for
this end and purpose, the which he does accompany with the secret operation of
his spirit, in the hearts of all those, whom he has ordained to salvation.
And therefore whosoever desires to be made partaker of this regeneration, he
must with all care and diligence give himself to the continual hearing of the
word of God preached in the assembly of the Church: and withal he is to use
all private means whereby he may be prepared for the public ministry, so
as it may be profitable unto him; as namely the continual company and
conference of those who have already attained to that which he desires, and
who having travailed in the way of Godliness, may the more easily direct him
in the same. Secondly he must give himself to the reading, studying and
meditating of the word of GOD, and to the careful use of all those means
whereby he may be made to understand, know, and remember it. But especially he
is to desire this by earnest prayer at the hands of God, who only is able to
grant his desire, and without whose working, the most painful use of all
means, is altogether in vain: but he that carefully uses these aforesaid
means (yet not trusting in them, but relying himself on the merciful promise
of God, who has promised to be ready at hand to all those that seek him)
shall find by experience that no man does in vain seek for help at the hands
of God.

As touching the manner how regeneration is wrought, John. 3. 8
Christ teaches us John. 3. 8, That no man knows it: for even as, says he,
thou hear the noise of the wind when it blows, but yet thou can not see
it, or discern whence it comes, or whither it goes; so although we hear
the word of God sounding in our ears, and know that God does by that sound
beget men, yet no man knows how this is: that is, regeneration is not
anoutward, visible, and sensible, but an inward and secret work. For even as a
man being suddenly taken with the plague, or any infectious sickness, says,
he knows not how it happened, only he sees the effects of it: even so the
action of regeneration, in it self is secret and unknown, but manifest in the
effects which follow of it. We may (not unfitly) compare it to that sudden
and strange change which befell Saul, 1. Sam. 10. ^
whereof we read, 1. Sam. 10. 9. For when as God was about to advance Saul
from his private and base estate, to the kingdom of Israel, he saw that it
was needful to make him a new man endued with a new mind, will, and
affections: to take from him his rude and base conditions, and to endue him,
with an heroical spirit of wisdom, courage, and of all gifts needful for
so high a calling. And therefore, even as he turned his back to go away from
Samuel, God changed him, and gave him an other heart, and made him another
man. Even so does God, by changing the minds and wills of his elect, so
secretly, as that they themselves know not which way it is done, make them
new men, and prepare them for his everlasting kingdom.

The time of regeneration, are the years of descretion, for this work has no
place in infantes, being not as yet endued with the actual faculties of a
reasonable mind and will. The which must first existe, before they can be
changed, and be actually defiled with sin, before they can be cleansed.

Secondly in the years of discretion, there is no set and appointed time of
regeneration: for as we are taught, Math. 20. in the parable of the work men,
some are called at the first hour of the day, some in the midst of it, some
in the last hour: Some in their young years, some in their middle age, and
some in old age. Yet no man ought in this respect to defer the seeking after
regeneration, for so he will be more and more unfit and unwilling to take
any pains in this behalf, and be at length so hardened and benumbed with a
long custom of sin, and of deep hypocrisy, that there will be far less
hope of winning him to the true obedience of Christ then there was before.
Thirdly, regeneration, although it do continually increase, as long as a man
lives, yet it is wrought and begun, in one hour, in one moment of time; even
as there is but one hour of birth, although there be many of life.

If it be asked, whether that every regenerate manne, does know the special
hour of his calling: we answer, that regeneration, being an universal
change of all the faculties of a man's soul, and so consequently of all the
actions of his life, may easily be felt and perceived, especially ^y him, in
whom it is wroughte: and further this time of a man's conversion, ought most
carefully to be marked and registered, that so it may with continual and
unspeakable joy and thanksgiving evermore be remembered.

For if, as it is usually thought, the day of a man's natural birth which in it
self is the beginning, although of temporal life, yet of eternal death and
misery, be worthy to be not only diligently noted and kept in mind, but
also solemnly celebrated with great joy: how much more is it meet, that men
should mark the day of their spiritual birth, it being the most happy day
which can be seen, and in deed the beginning of eternal happiness. And yet
oftentimes this particular time, is neither marked when it is present, nor
remembered when it is past, namely by them, whose conversion is not so strange
and violent, but light and easy, the which difference we are now in the
fourth place to propounde.

The diversity of regeneration is very great, for that we may use our
accustomed similitude, as man in his natural birth is brought into the world,
sometimes with great facility, and safety, at other times in so great
pain, anguish and danger, that he may seem to enter into life, through
death: even so this new man is sometimes borne without any trouble, sorrow,
or delay: but often, with such horror of conscience such fearful panges of
desperation, such extreme sorrow, fear, and humiliation, that he may truly
be said to pass to heaven, through the midst of hell. Again some of these
new men are borne in so great strength and perfection, as if they were not
babes, but grown men in Christ. As was the Apostle Paul who came into this
spiritual world, not only a perfect man, but also a mighty giant, even an
notable apostle: whereas others in the beginning of their regeneration, are so
weak in the performance of the actions of spiritual life, that it may be
greatly doubted, whether they have any life or no.

Lastly the signs of regeneration, are as many, as are the several parts and
heads of sanctification, and therefore whosoever desires to know, whether
that this new man be begotten in himself, or no, let him consider diligently,
that which follows in all the third sections of this treatise, and applying
it to himself, see whether that he find this strange change in his own soul
or no: whether that he be fully persuaded of the truth of Gods word, which
says that the dead shall one day be raised up to life, and that all those who
did believe in Christ shall enjoy eternal happiness in heaven: or do
secretly in his mind doubt of the truth of these things: whether that for his
good estate in this world, he depend on GOD, or upon his own wisdom,
strength, riches and friends: whether that he fear God or man more: whether
that his chief delight be in serving God, in praising God, in hearing,
reading, and meditating, on the word of God or in worldly pleasures, in
eating, drinking, sleeping, in pastime, in the pomp and outward show of the
world: whether that he have the grace to pray daily to God, for all spiritual
graces distinctly and severally one by one: or that he prays seldom, lightly
and but for fashions sake: whether that he love those who fear God, as he does
his own brethren or children, or else is effected to them no otherwise then to
other men: by these signs and many other, which are hereafter to be declared
at large, this regeneration may easily and certainly be known. And therefore
it stands every man in hand, who desires to escape the second death, to
examine himself whether that he have any part in this first resurrection: as
the Apostle does exhort. 2. Cor. 13. 5.
2. Cor. 13. 5. saying, Try your selves, whether ye be in the faith or no:
know ye not that Christ is in you except ye be reprobats?

Lastly as the happiness, so also the holiness of this third estate excels
the first holiness of man, in that it is perpetual and cannot by any means
be lost: for whereas this seed of regeneration is once sown by the hand of
God, there it remains for ever, and brings forth fruit to life
everlasting. 1. Ioh. 3. 10. Every one that is borne of God does not sin,
neither can sin, 1. Ioh. 3. 10
because the seed of God is in him. Where by sin he means a total apostasy
from God, not a particular sin, the which the faithful do often commit
without indaungering their salvation. Which does not depend on their own
righteousness as Adams did, but upon the righteousness of Christ. This
certainty of perseverance in the faith comes not of any strength of man, but
of the goodness of God who confirms unto the end all those whom he does once
effectually call.

Chapter. 4.
Sect. 1. Of faith in general, and of legal faith.
THe first kind of subjection which man owes to God, is that, which the
subject or tennant owes to his king or liegelord, of whom he holds his
houses, lands and possessions, by whose favor, procured by dutiful obedience,
he lives in a good and happy state, and whose anger would be to him extreme
misery and even death it self, and may be called affiance or dependaunce.
Thus was man in his first creation, Of faith in general, and of legal faith.
affected to God, on whom only he did depend, and rely himself for a happy
estate. This subjection is in holy scripture called faith, because the object
of it, is the faithfulness of God, and the truth of his word, and promises.
For as in the latin phrase, habere fidem is to give credence to another, so in
divinity, to have faith is to attribute faithfulness to God, or to
acknowledge him to be faithful in all his promises, both by believing them as
also by depending on them. Thus Sara is said Hebr. 11. 11, To have had faith
in that she judged God to be faithful in his promises. Heb. 11. 11


This faith is of two kinds, the faith wherewith Adam was endued in his first
creation, and the faith which God gives in regeneration: the first is called
usually legal, the other Evangelical. The which two kinds, although they do
differ the one from the other, yet they agree in substance, being of the same
nature in general, and therefore we will first declare the general doctrine
which is common to both the kinds of faith, and then see what is proper to
each kind, and wherein the one differs from the other. Faith in general is
thus defined: Affiance in Gods promises propounding eternal happiness, to the
perfect holiness of the reasonable creature, or to man being perfectly holy.
Or thus; Faith is the trust and confidence of a man's heart, relying himself
wholly on God for eternal happiness to be had by perfect holiness. Or thus;
Faith is the affiance of the heart, arising of an effectual persuasion of the
truth of Gods word, which promises happiness to man being perfectly holy,
Iam. 1. 19.
and threatens eternal misery to him being polluted with sin. James. 1. 19.
The devils believe and tremble.

These definitions being in substance all one, offer diverse points to be
considered: and first what part or faculty of man's soul is the Subject and
Seat of faith, whether the mind, the will, or the affections, whether one,
some, or all of them. For answer hereof, in that we say that faith is
affiance, trust, or confidence, we do plainly put it among the affections. For
so it seems to be of the same kind with hope, love, fear, and the rest of
the spiritual graces: al which, and especially faith, although they spring
from a former knowledge, and are always joined with it, yet they are in nature
to be distinguished from it. As in this instance, faith has the original and
beginning in the mind, for a man can never rely himself wholly on God for
happiness, unless he be persuaded, that God both can and will make him
happy. Yet not the bare contemplation and persuasion of the mind, but the
affiance and affection of the heart is faith; and yet, for so much as it is
impossible, that a man should be fully persuaded in his mind, of the truth
of Gods promises, and not together set his whole affiaunce and faith on him, or
that he should be by faith rightly affected toward GOD, unless first he have
the knowledge of GOD and of his promises, hence it is, that faith is often
placed in the mind, knowledge being put for affiaunce, as the cause is often
put for the effect. Coll. 2. 2.
Thus Coll. 2. 2. Faith is called (...) the full assurance and certain
preswasion of the understanding, and so throughout the wholle scripture, faith
is made nothing else but belief, and to have faith, nothing but to believe
that the word, promises and threatenings of GOD are true. But in truth to make
up the full nature of faith, there must be added to this action of the mind,
an action of the heart and will, to wit, affiaunce. We confess that there is a
kind of faith which is a mere persuasion of the mind, as namely that which
is called the faith of miracles, whereby a man being persuaded of the power and
will of GOD, for the effecting of strange things, does by virtue of that
knowledge, work miracles: but this faith does not concern the salvation of
man, and therefore does not belong to our purpose.

In the second place the definition gives us to understand, that the object,
or thing whereat faith aims, and where about it is conversant, is not any
particular blessing or good whatsoever, but full and perfect happiness, which
contains in it all graces, blessings, pleasures* and joys whatsoever do
any way make for the good and excellent estate of man.

Likewise the promises of GOD, whereon faith relieth, are those which are made
concerning happiness. Yet sometimes it pleases GOD, to make some one
particular and temporary blessing a sign and pledge of eternal and
universal happiness; and then the faith of the believer, relieth it self
first and immediately upon the said particular promise, and on the blessing
therein contained, but it does not rest there, but through that particular
object does see and take hold of eternal happiness. Thus GOD promised to
Abraham, being now stricken in years a son: this promise Abraham did fully
apprehende by faith, and by this means became happy, and was accounted just
before GOD. Romans 4. 22. Romans 4. 22.
Abraham believed God promising a son unto him, and this his particular
faith, was accounted to him for righteousness: for that, in that one blessing,
he saw the infinite treasures of Gods mercy, love, and bounty propounded unto
him. Although we might answer another way, saying, that the object of Abraham's
faith, was not only Isaac, but also Christ the savior of the world, who was
to come of Isaac and to make all the nations of the earth, happy. Mat. 9.
Likewise Math. 9. The man sick of a palsy, under his bodily and temporary
health, looked for eternal salvation, as Christ the searcher of the heart,
does witness, saying to him, thy faith has saved and purchased to thee thy
former health, and withal, pardon of sins, which is everlasting happiness.

Hereof arises a third point to be considered, to wit, that this faith does
after a special manner, both tie man to God, and so bring forth all the rest
of the parts of holiness, for as this is ingrafted into the nature of all
living creatures to preserve themselves in a good estate so especially those
which are endued with reason, namely Angels and men as soon as the exist,
they do in the first place bend all the force of their minds, to seek out
some means of continuing and increasing their own happiness. The means
which do in this consideration offer themselves, are of two sorts, the first
is, the only true means, even God the fountain of all happiness, on whose
word and promises made touching their happy estate, they by faith depend, and
rely themselves, and so they are joined to God for ever. The other means is the
creature it self, trusting not in God, but in it self, whereof hereafter.
Thus faith in that it joins us to God, it conueyeth from God to us, as all
happiness, so also all spiritual graces, and holiness the means of
happiness, in the which respect it may be called the fountain of all the
holiness follovving: even as when water is brought from a fountain or
spring, to any place somewhat distant by pipes of wood, lead, or clay, the
first pipe which joins all the rest to the fountain, may be said to give the
water to the rest, so does faith convey the graces following to us, and that
both by the immediate and extraordinary blessing of God, who multiplieth his
graces upon the creature cleaving unto him in full affiance, as men usually give
howses, land, and all things needful, to those that rely themselves upon them,
as also by means inherent in the reasonable creature: the which loves,
honors, and serves God, not for naught, but as the giver of all happiness,
and so do all the rest of the affections, and faculties of man's soul follow
both that light of the mind which faith brings with it, or rather which
brings forth faith, commonly called belief, and also faith it self. The
last words of the definition which mention the perfect holiness of man, give us
to understand, that the only means of being happy, is to be first perfectly
holy, as has been heretofore often declared.

Thus much of the general doctrine of faith, Of legal faith.
now we come to the kinds of faith, the which are two in number, the first is,
the faith of the first estate, to wit, that wherewith Adam was endued in his
creation, the second is the faith of the third estate, to wit, that whereof all
the regenerate are made partakers, so that the first is a created, the second a
recreated faith. The which two kinds as they do agree in all those points
which have been declared in the former section, so they differ in that which
follows. The difference arises of the diverse kinds of that perfect holiness
which is mentioned in the general definition of faith. For the faith of the
first estate, looks for happiness by righteousness inherent in the person of
the believer, and by his own natural holiness, but the faith of the third estate
makes men happy by imputed righteousness and supernatural holiness. The cause of
this difference is this God created man perfectly holy, and therefore he might
well look that he should retain that holiness which was bestowed upon him, but
man by his fall lost his holiness, and therefore being now sinful and
unrighteous, must in this third state cloth himself with the righteousness of
some other. So that in both states, perfect holiness is the means of attaining
happiness, but in the first state this holiness is inherent in Adams person, in
the second it is had from another. And therefore the first kind of faith is to
be defined, affiance in Gods promises propounding happiness to the natural,
proper, or inherent holiness of the reasonable creature whether man or Angel.

This faith is usually called legal faith, although not properly, seeing that
this name agrees also to the euangelical faith, the which does require perfect
obedience, and the absolute fulfilling of the moral law: for whosoever
believes in Christ, fulfilleth the law, and has legal justice, by the death
of Christ, and legal holiness; although not perfect in this life by his
spirit. Yet because the moral law was given for this end, to show man his
unrighteousness, by commanding inherent righteousness, hence it is that by
legal righteousness is usually meant proper or inherent righteousness, and
so by legal faith, is meant that faith which looks for happiness by inherent
righteousness, the which may more fitly be called natural faith, because it
was engraven in the nature of man, as the other kind is supernatural; yet we
call it legal faith, because perfect inherent righteousness, is nothing but
the perfect keeping of the laws and commandments of God, as sin is
defined. 1. Ioh. 3. (...), ^ John. 3.
sin is the breaking of the law, whether it be the moral law, written,
Exodus 20. (the which was engraven in the heart of Adam in his first creation)
or any other law, ^xod. ^^
yea even of things in nature indifferent enjoined to man by God: the
transgression whereof is a transgression of the moral law; for the creature
sins, whenever he disobeyeth the voice, word, law, and commandment of
God, whether in a thing in nature indifferent, or simply unlawful. Thus did
Adam sin, and fall away from God by eating the fruit of a certain tree,
which he was forbidden to touch.

So that by this legal faith, none can trust in God for eternal happiness, but
only he who in his own person fulfilleth the whole law of God, and that in
deed, in word, in thought, in will, and in affection, yea in the universal
purity of this nature, being free from all curruption of sin. The which thing
for so much as it cannot possibly be performed by any of the sons of Adam, all
being stained with that original impurity, which cannot by any means in the
world be shaken off. Hence it follows that this natural faith cannot have
place in any of them, only the holy Angels which continue in their natural
purity and holiness are endued with it, for they trust for happiness, by the
means of their own perfect righteousness. Yet this their happiness is not
so to be attributed to their proper obedience, as that it be wholly denied to
the grace of God, Romans ^. ^.
for where the Apostle says, Romans 4. 4 If salvation be by works, it is not of
grace, he means, the mere favor of God remitting sin, the which has
place i^ the other kind of faith, yet even the holy Angels although they be
saved by works, that is, by their own perfect holiness, yet their holiness
comes from the grace of God, without the which supporting them in all
temptations suggested by their own free minds and wills, or by the reprobate
Angels* they could not stand.

Sect. 2. Of infidelity.
THus much of faith. Now we come to the first kind of rebellion, whereby man
falls away from God, called infidelity, for that it is both in name and
nature clean contrary to faith. For by it, man cease to trust and depend
upon GOD, renouncing his patronage and protection, as being altogether unable
to bestow any good thing, much less perfect happiness upon his clients: and
therefore he seeks for another Lord and king in whom to trust. So that as
faith is affiance on Gods promises, so this kind of rebellion, may not
unfitly be called and defined defiance, or distrust in Gods promises
propounding happiness to the holiness of the creature, and eternal misery
to his disobedience. The first example of infidelity, Of infidel^^^
is the devil with his wicked Angels, who, not acknowledging God to be the
giver of happiness, did begin to seek for it else where: in the which
consultation, he saw that as there was no creature more excellent then
himself, so there was no means of attaining happiness so like, as for to
rely himself upon himself, upon his own strength, power, wit, policies, and
inventions: by the which he did persuade himself, that he should become far
more happy, then he could be by continuing in that obedience and alleagance,
which he did owe to God. The second example of infidelity was Adam, who was by
the deceit and persuasion of Satan, drawn away from trusting in God and on
his word, to trust in the ^euill, and in that means of attaining happiness
which he did show unto him. In Adam all mankind fell from faith to infidelity,
wherein it remains, all men being bred, ^orne, and brought up, without any
affiance in God, relying themselves for their happiness only on themselves,
their own wit, lear^ing, beauty, strength, friends, riches, nobil^tie, yea on
sin, Satan, and this present world, and no more depending upon God, t^en if
there were no God. For victory they trust in chariots, and horsemen; for
health, in the physician; for life, in meat and drink; for riches, in their
own industry, or in their parents; for glory and honor, in vvorldly
preferments and dignities, not once upon any occasion acknovvledging God, or
looking up to heaven.

This infidelity or defiance of God, comes of unbelief, which is the
blindness of the mind, or the ignorance of man, not seeing the evident truth
of Gods promises; but being persuaded that his word is altogether void of
truth, and that his promises are nothing, but fair pretenses, his fearful
threatenings, nothing but vain skarcrowes, terrifying and fraying none, but
religious fools: and that the whole course of the world is not ordered by his
decrees, will, and providence, but by nature, chance, fortune* and the
counsel o^ man. So we read Ephe. 4. 18. The Gentiles have their understanding
darkened, Ephesians. 4. 18.
and so are alienated or estraunged from God b^ the ignorance which is in
their minds and 2. Tim. 3. 8. Men of corrupt minds an^ reprobate as touching
faith. ^ Tim. 3. 8.
Lastly this blindness of mind, the companion and cause of infidelity
comes by our natural corruption, from the fall of Adam, for whereas once the
light of his mind was darkened by the delusion of the Devil, insomuch that he
thought evil to be good, and the way leading to extreme misery, to be the
only means of the greatest happiness, it could not be, but that his will,
affections, actions, and all the faculties both of body and soul, should be
corrupted, for that one of them does follow the disposition of an other, so
that a corrupt mind brings a perverse will, and a sinful will and inordinate
affections do darken the mind as has been already showed.

Hereof it follows that infidelity does both separate a man form God, and
also deprive him of all the parts of holiness, yea instead thereof fills
all the parts and faculties of a man's soul and body, with the corruption of
sin. For man renouncing God, is wholly separated from him, neither can any
longer receive any blessing from him: for even as a subject or tennant,
discliaming his king and Lord, and relying himself, upon a new master, even
one who is a deadly and professed enemy to his first master, does
incontinently deprive himself of all those farms, lands, houses,
prefermentes, and commodities whatsoever, the which he did enjoy whilst he
lived in alleagance to his lord; so the case stands with man, when as by
infidelity he falls from God. For then he loses all manner of blessings,
belonging either to his happiness, or to his holiness, yea it is impossible,
that a man should either love, fear, honor, or obey God, from whom he
looks for neither good nor evil, and therefore infidelity is to be accounted
the root of all evil. Heb. 3. 12.
Heb. 3. 12. Take heed brethren least that there be in any of you an evil
heart of unbelief to depart away from the living God. Thus much in general of
infidelity, the which (as has been said of faith) is of two sorts: Legal, and
Evangelical; legal infidelity, is to distrust Gods promises, propounding
happiness to the inherent holiness of the creature, as did the wicked Angels
who were persuaded that they could not become happy by continuing in
holiness: Likewise Evangelical infidelity is to distrust Gods promises,
propounding happiness to man relying himself on the mercy of God in Christ,
as most of all the men in the world have always done, do at this day, and
will do as long as the world endures.

Sect. 3. Of the faith of the gospel, usually called justifying faith.
IT has been declared, that the renewed holiness of a man regenerate has two
parts, Subjection, and Conformity. The first kind of renewed Subjection being
opposed to infidelity, is called, as in the first state, by the name of faith.
The nature and force whereof, is to repair that breach which infidelity has
made betwixt God and man, and to join man to God, in due subjection, as he was
in his first creation, so that it is as it were the hand, whereby man being
before separated from God, does lay hold on him, by believing his promises,
and by putting all his trust and affiaunce therein. But what bond can be
imagined so strong, as to be able to knitte God and man (being now polluted
with original and actual sin) together in any manner of conjunction, being
far more con^^ary and repugnant, the one to the other, then (...) fire to
water, or light to darkness, or any other thing in the world? All which do
only in quality fight one against another, Of justifying faith.
but sin is contrary to the very nature and essence of God, and therefore
although that affiance in God which was in Adam, were renewed in us, yet it
would not serve to join us to God, because we want that perfect holiness,
without the which, no faith can join any creature to him. So that before that
faith can either join us to God, or be any thing auailable for our salvation,
it is needful that we should have perfect holiness: the which whosoever
goes about to effect in himself, will find it a thing altogether impossible,
and that in these respects. First, because man in the very moment of sinning
does make himself guilty of eternal death, and so he being once dead, cannot
raise himself up again, or make himself capable of holiness, muchlesse
work it, fully and perfectly in himself. Secondly, if that this be
attributed, to the patience, and long suffering of God, that man is not
straight way, as soon as he sins, utterly destroyed, and so consumed to
naught, by the anger of God, but that he does still exist in nature, and so
consequently is not altogether incapable o^ holiness. Yet it is impossible for
him, either to shake off that original sin, which cleaves inseperably to
his nature, or yet to fulfill the law of God, by actual obedience, both which
are needful for perfect holiness. Lastly if man could not only do away his
sin already committed, but also restore himself to his first integrity, yet
this would not serve for his eternal salvation, because he were as like to
fall away again, from GOD, as he was before.

So that before man can be joined again to God in happiness, he must do four
things, whereof every one is altogether impossible to be performed, either by
man himself, or by any other creature. First he must by sustayning eternal
death, satisfy the justice of God for his sin already committed, the which
if he do (as he must do if God be just, that is, if he be God) how can he
ever live, who must die for ever? Secondly he must wholly change his own nature,
create in himself a new mind, heart, will, and even a new man, the which
thing belongs to God only. Thirdly he must perform, absolute and perfect
obedience, to the law of God. And lastly he must continue in the said
obedience for ever. How then? is there no means of salvation left for man?
can there no way of performing these impossibilities be invented? Let all the
men in the world lay their heads together, and consult of this weighty
matter: let them have the wisdom of Solomon, the counsel of Achitophel, the
natural wit of Aristotle, the learning of the greatest Philosophers, the
divining spirits of the southsayres: what can they all say to the first
question? how will they make man to live, who must die for ever? they will
confess that death and life cannot be together, and therefore they must come
to this last refuge, that man shall not die in his own person, but get some
other to die for him, and so satisfy Gods justice. Well? this is good payment,
if he who dies for man be in nature and dignity equivalent to him: but where
shall this mediator be found? As touching man, every one desires to live,
and abhors death, yea no man will die for a just man, much less for a
sinner. But yet perhaps some one will find such a friend, as will not refuse to
die eternally for him. Will this serve the turn? no truly, except he have more
lives then one, because he must first die for his own sin, and what then is
left to discharge other men's debts?

But we may fly to some saint or holyman, to S. Peter, S. Paul, S. Mary: whose
righteousness is so great, as that it will be a ransom both to do a way their
own sin, and the sin of others also. But there is no merit or
righteousness, which can proceed from any of the sons of Adam, no more then
sweet water can flow from a corrupt fountain, yea no righteousness of any
saint whosoever, will serve for himself, or satisfy Gods justice for his own
sin, but when he has done all that he can, he is an unprofitable servant,
and (for any help he can have by his own holiness) in the same state of
eternal death, wherein others are: his greatest righteousness, coming in the
name of merit, being in the sight of God no better then a filthy and defiled
clout. So then there is no means of man's salvation in man. Neither can the
oblation of brute beasts serve the turn, or stand in the place of a reasonable
creature, for sin is not purged by the blood of bulls and gotes. Heb. 10. 4.
Heb. 10. 4
neither will God accept a thousand rams as a sufficient ransom for the sin
of man's soul. Mich. 6. 7.
Mich. 6. 7. so that we finding no succor in this world, are constrained to
fly to the holy Angels, and to crave their help in this behalf. But what can
be hoped for at their hands, whose righteousness be it never so great, is no
more, then they do owe to God for themselves, being bound to serve him with
their whole mind, heart and the whole strength and power of their nature. If
it be imagined that their death might deliver us from death; we answer, first,
that no man can find such favor, in their sight, as that they will suffer
themselves to be accursed for him, from the happy and glorious presence of God,
which they have enjoyed in heaven, ever since the first creation thereof.
Secondly if that we should suppose such an impossible and inordinate love in
them, yet the death of many angels, could not satisfy Gods justice for the
sin of mankind, but only for the sins of some number, much less perform
all those things which are needful for the effecting of our salvation and
therefore every one may say of him self, O miserable man that I am, whom no
creature either in heaven or earth can deliver from sin, and from the
punishment of eternal death due unto it.

Seeing therefore that no creature can satisfy Gods justice for the sin of man,
it remains that God should either save man without taking any satisfaction
for his sin, or else himself be this mediator (for it has already been
declared, that God has certainly decreed the salvation of man) but both these
are impossible: for God can no more save man, without satisfaction made to his
justice, then he can cease to be just, or to be God. Again it is no less
impossible for God himself to make this satisfaction: for first, sin cannot
be imputed to the godhead, but only to some nature which is capable of sin;
but the divine nature cannot any way be made, or imagined the subject of sin,
no more then the fire can be made the subject of extreme cold: secondly if
this impossibility were supposed, that God could some way take the sin of
man upon himself, yet he could suffer no punishment for it; for his nature is
such that it can no way suffer, much less sustain the punishment of eternal
death due unto our sin. What then can all the wit, wisdom, policy, and
invention of man say to this case, but only acknowledge that mankind is in a
most wretched and miserable case, quem ipsa salus seruare non potest: whom God
himself cannot save?

But when man is brought to a bay and even at his wits end, there the wisdom
of God does most appear, and that which seems impossible to man, is possible
with God, who as he has decreed man's salvation, so he is able to bring it to
pass, and that, not by taking away his own justice and essence, but by
satisfying and establishing it: not by polluting the Godhead with the sin of
man, but by purging man from sin, by the infinite power of the Godhead, not by
translating sin from man to God, but by making the nature of man able to
bear the own burden by joining it to the nature of God: not impairing his own
justice, but punishing the sin of man more then it deserved, and yet not
consuming man in his wrath, but declaring the endless riches of his mercy in
saving him from death: that so all the praise, glory and thanksgiving of our
salvation might redound to God, who is the beginner, worker, and finis^^r, yea
the very means of it, and who as he did in the beginning, without the help or
means of any creature, create man in perfect holiness and happiness; so
again he himself, and that by himself, does restore him to perfect
righteousness, holiness and eternal glory.

But it is needful that we make a more plain declaration of this mystical
and wonderful doctrine, especially it being the most happy and joyful
doctrine, which ever sounded in the ears, or was at any time uttered by the
tongue of man, the sum of it is this. The only means whereby God could
restore man to his first estate, was, that he himself should take unto his
divine nature the nature of man, so that he might in that nature take upon him
both the guilt, and also the punishment of our sin. For this cause, the son
of God, even God himself, did take upon him our nature, consisting of a body
and a soul, endued with all the natural powers and faculties, which are in
man, yea subject to all humane infirmities, yet without sin. This humane
nature, was begotten not by man, but by God, it being formed and fashioned, not
by the seed of man, but by the power of the godhead, in the womb of the virgin
Mary, (who was of the lineage of David) of part of her substance, it being first
sanctified by the holy Ghost, from the inherent corruption of sin, and so
this nature being from the first moment of the conception, united to the
godhead, in one person called Jesus the Savior of the world, the promised
Messiah, or the anointed, or holy one of God, and consisting of the divine,
and a humane nature, was brought forth into the world, in Bethlem in the land
of Jury, according as the prophets had foretold, in the reign of Augustus
Caesar, and so lived about 33. years, till that in the days of Tiberius
Caesar it suffered a shameful and violent death; the which death of this
humane nature, was more then a sufficient ransom, for the sins of the whole
world, because it was the death of God (tho not of the Godhead) and therefore
it was of infinite merit and dignity; yea it was more then the eternal death
of all the men in the world, although it had lasted but one moment of time, as
it continued but three days. For it is, and that in the judgment of any
reasonable man; a far less matter, that all the creatures in the world
should die for ever, then that God himself the creator of all things, the Lord
of glory and giver of life, yea who is glory and life it self, should suffer
death one minute of an houer. So that the humanity of Christ, gave the
possibility of suffering death, as the divinity gave the sufficiency,
excellency, and merit of this ransom or payment made to God, for the debt of
man.

This incomprehensible mystery of Gods wisdom, and eternal counsel, may be
declared after this manner. Suppose that there is in this, or that country, an
absolute, maiesticall and glorious monarch or king, against whom many
thousands of his subjects rebel, refusing to perform loyal obedience to his
laws. The King seeing this rebellion, purposes so to deal in revenging it,
as that not only his justice, but also, and especially his mercy and love
toward his natural subjects, may appear: and therefore he means to
punish their offense in himself, by putting to death his own only son,
who is of his own nature and essence, even bone of his bone, flesh of his
flesh, and blood of his blood, who is a lively picture, yea a living image of
his own person, representing after a most plain manner his stature, form,
beauty, strength, complexion, behavior and conditions, yea who does reign
jointly and equally with him, being partaker of his riches treasures, glory,
majesty, power, office and authority. This death of this prince being decreed
by the king his father, it is needful, that for the suffering of the course of
the law, together with the sentence and punishment of death, he should debase
him to the condition of a subject, yet retaining the aforesaid prerogatives. So
that there is in one person the condition, and as it were the nature both of a
king and of a subject, the one makes that he may be put to death, the other
makes, that this death (tho it be the death, but of one person) is more then a
sufficient ransom, for the offense of ten thousand of his subjects, as the
people of Israel do confess, 2. Sam. 21. 17. 2. Sam. 21. ^^
That it were much better that ten thousand of themselves should perish, then
that King David whom they call the light, that is, all the glory of Israel,
should be in danger of death.

In like manner there was no way, whereby God the glorious monarch of heaven
and earth, could preserve both his own justice and man, but that he should
give his own only natural and eternal son, the brightness of his glory,
the express form and charecter of his Godhead, being partaker of his own
essence, glory, majesty, power, authority, wisdom, justice, mercy, and in
breife of his whole divine nature, to be a ransom for the sin of man. For
the which purpose it was needful, that he should to his kingly and divine
estate, take unto himself the base condition of a subject, and creature* and
in that condition submit himself to the law of God* and to the sentence of
death pronounced by God the father, as by a most just, severe and righteous
judge. By faith in this death of the son of God, salvation is brought to
mankind. For it freeth the believer from all manner of guilt of sin, whether
original or actual, whether past, present, or to come. And further as this
mediator does redeem us from death, and indue us with perfect righteousness
by his death, so by the virtue of the holy spirit, proceeding from his divine
nature; the believer is endued (although not at the first) with perfect
holiness and preserved for ever from falling from this estate. Thus we have
summarily declared the doctrine of faith, as it has been published to the
world, by the ministry of the Apostles, whose doctrine we do heartily
embrace, and openly confess, professing that there is no other name, means,
nor mediator in heaven or earth, which can give salvation, then Jesus the
son of Mary.

Now that we see what is the object of this justifying faith, we are in the
next place to gather out of this doctrine the difference betwixt legal and
evangelical faith, betwixt that faith wherewith Adam was endued, in the state
of innocence, and that which has place in this state of regeneration. Both
kinds are affiance in god for happiness to be had by the means of perfect
holiness, but the first kind looks directly on the godheade, without any
mediation; the second beholds the godheade, through the humanity of Christ,
as through a veil or covering: for man being now polluted with sin, dare not
look on god without a mediator, as he did before the fall. Secondly
evangelical faith co^teineth in it forgiveness of sin, which was not in the
first estate. Thirdly the righteousness whereby legal faith trusts for
happiness is natural to man, inherent in the person of man, and his own; but
the righteousness of the other kind is borrowed from an other. The first
kind makes man trust in himself, but the second makes him to renounce him
self and to fly to Christ for righteousness. The first kind relyeth it self
on the equity and justice of god, the which rewards the righteousness of the
creature with life. But the other flies to his love and mercy in Christ, the
which pardons and saves a sinner. (...). 4. 5.
Romans 4. 5. Legal faith cannot of it self justify a man, it being but one
part of man's holiness, called by the divines Sanctitas Fiduciae, that is, the
holiness of the affection of trust, or co^fide^ce, or a holy confidence,
besides the which there is required for perfect holiness, the holiness of
hope, of love, of fear, of reverence, and of all the affections, yea the
holiness of the will, and of the mind, and to be short, the holiness of the
wholle nature, and of all the actions of man: so that if we should suppose,
that Adam did even in the very moment of sinning, and also after he had
transgressed gods commandment still retain this part of his holiness, to
wit, affiance in god, yet we could not think that he did continue in the
state of life, which is lost by one sin; but not kept by one part of
holiness. But it is far otherwise with this euangelical faith, the which,
although in the own nature it be but the holiness of one affection, namely
of confidence or affiance, as legal faith is, yet it brings with it perfect
righteousness or justice* making the righteousness of Christ's death to belong
to the believer. In the which respect it is called justifying faith, not that
^his faith can be without some measure of ^he other parts of holiness, or give
the possession of eternal glory without perfect ^olynesse, but that in the
matter of our iu^^ification only faith has force, in so much that he who
believes in the last moment ^f his life, as the thief on the cross did, Luc.
^3. 42. Luc. 23. 42.
having neither time to do any one ^ood work, nor yet strength to speak one
^ood word, or yet almost to think a good ^ought, is as surely and as fully
purged ^^om all his sins, as he who has lived a ^ousand years in the
greatest measure faith, godliness, zeal, love, patience, so^ietie, chastity,
humility, and of all other ^^rituall graces whereunto any man can at^^ne in
this life. For inherent holiness (com^only called sanctification) be it never
so ^at, is imperfect, and therefore as little auailable for our justification,
as if it were none at all. For imperfect holiness does no more justify, then no
holiness does, neither is there any other account made of it before the
judgment seat of God, in the matter of our justification, howsoever there be
necessary use of sanctification for salvation, as we are hereafter to consider.
And yet although this one part of man's holiness do serve for our
justification, we are not thereof to gather that we are saved by it, as a part
of inherent holiness, for faith does not justify us, as it is a part of
holiness, but because this affection has (by the goodness of God, decreeing
man's salvation by this means) this natural property or quality, to
appropriate to a man Christ with his righteousness. Lastly the first kind is
easy to be had, and attained unto by supposition of perfect inherent
holiness, it being agreeable to natural reason, yea there being some relics
of it in the gentiles themselves who know good and evil, and also that the
punishment of death, is due to the one, and the re^ward of happiness appointed
for the other. B^ Evangelical faith is supernatural, yea it contrary to our
natural disposition, and c^^ not be attained unto without the mighty
^^peration of the spirit of God, whereof her^^after.

This wholle doctrine may be gathered into one sum or definition in this
manner: Evangelical faith is affiaunce in Gods promises propounding eternal
salvation to all those who rely themselves wholly on the mercy of God in
Christ. Or more briefly thus; It is affiaunce in Christ for happiness. Or thus;
It is trust or confidence in Christ, whereby his death and the righteousness
arising thereof are appropriated to the believer. Now we are out of the
several parts of these definitions to search out more particularly the true
nature of faith, to what kind or head it is to be referred, whether it be a
part of regeneration and sanctification, or something diverse from both these.
Secondly what is the place and subject of it, whether the mind, the will, or
the affections. Thirdly by what means it may be wrought and attained. Fourthly
by what signs and marks it may be known. Fifthly whether it may be lost or
no. Lastly how it has this force, that it is of it self able to justify and
to save a man.

For the first; Regeneration* and sanctification, or the new creature or
recreated holiness: or thus; The new man and holiness, signify all one
thing, to wit, regenerate sanctity, or in plain English, renewed holiness,
so that faith, if it be a part of the new man, it is a part of regeneration,
and of holiness; and contrariwise, if it be a part of man's holiness, it is a
part of regeneration, of the new man and of the new creature. That it is a
part of man's holiness we cannot doubt, seeing it is a holy affection, even the
affiaunce and confidence of the heart, relying it self on God: the which
affection was also in Adam, and therefore it is a part of regeneration, and of
the new man. For although there be great difference betwixt legal and
euangelical faith as touching the means of salvation, the which is in the one
the justice of God, in the other his mercy, yet both of them are to be referred
to the same head of man's holiness. Legal faith being a part of the created
holiness of man, as Evangelical faith is a part of his regenerated, or
recreated holiness. The truth hereof may easily be gathered, out of the
section written of faith in general: for Legal and Evangelical faith agree
in a common definition, and in all those points which are there mentioned. The
which does also show us what to think of the subject of faith, to wit, that it
is in the will of man* being nothing but a holy affection of confidence, trust
or affiaunce.

If it be objected that faith is usually in the scripture called belief, as
infidelity is unbelief, the which is an action not of the will but of the
mind, giving assent or dissent to the word of God: we answer, that belief
is put for faith or affiaunce, because it does always not only accompany it,
but also after a sort beget it, and is the cause of it. For when as a man does
without doubting believe Gods promises being fully persuaded of the truth of
them, he cannot choose, but rely himself upon them; so that belief although
it cannot be separated from faith, yet it may and ought to be distinguished
from it. If it be objected that Evangelical faith, cannot be made a part of
man's holiness, seeing it is not commanded in the moral law; we answer that
it is commanded in the moral law, as the other kind is, in that it is all one
in substance with natural faith, both kinds being affiaunce in God for
happiness to be attained by the means of perfect holiness: and therefore
both kinds are commanded in the first commandment. Iehoua, shall be thy God:
the which law does enjoin, that all the affections of man, to wit, his love,
fear, hope, reverence and with the rest, his whole affiaunce or confidence be
set wholly o^ God, as well after his fall to be saved by the mercy of God in
Christ, as in the state of innocence to be saved by his own righteousness.
Yea this first precept commands al men to believe God in his word, as well in
his Gospel as in his law: and therefore whosoever does not know, believe and
embrace the Gospel, he does transgress this first commandment.

In the third place we are to consider that the means of attaining faith, is
to get the knowledge of the word of God, first of the law, which showing
sin, death and damnation, does bruise and wound the heart: and secondly of the
gospel, which teaching faith, righteousness and salvation, heals the
aforesaid wounds, and comfort the sinner, with pardon of his sin, and
hope of eternal life. This knowledge must of necessity go before faith: for
the mind of a man must be enlightened to see the truth, before the heart and
affections can love and embrace it. The means which God does ordinarily use
in bringing men to know his will, is the public ministry of the word,
performed by men endued with spiritual gifts fit for this purpose, yet as has
been said of regeneration, so we are to think of faith, and all other
spiritual graces, that they come not by virtue of the means, but by the power
and work of Gods spirit, without the which it is impossible that any man
should understand, believe and embrace the doctrine of the Gospel. But how
comes it to pass that man being a reasonable creature, endued with an
understanding soul, whereby he is able not only to conceive any thing that is
taught, but also him self to invent new things not heard of before, should be
so brutishe and blockish in learning the word of God? We answer that this
comes of the nature of the doctrine of the gospel, the which being contrary
to man's reason, cannot be conceived by it. Yea as soon as it is hard, it is
straight way rejected as absurd, 1 Cor. 2. 14*
ridiculous and foolish, so we read 1. Cor. 2. 14. The natural man
perceives not the things of GOD, for they seem foolishness unto him, neither
can he perceive them, because they are spiritually discerned.

Thus (to make instance in one point of this doctrine, to wit, in the
resurrection from death) we see, Act. 17. 32. that when the wise philosophers
and men of Athens hard Paul mention it, Act. 17. 32*
they mocked him. And so we are to think of the chief points of (...)
religion. For who seeing or hearing of Jesus the son of Mary. living in so
miserable a condition, and dying so shameful a death as he did, would either
believe him to be the eternal, and omnipotent God of heaven and earth, or to
be able to save others, who did not save himself from death? or what man,
especially if he were endued with natural wit, and humane wisdom, would
forsake all the commodities, profits, pleasures, and joys of this present
world, and endure the sorrows, reproaches, troubles, losses, dangers, and
manyfolde crosses whereunto the godly are subject in this life, in hope of an
other life, which is to all reason not only uncertain, but also incredible?
Hence it is, that the number of believers is as nothing, in respect of the
infinite multitudes of unbelievers, who are almost as many as there are men in
the world, and that the more a natural man, does excel in wit and wisdom,
the more incapable of faith he is. (...) 1. 27.
1. Cor. 1. 27. Brethren (says the Apostle) behold your calling, that not
many wise men after the flesh, not many noble, mighty or rich, are called to
faith, but God has chosen foolish and weak things to confound the wise.

Yea this difficulty of believing is greater in these last days, then ever it
was before, as Christ himself teaches us, Luc. 18. 8. saying, Luke. 18, 8*
Think ye that the son of man when he comes, Mat. 24. 12. ^
shall find faith on the earth? And to the same effect, Mat. 24. 12. 22.
Because iniquity shall abound, the love of many shall wax cold, insomuch that
unless those days were shortened, no flesh should be saved. The cause of this
defect of faith, is first the abundance of sin before mentioned, in that the
sins of all ages, do even flow together into the last, as into a common
sink. Secondly the state of the Church, unto the which God does not reveal
himself so manifestly and sensibly as he did in the first ages of the world,
in apparitions of Angels in visions and dreams, invisible forms, and sensible
voices, speaking familiarly with his servants as one man does with another, in
holy oracles giving answer to every question propounded, in temporal
blessings bestowed on the faithful, and in corporal punishments laid on the
wicked* in the extraordinary gifts of prophecy, and immediate revelation, of
speaking strange languages, and working miraculous things. By these and
diverse other means, God did so plainly reveal himself to the old world,
that they who did not believe his word, may be said to have been such, as would
give no credence to their own senses. But in these last ages, God having once
revealed himself in his son and in the gospel, sufficiently for the
salvation of the elect, (yea in truth far more clearly then ever he did
before) does not any longer reveal himself by any of the aforesaid means, but
as it were hides himself in secret, insomuch that he seems to most men,
either not to exist at all, or else to have wholly cast off the care and
government of the world: and therefore men cast off all faith, belief and
fear of God.

In regard of the which difficulties, it stands every one in hand who
tendereth his own salvation, to be both watchful in preserving faith, and
also diligent and careful in seeking for it. For howsoever no carfulness can
without the blessing of God, work faith in the hearts of men, yet it is in the
power of man to use the outward means of attaining it; the which whosoever
does as he ought to do, he need not doubt of success, for so much as God is
near at hand to al those who seek him. Yea further, whenas we suppose, that
we are endued with a true saving faith, we are to take heed least we be
deceived with that common error of men, who when they are ignorant of God, and
of his word, and have in their hearts scarce any shadow of true faith, yet they
are not ashamed to profess that they do, and always did trust in Christ,
whereof if any man do doubt, and begin to examine their faith whether it be
true or counterfeit, then they are grievously offended, and think they have
great injury offered. But we are to think far otherwise, and knowing that
true faith is a very rare thing, not easelie to flatter our selves in a false
opinion of it, but rather to take a strait examination of our faith, the which
that we may the better do, we will now come to the fourth point, namely to the
signs whereby true faith may be discerned.

The signs are (...), even so many as there are in a regenerate man spiritual
graces and several parts of holiness, all which come from faith as from a
fountain or root, and therefore will certainly declare the sincerity of it,
as good fruit and sweet water show the goodness of the tree and fountain:
and therefore he that would know ^ow unfeigned his faith is, must look at the
sincerity of his knowledge, love, fear, re^erence, and obedience which he
owes to God: if these graces be plentiful in his life, his heart is truly
replenished with faith, but if this fruit do not appear, his faith is not a
living tree planted by the rivers of Gods blessings, but a dead stock having
nothing but the outward form of a tree But we shall have better occasion to
entreat of the signs of true faith, when we compare it, with that temporary
faith, which often has place in the reprobate.

The fifth question, is, whether this faith may be lost, or no; whereunto we
answer, as has been said before of regeneration in general, that where it
is once truly imprinted in the heart, by the finger of God, there it remains
for ever: and although it be subject to many alteratio^s in regard of the
greatness or meannesse of it, yea although it seem sometimes to be clean dead
at the root, bringing forth little or no fruit, yet there remains life
hidden in the heart, as there does life and sap in trees in the midst of
winter, when they seem to be dead and withered. For the conversion of a man
from infidelity to faith, works such a total and strange change in him, that
it is impossible, that one should become of a faithful man an unbeliever.

The last question is, how it comes to pass, that of all the spiritual
graces, which are in the mind, will, and affections of man and of all the
parts of man's holiness, this only should have in it this wonderful virtue
and force to apprehend Christ, and to make a man perfectly just before the
judgment seat of Christ: and why not the true knowledge of God, unfeigned love,
the fear of God, or a general holiness of life and conversation, should not
as well justify a man, as this one affection of confidence or affiance?
Whereunto we answer, that this means of justifying men by faith only, does
most of all make for the glory of God (the which is the last end of all the
decrees and actions of God) for if man were accounted righteous for his
holiness or love, he might impute his salvation to his own desert: for
perfect love deserves love, and holiness will challenge life, as of due debt.
But affiance implies a humble, loyal, and duetifull subjection, acknowledging
the unworthiness, baseness, insufficiency, and weakness of man, and together
the mercy, goodness, love, favor, bounty, truth, and power of God. This
reason is used for this purpose, Romans 3. 27.
To. 3. 27. what law, or means of salvation does take away all boasting from
man, and so gives all the glory of our salvation to God? not the law of
works, or inherent holiness, but the law of faith: yea of all the graces
which are in man, faith only has in it this natural property to make a man
partaker of Christ's death and righteousness, and so of salvation. For even as a
tennant inioyeth his house and lands, not for that he loves or fears his
lord, or for any virtue wherewith he is endued, but only because he does depend
on his Lord, and so does purchase unto him worship and honor by relying
himself wholly upon his love, favor, liberality, constancy, ability, and
riches: so stands the case with man in respect of his salvation. For no grace
save only this affiance on God, and on his mercy in Christ, can convey unto us
remission of sins and eternal life. In the which respect it is commonly said
in holy scripture that faith does justify, not as it is a part of man's
holiness, whereof no one part, no not all the parts of it if any one be
wanting, will serve to make a man righteous before God, but as it has in it
this proper virtue, to make the death of Christ, the death of the believer, and
so the righteousness arising of the said death the righteousness of the beleuer:
Romans 6. 7.
For he that has suffered death is iustisied from sin.

Thus much of the object, nature, and attributes of euangelical faith. It
remains that before we proceed to the rest of the parts of man's holiness, we
should declare the relation which is betwixt faith and them. It has been said
of faith in general, that it is as it were the root from the which other graces
do spring, in that it tieth us to God the fountain of al graces, as to the only
giver of all happiness: the which thing is true of this evangelical faith after
a special manner. For in that it ioineth us to Christ, it makes us partakers
of the spirit of Christ: or rather causes an increase of all spiritual
graces. For regeneration is, although not in time, yet in nature before faith.
Therefore this faith is made the subject of the spiritual life of the new man,
Gal. 2. 20.
even as the heart is in the body the fountain of heat. Gal. 2. 20. I live, yet
not I but Christ lives in me, and in that I now live in the flesh, I live by
the faith of the son of God, who has loved me, and given his life for me.
And Act. 15. 9. Peter says that God did purify the hearts of the gentiles,
Act. 15. 9.
that is, as it is expounded. verse 8. work sanctification in them by faith.
In the which respect, it is compared to the foundation of a house, where upon
the whole buylding stands: and to the root of a tree, which gives heat,
sap, and life to all the parts of it, Col. 1. 2^*
Coll. 1. 23. If ye continue founded and established in faith: and to a
fountain of living water. Job. 7. 38.
Ioh. 7. 38. He that believes in me, out of his belly shall flow rivers of
the water of life. And therefore it is put before all other graces 2. Pet. 1. 5.
Join to your faith virtue, and to your virtue knowledge, temperance, Pet. 1. 5.
patience, godlynes, brotherly love and kyndnes. Hence it is that it is usually
distinguished from the rest of the parts of sanctification they being called
by the name of love, These. 3. 6.
or of the holy ghost. 1 T^ess. 3. 6. Tymothie has brought us tydinges of your
faith and love. Act 6. 5
So it is said, Act. 6. 5. That Stephen was a man full of faith and of the
holy spirit; not that faith it self is not a work of the holy spirit, and a
part of the spiritual holiness of man, but because it is the first work of
Gods spirit, and the foundation of man's holiness and salvation, who must be
by faith freed from sin and death, before he can be endued with positive
holiness and life. Thus the Apostle does often exhort us to fanctification
and holiness of life, by an argument drawn from justification which is the
proper effect of faith, Romans 6. 14.
as we may see. To. 6. 14. sin shall not have dominion over you, because you
are not under the law but under grace.

But it may be asked, how justification does bring forth sanctification,
especially seeing that to man's reason, it is rather a motive to a wicked and
dissolute life, that by the multitude and heinousness of our sins the mercy
of God, whereby they are pardoned, might the more appear. Romans 3. 7. and 6* 1.
Romans 3. 7. and 6. 1. We answer that justification does of necessity bring
forth sanctification, and that diverse ways. For first, the sense of the
unspeakable love of God, whereby we are delivered from eternal damnation,
does inflame the heart of the believers with a great love of God: the which
cannot be showed any other way, then by keepeing his commandments, and by
laboring to glorify his holy name, by a holy life. Secondly God does save the
faithful, not as stocks or stones, without requiring any work, action, or
duty at their hands, but so as that he makes them to be his fellow workers:
not that man can do any thing of him self without the grace of God, but that
man being endued and renewed by grace, does after a sort work his own
salvation, not by any natural virtue, but by the power of Gods spirit: and
therefore, as Christ takes away the guilte of sin being committed, so the
faithful ought to endeavor that sin be not co^mited. Otherwise if they should
still of set purpose commit sin they should cross Christ in the work of
their own redemption, defiling the^ selves with sin, whom he has cleansed with
his blood, yea they should crucify him again, and tread under foot his
blood as a vile thing. Thirdly the faithful do labor for sanctification, as
for the only testimony of the soundness of their faith, and of the truth of
their justification. For faith without the other parts of holiness, is but
adeade and unprofitable faith. Lastly the faithful man knows that faith is
not of it self without the rest of sanctification, sufficient for the
attaining of salvation. For although it alone dothfully justify, that is, bring
perfect remission of all manner of sin whatsoever; yet before that a man can
enter into the kingdom of heaven. he must be endued with perfect positive
holiness, the which cannot be made perfect in the world to come, unless it
be begun and carefully sought after in this life.

CHAP. V.
Sect. 1. Of the hope of man's first state.
THe second head of man's holiness, and subjection which he is to perform to
God, as to his king, is called hope, the which flows from faith after a
special manner, Of the hope of man's first state.
yea in truth it is nothing else but a particular faith, or an affiaunce on God
for some particular good. For when as the happiness whereof faith takes hold,
is not present but to come either in part or in whole, there comes out hope,
which is an expectation of the accomplishme^t of Gods promises already
apprehended by faith. Romans 8. 24.
So that hope can have no place there, where full and perfect happiness is
present. Romans 8. 24. Hope that is seen is no hope: For how can a man hope for
that which he sees? That is, if the thing hoped, or which we desire, be
present, then the nature of hope is clean taken away and overthrown: for it
is impossible that a man should hope for that, as being to come hereafter
which he presently enjoys. Whereby it appears that man in his first estate
of happiness, had either none or little use of this grace, because his
happiness was present. For howsoever the happiness of Adam in his innocence,
were not so great and excellent, as that whereof the faithful shall be made
partakers in the world to come, yet he then enjoyed both perfect and present
happiness. Neither does it appear in the scripture that God did promise any
other happiness unto him, then that which he presently enjoyed; and therefore
it had not been holiness, but presumption and sin for him to have hoped or
looked for any other. How then can we make hope a part of that holiness
wherein man was created. We answer that although Adam in his innocence looked
for no other happiness, then that which he did presently enjoy, yet he did
hope that God would both continue that happiness, and also reveal himself
and his glory to him, after some other manner, then he did at the first, and so
increase his present happiness.

Sect. 2. Of desperation or the want of Hope.
MAn falling from faith to infidelity, fell from hope to desperation (for so
we call that want of the hope of salvation which is in all carnal men) neither
could he otherwise do. For as he who takes away the root and the foundation,
takes away the tree and the house, yea all that grows on the one, and is
built on the other: So when faith falls, the whole holiness of man falls
to the ground; but especially hope, the which has a nearer conjunction with
faith, then other graces, have, Of desperation.
and is more naturally grounded upon it: as it is said, Heb. 11. 1. Heb. 11.
1.
Faith is the groundeworke, or foundation and subsistence of things hoped for.
For happiness must first be believed in the mind, and apprehended by the
will, before it can be hoped for. So that seeing man since the fall, does not
by faith depend on God, he can not hope to receive any good thing at his
hands: neither does he once think of any other happiness, then is the enjoying
of the carnal and sensual pleasures of this present world. The which being
ended by death, all the joy, pleasure, and happiness of one unregenerate,
seems to him to be at an end, as it is indeed. For either he thinks (as
most carnal men do) that he shall die like a beast, and that neither he
himself nor any other, shall be raised up again to life, to receive either good
or evil, or if he have some knowledge and belief of the word of God, whereby
he thinks that there shall be another world, wherein some shall have happiness,
others misery and sorrow, yet he being destitute of faith, whereby his sins
should be remitted, and his person endued with perfect holiness and
righteousness, can look for nothing, but the eternal anger of God. Thus the
Apostle describes an infidel, that he is one without hope. Ephe. 2. 12. 1.
Ephesians. 2. 12.
These. 4. 13. These. 4. 13.


The signs whereby this desperation may be known, are these. First the
general sign of the want of any one grace, to wit, the want of other graces,
which are in a man truly regenerate. For such is the nature of this renewed
holiness, that where one part is present, there is no part wholly wanting:
and therefore we may know ourselves to be without hope, if that we feel that we
are destitute of the true knowledge of God, of a lively faith which is the
mother of hope. Secondly a proper sign of this desperation is, when as a man
is not affected with an unspeakable joy in regard of the life to come but
hears it mentioned as an ordinary, common, and light matter: whereas if he
had any true hope of eternal glory, he would be replenished and even ravished
with joy; and that in the midst of all troubles and miseries by the
consideration of it. But because a man may more surely judge, by that which he
feels to be in himself, then by that which is wanting, therefore men are to
gather this desperation by these notes, to wit: By an immoderate care for the
preserving, and prolonging of this present life, together with an excessive
fear of death in our selves, or sorrow for the death of others, 1 Thessalonians. 4.
13. 1 Thessalonians. 4. 13.
I would not have you sorrow for the dead, as other do which have no hope. And
such other notes plentifully mentioned in the scripture.

Sect. 3. Of renewed hope.
THe use of this hope is not so little in the state of innocence, but it is as
great in the state of regeneration, in the which although man be restored to
his former happiness, yea to more excellent happiness then he had before, yet
it is not present in this world as Adams was, but for the greater part to come
in the world to come, and therefore it can not be here enjoyed, but only hoped
for. If it be asked why God does not grant to his elect children the present
fruition of that happiness, especially seeing that the deferring of so great a
good, cannot but be very grievous unto them: for as the desire when it comes
is a tree of life, so the deferring of the thing hoped for, is the drying of
the bones. Prou. 13. 12. Prou. 13* 12.
To this we answer, confessing that this deferring of the happiness appointed
for the faithful is, and ought to be very grievous unto them. For as he who is
poor, Of renewed hope.
sick, weak, in prison, exile, and in all kinds of misery has good cause
to desire riches, honor, health, strength, liberty, and to see his own native
country, his parents, kindred, and friends, and in breife to be happy: no
less cause have the faithful to desire to be dissolved, and to be with
Christ. But God having regard, rather to their good then to their desire, has
in wisdom appointed that it should be otherwise, and that their happiness
should be hoped for, for some space of time, before it be enjoined. Yea this
delay is needful for the good of the faithful for that otherwise they could
not be prepared and made fit for the enjoying of eternal glory. And that in
these respects.

First in that the faithful are left for a while in crosses, troubles, sorrow,
sin, and all manner of misery, they have time given unto them to consider,
both their own natural estate how wretched they are of themselves; and also
the excellency of that glory, which is prepared for them in heaven, and so see
and acknowledge the unspeakable goodness of God, who has freed them from the
one, and will at the appointed time, bring them to the other. The which thing
cannot be so duly waied and considered by man, when he is in the state either
of extreme misery, or of absolute glory, as it is by the faithful in this
present life, the which is a mixed state consisting partly of sin and misery,
and partly of holiness and happiness, partly of life, and partly of death: so
that as a man cannot at any time so well di^cerne a thing to be black or
crooked, as when he lays it beside that which is white or straight; so the
faithful do more easily and truly conceive their own misery and Gods mercy
in this life, wherein they do sensibly feel them both, then either they did
before regeneration, in which time they knew neither themselves nor God, or
then they shall do in the world to come, wherein their natural misery is not
felt in their own bodies and souls, as it is in this life, but only
remembered and beheld in the reprobate. Wherein God deals with sinful man, as
earthly kings deal sometimes with rebels and malefactors, whom although they
purpose not only to pardon their offense, but also to receive into favor and
love, and so do restore them from death to life, from shame to honor, yet
they do not at the first admit them into the highest degree of their favor,
to their secret counsel, or to their personal presence. Thus did King David
deal with Absolon, 2. Sam. 14. 22. ^ Sam. 14. 22.
who after that he was pardoned, and received into favor, was two years in
Jerusalem before that he saw the kings face. And thus do the faithful, after
that they are fully justified from the guilt of their sin, they do not
forthwith rush into heaven, but remain here on earth, in the outward court of
Gods palace, waiting till they may be admitted into the glorious presence of
God in heaven. For we are not to think, that there ought to be the same manner
of the first creation of man, and of his regeneration: and that as in the
first, so also in the second birth man ought incontinently as soon as he does
existe, to be made perfectly happy, as if happiness were a small and light
matter, which might be lost in one moment of an hour, and recovered in
another. And therefore we are to put a difference betwixt the first and the
second happiness of man: the first being given immediately by God, whereas
the other is gotten, although not by the help, yet by the means of man; who
is in some sort to work his own salvation, and must be endued in this life
with some measure of grace, whereby he may be prepared for the fullness of it
in the world to come: the which thing cannot be done, unless his salvation be
deferred: for otherwise there would be no trial of his faith and love, yea no
use of hope, patience, prayer and such other spiritual graces, for the working
whereof God does defer the happiness of his elect. This the Apostle does
plainly teach us, Romans 8. 24. 25. 26. Romans 8. 24. 25 26.
saying, If the thing hoped for be seen, hope is no hope, for how can a man
hope for that he sees? but if we hope for that we see not, then we do with
patience abide for it. Likewise (our hope being thus deferred) the spirit
helps our infirmities in praying for us, with sighs which cannot be
expressed. Thus we see how it comes to pass, that hope has so necessary and
great use in this third estate.

Now we are to declare the nature of it more particularly, by showing first
what it is: secondly what relation it has to faith: thirdly what are the uses
and commodities which it brings: lastly what are the signs, by the which it
may be known. For the first: Renewed hope is an expectation of celestial
glory or of eternal glory in heaven. This definition gives us to understand
that the object whereat this holy affection aims and looks, is not present
but to come, and yet not any future thing, but that which is good, for not
only hope, but all other affections, and the whole will of man, yea even when
they are sanctified, and in their purest and holiest estate, do abhor and
eschew all evil, whether present or future, and do cleave only to that which
is good for man. And yet not any future good is the object of this hope, but
the chiefest good, which indeed is all manner of good, and even happiness it
self. For so we are to think that as faith trusts in God for happiness, so
hope waits for it. And although both faith and hope sometimes take hold of a
particular good, as Abraham both trusted and hoped in God for Isaac: and as the
man sick of the palsy did for bodily health, yet neither faith nor hope rest
in a particular good, but only through it look at the general good, using it
as a means, way, token or pledge of the general good and happiness. Yea
further there is this difference, that faith and hope do for the most part
apprehende a particular good, whether it be a temporal blessing, or a
spiritual grace doubtingly, unless there be a special promise of it, as was
that which God made to Abraham of Isaac, as not being absolutely needful for
their happiness, and therefore not needful to be granted by God: but they
lay hold on happiness, which is the universal good without doubting or any
exception whatsoever. So that by hope we mean hope of eternal glory; in the
which sense this word is used throughout the writings of the Apostles. Lastly,
the object of hope is not any terrestrial good or happiness, as was that
wherein Adam was created, but a celestial happiness, as it has been in
part described heretofore.

In the second place we are to declare the nature of hope, by comparing it with
faith, with the which it agrees in these respects: First faith is the cause,
and as it were the mother of hope, for a man cannot hope to come to heaven,
unless he be first taught by faith the right way, and true means of
salvation. Yea he is more then mad who thinks once to enter into the
glorious presence of God in heaven, being not first cleansed by faith from the
filthiness of his sin, but whom faith iustifyeth, him hope glorifyeth.
Again as faith brings forth hope, so hope like a loving and gracious child
cherishes and vpholdeth faith: for how could any man rely himself wholly on
God for happiness, if, as there is nothing but misery to be seen in this
world, so there were no good to be hoped for hereafter. Where this question may
be moved, whether that faith cannot possibly be without hope, as if a man
should trust in God without regard had to any reward, yea tho he knew
neither of heaven or hell. To this we answer, that seeing God has so plainly
revealed his will as touching eternal glory prepared for the faithful, we are
not to think that he has faith who is destitute of hope, 1. Cor. 15. 1. 2.
as appears, 1. Cor. 15. 1. 2. yet if we do generally consider the nature of
these graces, we shall find that if God had revealed nothing of the life to
come, a man might have believed not only without hope, but even against hope,
seeing no likelihood of obtaining any good, and as it is said of Abraham, Romans
4. 18.
Romans 4. 18. Against all hope to believe in hope. In the which words we see
that Abraham believed with hope, and against hope: That is, that he had a
general and confused hope, whereby he certainly looked for the
accomplishmente of Gods promise, although he saw no particular means or
manner how it should be accomplished. In like manner faith being affiance in
GOD for happiness, does necessarily imply happiness either present or to
come, Of renewed hope.
and therefore when it sees no present happiness* it incontinently brings
forth hope to wait for it in time to come: yet it is not needful that this
happiness should be particularly determined and defined, what, when, where,
and how it is to be hoped for. For if it had pleased God to have appointed it
so, it had been sufficient for man living in this miserable state, to hope that
God would make him happy, although no particular circumstances of his
happiness had been set down. But now our hope is not confused, for we know
when, where, and in what manner we shall be happy, as has been heretofore
declared. So that here we see, how faith and hope do differ, faith looking at
happiness in general, without minding the particulars of it. But our hope
teaches us to look for one certain happiness, which is the inioying of the
glorious presence of God, of Christ, and of the holy Angels in heaven, where,
before many ages pass over, all the elect shall meet.

Now we come to the commodities, which the faithful reap by hope, and that
especially in these respects. First it strengthens them against all crosses,
miseries and evils whatsoever may befall them in this life, Of renewed ^ope.
whereby their faith might be shaken, and they overcome, and even swallowed up
of grief, sorrow, shame, impatiencie and distrust: against all which they are
comforted and vpheld by calling to mind that unspeakable happiness which
abides them in heaven: even as the Husbandman indureth all manner of toil in
hope of harvest, and as the Mariner is not dismayed with any tempest, when he
sees his harbor and haven to be near at hand. In regard whereof the Apostle
calls hope the helmet of a Christian, whereby his head, even his faith is
armed against all assaults. Secondly* hope serves to preserve and increase
in us all the other parts of sanctification, it makes the faithful man
contemn all the vain delights and pleasures of this world, all which are not
a shadow of that joy, whereof he shall be made partaker. It makes him cleanse
himself from all sin, that he may enter into Gods presence, and sit at the
heavenly banquet in his wedding garment. Thus we read, Ioh. 3. 2. 3. When
Christ appears, Ioh. 3. 2. 3*
we know that we shall be made like to him in glory: and therefore every one who
has this hope purifieth himself, that he may be holy, even as he is holy.

Lastly these uses of hope may be unto us true and infallible signs, whereby
we may try and examine our selves, whether this grace be effectually wrought in
our hearts or no. For if we be (as most men are) dismayed utterly, and even
clean out of heart when as any worldly evil, as poverty, contempt, shame,
slander, reproach, sickness, loss of goods, of friends, or any other such
cross does befall us, it is evident that we have not this helmet of hope, by
virtue whereof the godly do not only not despair, but so much the more
rejoice in their greatest miseries; whereas the unbelievers are stricken dead
with the least cross that does befall them. Again, if we find in due
examination that our mind, affections and desires, are set wholly or chiefly
upon the pleasures and profits, the riches and dignities of this world, and
that we have small careof our estate in the world to come, little or no
delighte in spiritual exercises, in reading, meditating and heareing Gods
word, in praying to God, and in performing the actions which tend to
godliness, let us not deceive our selves, for we are as yet without hope of
eternal salvation: yea whosoever he be that being thus affected, says with
himself or to others, that he hops to be saved as well as others, the which
is the common opinion and saying of carnal men, his hope is nothing but a
vain presumption, the which will not be any way profitable unto him.

CHAP. VI.
Sect. 1. Of the fear of God.
NOw we are to proceed in declaring the subjection, which man being in the
state of innocence did owe to God as to his king and liege-Lord, who may of
right require at the hands of his subject and servant as trust and hope, Ios.
4. 14
so also fear. Ios. 4. 14. 2. Kings 8. 40. But it may seem that faith and
fear cannot agree together. 2. Kings. 8. 40.
For how can man both fear to receive evil at the hands of God, and also by
faith trust for happiness, which is all manner of good. For answer hereof, we
are to consider, that the fear of man's first estate, was not such a slavish
fear, as rebels and malefactors bear toward severe and righteous magistrates;
or slothful and careless servants to their masters, Of the fear^ of God
but that fear wherewith loyal subjects are affected toward their natural
kings, and dutiful children toward their loving parents, whom they fear, not
in regard of any deserved punishment, for there is no offense committed, but
because, First of the power and authority which they have over them. Secondly
in regard of their majesty compared with their own mean condition. Thirdly
in regard of the infirmity of their own nature, whereby they may fall into
some offense, and so displease and dishonor them, and show themselves
unthankful for so many benefits received. For the first it is agreeable both
to the word of God, and even to reason it self, and to the nature of man, to
fear all those who have authority over them. Thus the subject ought to fear
the magistrate, Romans 13. 7. the servant the master, Romans 13. 7.
Ephesians. 6. 5. the son his father, Ephesians. 6. 5.
the wife her husband; and thus man is commanded to fear God, Leu. 19. 4
Leu. 19 4. the which commandment is a part of the moral law, and therefore
it belonged to man in the state of innocence. This the heathen orator
witnesses, saying, All they who are in the hands and jurisdiction of any
other do fear. For although they be persuaded of their love and mercy, yea of
their own innocence, yet they do consider not only what they will do, but
also what they may do.

The second cause of this fear, was the surpassing and incomprehensible glory
and majesty of God, the which being fully revealed has force, not only to
astonishe and amase, but also to confound and consume any creature whatsoever,
yea although the said creature be not stained with sin, and so not subject
to the anger of God. For even as a brittle glass being filled with some
extreme strong liquor, cannot but burst in sunder, not because of any
antipathie which is betwixt them, but because the glass is not of sufficient
strength to contain the liquor: So is it with the creature when God does
appear in perfect glory, in regard whereof the Angels themselves are said to
cover their faces least they should behold it; ^. 6. 2*
how much more then has man, who is but dust and ashes, and whose life is in
his nosethrilles, just cause of fear. Yea the brute beasts, and senseless
creatures themselves, who neither do nor can sin, are said to be affected
with this fear of the glorious majesty of God. ^alm. 29.
Thus we read, Psalm. 29. The voice of the Lord showing it self forth in power
and glory, does break the cedars of Libanus. It makes them skip like young
calves, yea it makes the desert to quake; the hindes to calue, the mountains
to smoke, and in breife, all creatures what soever to melte away before his
face. And thus did man fear God in the state of innocence, for although he
had daily conversation with God, yet he knew that as a vessel of glass, clay,
or any brittle matter, often meeting with vessels of brass or iron, may easily
get a knock, and so be broken to shiuers; so might he be confounded by the
glory of God, if God did at any time reveal the same fully unto him. Thirdly
man being in his first state had just cause to fear God, in regard of the
weakness and mutability of his own nature, which might easily be overcome with
some temptation, and that in regard of the freedom of his will, which might
easily forsake God and embrace evil: by the which means, he should not only
be subject to the anger of God, and to eternal death, but also displease and
dishonor God, who had showed him self so loving and bountiful a father and
creator unto him.

Thus we see the causes of this fear, now we are to consider the uses of it.
First it served as a bridle to restrain man from falling from God by
disobedience. For although man in this holy estate did obey God more for love,
then for fear of punishment, yet it pleased God to use all means possible to
keep him from sin, and therefore he propounded not only the reward of life
to his obedience, but also the punishment of eternal death to his disobedience
whenever it should happen, as we read, Genesis 2. 17. ^en. 2. 17.
In the day wherein thou shall eat of the tree of knowledge of good and evil,
thou shall incontinently die. Secondly this fear served to keep man as from
sin, so from all presumptuous, bold, and indecent behavior in respect of God.
For we know, as it is commonly said, Familiar conversation will easelie breed
contempt. Lastly man was by this fear put in mind, and made to acknowledge as
the baseness, infirmity and mutability of his own nature; so also the
infinite power, authority and majesty of God.

Sect. 2. Of the want of fear.
THe third head of man's rebellion, is the want of the aforesaid fear of God:
for since the fall man has no regard, either of the power, might and majesty
of God, Of the want of fear.
or yet of the weakness of his own nature as he had before, but conceiueth
amiss both of God and of himself. But what marvel is it that man does not
fear, in consideration of the weakness and mutabilitie of his nature which
may fall into sin, when as he fears not the justice of God, and his
eternal anger due unto him self for sin already committed? For if man in
his innocence had just cause of fear, as has been declared, how much more
ought he being sinful? For if he being righteous is scarslie saved, how shall
he now appear before the judgment seat of God, being guilty of sin? And
yet man in this sinful state has although greater cause of fear, ^et less
fear then he had before, yea in truth ^one at all, but is benumbed with a
senseless security, having no remorse of conscience, nor fear of punishment
for sins ^ommitted, neither stands in awe of the glorious presence of God.
This appears ^oth by the testimony of scripture in many ^laces, as namely
Romans 3. 18. Romans 3. 18.
where a carnal ^an is described by this note, That he has (...) fear of God
before his eyes: as also by ^ayly experience which shows us, that ^ery few in
the world do in their actions regard, whether they be good or bad, whether
pleasing or displeasing to God, and so whether they be such which will bring
upon the doers some heavy judgment or no: whereas if men's hearts were
possessed with the fear of God, they would think him to be always present
with them, and to behold their doings, and so they would be both restrained
from evil, and pricked forward to do good, but we see it to be far
otherwise: for in committing sin, men think that they are safe, and all is
well, if they can do it so secretly, as that they may avoid the shame,
slander, reproach and anger of men, together with the punishment prescribed by
humane laws. But we need not stand in the enlarging of this point, which is so
manifest.

Sect. 3. Of renewed fear.
THe third head of renewed subjection is the fear of God, the which is a
singular grace and has great use in regeneration, howsoever it may seem to
fight with faith and hope more then it did in the state of innocence, seeing
that the faithful can not loose that holy and happy state wherein they are
placed and therefore need not fear any evil, Of renewed fear.
being not only happy, but also sure to continue so for ever. To this we
answer, that although the fear of eternal death and misery cannot stand with
perfect faith and hope, whereby life and happiness is certainly expected, yea
although the faithful need not fear the mutability and freedom of will,
being certain of their final perseverance in faith, yet there are many
causes by the which they ought to be moved to fear God. Hither we are to
refer the causes of fear in the state of innocence: whereof the most ought
to be of more force to move the faithful to fear God, then they were to man
in his pure estate. For shall man being in happy innocence, the holy Angels
being in perfect glory, yea the brute and senseless creatures, fear in regard
of the glorious majesty of God, and shall the faithful, being sinful and
miserable, not be affected therewith? But we know that the servants of God have
always feared his glorious presence. Thus the people of Israel make it an
impossible thing, that a man should see the glory of God and live. And Manach
Sampsons fafather says, Judge. 13. 22. Judge. 13. 22.
We shall die because we have seen God. Further the faithful are not freed
from the fear which the committing of sin brings with it, for although
they know that no sin, tho never so heinous can deprive them of the eternal
love of God in Christ, or of eternal salvation, yet they ought so much the
more to fear to displease or dishonor God, then Adam did in his innocence,
because God has showed himself more loving, gracious and bountiful to them
in their regeneration, then he did to Adam in his first creation, for God
shows his love far more in bringing some few from the common death of
mankind to eternal salvation, then he did in creating all in a common state of
life. Neither are we to think that the faithful living in this world, are so
exempted from sustaining the punishment of sin, as that they do not in this
regard also fear God: for although (if we speak properly) it cannot stand
with the justice and equity of God to punish the faithful for their sins,
the which he has already punished to the full in the death of Christ, yet the
fatherly chastisements which he lays upon them for their great and
presumptuous sins, to keep them and others from committing the like, are
often so sharp as that they do not without cause seem to be grievous and
fearful punishments. Hence it is, that this sentence is annexed to those
grievous judgments which befell any of the people, That all Israel may hear
and fear the Lord. Deuteronomy. 19. 2*


The uses of this grace are as before, to restrain the faithful from sin,
for although that be true which the heathen poet says. Od^runt peccare boni
virtutis amore: oderunt peccare mali formidine poenae, yet two motives are more
effectual then one, especially in this corrupt state, wherein the faithful
retaining some relics of their corrupt nature, are often frayed from sin by
fear, when as the love of God is not able to restrain them. Pro. 16. 6. and
3. 7. and 14. 16. Prou. 16. 6. ^ 3. 7. and 14. 1^*
A wise man fears and escheweth evil. In this respect, The fear of God is
called the beginning of wisdom, that is, of an holy and unblameable life,
Psalm. 10. 10. Pro. 11. 7. Psalm. 10. 10: Pro. 11. 7.
because the godly man does always behave himself, as in the presence of the
great and fearful God of heaven. Hitherto the rest of the uses mentioned in
the first section of this chapter are to be referred, which it is not needful
to repeat. Yet there is one special commodity which the faithful reap by
this grace, to wit, immunity from temporal plagues: for even as it is said of
a fierce and roaring Lion, that in the heat of his rage he spares those
beasts which yielding themselves to his power, do by fear and trembling ask
mercy at his hands, so when as God is so provoked to anger by the sins of
his servants, that no prayers or vows can pacify him, yet this submisse fear
of his wrath does quench the burning heat of it: by the which means it comes
to pass, that this fear of God does not breed any trouble or disquietnes in
the minds of the godly, but rather freeth them from the fear of all evil
whatsoever: and therefore to conclude this chapter, every faithful man ought
to labor with all care, both to have in his heart, and to express in his
whole life and behavior, this singular grace of the fear of God, that so he
may call God his fear, as he is called the fear of Isaac, Genesis 31. 42. 53.
^en. 31: 42: 53
where Jacob does swear to Laban, by the fear of his father Isaac, that is,
by God, whom only and no other thing in the world Isaac feared. Thus we are
exhorted, Heb. 12. 28. ^eb. 12. 28.
Let us labor to please God with reverence and fear. For even our God is a
consuming fire.

CHAP. VII.
Sect. 1. Of the subjection which man in his innocence did owe to God, as to
his father.
THus we see the first part of man's subjection with the particular duties
thereof; the second kind of subjection, is that which the son owes to the
father: for God was to man in the state of innocence, not only a liege Lord
and sovereign King, but also a gracious and loving father: and that by virtue
of the first creation the which is a kind of generation. For the creator
gives being and existence to the creature, as the father does to the son.
Yet not all the creatures are in this respect to be accounted or called the
sons of God: no more then men do account those senseless things which they
fashion and make of clay, wood, or any such matter, to be their children
although they be their workmanship, and therefore there is somewhat else in
man which makes him the son of God, to wit, the likeness or similitude of
man to God: for man does resemble God, so as we see the son does his father,
not in the outward shape of his body, Of filial subjection.
for God has no shape, neither can be resembled to any thing that either is,
or can be imagined, but in the inward holiness of his soul, the which is called
in scripture, The image of God, whereof more hereafter. Yet this is here to be
noted, that although man be by his original and natural state, the son of
God, yet he is not so his son, as is the second person of the Godhead: who
partaketh the very essence of the father, whereas man has not in him any part
of gods essence, but only a shadow, or light resemblance of it. So that the
second person is the son of God, as is the natural son begotten by any man;
and therefore is of the substance of his father not differing from him in any
respect, save only that the one is the father, the other the son: but man is
the son of God, so as he who is a son by some accidental means; as by law,
by adoption by tuition, by susception, or by any other way beside natural
procreation. For these sons do not participate the nature and essence of
their fathers, but only do resemble them perhaps in countenance, conditions,
name, or in some such outward respect; whereas in nature, kind, and substance
they are far differing from them. But to proceed: Man being not a senseless,
or brutish, but a reasonable creature, is the son of God, and not he only, but
also all the holy Angels, who being likewise endued with the image of God, are
called the sons of God, Job. 1. 6. Job. 1. 6.
The sons of God came on a day, and stood before the Lord: and thus Adam is
called, Luke. 3. 38, Luc. 3. 38.
The son of Seth, the son of Adam, the son of GOD. This fatherhoode is
the chief, and as we may say: the father of all other kinds of fatherhoode.
Hence it is that Christ forbids us, Math. 23. 9, Math. 23. 9.
To call any our father here on earth, because we have one father in heaven,
whom we must all acknowledge to be our first, chiefest, highest, and best
father.

And therefore look what duties any son owes to any terrestrial father,
the same ought man to perform much more to God his heavenly father, as namely;
First that he reverence him: secondly that he imitate him: and thirdly that he
seek unto him for those things, whereof he stands in need. For the first,
to reverence is, In an ingenuous kind of awe to give honor as to one who is
every way our better and superior, as the father does excel the son in
wisdom, strength of body, in age, authority, and in all other respects.
This duty God requires, Mal. 1. 6. saying by the prophet, ^al* 1. 6.
The son does use to honor his father, and therefore if I be a father, where
is my honor? Yea in truth we may well think, that this affection of reverence
is too mean to be given to God, whose authority over man is so great, that
it requires rather a just fear, then this modest awe, as his incomparable
excellency does deserve rather glory then honor. The second duty due to God
in regard of this fatherhoode, is Imitation, the which fathers do, and that
justly require of their children, whom they do not suffer to use the fashions
and behavior of strangers, but rather do conform them to their own
conditions, manners, and gestures. Yea children for the most part do perform
this duty of their own accord: for they being of the same constitution of
body and disposition of mind, whereof their fathers are, and having been
continually brought up in beholding their manner of life, cannot so degenerate
but that they will, more or less tread in the steps of their fathers. Ioh.
8. 39.
Ioh. 8. 39. If ye were Abraham's children, ye would do the works of Abraham.
In like manner man in this his first state, did wholly fix his eyes on God, as
on the only perfect pattern of holiness, making his actions presidents and
examples for imitation, so far forth as they might be followed by him; the
which caution is necessariy to be added: for it were not holiness, but
presumption and great impiety, either for man or Angel to take upon him to
imitate God in the actions of omnipotency, and in such other respects which
are not agreeable to the condition of any creature: otherwise man may and ought
to imitate God, as Christ teaches us, Math. 5. 45.
Math. 5. 45. saying, Do good to them who do evil to you, that so you may be,
or may appear to be the sons of your father in heaven, who suffers the
sun to shine and the rain to fall upon the just and unjust: be ye therefore
perfect as your heavenly father is perfect.

The third and last duty belonging to this head is supplication for things
needful: for as children in all their wantes and necessities, have straightway
recourse to their parents in assured confidence of having their wants supplied
by means of that tender affection, which parents bear to their children; so
ought man upon every occasion to seek by humble prayer for help at the
hands of his heavenly father, whose love far exceeds the affection of any
earthly father or mother to their children. This Christ himself (who in all
his doctrines which he delivers, has recourse to the first creation of man)
teaches us, Math. 7. 9. Math. 7. 9.
What man is there among you, which if his son ask him bread will give him a
stone? If ye then which are evil can give to your children good gifts, how
much more shall your heavenly father give good things to them that ask? To
this agrees the practice of Christ, who in that form of prayer which he
propounded to his disciples, taught them to pray to GOD not as to their master,
Lord or King, but as to a loving father. Math. 6. 9. Math. 6. 9.
Pray after this manner; Our father which art in heaven. Lastly if it be here
objected that there could not be any use of this duty in the state of perfect
happiness, wherein nothing was wanting, and therefore nothing could be asked:
we answer, that man's happiness although it were perfect. Yet it might have
been greater, and that he had not so many blessings, but that he might by
prayer have obtained more at the hands of God.

Sect. 2. Of the want of filial subjection.
It has been declared that of all earthly creatures, man only was created the
son of God, because he only was endued with the image and likeness of God
the heavenly father, in perfect holiness and happiness: the which whenas he
did loose by his disobedience, he did together loose the name, title and
prerogative of being the son of God. Yea withal he lost all ability of
performing any duty to God, which the son owes to his father, being now
affected to God not as a dutiful son, but as an ungracious, stubborn and
lewd runnagate, who has openly forsaken, and disclaimed his father. For (that
we may insist in those duties which are named in the former section) he is so
far from yielding due honor and reverence to him, that he does every way
dishonor him, he stands in no awe, neither makes he any reverent account of
the presence of God, yea far less then of the presence of any sinful man
like to himself, in whose sight he would be ashamed to commit any heinous
sin, or to speak any filthy word without using some preface of reverence
unto him: Of the want of filial subjection.
whereas the consideration of Gods presence and of the reverence due thereunto,
cannot either restrain him from sin, or any thing abash him in committing
it. Further whereas the son should honor his father by yielding humble
attention, and careful obedience to his sayings and commandments; man does
in this respect so notoriously dishonor God, that it is a shame to speak, how
base and vile account he makes of Gods word, how he does continually without
any remorse of conscience or shame of face, break every one of his
commandments. But we will not stand in amplifying the irreuerent behavior
of man toward God.

As touching the second duty which is imitation of God, we know that the
heavens are not so far distant from the earth, or the east from the west, as
the ways of man are from the ways of God. Yea as Christ tells the Jews
plainly, (...). 8. 41.
Ioh. 8. 41. man has changed his father and therefore he does the works of
his new father the devil, his lusts reign in man, he is a liar and the
father of liars. He fell away from God, and this his damnable rebellion man did
imitate, and so continues following his example, motions, and entisements in
all things. Lastly as touching supplication which we make the third filial
duty, man is so wholly alienated from God, that what necessity soever do
pinche him, he has not either the mind or the will* and as we use to speak,
neither the heart nor the face once to go to God by humble prayer for help. He
flies to worldly means, as to his own wisdom, strength, riches and friends:
and if all fail, yet he will rather seek for help by sorcery and witchcraft,
at the hands of his new father the devil, then he will by prayer call upon
the name of God. Thus are all unregenerate men affected, howsoever in a show of
religion, or as a common proverb they will sometimes say, God help me, or God
be merciful to me: whereas in truth, they being destitute of faith, have no
confidence in God, neither any hope of obtaining any thing at his hand. Neither
is there any cause why they should think otherwise: for God does not hear
and help, but detest and plague unbelievers.

Sect. 3. Of filial subjection renewed.
THus we see how man is altogether spoiled by the malice of Satan of this
excellent dignity of being the son of God, but by the mercy of God he
recouereth it in the state of regeneration in as ample manner as he had it in
his first creation. For as all natural men are in Adam ungracious bastardes;
so they become the sons of God in Christ, not by partaking his eternal and
essential filiation (whereof no creature is capable) but by being renewed, and
made conformable to the holiness of his human nature. For as man lost this
dignity by loosing the image of God, to wit, his perfect holiness, by virtue
whereof he only of all earthly creatures was the son of God; so being now
by the spirit of God restored to the said image of God, he is together
restored to the dignity of being the son of God. Ioh. 1. 12.
Ioh. 1. 12. As many as believed in him to those he gave power to be the sons
of God. ^. Pet. 1. 4.
For as we read, 2. Pet. 1. 4. We are made partakers of his divine nature,
(that is, of the image or resemblaunce of the divine nature) in that we fly the
corruption of lust which is in the world. Of filial suiection rene^ed.
From this prerogative of being the sons of God, the scripture, (speaking to
men according to the manner of men, whose sons do in time enjoy their fathers
possessions) stirs up the faithful to an undoubted expectation of eternal
glory. Gal. 4. 7. We are no more servants but sons and the heirs of God
through Christ: Gall. 4. 7.
and Romans 8. 17. Romans 8. 17.
If we be sons, then are we heirs: 1. John. 3. 2
the heirs truly of God, and the fellow heirs of Christ: and 1. John 3. 2. We
are now the sons of God, although our inheritance does not appear till
Christ appear.

Now to proceed: As the faithful are restored to this dignity; so they are
endued by the spirit of God with the disposition belonging to it, being so
affected to God as children ought to be to their natural fathers. They
reverence him above al things in the world, in word and deed, in mind,
heart, and in all their behavior. The great security and certainty which they
have of their own good estate, does not make them any way presumptuous neither
does the familiarity which God vouchsafes to have with them as with freindes
Ioh. 15 15. Breed in them any contempt of God, but they stand continually in
awe of him, ^oh. 15. 15.
and of his glorious presence, yielding to him his due honor both in word,
deed and affection, whenever they have any occasion to deal with him. This
we may observe as in the other servants of God, so especially in Abraham, who
although he was the friend of God, as he is called Iam. 2. 23. ^am. 2. 23.
And had familiar conversation and talk with God, ^. Chro. 20. 7*
as one friend uses to have with another, ^sa. 4. 8.
yet he durst not speak the second time to God in the behalf of the Sodomites
without using some preface of reverence, saying, Genesis 18. 27. Genesis 18. 27. 30.
Behold I have taken upon me to speak to God who am but dust and ashes, And
again, Verse. 30 let not my lord be angry if I speak for them. This affection
of the faithful is described, Psalm. 123.
Psalm. 123* As the eyes of the servant are upon his lord, and as the handmaid
does modestly wait in presence of her mistress; so are we affected to God.
Likewise for the second duty which is Imitation, the faithful man endeavors
by all means to conform himself to the absolute purity and holiness of
God. Whereof the Apostle having wise consideration, uses the examples of
Christ's death and resurrection as most forcible arguments to enforce the
mortification of sin, and the vivification of all holiness in us, Romans 6.
Romans 6. and Ephesians. 5. 1. Ephe. 5. 1
Be ye followers of God as beloved children.

Lastly, As a son being pinched with any grief or want, does straight way
run to his father for relief; so do the faithful in the manifold miseries
and crosses of this present life seek for help at the hands of their
heavenly father. For the which purpose they are endued with a notable gift of
God, called the spirit of prayer, that is, the grace, ability or faculty of
praying wrought in them by the holy spirit. This grace of God is diligently to
be declared and considered, for that of all the parts of man's holiness, none
is a more infallible sign of true regeneration, then is this gift of prayer,
whereby a man is made able, willing and ready, to pray aright unto God as the
present occasion does require. For this gift consists of many particular
graces of Gods spirit, the which are needful for the right performance of this
duty, and cannot be found in any carnal man. First there is required the
true knowledge of those things which belong unto the good and happy state of
man, which is not attained but by the work of the holy spirit, Romans 8. 26.
Romans 8. 26.
We know not for what to pray, as we ought, but the spirit helps our
infirmity. For all men generally and naturally feel their temporal wants, as
poverty, sickness, shame, and whatsoever belongs to the maintenance of this
present life: but as for spiritual graces, as the knowledge and fear of God,
faith, love, patience, and the rest which concern their eternal salvation,
they never trouble themselves in seeking them, or are grieved for the want of
them, nay (for the most part) they never think of any such matter or know
what these things mean.

Besides, none can pray aright, yea although he be enlightened with some
knowledge of the spiritual state of man, and have a glimmering of the things
belonging unto it (as a carnal man may have) unless he have true faith, whereby
he may be assured that god both loves him, and will grant his requests, Romans
10. 14. Romans 10. 14.
The Apostle makes it impossible for him who does not believe in God to call
upon him. But the believer has received not the spirit of bondage to fear, to
dread and fly from God, as from a just judge, as the carnal man does, but of
adoption, whereby he cries Abba Father. These and many other graces are
needful for the performance of this duty of prayer. Whereof it follows,
that whosoever has received this spirit of prayer, is undoubtedly one renewed
by the spirit of GOD, and that where this grace is wanting, there is no
regeneration or sanctification. And least that any man deceive himself by
thinking that he has this grace of praying to GOD, when he has it not, we
will here set down a few notes or marks wherein the praying of a faithful
man differs from that kind of praying which a carnal man may use.

First therefore a faithful man conceiueth his prayer himself, in his own
mind, having considered what things are most needful to be prayed for at
that time, and in that company, if he be with others, and so he does, as it
were pour out his prayer from the bottom of his heart: Whereas the carnal
man, although he be in worldly matters a jolly wise man, yea and can tell his
tale before whom soever, as readely as the best, yet he has neither the wit
to conceive, nor the tongue to utter two sentences of prayer before God, or if
he must needs have prayers either by himself for a show of religion, or in
some blind devotion, or in his family, least he should seem wanting in his
duty, then he is forced to get some prayer book into his hand, and so reading
so many as he thinks good, therein rests. The which thing although it may
be done at some times, and is to be commended in respect of their atheism, who
never pray either for themselves or any other, yet it is not sufficient,
because the prayers of particular men ought to be framed according to their
own particular state, and the present state of those in whose behalf they
pray.

The second difference is this, if a carnal man pray without book, it is but
in two or three words, as, Lord have mercy upon us: God fend us the light of
heaven, God send us this or that thing: the which are not to be called prayers,
but wishes: whereas the prayer which comes from a faithful heart, is uttered
in a competent number of words, as it is meet and needful. We do not deny
but that one may offend in using too mamy words, the which fault Christ
forewarneth us of, Math. 6. 7. 8. Math. 6. 7. 8.
and it is at this day to be seen in those dotrels who think that they serve
God in mumbling over so many doozen of Creeds, Pater nosters, and Aue Mary's:
yea further we confess, that the force of prayer is not in the words of the
mouth, but in the faith of the heart, the which alone will make the prayer to
be heard, although words be altogether wanting, as we read, 1. Sam. 1. 13. 1.
Sam. 1. 13.
of Hanna Samuels mother, who prayed so effectually that her request was
granted, and yet she uttered no words, but only moved her lips and prayed
in her heart. And yet for all this, faithful prayers are and ought to be, if
there be no hinderance, plentiful in words: for although thou pray alone to
God, who understands thy thoughts as well as thy words, yet God must be
served not only inwardly in thy mind, but also with the members of thy body,
especially with the tongue which is given to thee for this end. Yea the words
of thy mouth do stir up thy affections, and make thee more fervent in
prayer. But if thou pray in the company of others, it is needful for their
edification that thou utter words, not only in a general and confused
manner, but so as that the several petitions conceived in thy mind may be
plainly declared, and distinguished one from another. For sins must be
confessed, graces wanting desired, plagues and judgments removed, benefits
remembered, the brethren commended to God, not in gross (unless it cannot well
otherwise be) but in particular, that so the hearers may be the more edified.

If it be here objected, that this dexterity and faculty of uttering prayers
in the aforesaid manner, is not to be looked for at the hands of ignorant and
unlearned men, who cannot so much as help themselves by reading the holy
scriptures, and the writings of godly men: We answer; That as Satan has in
former ages defaced the true worship of God, and advanced superstition by no
means more, then by bringing into the Church a general barbarism and decay
of learning; so ought Christians in this time of grace, to furnish themselves
with all things, which may further their edification; and although all cannot
attain to learning for diverse hindrances, yet all may and ought to be able to
read: by the which means, being diligently used, they may soon come to have
their senses exercised in spiritual matters, and acquainted with the language
and words belonging thereunto, far above their own hope and expectation. Yea
even those who being of ripe years, cannot read, ought to be ashamed rather of
this barbarous and brutish rudeness, then of learning that which will make
greatly for their profit, comfort and eternal salvation. Again, he who is
endued with inward graces needful for prayer will find words whereby to utter
his mind be he never so unlearned: for the spirit of God gives utterance,
opens the lips, and vntieth the strings of the tongue to all those whom he
sanctifies. Neither need this seem strange, for as one says, all me^ are
eloquent enough in that which they know and like. Put case the unlearned man,
who thus excuses his Atheism and want of religion (for where there is no
prayer, there is no jot of true religion) by his rudeness, were put in mind
by some friend that such a nobleman had a rich farm in his hands, the which
he might easily obtain, if so be he could tell his tale well before the said
noble man. I warrant you he would not loose it for asking, neither would he
come bluntly to him and say, Sir I pray you give me this farm, but he would
and that without any teacher find store both of reasons, and of words fit for
his purpose. He would say, may it please your Lordship, to be my good Lord and
master: I am a poor wretched man, having sustained so many losses, haning so
many maimes, wounds, and infirmities; having a great charge of children, of
whom so many are not able to put on their own clothes: and therefore I am bold
to trouble your Lordship in such a matter; the which if I may obtain, I shall
pray for you as long as I live, and will by Gods grace be as faithful and
dutiful a servant, as ever your Lordship had. I have no friends to help
forward my suit, but do wholly rely my self on your goodness, and pitiful
disposition. These and many more like, and more effectual persuasions and fit
phrases, proverbs, terms and sayings the simplest man in the world could use
for a temporal commodity: how much more able would he be to call upon God by
prayer, wherein there is far more matter offered, whether we regard the
wretchedness of the suter, or the mercy and goodness of God?

But to return to the matter in hand, the third difference is, that the
carnal man prays very seldom, yea for the most never but upon some urgent
cause, as when he is pinched with some grievous cross, as sickness or poverty,
or when he is in some great danger as being in battle on Land, or in a
tempeston the sea; Jonas 1. 5.
as we read, Jonas. 1. 5. The Infidels in extreme danger fell to prayer. These
extremities will wring out of the most irreligious atheist some kind of
prayer, but not till he see that all other means do fail: For till then he
never thinks on God. But it is far otherwise with the faithful man: for he
prays daily and hourly to the Lord he never wants matter of praying, but
takes every occasion to pray, if not openly and in words, yet secretly in
his heart. Yea the faithful in all their dangers, troubles, miseries, and
affairs whatsoever, do not put the means in the first and chief place,
reposing their confidence therein; but first they seek for help at the hands
of God, and then trusting that he will give a happy success, use the means
with all care and diligence. Fourthly the carnal man does not in praying use
either perseverance in continuing his suit till it please God to hear him, or
yet patience in suffering with a quiet mind the delay of that which he
desires: But if he be not heard at the first, he straightway gives over: yea
most commonly he waxes so profane and godless that he will never afterward
pray to God, tho he have never so great need: and not resting herein he
murmureth against God, and in great rage curses all things that come in his
sight or mind: but the godly man is never wearied with calling upon God, but
is content to tarry the Lords leisure, considering that God knows what is good
for him better then he himself.

Fifthly, the carnal man prays only for temporal blessings, as health,
peace, riches, honor, and such other. And if so be that he have some knowledge
of the life to come, he will indeed desire that he may after this life be in
heaven; but you shall never hear him desiring to go in that way in this life
which leads to heaven. He desires to be happy in the world to come, but not
to be holy and righteous in this world. He would gladly be partaker of the
joys of heaven, but yet not with the condition of forsaking his earthly
pleasures. He thinks it no wisdom to forgo a certain and present
happiness, for that which will perhaps come, but he knows not when, neither
can any man make him, as he thinks, any good assurance of it: but the
faithful man counts all worldly pleasures to be, as they are in deed, but as
dross and dung in comparison of spiritual graces: and therefore his prayers
are chiefly of those things which concern his eternal salvation. Sixthly the
carnal man prays only for him self, for his children and friends, by whom
he may have some temporal comfort or profit: never remembering the affliction
of Joseph, that is, having no fellowe-feeling of the miseries of the church of
God, and of the particular members thereof: whereas the faithful desire the
good of their brethren, yea even with their own hurt, if so it stand with the
good pleasure of God. Lastly (which is the maine difference of all) the carnal
man prays without faith, and therefore he cannot pray aright, Romans 10. 14.
Romans 10. 14
doubting (as he has good cause) whether God will hear him or no: whereas the
faithful man is undoubtedly persuaded, that God will grant his desire, if it
be needful for his salvation: otherwise if it be some temporal blessing, or
some particular grace without the which he may be saved, he knows that God
will either grant his request, or make him plainly see and confess that it
is more for his good, that his mind be not fulfilled in that behalf.

Now for a conclusion, we see how greatly it behooves every one, who would be
accounted in the sight of God and man a true Christian, to give himself
carefully to the attaining of this gift of prayer, and to the performing of
this duty both by himself alone, and also with his family, especially if we
do duly consider the manifold commodities both temporal and spiritual,
which may be reaped by this means. For as touching this present life, hearty
and fervent prayer coming from a faithful man, is health in sickness,
riches in poverty, safety in danger, comfort in all adversity, yea it is
all in all. But far more notable are the uses of it in regard of the
spiritual life of our souls: for prayer is the exercise of a man's soul, as
the word of God is the food and nourishment of it. So that as a man cannot
keep* his body for any long time in health and strength, unless he use some
exercise, yea although he do fill it with meat, and feed it most carefully:
even so although a man do hear the word of God every day preached unto him,
yet unless he do by this spiritual exercise of prayer, draw the said
heavenly food into the several parts of his soul, he shall sensibly feel
his faith, love, patience, and all other parts of holiness to decrease by
little and little until at length they come to nothing; yea as the exercising
of the body does not only preserve it in the natural vigor, but also
increases the strength of it, and keeps it from sickness; so by the daily
use of prayer, we shall find that the Lord will increase in us all spiritual
graces, far above our own expectation, or the opinion of any other. And
therefore let us give ear to the Apostles exhortation, Ephesians. 6. 18. Ephesians. 6. 18.
Take to you the helmet of your salvation which is the word of God, and withal
pray always with all manner of prayers and supplications in the spirit, and
watch thereunto withal perseueraunce, not only for your selves, but also for
all saints.

Thus much of the duties of renewed filial subjection which man owes to God
his heavenly father. To the which one other duty of filial subjection must be
added, to wit, patience in regard of those manifold and grievous afflictions
wherewith God does chastise, Prou. 3. 11. 1^*
try, and nurture his children. For as the goldsmith intending to make
precious and excellent vessels fit for the use of great kings, does cast his
gold into the fire, that so it may be come pure from all dross, so before that
the faithful can be vessels of honor, fit for the service of God in the
kingdom of heaven, they must be cast into the furnace of affliction, and there
be weaned from the vain delights and pleasures of sin, yea tried to be
sound in the profession of the faith, and corrected for their former
misdemeanour. Now these afflictions are of their own nature as bitter as
galle unto us, and therefore it is impossible that flesh and blood, being not
strengthened with some special grace of God should receive this loathsome
potion, without repining, murmuring, distruste, despair and many such
inconveniences. For the avoiding whereof it has pleased God to give unto his
faithful servants this gift of patience whereby they do quietly, constantly,
yea chearefully and joyfully suffer any affliction, as coming from God, who is
not to them a cruel enemy, but a loving and tender hearted father, remembering
mercy in the midst of anger, even as a father, spares his own natural son
making his moan unto him.

This doctrine is declared at large. Heb. 12. 5. 6. 7. etc.
Heb. 12. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. 10. 11. 12. 13. the words are many, but being very
fit for this purpose it shall not be irksome to set them down. Forgette not
the exhortation which speaks to you, Prou. 3. 12.
Prou. 3. 12. as unto children; My son despise not the correction of the
Lord, neither faint when thou art rebuked of him. For whom the Lord loves,
him he chasteneth, and scourges every son whom he receaueth. If you endure
chastening, God offers himself to you, or declares himself to be your
father: for what son is there whom his father does not correct? But if ye be
without this chastening, then truly ye are not right sons but bastards.
Moreover, we have had our carnal fathers our correctours, and have stood in
awe of them: shall we not then much more obey our spiritual father and so
live? for they chastised us for a few days according to their pleasure, but
God chasteneth us for our profit, that so we might be made partakers of his
holiness. Now all chastisement brings with it for the present time sorrow,
not joy; but afterward it gives the fruit of peace and righteousness, to
those who are exercised with it. And therefore let us lift up our faint hands
and our weak knees. etc.

Lastly as touching this duty of filial subjection, it had not so great use
in the state of innocence, in the which man was not subject to crosses,
afflictions, and miseries so as the faithful are in the state of regeneration.
Yet man in his innocence was not altogether destitute of this grace, or
without some use of it: For it was his duty to take in good part whatsoever it
pleased God to do unto him, if not in laying any evil upon him, whereof his
happy estate was not capable, yet in withholding or withdrawing from him some
particular blessing whereof he had great desire, and which would be very
pleasant unto him.

CHAP. VIII.
Sect. 1. Of servile subjection.
BEsides the aforesaid kinds of subjection, man owes to God all such duties as
the servant is bound to perform to his lord or master, as namely, to obey, to
serve or minister unto him, and lastly to profit him; for man according to his
first creation is Gods servant: the which is not to be accounted a base
condition, derogating from the dignity of this his glorious estate, seeing
that the holy Angels, Of servile subjection.
which do far excel man in glory, are not ashamed to wear Gods livery, and
to be called his servants.

The first duty is obedience, the which is to be performed of all inferiors,
to those who have any authority over them, whether kings, magistrates,
fathers, or teachers, but especially it is to be performed by servants to
their masters, Ephe. 6. 5.
Ephe. 6. 5. Servants be obedient to your masters in simplicity of heart as
unto Christ. So was man affected to God in his innocent state as does evidently
appear in that his innocence is nothing else but perfect obedience to God, to
his word, laws and commandments. Whereof it follows that he did perform
unto God the second duty, to wit, faithful service, in performing with all
care and diligence, whatsoever work it pleased God to employ him in. Thus did
Adam before his fall serve God in doing those things which were enjoined him:
and thus do the Angels in heaven continually waiting and attending in the
presence of God, ready to go whither he sends, Heb. 1. 14.
and to come, when he calls, as we read, Heb. 1. 14. They are ministering
spirits sent out for the electes sake: and more plainly, Psalm. 103. 20. Bless
the Lord ye his Angels which excelling in strength do his commandment and
obey his voice: ^^hl. 103. 20.
bless the Lord all ye his hoastes, his servants which do his will.

But there may some doubt be made as touching the last duty, how man should
profit God: we answer that Gods riches consist in his glory, the which the
more that it is increased and enlarged, the more is Gods advantage procured.
This we may see in the parable of the talents, Mat. 25. 14.
Mat. 25. 14. the meaning whereof is this, that God gives his graces to men to
this end, that they should use and increase them for his advantage. Yea God
there compares himself to a covetous usurer that is so greedy of gain, that
he reapeth where he did not sow, and gathers, where he did not scatter, that
is, he labors by all means to gain glory to himself. But what shall we
say to Elephaz, Job. 22. 1. 2.
Job. 22. 1. 2. who seems to deny this, saying, shall man profit God? is it
any gain to the almighty, that thou art just, and walk in a perfect way?
The meaning of those words is this, that God is not so tied to man, but that
he can set forth his glory without him, or his righteousness; yea he can
glorify himself in the unrighteousness, and destruction of man, but man's
goodness it does profit himself and other men like to himself, Psalm. 16. 1.
as we read, Psalm. 16. 1. My goodness does not extend it self to thee O
Lord, but to the saints here on earth. And yet it pleases God in mercy
(that so he might stir man up to all holiness) to count only that glory
gained which is gotten by the obedience and salvation of his servants.

Sect. 2. Of the want of the aforesaid subjection.
MAN by falling from the obedience of God, became a fugitive (and as it is
said of Cain the first of this sinful generation, Genesis 4. 14. Genesis 4. 14.
) being cast forth from the presence of God, for his sin, is now a vagabond
on the earth. And as is this his miserable and vi^e condition, so is his
disposition. For he has clean lost all the properties of a good servant, and
all ability of performing any acceptable duty to God. In steed of obedience,
he does continually break all Gods commandments, in all his thoughts,
words, deeds, and in the whole course of his life.

Neither does he wait on God to do service unto him, Of servile rebellion.
for he serves Satan, sin, and his own corrupt desires, John. 8. 34.
Verily I say to you (says Christ) that every one who commits sin, John.
8. 34.
is the servant of sin, in that he does not obey the voice of God commanding
a holy life, but the unlawful motions of his sinful flesh: Romans 6. 16.
and Romans 6. 16. Know ye not that to whomesoeuer you give your selves to obey,
his servants you are, whether of sin to death, or of holiness to life? Yea
a carnal man is a bondslaue sold into the jurisdiction of sin, Romans 7. 14.
that look as a slave, Romans 7. 14.
whom they used in old times, (as they do still in some countries) to buy
with money, as horse, sheep and oxen, was no more his own man (as we say)
then were the aforesaid brute beasts, but was compelled to fulfill his masters
will in all things, whether good or evil; so it fares with man, who of the
servant of God, is become a most vile slave of Satan, always attending his
will and pleasure, and performing the same with all his might and strength, yea
with all the faculties of his mind, and the members of his body. The
particular functions whereof, are by the Apostle cited, Rom: 3. 13.
Romans 3. 13. Out of the old Testament, His throat is an open sepulcher, his
tongue speaks nothing but deceit: his lips, whereby he prete^deth frindship,
have under the^ the poison of Aspes: his mouth full of cursing, his feet swift
to shed blood: and so all the rest of the members of a man's body, have their
task allotted unto them, the which they do not grudgingly and unwillingly as
usually bondslaues do, but most readely, greedely, and joyfully, delighting in
nothing but in that which they know pleases the humor of their master. So
that all men naturally are in a greater bondage under sin, then any of them
is under their temporal masters or owners. For there is no slave of so base a
mind (the which cannot be found among the brute beasts) but that tho his body
be oppressed, and kept under chains, yet he desires freedom, and so he being
detained against his will, keeps a free mind and will: but man being in this
most filthy and wretched thraldom, thinks himself to be in the most happy
state that may be, and therefore neither does nor can desire to be freed from
it.

Lastly as touching the third duty of a servant, man does not bring any
advantage of glory to God, but does dishonor him by all means, leading his
life so as if there were no God, or as if he neither could punish sinners for
their wickedness, nor yet do any good to the righteous man, and yet will he nil
he, he shall one day glorify God in being an open spectakle of his wrath and
justice: when as he shall hear that sentence pronounced again by Christ, Take
this slothful and unprofitable servant, and cast him into utter darkness,
where shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth.

Sect. 3. Of servile subjection renewed.
THus we see the wretched estate of man being the vassal and slave of sin,
with whom it fares, as it did with Pharaohs servants, which had sinned
against their Lord, Genesis 40.
Genesis 40. For some as they live, so they die in that slavery: and therefore they
die eternally, others, to wit the faithful are pardoned, and restored to their
former dignity: insomuch that being by Christ reconciled to God, they do
boldly enter again into his presence in the which they do always stand,
attending his pleasure, obeying his commandments, performing whatsoever
service is enjoined them, and so procuring Gods advantage as good and faithful
servants do to their earthly masters. Of servile s^^^iection rene^^ed.
Yet not al after the same manner and in like measure: For as among earthly
servants, so also in the house of God (which is his church) there are diverse
functions and degrees of ministrations, and as some serving immediately and
directly about the person of their master, are in higher estimation with him;
so some of the faithful do serve God in public functions, and do in greater
measure glorify him, then others do. In this order are to be accounted the
faithful patriarchs, preistes, prophets, Kings, magistrates, Apostles and
ministers: whose service comes near to God, and does directly and properly
enlarge his glory: and therefore in lue of their long and faithful service God
does reward them with this most honorable title, calling them his servants.
Thus God calls Abraham, Genesis 2. 6. 24*
Genesis 26. 24. I will bless thee for Abraham my servants sake. Iosu. 1. 7.
And Moses Iosu. 1* 7. On whom this epitaphe is written* Deuteronomy. 34. 5. There
died Moses the servant of the Lord. Deuteronomy. 34. 5.
Thus God calls David, often sparing Jerusalem in the midest of his anger,
For his servant David's sake, and thus are Joshua, Daniell, and others called.
And all they whose godliness, faith and love was great and notable as Job and
others, Job. 1. 8. Yea of late days the church imitating God herein, has most
thankfully and worthily given this glorious title to those, (...). 1. 8.
who have been zealous in beating down superstition, and in advancing the
gospel, kingdom and glory of Christ.

These are gods chief servants and as it were the golden vessels of his house,
besides the which he has other vessels of honor, wherewith he is served: even
all true believers, and true hearted christians, who also are Gods faithful
servants, yea although they spend all the days of their lives in such
callings, as may seem to appertain nothing to God, neither any way to set
forth his glory. For example, in the first ages of the gospel many Christians
were bond servants to infidels, whereby it came to pass that they were
continually employed in their masters affairs, the which had no more to do
with the service of God, then darkness has with light: yet these Christians
were accounted Gods faithful servants, in that they performed faithful
service to those infidels. Thus we read Col. 3. 22. ^oll. 3. 22.
Servants obey your masters in all things, not with eye service, but in
simplicity of heart as those that fear the Lord: Yea he adds; and what
soever ye do, do it not as to men but as to God: knowing that ye shall receive
a reward for it of the Lord, so that a godly and upright life in what kind
soever it be, Romans 6* 17.
is the true service of God. Romans 6. 17. Thanks be unto God, that although ye
were once the servants of sin, yet now ye are made the servants of
righteousness, and therefore as you did before present your bodies before
uncleanness and all manner of sin ready to commit sin: so now present your
bodies before righteousness, as being ready to all holiness of life.

This exhortation is carefully to be followed of all that desire to be
accounted the servants of God, that as whilst they were in the service of
sin, they did no manner of service to God; so now being the servants of God,
they labor to shake clean from their necks the yoke of sin. For as Christ
says, Math. 6. 24. Math. 6. 24.
We cannot serve two masters, both God and Mammon, but must of necessity
cleave to the one and forsake the other. The which we cannot but do, if that we
consider that this new service is not like to the old, It is not a painful,
doleful and ignominious condition, but an easy, pleasant and glorious state.
For the yoke of Christ is easy, and the burdens which he lays on the
shoulders of his servants, are light, at the least no heavier then they are
able by his grace to bear. Yea this is such a service as that the faithful
may more truly and fitly be called Christ's friends, then servants.

So then to conclude this chapter, we may, and that not unfitly compare the
spiritual state of all the faithful, to the outward state of one of them
named Onesimus, of whom we read in the epistle written to Philemon: Philem. 1.
who having fled from his master, was by the Apostle Paul converted to the
faith, and afterward reconciled to his master, as all the believers are to God
the father, by the intercession not of any Saint or Angel; but of Jesus
Christ the son of God who speaks to his father in this manner: I beseech
thee for thy elect children who are begotten to the faith by the ministry of
my gospel, and who in time past were unprofitable, but now are profitable both
to thee and to their brethren, although (such is their desire to advance thy
glory) when they have done all that they can, they think it nothing, and
count themselves unprofitable servants. They departed from thee for a season,
that thou might receive them for ever, into an immutable state of grace and
happiness, from the which it is impossible that they should fall. Receive
them therefore not as servants, but above servants, even as friends, and as
my beloved brethren. For masters do not use to make their servants of their
counsel, but I have revealed thy wholle will unto them. If they do owe thee
any thing, as they have sinned griuously against thee, that put on my
accountes: score it upon my cross, I will pay it: nay I have already paid it
to the full. Thus we have for the greater evidence of this matter allegorized
the Apostles words, although contrary to our use, yet not without the warrant
of the practice of the Apostle in diverse places.

CHAP. IX.
Sect. 1. Of man's subjection to God as to his teacher,
THe fourth kind of subjection, which man being in the state of innocence did
owe to God, is the subjection of the scholar, or disciple to his teacher or
master. For man before his fall had no other schoolmaister then God himself,
no other teacher, preacher or instructor: for then God was to man all in all:
Of man's subection to God as to his teacher.
he did instruct him immediately by his own voice without the ministry of
man. For as a man need not light a candle wherewith to see, whenas the son
shines clearly in his eyes; no more needed man in his innocence to be taught
by man, seeing that he enjoying the bright sunshine of Gods presence, did
therein as in a most clear cristall glass see all things which were needful
to be known. So that as in the fourth estate of man, which is the second state
of glory, tongues shall cease, yea prophecies with all ecclesiastical
functions shall be abolished and have an end, ^ Cor. 13. 8*
as we read, 1. Cor. 13. 8. so in this perfect and happy state, which was the
first state of glory, they had not as yet any beginning.

For we are not to think that in the state of innocence of men some were
wise, learned, and endued with understanding, and others foolish, rude and
ignorant, as they are now in the world: seeing that the natural knowledge of
all men was perfect, although it might have been increased either by the holy
Angels, who excel man in all gifts and therefore in knowledge, or by the
immediate revelation of God himself. Yet the Angels were not the teachers of
man (unless that it pleased God to use their ministry at some times) for they
had not any such function committed unto them, neither did they know all
things which concern man's estate: for the revealed will of God was known to
man (so far forth as it did concern him) as well as to the Angles. And as
for that which was not as yet revealed, it was unknown to the Angels, as well
as to man. Yet we do not mean, that man in his innocence, had no need of
teachers in the time of his childhood, or that being now come to ripe age, he
might not receive increase of knowledge by the means of some other man, as we
are to declare in the third part of this treatise: but that he being of perfect
age, was able of himself without the teaching of any other, to attain to the
true and perfect knowledge of God. But here it may be asked, what this is that
man being endued with perfect knowledge, could learn of God. We answer, that
although man wanted no knowledge which was any way needful for his present
state, or which might be required in perfect happiness, yet it was ordained by
God that his knowledge should continually increase, as God should from time
to time reveal himself more and more unto him. For the event of things in
the continual administration of the world, would have laid open many of
Gods counsels, decrees, and actions which could not be foreseen by man in
the beginning, neither were revealed to him by God.

Thus we see the subjection it self: the duties belonging unto it, are these
two; The first, that man be ready to learn of God, whatsoever it pleases him
to teach. The second follows or rather goes before the first, to wit, that
he believe whatsoever God says unto him. For discentem oportet credere,
nothing can be learned unless the teacher be believed. These duties are such,
as that man might easily perform them unto God. For how is it possible, that
he should not learn, having such a teacher, as is able to put knowledge and
wisdom even into stocks and stones? And how shall he not be believed, who is
truth it self? For every thing that is true, is therefore true because it
comes from God. He is the fountain of truth: for there is no truth in the
creature, but that which it received from God. And therefore as a man may
boldly drink of the fountain it self, because the water of it cannot as yet
be corrupted, but if he let the said water run some distaunce of place from
the fountain, so that he be constrained to take it at the second hand, it
having run by many weeds, ditches, and whatsoever thing it might meet
withal, he may easily be deceived, and drink filthy and noisome water, for
that which is pure and wholesome: so if man learn of God, he need not fear any
false or corrupt doctrine with the which he may perhaps meet, if he be
instructed by any creature, whether man or Angel.

Sect. 2. Of man's rebellion to God his teacher.
ANd yet for all this, such is the graceles untowardness of sinful man in
this his corrupt estate, that like a trewantly boy, he forsakes God his
heavenly teacher, altogether refusing to be taught and nurtured by him. This
Solomon teaches us in the book of the proverbs, wherein he does at large
describe the fool refusing to hear the voice of wisdom, criing openly in the
streets: that is, the carnal man rejecting the knowledge of God, and all
godliness (which only is true wisdom) Pro. 1. 20. ^ou. 1. 20


But man will allege in his own defense that there is good cause, why he
should refuse to have God to be his teacher: seeing that if he, being now
defiled with sin, should come into the presence of God, it could not be but
that he should be consumed, even as powder, flax, straw or any such matter when
it meets with fire. To this we answer, that this fear of man is just and
not without cause, it being impossible that he should come before God, being as
he is polluted with sin, and not be incontinently destroyed: yet that this
is no sufficient defense of this rebellion, for so much as God (that he might
make the wicked more in excusable, and more fitly save his elect) has in
great mercy appointed that man, being now sinful, should be instructed in
the knowledge of God by the ministry of sinful men, like unto himself in all
respects, of whose presence he need not be afraid: Job. 33. 6. 7*
and yet such men as are furnished by God with sufficient gifts for the
performance of this work. For although there be in the men themselves much
ignorance, many infirmities: yea oftentimes great corruption of sin, yet
their ministry is by the blessing and work of God straungly powreful and
mighty, in bringing men from ignorance and sin, to the knowledge and
obedience of God: that which they teach, being the true and certain word of
the eternal God, the heavenly Manna and food of man's souls, howsoever it be
set before men in base and earthen vessels, to wit, in weak men consisting of
flesh and blood as the hearers themselves do.

But how do men receive this ministry of man? are they not so thankful to
God for this mercy, that howsoever, they did before altogether abhor from
learning the word of God, for fear of being destroyed by him, yet they are
now so desirous of knowledge, so careful to provide themselves of able and
sufficient teachers, so diligent in resorting to the places of Gods worship, so
attentive in hearing the word preached, and so careful to practice it in
their lives, as that nothing more can be required of them? nay are they not as
untoward and ungracious as they were before? Yes truly: yea they are further
off from learning then they were: they did before fear to be taught by God
himself, now they disdain to be taught by men, whom they think no better
then themselves: if God were their teacher, they could take no exception
against him, but only of their own sin. But now they find a hundred
faults with their teachers, sometimes they say that they have no learning, no
knowledge in the arts, or in the tongues, they are not cunning in the ancient
fathers, they want eloquence, utterance, fit words to express their meaning:
sometimes they find faults in their lives: for if they see them eat and
drink, mary wives, provide for their children, build houses, or purchase
living, and keep company, they call them epicures, drunkardes and worldlings,
if they abstain from these things, they say they have no good nature, and want
manners.

This natural state of man we have most liuelely pictured out unto us in the
people of the Jews, who having God not only for their king, father and
master, but also for their doctor or teacher, did desire that God would not
speak immediately to them, appearing in his glory and majesty, as he had done:
because that it was impossible for any man to hear the voice of God and live,
but rather would use the ministry and mediation of Moses for the declaration
of his will to them. But when they had this their request granted, Deuteronomy. 5. 25.
how they did submit themselves to this ministry of man, Stephen tells them
to their faces, Act. 7. 15.
Act. 7. 15. saying, Ye stifnecked and of uncircumcised hearts and ears, ye
have always rebelled against the holy Ghost: as your fathers did so do you:
which of the Prophets, have not your fathers persecuted and slain? whereunto
Christ gives witness, Mat. 21. 33.
Mat. 21. 33. with all the Prophets, of whom there is not one from Moses, who
was their first Prophet, to Christ, who was the last (for in him all prophecies
were fulfilled) who does not complain, that they do continually stretch out
their hands and voices to a rebellious and gainsaying people, Romans 10. 22*
Romans 10. 22.

Yea they rejected the ministry both of John Baptist and of Christ himself,
saying of John, who lived an austere life, that he was possessed of a devil;
and of Christ, who (to make them inexcusable) used their own fashions, as
far as might be done without sin, that he was a glutton, a drinker of wine
and a companion of publicans and sinners. Thus are all unregenerate men
disposed. For howsoever for a show of religion, and to avoid the reproach of
men, and the punishment of laws, they do go to the Church to hear sermons:
yet they take no delight in hearing (unless it be in the eloquence of the
preacher) and tho their bodies be present, yet their minds are about some
worldly pleasure or profit. Yea it goes in at one ear and out at another. For
when they come home they never take account of themselves, their wives,
children or servants, what they have learned, but falling to their ordinary
talk of worldly matters, or going about some buisinesse, which they have in
hand, never once think on the word of God, but forget it for ever, as if
they never heard of any such matter, and so they are always in learning, and
yet they do never learn or come to the knowledge of the truth, 2. Tim. 3. 7.
2. Tim. 3. 7. They do not delight in reading the scriptures, and other
books, which might help them forward in learning religion, but if they can
get a book of stories, or of some pleasant conceits finely penned, there is
their delight.

By what marvel is it, that men do not learn Gods word when as they do not
believe it? for although they be content to say as other men say, and to
believe as the Church believes, Yet they say in their hearts there is no God,
Psalm. 14. 1.
Psalm. 14, no heaven or hell: let us eat and drink, for after death there is
no pleasure. Neither is it any great marvel, that the unregenerate man does
not believe the word of God, seeing he is so dull and blockish, that he cannot
conceive it, 1. Cor. 2. 14.
1. Cor. 2. 14. The natural man perceives not the things of God, neither can
he, because they are spiritually discerned, whereof more hereafter. Hence it
comes that it is so hard a matter to bring men to any true knowledge of GOD,
Heb. 5. 11.
Heb. 5. 11. These spiritual mysteries are hard to be uttered, because ye are
dull of hearing. And therefore men must be taught religion as children are
taught to read, learning one letter to day and another to morrow, one point
now, and the rest hereafter, as the prophet complains of the dullness of the
Jews. Esaias. 28. 13. Esaias. 28. 23.


But it may be here objected that if natural men be so dull and unable to
understand Gods word, they are not to be blamed for not learning, and for not
doing that which they cannot do. Whereunto we answer that this dulnes of men
comes through their own defaulte, in that they cannot by any means be
brought to bestow their natural gifts, their time, and labor in learning.
The which thing if they would once carefully and heartely do, and so continue
without being weary in seeking to know GOD, and in using the means of their
salvation, joining with their endeavors hearty prayer to God for his blessing,
they would soon see that it is an easy matter to learn these things, the
which are of that nature, that one point of them being well learned, all the
rest will follow of their own accord: so that all the hardness is in
beginning to learn. Yea GOD is hard at hand, and easy to be found of all
that seek him, howsoever it be impossible for man by his own wit or industry,
without the grace of God, to attain the true and saving knowledge of God.

Sect. 3. Of the renewed subjection of man to God his teacher.
In the third place we are to consider the contrary disposition of those, who
being renewed by the spirit of God, give themselves unto his discipline to be
instructed by him in all things. For although they attain to their knowledge
by the means and ministry of man, whereby it has pleased God rather then by
his own voice, or by immediate revelation that the salvation of his elect
should be wrought: yet not man, but God himself is the author and worker of
this knowledge, who as he did in the state of man's innocence; so does he in
his regeneration reveal himself and his will unto them by his holy spirit,
Job. 32. 8.
Job. 32. 8. There is indeed a spirit iu man, but it is the spiration of the
almighty that gives understanding. Math. 13. 8. 10. Callnot any man Rabbi
master or doctor, Math. 13. 8. ^
For you have one doctor, even Christ, and all ye are brethren: That is, you
are not to think that because you hear men preach unto you, that therefore
your minds are enlightened by them; for they are your brethren, that is, men
like to your selves, Of man's rebellion to God his teacher.
who cannot without the special work of my spirit learn any thing
themselves, much less teach others: so that Christ is the head master in the
school of his Church; who although he be absent from it according to his
human nature, yet he is present in it by his spirit, by the which he teaches
the faithful all things needful, and that without any error or shadow of
any. For as has been declared, it is impossible that God should deceive or be
deceived, and therefore the holy ghost is called, The spirit of truth. Ioh. 14.
16. and 15. 26. ^^h. 14. 16. and ^^. 26.
Christ promises that, When he comes he shall lead them into all truth.
^^h. 17. 13.
Ioh. 17. 13.

And as God is the teacher, so the faithful are his scholars, as all those who
did believe the gospel, ^ Thessalonians. 4. 9.
are usually in the book of the acts called Disciples, and 1 Thessalonians. 4. 9. Men
taught by God. Ineede not (says the Apostle) to write to you of brotherly
love, for you are taught of God to love one another. That is, the spirit of God
has already engraven the doctrine of love in your minds and hearts, and
there fore ye have not so great need and use of my ministry in this behalf,
as they whom God has not taught after this manner. Thus the prophet David
often prays to God that it would please him to instruct him in his
commandments, as we may read often. Psalm. 119. Psalm. 119.


Lastly they perform to God the second duty of this subjection, which is to
believe his word in all things: rejecting whatsoever is contrary thereunto.
Yea tho an Angel did preach it from heaven: all antiquity, Churches, councels,
all the wise and learned men in the world do maintain and affirm it, yea tho
their own wits and senses do witness the truth of it: so that the faithful
may in this respect be compared to the scholars of a certain philosopher named
Pythagoras, who if they once heard any thing uttered by their master, they
held that as a most certain truth, without inquiring any further into it. And
so among the true disciples of Christ his holy word is of so absolute
authority, as that no doubt is made of any thing, therein contained.

CHAP. X.
Sect. 1. Of man's subjection to his creator.
THe last, and greatest kind of man's subjection is that, which he owes to God,
as to the creator of all things whereof there is no question to be made; Of
man's subjection to his creator.
and therefore we need not stand to prove it. The duties of this subjection
are three; The first is to glorify God: the second to be wholly moved in him
or by him: the third to rest contented in his will. For the first as the chief
and last end of the creation of the world, and of al things therein contained,
is the glory of God; so it is meet and needful, that all creatures jointly
and severally do perform this duty of glorifying him. Yea there is no
creature either so base, or so excellent that it should be exempted from this
duty. The greatest and mightiest creature must stoop to the performance of
it, as the weakest and seelyest thing in the world is able to set forth the
glory of God, Psalm. 145. 9. 10.
Psalm. 145. 9. 10. The Lord is good to all, and his mercy is over all his
works. All thy works O Lord shall praise thee. They shall show the glory and
beauty of thy kingdom.

Thus we see that it belongs to all creatures to praise GOD, as they are
exhorted particularly. Psalm. 148.
Psalm 148. and as we read. Revel. 5. 13. And all the creatures which are in
heaven, Reelu. 5. 13.
on the earth, under the earth, and in the sea, all things that are in them, I
hard saying praise, honor, glory and power be unto him that sits on the
throne, and unto the Lamb for evermore. Yet they do not all perform this
duty after the same manner: for those creatures which are void of reason, do
it only by giving to men and Angels matter of the actual setting forth of
Gods glory. For the reasonable creatures are as it were, the trumpeters of Gods
glory, which they do enlarge and publishe, as by all other their actions, so
chiefly by those which tend directly to God himself, and are usually called
the worship of God. For although all the actions of man in his pure estate, even
the common actions of life, as eating and drinking, did make for the glory of
God: yet these do not make the worship of God, because they do not directly
tend to his glory. But the worship of God in this state of innocence
consists especially in cenfession, which is an open acknowledging and
declaring of Gods glory in regard of his infinite and unspeakable power,
justice, wisdom, truth, love and bounty, shining in the creation and
administration of the world, and especially in them selves the most excellent
and happy creatures.

Thus do the angels in heaven worship God. Of man's subjection to God ^s to his
creator.
Reave. 7. 11. 12. And all the Angels stood round about the throne, and the
elders and the four beasts, Reu. 7. 11. 22
and they fell before the throne on their faces and worshipped God, saying,
Amen: praise, glory, wisdom, thanks, honor, power and might be unto our God
for evermore, Amen. Thus shall the faithful worship God in the state of
glory, and therefore this was Gods worship in the state of innocence,
wherein we are not to think that Adam offered sacrifices of beasts and other
things to God, Genesis 4. 3. 4.
as we read that his two sons Cain and Abel did, Genesis 4. 3. 4. for there
were no types in this state, because the mediator was neither promised nor
prefigured: yea there was no sin in it, and therefore no effusion of blood in
sacrifices: the which two, namely sin and death go together. But the
sacrifices in this state were the calves of man's lips, even his continual
giving of praise and thanks to God. Yet there was use also of prayer or
invocation as has been declared Chap. 7. Sect. 1.

Secondly it is the duty of the creature to move in the creator, that is, to
feel, perceive, know and acknowledge, that all the motions of it self, Reu.
7. 11. 22
all the mutations which may any way happen to it, as the first coming of it
into the world, the increases which it has, yea all the faculties of
performing any action come from God. Act. 17. 28.
Act. 17. 28. In God we live, move and have our being. The last duty of the
creature is to rest contented, howsoever it pleases God to dispose of it,
without murmuring or repining, no not at the utter destruction of it self.
This the Apostle teaches us, not to be so presumptuous as to ask of God, for
what cause he has elected some men to life, and rejected the rest, Romans 10
saying, Who art thou o man that pleadest with God, shall the thing formed say
to him that made it, why have thou made me thus? has not the potter power over
his clay, to make some vessels to honor, some to dishonor?

Sect. 2. Of man's rebellion against his creator.
THe last kind of man's rebellion is that, whereby he is wanting in that duty,
for the performing whereof, he and all other things in the world were
created. Of man's rebellion against his creator.
The duty is, the advancing and setting forth of the glory of God, the which
man in his corrupt estate, does not only, not enlarge, as he should do, but
also in all his actions, and in the whole course of his life, greatly hinder
and obscure: for although he do in his eternal confusion glorify God, by
manifesting his power and justice: yet this glory is not given by man, but
taken and extorted by God: and therefore it is no holy duty; wherein this is
especially required, that it be performed voluntarely without compulsion.

As touching the worship of God, whereby he is chiefly glorified, the Apostle
teaches us, Romans 1. 21
Romans 1. 21. that although man have some little knowledge of God by nature, yet
he does not glorify him as God, neither is thankful unto him, but becomes
extremely foolish, in turning the glory of the incorruptible God, into the
similitude of the image of corruptible things, and as of beasts* birds; yea of
creeping things, the basest of all other. And so does dishonor God, more then
can be spoken. Thus do all carnal men worship God, for although they be not
all so mad as to cast them selves down before stocks and stones, yet they are
all Idolatours making either their money, their belly, their honor, or some
other worldly thing their God, whom only they serve in deed, and heart.

Likewise as touching the other duty, whereas they should be wholly moved and
ordered by God as by the fountain and beginning of all things, and directed
by his spirit in every thing, that they do, they are moved by the spirit of
Satan, by his suggestions, and by the corrupt lusts and desires of their own
flesh to all evil. Likewise for the last duty, namely contentation: men are
content that God should do good to them, but they take it in snuff, that he
should dispose of them otherwise, then they think is for their good: whereof
to let other instances pass, it comes, that the doctrine of Gods eternal
reprobation is so curiously scanned, so hardly received; yea oppugned and
rejected by many.

Sect. 3. Of the renewed subjection of man to his creator.
But it is far otherwise with the faithful, who as soon as they are renewed
by Gods spirit, and so made new creatures, do forthwith make the glory of
God, the square and rule of all their actions, always doing that whereby it
may be most advanced: yea they make it the last mark and end whereat the
whole course of their lives shall wholly aim: insomuch that they make this
account with themselves, that if they can hit this mark by procuring Gods
glory in any good measure (yea tho it be with the loss of their own lives)
they think that they gain much by the bargain. They glorify God first, in
the common actions of their life, for they meet with nothing so mean and base,
which will not afforde them some matter to acknowledge the wisdom and
goodness of God. Secondly in giving to God his due worship: by praying unto
him as to the only giver of all good things, by giving thanks unto him from
whom they have received all those blessings, whether temporal or spiritual,
Of the renewed subjection of man to his creator.
which they enjoy: and lastly by praising God, as in all other respects, so
especially for that great and unspeakable mercy which it has pleased him to
bestow upon his elect servants.

In the state of innocence man praised God for his wisdom, power and
goodness showed in the creation of the world: for his justice, in rewarding
the holiness of his reasonable creatures with life and happiness: but now God
has put a new song of thanksgiving into our mouths, wherein the faithful
sound out the praises of that most loving, gracious, merciful, and pitiful
God, who has forgiven them all their sins, Psalm. 103. 3. 4.
and pardoned their iniquity, who has redeemed their souls from the pit of
everlasting confusion, and has crowned them with mercy and compassions. Psalm.
103. 3. 4. And therefore this was an usual form of thanksgiving used in the
Church from time to time, Psalm. 136.
Confess unto the Lord, or praise him, 2. Chro. 5. 13. and 7. 3. 6. and 20.
21.
and why? because he is good, because his mercy endures for ever and ever. As
we may see, Psalm. 136. in every verse, 1. Esd. 3. 11.
2. Chro. 5. 13. and 7. 3. 6. and 20. 21. 1. Esd. 3. 11.

This celebrating of the praises of God the godly count the greatest pleasure
and happiness in the world: Psalm. 62. 6. My mouth is filled even as it were
with marrowe and fatness (that is, with the most sweet and pleasant things)
when as I praise the Lord, Psalm. 62. 6.
says the prophet: Psalm. 84. 5
and again, Psalm. 84. 5. Blessed are they, that stand in thy courts o God,
for why? they shall evermore be praising thee. For although the faithful might
praise God, though they lived out of the Church in a wilderness: yet for the
greater advancement of Gods glory, they desire and labor that they may praise
God, not among wild beasts and trees, but in the assembly of Gods people, as
it were before many witnesses.

Now as touching the second duty of the creature which is to move only in
the creator, and by virtue received from him, we know, that as the bodies of
the faithful do not move themselves, but are moved by the power of the soul,
within their bodies; so neither their bodies nor souls are moved by any other
power, but by the holy spirit of God: for they do not think their own
thoughts, desire their own pleasures, speak their own words, or do their
own works, but are wholly moved and ordered by the spirit of God. Lastly
this property of a faithful man is worthy to be noted that he is not only
patient, in regard of the greatest evils, which can be laid upon him, in in
this world (as has been declared in the chapter of Filial subjection) but
also would be content if that it should please God to destroy him utterly,
Job. (...)
and eternally. Job. 13. 15. If God kill me, 2. Sa^^
shall I not trust in him? so David says, 2. Sam. 15. 26. If I have found
favor in the eyes of God, he will bring me back again to see the place of
his worship, (...). 5.
but if he say, I have no pleasure in him (what then?) behold here I am, let
him do to me, whatsoever seems good in his own eyes.

CHAP. XI.
Of man's subjection to God as to an husband.
THus we see the diverse kinds of the renewed subjection of man, correspondent
to the kinds of created subjection: to the which there is one other kind of
subjection to be added, the which was not in the state of innocence, and
therefore could not be lost by the fall of man. Of man's subjection to God as
to a husband.
This is the subjection of the wife to the husband, by the which bond it has
pleased God of his unspeakable mercy and love, to tie the faithful to himself,
so that they should be to him, not only as subjects, sons, servants,
scholars, and creatures, but also as his espoused wife. This strange marriage
is celebrated and extolled in that song of songs, the which is wholly to be
understood of this spiritual marriage betwixt God and the faithful: likewise
it is set down, ^phe. 5. ^2.
Ephe. 5. verse. 22. to verse 33. The husband is the wives head as Christ is
the head of the Church, therefore as the Church is in subjection to Christ, so
ought wives to be to their husbands.

This kind of subjection is called, Ephe. 5. 32, ^phe. 5. 32.
A great mystery, and therefore it needs to be explained after this manner.
The riches of the love and mercy of God, redeeming man from sin and death, is
so exceeding great, as that he thinking it a small matter to restore him to
that perfect and excellent estate from the which he fell, does advance him to a
higher degree both of holiness and of happiness. Hence it comes that man is
more nearely joined to God, then he was before, both in subjection and in
conformity. But what bond of subjection, can join man more nearly unto God
then the son is to his father? after the which manner, man was before joined
to God, as has been declared. We answer that although this conjunction which
is betwixt the son and the father be very great: yet the word of God
teaches us that a greater may be given, to wit, that which is betwixt the wife
and the husband: for this conjunction makes two distinct persons to become one
person, and one flesh, Mat. 19. 5.
Mat. 19. 5, but that other conjunction has no such strange effect. And
therefore it has pleased god in mercy to tie and knit man to himself, not
only with those bonds of subjection, wherewith he was tied to him in the state
of innocence, but also with this new and most strait bond, taking all the
faithful unto himself, not only as his loyal subjects, as faithful
servants, as toward scholars, as orderly creatures, and lastly as natural
sons, but also as a most dear and beloved wife joined to himself with such
an indissoluble bond of love on his part, and such loyal affection on their
parts, as shall never be broken, even as the husband takes to himself his
beloved spouse, on whom he will bestow all his love, riches and care, and
whom he will defend against all evils and dangers whatsoever.

This contract made betwixt GOD, and his Church is set down, Ezech. 16. ^^ech.
16.
the words are many, yet worthy to be remembered. Now when I went by thee and
looked upon thee, behold^ thy time was come, yea, even the time to woo thee:
then spread I my clothes over thee to cover thy dishonesty, yea, I made an oath
unto thee, and contracted my self with thee ( says the Lord God) and so thou
becamest mine own. Then washed I thee with water, and purged thy blood from
thee, and I anointed thee with oil, I clothed thee with broidred work, and
shodde thee with badgers skin, and I girded thee about with fine linen, and
covered thee with silk. I decked thee with costly apparel, I put braselets
upon thy hands* a chain about thy neck, and I put a frontlet upon thy face*
and earings upon thine ears, and a beautiful crown upon thine head. Thus
wast thou decked with gold and silver, and thy raimente was of fine linen and
of silk, and of broidred work: thou did eat fine flower, home and oil,
marvelous wast thou, and thou did luckily prosper into a kingdom, and
thy name was spread among the heathen forthy beauty. etc.

For the further declaration hereof, if we do consider the notable resemblance
which is betwixt marriage and this new conjunction of man to God, we shall have
great cause to admire the wisdom of the holy ghost, who in enditing the
scriptures does paint out such dark mysteries with so lively colors, and does
so fit earthly types to spiritual things. The ground of this new
conjunction whereby man is more nearely, firmly, and surely tied to God then
he was before, is the incarnation of Christ, wherein our nature was inseparably
united to the godheade in one person, even as the wife (which before was of a
diverse kind, blood and name) being now espoused to her husband, becomes one
flesh, blood and bone with him, yea one person called by one and the same
name; so that as the wife being thus, as it were incorporated to her husband,
is more nearely joined to him then any other whosoever, whether son,
kinsman, orfriende, and may more confidently look to be enriched and protected
by him: so the faithful being now in the human nature of Christ thus
espowsed and made one person with GOD, are more nearely joined to him then man
was in the state of innocence, wherein God did not take unto him self the
nature of man, and therefore did not acknowledge man to be as his beloved
spouse, and a part of his own person, but only as his subject, servant,
scholar, creature and son. All which are distinct persons from the King,
master, teacher, creator, and father: and so may more certainly and
undoubtedly look to be not only protected and saved from death, by the
strength of God their new husband, but also to be enriched by him with all
spiritual and heavenly blessings belonging to a holy and happy estate.

Thus we see the manner of this new subjection, the duties belonging to it are
all those, which a dutiful wife owes to her husband: as namely, that she
please him, and cleave inseparably to him. For the first as the Apostle
writes, 1 Cor. 7. 34. As she that is married cares for worldly things how she
may please her husband; ^ Cor. 7* 34.
so ought the faithful endeavor by all means to please their heavenly
husband, by being pure both in body and soul, doing all those things, which
they know are acceptable in his sight: especially by performing the second
duty, to wit, that they renounce all other things in the world, and cleave fast
to God without separation: even as the wife forsakes father, mother, sisters,
brethren, kindred and acquaintance, and betaketh her self wholly to her
husband. This duty of the church to Christ is notably described, Psalm 45. 11.
12. Hear o daughter, incline thine care, forgette thy people and thy fathers
house: so shall the King have pleasure in thy beauty, Psalm. 45. 11. 12:
for he is thy Lord, and worshipp thou him. Yea there can no wife have so good
cause to perform all loyal duty to her husband, as the faithful have in
respect of God. For if it should please some great prince to advance some
base, poor and miserable woman to the dignity of being his wife, all men
would say, that she could not by any duties of subjection, show her self
sufficiently thankful, how then shall sinful man, who of himself is the most
wretched creature in the world, but is now espowsed to God the King of Kings,
behave himself in any measure so dutifully as he o^^ht?

The second part of this treatise wherein is handled the second part of man's
holiness and sinfulness, to wit, his conformity or likeness to God with the
contrary unlikeness or defermitie.
CHAP. I
Sect. 1. Of the image of God in man in his pure estate.
IT has been declared, that the good estate of the reasonable creature whether
man or Angel, consists in this, that he be joined to God, the fountain of
all goodness, both personally or locally in happiness, and also spiritually
in perfect holiness. The which holiness has two parts: Subjection and
Conformity. For so it has pleased God in great wisdom to join these two
together in his reasonable creatures, least that they should be too much either
debased by the one, or lifted up by the other. For if they had been made like
to God without subjection, they would easily have been brought to think
themselves ^quall to God, Of the image of God in man in his pure estate.
and if they had been subject to ^od without any likeness or rese^blance to him,
^ey should have lacked that wherein their ^hole excellency and dignity does
consist, ^ have been in the same condition with the ^ute beasts. Thus God has
created the ^ule of man, in an equal temperament ^f contrary qualities, that
so the one might ^ualifie and preserve the other. The sub^ection of man is
already declared: now ^olloweth his conformity, which is that ^arte of man's
holiness, wherein he resembles God, or is like unto God, usually ^alled in
scripture the image of God: for as there is a likeness and similitude betwixt
^n image, and that whereof it is the image, so there is in respect of this
part of man's holiness a likeness betwixt God and man.

For the better understanding of this matter, and the easier resolving of those
manifold doubts, which are moved about it, it is needful that we declare
what God is, to whom we make man to be like. The essence of God is so infinite,
secret, and hidden that it cannot be conceived in our minds, much less
expressed in words to the capacity of others. For whereas it is said, Ioh 4.
24.
John. 4. 24. That God is a spirit, the meaning is, that the nature of God is
not visible and sensible, but mystical and wonderful as are spirits. For
otherwise the name of spirit as it is given to Angels, is too gross to
express the essence of God. Yet it has pleased God in mercy to make himself
known unto us by his properties, usually called by the divines, the attributes
of God, as his knowledge, wisdom, justice, mercy, love, power, eternity, and
such other. For as we in common speech going about to describe any man, do
mention his virtues, qualities and conditions, saying that he is honest,
gentle, faithful, liberal, just, and learned: so we have revealed unto us in
scripture no other essence or nature of God, but the aforesaid attributes, and
therefore if we would describe God, we must say that he is a certain essence,
most simple without any manner of composition, existing of it self, and from
whom all creatures and actions do exist, being eternal without beginning or
ending, infinite in knowledge, wisdom, justice, mercy, love, strength, power,
and in all goodness, holiness, and purity.

Thus we see in part what God is: now the image of God in the creature is,
whenas it is like to God in some of the aforesaid ^espectes: as when the
creature is endued with knowledge, wisdom, justice, power, ^oue, mercy, or
any other of the attributes of God. But it may be here objected, that ^f the
attributes of God, which are his essence may be given to any creature, then ^t
should be partaker of gods nature, and so be a God. We answer, that the
attributes of God may be in the creature, although not so as they are in God:
for example; God has strength and the creature has strength, every one more
or less. Yet there is this difference, that the strength of God is essential
unto him, and a part of his nature: but the strength of the creature is a
quality or accidental thing, which may be spared: as when we see two suns,
the one is a true substance, but the other is only the reflection of the beams
of the true sun. In God it is primarelie as in the fountain, but the
creature has his strength from God: in God it is infinite, in the creature it
is finite; God has all strength, the creature has but some, yea the strength
of the mightiest creature, is great weakness in comparison of the power of
God.

Again, some man may object, if all things be infinite in God, and finite in
the creature, there can be no proportion or similitude betwixt them. Of the
image of God in man is his pure estate.
We answer^ that there may be tho no proportion, ye^ similitude betwixt an
infinite and a finit^ thing: as for example, one drop of water i^ like to the
great Ocean: both being of the same matter, and of the same form, both being
water and round. Again, to take our first similitude, the body of the sun
may be said to be of an infinite greatness (although no creature be simply
infinite) for philosophers do teach that it is far greater then the whole
earth, and yet a man may see the likeness and image of it in a little dishfull
of water: Lastly not all the attributes of God, but only some of them can be
given to the creature, for no creature is eternal, infinite, or existing of it
self* In the which respect, we call this resemblance which the creature has
to God, rather a likeness, then an image; for we know that an image is like to
the thing it self in every respect, as the image of a man seems to be a man,
the image of the sun or moon in the water, seems to be the sun or moon
it self. But no creature seems to be God, because it is unlike to God in more
respects, then it is like, for a beast may be like a man in many respects, as
is an Ape: yet we do not say that it is the image of man, because the
unlikeness and difference is greater then the likeness.

But to apply these things to the matter in hand. It will be here said, why
then does the scripture say, that man was created according to the image of
God? we answer, that the holy Ghost in enditing the scripture, has more
regard to our capacity, then to the exact propriety of speech and therefore
calls the likeness of man to God, by the name of Gods image, that he might
distinguish it, (as being far greater) from the likeness, which other
creatures have to God. For as a man speaking of beasts, may say that a horse
or any other beast is like to a man, because it has a head, eyes, mouth,
breast and belly as a man has: but when he comes to the Ape, or to the
Satyr, there he finds so great likeness, that he sticks not to call it,
though improperly, the very image and picture of a man. So the scripture
says that every thing has some likeness to God. For the stars are
glorious, the heavens are simple, the fire is pure, the air is subtle, the
thunder is fearful, the wind is mighty, the rain is good, the rocks and
many other things in a manner eternal, the birds of the air and the beasts
of the field are careful to preserve those which they bring into the world,
and are loving and pitiful toward them, as God is affected toward all his
creatures; and therefore every creature has alikenes to God. Whereof it
comes that God does often in the scripture compare himself, even to his
senseless and brutish creatures, Esa. 5. 29.
as may be seen Esa. 5. 29. Hosea. 5. 14. Hosea. 5. 14.
yea we read, Genesis 1. 31. That God looking on his creatures, Genesis 1. 31.
said, That they were all good. Whereof it follows that they are all like to
God, who is goodness it self, and is said to be only good, Math. 19. 17.
Math. 19. 17.
But when as the holy ghost in the scripture comes to speak of a man being
endued with reason, understanding, knowledge, wisdom, and memory, with
justice, equity, courage, temperance, chastity, love, pity and all manner of
holiness, with a beautiful proportion of body and excellent gifts of the
mind, yea with lordshippe and dominion over all these earthly creatures, he
says of him, that he is the very image of God, as if he were a finite and a
created God. And yet he does not mean that man is either a God, or the image
of God: for there can be no image of God, either found in any creature, or
imagined by the mind of any man or Angel; only Christ the eternal and
essential son of God is the express character and engraven form of the
father, being so much more his image then any man or Angel is: as a natural
son begotten of the body of his father, being of the same substance, flesh,
blood, bone, stature, color and conditions with his father, is more his image,
then is an ape, horse, or any other beast.

Thus we see that the image of God in man, is, that great similitude, which he
has to God, whom he does resemble not only in one, or in a few respects as
other creatures do, but in many, yet not in all. In this sense God after that
he had made all other creatures, Genesis 1. 26.
says, Genesis 1. 26. Let us make man in our own image, according to our own
similitude. Where we see that the image and similitude of God are all one, both
signifying the difference of excellency, which is betwixt man and other
creatures there named. In like manner, if we compare man with the Angels, we
shall find that as he does far exceed the other creatures; so the Angels
do far exceed him, in bearing the image of God. Of the image of God in man
in his pure estate.
For they are endued with a greater measure of understanding, knowledge,
wisdom, strength, purity, holiness, and of all goodness, then any man is
capable of, and so they approach nearer to the nature of God, and are liker to
God then man is. Again, of men, they who have a greater measure of the
aforesaid attributes, have more of the image of God; as the magistrate who has
greater power and authority then private men, and therefore are in the
scripture called Gods: the man who has greater strength then the woman, and
therefore is said to be the image of God, whereas the woman is made the image
of the man, 1. Cor. 11. 7.
1. Cor. 11. 7. and so the rich, noble, learned, wise, aged man, in respect of
him who has a smaller measure of these gifts, may be called the image of God.
So that if we go from the basest worm creeping on the earth, to the most
glorious Angel in heaven, as each one is more excellent then other, so it is
liker to God: yet the scripture vouchsafes this title of Gods image, to none
save only to man and Angels. This is the general acception, and in this sense
the image of God is also usually taken by divines writing of man's holiness.

Thirdly it may be used yet more specially, to signify not all the holiness
of man, but only that part of it, whereby he resembles God more notably then
in the other: for as touching all those parts of man's holiness, which have
been declared in the first part of this treatise, they cannot be properly said
to be any part of the image of God, because there is no such thing in God, he
being over all and therefore ackngwledging no manner of subjection to any,
neither any duty of subjection, as affiance, hope, fear, reverence,
imitation, invocation, service, worship, thanks, or any other of that kind.
But if we speak of man's understanding, knowledge, wisdom, love, hatred, or
any other of the faculties of his mind or will, we may call these very fitly
the image of God, because man does in these points resemble God, in whom the
like things are found. Yet the scripture, and those learned men which follow
the phrase of the scripture, do not speak improperly in calling the whole
holiness of man by this name: seeing that holiness in general is gods image,
who is perfectly holy; and therefore he that loses the first part of his
holiness, namely the due subjection of man to God, or is wanting in the
performance of any duty belonging unto it, as the wicked Angels rebelling
against God, and yet keeping a great part of their conformity to God in
knowledge and wisdom, strength, and many other respects have done, he is
unlike to God, who is not perfectly holy, and has lost the image of god. So
that to conclude, we are in this second part to entreat of the image of God
in this third sense, it signifying the second part of man's holiness, wherein
he does more specially resemble God, and which for the excellency of it has
the name of the whole given unto it. But because the image of God is usually
taken more generally, therefore we will call this second part of man's holiness
the likeness, similitude, or conformity of man to God, the which is the right
and orderly disposition of those faculties of man's soul, wherein he does
resemble God, to wit, of his mind and will: whereof hereafter in particular.

Sect. 2.
Of man's deformity or unlikeness to God.
AS God created man so like unto himself in perfect happiness and holiness,
that he might in some sort be said to bear about with him the image of the
great and glorious God of heaven; so man by his fall lost that precious jewel
which was unto him as a chain of gold about his neck, yea as it is called,
Psalm. 8. 6.
Psalm. 8. 6. A crown of honor and glory: And so became miserable and unholy
as unlike to God, as darkness to light, and hell to heaven. And yet the image
of God, is not so clean abolished, but that there are some relics of it to
be seen in man: for look in how many respects either of happiness or
holiness, man since his fall does excel the rest of the creatures; so much of
the image of God does remain in him. As for example, one part of man's
happiness was the outward dignity of his body, the use of Gods creatures, in
the which respects man has, even in this his corrupt estate, evident relics
of Gods image. Likewise for the other part of Gods image, Of man's deformity or
unlikeness to God.
there remains in the mind of man, some small knowledge of God, of good and
evil, the which if it were perfect, were the holiness of the mind.

Yet these relics do not make, that any one part of Gods image does remain:
the which is wholly defaced, although not utterly abolished. It may now be
compared to a fair picture of some beautiful man, whereof every part is
blemished, stained, and mangled. Yet not so, but that the proportion of it may
be discerned, and each part distinguished from other: or (as it is commonly) to
the ruins of some stately palace: or lastly, to a dead child, wherein
although we may discern the likeness and image of the Father, yet it is but a
vile, lothsom and rotten carcass. Therefore these relics do not make man to
be either happy or holy in part: only they serve for these uses: First to be
monuments of the great bounty and goodness of God, showed to man in creating him
after his own likeness. Secondly to be as means whereby God might work the
salvation of his elect, and suffer the reprobate (who by this means become
inexcusable) to work their own eternal damnation. Thus we see the general
deformity of man, consisting in wretchedness and sinfulnes, the particulars
whereof we are not here to declare: Of man's deformity or vnliknesse to God.
because the former part has showed both the wretchedness of man, and the
first part of his sinfulness: only we are here to entreat of that special
deformity of man, whereby some parts of his holiness are defaced, namely,
those wherein he did so rese^ble God, as that he might have been said to have
the^ in common with God, as are the mind, memory, will, and many of the
affections, and in brief the chief faculties of the soul of man, all which
are strangely corrupted and wholly perverted from that good, holy and
orderly disposition wherein they were created.

Sect. 3.
Of the renewed Image of God in man.
AS the fall of man defaced the Image of God in man; so the grace of God does
wholly restore the same, both in happiness and also in holiness, as has
been declared in part already: only there remains that part of renewed
holiness to be handled, which may most properly be called the image of God;
consisting in the renouation of the reasonable mind and will, even the
faculties of man's soul: not that God has a soul, or any such faculties of a
soul as man has, but only it has pleased him to resemble his
incomprehensible essence to our nature for our capacity: (...) the renew^d
Image of God in man.
for the faculties of a reasonable soul, being in due order, do greatly
resemble the nature of God, which is reasonable, or rather reason it self. And
therefore although in truth not like to any created nature, yet liker to
reasonable creatures, then to any other. Yet we have rather chosen to call it
the conformity of man to God: because the image of God is usually taken more
generally: sometimes for the wholle conjunction of man with God, both outward
in happiness, and spiritual in holiness; And sometime only for one part of
it, namely for renewed holiness. Col. 3. 10 and for renewed happiness. Coll.
3* 10.
2. Cor 3. 18. 2 Cor. 3. 18.
But the image of God is taken more specially, for the special conjunction of
man to God in holiness, especially in the writings of the Apostles, who do
not speak so much of the renouation of man's happiness (because that is not
present, but to come in the world to come) as of his holiness, the renouation
whereof the faithful are to labor for in this life, leaving their happiness
to the time appointed by God.

CHAP. II.
Sect. 1.
Of the created holiness of the mind.
Among the faculties of ma^s soul, the first and chief place is given to the
mind, or understanding part it being the first both in nature and also in
dignity: for it is the beginning and fountain from the which the other
faculties, yea all the motions and actions of the whole man do flow: and is of
so great dignity, that by reason of it, man does not only far excel all
other visible creatures without comparison, but also approaches very near to
the excellency of the Angels, and does in some sort resemble the all-knowing
essence of God. This did Satan know very well, that man was like to God in
nothing so much as in his understanding, and therefore he persuaded Eua to eat
of the forbidden fruit, by promising that by that means she should attain
to a greater measure of knowledge, and so consequently greater likeness to
God then she had. For so he says, Genesis 3. 5. God knows that when ye shall
eat of this fruit, your eyes shall be opened, Genesis 3. 5.
and ye shall be as gods, knowing good and evil.

But to leave the dignity of the mind to them who take in hand the natural
description of man: Of the created holiness of the mind.
we are here to consider the spiritual state of it in respect of God, to wit,
the holiness of it. That the mind was created holy, no man can deny, but he
who sticks not to reproach his maker, as having erred in the most excellent
part of his work: and therefore it is more needful that we declare the
particulars of this holiness. First, what it is, or wherein it consists,
secondly the several parts of it: for the first.

The holiness of the mind consists in the perfect knowledge of God, and so
it may be briefly defined. Where we say perfect, we mean that perfection and
measure of knowledge, whereof the nature of man is capable, for there is a more
perfect and excellent knowledge in the Angels, then can be in any man. Again
there is more perfect knowledge of God in God then in any Angel. For God is
known perfectly and essentially to himself only. These transcendent kinds of
knowledge, which are without the compass of human nature, are not required
at the hands of man; and therefore he wants them without sin. Again, we
do not mean by perfection the highest degree, or the greatest measure of
knowledge which may be attained unto by man: for in this innocent estate, one
man may want that great measure of knowledge which an other man has, and yet
want no part or jot of the holiness of his mind; only by perfection we mean
that knowledge wherein there is no part wanting, which is any way needful for
the holy and happy estate of man: that is, whenas a man knows all those
duties which he owes to God, and whatsoever thing belongs necessarily to
his own good estate.

The second word of the definition is knowledge, whereby we mean both actual
and potentiall knowledge; Actual knowledge is that which is already really in
the mind: Potentiall knowledge is that virtue or faculty which conceaueth
things offered to the mind by any means. The first is to have knowledge, or
the habit of knowledge: the second is to be able to get that knowledge which
as yet is wanting: of these two hereafter in particular. Lastly by the
knowledge of God, we mean all manner of knowledge, whereof, although there be
diverse kinds, (as there are many things in the world besides God to be
known) yet the holiness of the mind consists in this, that it knows all
things in God, and nothing any otherwise then as it comes from God, and has
relation to him. For God is all things in all, and all things do exist in God:
and therefore every thing may be known in God, and God known, yea seen and
felt in every thing, even in the least and basest creature. The wicked Angels
are in this their corrupt estate endued with a great measure of knowledge, but
this their knowledge is void of all holiness, because it has no relation to
God and his glory: for this only is to be accounted the holiness of the
mind: not barely to know the natures, properties and differences of things,
but to see and acknowledge the wisdom, power goodness and glory of God in
them. For holiness has relation to God only, it sees God through the
meanest things, and does not rest in any thing, till it come to God.

Yet we are not to think that the mind of man is in this his innocence a
confused chaos, or heap of knowledge: for God the maker of man is not the
author of confusion: And therefore we are to distinguish this knowledge into
the several kinds and parts of it, whereof the first and chief is the
knowledge of God, that is, of the proper nature, attributes and actions of God:
the second is, the knowledge of the creatures. The first kind may be called
divine, be cause it tends directly and immediately to God himself. Where we
do not mean that man could possibly comprehend, within the narrow compass
of his shallow brain, the infinite and unsearchable essence of God, the which
thing the Angels cannot do. Yet we are not to doubt, but that he did think
aright without any error of the nature of God. And no maruaill seeing he did
see God face to face as the scripture speaks, that is, was daily conversant
in the presence and company of God, as the Angels in heaven are, although not
in the same measure: from this knowledge as from a fountain, springs the
knowledge of the creatures (commonly called human knowledge) because all the
creatures belonging to man, and serving for his use, are known for his good
only. For as a man may easily see all things, being there where the sun
shines clearly; so man living in Gods presence, could not have the nature of
any creature hid from his sight. From both these kinds of knowledge, came the
knowledge of evil: for, Rectum est index sui et obliqui, a straight rule or
line shows the crokednesse of any thing; and so all truth, good and right
shining in God and in his creatures, did show to man what was false, wrong,
hurtful, unlawful, or any way evil: for although Satan did promise to man a
greater measure of the knowledge of good and evil then he had, Genesis 3. 5.
Genesis 3. 5. as if his knowledge had been imperfect in that behalf; yet he
knew what was evil, better before his fall then afterward, although by his
fall he gott^ the sense and experience of evil which he wanted before.

Thus much in general of man's knowledge, the which is now to be considered
more particularly in the two kinds of it, Potentiall and Actual. Potentiall
knowledge is the aptness and ability of the mind, to conceive and
comprehend whatsoever it should please God to reveal. Here i^ may be asked,
by what means man in his innocent estate did attain to knowledge* We answer,
that Adam the first man was created in perfection as of body and soul so also
of actual knowledge, not gotten by sense, experience, observation, and by his
own industry, (and yet it was afterward to be increased by these means) but
engraven in his mind by the finger of God, and inspired by God together with
his mind. But his children were not to come so lightly to knowledge, to whom he
could not propagate his actual knowledge, but only his potentiall: for they
were to be borne as in weakness of body; so with minds void of all actual
knowledge, not having the forms, similitudes and universal notions of things
(called Ideae or species) engraven in them by nature, but being appointed by
God to seek for knowledge by some outward means, and so to replenish these
empty rooms with all variety of knowledge. The which thing was done in this
state far more easily, certainly, and sooner then any man can get knowledge
in the sinful state of man.

First for human knowledge, it was to be gotten by the aforesaid means of
sense, experience, observation, and collection. For the which purpose man had
great subtilitie, and quickness of outward senses, arising of the exact
temperament of his body, and being able to receive aright without error the
impression of any object. And accordingly were the faculties of the mind
disposed, the which as it is commonly said, follow the temperature of the
body, and by the which man was able with great quickness, facility,
certainety and truth to conceive and understand, to imagine and invent, to
compounde and divide, to collect and infer, to reason and discourse, to judge
and determine, and in sum to perform all the duties, actions, and motions in
any natural and finite object without failing or erring in his work. Thus we
see that man was to come to the knowledge of the creatures, called humain
knowledge, not by immediate inspiration, or any supernatural revelation from
God, but by the means of the natural faculties of his body and mind: for as
it is in the corrupt estate; so in the state of innocence, the outward senses
of the body did let knowledge into the mind, as light comes into a house by
the windows of it. Yet man did not get knowledge only by opening his eyes,
but by diligent using and employing all the faculties of his mind in this
work.

Hereof we may infer these things; First that man knew not any thing which
might not be known by the aforesaid means of his natural faculties. As for
example, he could not give any certain judgment of the effect, where the
causes were contingent, as in his own actions, he could not foresee his own
fall, whether he should resist or give place to temptation, because the truth
hereof did depend on the extemporall motion of his freewill, which might
incline it self to either part: Secondly that he knew not any particular
thing, which had not at any time been apprehended by his outward senses, and
therefore he could not know the secret thoughts of another man, nor define the
number of things infinite, as to tell how many stones, or fishes were in the
sea: these things he did not know, neither was it needful for him to know
them. Again, hereof it follows, that man in his innocence had not any
perfection of knowledge till he were come to ripeness of age: for that during
the time of his infancy and childehood, the faculties of his body and mind
were weak, and therefore not able to perform their several functions in any
perfect manner: Yea further that in his youth he was to be trained up in
learning and in using all the means of attaining knowledge. Wherein we are not
to think that he was so slow, dull, and untoward as are the wittiest and most
forward ones in this corrupt estate, but that he did profit in knowledge far
more easily then any can do in this sinful time. Lastly in that man was to
get knowledge by the aforesaid means, it appears that all men were not
endued with the like measure of actual knowledge; for howsoever the natural
faculties of the mind, serving for the getting of knowledge were much alike in
all without any great difference, (for it could not be but that there should be
some difference as in the te^perament of the bodies, so also in the minds or
greater, their actual knowledge was less of men,) yet as men did give
themselves more or less to the use of the means, and to the searching out of
the truth of things.

Thus we see what was the means of man's humane knowledge: but how shall we
think that he came to the knowledge of god, who is not subject to sense, and
therefore to be known by some other means? For the answer hereof, we are to
distinguish the knowledge of God in to two parts: The one is the knowledge of
gods nature; the other is the knowledge of his actions, counsels, decrees, and
will: this latter part was altogether unknown to man, but so far forth, as
it was extraordinarily revealed to him by God, otherwise, no man, yea no Angel
in heaven knows the mind of God, or is admitted into his secret counsel,
as no Angel knows when the world shall have an end, Math. 24. 36. Math. 24.
36.
Thus man in his innocence was ignorant of his own fall, and of the whole
work of our redemption by Christ: for these things were not revealed unto
him, neither had he any need of this knowledge. Yet God did from time to time
reveal his counsels unto man so (far forth as was needful) and that by
visions, apparitions, dreams, ^ ectasies, inspirations, and by the ministry
of Angels, but most commonly by a created voice, as he spoke to Adam in the
garden. This part of divine knowledge, being revealed by God, might easily be
attained to by man, who was able to conceive, understand and remember that God
had decreed and would do this or that thing. But for the knowledge of Gods
essence and nature, which is every way infinite, how shall we think it
possible to be comprehended by man, although the same were revealed by God:
seeing that it is impossible for God himself to make a finite thing comprehend
that which is infinite.

Again whatsoever man knows or conceaueth in his mind, he conceiueth it by
a similitude, or image of the said thing abstracted from it by his outward
sense: but whereunto shall man resemble or compare God, who is not like to any
thing either truly existing or which can be imagined? We answer confessing
all this to be true, and agreeable to the word of God, for it is impossible
for a man to know GOD fully, as a man may know the whole nature, form,
force, matter, virtue and ability of a tree, beast, or any other creature. But
how much soever we do give to God in our minds, yet there is more due unto
him. And yet man may in some sort comprehend the nature of God, even by knowing
it to be incomprehensible, and get a likeness or form of it, by knowing it to
be incomparable to any thing, and unlike to all things. Whereof arises this
knowledge of God in the mind of man, God is a certain thing or nature
incomprehensible and incomparable.

But this is nothing to the purpose: for it is not sufficient for man in
regard either of his happiness, or of his holiness to have a general and
confused knowledge of God, that he is a certain thing or nature, there being
innumerable natures beside his in the world: or to have a privative knowledge
that God cannot be comprehended of any creature, or resembled to any thing, for
this knowledge, is nothing but a confession of ignorance: and therefore it is
needful to search out not only what God is not, but also what he is: but this
cannot be done by any creature, and therefore let us ask counsel of the
scripture, and learn the nature God, of God himself to whom only it is
fully known. This may be done, John. 4. 24. John. 4. 24.
where it is said, That God is a spirit. But so are the Angels also, Heb. 1.
7. Heb. 1. 7.
how then? shall we think, that God and the Angels, which are creatures, are
of the same nature? God forbid: for that thought were no holy knowledge but a
blasphemous error; yea the scripture means no such thing, as that God is a
spirit, but only that he is of an invisible, subtle, and pure nature, as are
the Angels, and as is the wind and air (from the which the name of spirits is
taken) or as is the flame of fire, which is made the synonymum, that is, of the
same signification with the name of spirit: Heb. 1. 7. Heb. 1. 7.
He makes his Angels spirits, and his ministers, flames of fire.

If this be true, as it is most true, then we are but where we were, for hereby
we learn only that GOD is not a visible or sensible thing. And therefore we
must have recourse again to the mouth of GOD, and with Moses ask boldly what
he is, ^xod. 3. 13. 14.
and desire to have his true name and nature revealed unto us. The answer
which GOD gives is this, I am that I am, or I will be that I will be, that is,
I am no chaungling but the same for ever. But neither these places, nor any
other in the scripture, do flatly define what the essence of GOD is, what then
is to be done in this case? shall we think that GOD, who made man so happy,
and was so bountiful unto him, did envy to him the knowledge of his own
nature? that cannot be: We are rather to gather by the silence of GOD in this
behalf, that this is too high a point of knowledge for man to reach unto; yea
such an one whereof the mind of man is not capable: And therefore man in his
innocence was not to busy his head in sounding the bottomless depth of
Gods essence, or to think that the tongues of all the Angels in heaven were
able to utter so significant a word as should contain in it the form and
substance of Gods nature.

How then may man know God, or at the least come near to some manner of
knowledge of him? We answer that neither God nor any other thing can
possibly be conceived by man, but by some resemblance or Image, and therefore
the only way to attain to this light and imperfect knowledge is to imagine of
God, by that which is of al other things most excellent in nature, and so
approaches nearest to the nature of God, and which all men know to be the most
excellent of all others. In this contemplation the nature of the reasonable
creatures does first offer it self, as far excelling all other natures, and
therefore man must be feign to gather out of himself, or else from the Angels,
if they were so well known unto him, an Idea, Image or notion of God, not by
thinking him like to any creature (for that were idolatry) but by appyling the
best, highest, greatest and most excellent things which he finds in himself
to the nature of God. This means of attaining to the knowledge of God, is so
natural to man, that it remains even in his corrupt estate, wherein nothing
is more common then to think and speak of God as of a man for ignorant men
knowing nothing more excellent then themselves, do think their own nature to
be likest to the nature of God.

Well, then let us use this means seeing we have no other, and see if we can
conceive of the great ocean by a drop of water. What then is counted most
excellent in the nature of man? what but his understanding, knowledge, wisdom,
counsel, his reasonable wit and orderly affections, his love, favor, mercy,
pity, his justice, purity, and such other virtues, his strength and power,
his Lordshippe over the creatures, and his, glory arising thereof? In these
things does the excellency of man consist, and therefore man, as it were,
putting his own coat on God, is to conceive of him in his mind as of a
nature surpassing, yea infinite in knowledge, wisdom, counsel, in will, love,
hatred, favor, and revenge, in mercy and compassion, in purity and justice,
in might, power, dominion and glory, and no marvel that man does thus
conceive of God, seeing GOD in regard of the weakness of man's capacity, has
revealed him self to man in this, and in no other manner, even in the person,
likeness, and nature of man, and yet this is the only nature of GOD which is
revealed.

Now as touching the means whereby man in this his innocence attaineth to the
knowledge of this nature of God (which being after a sort his own nature, is
familiar unto him and may easily be conceived) they are two. The first are the
natural faculties of his soul and body, to wit, his senses outward and
inward, by the which he did plainly and certainly gather out of the creatures,
the actual knowledge of gods attributes, wherein as has been said, his
nature being otherwise incomprehensible is revealed, as namely, of his
infinitenes, eternity, wisdom, justice, power, and love, all which do shine so
clearelie in the creatures, that man even since his fall does by this means
attain to some knowledge of God: as we read. Romans 1. 20. Romans 1. 20.
The invisible things of God, to wit, his eternity, power and godheade are
plainele seen since the creation of the world, being considered or understood
in the creatures. If by man being sinful, how much more by him being in his
pure estate? For what marvel is it that one who has both his eyes, and is
clear sighted, does see the light of the sun shining in his eyes, which is
so clear of it self, that a blind man may perceive it?

The second way or means of knowledge, was immediate revelation: for as it
shall be in the second, so in the first state of innocence, GOD did reveal
himself and the glory of his power, wisdom, love, and of the rest of his
attributes immediately by himself, and that diverse ways as it seemed best
unto him, vouchsafing to have familiar conversation with his reasonable
creatures, and to speak with them face to face as one friend uses to do
with another. This second means did make perfect the actual knowledge gotten
by man himself out of the creatures, increasing it to a far greater measure
then can be attained in the state of regeneration.

Thus much of the means whereby the potentiall knowledge of man is made
actual: whereby it appears that there was no ordinary ministry appointed
by GOD in the hands either of Angel or of man as it is in the state of
regeneration as has been declared in the first part Chap. 8. Sect. 1. For if
we should suppose that some one man in this state of innocence did live
solitarelie by himself, not having the company or help of any other; yet we
are not to think that he would have been ignorant of God, but rather to be
persuaded that howsoever he might want the knowledge of some particulars (the
which does not make an imperfect knowledge) and also be inferior to others in
measure of knowledge, yet he should have been endued with the perfect
knowledge of God. For as has been said, this state of happiness is of the
same kind with the happiness of the Angels in heaven, although in degree of
knowledge and all other graces it be far inferior to it. For this is a
certain and general rule, that in all states of innocence, whether they be in
heaven or on earth, whether in this world or in the world to come, God does
reveal himself to his reasonable creatures face to face, that is, immediately
without the mediation of any creature, as God says, Numb. 12. 8. Numb. 12. 8.
That he spoke to Moses face to face, mouth to mouth. But he spoke to the
people by the mediation of Moses. Thus, 1. Cor. 13. 12. 1. Cor. 13. 12
To see God face to face, (as the Godly shall in the world to come) is opposed
to the knowing of God by the ministry of man, as the faithful do in this
life, wherein God does reveal himself to them by his ministers, as one man
speaks to an other by an interpreter or messenger, not in personal presence.
Yet this immediate teaching does not hinder, but that in this state of
innocence one man might have his knowledge increased by an other, as God did
reveal some particulars to one more then to another, or that the weakness of
man's infancy and childehood should not be supported by teachers, as has been
declared.

Thus much of the potentiall knowledge, called by philosophers, the suffering
understanding, or faculty of the mind the which in conceauing any thing does
suffer the impression of knowledge, as wax does suffer when as any form is
imprinted in it. Now we come to actual knowledge, called the agent faculty,
because knowledge being once gotten is not idle, but working in the mind, and
does not only move it self, but also is the beginning of motion to all the
other faculties of the body and soul.

As touching the measure of man's actual knowledge in his innocence (the which
point only rests to be considered) it is to be defined by his happiness,
and by comparison made with the knowledge of the faithful in their
regeneration. For first man knew whatsoever might any way make for his good
and happy estate, as namely, he had the perfect knowledge of God (which is a
great part of happiness) beholding him daily and continually, although not in
his essential form, which is incomprehensible, yet in the clear evidence of
his glory. Besides he had the knowledge of all the creatures, whose forms,
kinds, natures, properties, virtues, qualities and commodities, he did
perfectly comprehend: as appears in that Adam gave to every beast a name
agreeable to his nature. He knew how to govern families and commonwealths,
with meet orders and laws, and in general, whatsoever thing did any way
belong to the necessity, use, pleasure or commodity of human life.

Secondly we may gather the measure of the created knowledge by comparing it
with renewed knowledge. For if we should put together in one man, the knowledge
of the best and most learned divines, politicians, physicians, logicians,
mathematicians, philosophers, and of all that are most excellent in any kind,
yet it is not so great, sound, pure, subtle and perfect as the knowledge of man
in the state of innocence. And no marvel seeing he had far more excellent
means of knowledge whether we regard his own nature, and therein the purity
and integrity of all his senses and faculties, both outward and inward, or
yet his scholemaister and teacher who was Godhimselfe.

Sect. 2,
Of the sinfulness of the mind or of the ignorance of man in his corrupt
estate.
THus much of man's knowledge in his pure estate, from the which we come to his
corrupt state as out of the clear sunshine into a dark dungeon: for as
before the fall of man his mind was enlightened with the perfect knowledge of
God and of al things in the world; so since the fall, it is ouercast and even
wholly possessed with palpable darkness, being destitute not only of all
actual knowledge, but also of all ability of attaining the true knowledge of
God by any faculty, virtue, industry or any means inherent in himself, the
which in the former section we call potentiall knowledge: for the first kind
of knowledge, namely actual, real or that which is already gotten, it is
evident to the eyes of all that list to consider it, that the natural
knowledge of man is mere darkness and ignorance. By natural knowledge we
mean that knowledge which is^ and may be seen in all unregenerate men, Of the
sinfulness of the mind.
who are come to years of discretion, and have neither increased nor decreased
that knowledge which they have of themselves. Both which accidents may happen
to carnal men, as we are to declare in the third part of this treatise. Chap.
6.

In this sort of men we are to account all ignorant people, who having been
brought up in rudeness and ignorance, not using the means of getting
knowledge, as the heareing, reading and learning of the word of God, have no
other opinion of God and of religion, then those rudimentes and beginnings,
which they brought from their mothers wombes, and which they have gotten (or
rather which have crept into their minds by little and little they not seeking
or looking after any knowledge) not out of the books of the scripture, but out
of the creatures: The which being daily, beheld, felt and enjoyed, can not but
leave some impression of the knowledge of God in the minds of those who have
any spark of reason remaining in them. Hence it is, that man even in this his
corrupt estate, thinks that there is a God, that this God is of great power
and therefore to be feared: that he is the giver of all good things: and
therefore to be worshipped and honored in way of thankfulness, that he is
just, and there fore will punish sinners, and reward good and innocent men.
Likewise he has some knowledge of the second table, yea more then of the
first, whereby he can decerne right from wrong, honest things from dishonest,
so that he condemns theft, oppression, incest, adultery, murder and such
like gross sins. For although many do diminishe this light of nature and
become such detestable atheistes, as to fay in their hearts, that there is no
God, yet man naturally thinks otherwise, as appears plainly both by the
word of God, and by common experience.

For the first we have this doctrine, Romans 1. 19. 20. Romans 1. 19. 20.
that which is known of God (that is so much as God has made known to all
men generally not only to his Church, but also to the heathen and infidels) is
manifest even to the gentiles. For God has made it known unto them: for the
invisible things of God, as namely, his eternal power and Godheade, are seen
since the creation of the world, being by reason or the understanding gathered
out of the creatures. This appears also in all ages and nations which have
been since the beginning of the world: for although few of them have had the
knowledge of the true god, and of his true worship, yet all generally have had
and worshipped some God: yea almost every particular country, city, town,
village, and family has had their proper gods, whereby it is plain, that
there was in their minds the aforesaid knowledge, to wit that there is a God.

Neither could it be otherwise, for whenas man sees the creatures, to wit, the
heaven, the earth, the sea, he must needs think with himself, that these
dead and senseless creatures could not make themselves: yea that no man, nor
any other creature could make either them or yet it self: for how should any
thing work or do any thing before it do exist it self. Thus we see what is
the natural knowledge of natural men: but what is this incomparison of that
knowledge which man had in the state of innocence, but mere and gross
ignorance? For man in his pure estate had more perfect knowledge of God
(although not the same particular knowledge) then all the ^earned divines in
the world have had, have, or shall have hereafter. But since the fall he has
not by nature the knowledge of the true God: for we cannot say that he that
thinks his idol to be a God, knows the true God. Besides, this natural
knowledge, of God is not a settled and grounded persuasion, but a light and
wavering opinion, a mean betwixt knowledge and ignorance, and therefore little
regarded or followed in life, and easily lost out of the mind: whereof it
comes that those relics of the knowledge of God, are so soon lost, and by
the least persuasion or occasion turned into senseless idolatry, wherein GOD
is thought to be like to man and other baser creatures.

But to proceed, although the actual ignorance of the natural man be so
palpable, as that it cannot be denied, yet he will not yield to potentiall
ignorance, that is, he will not confess himself to be so blockish, dull, and
incapable of the true knowledge of God, but that he might easily attain unto
it by his own strength, and by the natural faculties of his body and mind,
if so be he listed to go about it. For the proof whereof, he will allege the
examples of many natural and unregenerate men, who although they never knew
indeed what spiritual regenerationment, but did always laugh at it, and
secretly scorn the professors of it, being in their whole lives carnal,
worldly and dissolute: yet for knowledge in all points of divinity they were
counted the most profound men of all others. To this we answer, as we are
taught by the Apostle, 1. Cor. 2. 14. That the natural man does not conceive
or comprehend the things of God, 1. Cor. 2. 14.
for they are foolishnes unto him, neither can he know them, because they are
spiritually discerned, that is, the carnal man is not only actually ignorant
of God, but also unable to conceive and understand heavenly things. For
although he labor most earnestly in a presumptuous opinion of his own wit and
learning to know God, yet it is a thing altogether impossible for him to
attain to the true knowledge of him. To this agrees daily experience, for
who sees not that the word of God is preached diligently, plainly, and
painefully in many places, in the which most of the hearers remain as ignorant
of religion, as if they had never heard tell of such a matter? whereas if a man
did tell them a tale of any worldly matter, belonging to their profit or
pleasure, they would understand it at the first, and carry it away so well, that
they would be able to instruct others very readely in it.

As touching the great measure of knowledge which may be seen in diverse
unregenerate men; We answer, First, that God does bestow his spiritual gifts
not only on the elect, but also on the reprobate (as we are to declare at
large in the next part) and therefore they are not mere carnal men, because
they have a shadow of regeneration: Secondly, the knowledge of these men,
howsoever it carry a glorious show, yet in strait examination will be found to
be nothing but ignorance. For it being not wrought effectually in their minds
and hearts by the spirit of God, but only borrowed out of the books and
sermons of other men, has no steedfast ground in them, but in mingled with
much doubting, unbelief, error and ignorance. For who knows not, that it is
an easy and common matter for men to talk, and reason at large of matters
which they do not understand? 1. Tim. 1. 7. They would be doctors of the law,
1. Tim. 1. 7.
and yet they know not what they speak, nor whereof they affirm. So many did
prophecy in the name of christ, who neither knew Christ nor shall be acknowledged
of him: John. 3. 10.
so we read, John. 3. 10. of Nicodemus who although he were a teacher in
Israel, yet he was ignorant of the doctrine of regeneration, that is, of al
religion. So many preach of God, Christ, faith, the resurrection from the dead,
and dispute very cunningly and subtillie of these things: who think in their
hearts that they are but vain and false doctrines, invented perhaps for a good
end, to make men live an honest and orderly life, but such as have no truth in
them, neither shall ever be seen to come to pass.

If any do marvel how men of singular wits, of great capacity, learning,
reading, judgment and wisdom should be so dull, or rather dead and
senseless, as not to understand the doctrine of God, of his nature and
actions, which is so plainly taught, and so often iterated in the scripture,
the reason hereof is given in the place before cited. 1. Cor. 3. 14. Because
the things of God are spiritually to be discerned. 1. Cor. 3. 14.
That is because there is a repugnancy and contrariety betwixt the reason of a
natural man, and the things of God. For the natural man tries the truth of
all things by his own senses, esteeming that impossible and false, which
cannot be effected by ordinary and natural causes: but the word of God,
especially the doctrine of the gospel, has in it many things which are
impossible in nature, and therefore incredible in all reason: as namely, the
incarnation of God, the miraculous conception of Christ, the spiritual
regeneration of the faithful, the resurrection of the body, eternal glory,
and many other: the full knowledge and undoubted persuasion whereof, is far
more hardly attained by those who excel in natural wit, worldly wisdom,
profound learning, then by those who are simple and unlearned. ^. Cor. 1. 26.
1. Cor. 1. 26. Brethren you see your calling that not many wise men are
chosen: the reason hereof is evident: for it is needful that he who would
believe the word of God, should renounce his own knowledge so far as it is
contrary to the other. But the more wit and learning a man has, the more he
attributes to it, to himself and to his own strength. Whereas they who have a
small measure of these gifts, do not trust so much unto them: as the wise man
witnesses, saying, That there is more hope to win a fool to wisdom, then
one who thinks or knows himself to be wise, and so is wise in his own
eyes.

Thus we see the great ignorance of God, which is in all unregenerate men: now
for the knowledge which man has of the creatures, we may say with the prophet,
Ier. 2. 13. Ier. 2. 13.
Man has forsaken God the fountain of wisdom, and then what wisdom can be
in him? For as he is ignorant of God, so is he of the creatures of God, being
naturally so void of all manner of knowledge, as that he seems not to differ
from a brute beast, but only in the outward proportion of his body, and the
faculty of speaking. Nay he is more ignorant then are the brute beasts, whereof
there are almost none, which knows not and that without any teacher, even by
the secret instinct of nature, what is good and evil for it self, yea the
secret virtue of some herbs or of other things which may stand them instead: but man being any way distressed, knows not how to go either to God
or any natural thing for help: being so far from knowing other things that
he knows not the parts, temperamentes, frame, disposition, infirmities and
diseases of his own body, or any thing belonging to it, or the preserving or
healing of it, save only the outward members and fashion of it. Neither is
there any cause why man should brag of that great knowledge, which he is
able to attain unto, whenas he gives himself to search it out. We do not
deny but that God grants thus much to the labor of industrious men, that
they attain to knowledge, some more, others less: but the learnedest
philosopher in the world cannot deny, but that he is not only actually
ignorant of many things, but also naturally unable to pearce into the depth of
the wisdom of God in the creatures, and that by reason of the dullness and
shallowness of his wit, which cannot find out the true causes, forms,
reasons and virtues of natural things: as why the lodestone draws iron to
it, of the which kind infinite instances might be brought. And if they chance
to find out the virtue and quality of any thing, it is done not by
considering the causes, but by marking the effects; and so not by knowledge or
any good cunning, as we say, but by chance and by experience the
schoole-maister of fools.

Sect. 3. Of renewed knowledge.
IT remains that we consider how God of his great mercy and goodness, does
renew in all his faithful servants, this first and chief part of his
glorious image. We call it the first and chief part, because that in the work
of regeneration, the illumination of the mind, with the true knowledge of God,
both has the first place, and also is the cause of all the rest of man's
holiness. Math. 6. 23.
For as Christ does teach, Math. 6. 23. If the eye have light in it, it does
enlighten the wholle body, but if it be dark, there is nothing but darkness
in the body. That is, if the mind of man which is the eye of the soul, be
truly sanctified and renewed with knowledge, there follows holiness in all
the faculties of the soul, and in the whole man. But if there be darkness and
ignorance in the mind, there is nothing but sin in all the parts of man.
Neither can it be otherwise: for as it is impossible that a man should either
trust or hope in God, or love, fear and obey him, or perform any duty of
holiness unto God, whom he does not know in his mercy, love, goodness,
promises, power, justice and the rest of his attributes: so is it no less
impossible, that any man should know, and be fully persuaded that God is true
in his promises, merciful, bountiful, and just, and not be affected to him
accordingly. And therefore the first action of the holy spirit, framing the new
man in the elect, is to take out of their minds their natural dulnes,
unbelief and ignorance, and to make them able to conceive, understand, believe
and know God. Rom* 12. 2.
Thus the Apostle teaches. Romans 12. 2. Be ye transformed by the renewing of
your minds, that ye may approve the good and acceptable will of God: so, Ephesians.
4. 13.
Ephesians. 4. 13. Be renewed in the spirit of your minds and (so) put on the new
man. Of renewed knowledge,
Thus he prays for the Colossians, Col. 1. 9. That they might be filled with
the knowledge of the will of God, in Col. 1. 9.
all wisdom and spiritual understanding. And thus it is said. Act. 16. 14.
Act. 16. 14. That whilst Paul preached the gospel, although the reprobate did
not conceive or understand it, Yet God opened the heart (that is the mind) of
Lidia to believe his word.

This illumination of the mind, is the most sensible and evident thing in
regeneration, and that whereby they that deny the work of the holy spirit in
renewing the faithful, may most plainly be convinced, for what is more
wonderful, then that men, who before were dull, rude, simple and unlearned, yea
incapable of any kind of knowledge, should on a sudden become able to
comprehend in their minds most steadfastly, and to expres in words very se^sibly
the hidden mysteries of christian religion? Yet this experience teaches to be
true, and the Apostle witnesses the same. ^ Cor. 2. 15.
The spiritual man discerns all things. This comes not by any natural
strength, but by the work of God: yet he does not inspire this knowledge
immediately, but by the means of the ministry of his holy word. And therefore
it behooves every one, who would feel in himself this wonderful work of
God in changing his mind, to give himself diligently and continually to the
hearing, reading and meditating of the word of God.

Lastly this renewed knowledge is not either so great, or yet so general as
was the knowledge of man in his pure estate, wherein he knew God, and all
other things perfectly: but the faithful know God, his word, will and actions,
so far forth only as is needful for their salvation. As for the knowledge of
the creatures, that is to be hoped for in the life to come wherein we hope for
our full adoption even the rede^tio^ of our bodies: the senses and faculties
whereof are, whilst we remain in this life, as dull and weak in the faithful,
as in the unbelievers. And therefore they remain as ignorant as touching this
secundarie knowledge of the sensible creatures, as do the other. Yea the
knowledge of God, as all other parts of their holiness, is imperfect, 1. Cor.
13. 14. While I am a child (that is, 1. Cor. 13. 14
while the faithful live in this world) I understand like a child, I think
and speak as a child: now I know in part, but then I shall know even as I
am known.

CHAP. III
Sect. 1. Of the conscience of man in his pure estate.
BEside the general knowledge (whereof we have spoken in the former chapter)
there is in the mind of man a particular knowledge, the which for the great use
which it has in the spiritual state of man, has a proper name given unto it
(being called Conscience) as if it were a distinct faculty of the soul,
whereas if we speak properly, it is nothing else but an action of the mind,
and the knowledge of one partilar thing, to wit, of man's estate before God,
whether he be righteous or sinful, and so consequently whether he be in the
state of life or of death, as the word does plainly signify. For conscience
is sui scientia, or scientia cum vel coram deo; that is conscience is a man's
knowledge of himself; or a knowledge with God, before God, or in the presence
of God. And therefore we may define it thus: Conscience is the opinion or
persuasion of a man's mind concerning his estate before God. Or thus: It is the
testimony or judgment that the mind gives of innocence or guiltines, Of the
consc^^cence of man in his pure estate.
of righteousness or sinfulnes of life or death. So it is de, fined Romans 2. 15.
Romans 2. 15.
To be the accusing or excusing of a man's thoughts or of his mind. So that we
may call the conscience the witness, which before the tribunal seat of God,
being in the judgment hall of a man's mind, does either excuse and justify his
several actions, and whole life and person and so pronounce the sentence of
life unto him; or else does accuse and condemn him in regard of sin committed,
and so adiudge him to eternal death.

Thus much of conscience ingenerall: now as touching the conscience of man in
his pure estate, we cannot doubt but that it did wholly justify him, being as
then without any spot of sin: from this true excusing conscience, comes
confidence, whereby man is imboldened to converse in the presence of God, to
hear him speak, to see his glory, and so to have a kind of familiarity with
him, as man had in his innocence: where as an accusing conscience breeds
fear and shame, as we see plainly in Adam, who so soon as he had sinned, was
compelled by this accusing witness (for there was no other to accuse him) to
run into a hole and hide himself among the trees, when he perceived God to
be present: but hereof more in the next section. Lastly if it be asked, how
conscience can be made a part of man's conformity to God, seeing as it may seem
there is no such thing in God; we anwere, that conscience, to wit* this
clearing conscience has place in God, who in him self and before himself
does see and know himself to be purity, and holiness it self and so free
from all shadow of sin.

Sect. 2. Of a corrupt conscience.
AS touching man's conscience in his corrupt estate, this must of necessity be
granted, that where the whole is corrupted, there every several part is
corrupted: and therefore seeing the whole knowledge of man's mind is darkened with
blindness, this particular knowledge must needs be in the same case: so that
now the conscience is a false witness, and does judge of right and wrong, of
life and death so as a blind man judges colors, saying that black is white,
and white is black, that evil is good, and good, evil: Of a corrup^
conscience.
and yet as the mind is not so wholly blinded, but that there remain in it
some relics of knowledge, truth and light: So the conscience has his part
as well of this light, as of the aforesaid darkness, and by virtue thereof,
does sometimes speak the truth, even as the greatest liers use to do.

First of the false witness of the conscience because this is more common,
then of the true testimony of it. The false testimony of the mind or
conscience is of two kinds; the first and most usual kind, is when as it does
falsely excuse: the second is, when it does falsely accuse. The first has place
in all those who think that to be no sin which is a sin in the sight of
God. And it is of two kinds, for either it does not accuse a man where it
should accuse him, or else it does justify and absolute him for that for the
which it should condemn him. The first may be seen in all those in whose
opinon and judgment that is no sin which is accounted sin in the sight of
God: as namely in them, who being therefore called libertines (but as it is
said of them, are too shamefully licentious) think that there is no sin,
and that they may do what they list. And so are not checked by their
consciences, no not when they commit most heinous sins. This kind of a false
excusing conscience is in those also who think original sin to be no sin,
or not to deserve eternal death: or who do any way extenuate the heinousness
of sin, thinking some sins to be venial in their own nature. And also in
them who think wicked thoughts, or vain words to be no sins.

Lastly this conscience is in a manner in all unregenerate men, especially in
those who living a civil and honest life, free from gross sins, as
adultery, murder, theft, perjury and such other, think themselves just
before the judgment seat of god. This presumptuous opinion was in the
pharisees, who had a great conceit, and made no small bragges of their own
righteousness, as we may see, Luc. 18. 20. ^uc. 18. 20.
And also Mar. 10. 20. Marc. 10. 20.
in one of their scholars, who was not ashamed to affirm, and that before the
face and visible presence of God, that he had kept all the commandments of
the moral law, and that not only in some part of his life, but continually
even from his youth up. Yea this is the fond opinion of most men, who think
themselves to be no sinners, because they are not notorious malefactors: to
fulfill the law of God, because they do keep the laws of men: to be innocent
and just before God, because they live irreproouably (as very few do) in the
eyes of men. But this is a very fearful and dangerous estate, and that which
is the cause of most men's destruction: for they never seek to know the gospel,
and to have remission of their sins in Christ, because this their flattering
and lying conscience, does bear them in hand that they are righteous enough
of themselves, and therefore need not to be clothed with the righteousness of
Christ, as we read, Revel. 3. 17. Revel. 3. 17.
They say with themselves every one in his own mind, I am rich and want
nothing, where as indeed, they are wretched, poor, blind, naked, altogether
sinful and in the state of eternal damnation.

The second kind of a false excusing conscience, is that, which does not only
excuse, but also justify a man, for that for the which it should condemn him,
such is the senseless blockishnesse of a corrupt mind. This conscience is in
those who serve God after a false and devised manner, and so think that their
will worship does make them acceptable to God, which in ^rueth is most
abominable in his sight. They think that they advance his glory, when as
they set up idolatry, and that when they persecute the true ministers,
Apostles, and servants of God, They do God good service, John. 16. 2.
as we read, John. 16. 2. They think that they shall be heard of God for their
much babbling sake. Mat. 6. 7.
Math. 6. 7. for saying over and over so many creedes and pater nosters. And
lastly that they shall be saved for those actions, the which howsoever they
carry a show of religion and devotion, yet they are grievous sins before God,
and those for the which the doers should be condemned, although they had not
sinned in any other kind.

Thus much of a false excusing conscience. Now follows a false accusing mind
and conscience. This is contrary to the former kind, for it accuses where it
should excuse, and judges that to be unlawful which is lawful. This false
testimony of the conscience comes of the ignorance of christian liberty,
accounting things in nature indifferent, as altogether unlawful, whereof it
comes that men think it a sin to eat this or that meat, on this or that
day, to mary, to be in this or that company, to wear this or that apparel,
to use this or that kind of recreation and so of many other things, which are
neither commanded nor forbidden in the word, but left indifferent, and in the
which a brother or sister is not in bondage, but God has called them in peace:
the which although it be not so evil and dangerous as is the other kind, for
that it is safer and better for a man to fear in doing that which he might
boldly do, then to be bold in doing that which he ought not do, yet it is an
evil and sinful conscience, displeasing in the eyes of God, who as he has in
great mercy given us great liberty in Christ, so it is his will that we should,
although be sparing in the use of it, whenas it does not further our
edification and salvation, yet not babes in knowledge and unthankfully ignorant
of the great benefits bestowed on us.

If it be here objected, that this false accusing conscience cannot be truly
said to be in the unregenerate man, because whatsoever is done by him, being
destitute of faith, it is a sin, although it be in the use of things
indifferent, and might be lawfully done by a faithful man: We answer, that
the con^cience of an unregenerate man should not accuse, because he does use
any indifferent thing, as because he eats or drinks (as it uses to do,
and therefore it is a false accuser) but because he does it without faith,
whereby both his person, and all his actions should be made acceptable to God:
Thus we see what is the false or lying conscience.

Now let us see how it is a true witness, for according as the light or
knowledge of the mind is more or less, so is this true testimony of the
conscience, Romans 1. 15.
sometimes excusing truly, and sometime accusing truly. Romans 1. 15. For
although it be impossible, that the conscience of an unregenerate man should
truly clear him of sin, and the punishment thereof, because his whole life,
yea every particular action of his life, and every part of his body, and
faculty of his soul is polluted with sin, yet as a carnal man may be free
from some particular sin; so his conscience may truly excuse him in that
behalf. But the chief use of the conscience is to accuse truly for sin
committed, in the doing whereof it is very forcible, and as it is commonly
said, in steed of a thousand witnesses: therefore has God in great wisdom
left some light in the mind of sinful man, that he might be convicted by
himself, and so left inexcusable: Yea sometimes it comes to pass, that this
conscience is not only the witness, but also the executioner, stirring up
such fearful storms of anguish, fear, sorrow, shame, and desperation, as
are most intolerable, and may be truly said to be the very flames of hell
fire. This is verified by the tragical end of the traitor Judas, at whose
horrible treachery, whenas all men held their peace, this witness, even his
own conscience stepped forth, and did not only accuse and convince him by his
own mouth, which said unto him, thou have sinned in betraying innocent
blood, but also did execute him with his own hands, which brought him to a
fearful and shameful end.

Yet this witness is not always thus diligent in doing his duty, but only
either after some heinous sin be committed, as in the aforesaid example, and
chiefly whenas it is stirred up and awaked by some judgment powered out upon
the sinner. Thus did the conscience of Joseph's brethren sleep till their
trouble and danger which befell them in Egypt, Genesis 42. 21.
did awake it. Genesis 42. 21. or at the least, til the judgment be denounced
against him, Act. 2. 37.
thus we read, Act. 2. 37. That many of the Jews were pricked in their hearts,
that is, were troubled in their consciences and minds, by hearing of their
horrible sin committed in crucifying Christ. Otherwise the conscience is idle
for the most part, and lulleth men a sleep in sin, deferring the doing of
his duty til the day of judgment, wherein the volumes of all men's consciences
shall be laid open: this is called a seared, benumbed or senseless conscience:
and surely it is the most fearful estate that any man can be in, and yet it
is a common thing, for who sees not how most men go on from day to day, every
man in his own sinful ways, having no remorse of conscience, but put far
from themselves the evil day, as if there were neither heaven nor hell, and
that God would neither do good nor evil? Lastly it may here be asked,
whether this true testimony of an accusing conscience, be a sinful, or a
lawful action of the mind. Whereunto we answer, that whatsoever thing is
holy, that is lawful; for this light of nature which is in the mind and
conscience, is a relic of the image of God and of the same nature with it:
and that the sin which the conscience does truly accuse, does no more make
it impure, then the guiltiness of a fellon or traitor does any way touch him
who gives true testimony of it.

Sect. 3. Of a renewed conscience and of the certainty of salvation.
THis particular knowledge and motion of the mind, which we call conscience,
has place and force in the faithful, both in accusing and also in excusing.
For the first, we know that the faithful have both the true knowledge of sin,
by the general renouation of their minds, and also sin it self by the
infirmity of the flesh. And therefore they have an accusing conscience, which
is nothing else but the sight or knowledge of sin in themselves. Hereof
follow diverse effects in them, as namely fear in respect of those temporal
punishments, whereunto they by their sins have laid themselves open. Secondly
an increase of humiliation in regard thereof. And lastly this accusing
conscience is as a bit to restrain the faithful from sin, checking them as
it were in the teeth with the judgments of God, which they do by committing
sin pull upon themselves. Thus we see what is the accusing conscience of the
faithful: which then works when they fall by force of temptation into some
great sin: Of a renewed conscience.
otherwise it does not greatly vex and trouble them. Yet as sin is never
wanting, so it is never altogether idle.

Now let us consider the contrary work of the conscience, excusing the
faithful before God: the which it does first in regard both of their own
inherent righteousness, and also of the imputed righteousness of Christ. In
the first respect their conscience excuses them, not as being perfectly just,
but as those who are Gods faithful servants, performing unto him, tho
imperfect, yet true, unfeigned and hearty obedience. Thus does the Prophet
David often in the psalms offer his innocence and integrity to the trial of
God.

This excusing conscience dare not show his face before the judgment seat of
God, where it would be found as a filthy and defiled clout: but it comes
into the court of Gods mercy and love, who rewards the Godliness of his
servants with temporal blessings, and security from temporal judgments. But
the true excusing conscience looks on the perfect righteousness of Christ, by
virtue whereof it does justify, and absolve the faithful, as being fully and
perfectly just, and free from all guilt of sin. This excuser is he who only
can abide the trial of Gods justice, Of a renewed conscience. and of the
cer^tainty of salua^tion.
who makes the faithful rejoice in all miseries; yea secure in regard of
danger. It makes them triumph over sin, Satan, hell, death and damnation,
and replenisheth their hearts with such a perfect peace, whereby they feel
the joys of heaven, even whilst they live upon earth, whereof whosoever has
once tasted, may count himself thrice happy. This kind of excusing
conscience comes of a true faith, as does the former kind of the other
parts of sanctification and of holiness of life: the one freeth the faithful
from the fear of temporary evils, as the other does from the fear of
eternal death.

Of both of them arises the assurance of salvation, which is the undoubted
persuasion, and certain knowledge of a faithful man, that he is one of those
who shall be made partakers of eternal glory. But against this doctrine many do
object and say, that it is impossible for any man to attain to any such
knowledge, seeing that the eternal counsels and decrees of God are so secret,
that no man has at any time known the mind of God, or been of his counsel
in that behalf. Again that this knowledge is to be gotten, if by any means,
then either by immediate revelation or by arguments drawn from a man's own
estate, as from some faith or holiness which he fyndeth in himself. The first
means is generally rejected. The other being uncertain cannot be a sure
foundation whereon to build this certain persuasions. Lastly that by this
means there would a door be set open to all licentiousness and Godless
security. For what need he who knows certainly that he shall be saved, take
pains, and sustain trouble and grief in working his own salvation by a
Godly and holy life? To this we answer, confessing that the number of the
reprobate or elect cannot be known, and also that this knowledge is not gotten
by any immediate revelation, yet affirming that every faithful man may be, and
ought to be assured of his own salvation and that by that wounderfull work of
regeneration wrought in him by the holy spirit: the which does even lead the
faithful man as it were by the hand into the secret counsel of GODS
eternal election, and does there let him see (not the state of other men) but
his own name written in heaven. For they who are truly regenerate are truly
called, they who are truly called are justified they who are justified are
(that is they shall be as certainly certainly as if they were already)
glorified, Of a renewed conscience, and of the certain^ty of salvation.
Romans 8. 29. 30. And therefore the scripure speaks of the faithful as of
those who have already attained eternal salvation. Romans 8. 29. 30
Ioh. 3. 8. Ioh. 3. 8.
Yea this is done not without good cause. For the regeneration of this life and
the eternal glory of the life to come, are not two diverse states or
conditions, but only diverse degrees of the same condition: eternal salvation
being nothing else, but the perfection of holiness and happiness, whereof the
faithful have in this life received some part, as a pledge and earnest-pennie
of the whole. So that they having already as we say, one foot in heaven, and
gotten possession of it, need not doubt of their salvation: but may
confidently say as it is, 1. Ioh. 3. 14. We know, (not we hope or gresse) that
we are translated already (not that we shall be hereafter) from death to life
(not by any immediate revelation) but because we love the brethren: 1. Ioh. 3.
14
that is, because we feel our selves endued with renewed holiness, whereof
the love of the Godly is a notable part. And with the Apostle, Romans 8. 38.
Romans 8. 38. I am persuaded that neither death nor life, neither Angels nor
principalities, neither things present nor things to come can separate me
from the love of God in Christ.

But it may be further objected, that although true regeneration be a certain
sign and forerunner of salvation, yet it is hard for a man to know whether
his regeneration be true, or only a shadow and resemblance which is often in
the reprobate; and although he have true faith and holiness at one time, yet
he may loose and lack them at an other, and so dispossess himself of that
estate of salvation wherein he was. In both which respects, He that thinks
that he stands, ought to fear least he fall, rather then to boast of the
certainty of his salvation. We answer that true regeneration is not so small
a matter, neither makes so light a change in a man, but that it may be
plainly discerned where it is present. Neither is it any uncertain thing
which may be lost, but wheresoever it is, there it does evidently appear at
one time or at an other: and where it once appears there it always abides.
For regeneration being a total and a supernatural change of the mind, will,
affections, thoughts, words and deeds of a man, cannot be hid or doubtful
for any long time, but will show it self both to the eyes of other men, and
much more to the conscience of the believer himself. Of a renewed conscience
and of the certainty of salvation.
For all though it comes often to pass, that the infirmities and sins
appeareing in the life of a faithful man, make the sincerity of his religion
doubtful to others; yet he himself feeling the inward work and motions of
Gods spirit, is undoubtedly persuaded that he is the child of God. We
confess that a man truly regenerate may have his faith sore shaken, and the
holiness of his life greatly blemished by the force of temptation: and so may
for a time want in part or wholly this assurance of salvation. Yet this does
not hinder him from having it at an other time, yea all the days of his life,
as may be seen in most of the faithful.

Lastly we are not to think that this assurance of salvation is, or can be to
a faithful man a motive to sin, and dissoluteness of life, with the which
it cannot stand. For as it is gotten by holiness, whereby a man sees that he
is endued with the spirit of God, and effectually called to believe the
Gospel, so it is lost by a sinful and wicked life, the which shows plainly
that a man is destitute of true faith and of Gods spirit, for by the fruit
the tree is known: nay there is nothing of greater froce in restraining the
faithful from sin then this that they know that the committing of any one
wilful sin does wound their own consciences, and diminish this notable
treasure of assurance of salvation. For as he that takes one or a fewestones
out of a wall, although he do not overthrow the building, yet he makes it the
weaker; so a few sinful actions in the life of a faithful man, although they
can not deprive him of this assurance, it having been gathered, and as it were
builded up with the holiness of many years, yet they do diminishe it, and
can not but trouble his conscience.

CHAP. IIII.
Sect. 1.
Of the created holiness of man's memory.
IT had been little auailable, for the holy and happy estate of man, that he
was endued with those notable faculties of conceauing, understanding and
knowing Gods will and word when God did reveal himself unto him, if he had
not been made able to retain the said knowledge for the time following. For
otherwise God should have powered his graces into a bottomless or broken
vessel, Of the created holiness of man's memory.
which could not keep, or contain any thing, and man should have reaped
little profit by that which would be as soon lost as gotten. For this cause
God in great wisdom did endue the soul of man, with a special faculty
usually called memory, by virtue whereof man in this state of innocence does
safely keep, whatsoever the mind does truly conceive, and so when occasion
serves, does give the said knowledge back again to the mind, to be thought
upon, meditated, uttered in word, and followed in peed so that the memory is
the storehouse of the soul, wherein things both new and old are carefully
laid up, and faithfully preserved, and as it were, the register of the mind,
taking a note of every thing which comes into it. This faculty as all the
other of man's soul, was in the state of innocence so perfect and of such
strength, as that by it man might at any time call to mind, not every
trifling thing which he had heard and seen a thousand years past, (for so his
memory should have been confounded and in a manner infinite) but whatsoever
thing had at any time been revealed unto him by God, or was conceived by his
natural faculties, if so be it were a matter of any importance, the knowing
and remembering whereof, might serve to some notable use and profit unto him.
As for other common matters of life, which it was more gain to loose then to
keep, in these, human infirmity prevailed to forgetfulness.

For we are not to think, that man was in this respect or any other as God is,
whose nature being every way infinite, does in one moment, and with one motion
of mind, remember or rather know all particulars that have been done at any
time. For God does think of all things together without confusion, but the
mind of man being not only finite, but also having in it a kind of weakness
(if we compare him with the Angels) can not think of many, much less of
infinite things at once, but of one thing after an other: and so does the
memory remember those particulars, which were committed to the custody of it,
letting go matters of no use, that there may be place for things of
importance, as are the actions, comaundementes, apparitions, revelations and
word of God. In the knoweing and remembering whereof, the happiness and
holiness of man did consist: Of the create^ holiness of man's memory.
and therefore it stood him in hand to commit these things to sure custody,
the which we are not to doubt but that he did so, as that after many thousand
years he was able to remember that, which might any way serve for his good.
Neither ^^ede we marvel thereat, considering the frailty of our own
memories, which are never good when they are at the best, and are soon clean
lost by sickness, age or any such means. For as is the strength of the body,
whereby as by an instrument the soul works; so are the faculties of the
mind: and therefore as the body of man did continue in perfect vigor for many
thousand years, yea for ever, so did his mind or memory retain the first
vigor without being diminished. Whereby we see that man in this faculty of
memory, whereby his knowledge was made eternal, did notably resemble God,
whose nature is eternal.

Sect. 2. Of the sinfulness of man's memory.
AS in all other respects, so also in regard of this faculty man since the
fall is so changed from his first estate, that he scarce seems to be the same
creature that he was, having as wholly lost this faculty of a reasonable soul,
as if he had never been endued with it. For howsoever in regard of earthly,
worldly and sensible things, this faculty is after a sort remaining in man,
yet it has no manner of force or power to retain heavenly and spiritual
matters, and the true knowledge of God: and no marvel; for how shall the
memory keep when as the mind cannot conceive it? But man's corruption cannot so
be cloaked in this behalf, as if it it were wholly in the mind, and not in
this and other faculties. For although the fountain of it be in the mind,
which is the moouer and governor of the other faculties, yet each faculty has
his peculiar fault, the which may plainly be seen in the memory. For suppose
that, which does daily come to pass, that a carnal man does not only hear
the word of God for fashions sake, but also mark and in some measure
understand it; Of the sinful^nesse of man's memory.
a man would think that all were safe and brought to a good pass: the mind
has done his duty in conceiving the truth of the word, as the body has done
in hearing; so that now the word of God is come to the memory, and desires to
be laid up there and preserved. But does the unregenerate man lay up in the
treasure of his memory that which he has heard and understood of the word of
God? surely nothing less: but as we may plainly see in most men, does
straight ways forget, and as the proverb is he lets it come in at the one
ear, and so passing through the mind, out at the other without troubling
himself any more about it. Whereby it comes to pass, that many having been
continual hearers of Gods word for the space of many years, do not remember
any part or jot of it, no more then if they had never heard of any such matter.

The reason why the memory is thus wanting in her duty, where the mind does
that which belongs to her part, is, because diligence, care and affection,
(all which are wanting in carnal men in respect of God and his word) are
needful for the safe preserving of things in the memory. For as it is truly
said by one, Senes quae curant meminerunt, the oldest man that is, does
remember where he laid his gold: and no man forgets that which he thinks
any way to concern his good. But men think that there is no good to begotten
by the word of God, and therefore as soon as they come from the place where
the word was preached, they give themselves wholly to think and talk of
worldly matters, whereas they should call their memories to account for that
which was committed unto them, and so by repeating it, and conferring with
others about it, imprint it firmly in their minds and memories.

Sect. 3. Of a renewed memory.
But it is otherwise in the faithful, to whom God gives, as an understanding
mind to conceive, so also a firm memory to keep that knowledge, which he
does by any means reveal unto them. Hence it is that they are usually in the
scripture distinguished from hypocritical hearers, by this note of laying up
in their hearts, that is, in their memories. For the hypocrite he hears the
word, understands it, and receives it with joy, Of a renewed memory.
but goes no further: whereas the faithful man takes better hold of it, and
puts it into his memory in safe custody, as it were under lock and key, and
so makes it his own for ever. Thus did David remember that God had sometime
delivered him from a Bear and a Lion, and has this ready at hand for his
use, 1. Sam. 17. 34.
1. Sam. 17. 34. Thus did Mary the mother of Christ lay up in her heart, all
the sayings and actions of Christ. Luc. 2. 51.
Luke. 2. 51. And thus ought every Christian to keep carefully in his memory
whatsoever thing he has seen, heard or red, which is of any moment for the
increase of holiness.

As first and chiefly the whole scripture: not the words or syllables of it,
(as do the Jews, who greatly brag of their cunning in this behalf, as knowing
how often every word is in the old testament) for that is and endless labor
and impossible, but the chief precepts and examples contained in it, the which
may easily be brought to pass by the daily reading, hearing, and remembering of
some part of it. Secondly he ought to keep in memory all the actions of God
which he himself or any other has observed from time to time, as namely, his
fearful judgments upon sinners, his providence watching over the godly and
preserving them from evil, yea his fatherly chasticements and afflictions laid
upon them: and in brief whatsoever thing may any way further him in the way of
godliness. For the which purpose he ought to use all those helps, which are of
force for the deep imprinting of these things in his mind: as namely the daily
remembering of them, the applying of them to his present use, the rehearsing of
them to others: for so they will be made familiar unto him, and his own
forever. Yea he ought to go yet further, and suspecting the frailty of his
memory (which being very narrow and shallow, cannot contain many things
together, and therefore being full it is constrained to let one thing go as it
receives another,) to have his note book, and therein as in a sure storehouse
to register those things which he would remember. For if men be so careful in
worldly matters, that they will not trust their memories with their reckonings
and matters of moment, but will be sure to note them down, and so make sure
work* what a shame is it, that we should be so negligent or slothful in
spiritual matters, as not to use this, and all other helps?

CHAP. V
Sect. 1. Of the created holiness of the will.
BEsides these faculties of the soul which have already been declared, and
which may be called speculatiue, there is an other kind commonly called
practical; because they are exercised in action, as the other are in
contemplation. This latter kind is necessarily in regard of the perfection of
man's soul added to the former, that as by the one he sees and knows what
ought to be done, so by the other he might move himself to the doing and
performing of it. For howsoever they be joined to the other, not as superiors
in authority, for they are blind of themselves, and therefore must not lead
the way, or sit at the helm: nor as equals, for so there might discord and
contention be raised in the soul of man; but as inferiors to be guided and
governed by the light of the mind: yet if we speak properly, we must confess
that all the outward actions come directly from them, and not from the other.
Whereby it may be easelie gathered that these practical faculties, having the
greatest stroke in our actions, Of the created holiness of the will.
do contain in them a great part of man's holiness, and that whereon all the
rest does depend. For the will, which is the chief of these practical
faculties, compels the members of the body to any action, but cannot be
compelled by the mind. For a man does this or that thing, not because he
thinks that it ought to be done, but because he will do it; so that the will
is the absolute monarch in aman, and the mind is his wise counselor, to
whom, although this monarch ought to yield, and in some fort to obey, yet he
need not except he list; For he having the whole authority in his own hands
cannot be compelled by any.

The holiness of these practical faculties, which is usually in the
scripture called love, is their due subjection to the faculties of the mind,
whereby they are moved to the doing of those things only, which the mind
commands or rather counsels. For although in the corrupt state of man, the
holiness of these faculties cannot be defined by their conformity to the
mind, which being it self sinful and out of order, cannot be a rule of
holiness to any other part, yet in this state of innocenc^e, the mind
propounds nothing as good to these faculties, but that which is indeed good,
and to be embraced by them.

These practical faculties are of two sorts, to wit, the will and the
affections. First of the will, then of the affection. As touching this faculty
of man's soul called the will, although it be proper to reasonable things (for
a reasonable will cannot be severed from a reasonable mind) yet there is a
resembla^ce of it in all those creatures, which being endued with sense, have
by it a natural appetite choosing one thing and refusing an other, the which
may fitly be called a brutish will. And therefore that we may the more plainly
see what force this faculty has in man, we will consider and define it in
general, as it agrees both to reasonable and to unreasonable things, and that
in this manner: Will is the free inclination of any thing (which has in it
self the whole fountain of natural motion) to that which is apparently good
and agreeable to the own nature. Frst we say that will is an inclination: for
the proper action of it, is to bend the thing wherein it is to that thing
which it likes: wherein is contained or rather insinuated unto us, the
contrary action of the will, which is to withdraw the thing wherein it is,
from that thing which it disliketh. Secondly this inclination is free, that is,
it comes of the thing it self, and is not extorted by any outward force: for
although the will be stirred up, and set forward by motives both inward and
outward: yet it cannot be compelled, compulsion and willingness being
contrary each to other. If any man do here object, that many are constrained
by force to do that which is sore against their wills: We answer, that the
outward action may be constraned, but not the will: for violence may make one
do that which he is unwilling to do, but it cannot make him willing to do that
which he is unwilling to do.

Thirdly we are to consider what things maybe said to have will, not stocks or
stones, but only those which have in them life and motion: neither all such
things, but only those which having in themselves the wholle fountain of
motion do perfectly live and move. For trees have life and motion, but not
will; because their life and motion is imperfect not coming wholly of any
faculty and virtue inherent in themselves, but depending of some other outward
force: Whereof it comes that their motion is not free but forced: for the
motion or action of a tree in bringing forth fruit, comes not wholly from it
self, but chiefly from the Sun, the heat whereof forces the tree to turn
the moisture of the earth into leaves, flowers, and fruit. But it is far
otherwise with beasts, birds, and all things which have sense in them. For
these have perfect life, and motion, having within themselves the whole
fountain, beginning, ability and faculty of motion, not depending on any
other outward thing, but being entire in themselves, do move and perform all
natural actions of themselves. And therefore being free from all outward
force, may either do or not do, move or rest, go or stand, eat or drink,
go hither or thither when themselves list. As when a bird flies toward the
east, rather then toward the west, it is not blown that way by force of the
wind, but carried by the proper and free inclination of it self. But when it
being taken is carried up and down in a man's hand, this motion comes not from
it self, but from an other, not of inherent will, but of outward violence and
compulsion. Again man has will, because he is of perfect life and motion,
having in himself the whole fountain of action and power of moving himself,
without the help of any other thing, and therefore he also can sit down or
rise up, speak, laugh, go about this or that business or work, think of
this or that thing, as he himself lists and is disposed. Thirdly the Angels
both good and evil have will, for they are natures of perfect life and motion,
in that they have in themselves the wholle fountain of motion and therefore
they are free in all their natural actions.

Thus we see what creatures have freewill: where we are to think that this
freedom of will, is as great in the least and weakest of these creatures, as
in the greatest; in a sely fly, as in a man or Angel. If any man do hear
object that all creatures move in God, and without him are not able to do any
thing: We answer that God has put into every creature a natural virtue and
power of doing all things belonging to it self, by the which, being not
withdrawn or hindered by God, the creature: is able to perform all natural
actions, without any extraordinary help from God: as when any creature does
this or that thing, the action comes of it self, in that the faculty of
performing it is inherent in it self, and yet the same action comes from
God. But to return to the matter. Lastly, God has will because he is such a
nature, as has in it self the whole fountain of perfect motion, yea that
which is the fountain of all fountains, and therefore he does al things of his
own free will, the which differs from the will of the creatures, as in other
respects, so also in that it cannot be hindered by any force, but can hinder
the will of any creature, as we know that God brideleth the will, even of the
devil and his Angels, the which otherwise are mighty creatures.

Thus we see the subject of will: now we come to the object of it, or that
whereunto the will of any thing inclines. First therefore the will of any
thing inclines it self to that which is good, and in any respect convenient,
pleasant, and profitable, as we know that every thing does abhor and decline
from that which is any way evil, hurtful, dangerous, grievous, inconvenient,
and unprofitable. Yet the will does not incline it self to any good, but
only to that which is apparently good: for although the will of God inclines
always to that only, which is good indeed and in truth, because he cannot be
deceived in any thing, yet the creature does often think evil to be good, and
good evil, and so abhors that which is good, and inclines to that which is
in truth evil, yet good in show and appearance. Lastly not any apparent good
is the object of the will, but that which every thing thinks to be good for
it self: for a man does not incline himself to that, which he thinks to be
good for a beast, unless he think it good for himself also. Yea every thing
follows the natural disposition of it self, desiring those things only
which are agreeable to the own nature.

Thus much ingenerall of will: the which is of two kinds, brutishe, and
reasonable, the which has place in all those natures, which are inducd with
reason, as namely in God, in Angels, and in man. But to let pass the will of
God, and of Angels, as being no part of the matter in hand, we are to consider
the created holiness of man's will, which is the inclination of man only to
that which is truly good: Or thus, The due subjection or obedience of the will
to a holy and clear mind, showing without any error good and evil: or more
briefly, The conformity of man's inclination to his knowledge, or of man's will
to Gods will. For then this faculty is perfectly holy, whenas it chooses for
action those things which the mind judges good, right, lawful, and
agreeable to the will of God: and contrarily rejects and refuses whatsoever
it says to be evil, unlawful and forbidden: and lastly when as touching
those things, which are not as yet fully determined by the mind, to be either
good or bad, convenient or inconvenient, to be done or to be left undone, it
staieth it self in the midst, not inclining to the one or to the other.

Thus we see what was the actual will of man, even his full inclination to
good. But there was another will in him, which we may call potentiall, as has
been said that man has both an actual and a potentiall understanding: this
potentiall will commonly called Freewill, is the power which man had of
inclining his will, either to good or to evil: Or more briefly, The
possibility of willing either of good or evil. It may be made plain in this
manner. Suppose a man to bear good will to his friend, and a loyal and
duetifull affection to his prince, as many do, this is his actual will: But
again, that man may change his will, and become altogether disloyal to his
prince, and a hater of his friend: this is his possible and potentiall will. So
man inclines really and indeed only to good, but in possibility either to
good or evil. Yet not equally, but more to good then to evil, as he that now
loves his friend, although hereafter he may love or hate him, yet it is liker
that he will love then hate him. That this potentiall will was in man, we need
not prove by arguments, being sufficiently proved already by the event it
self, and the woeful experience of mankind, the which by the means of his
potential will, has lost that holy, and happy estate, wherein it was created.
For man being enabled by God to will either good or evil, and being commanded
by God to will good only, did chose rather to satisfy his own perverse and
sinful desire in willing evil, then to obey the will of God in willing good.
If any man do ask why God did put into man this potential, doubtful and
uncertain will, seeing that if he had been created without it, he had been
sure from falling, being actually and immutably disposed to good. To this we
answer, (...), we ought to rest contented in the will of God, thinking well of
all his doings, although we cannot see, or give any reason of the same.
Secondly, that man could not have been created without his potentiall* will?
for so his nature should have been incapable of sin. For if his will had been
inclined to good actually and immutably, it could never have been inclined to
evil, and so he could not possibly have committed sin, because of the want of
the free and potentiall will. But he by whom this doubt was propounded, will
marvel to hear that brought against his opinion* which he did allege as the
only reason and strength of it: and that any man should think freewill to
have been needful in the state of innocence, because without it man could not
have sinned, when as he thinks that it might very well have been spared for
that cause: seeing that as sin it self, whereby Gods glory is obscured, and
man's happiness utterly lost, so all the means, occasions, and inducementes of
it ought by all means to be avoided: To this reply we make this answer, that
Gods glory is impaired much by the committing of sin, but much more by this
supposed impossibility of committing sin: for immutability, and
vncapablenesse of sin, are a great part of his glory, and inseparable
attributes of his divine essence, and therefore they cannot without the great
dishonor of God be communicated to any earthly creature* Now as touching man
himself, (whose patron although he yield to this, yet he thinks it
impossible to be proved, that this impossibility of sinning is not good and
profitable for man) what reason is it, that his good should not give place to
Gods glory, for the which he was created, seeing that the wanting of potentiall
will, and the impossibility of sinning arising thereof, do directly obscure the
glory of God, but not necessarily hinder the happiness of man? who cannot
think that GOD does either compel, or any way cause him to sin, in that he
has made it possible for him to sin? But what will be said for this
impossibility of sinning, if so be it be found hurtful to man himself, as it
is indeed, as will easily appear to him who considers that it depriueth man,
not only of all praise and commendation (which being received at the hands of
God, is not lightly to be esteemed by man, who thinks it a great matter,
Laudari a laudato, to be praised by a worthy man) but also of holiness it
self. For what is more ridiculous, then that man should look for any
commendation for not sinning, when as he could not so much as be willing to
sin, seeing that the brute beasts, yea stocks and stones in the which there
is no sin, nor shadow of any, may as justly look for praise in that
respect, or for performing positive duties of holiness, coming not of a
willing and ready mind which God regards* but of necessity and constraint,
and as the due praise of holiness, so also holiness it self is taken away by
this impossible possibillity of sinning, for nothing can properly be said to be
the subject of holiness, which naturally may not become sinful; as nothing is
said to have life, or sight, which may not become dead or blind. And therefore
we do not say that stones and brute beasts, have in them any holiness,
because they cannot have sinfulness which is the privation of it.

How then will this curious questionarie say, can the holy Angels fall from
God, and do ye make the nature of God a fit harbor of sinfulness? not so
neither, but we say that God is not properly the subject of holiness,
(although it has pleased him to set forth his incomprehensible nature to our
capacity, by taking to himself this and other attributes of the creature) for
God is the rule of holiness, and any thing is then truly holy, whenas it
obeys the will and commandments of God: but we cannot in proper speech say,
that God either commands or obeys himself, as for the holy Angels, they
retain as all the rest of their natural faculties wherewith they were endued
in their first creation, so also this free and potentiall will: and if it be
possible that any of those which do now keep their standing in holiness and
happiness, should fall from God; yet this is to be ascribed, not to any natural
impossibility of sinning, which is not to be admitted or supposed in any
creature, no not in the humane nature of Christ, to the which the sin of
mankind could not have been imputed, if it had been naturally incapable of
sin) but to the love and grace of God, who does continue and uphold them in
their holy state, not by mangling their nature and detracting any natural
faculty, as potentiall will, or any other: but by co^firming their actual will
in the natural inclination of it to good only. Lastly this natural
impossibility of sinning, would make man either a God, as has been said: or
which is liker, a senseless stock, not having in himself perfect life, and
the full power of moving himself. For how can we suppose that Adam should have
been created a living and a reasonable creature, and not to have been able to
will, and to eat the forbidden fruit, or to do any other thing incident into
his nature? If it be said, that God might have confirmed him with his grace;
We answer, that that is true, but he neither was bound to do it, neither did,
or could think man worthy of more grace, who did abuse so many and so
excellent graces as he had by nature.

Sect. 2.
Of the sinfulness of the will.
AS there is nothing but horrible confusion in that commonwealth wherein
neither the prince can rule, nor the people obey, the one wanting wisdom and
counsel whereby he should make righteous laws, commanding good and
forbidding evil: the other due moderation, whereby they might be restrained
from evil: and so the raynes of licentiousness being let loose to the furious
multitude, all is filled with thefts, murders, adulteries, and all manner of
heinous enormities: and (that we may come nearer home, making the se^sible
misery of the body a type of the spiritual misery of the soul) as when one
blind man leads another, it cannot be but that both of them should fall into
the ditch: So the case stands with the sinful and disorderly soul of man,
wherein the mind being void of knowledge, is not able to direct the practical
faculties from evil to good. And if happily there be some good motion suggested
by the mind, wherein there is a little light remaining since the first
creation, ^f the sinful^esse of the ^ill.
yet it is not followed and obeyed, but frowardly rejected by the practical
faculties, and so the understanding faculties which are darkened and blinded by
the fall of man, leading the practical faculties, which by their own nature
are blind, and by sinfulnes perverse, cannot but lead man into the pit of
sin, and of eternal destruction.

But let us consider these practical faculties in particular, first the will,
then the affections. As all the other faculties of man, so also the will has
lost the created holiness, and what marvel is it, that the will it self is
sinful, seeing by it all the other faculties of man's soul and body were made
sinful? Yea it is more sinful then the former faculties, and so is justly
punished, for being the cause of man's sinfulness: for it does more, (if more
can be) abhor and refuse good, then the mind is ignorant of it. The means
whereby the will became sinful, was the own default: for it being created by
God, actually only good, and potentially more good then evil, did by refusing
good and choosing evil, make it self for ever unable either to choose good,
or to refuse evil: and that by continuing in that wrong way, wherein it had
made one step in choosing forbidden fruit, and by adding one degree of
perverseness to another, till at length it became habitual and natural to it.

The sinfulness of man's will in this his corrupt state, is the actual and
potentiall inclination of it only to evil. This definition needs some
explication and proof, it being greatly controuerted and oppugned by many, who
as if they were not of the progeny of Adam, think that his fall does not
belong unto them: neither has taken from them the created holiness of will,
and therefore they affirm and defend, that the will of man even in this
corrupt estate, is, if not actually inclined to good, yet so free that it may
of it self incline it self and the whole man either to evil, whereof no man
doubts, or yet to good, wherein the whole controversy stands. But this
opinion is not to be received, for it is an enemy both to gods glory, in that
it takes a way the supernatural work of his spirit in regenerating the
faithful, and ascribes the salvation of man, not to the love, mercy and
power of God, but to the natural faculties and inherent strength of man: and
also to the salvation of me^ whom it deceaueth with a vain show of
conversion, faith and holiness. And therefore that the truth of this matter
may appear. We will first set down the state of it, by showing what is good
and evil, and what it is to have freewill in regard of both (or rather) either
of good or evil.

Good therefore is to be defined by God: who only is good and therefore the only
rule of goodness: for whatsoever in the creature is agreeable to the goodness
of God, that is straigth and good; as whatsoever is disagreeing from it, is
crooked and evil. Yet this goodness of God is not that which is essential to
his nature, and cannot be comprehended by any creature, but a finite, created,
and accidental goodness, which God has put into every one of his creaturs,
as a shadow of his infinite goodness. Now in man this goodness is his
holiness and happiness not devised by himself, but appointed by God, and
revealed in his word. Contrarily, evil is the sinfullnesse and wretchedness
of man: yea although it have never so great an appearance of goodness, holiness
and happiness, yet if it be not that holiness and happiness which is
agreeable to the will of God, it is evil, sin and misery: This goodness is the
object of ma^s will or the thing whereunto he enclineth himself who in the
state of innocence had power to will and choose true goodness; yea he did
actuallie choose it, being in all his thoughts, words, deeds, faculties, and
in his whole nature and state, made by his own freewill conformable to the
will of God.

But as touching the will or proper inclination of man in this his corrupt
state, we do utterly deny that he is able by any natural faculty in
himself, by any imagining, inuenting, or discoursing; by any wit, wisdom,
learning, reading, or knowledge; by any good education, instruction and
exercise: or ingenerall by any means that a natural man can use, or that all
the men or Angels in the world can use in his behalf (without the
supernatural work of Gods spirit changing his nature) to incline himself to
that which is good, that is, to that holiness* and happiness which is
agreeable to the will of God. Or more plainly, he cannot say thus with himself
and do accordingly. This is the true and only happiness appointed by God for
man: This holiness is the only way which God has appointed, that man should
walk in, as in the way leading to that happiness: This is the only
happiness which I do of my self propound to my self, and that in this way of
true holiness I will walk all the days of my life: I will by continual
studying and hearing the word, by restraining my own desires, and avoiding all
occasions of sin, and by such means as I can use, get the true and sound
knowledge of God, true faith, and hope of eternal glory, and of the
resurrection of the dead, true repentance, mortification of sin, and of all my
corrupt affections, yea an unfeigned love of God and of all goodness, and in
sum all the spiritual graces which are the parts of man's holiness, and the
means of salvation. This I have resolved with my self to do, not that I
think that I am able to attain the perfection of these things, but yet my
whole will, inclination, affection, desire, care, study, endeavor and labor
shall be set on these things. This is to have free will to good, not for a man to
say, I desire to be a holy man, and to be in heaven after this life, but to
incline and bend his wholle body, soul, and all the faculties of them both
to holy and heavenly things. The which thing is as impossible for a natural
man to do, as it is for him to fly up to heaven. But how can this be proved?

First the scripture says: Genesis 9 5.
Genesis 6. 5. All the motions of the thought of man are only to evil. ^ Cor. 3.
5.
2. Cor. 3. 5. Not that we are able to think any thing as of our selves, but
our sufficiency is of God. ^oh. 6. 44.
Ioh 6. 44. No man can come unto me unless he that sent me, do draw him. For
the which doctrine of the impossibility of natural inclination to good, it is
said. Verse. 4. 66.
Ver. 4. 66. of the said Chapter, that many left Christ, as dispairing to
attain to that which he affirmed to be impossible in respect of the strength
of man. Ioh. 8. 43.
And Ioh. 8. 43. Ye do not know my doctrine, because ye cannot hear it. That
is, because ye cannot of your selves understand and believe. Romans 8. 7.
Romans 8. 7. The cogitations of the flesh neither are subject to the law of
God, neither can be, they that are in the flesh cannot please God. Romans 9. 16.
And Romans 9. 16. It is not in him that wills, nor in him that runs, but in
God that shows mercy 1. Cor. 2. 14. 1* Cor. 2. 14.
The natural man does not perceive spiritual things, for they are folishnesse
to him, neither can he perceive them, because they are spiritually discerned.
Gal. 2. 8.
Gall. 2. 8. Ye are saved by grace in faith, and that not of your selves, it is
the gift of God.

Besides this evident voice of the scripture (the authority whereof ought to
be sufficient without any other proof) we see this error of freewill to be
plainly confuted by the experience of all times and places. For if man were by
nature free to choose either good or evil, why should not the choice of good,
of holiness, and of the way which leads to salvation, be, if not as common
as the other yet a very common and ordinary matter. But we see, that of the
natural men which have lived, and do live in the world, not one of a
thousand have once set foot in the right way of regeneration and salvation.
And no marvel, for how should a man choose that as the only good, which he
did never know, and whereof he never dreamed or heard? in the which state all
men are by nature, being altogether ignorant of the true God, his word,
worship, and religion, and so having no means of knowledge, but their own
senses, which do reject that God, worship and religion, which is not
agreeable to the judgment thereof, the which does plainly show the
impossibility of this freedom of will. For nothing has freewill to that
which is against the nature of it, as God has not freewill to evil, a man to
fly, a horse to speak.

If it be objected that a man may have a desire, inclination, and will, to that
which is impossible for him to do and accomplish: We answer that this is
nothing to the purpose. For when we deny that there is in man any freedom of
will to good, we do not deny that a carnal man may wish that he were holy and
happy, but that he cannot accomplish or begin the work of his regeneration
and salvation. The which beginning and working of grace, comes from the will,
which is the fountain of action, enclining men with all the faculties of soul
and body to any thing. Now regeneration is a thing contrary to the corrupt
nature of man, for that faith and human reason do fight together, no less
then do wisdom and foolishnes. 1. Cor. 1. 18.
1. Cor. 1. 18. And so in all the other parts of holiness.

This is confirmed also by continual and daily experience. For if regeneration
were agreeable to man's nature, it would be common and ordinary, whereas it is
and always has been a rare miracle, not to be found among many thousands of
men. Nay which is more, men do neither of themselves and their own
inclination seek after it* nor can by any means which they can use be brought
unto it. In other studies, faculties, and exercises men do daily profit and
go forward; none being so dull and blockish, but that he may with pains in
continuance of time be brought to knowledge. But no pains, no time, no
excellency of gifts in the minister can make men religious, or to be endued
with the true knowledge and obedience of God. Yea for the most part the more
that men are taught religion, the more blockish and backwarde they become, and
so continue all their life time. We confess, that God does sometime bestow on
carnal and reprobate men spiritual graces, yea a shadow of regeneration,
whereby both the minds of men are enlightened to see the truth, and also their
wills and affections lightly inclined to love and embrace it. As we are to
declare in the last part of this treatise. But this change comes not of man
but from God: neither is it an effectual and total inclination to good, and
therefore not that which is meant in this question of freewill.

But the maintainers of freewill will perhaps yield to this, that no man can
choose the right way before he do deliberate of it, and that nothing is
deliberated of which is not first known. And therefore that freewill is not
actually in an ignorant man, but being as it were fettered and chained by
ignorance, is stirred up and set loose by the knowledge of the word of God,
with the which whosoever is endued, having the right and the wrong way
propounded unto him by the preaching of the gospel, the same man has freedom
of will, either to choose or to refuse eternal salvation with the means of
it, yea although he have not as yet any supernatural grace bestowed on him. To
this we answer, confessing that the true illumination of the mind can not be
severed from freedom of will, but yet that neither the one nor the other can
be attained unto by the natural inclination of the will: who although he may
by natural means get a superficial, and as it is usually called, an
historical knowledge of all the points of religion, yet is it impossible for
him to get any such true knowledge, as will be effectual to move his will in
the choice of good. For howsoever many carnal men seem to have a great
measure of divine knowledge, yet they are far from being firmly grounded in
the truth, but do make a fair show of religion, faith and holiness, whenas
their hearts are full of Atheism, unbelief and all sinfulness, in the which
(for the most part) they are more wilful, stubborn and desperate, then they
who are altogether void of knowledge. Neither indeed is it any marvel, that
a natural man should be unable to resist and offer violence to his nature, to
deny himself and all worldly pleasures, to forsake his sins which are more
pleasant to him then life it self, and all for hope of eternal salvation,
whereof he neither sees any probability for the time present, nor can have any
certainty, and assurance for the time to come.

If it be here asked what should be the hinderaunce, why man being now sinful
cannot as well enclin^ himself to good, as he being innocent did choose evil,
and so return to his first state by the same way, whereby he fell from it? We
answer, that as a man having his sight and life, has in his own power either
to keep them, or to spoil himself of them, by putting out his eyes, and by
killing himself: yet after that he is blind and dead, he is not able to take
again unto himself his sight and life: so man being in his innocence endued
with spiritual life, and a ready inclination to all good, had power to
continue in that estate, if he had so thought good: but after that he had once
by freedom of will, lost the goodness of his will, and wholly deprived
himself of the spiritual life of holiness, he could not being now dead in
sin restore himself to the state of life. And therefore he has no more
power of choosing good, then a dead man wanting the fountain of motion, is
able to move himself about any business.

If it be further asked, why the word of God bids men believe, forsake their
sins, turn themselves to God, repent, be holy, refuse evil and choose the
good, if so be they are by nature altogether unable to do any of these things,
or how that men can be justly blamed, or condemned for not doing that which is
not incident into their nature, neither possible to be performed by any
natural man: and lastly why men should trouble themselves in using the means
of attaining to regeneration and salvation, seeing that all their labor is in
vain without the supernatural work of God, and not rather sit still and
expect the time wherein the Lord will change their natures, and make them
capable of holiness. We answer in one word to all these doubts: that the
scripture bidding men to choose good and become holy, does command nothing but
that which is in their power to do; and therefore does not mean that men
should go about to change their own corrupt natures, and indue themselves
with spiritual graces: but only that they should be careful in using the
means of holiness, as namely, the abstaining from those sins whereunto they
are given, the avoiding of the occasions of them, the hearing of the word of
God, and the doing of whatsoever is effectual for this purpose, and may be
done by an unregenerate man: but whenas men are altogether careless of their
own salvation, contemning the word of God and all other means of it, yea
adding one measure of sinfulness to an other, who can deny, but that they make
themselves subject to the just sentence of eternal damnation? And therefore
this natural impotency of will, which is in man, ought not to make any man
cease from using the means of salvation: for howsoever it be impossible for
him or any other creature to change his own heart and nature, yet he shall
find God to be ready and near at hand to all those that call upon him, and
never to be wanting for his part.

It remains that we do briefly show, what liberty and ability of will is
remaining in man in this corrupt state, wherein if he have no will, he has not
in him the whole fountain of life and motion, and so he is no man, yea in
truth worse then any brute beast: and if he have a will, it is either a free
will or else no will, yet this freedom of will is not indefinite, neither does
it make him omnipotent, and therefore we are to see how far it reaches. For
the knowledge whereof, we are to distinguish betwixt the natures of things
indifferent, and of those which are simply good or evil. In the first kind
we are to reckon all common actions, as to eat, to drink, to mary, to sleep,
to build, to plough, to learn, to teach, to study, to speak, to think, and
all other things of the same kind, which are neither commanded nor forbidden
in the word of God. In all these man has freewill, being able of himself to
incline himself, to the doing or not doing of any of them, as daily experience
does plainly prove. But it is not so with him in the other kind of things,
either in choosing good or in rejecting evil, yet he has some freedom in
these things also: first of good, then of evil.

In the good things we are to consider the outward action and the inward
grace, in the outward action, a carnal man has freewill, being able to
incline himself to the doing or not doing of it. For example a carnal man may
hear the word of God, or not hear, worship God, or not worship him, relieve
the necessities of the Church, or not do it, suffer martyrdom for the
profession of the gospel, or perform the outward action of any christian
duty: but as touching the inward grace, it is not in his power to get it, but
only to leave it. As he cannot indue his own mind with the true knowledge of
God, with the fear of God, with the love of the godly: and therefore his
outward action is but a painted sheath or sepulcher, not effectual to his own
salvation, yea in truth not to be esteemed good. Again, an unregenerate man
may of himself seek and get inward graces, as some knowledge of God, justice,
temperance, chastity, patience, and such other: Yet this does not make him to
have freewil to good: for first in the question of freewill, this word Good
signifies not any one, or a few particular graces or actions, but a general
holiness effectual for happiness. Secondly, these gifts although they be
parts of renewed holiness in the believer, in whom they spring from the
root of a true faith: yet in an unbelieving and unregenerate man they are not
spiritual graces, but natural gifts, unable either to sanctify or to save
him that has them. Thus much of doing good.

Likewise in the committing of evil, a natural man has freewill not only to
do it, but also to leave it undone; for he may sin if he will, and he need
not except he list. Of the first no man ever doubted, but the second needs to
be explaned in this manner. As good, so also evil is of two kinds, inward,
and outward: the inward corruption of sin cannot be avoided by any means: for
beside the original sin which is common to the regenerate, and to the
carnal man, it is impossible that the inward faculties of a carnal man should
be free from actual sinfulness, dullness, ignorance, oblivion, and
perverseness, and therefore in regard of this inward corruption of the
faculties of the soul man has no freewill, but sins of necessity. Again
his outward sins are of two sorts, the one is of those which are sins not
in their own nature, but as they come from the inward root of infidelity, as
namely, all the indifferent actions of a carnal man, his eating, drinking,
speaking, working, buying, selling, and all other of that kind. Yea his good
actions, as namely, his hearing Gods word, his praying, his giving of alms,
his temperate, honest and just actions; all these are sins in the sight of
God. And therefore the carnal man has not freewill in this kind of outward
actions. For whatsoever he does it is a sin, and if he do nothing, yet that
his doing nothing is sinful, yet in particulars he has freewill, or liberty
of not sinning, for although he cannot but sin in every thing that he does, yet
it is in his freewill whether he will do that indifferent thing or no, and so
whether he will sin in that particular or no, as namely, a carnal man
purposes to build a house: if he do it, he cannot choose but sin, because
he cannot purge himself from infidelity, yet he need not sin in that
particular except he list, because he need not build the house except he list.

The second kind of outward sins, is of those which are sins in their own
nature, as being directy forbidden in the moral law, as idolatry, perjury,
murder, adultery, theft, and such other: in the committing whereof, a carnal
man has freewill, it being not needful that he should commit them, as we see
in many unregenerate men, whose outward lives are irreprouable: for the inward
force of original corruption, and of corrupt desires enclining the will to
sin, does not make any necessity of any particular sin, because they may
be repressed by natural strength and hindered, although not from breaking
forth into any sin, yet from bringing forth this or that particular sin. For
whenas a man commits adultery, or murder, he does it of a free, although a
corrupt will, and not of any force or necessity. Thus we see in how many
respects the freedom of will remains, the which being not distinguished from
a true and general good, consisting in holiness and happiness, have been
the occasion of many errors in this point of doctrine, whilst many have
thought that either a man has freewil by nature, or else he is able by learning
and knowledge to get an artificial freedom of will, and that in the work of
regeneration, the will works together which grace, if not strongly, yet
weakly and faintly, as we see a sick man goes about his business, but the
word of God teaches us to think the will of man not only weak, but clean
dead in respect of true holiness, as has been declared, and that an
unregenerate man is no more able of himself to enter and go on in the way of
godliness, then a dead man is able to go about the affairs of this
temporal life.

Sect. 3.
Of the renewed will of man.
WHen as that happy hour comes wherein it pleases God of his infinite love
and mercy, to call any of his elect children out of the bondage and slavery
of Satan, Of the renew^^ will of man.
into the glorious liberty of the kingdom of Christ, he then sends down
his spirit into the heart of that man, whom he purposes to call, and by the
mighty operation thereof, does change him into a new creature, taking from him
the dullness and ignorance of his mind, the untowardness of his will and
affections, and enduing him with the contrary graces. This change is wholly to
be ascribed to this supernatural working of the spirit, and not in any
respect to the natural force of man's will: who howsoever perhaps he before
his conversion, using the outward means of regeneration and salvation, may
after a so^^ desire holiness, and eternal life: yet he is no more able to
work it by himself, then he was in his creation able to take to himself
created holiness, before the same were inspired into him by God. For the will
of man, as also all the rest of his faculties, is not an agent or worker in
this action, but only does suffer the work of the holy spirit, to whom it is
as easy to sanctify the will of that man, who abhors and detesteth all the
outward means of holiness, as of him that is so careful and diligent in
using them, that he might seem to have changed his own will from evil to
good. This we see in the conversion of the Apostle Paul, whose will being most
spitefully bent against the Gospel, was in one moment changed to the true
love of it.

But how is the will after this work of regeneration? Is it as idle and unable
to do any thing as before? Or is it now able of it self without the immediate
work of Gods spirit, to choose and do good? We answer, that although the
holy spirit of God does never forsake him, whom he has once renewed, but
does to the end of his life, yea for ever accompany and assist him, yet there
is a great difference to be put betwixt the first act of regeneration, and the
continual course of renewed holiness arising thereof. For a carnal man is
renewed by the sole work of the spirit of God, without any help, action or
motion of his own will (unless we will say that it moves, in that it is
moved) but a faithful man being already regenerated does choose, embrace,
follow and do good, and perform all the duties of renewed holiness by the
proper and inherent faculty and motion of his own freewill. That the renewed
holiness of the will, and of all the other faculties of a faithful man, are
proper and inherent in him no man can doubt: for his knowledge of God, and his
inclination to good, although it were wrought in them by the holy spirit, yet
it is not the proper holiness of the holy spirit, whose holiness is perfect,
infinite, uncreated and essential, but this holiness of the faithful man, is
imperfect, finite, and accidental: not inherent in the nature of the holy
spirit, which is not capable of it, but in the natural faculties of the
faithful man. Yea this holiness is now made natural unto him, for although
it be contrary to his corrupt nature, yet it is agreeable to his created and
renewed nature. So that the first renewing of holiness is a supernatural,
miraculous, unknown and divine work: But the continual using of it is an
ordinary evident, and a human action. For as in the first creation of man, it
was a marvel to see a sensible lump of red earth turned into a living and
reasonable man, having free will to do either good or evil, but after that
man was once created, it was noe marvel to see him use those faculties which
he had received from God: So in his second creation, it is as great wonder to
see a blockishe, ignorant, froward, corrupt, sinful, and earthly man to become
pure, holy, and heavenly in all the faculties of soul and body, but after that
he is renewed and sanctified, it is no marvel to see him choose and do new
and holy actions. And therefore we are not to think, that the holy spirit
works the continual course of holiness in the faithful, as in stocks or trees,
although he begin it in them in that manner, but that first he gives to them
holy faculties, by the which they work the residue of their own holiness, he
created in them a holy will; then by means and inherent power of that will,
they themselves choose and do good.

Thus much ingenerall of the renewed holiness of the will, the which differs
from the created holiness, which it had in the state of innocence in two
respects. First whereas the created will of man, did for the present act
incline it self wholly, only, and perfectly to good, this renewed will,
(although it also does actually incline itself to that which is truly and
only good) yet it does this imperfectlie and impurely. For by reason of the
relics of sinfulness which are in it, it does in part incline it self to
some particular evils, as to this or that sin: we say to particular evil,
because it is impossible that this renewed will should reject in general the
true good, Of the renew^d will of man.
consisting in true holiness and happiness, the which makes the second
difference betwixt the created and the recreated will of man. For the created
will of man might (as it did indeed) refuse good and choose evil in general:
the which thing cannot happen to the recreated will: for it is impossible that
one truly renewed, should ever make a general declination from good, which
is a total apostasy from God, yet he may choose and accomplish many
particular sins.

So that to conclude, the will in this state of regeneration has freedom and
ability of choosing good and rejecting evil: yet this liberty is not so
perfect that it can wholly incline it self from evil to good, but may be
compared to one who has been a captive or prisoner all his life time, and is
now set at liberty, so that he may go whither he list, and do what he
thinks good: Yet having his fetters hanging on his heels is so shakled and
hindered with them, that he cannot run up and down so readely and freely as
otherwise he would, yea they make him to stumble often, and sometimes to fall
on the ground: so the faithful are freed from the bondage of sin, and set
at liberty by Christ, yet they are so shakled with the natural corruption of
sin remaining in them, that they cannot so perfectly choose good and refuse
evil, but that they do often stumble, yea fall into great sins. Yet as this
renewed holiness of the will is during the time of this short life, inferior
to the created holiness of it in the perfection of actual freedom to good,
so it is to be preferred unto it in respect of perpetuity and immutabilitie.
For this imperfect freedom of will is so continually vpheld by the secret and
mighty grace of God, that it cannot possibly be wholly lost: whereas the
perfect freedom of the created will, was soon brought to an end. Yet this
difference is not to be put in the nature of the renewed will: for as the will
of all creatures, so also the will of regenerate men is mutable, and for any
inherent and natural faculty which either is, or can be in it, may loose the
goodness and liberty of it, but to be ascribed to the immutable and
supernatural grace of God, assisting the renewed wills of the faithful,
whereas he left the created will of man to destroy it self, that so by the
weakness of the creature, the glory of his power might the more plainly
appear.

CHAPTER. VI.
Sect. 1. Of the created holiness of the affections, and especially of love
and hatred.
THe last head of man's holiness, is the holiness of his affections, which are
the diverse dispositio^s of man, stirred up in him by the diversity of objects,
and may be called so many particular wills or motions of the will, for so much
as they are nothing but diverse inclinations to apparent good, or declinations
from apparent evils. To make the nature of them plain by familiar examples: a
man going in the street meets with his own father, son, or some friend
whom he loves dearly, straight way he feels a change of his disposition,
which before was quiet and settled, his will enclining it self toward that
object, whereof comes the affection of love: annon he meets with his
deadly enemy, at the sight of whom his stomach rises, he abhors from him
as from an evil, there is a contrary disposition called the affection of
hatred. Afterward he espieth a poor, impotent, sick, lame, Of created love
and hatred.
and naked man, whose extreme misery he cannot behold for grief, and
therefore he turns away himself and sigheth: there is pity, mercy or
compassion. Not far off there appears a great rich man, him he enuieth,
although he ought not either to hate or envy. Straight way he spieth a
pleasant picture, or hears some good news: there he is made glade and
rejoices: but going a little further, he sees his friends house on fire,
then his joy is turned into sorrow or grief. If he meet a man whom he knows
to be wise and just, and sees to be aged, him he reuerenceth: but he
contemns a base, vile, and lewd person: an offense committed kindles anger,
as a lawful action works contentation. Lastly if he see any thing, that he
stands in need of, and is greatly for his use, that he desires: but if he
chance to see a rotten carrion or any loathsome thing, that he abhors.

Thus much of the nature of the affections, now we come to the holiness of
them. For although they be so suddenly stirred up in a man, that they may
seem to come rather of foolish rashness then of reason and due regard, and
make so great a change in him, as if the object did lay violent hands upon
his mind (in the which respect they are called passions of the mind, and
therefore were disclamed by those philosophers which professed constancy and
exact virtue) yet they contain in them a part of man's holiness and of the
image of God who cannot suffer, and in whom there is no shadow of change. But
thus it has pleased him to shadow out his own incomprehensible nature, by
the likeness of our nature, resembling it, as to the other faculties of the
soul of man, so also to these affections, yea so that a great part of his
glory revealed to his church consists in them. For although he has
manifested himself to the heathen in his wisdom and power shining in the
creatures: yet in his church he is most glorious and renowned in respect of his
mercy, compassion and love in Christ. The which affections, as also anger,
hatred, and all the rest, are every where in the scripture attributed to God.
In man they are then holy whenas they are agreeable to the nature of the
object; as, when a man loves that only which ought to be loved, and hates
that which by the will and word of God ought to be hated: and that with due
measure and moderation. Thus they being ordered by reason and the word of God,
are not contrary to holiness, but a part of it. Yea they are as bellows
blowing up and increasing spiritual graces, and do carry man forward to a high
degree of holiness.

Now we are to declare these affections in particular, but because the former
part of this treatise (wherein those affections which imply subjection, as
faith, hope, fear, and reverence, are already handled) is grown in length
far above our purpose, as also that there may be some place left for the
third part of this treatise, which in no case may wholly be omitted, we will
omit the several explication, and only choose out some few of them, which
are the chief and of most notable use. In the which rank the first place is
to be given to love, being taken not generally for that pleasure which is taken
in the fruition of some good thing, in the which sense a man is said to love
this or that thing, this or that kind of meat, as it is said of Isaac, Genesis
27. 9.
Genesis 27. 9. But as the object of it is some reasonable thing, to wit God,
Angels, or man, in the which sense it is usually called charity, and may be
described, A hearty and vehement desire of the good of an other, arising of an
inward pleasure taken in some good which we see in him. This affection is first
and chiefly to be set on God who only is good, in the fruition of whom there
are infinite pleasures. And therefore man ought to desire his good (in the
advancement of his glory) above all the things in the world. For he that
loves father or mother, son or brother, or any creature whatsoever more then
God, is not worthy to enjoy those fountains of pleasures, which the fruition
of God does yield to the hearty and vehement lover, Math. 10. 7. From this
love of God proceeds the love of the reasonable creatures, ^ath. 10. 7.
which being endued with the image of God are for his sake to be loved. Even as
we know that he that bears hearty and vehement love to his friend, cannot
but love his friends son, being a resemblance of his father. Hence it
follows that all the reasonable creatures are not to be loved alike, but more
or less as they are more or less endued with the image of God. And therefore
greater love was due to Angels then to men: and among men to those who did
excel others in measure of holiness and of spiritual graces.

This is the first stream of love flowing from the love of God as from a
fountain: beside the which there is an other fountain of love, namely, the
natural affection which every living thing in the world bears to it self,
whereby it takes more pleasure in it self, and does more desire the good
estate of it self, then of any other thing. This natural love has place in
man who, even in this his innocent estate, does bear a greater measure of love
to himself then to any other creature. The which selfeloue is not to be
reprehended, it being not only in all living creatures, but also in God
himself, who (as good reason is) does delight more in himself, then in any
other thing, and does more desire his own glory then the good of any creature.
From this fountain of selfeloue flow many streams of special love, whereby a
man is more affected to those who do any way come nearer unto himself, then
to the common sort of men. In this respect he bears a greater, and as it were
a partial love to his natural parents, children and kinsfolks, being of the
same substance, flesh, blood, and bone with himself: to his wife who by the
institution of God is united into one person with him, Genesis 2. 24 Genesis 2. 24.
to his special friend who is joined with him in a perpetual covenant of
love, John. 20. ^. John. 20. 2.
The disciple whom Christ loved and is to him Deuteronomy. 11. 6.
as his own soul. Deuteronomy. 11. 6. To his acquaintance, alliance, companions and
neighbors, and to all those to whom he is bound by any special means; ^ut.
11. 6.
this love is to be exercised and declared in the performance of all Christian
duties to our brethren, in communicating unto them al those blessings both
temporal and spiritual, which we have received from God, so far forth as
their necessity shall any way require. If these duties be wanting, our love is
either very weak, or rather hypocritical and pretended. Thus the Apostle
says, that he exhorting the Corinthians to contribute to the Church of
Jerusalem, did thereby try the naturalnesse and syncerity of their love, ^ Cor
8. 8.
2. Cor. 8. 8. likewise, ^ John. 3. 17. 18
1. John. 3. 17. 18. He that has things pertaining to the maintenance of this
natural life, and sees his brother want, how is the love of God in him?
therefore let us not love in word and tongue, but indeed and truth.

Thus much of love, whereunto hatred is contrary, the which also has place,
and some use in this state of innocence, although not so great as love has,
because there were more good obiectes then evil. This affection being contrary
to love is in general an abhorring from any evil, but as it is referred to
those things which are endued with reason, it is a desire of evil to happen
to that person which is hated, arising of some inward grief conceived by
means of him. But what use could there be of this affection in the state of
innocence, or who was the object of it? not God, for he is pleasure and good it
self, and therefore does neither deserve to be abhorred, being in no respect
evil; nor yet gives any occasion of hatred to man by grieuing him: not the
Angels, nor man himself who also are good both in themselves and toward man,
and therefore there remain the wicked spirits only, the devil with his
helhoundes, on whom this affection is to be exercised. The which thing man
might lawfully do, requiting their accursed and spightfull hatred of God, of
his glory, creatures, and specially of man and his salvation, with a vehement
hatred desiring their eternal confusion, not simply because they are sinful
and miserable; for they are in that respect rather to be pitied, but because
of the nature of their sin, which being a desperate hatred of God, has
belonging unto it the imprecation of the Church of God. Yet the devil himself
the Captain of this wicked crewe is not so vehemently to be hated, as God is
to be loved: because he is not so evil, as God is good: for God is simply,
infinitely, and essentially good: but the devil is not infinitely evil,
because he is a creature: nor absolutely, for he has some good in him, as is
the created might and power of his nature: nor essentially, for the substance
of his nature remains vncorrupt, as in the holy Angels.

Sect. 2. Of corrupt love and hatred.
OF all the faculties of man's soul none are so much stained with the
corruption of sin, as are the affections: for as the will is more froward from
good then the mind is ignorant of it, so the affections are far more
outrageous then the will is froward: and no marvel, for they being of so
violent a nature, as cannot without much a do be kept in due order, by the
force either of created or renewed holiness, how great shall we think their
disorder and sinfulness to be in this corrupt state, wherein they may run at
random as far as they list, being not restrained by any superior power?
Whereof it comes that as they being sanctified and set on good, do procure a
great increase of holiness, as has been said, so they being in a carnal and
sinful man (esspecially where they are strong by nature) do increase his
sinfulness unto the highest degree: Of corrup^ love and h^tred.
the which as it is strong in the other faculties of the soul, so in the
affections it may well be compared to a mad man set on horsbacke, yea on a wild
horse which cannot either stay himself, or be stayed by any other means, till
he have run himself out of breath and life in all outrage of sin. The
sinfulness of the affections consists in this, that they are moved by
contrary obiectes: for those which should be stirred up by the euilnesse of
the object to abhor it, do in that respect embrace it and move toward it:
and contrarily those which should be moved by the goodness of the object to
embrace it, do in that respect abhor and avoid it, as will appear more
plainly in the particulars; as namely, in love and hatred, the which affections
are both common and strong in carnal men, yet not holely and rightly disposed
in them: for they do rather love that which they should hate, and hate that
which they shonld love, then love and hate that which ought to be loved and
hated.

First as touching God on whom man ought to set his whole love, a carnal man
does not know God, much less love him, it being impossible that one should
love that which he does not know, as it is commonly said Ignoti nulla cupido.
Yea if a natural man do by any means attain to some knowledge of God, yet
he is as far of from loving him as he was before: and which is more* although
God do bestow never so many blessings and pleasures upon him, as what has he
that he has not received from God: yet he cannot by them nor by any other
means purchase his love, so greatly is the affection of man alienated from
God. Yet we cannot say that man does by nature hate God (for then his fall were
as great as the fall of the devil, and the rest of the wicked spirits, which
is not to be thought) especially seeing that we know, that all men by the
instinct of nature delight to have a God, according to their own Imagination,
and him they will love and honor. Yet this may be truly-saide, that it is
natural for man to increase, as in all other parts of his natural
sinfulness, so also and especially in the want of the love of God, in so much
that although not all, yet many become haters of God, as appears, Rom, 1. 30.
^m. 1. 30.
For although men, especially living in the church, be restrained by the shame
of the world and the fear of punishment from professing themselves to be
haters of God, yet in that they do hate the ministers and servants of God,
which do zealously preach and profess his gospel behauing themselves
spightfully, contumeliously, and maliciously toward them, it is evident that
in their hearts they do hate God himself. As Christ witnesses, Ioh. 7. 7. The
world cannot hate you but me it hates, because I testify of it that the
works of it are evil. Ioh. 7. 7.


From this fountain of the want of the love of God, comes the want of love
toward men. For if the carnal man do not love God himself, surely it is
not like that he loves man for Gods sake, and because he is created or
recreated after the likeness of God. What then does sinful man love? For we
have said that this affection has a strong and common use in this corrupt
estate surely he loves himself (if that may be called love and not rather
hatred which brings to everlasting destruction) and all manner of worldly and
fleshly pleasures: soft apparel, and to go bravely, sweet meats, and to
fare daintily, fair buildings for outward pomp and vainglory; rich
coffers without any scarsitie, new pastimes and merry company, sleep, ease,
idleness, warmnes and whatsoever may please the mind, or tickle the outward
senses, Of renewed love and hatred.
that is the thing which man loves. But what say ye to the streams which come
from this self love? Does not man in this sinful estat love his parents,
children, wife, friends and acquaintance? We answer that he loves all these
by the instinct of nature, and yet by the increase of his natural corruption
it does usually come to pass, as experience does teach, that most natural men
love neither father nor mother, son nor daughter, sister nor brother, wife
nor friend, kinsman nor neighbor, nor any other save only themselves. So that
man makes himself an Idol, loueing hinselfe wholly and only as he should do
God, and bearing no hearty affection either to the godly for gods sake, or to
his own for his own sake.

Sect. 3, Of the renewed holiness of the affections and specially of love and
hatred.
AS the created, so much more the recreated holiness of man admits all the
kinds of affections: by the violence whereof as it is sometimes hindered and
impaired, so usually it is set forward and augmented: for even as a ship
houlding her right course and having her sails filled with a great gale of
wind, makes a speidie, gainful and happy voyage, howsoever if that she
chance to meet with a rock, or to run upon some sand she is in greater
danger then if she had made less have, and borne a lower sail: So where the
strength and force of these affections is wanting, there is as less danger in
respect of sudden falls, so less ability of aspiring to any high degree of
holiness, for that the graces of the holy spirit wanting their sails, or being
be calmed for want of wind, often lie floting up and dowen, and do not make
so evident or notable progress in their course.

Of these renewed affections the most notable is called love, an affections so
often commended unto us, and so highly extolled in the scriripture, as if it
contained not one part only, but even the wholle substance of created
holiness: in the which respect it is said to be The fulfilling of the law,
Math. 22. 14.
Math. 22, 40. Romans 13. 8.
Romans 13. 8. and the one half of renewed holiness, the which is usually
comprised in these two words, 1. Cor. 13. 13.
Faith and Love, which is said, 1. Cor. 13. 13. To be greater then faith.

But that we give neither more nor less to this affection then is due unto it
this is to be held, that holiness whether created or recreated does not
consist either in any one or in a few, but in many graces; amongst the which
love has the first place assigned unto it, yea often the denomination either
of the wholle holiness of man, or more commonly of the holiness of all the
practical faculties. Not as if it were the only grace, for there are many
distinct graces, even as many as there are distinct faculties of man's soul
required in perfect holiness; or yet as if it were the chief grace, for faith
has the first place, although in nature it be not so excellent as love which
is an heroical grace, being the foundation, and as it were the subject and
groundwork not only of love, but also of all other graces, and of all
holiness whether created or renewed. Why then is love more spoken of, and
inculcated in the scripture then faith or any other grace? We answer that the
spirit of God, having continually in enditing the scripture respect to the
capacity of men, propounds and commends unto them holiness, not so much
in gross and in general, as in some particulars, which are more easily,
surely and certainly conceived then the general: in the which respect love is
preferred before faith, as being more evident, apparent and sensible, and
therefore a more sure and infallible mark and note of general holiness. The
great appearance of love arises of these two causes. First because, whereas
faith has relation to God only, love extends it self both to God and men.
Secondly where as faith lies hidden in the heart and mind, love is outward
practical, and therefore more apparent and sensible. Again love is preferred
before all other practical graces, because holiness consists as partly in
duties to be performed in respect of our selves, so cheifely in duties to be
performed to others, namely to God and to men: the which a man cannot perform
as he ought, unless he bear a love and a hearty desire of the good both of God
and of man.

Thus much of love in general. The particulars of it are these. First the
regenerate man loves God above all the things in the world, desiring his
good in the advancement of his glory much more then his own salvation. From
the which fountain of the love of God, springs the love of all men, but
especially of the Godly, who are renewed according to the image of God in
holiness and justice, Psalm. 16. 3.
Psalm. 16. 3. All my delight is in the holy ones which are here on earth and
cheiflie in those which excel in virtue. This love of the saints is an
infallible sign of true regeneration and of the true love of God, namely,
whenas a man loves an other, hartelie and vehemently, even as it were his own
natural son or brother, for this cause only (he being otherwise astraunger
unto him) for that he sees in him manifest signs and arguments of true and
unfeigned godliness, 1. Ioh. 3. 14. 1. John. 3. 14
We know that we are translated from death to life, Ioh. 13. 35.
because we love the brethren. And Ioh. 13. 35. By this shall all men know
that ye are my disciples if ye love one another.

Now we come to the other fountain of love, namely, self-love, the which
also has place in the regenerate, although in an other manner then in carnal
men. For they love themselves, yet so as that they love God more by infinite
degrees, and their brethren as themselves. Again, they do not show or use
this self-love in providing earthly and sensual pleasures for their bodies,
but in procuring the eternal salvation of their souls, and yet they do and
ought to love themselves more then they do any other, yea to be more careful
for the good estate of their own bodies and souls, then of the bodies and
souls of their brethren. Yet this must be understood in equal comparison: for
a faithful man ought not to love his own body and to desire the safety
thereof more then the eternal salvation of his brother: the which ought to be
procured, yea with the loss of our own temporal lives Ioh. 3. 16. John 3. 16.
As Christ laid down his life for us, so we ought to lay down our lives for
our brethren. Yet a man need not deprive himself of life for the safety of
the temporal life of his brother being a private man, nor of eternal life for
the procuring of his eternal salvation.

If any man do here object the examples of Moses and Paul, of whom the one
desired to have his name blotted out of the book of life: and the other to be
accursed from Christ for the good of the Jews. We a^swere that the Jews were
then to be considered not simply as me^, but as the whole visible church of
God, the confusion whereof could not but be a great hinderaunce to Gods glory,
the which ought to be procured, even with the eternal confusion of our own
souls, if the case do so require. For so Moses alleges that if God did
destroy his own people, the Egiptians who were spiteful enemies to God and
his worship, would laugh at their destruction and blaspheme God himself. And
so we cannot doubt but that the glory of God shall be wonderfully enlarged by
the conversion of the Jews, and therefore it may be more desired then our own
salvation.

From this fountain of self love flow the before said streams of special
love, whereby the faithful man is affected more to those who do any way come
near himself, then to those who are estraunged from him. This partial love is
good and lawefull, for why should not man incline and cleave more to those
whom God has joined more nearely unto him? Hence comes the special love due
to parents, which cannot be wanting but in him who is notoriously unnatural,
unthankful, and unholy. For if a man love the houses and places wherein he
has been and lived sometime, shall he not much more love his parents from
whose bodies he came. Secondly the love of children, with the love of whom he
that is not touched and enflamed, may be accounted less affectionated then God
himself, and more senseless then are the brute beasts. An example of this
fatherly affection we have in Jacob, of whom it is said that he did love his
son Benjamin so dearly that his soul was so tied to the soul of Benjamin,
that he could not live but would inco^tinently die for sorrow if so be he were
taken from him, Genesis 44. 36.
Ge. 44. 36.

This fatherly affection is so strong by nature, that if it be not well looked
unto, it will as a great river or stream rise above the banks and due limits
of it, and carry a godly man beyond all due regard either of reason or of
religion, as appears plainly in that notable man of God king David, 1. King.
1. 6.
of whom it is said. 1. King. 1. 6. That he did cockour his son Adonia, and
could not find in his heart to grieve him, no not with a sharp word. And we
know how he loved his ungracious son Absalon, being more sorrowful for his
death (who for his monstrous unnaturalness was not worthy to live on the earth,)
then he was glad for the victory which he himself had gotten, and for his own
safety. And therefore he did so bitterly lament his death, saying, O Absalon,
Absalon, O my son Absalon, would to God I had died for the.

Thirdly from this fountain comes the special love of those who are tied
with the faithful man in any outward bond, as in marriage or special
friendship: for the first, ^o the mutual love which ought to be be^wixt the
husband and the wife, the scripture does often exhort by arguments drawn from
the institution of God, who has made them one person and one flesh. Thus Ephe.
5. 29. Ephe. 5. 29.
No man ever hated his own flesh, but does nourish and cherish it. And
therefore a man ought to love his wife, even as his own body, and as Christ
has loved his Church. Yea there is great reason and necessity of a great
measure of mutual love betwixt man and wife. For seeing they do forsake their
fathers, mothers and kindred, not dwelling any longer with them, but betaking
themselves to their own house, and to each other as to a perpetual companion
and partner in good and evil, in joy and misery, how should not their love be
exceeding great?

The second outward bond of love is friendship, whereby we do not mean any
common good will and acquaintance, but a special contract of perpetual loue^
such an one as was betwixt Jonathan an^ David, 1. Sam. 18. 1.
whereof it is said, 1. Sam. 18. 1^ That the soul of Jonathan was tied to the
soul of David. And David himself wh^^ had best experience of it, witnesses
th^^ greatness of Ionathaens love, 2. Sam. 1. 26.
2. Sam. 1^ 26. Saying, how am I grieved for thee (...) brother Jonathan, thou
was sweet and pleasa^ unto me, thy love was wonderful to me passing the love
of women. Lastly from this fountain of selfeloue, comes the love of
kinsfolks, alliance, acquaintance, companions, neighbors, and of all whom God
has joined more nearely to us then he has done others.

CHAP. VII.
Sect. 1. Of joy, sorrow, and pity in the state of innocence.
BEside the foresaid affections of love and hatred, there were many other
created in man, as namely, to let the rest pass joy, and sorrow, which is
contrary to it. The first is a delight or pleasure conceived by the present
enioiing of some good thing, whereby a man is moved to seek and embrace the
said good, as sorrow is the abhorring of some present evil as being bitter and
unpleasant. Both these affections had place and use in this first estate, yet
not equally: for a great part of happiness consists in joy: yea happiness
may be said to be nothing else but the joyful fruition of good and pleasant
things, whereas sorrow is contrary to happiness, Of joy, sorrow and pity in
^he state of innocence.
how great cause and continual use of joy man had in his innocence, we may
easily gather by those infinite blessings wherewith he was even compassed
about, living not only free from all troubles, crosses, afflictions, dangers,
wants, encumbrances, and whatsoever thing might any way grieve or hurt him, but
also in abundance and superfluity of al pleasures belonging both to his body
and soul, in perfect strength and health, in wealth, peace and liberty, in
honor and glory, and which is all in all, and in truth the fountain of all
true joy, in the favor and love of God.

The holiness of this affection, consists in this, that it be correspondent,
and proportionable to the goodness and excellency of the object, and that the
joy which man conceiueth by the fruition of any thing be greater or less, as
the thing it self is more or less excellent, a greater or a less good, and
therefore man was chiefly to delight himself and to rejoice in God who is the
chief and first, yea the only infinite good^ in the fruition of the presence
and favor of God, in serving and praising God and in meditating on the
creatures, works, wisdom* power, mercy and goodness of God* Secondly as God
has put into every one of his creatures, Of joy, soro^ and pity in the state
of i^nocency.
a finite and proper goodness; so it was lawful for man to be affected
accordingly with the pleasure flowing from the said thing. For example, God
created for the use of man great variety of trees bearing sweet and pleasant
fruit, all which man might lawfully use with joy and pleasure. Yea this
joyful use of the creatures was not only permitted to man, but also commanded
by God: Deuteronomy. 26. 11.
for so we read, Deuteronomy. 26. 11. Thou shall bow thy self, before the Lord thy
God, and thou shall rejoice before him in all the good things which he has
given unto thee, thou and thy whole family. For why? he that reioiceth aright
in the fruition of the creatures, rejoices in God, the maker and giver of
them, and by them is stirred up to greater alacrity in serving and praising God.

Now as touching sorrow, it had also place in the pure nature of man which was
subject to this passion, howsoever he being in perfect felicity, had not any
great use of it, yet we may suppose some causes of sorrow, even in this happy
estate, both in man himself, who might be moderately grieved for the want of
some particular good, and in some other respects, as also in other creatures,
for the miserable estate of the wicked Angels having been so glorious and
happy, especially the dishonor which they did many ways procure to the name
of God, could not but work sorrow in the heart of man. So that the sorrow of
man in this first state, being rather in regard of others then of himself,
ought to be called pity rather then sorrow. The holiness of this affection
consists in this, that it be in greatness correspondent to the greatness of
the evil, diligently waied with the several circumstances of it, and also
moderated and qualified with contentation in respect of the will of God, by the
which the said evil came to pass.

Sect. 2. Of corrupt joy and sorrow.
THese affections joy and sorrow do remain in the corrupt state of man; yet
after a far diverse manner: for whereas before the joy of man was chiefly in
God and in spiritual things, now it is wholly in carnal, sensual and earthly
pleasures: before man never thought himself well but when he was praising and
serving God, and meditating on his love, and the manifold blessings received
from him, now man never thinks on God: and if he by some outward means, as
the laws of me^, Of corrupt joy and sorrow*
or the avoiding of the sham of the world, be drawn to some spiritual
exercise, as is the hearing of the word, prayer, or any other, he takes no
manner of pleasure in it: Yea it is irksome and tedious unto him, his mind
and affections being set upon worldly pleasures, as namely in the abundance,
vanetie, goodness and sweetness of meats and drinks, in sleep and
idleness, in carnal and filthy lusts, in pastime and merry company, in
gorgeous apparel, stately buildings, large revenues, in health, strength,
riches, honor, and preferment, in children, friends and profane knowledge, or
in some other of the same kind.

Not as if there might not a lawful pleasure be taken in corporal and outward
blessings, as has been declared, but man passing by God the giver of all
these blessings places his whole joy and felicity in the fruition of them,
and so makes them his Gods. As the Apostle does plainly witness that the
coueteous man is an idolatour. He is not stirred up by the sweetness which he
feels in the use of the creaturs to rejoice and delight himself in God the
giver of them, but is by them more alienated from God, and being even drunk
with sensuality forgets and contemns God, much more in prosperity then
in adversity; and therefore God does so often forewarne the people of Israel
of forgetting him, whenas they come into that pleasant land flowing with milk
and honny whither they went.

Hence it comes that the joy of a carnal man is unconstant, uncertain and
momentany, even as is the matter of his joy. For as no worldly thing is
constant, so the joy which arises of worldly things must needs be unconstant.
Yea while it does continue it is not pure and sincere joy, but mingled with
much sorrow and vexation of mind, it being impossible that any man should have
such perfect joy in this world in respect of worldly blessings, as is void of
all manner of crosses and grief. And therefore Solomon says, ^roue. 14. 13.
Prou. 14. 13. That the heart of the wicked man is heavy even while he laugheth
and that sorrow is the end of his joy.

Thus we see the sinfullnesse of man's joy in this corrupt state.

Likewise his sorrow is not such as it ought to be: he is indeed often
grieved, but not for the want of the favor, presence and grace of God, not for
his sins by the which he does displease and dishonor God, not for the
miserable estate of his soul rotting in ignorance, atheism and infidelity.
These things never trouble him, Of corrupt Joy and sorrow*
but if he be in any worldly misery, if in poverty, sickness, danger,
prison, in the displeasure of any great and mighty man, then he is
overwhelmed, and even stricken dead with sorrow. As for the miseries wherein
he sees other men to be, the scripture does often teach us, and daily
experience does testify the same, that a carnal man is cruel, merciless,
void of all pity and compassion.

Sect. 3. Of holy joy and sorrow.
IT now remains that we declare the holiness of these affections in the state
of regeneration, wherein both joy and sorrow have so great and continual use
as that they may seem to strive for the pre-eminence whether of them should
bear the greater sway in the faithful. Renewed joy arises of the inward sense
and feeling of the love and mercy of God in Christ, whereby a faithful man
knowing assuredly that he has attained remission of all his sins, safety
and freedom from the anger and judgments of God, eternal happiness with all
spiritual and temporal blessings tending thereunto, is (and that not without
good cause) replenished in his soul with an exceeding and unspeakable joy in
regard of this his happy state: Of holy joy and sorrow.
the greatness whereof no man either knows or can express, but he in whom it
has pleased God to work it by his holy spirit. Yea if we shall compare this
renewed joy with the joy which man had in his first estate, we shall see that
the faithful have both greater cause of rejoicing, and greater joy then man
had in his perfect happiness: in that he has not only attained to a more
perfect, absolute, and certain happiness, but also has escaped the contrary
misery, even the eternal wrath of God due unto him for his sins, whereof
man had no taste in his first estate. This joy differs from the joy of the
carnal man in many respects: the one rejoices in God, the other in the
creatures: the one in temporal, vain and momentanie, the other in spiritual,
heavenly, and eternal things, the one in the good estate of his body the
other in the good estate of his soul: The one shows his joy in the use of
carnal pleasures: the other, in spiritual exercises Ephesians. 5. 18. Be not drunk
with wine wherein is excess, Ephesians. 5. 18.
but be ye filled with the spirit, speaking to your selves in psalms and
spiritual songs, making melody to the Lord in your hearts. Of holy joy, and
sorrow.
And lastly the one is continual and constant abiding, yea flourishing so much
the more in the midst of the greatest afflictions, Romans 5. 3. Romans 5. 3.
Act 16. 15. The other is short and uncertain, Act. 16. 25.
being clean dashed with the least cross that does happen.

This renewed joy, although it be so exceeding great as has been said, yet
it is mixed and indeed tempered with much sorrow: so it has pleased God in
great wisdom and mercy to give to his children in this life, not the absolute
perfection of that joy and happiness which he has prepared for them; but
rather to temper the exceeding sweetness of it with sorrow and afflictions,
that so the bitterness of the one might make the other the more welcome and
acceptable unto them. The causes of this sorrow are diverse, some in the
faithful themselves, some in others: in themselves first and chiefly their
sins whereby they do displease and dishonor God, who has showed himself
to them so gracious, bountiful and merciful. Secondly the manifold
temptations, crosses and afflictions which do daily befall them: these
howsoever by the gracious assistaunce of Gods spirit, they do often increase
this spiritual joy, yet being bitter and oftentimes intolerable to flesh and
blood they do prevail against this spiritual joy, by reason of the
infirmity of the flesh: and although they cannot clean extinguishe it, yet
they cool and diminishe it; yea and so drive it into a corner, as that it does
not any way appear. Yea even the ordinary misery and vanity of this life,
being compared with the happiness of the life to come, does work in the
faithful sorrow, sighs, and groans, as we read, Romans 8. 13.

Beside this matter of sorrow which they have in themselves, Romans 8. 13.
they are continually sore grieved, and even tormented in themselves, when as
they behold the vain and wretched estate of the creatures, being moved to
pity, even by the miseries of the brute beasts, the horrible sins which
abound every where, and the general atheism which reigns in the world, to
the great dishonor of the name of God. And much more whenas they consider the
calamities, miseries, abuses, corruptions and defections of the churches,
professing the name of Christ. These things do, and that justly work
continual grief in the hearts of the Godly, yet this grief is moderated
with patience, and contentation in the will of God, and so it be comes a
godly sorrow, which does not bring them to desperation and death as carnal
sorrow does; but is at length the cause of greater joy. And thus omitting for
breuities sake the rest of the affections, which have not so common and notable
use in the life of man, we conclude this second part of man's holiness, to wit,
his conformity to God.

The third part of this treatise, of the chaunges hapening in the three
estates* or of the degrees of holiness and sinfulness
CHAPTER. I.
Of the chaunges hapening in the three estates of man in general.
THe mutabilitie of the creature (whereby the identitie of God is illustrated)
appears not only in the general diversity of man's state, which sometimes
is innocent and happy, Of the chaunges hapening in the three estates of man.
other times sinful and miserable, and again becomes holy here on earth and
glorious in heaven: but also in the particular chaunges hapening in his
several states, whereof none can make him so immutable as that he may say
truly of himself, I am that I was, and will be that I am and no otherwise. As
touching his created holiness it could not be either so firm and steadfast,
but that it might be in some sort diminished, or so absolutely perfect, but
that it ought daily to be increased. But this uncertainty and mutabilitie
appears far more plainly in his other estates, the one of natural
sinfulnes, the other of renewed holiness, of both which there are in a manner as
many degrees as there are carnal and regenerate men in the world. For although
the corruption of sin, have already so possessed all the parts and faculties
of body and soul, and be as deeply imprinted into the soul of man, as the
spots are in the skin of a leopard, and therefore may seem not to admit
any increase by reason of the greatness or any decrease by reason of the
naturalnes of it; yet both these chaunges may be seen, the one usually in most
unregenerate men, who do daily plunge themselves deeper and deeper in to the
pit of sin, adding one sin to another, and thirst to drunkenness, as the
scripture speaks: the other in diverse both within and without the church.
Likewise in regeneration the faithful man never stands at one stay, but does
always grow either upward or downewarde in godliness. For as usually he
increases his spiritual strength, changing his christian infancy with a ripe
and constant age, and adding grace to grace till he become a perfect man in
Christ: so sometimes he decreaseth in holiness as we see the bodies of men do
in old age, and so as it were returning the same way he came, falls into one
sin after another, and so decreaseth in holiness, although not totally and
finally, yet greiuously and fearfully. Thus the spiritual state of man
changing it self from less to more and from more to less, from good to
evil and from evil to good, yea from good to better and from evil to worse, is
as variable as is the moon, which continually decreasing or increasing in
light, appears every night in a new form.

These chaunges, differences and degrees are necessary to be known of all
christians, that so they may be either sought after or avoided, as they are
either good or evil. And therefore we are here to declare the degrees both of
the holiness and also of the sinfulness of man: not the conversion of one
estate into another, the which is the argument of the two former parts of this
treatise; but the proper chaunges of each state as first, how Adam continuing
in the state of innocence, might either have decreased or increased in
holiness. Secondly how a carnal man abiding in his natural sinfullnesse may
be more or less sinful. And Lastly how a regenerate man may decrease or
increase in spiritual graces. Of these in order, if first we put the reader in
mind that these chaunges are made from that measure of created holiness, of
sinfulness and of renewed holiness, which has been declared in the two
former parts of this book: wherein although sometimes for illustration a
higher degree both of holiness and of sin be mentioned, yet we have
indeauoured to set down that mediocritie, as it may be called, of holiness
both created and renewed, which is to be seen ordinarily and usually in men,
in the state of innocence and of regeneration: and likewise that measure of
sin which is natural to all men, and may be seen in many unregenerate men:
not in all, because in some it is diminished, nor in most, because usually it
is increased, as afterward will appear.

CHAP. II.
Of the chaunges of created holiness.
IT may be doubted how man living and continuing in his innocent and happy
estate, could decrease in holiness, especially seeing that (as has been said
in the first part* Chap. 3. Sect. 2.) all the parts of his holiness were so
tied and linked together, that he could not loose any particular grace without
loosing all, nor commit the least sin in the state of innocence, because by
committing sin* and in the very act, and moment of committing it, he should
fall from his innocence into a sinful state. We answer, that although all
this be true, yet there must a difference be put betwixt the want of a grace
and the small measure of it, and so betwixt the committing of sin, and the
decreasing in holiness, which may be without sin: and that in this state, if
so be it be with these conditions: first that this decrease be not so great as
that any grace or part of holiness be wholly wanting: Of the changes of
created holiness.
for thereof sin would necessarily follow. Secondly, that it be not
continual or final, but only for some short space of time. In this manner we
may well think that particular graces, as faith, love, temperance might be in
man in the state of innocence sometimes in great and sometimes in small
measure. For as he did carry about with himself the infirmity of humane nature
consisting of flesh and blood, and was outwardly subject to the temptations of
Satan, so we cannot doubt but that by these means his faith, and withal, all
the other parts of holiness, might receive some wound, although not be clean
overcome, and mingled with doubting and wavering, although not wholly turned
into it. Likewise the love of God and of his glory, might be abated for some
space of time by force of temptation, and he made less zealous of Gods glory,
and less cheerful in serving him, yea dull and lumpish and without his
wonted alacrity The truth hereof appears in the example of Christ, whose
humane nature although it were endued with far more firm and plentiful
holiness, then was man in his innocence, yet in that it was a humane, that is
a created and weak nature, it could not be freed from this mutabilitie
whereunto all creatures are subject. Whereof it came, that the unspeakable
force of his last agony wherein he felt the infinite anger of God due to the
sin of mankind, did give his faith a great blow, yea it made an evident
decrease of it for a short time: insomuch that he burst forth into these
words, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me. Where we are not to think
that his faith did fail, which appears plainly in those words my God my
God. But as the most valiant champion receiving a mighty blow is made to reele
and stagger by the force of it; so was the faith of Christ shaken by this
temptation, as is a strong house by a great blast of wind, yet without
danger of being ouerturned: now to proceed.

As man's holiness might have been diminished in regard of the measure of
particular graces; so it might also have been increased in the same respect;
not that we suppose it to have been imperfect, but for that, that which is
already perfect, may become more perfect. As namely that we may make instance
in some particular, the knowledge wherewith man was endued in his innocence was
exceeding great as has been showed, yet no man can doubt but that the same
would in process of time have been continually increased, as God did reveal
himself, his word, counsels and actions daily more and more. This increase of
holiness in the understanding, all the otheir faculties do follow: for the
more that man knows God, the more he trusts, loves, fears, obeys,
worshippeth and honoreth him: the oftener that man were delivered from danger by
the goodness and power of God, the greater would be his affiance in God: the
more blessings that he does receive, the greater is his thankfulness. So that
the life both of man and of the Angels in their innocence being a continual
exercise of holiness, cannot but have a continual increase of it. Yea we may
well think, that both many of the Angels and all mankind were so easelie
drawn from God and brought to a fearful ruin, because they were tempted to
this Apostasy in the beginning of their lives, immediately after their
creation, before they could increase and confirm their holiness by
observation and holy experience. By the which means we are to think that even
the holy Angels themselves, which do continually behold the face of God in
heaven, have since their first creation continually increased their holiness,
and so are a great deal further from falling and sinning against God, then
they were in the beginning, being vpheld in all temptations suggested either by
their own thoughts, or by the wicked Angels, although by the supernatural
grace of God, yet not without the means of this natural increase of their
created holiness.

Again this increase of holiness has place as in particular men, so also
generally in the ages of this innocent state: for as in this sinful estate
wherein we live, the latter ages are more sinful then the former, because they
partake the sins of all the former ages; so if the state of innocence had
continued, the latter ages being taught by the first would have exceeded them
in knowledge and in all other parts of holiness. Lastly this is to be noted,
that we do not here speak of that increase of holiness which was in the
childhood of man in his innocence, during which time he did grow both in
stature of body, and in holiness of soul, as it is said that Christ did in his
innocence and infancy, Luke. 2. 25. Luke. 2. 25.
But of the progress in holiness, after that he was come to ripenes of age,
and the ordinary state, measure and degree of holiness, to wit, that wherein
Adam the first and the last man, of this innocent generation was created.

Chap. 3. Of the natural decrease of sinfulnes.
IN the next place we are to consider the changes which happen in the sinful
state of man, the which being the worst of all states ought not in constancy to
excel all other. First of the decrease, then of the increase of sin. By the
decrease of sin, we mean the increase of the relics of Gods image, and so
consequently the decrease of the corruption of sin which is contrary
thereunto; as namely, when as the light and knowledge remaining in the mind of
man after his fall is by any means increased, and so the contrary blindness
and ignorance in part expelled. This decrease may happen in all the parts of
man's sinfulness, for by it the dullness and ignorance of the mind, the
perverseness of the will and affections, the wickedness of life in outward
actions may be diminished. For the better understanding of this point, it is
needful that we set down what is the natural state and degree of sinfulness
the which is sometimes diminished, and sometimes augmented in men, that by the
mediocrity the extremes may be known. It is hard to give any real example of
it, Of the natural decrease of sinfulness.
because the nature of man being in continual motion, is always either under
or above, this state of sinfulness, yet it may be described after this manner.
Suppose a man of ripe years of a soft and simple disposition the which is to
be found in men whose bodies are of some cold complexion (for hot and fiery
natures have strong, quick, vehement and unconstant motions, able to change
themselves without any outward means, and therefore do always run into the
one or the other extreme) having lived in some solitary place not acquainted
with the fashions, corruptions and sins of the world, not having given
himself either to continual meditation or been instructed by others in the
knowledge of religion: look what measure of sinfulness is in this man, the
same or there about is the natural sinfulness which all men take from Adam,
and bring with them out of their mothers wombes into the world. Again, suppose
or rather behold with your eyes (for the living examples of the increase of
sin are infinite) one brought up in the company of lewd and wicked men, and
endued with wit, beutie, strength of nature, riches, honor, and all manner of
worldly things, such a one may become a virtuous and holy man, but usually he
is so in every respect, that a man may see plainly in him a pattern of the
increase of natural sinfulness. Lastly spy out one of a gentle nature and
ingenuous countenance, virtuously brought up from his first infancy, having
never used any evil company, but being continually given of himself to get
learning and all manner of knowledge, yea carefully inured by his parents,
tutors and teachers to the daily practice and exercise of what soever thing is
honest, good, right, and any way commendable, and lastly who has no true touch
of religion, and is endued with a competent portion and measure of the gifts
of nature, and of fortune (as they are ignorantly termed) this man although he
may by the perverseness of his corrupt nature tread all these things under his
feet, and become very vicious, yet usually he may be an example of the
decrease of natural sinfulness.

These three men are all carnal and sinful, yet there is great difference
among them, the which that it may the more plainly appear, we will compare
them and their diverse degrees of sinfulness together. The first is the right
natural man. The second is on his left hand having augmented his sinfulness.
The third on his right hand having diminished it. The first is altogether
ignorant of the true God and of his worship, yet he thinks that there is a
God in heaven, and does worshipe his God very diligently one way or other
after his fashion. The second is fully resolved in his mind by arguments
invented by him self and suggested by the devil and other Atheists like to
himself, that there is no GOD, and therefore that it is but folly to worship
any. The third man is persuaded by many reasons that there is a God, yea he
knows the true God, and performs some part of his true worshipe. The first
knows not what to think of God, or to what thing to resemble him, yet he
thinks him to be powerful, mighty and bountiful, ascribing all his
mishapes and his good luck to his false God. The second gives all to blind
fortune, wise counsel, and hardy adventures, yea he defieth God in his heart,
thinking that to trust in him is the next way to all mishap. The third knows
and acknowledges that all things both good and evil come from that only true
GOD, who is every way infinite and incomprehensible, and yet knows not God in
Christ as he ought to do.

Likewise for the sinfulness of the will the mere natural man cannot choose
and incline himself to any God, religion or worshipe which is not sensible,
and therefore he cannot choose the true God, and true holiness, the which are
spiritual and contrary to sense; no not if these were propounded to his will,
either by his own mind, or by some other, but chooses for his part, eating,
drinking, sleeping, ease, pastime, pleasure, and voluptuousuesse. The second
man who is supernatural in sinfulness detesteth and abhors the name of God
and of any thing that is good, but the third may have an inclination to good.
Lastly the first man does not in his life commit horrible sins, such as are
murder, incest adultery, robbery, or perjury being restrained even by his
own conscience, condemning these heinous sins: and although he bear no love
to any but to himself and to his own, yet he means harm to no man. As for
the second he abstaineth from no sin, tho never so heinous whereunto he is
intised by any means. Whereas the third man leads a life without all spot,
show or suspicion of any such matter, yea he is good to every one as occasion
is offered, being far from hurting any. So that to be short, the first man
may be called a brute beast which is given to al sensuality, yet without
either knowledge or practice of good or evil. The second a devil incarnate,
the third a carnal and sinful saint.

Thus we see both by the natural state of sin, as also by the increase of
it, what is the decrease of it. Whereof we are to think and hold, first that
although it may be general in any, or in all the parts of man's sinfulness,
yet it can not be total in any one, much less in all, for no part of it can
be wholly diminished in an unregenerate man. Secondly this decrease does take
away the corruption of sin, more then it does put the contrary grace in the
room of it: being in school terms rather pruatiue then positive. And
therefore the carnal man in this decrease of sinfulness does not so much
know, approve, embrace and follow the true God and his worship, as he
knows all false gods to be no gods, condemning and detesting all idolatry.
And so in life although he can refrain himself from doing evil, yet he is not
able to perform the contrary Christian duties. For the light of nature being
increased by such means as a natural man may use, will teach and may enable
him to abstain from gross sins. But the true knowledge and practice of
good, comes only from the work of gods spirit; whereof it comes that
this decrease of sinfulness is not to be counted true holiness, neither any
part of it, and so it is not effectual to salvation.

Thus much in general of the decrease of sinfulness, now we come to the
several kinds of it, the which are two in number: natural and supernatural.
The first kind (whereof the third of the aforesaid carnal men may be a
shadow) we call natural: not that it is a natural thing for a man to decrease
in sinfulness, in the which he grows as naturally as the smoke goes
upward, and therefore it is a violent motion contrary to his natural
inclination, but because it may be attained by a natural man, in whom there is
neither true regeneration, nor any shadow of it, and that by natural means
without the work of the holy spirit, and therefore it may be seen not only
in carnal men living in the Church, but also (and that more plainly) in many
heathen and professed infidels, who never heard tell of the true religion and
worship of God, of whom many as it were laying violent hands on themselves,
and their natural dispositions inclined to all vice and sinfulness, have
gotten the habit, that is, the constant and permanent disposition of moral
virtues, as namely, of justice, temperaunce, sobriety and chastity, in so much
that they have not only led a life pure from the spots of gross sins, but
also have after a sort changed their wills, minds and affections from an evil
and vicious, to a good and virtuous disposition. This the Apostle witnesses,
Romans 2. 19. Romans 2. 19.
The gentiles having not the written law of God, do by nature, that is without
spiritual grace, the things contained in the law, and so are a law unto
themselves. Of this decrease we have many and manifold examples even some of
all sorts of men, but especially it appears in those who in old times
professed themselves to be philosophers, that is, seekers and practisers of
wisdom and virtue as namely Socrates, Plato, with many others, as Aristides,
Cato, Seneca, whose virtues we can not think to have been mere hypocrisy, it
being well known that they were so affected inwardly in their minds as they
professed outwardly in their lives. Yet we confess that this decrease of
sinfulness is not a like in all: for in some it is inward and true as has
been said, but in others yea most commonly it is only in outward life. Of the
natural decrease of sinfulness.
For many do lead an honest and irreproueable life, being vitiously disposed
in their minds, some for fear of civil punishment, or of public shame,
others for vain glories sake, as did the pharisees. Again this decrease is
more general in some who abstain from many kinds of vices, then it is in
others, who are faulty in many respects. And Lastly this decrease is more
firm and permanent in some continuing the wholle time of their life: but in
others it has place in their young years by force of good education, but is
afterward altogether forgotten and rejected. In the heathen it is more in
regard of the duties of the second table, the which are more easelie known
then are the duties belonging to the worship of God. But in hypocritical
Christians, the outward decrease of sinfulness is greater in the duties of
the first table. For they will be very devout, and diligent in the outward
service of God, and yet live very wickedly in regard of their brethren. These
and many other degrees and differences of this natural decrease, may easily be
observed in many both within and without the Church, and also in all histories
whether divine or human, but are too many to be handled in this short
treatise.

CHAP. IIII.
Of the supernatural decrease of sinfulness.
AS the increase of light does make a decrease of darkness, it being impossible
that two things of contrary natures sholude be together in one subject, the
one not expelling the other, either wholly or in part: so the spiritual graces
of God (which are the matter of man's holiness) bestowed on unregenerate men,
do work in them a decrease of sinfulness, making them less sinful then
otherwise they would be, and then usually unregenerate men are. This decrease
we call supernatural, because it cannot be attained unto by those natural
means of diminishing sin, mentioned in the former chapter, and therefore it
is not to be found in the most innocent and virtuous pagan that ever lived, but
is to be accounted a work of Gods spirit, brought to pass by the ministry
of his word sounding in the ears of those who are members of the visible
church, Of the supernatural decrease of sinfullnesse.
without the which, this decrease of sin is not ordinarily to be found. Nor
yet in all the members of the church, of whom many do exceed the heathen in
sin, but only in those who do yield obedience to the gospel, although not
in such manner as the faithful do, yet in so great measure that this
decrease of sin may very fitly be called a shadow of true regeneration,
there being no grace effectually wrought in the faithful whereof a
resemblaunce may not be found in this sort of men. For not only their life is
agreeable to the word of God, but also they are inwardly enlightened to see the
truth, and are well affected toward it, and endued with a kind of faith,
hope, love, patience and all other graces: and that not in hypocrisy though
many do make an outward show and profession of those graces whereof there is
not any shadow in their hearts, but in truth. As we read Heb. 6. 4. 5. Heb.
6. 4. 5.
It is impossible that they who were once enlightened, and have tasted of the
heavenly gift of the good word of God, of the joys of the world to come and
(in general) were made partakers of the holy Ghost, if they fall away etc. If
it be asked why God does bestow these excellent graces on the reprobate, as it
were throwing pearls among swine; we answer that he does it especially for
these three causes: first for the setting forth of his own glory. For by this
work, his love, mercy, goodness, wisdom and truth, appears even to the
reprobate: on whom as he lets the rain to fall, and his sun to shine, as well
as on the faithful; so he powers forth his graces as well on the one as on
the other, although not after the same manner: for although the eternal love
of God which brings with it eternal salvation, does belong to the elect
only, yet there is a general, and as we may term it, a temporary love which
God bears to all his creatures and in them toward all men, both elect and
reprobate. Secondly this is done in regard of the elect, for whose sake God
blesses the reprobate with whom they live, both in temporal and spiritual
things, and whose salvation is furthered, and some time wrought by the gifts
and ministry of these men. Lastly, God does by this means make them who are
endued with these graces, the more inexcusable, in that they contemn and
tread under foot so great mercy.

Now we are to declare the difference, which is betwixt true regeneration and
this supernatural decrease of sin, which is a shadow of it. First therefore
true regeneration is general stretching it self over all the faculties and
parts of the soul and body, and working an universal holiness as the leaven
which being put into a great lump of dow, never cease spreading it self
abroad, till the whole lump be seasoned. Luke. 13. 21. ^^c. 13. 21.
But the shadow fails for the most part in one point of holiness or other,
yea often many parts of sanctification are wanting, as the mind is often
enlightened with the knowledge of the truth whenas the obedience of life and
outward actions is wanting, ^ Cor. 8. 1.
1. Cor. 8. 1. We have all knowledge, knowledge puffs up, but love edifieth.
Again there may be seen in them good affections without knowledge. Romans 6.
Romans 9.
I bear witness (says the Apostle) that the Jews have the zeal of GOD, yet
not according to knowledge. Yea often the mind is enlightened in part, and in
part remains in ignorance, as in those who professing and holding in
judgment the truth of the gospel, to wit of the fund amental and chief
doctrines of it, do together maintain many errors and heresies. We do not
deny, but tha^ one truly regenerate, may be in some errors (for we all know
but in part, 1. Cor. 13.) yet this is the force and property of a regenerate
mind to be able to discern the truth from error when as both are laid
before it, 1. Cor. 13. 1
howsoever it did not see it before. And therefore when as we see a man,
although endued with many gifts yet to be of a corrupt mind, and unsound
judgment, enclining always to the wrong part in matters of religion, his
regeneration may in that respect be suspected to be ineffectual. This the
Apostle does plainly testify, 1 Cor. 11. 19
1. Cor. 11. 19. There must be heresies, that those who are approved may be
made manifest: that is, God does suffer schisms and divisions to be among you,
that by this means it may appear whose holiness is sound, and whose is
hypocritical, or at the least light and ineffectuall. Secondly men truly
regenerate, receive a greater measure of particular graces as of faith, love,
and patience then the other do: Yea they do daily increase in grace, whereas
the other do commonly stand at a stay, never attaining to any great measure of
godliness, but abide in a certain indifferent kind of mediocrity being
neither hot nor cold. Besides true graces are fruitful, but the shadows
are barren, either wholly or in part, as the faith of these men does not work
and show forth it self by love, their love is without works of compassion
and Christian communion, their good works without alacrity. Lastly the shadow
of regeneration does often come to nothing and is turned into mere Atheism,
and want of all religion: but true regeneration can never wholly decay, as
Math. 3. 20. Some receive the word with joy, Math. 3. 20.
and afterward fall away: Heb. 6. 4. 5.
and Heb. 6. 4. 5, we read of those who being once made partakers of the holy
Ghost: do afterward fall away from Christ, yea while they do retain this
resemblance of true sanctification, they are not constant, but variable in
doing good, Iam. 1. 8. Iam. 1. 8.
A double minded man is unconstant in all his ways: that is, a man half
carnal, and half regenerate does not keep throughout the course of his whole
life a constant tenor of godliness, but often changes his mind, opinions,
affections, and practice.

By these and such other notes which may be observed in the scripture, and by
daily experience, this shadow of holiness may be discerned from the truth:
yet we ought not peremptorely to judge, or rashly to condemn any man: for
there may be found even in men truly regenerate many wants, errors, sins
and alterations, as afterward will appear. Therefore we ought to think the
best, where we see any likelihoode of good: and where there is none, to hope
for better in time to come: and so leaving other men to Gods judgment, to
censure our own profession and regeneration by these rules. Yet it is both
lawful and needful, that we should know how to distinguish truth from
falshoode, right from wrong, good from evil, the shadow from the body in the
professions of our brethren. The which it is the part of every Christian to
mark and consider, to try and think of it, according to the truth of the
word of GOD: but in judging and speaking to use great moderation and wisdom.

CHAP. V.
Of the particulars in this supernatural decrease of sinfulness.
THe first and most usual part of this supernatural decrease of sin, is the
illumination of the mind, whereby a carnal man, who before did not believe
the doctrine, either of the law or of the gospel, is brought to see and
acknowledge the truth of the one or of both. To believe the law of God to be
true, is to have a sight and a sense of sin: to see sin is for a man to
know himself to be so sinful in nature, in soul, and body, in life and
actions as indeed he is. To feel sin is to know that for his sin he is
subject to the wrath of God which is eternal death. This first part of
illumination, is far more easily and often wrought in a natural man then is
the other: because by the light of nature man has some knowledge of good and
evil, and that the righteous are to be rewarded as the wicked are tobe
punished. Hence it is that many make this first step in this shadow of
regeneration, and go no further. Thus Cain and Judas with many others did see
their sin and the punishment due unto it, but yet had no belief of the
doctrine of the gospel* for remission of sin. The second part of illumination
is, Of the particu^lar decrease of sinfulness.
to think the doctrine of the gospel to be true, namely, that remission of
sins, and eternal glory is to be had by faith in Jesus Christ. Heb. 6. 4.
Heb. 6. 4. This knowledge GOD works by his spirit and word in many
reprobates. Act. 8. 13.
Act. 8. 13. Simon magus believed and was baptized: of whose reprobation
although we can affirm nothing, because the Apostle doubts of it Verse. 22.
Yet it is plainly out of the 21. verse, that he was not as then truly
regenerated. Yea many carnal men attain to so great a measure of knowledge,
that there is no point or head of christian religion which they do not in
some sort conceive, understand and believe, although not fully, for that is
impossible, yet so as that they are able to perform the duty of teachers in
the Church, in laying open plainly and evidently to the capacity of the
hearers, the mysteries of the gospel, in resolving al doubts, controversies,
questions, objections and arguments which are moved about anypoint of doctrine.
Thus did the teachers at Corinth of whom the Apostle writes 1. Cor. 13. 2.
Though I had the gift of prophecy, 1 Cor. 13. 2.
and knew all secrets and knowledge, and have not love, I were nothing. So Math
7. 22. Math 7. 22.
Prophecy in Christ's name whom he does not acknowledge as his.

This knowledge is commonly called an historical faith: a gift common to the
elect and the reprobate, yet not so common as it seems to be. Yea in truth
more rare in respect of the great multituds of professors and christians,
then it is common in respect of the small number of true believers. For to let
pass those who know nothing of religion, we are not to think that all they
who are learned, and as we say great clerks in divinity and profound
schoolmen, do in their minds and judgments hold these things to be true.
Yea it appears plainly in the example of Judas (who although he did preach
the gospel with his tongue, yet he did not believe it himself: as Christ
witnesses Ioh. 6. 64) (...). 6. 64.
that many do go about to persuade others, that to be true which they
themselves think to be false. And no marvel: for why should it be thought
easy and common for a natural man to believe that which is contrary to
natural reason? (...). 3. 12
we se Ioh. 3. 12, that Christ could not or rather did not make Nicodemus a
teacher in Israel believe the doctrine of spiritual regeneration. And so we may
well think that many otherwise learned, think that it is no such
supernatural work, but that it may be attained by natural means. Likewise how
many, think we, are persuaded in their hearts that this world shall never
have an end, or that there shall be a new world, wherein the bodies of men
which were consumed to nothing many thousand years before, shall be raised up and
live for ever.

But to proceed: of the decrease of ignorance comes the decrease of
infidelity. For as the mind is enlightened; so often is the heart affected:
by the which means it comes to pass, that of the aforesaid knowledge does
often spring in unregenerate men a kind of faith, commonly called temporary,
because for the most part it is lost in process of time. It is to be discerned
from effectual and true faith by the fruits of it. For as we cannot judge
what life and virtue is in the root of a tree which lies hid in the ground,
but by the branches, leaves, and fruit which it sends forth; so faith which
is hid in the heart of man, cannot be tried by any other means. The fruits
of true faith are al other spiritual graces, all good and holy actions the
which it sends forth plentifully, and so carries with it a great train
whereby it may be known: but this temporary faith is naked and destitute of
these things either wholly or in great part, as has been said of this
shadow of regeneration in the former chapter. But that which is doubtful whilst
this says stands, is in time made manifest: when as the final and total
decay of it does show what manner of faith it was. For true faith abides for
ever, but this temporary faith may be lost by many means as first by heavy
crosses and afflictions, whereby it pleases God to try his servants, as the
pure gold is severed from the dross by the fire. 1 Pet. 1. 7
1. Pet. 1. 7. Rejoice in your manifould temptations, that your faith being
tried may be found to be sound. But of this sort of believers Christ says*
Math. 13. 21. Math. 13. 21.
That their faith dureth for a season, but having no deep root, it fails
when tribulation and persecution come. True faith says, although God should
kill me, yet will I trust in him, but this light faith is clean dismayed and
even nipt in the head in time of any great misery. Likewise it is lost by
the force of sin, and of worldly pleasurs, which make men to forget God and
all the affiance which they had in him, and so seek for happiness in this
present world, even as the natural life of man being in the heart is so^times
kept down with extreme sorrow, and sometimes dissolved with excesiue joy, 1.
Tim. 5. 11. 12. Younger widows will wax wanton against Christ, Tim. 5. 11. 12.
having damnation, because they have made void their first faith. By this
means it comes to pass, that many who in their younger years have had
notable graces in them, become in process of time key cold in religion, mere
worldlings and clean void of all faith. For the longer that a man lives, the
more he feels the pleasures of the world, and so laying faster hold on
them, decreaseth in faith till it be utterly lost, as appears in many of the
kings of Judah who were at the first sincere in the worship of God, but in
process of time fell away.

Thus much of the decrease of infidelity, from the which there comes a
decrease of the other parts of man's sinfulness, and a resemblance of all that
holiness which has been declared in the first part of this treatise: for the
carnal man having this knowledge and faith of God, does serve and worship
him by hearing the word and that with gladness, by praying unto God and by
all other means. Likewise he obeys God in the wholle course of his life, he
forsakes his sin and is humbled with sorrow in regard of them. He lives
vnblamably in the eyes of men, yea and may be indeed just, upright, honest in
all his dealing, and finally does in every respect resemble the true believer,
and yet the one is truly renewed unto eternal life, the other is but lightly
affected and changed and that to his greater condemnation.

CHAP. VI.
Of the natural, and supernatural increase of sinfullnesse.
NOw we come to the increase of sin, the which being as natural to man as it
is for the smoke to fly upward, may be more commonly found, and more
evidently seen, then the decrease of it: but the more that it is known of it
self: the less explication it needs, and therefore it shall suffice to
declare it briefly after this manner. The increase of sin, is the diminishing
of the relics of Gods image in man. Or thus, to increase natural
sinfulness, is to be sinful, against the law and light of nature. Of the
natura^^ and supernatural increase of sinfulness*
For beside, that man from his first infancy as he grows up in strength of
body and mind, does also grow in sinfulness, till he come to the state and
ripeness of it, which has been declared in the second sections of the first
and second parts, there is an other increase of sin, whereby man goes yet
further, and so exceeds himself and his natural corruption. This point of
doctrine is set down at large, Romans 1.
Romans 1. from the 18. verse to the end of the Chapter. Where the Apostle
shows first the increase of sin against the first table of the law, in
that the gentiles did worship God in the likeness of man, or of brute
beasts, whereas man by the light of nature shining in the creation of the
world, sees that God is of a far more excellent, powerful and wonderful
nature then is man, or any other creature. Then from the 24. verse to the end,
he shows the increase of sin against the second table* in that they were
given to unnatural lust, to the violating of all common equity, truth and
honesty, in lying, breaking couenantes, in commiting horrible murders, in
wanting all natural love and affection to their parents and kinsfolks, in
being cruel, merciless and savage, even as are brute beasts: and which is
worst of all in being professed inuentors of new sins, and open maintainers
of wicked and lewd men. In this catalogue of the increase of sin against the
second part of the law of God, and of nature, the Apostle inserteth one sin
of the first table, to wit, that many of the gentiles became haters of God.
Whereas man naturally has a kind of devout love unto his God: for so we are
to distinguishe the fall of man, from the fall of the wicked angels, as in
other respects so also in this, that they by reason of the great measure of
natural strength and grace which was given unto them, fell from the highest
degree of holiness into the contrary extremity of sin, being now so far
from loving God as they did before, that they bear a most desperate and
extreme hatred unto him, as to their deadly enemy, desiring and endeavoring by
all means to hurt and despite him by obscuring his glory: whereas man
naturally and commonly has a blind affection toward God, desiring both to
worship and to honor him. If we desire examples of this increase of sin,
although it has not place in all unregenerate men, of whom some do diminish
their sinfulness by means either of natural or of spiritual gifts as has
been declared, and far mo do so restrain it that it cannot increase, in the
which rank all men outwardly and ciuilly honest may be reckoned, yet there is
no age, country or story which does not aford many examples of men who have
exceeded in impiety against God, and in injustice toward men and in all
manner of wicked behavior, the ordinary and common sort of sinful men by
many degrees.

The cause of this increase of sin, is the crooked and corrupt diposition of
man's will, which is wholly bent and set upon sin, and does so greedely and
insatiably pursue after it, as that unless it be restrained by some means, it
can not rest, till it come to the highest degree of wickedness. For the which
purpose it imployeth all the parts and faculties of the body and soul: yea
all inward and outward blessings what soever: it makes the mind devise new
ways of commiting sin, new excuses, pretenses, colors and defenses for
it, being committed: so that the greater gifts of the mind and of body that a
man has ceaued, the fitter instruments has his will and his corrupt desires
to increase sin. Here of it comes, that not idiots, simple and unlearned
men, not the weakest in body, or the basest in condition, not the poorest nor
the youngest, but the most witty, learned, strong, noble, rich, aged are these
notorious wicked ones. The most horrible monsters in all outrage of sin,
which any story does mention were great Emperors and mighty men, as Nero,
Caligula and such other, and who are so wretched, covetous, worldly, so
perverse and obstinate in ignorance, superstition, infidelity, yea in hatred
of all goodness, as are they who by years have gotten wisdom, experience,
riches, and honor, so that we may easily acknowledge the truth of that the
Apostle writes 1. Cor. 1. 26 Not many noble, 1. Cor. 1. 26.
wise, rich or great men are called, to the sincere obedience of the gospel.

Hence it is that sin does more abound in this last age of the world, then
it did in old times, wherein men were more rude, simple and ignorant then
children are in these days, who are so soon ripe and expert in all
wickedness, as if they had been borne perfect men, not weak infauntes: and no
marvel, Of the nat^^rall and sup^^^naturall de^crease of sin^fulnesse.
seeing that this last age is as it were a common sink, wherein all the
sins, errors, heresies, superstitions, all the shifts, craft, deceipte; yea
all the wicked inventions and practices of all ages are gathered together. And
therefore it brings forth so great multitudes of expert practitioners in
sin, who besides that which their own invention does afford, are furnished
with the examples and tried experiments of all ages. This the spirit of God
has foretold in the scripture, as we see it is come to pass. Math. 24. 12.
Math. 24. 12. Because iniquity shall abound in the latter times, the love of
many shall wax cold. 2. Tim. 3. 1.
2. Tim. 3. 1. This know that in the last days shall come perilous times, for
men shall be lovers of their own selves, coueteous, proud, cursed speakers,
disobedient to parents, unthankful, unholy, without natural affection,
truce breakers, false accusers, intemperate, fierce, having no love to those
who are good, traitors, headie, high minded, lovers of pleasures more then of
God, having a show of godliness, but denying the power thereof. 2. Pet. 3. 3.
And again, 2. Pet. 3. 3. This first understand, that in the latter days
shall come mockers walking after their own lusts, saying where is the promise
of his coming. In these and other places of scripture, the spirit of God has
foretold, Of the natu^^ll and super^aturall en^rease of sin^^llnesse.
and even painted out the great corruption and sinfulness of these days, that
we might beware, least that we be drawn away by the infidelity and other
heinous sins which reign euerywhere, and so save our selves as out of the
fire, from this froward and godless generation, wherein we live.

Lastly, as the excellency of natural gifts and outward blessings, being
abused, is the means of the excessiveness of sin, not of it self but by
the corrupt disposition of our nature; so the spiritual graces of God,
bestowed upon men living in the Church, do often by the just judgment of God,
work the same effect, and that in far greater measure. For as it is impossible
that among heathen men, they who are of small wit, capacity, knowledge,
strength, and riches, should be wicked in so high a degree as they who excel
in the foresaid respects: so it is not possible that any, who has not
received some of the spiritual graces of God, should come to so high a degree
of sin, as they in whom it has pleased God to work that shadow of
regeneration, which has been declared in the former chapter. Hence it is that
none can fall into that extreme impiety which is the highest degree of sin,
even the sin of the devil and his Angels, called in scripture the sin
against the holy Ghost, which can never be forgiven, but they who did sometime
before receive grace from God, Heb. 6. 5.
to see, love and obey the truth, Heb. 6. 5. It is impossible, that they who
were once made partakers of the holy Ghost if they fall, namely into this
sin, which is an open, wilful and desperate hatred of God, of his glory, of
his religion, of his feruants and of all good things (as many of the hebrews
did to whom this was written) should be renewed by repentance. This excellency
of spiritual graces abused* was the means whereby the wicked Angels fell into
that extreamitie of sin wherein they are: and so it comes to pass in men,
in whom this sin by reason of the monstrous hugeness of it, is rare, and
happens not but in those, who for their cruel, spiteful, desperate and
malicious hatred to God and to the godly, are rather to be counted devils
incarnate then reasonable men. For it is hard for a Christian who has once
known God, to cast away all fear of God, and shame of men, and for to burst
forth into such outrage. Yet (as the scripture has not for naught taught us
it) so it comes to pass although seldom, yet oftener then it is well marked.
(...) the natu^^^l and super^^^urall de^^ease of sin^^^^nesse.
This increase of sin, called supernatural (because it cannot happen but in
a man after a sort regenerate) is taught by christ in the parable of the evil
spirit, which retourning to the place out of the which he was cast, goes not
alone but takes with him seven other wicked spirits every one worse then
himself: and so the end of that man is worse, that is, far more sinful
then the beginning. Even as we see it comes to pass in natural things, as
namely in water which after it has been a little warmed, becomes more cold
then if it had never had any heat in it. And so men who have had some heat of
religion kindled in their hearts by the spirit of God, if they contemn and
abuse the said graces, become more wicked and irreligious then they who never
knew what religion meant.

CHAPTER. VII.
Of the decrease of renewed holiness.
ALthough the faithful man being now truly regenerate by the spirit of God,
may boldly boast and say, the haven is found, then farewell all danger and
hap-hazard, Of the decrease of r^^newed hol^^nesse.
being, although not in full possession of happiness in heaven, yet past al
peradventure of perishing here on earth, yet it comes often to pass, that
such fearful tempests are raised by the malice of satan, the unruliness of
the flesh, and the entismentes of the world, that both the faithful
themselves and also others beholding them do not without cause fear
shipwreck of faith and of good conscience, and so the loss of eternal
salvation, the which precious jewel they carry in these weak vessels. For as
sometime they are by the grace of God, and the powerful workeing of his
spirit, even lifted up to heaven in the abundance of spiritual graces, and
the great measure of santification wherewith they are endued: so at other times
they are by the frailty of the flesh plunged into grievous sins, and so in
a manner cast down into hell as men void of all goodness. This comes to
pass first and cheifely by the will and pleasure of God, withdrawing the
assistaunce of his spirit from the faithful man, and so leaving him to the
temptations of satan and his own flesh, suffers him to fall not to his
destruction, but for the increasing of his holiness. For even as a man by his
intemperance or any other kind of misgouerning his body falling into some
dangerous sickness, has after his recovery more perfect health, and greater
strength then he had before his sickness, because he is now schooled and
taught by woeful experience to know his own strength which he sees now to be
but weakness, whereof he did presume so much be fore and whatsoever thing is
of force either to preserve or to impair his health, and so to be careful and
diligent in using the one, and wary in avoiding the other: so fares it with a
christian in regard of the spiritual health of his soul: for he being now by
the mercy of God: raised up from some grievous fall, receives a great
increase of holiness and of spiritual graces. He sees his own weakness, how
unable he is of himself to resist temptation, or the corrupt motions of his
own flesh, and so he is humbled both in respect of God and of his brethren,
which is a grace much esteemed in the eyes of God. Further he becomes more
careful in avoiding all occasions and prouocations of sin, and in using all
holy exercises of hearing the word, of praying and all other means whereby he
may be strengthened and increase in holiness. Hence is is that this decrease of
holiness is in a manner common to all the faithful, although not in the same
measure. For so it pleases God to leave the^ at one time or other to
themselves and to the temptations of satan, that so he may both see what is in
them, 2 Cro. 32. 31.
as he did to Ezechias 2. Chro. 32. 31. and also show to them their great
weakness. The means of this decrease is the crafty malitiousnes of that old
serpent, who goes about continually seeking which of the faithful he may most
hurt, using all that liberty which God grants unto him and employing his whole
time about no other business, but in putting evil motions into the minds and
wills of men, and in casting baits before their eyes and other senses
wherewith to catch them. Secondly this decrease comes by reason of the
relics of sin which remain in the faithful, as long as they remain in the
flesh, and which do continually send forth some sin or other, even as the
root of a tree being left in the ground will sproute forth although the body
of the tree be cut down. Hither we are to refer the manifould occasions of
all manner of sins, which do offer them selves in the course of manslife,
and therefore it is no marvel that there happen to a Christian, manifould
chaunges, and decreases of godliness, no more then it is, that a man is
wounded being in the midst of many malicious enemies, that he is scorched who
is forced to carry fire in his bosom, or lastly that he is defiled, who is
always among vessels full of pitch.

But to declare this doctrine more particularly, as the great use and
necessity of it does require: in that we speak of the decrease of renewed
holiness, we suppose a certain state and ripeness, which ought to be in all
Christians, and is to be seen in most of those men who are truly regenerate,
which is a holy and unblameable life proceeding from a sanctified soul, being
endued in some good measure with all and every one of those parts of
holiness which have been described in the third sections, of the first and
second parts of this treatise. This state may be called the ripe age of a
Christian, who as he does from his infancy and childhoode (whereof hereafter)
grow up till he come to a ripe man in Christ: so when he is come to this state,
he does not there stand at a stay, for there is not any settled estate in this
life, either of holiness or of sin) but sometimes grows on to a greater
measure of perfection (whereof in the next chapter) or else he decreaseth in
holiness, and so grows backward, even as we see it to come to pass in the
bodies of men, which being come to their ripnes do daily decrease in strength
and vigor, till at the length they become as weak and impotent as they were
in their first infancy. This decrease is now to be considered in the diverse
kinds of it which are two, Particular and General, Particular decrease is
when as some one part of holiness is lost, the other remaining: for although
no one part of holiness can be wanting, but the whole soul of man is the
worse in that respect, as we know that if any one member of the body be
bruised or maimed all the rest do suffer with it, yet one part either of body
or soul may be out of order the whole being in the natural disposition.

This particular decrease has many degrees. The first is when as the holiness
of a man regenerate does fail in some outward action, by giving place unto
some evident and palpable sin. For as for light and small offenses committed in
thought, inword and in some kinds of deeds, these are not to be accounted any
decrease of holiness, because they cannot be avoided, but will always, be found
even in the^ who are endued with the greatest measure of sanctification but
great sins such as are murder, adultery, theft, perjury or any other of that
sort, are seldom found in men truly regenerate, and being found they do
impair the outward holiness of their lives, For no man does account that life
so holy wherein gross sins are sometimes found, as that which is without spot
of grievous sin. This decrease does often happen to the faithful, as we know
Peter sinned by denying Christ, David by committing adultery and murder, Noah
in drunkenness, Lot in incestand many others in other kinds of sins, being
thereto carried by the force of temptation, as in a great tempest by a mighty
gale of wind before they could be think themselves, what they were about to
do, or what would be the issue of it. Whereof it comes, that this decrease
of holiness, staying it self in one or a few actions, does not necessarily
argue any inward want of the contrary grace, or any inward decrease of
holiness, either going before or following after: because a man may fall into
it as of a sudden, before he be aware, and immediately recover his former
station by true and unfeigned repentance. As we are not to judge either David
void of continency for that adultery committed with Berseba, or Peter to
have wanted faith, because he did at one time renounce the faith, or Noah to
have been an intemperate person, because he was once drunk, no more then we
are to think him a weak man, who stumbleth by chance at a block lying in
his way, and yet does straight way save himself from falling. Yea sudden sin
may be with greater graces, then they have who are free from the aforesaid
sins of Noah, Lot, David, Peter, being far inferior in holiness to them.
Yet it is the duty of all who profess themselves the servants of God, to
labor by all means to keep themselves pure and free as from the least and
most secret sin, so especially from open and gross sins: and that for these
causes.

First because by them they dishonor God, his religion, worship and name,
opening the mouths of Atheistes and infidels to blaspheme his holy name: the
which thing ought to be more grievous and bitter unto them then a thousand
deaths and torments. Secondly they provoke God to lay some fearful
punishment upon them: who howsoever he suffers the reprobate ones to go on
all their life time in sin, yet he never suffers any notorious sin of his
servants to go unpunished. Thirdly, they wound their own consciences by a
fearful expectation of Gods heavy judgments, Of the decrease of renewed
holiness.
they grieve the holy spirit, against whose will they commite that sin, they
offend their brethren, showing themselves to be if not wholly destitute of that
special grace, wherewith they should have been restrained from sin, yet but
weak Christians in that respect, as we may be bold to judge that the faith of
Peter, the continency of David, the temperaunce of Noah, were at the time of
their falls but weak, howsoever they were endued with a great measure of
other graces. Lastly one heinous sin is to be avoided, because usually it
draws more after it; for when as a man has once taken a taste of sin, and
felt the sensual sweetness of it, he is far more easily drawn to it, then he
was before, and so he goes from the first degree of the decrease of holiness to
the second, namely, to an habit of some one sin, or the want of some particular
grace* the which appears by the often committing and iterating of the same
sin, yea after that the faithful man has often by repentance labored to
purge himself from that sin, and by prayer to obtain the contrary grace at
the hands of God. This decrease also has sometimes place in a man truly
regenerate, especially in that kind of sin whereunto he is either by the
natural constitution of his body and mind, or an evil custom gotten before
his conversion, naturally inclined, whether it be pride, anger, covetousness,
or any other sin. But as it is far more grievous then the first degree; so
it is with greater care to be avoided, for it doubleth and tripleth the wrath
and heavy judgments of God, the offense of the godly, the reproach of the
gospel, the dishonor of God, and the corsiue of a gnawing conscience: and
Lastly it makes a ready way for higher degrees of decrease to wit the habites
of diverse sins, the want of many particular graces, and so to the highest and
most fearful degree, which is a general decrease of holiness: which is now
briefly to be declared.

Where first we are to put a difference betwixt a general, and a total
decrease: A general decrease is when all the parts of renewed holiness, and
of spiritual graces received, are diminished: but a total decrease is an
utter decay of holiness, as whereby nothing is left. This can not happen to
any one who is truly regenerate, who in the greatest extremity and depth of
his fall, retains some relics of Gods spirit and of grace received, yea
somelife of faith whereby he lives to God in christ, howsoever he be to the
eyes of all men, and even in his own conscience a dead rotten stock. Even as
we know that the trees have heat and life in their roots in the midst of
the coldest and sharpest winter, yea as many beasts ly all the winter long in
holes of the earth, without eating, drinking, stirring or having any iotte of
heat, sense or life in any of their outward parts, and yet there is a
remnant of life and of heat lurking in the heart which being in summer stirred
up does reuine the beast, so that it is able to go or run up and down, and
to perform all natural actions, in the same manner as it did before. This
Christ does plainly teach Ioh. 4. 14. Ioh. 4, 14.
saying, Whosoever drinks of the water which I shall give him (that is,
whosoever believes in me, as it is expounded, John 7. 38) shall never be more
a thirst, ^oh. 7. 38.
but the water that I will give him, shall be in him a well of water, springing
up into everlasting life: Ioh. 3. 9.
and 1 Ioh. 3. 9. Whosoever is borne of God sins not (totally) for the seed
of God remains in him, and therefore he can not fall clean away from God,
because he is borne of God, yet a man regenerate may decrease not only in one,
in a few, or in many graces, but also generally in all spiritual graces.

This decrease of renewed holiness, is of two kinds, for as of bodily
diseases, some begin at the heart which is the root and fountain of life in
the body, and so spread themselves over all the members of the body: others
have their beginning in some outward and inferior parts and pierce in till
that they come to the heart: so of these general decreases of holiness,
which are as grievous diseases of the soul, some begin at faith which is the
root and fountain of spiritual life, and so having stopped the fountain, do
easily dry up the streams issuing from it: others begin at the meaner and
baser parts of sanctification, and so first kill the fruit then the branches
and the body of the tree, til at length they take hold of the root it self.
Both these ways does satan use to destroy this wounderfull work of
regeneration, wrought in the faithful by the spirit of God. The first way is
the nearest and readiest, for if faith once fail, all holiness falls to the
ground: whereas faith may stand in some sort, although most of the other
parts of santification be wanting as the body may live although it lack the
arms, legs and other parts: but if the heart be once wounded, death is then
hard at hand, and therefore Satan does most of all and in the first place,
labor to overthrow the faith of the faithful man, desiring to strike through
the heart at the first stroke, that so as Abisai says, 1. Sam. 26. 8. ^ Sam.
26. 8.
he might save the labor of striking twice. This Christ tells Peter, that
satan had desired to tempt him, ^ak 22. 3 2.
but he had prayed for him, that his faith, whereat satan would directly
strike, should not fail.

The weapons wherewith he uses to strike at faith, are many and diverse; as
namely these; First the crosses and miseries of this present life which God
lays on his children for the trial of their faith, 1 Pet. 1. 7. Pet. 1. 7.
But they feeling them bitter, and after a sort intolerable to flesh and
blood, labor by earnest and continual prayer as also by all other means to
be freede from them. The which thing when as they cannot bring to pass, being
suffered to languishe, yea often to perish outwardly in their troubles, they
straight way are moved by satan to think that God has forsaken them, and
that there is no help or good thing to be looked for at his hands. This
policy satan himself does bewray and confess, Job. 1. 11 Does Job fear
God for naught? thou have blessed him in all things, but lay thy hand upon him
in outward crosses and thou shall see that he will be so far off from
trusting in thee, Job. 1. 11.
that he will curse thee to thy face.

The temptation is then most forceable when as the faithful in their greatest
miseries are exasperated, and, as it were, have their teeth set on edge by the
great prosperity of the wicked: insomuch that they often repent themselves that
they have not chosen that course and manner of life, whereby they see them to
flourish. But it is to be withstood by considering that God does chastise his
children, and purge them in the furnace of afflictions, that so he might make
glorious and heavenly vessels of them whereas the wicked are as sheep fed fat
against the day of slaughter: that they are by this means made conformable to
Christ their head: that the greatest afflictions of this world are not to be
compared to the eternal happiness of the life to come: and that ^s it is, Luke.
16. 25. Luke 16. 25.
as the wicked in this life have pleasure and the godly pain: so in the world
to come the godly shall be comforted and the other tormented. And therefore
they are to be undoubtedly persuaded of the truth of that which we read,
Eccles. 8. 12. Eccles. 8. 17.
Tho the wicked man do evil an hundred times, and yet prolong his days, yet
I know that in the end it will be well with them that fear God, and with no
other. Again the faith of the godly is often tempted by consideration had of
the impossibilities of the doctrine of the gospel, as of the resurrection of
dead bodies. For so by measuring the truth of God by their own shallowe
reason, they stagger at it, and sometimes fall flat down. 2. Tim. 2. 18. 2.
Tim. 2 18.
Hymeneus and Philetus taught, that the resurrection mentioned in the scripture
was already past, and so they did subvert the faith of many: but for this we
are to know, that nothing is impossible to God. The third temptation is the
obscure, secret and hidden manner of Gods working in these last ages: wherein
he having revealed himself fully in his son, and in the gospel, does hide
himself from the eyes even of the faithful, in that he does not appear so in
visions, revelations, dreams, the gifts of miracles in temporal punishments
and blessings o^ in any other sensible manner, but suffers all things to go
on and work after their own inclinations, as namely, tyrants to rage and
oppress his Church, to persecute his people, to erect idolatry, to deface his
worship, to blaspheme his name, so as if he had clean cast off the care of all
things here in this world. But this ought not to trouble us, for sensible
apparitions, blessings, and actions were for the infancy of the Church which
now is come to her ripe age, and yet the actions of God are no less wonderful
then before: yea they are as manifest to spiritual eyes, as ever they were to
the carnal eyes of men. The last weapon, wherewith Satan strikes at faith, is
ministered unto him by the faithful themselves, to wit, their manifould and
grievous sins, especially those whereinto they fall again and again having
often repented them, and whereof they cannot by any means get the upper hand.
Here Satan thinks that he has as much advantage against the faithful, as
he himself desires. For in the other temptations he did feight against the
word of God the which now he seems to have on his side, for whereas the
scripture does eueriewhere teach, that all who are justified are sanctified
from a sinful, life, and have power given them by the spirit of GOD to resist
and mortify sin, especially great and heinous sins, hereof he infers
after this manner: thou have no such power or grace to resist sin, thou can
not for thy life abstain from committing it, but do add one fall to
another, one sin to another, even against thine own conscience and therefore
thy faith is nothing but either mere hypocrisy and unbelief, or at the most,
it is but some light shadow of faith, which may be found in many reprobates.
This argument is hard to be answered, and therefore it drives many faithful
men to their wits end, and even to despair of themselves, and of the love
and mercy of God, which is a most fearful thing, killing all holiness even
at the root, and therefore to be avoided by all means, especially by
learning, if we be as yet ignorant, how to answer this argument thus cunningly
compacted by Satan. The best answer that can be made is, that he who is thus
tempted, labor by fasting, prayer, continual reading, meditating, and
hearing of the word of God, by avoiding all occasions of sin and diligent
waying the nature and manifold evils ensuing of it, to purge himself of the
sin wherewith Satan does so buffet him: and so to wring his weapon by force
out of his hand. But if this cannot be brought to pass, as often the faithful
cannot get the maistery over their sins, and the corrupt desires of the
flesh, then we must answer, that a true and saving faith may be at some time
without some fruit, as the trees are in the winter season, as appears
manifestly by the examples of diverse faithful men, as namely in David that
notable man, who did not only commit adultery which is a most grievous sin,
the harm whereof cannot by any means be amended, yea and added murder to it
a more horrible sin; but also as may be probably gathered, seems to have
continued long in these sins without repentance. Yet no man denies but that
he was at that time and long before truly regenerate, and endued with true
faith. But here Satan will reply and say, if it be so, that saving faith may
be joined with a sinful life, what difference is there betwixt the elect and
the reprobate, who may have a barren faith, yea a faith which will bring forth
the fruit of an unblameable life? how know thou that the tree has life,
but by the fruit, or that thou art in any better state then a reprobate or then
I my self, who do believe and tremble? To this he makes answer in this
wise: I know and confess that no true faith is fruitless, neither is my faith
so: For first I do remember the time when as my faith did bring forth
plentiful fruits in all respects, both toward God and my brethren, my life
being free from the least spot of any great sin, and I trust to see that
time again ere long. Yea even at this time wherein it has pleased God to
humble me by giving thee power to tempt and overcome me, there is difference
betwixt me and any hypocritical reprobate whatsoever: for my life is not
defiled with many sins, seeing thou can not charge me with any save only
this or that sin: to the which I do give place not always but seldom, not of
any obstinate wilfulness but of human infirmity, not of set purpose, but
against my will, and my flat resolution, having often fully determined with my
self never to commit it. Yea I will never cease from using al means possible
of being freed from it: neither will I ever think my self in good case, or
that I can stop thy mouth, till by the mercy of God that be fully brought to
pass. Thus much of the temptations of faith, the which because of the great
danger, whereunto the faithful are brought by them, are called by the Apostle,
Ephesians. 6. 16, The fiery darts of Satan. ^phe. 6. 16.
Now to proceed: from this decrease of faith whether it be less or greater
comes the like decrease of every part of renewed holiness, even as the
diste^peratures of the heart, and the hurt of the root of a tree, have place
in all the members of the body, and in the whole stock and every several
branch of the tree. For as, where there is no faith, there is no holiness, so
where there is little faith, there is little holiness, as has been declared
more at large in the chapter of faith.

There remains the other kind of general decrease, to wit, that wherein
first the inferior parts of sanctification are diminished, and afterward
faith it self: the which way although it be not so ready and dangerous as the
former, yet it is more usual: for as when a theife goes about to spoil any
man of his goods, if he offer to break in at the broadside of his house, he is
streghtway espied and receives the repulse, but if he under mine the house, he
may be within it, and on the dweller before he be aware: so when as Satan
comes as it were blu^tly to a christian, and does at the first dash move him
to forsake and renounce God by infidelity, his malicious purpose is soon
espied, and for the most part so carefully resisted, that he has not any hope
ever to prevail by that means and to rob the regenerate man of his renewed
holiness: so that he is driven to take an other way by the end (for he will
never give over) and to go more closely to work. First therefore whereas the
faithful man is not only godly, after the usual and ordinary manner in
abstaining from gross sins and performing those duties which are looked for at
the hands of every Christian, but also is very forward and zealous in
serving God, in setting forth his glory, in procuring the good of his Church,
and the edification of his brethren, he makes him to be weary of this kind
of life, and at length to give it quite over: yet so, as that he yet remains
as sincere a Christian, as unblameable in life and as diligent in serving God as
need to be: only whereas before he was more forward then was needful, (as
Satan will make him believe) and too busy in setting forth the gospel of
Christ by all means so far as his calling did permit, now he imployeth all
his time and care in procuring his own safty, ease, pleasure, wealth and
honor, all which he did very much neglect before: yet not by any evil means,
but so far forth as a Christian may do lawfully, and with a good conscience.
Afterward the same temptation continuing, the love of God and the practice of
godliness does daily decrease, till at length he become after a sort benumbed,
dead, and even keycold in matters of religion, giving himself wholly to the
seeking and inioying of worldly pleasures, so as if he looked for no other
happiness: whereby it comes to pass, that his faith and affiance in God
does greatly decay. Thus the Apostle writes 1. Timo. 5. 11. 12. 1 Timothy 5. 11.
12.
That many younger widows did show the decrease of their faith, love, and
holiness, by leaving off to minister to the Church as they had done sometimes.
And this he plainly affirms of Demas, 2 Timothy 4. 10.
2. Timo. 4. 10. That he had forsaken him, and the affairs of the Church, and
had embraced this present world. And this may be seen in many Christians,
whose faith, love, godliness, and zeal compared at one time with that measure
of grace which sometimes appeared in them, will seem to be nothing at all.

This kind of decrease happens especially in the time of prosperity and of
age. For as affliction and misery do strike at the faith of a Christian; so
the inioying of worldly pleasures in the time of prosperity does diminish the
other parts of sanctification by the immoderate and unlawful seeking and
using of earthly pleasures. Likewise although this decrease may happen in any
part of the life, as has been declared of the younger widows, yet most
commonly it is seen whenas Christians are somewhat grown in years, and have
gotten great wisdom and experience in the world (the which does by little and
little steal away the heart of man from God to it self, if great
watchfulness and care be not had) and are more linked and wedded to it then
younger men, although in all reason they should esteem less of it. This
appears in the examples of the kings of Judah, of whom many did in their age
loose their first love of God and of his worship. Thus did Solomon, Rehaboam,
Asa, Ioas, Achasia and Huzzia. Lastly this kind of decrease, although it be
not so violent, as is that other which begins at faith, yet in this one
respect it is more dangerous, namely, because it cannot so soon be amended
and repaired. For as it uses to be many years in growing before it come to
the full, so it gathers to it self the strength of many reason, pretenses,
defenses, worldly polices and shifts, by the which a man flattereth himself in
that palpable decrease, as if he were in as good an estate as ever he was.

So that we may compaire the decrease of faith, to a violent fever, the which
as it may soon kill a man, so it may soon be amended: but this latter kind
is like unto a lingering consumption, wherein as a man pineth away by little
and little, not on a sudden, but living in it for the space of many years,
so he cannot be cured of it but in some long space, because it is so confirmed
in all the members of his body. Yet both these kinds of decreases are most
fearful conditions, and those, from the which it stands every Christian in
hand daily to desire the Lord for his mercy sake in Christ to deliver him,
and rather to take him out of this world being in the state of perfect
godliness, then to suffer him to fall so grievously: as no doubt he does to
many of his dear servants.

Lastly it may here be asked what is the issue of these great falls, which
happen to the faithful, whether they continue in them till death, or else
recover their former estate. We answer, that God as he does for a time humble
them under the tyranny of sin, Satan, and their own corrupt flesh, so he
does in his good time, show forth the powerful and mighty virtue of his holy
spirit, which all this while lies lurking in the hearts of the faithful,
being in the first moment of their regeneration given unto them, as an
inseperable guide and ruler, to bring them through the manifold temptations of
Satan and the hinderaunces of their salvation to the glorious presence of God
in heaven. By this means it comes to pass, that the faithful man does after
long struggling with his enemies, yea after that he has been a long time in
bondage under them, yea clean dead in outward appearaunce, not only recover
his former degree of holiness, but also become more strong in all spiritual
graces, (...). 40. 29.
then he was before, as we read, Es. 40. 29. God will give strength to him
that is clean wearied, so that he shall go from strength to stre^gh and renew
his age as does the eagle, he shall bring fourth more fruit in his age, and
become more zealous in serving God, then he was at any time before. Yet
sometime it pleases God to make an end of these spiritual conflictes, not by
withdrawing the force of the temptation from the faithful, but by taking them
from it, and out of this world, which is the kingdom of satan, to that state
wherein they shall no more be troubled with any such temptation, as may
endaunger their salvation. So that the faithful do sometimes depart this
life, as in the midst of temptation, so in the decrease of holiness. Yet we
are not to doubt of their salvation: for he that is once engrafted and united
to Christ by a true faith, as all the regenerate are, whether he die in a holy
life, or in some sin, whether in repentance or in impenitency, whether in
full assurance of faith or in much doubting, yea although he seem to despair
of himself, always he dies in Christ, and therefore in the favor of God and
in the state of eternal life. For in the greatest decrease of holiness which
can befall to a faithful man, there remains some sparks of grace: but
especially the love of God, of his glory and of his children will show it
self, (and also the root of faith, otherwise perhaps invisible) in the
greatest agony or tempest of temptation whatsoever.

CHAP. VIII.
Of the increase of renewed holiness.
AS in the natural birth of man his body comes into the world not so great
and strong as afterward it becomes, but little, weak and impotent: so in
the spiritual birth of regeneration, the soul of man is not in the first
moment endued with perfection, but with a small measure of renewed holiness,
from the which it is to grow and go on forward to a perfect estate. For the
first act of regeneration, does put into the faculties of the soul not the
actual habit of spiritual graces, but the seeds and beginning of them, which
are continually to be increased by the word and spirit of God. Hence it is,
that the new man in the faithful has his infancy, wherein the graces of
gods spirit are as yet in small measure. In the which respect it is compared
to a grain of mustard seed, which being at the first the least of all seeds,
becomes very great: and to leaven, which at the first is in some one part
only of the dowe but in time spreads it self over the whole lump. Of the
increase of renewed holiness.
This meannesse of spiritual strength appears even in the Apostles
themselves whom being as yet his disciples and scholars, Christ does often
put in mind of the weakness of their faith Ioh. 6. 12. Ioh. 16. 12.
I have many things to say unto you, Act. 19. 2.
but ye can not bear them now. And Act. 19.. 2. There were at Ephesus certain
believing disciples, who were so weak in knowledge, that they were ignorant
of the holy Ghost. Likewise the Apostle writes to the Corinthians 1. Cor. 3.
1. 2. 1. Cor. 3. 1. 2.
That he could not speak unto them, but as unto babes in Christ (not in
knowledge, but in practice) and there fore could not give unto them any
strong meat, but only milk to drink. Of this weakness in capacity and
knowledge, there is mention made, Gall. 4. 19.
Gal. 4. 19. Romans 6. 19. Romans 6. 19.
Hereof comes weakness in faith. Romans 14. Romans 14.
And also necessarily the weakness of all the other parts of holiness:
wherein no Christian ought to rest as contenting himself with that small
measure of grace, but ought rather to be carried forward to perfection.
Especially seeing that this state of spiritual infancy is easily overthrown
and brought to nothing by the malice of satan, it being weak, and not able to
resist the force of temptation. And therefore although some do abide long in
this weak estate and perhaps end their days in it, yet usually God gives to
those who are truly regenerate, a daily increase and a new supply of grace:
insomuch that in a competente time they become of ripe age and of perfect
strength in Christ. Whereunto a christian is then come, when as he is not
destitute of any grace needful for the performance of any christian duty but
leads a life in every respect holy and unblameable, proceeding from those
spiritual graces which have been described in the third Sections of the first
and second parts of this treatise.

And yet this perfect estate of a christian is not the highest degree of grace,
which may be attained in this life: for besides and beyond that measure of
grace, which the faithful do ordinarely attain unto, it pleases God to
endue some of his servants with a more plentiful abundaunce of all spiritual
graces, as he promises, Math. 25. 29. That to him that has, there shall more
be given, Math. 25. 29.
and he shall have abundaunce. And it is said of diverse in the book of the
Acts, that they were full of faith and of the holy ghost. This abundance in the
mind is called Plerophoria, a certain and undoubted persuasion, said to be in
Abraham Romans 4. 21. Hereof comes abundaunce of faith, Romans 4. 21.
of love, Romans 5. 3. and 15. 13. and of all graces, Romans 5. 3. and 15. 13.
as 1 Thessalonians. 1. 3. the Apostle mentions the work of their faith, 1. These.
1. 3.
their laborious love, 2. These. 1. 3.
and their patient hope. And 2 Thessalonians. 1. 3. that their faith superaugescit,
that is, increases above the common and ordinary measure, and that their love
did abound accordingly. This abundance of grace is to be seen in the
prophets, Apostles, martyrs, and many other of the servants of God, who
therefore are made types and patterns for us to imitate and set before our
eyes, as lanternes full of light, and as shining and blazing stars, that we
might both admire and labor to overtake them in their excellent graces, and
especially in their particular virtues. For thus the scripture mentions the
uprightness of Enoch, who walked with God in all his ways, Iam. 5. 11.
the patience of Job. Iam. 5. 11, the faith of Abraham, the meekness of Moses,
the courage of Joshua, the faithfulness of Samuel, the absolute perfection of
David being a man according to Gods own heart, the wisdom of Solomon, the
zeal of Phinies, Josias and many others. Thus Paul mentions his own
painfulness in preaching the gospel to be far above the labors of the rest
of the Apostles. Thus he says, Rom 16. 7. That Andronicus and Iunia were men
notable among the Apostles, Romans 16. 7.
and of Timothy, that none was like to him in faithful labor, and care for
the good of the church Philip. 2. 20. Philip. 2. 20.


The notes and marks, whereby this abundaunce may be known, are these; a
burning zeal of gods glory, of setting forward his worship and gospel, a
vehement hatred of idolatry, and all shadows of superstition, a tender and
bountiful love toward the godly, a mind undaunted with any torment, death or
misery, a constant course of godliness in all outward chaunges whatsoever, as
the Apostle says of him self, Philip. 4. 13. Philip. 4. 13.
That he could want and abound, be full and empty, and that he could do all
things: a life free from any gross sin, an extraordinary contempt of all
worldly pleasures. Lastly a manner of freedom from being either overcome, or
almost tempted by any gross sin. For although the corruption of flesh, and
the impudency of Satan who was not ashamed to tempt Christ to commit sin, be
so great that no man be he nener so holy, may lay away his weapons, and be
secure in respect of temptations, yet by the blessing of God and a long
practice of all godliness, the faithful come sometimes to such a surpassing
strength in grace, that as the courageous horse going into the battle, scorneth
the fearful sounds and noise of the trumpets: so this godly man (whereof we
speak in this chapter) laugheth at the temptations of Satan, and the
entisementes of the world yet not presuming on his own strength, but relying
himself wholly on the mighty power of the spirit of God.

The means of attaining to this high degree of holiness, is to seek it by
earnest prayer at the hands of God, from whom only comes every good and
perfect gift. But the means which God uses in giving it, are diverse: some
good, some evil in themselves, and therefore not to be used by us: of the first
sort are all holy exercises appointed by God, for the begetting and continual
increase of grace: to the careful, diligent, long and continual use whereof,
God does often grant this happy success, even as he blesses the diligent
and painful hand with great plenty in temporal things. Of the second sort
is the abundaunce of sin before regeneration, the which it pleases God, some
time to change into this abundaunce of grace, as we see that the highest
floudes follow the lowest ebbes. This God does to make manifest the great power
and efficacy of his spirit in renewing the elect: which is able to bring the
greatest measure of holiness, out of the greatest wickedness, as clear light
out of palpable darkness. This Christ teaches us. ^uk. 7. 41.
Luke 7. 41. In the parable of the two debtors, whereof the greater had greater
cause and also a greater measure of love. And in the example of the woman,
verse: 47. Who loved much, because many sins were forgiven unto her: ^ers. 47.
sowhere sin does abound, there grace abounds much more. Yea for this
purpose God does sometimes use the hot fierceness of affections, and the
violent disposition of nature, the which as of it self it carries a man
headlong into the most outrageous sins: so being sanctified by Gods spirit,
it becomes the whetstone of holiness. Thus was the Apostle Paul, both
naturally and spiritually affected: and therefore being an infidel, he was a
most superstitious pharisie more then mad in persecuting the church, and
becoming a faithful man, passed all others in unquenchable zeal of Gods
spirit. Lastly as touching this abundance of grace, no man can attain so high
a degree of it, as that he may sit down as being at his iorneis end: but as
the greater riches that a man has the greater is his gain, desire and
increase of riches, so the more holiness that any man has, the more carefully
ought, and the more fruitfully may he labor in increasing it. Phil. 3. 13.
Brethren says the Apostle, Phil. 3. 13.
I count not that I have attained unto any such perfection: But still I do
forget that which is behind, and endeuore my self to that which is before:
That is, I do not mind that holiness, which I have already received, but do
continually think on that, which I do want as yet.

CHAP. IX.
Of celestial holiness.
ALthough we have now gone as far in declaring the renewed holiness of man, as
any man can in this world, either in having or in practicing it, yet we are
not here to rest, as being come to the end of our journey. For if the aforesaid
abundance of spiritual graces (which be it never so great, cannot possibly
be void of sin) be absolutely the highest degree, Of celestial ^olinesse.
this inconvenience, which is in no wise to be admitted, would of necessity
follow, that man does not in regeneration recover as good a state and as great
a measure of holiness by the mercy of God in christ, as he had in his first
creation, and lost by his own sin in Adam. And therefore we are to go on a
little further in this treatise, and in our desire till we come to such an
absolute perfection of renewed holiness, as is free from the least spot of
sin whatsoever. This perfection may without all question, yea must
necessarely be attained unto. For man can not be perfectly happy by enjoying
the presence of God, into the which nothing being sinful can enter, as long as
he is imperfectly holy. Yet he that seeks for it in this world, does no
otherwise then if he should labor to find out in some part of the earth, a
mine of so pure gold, as is not mixed with earth, base metal, or any manner
of dross. And therefore we are with the Apostle 2 Cor. 12. 2 Cor. 12.
to think that the grace of God is sufficient for our salvation although it be
not altogether free from sin. And as for this angelical purity, it is to be
hoped for not in this world, but in heaven where all the faithful shall both
in happiness and in holiness be made like to the angels, yet it being
revealed in the word of God, may be known of us in this life, yea it being
the mark whereat we must aim in this life, although we are not to hope to hit
it, it is needful to be known. And lastly it is to be handled in this place,
because it is nothing else but the absolute perfection and highest degree of
renewed holiness. For as the bodies and the souls of the faithful shallbe the
same in the world to come, that they are in this world, so also shall their
holiness. Neither can it be otherwise: For God is the same both in earth and
in heaven, to day and to morrow, now and for ever. The subjection of the
creature to God, and the image of God in the creature is the same at all times
in substance, although some particulars, have not so great use in the state of
perfect happiness as they had before, to wit, all those the obiectes whereof,
are either future or evil, as namely hope, sorrow, pity, and such other
affections: yet these also shall have both place and use in the world to com,
although not so great as the other. In the which respect, we may declare this
celestial increase of renewed holiness, by comparing it with the created
holiness of man's innocent estate, the which comes very near unto it, and
is as a mean betwixt the greatest abundance of holiness which can be had in this
life, and this celestial holiness: for as it is greater then the one, so it
is less then the other. So that if we would know what is the holiness
wherewith the faithful shallbe endued in the world to come, and shall shine as
the glorious Angels in heaven, let us have recourse to all the first Sections
of the two former parts of this treatise. For all the parts of the holiness of
man's first estate as well of his subjection as of his conformity to God belong
to his last estate in heaven, wherein man is not exempted from subjection to
God, but still remains first his subject, and therefore ought to trust and
hope in him, yea to fear him, secondly his son, and therefore he ought to
reverence, imitate and seek unto him, and so in the other kinds of subjection
there declared. Where this is to be noted that of the two kinds of faith,
legal and evangelical, handled in the first part of this treatise, not the
latter but the former is part of this celestial holiness. For in the life to
come, the elect shall be restored to that perfect inherent holiness, wherein
Adam was created: by virtue whereof, without any inputed righteousness
borrowed from any other, they shall look for happiness, even as the holy
Angels do. Likewise for the other part of holiness, which we call the
conformity of man to God, we are not to doubt but that the faithful shall in
the world to come, have the faculties of mind, memory, will and affections so
disposed, as has been declared. For all these are common to all things which
are endued with reason. Now as touching the difference, it is this, celestial
holiness is more excellent and exceeds the other: for as the bodies of the
faithful shall be more glorious, pure, and after a sort spiritual, then was the
body of Adam in his innocenceie, as we read 1. Cor. 15. 48. So also shall the
faculties of the soul and body be more able, 1 Cor* 15 48*
ready, and quick in performing their several duties and functions. We shall
have more full and certain affiance in him as in our King and be more like to
him as to a father, more quick in obeying his commandments, as servants
ought to be to their masters; our minds shall be more capable of knowledge and
more enriched with actual knowledge 1 Cor. 13. We shall see God face to face,
that is, we shall have familiar conversation in the presence of God and as full
and perfect a knowledge of God, ^ Cor. 13.
of his will, word, actions, and creatures, yea greater then that which man had
by his first creation. Likewise the will, although of it self it shall be as it
was before, free either to good or evil, yet it shall be by the grace of God
continually inclined only to good, and preserved from using the natural
freedom, in choosing evil. Whereof it comes, that this celestial holiness
is not mutable, and uncertain, as was the created holiness of man, but
immutable and the same for ever, and therefore much more excellent.

FINIS
Read (if thy copy have it otherwise) Page 9. lin. 28. would, believe and
page 30. 2. set the comma before Often. and lin. 3. read former safety. page
31. lin. 14. miseries happening in this. page 43. 6. in the event. p. 65. 11.
they existe. page 82. 29. that so he might. page 108. 24. when faith fails.
page 190. 24. things ^s of beasts. page 226. 12. 13. 14. so also in the minds)
of men yet their actual knowledge was less or greter as men did give
themselves. pa. 303. 9. will for although a carnal man. page 314* 2. a
senseless lump. page 315. 11. he creates, and 22. to that only page 364. 6.
effectual to salvation and* 27. of whom.


