The Jesuits Antepast, CONTAINING, A Reply against a pretensed aun swear to
the DOWNE-FALL OF POPERY, lately published by a masked Jesuit Robert Parsons
by name, though he hide himself covertly under the letters of S. R. which may
fitly be interpreted (A SAUCY REBEL.)

Esaias 38, verse 1. Put thine house in order, for thou shall die and not live.
AT LONDON Printed by William Iaggard dwelling in Barbican. 1608.

To the Right Honorable, my very good Lord, Thomas Earl of Dorset, Lord high
Treasurer of England, and one of his Majesty's most Honorable privy Counsel.
(*)
IT is a constant and undoubted truth, approved by all Canonical Scriptures,
ancient Councels, holy Fathers, Ecclesiastical Histories, Ephe. 4. 5
and Right reason it self; that as there is but one only GOD, so but one
Faith, and one Religion. Hence comes it (Right Honorable) that the Pope and
his Jesuits with other his Popish Vassals, employ their whole wits, learning,
study, care, industry, and diligence, to instill into the cares and hearts of
the multitude and common people, that the Religion which this day they
profess, is the old Roman Religion, which Saint Peter and S. Paul first
planted in the Church of Rome. And for this end they indeau^ur with might and
maine, yea, even with fire and Faggot, to persuade, or rather to enforce all
Christians to call it the Old Religion, The Chu^^ of England defends old Rom^
religion.
and to profess and believe it to be the Catholic and Apostolic Faith;
whereas the truth is far otherwise, as (God willing) shortly will appear.
Which if the Vulgar sort did once understand, they would no doubt stand at
defiance with the Pope, and from their hearts detest his late start-vppe Romish
Doctrine. There is a Sect of Friars at Rome, The late R^^mish faith the new
re^^^^^on.
called the Franciscanes, who have by little and little swarued from their
first institution, and become so licentious and dissolute, that another sort of
Friars commonly called the Capucheues, have accused them to have departed from
their Ancient and Primitive order; and therefore do the Capucheues term
themselves, the reformed and true Franciscanes indeed. This is this day our
case in the Church of Noble England, and in many other Churches within the
Christian World. The Capucheues hold fast, keep still, and constanty defend,
all the Ancient Orders of the first Franciscanes, they only reject and abandon
that, which by little and little crept into their Order, (viz:) superstition,
abuses, and neglect of Discipline. Even so is it this day with our Church of
England, she holdeth-fast, keeps still, and constantly defends all and
every jot of the old Roman Religion, reuerencing it, as Catholic and
Apopostolique Doctrine, she only rejects and abandoneth Heresies, (...) this
point w^ll (...).
Errors, superstition, and intolerable abuses, by little and little brought
into the Church. For neither did most Noble Queen Elizabeth in her time,
neither does our most gracious Sovereign King JAMES (who this day most happily
reigns over us) set up or bring into the Church any new Religion; but only
reformeth the Church, by the example of King Iosaphat, King Ezechias, Par. 19.
Reg. 18. Par. 29. 30, 1. 34.
King Josias, and other godly Kings in their days, and reduces it to the
Primitive order and purity of the old Roman Religion. This to be so, none can
in conscience deny, that will with a single and upright eye this day behold,
Reg. 2. 4. 8. ^ee defend (...) old Roman ^^ligion.
the godly settled Canons of this Church of England. For, the late Bishops of
Rome have in many points of great importance, swarued and departed from the
Doctrine of their Ancestors; whereof no doubt many Papists, even at and about
Rome it self, ^n: Dom: -- 1498.
would this day (if they durst for fear of fire and Faggot) accuse the Pope
himself. What shall I say of Hieronymus Sauonarola, that famous Preacher and
Dominican Friar? Was not be burnt with Fire and Faggot, because he preached
openly in the famous City of Florence, against the licencious lives of the
Pope and his Clergy, and against superstition and abuses crept into the Church?
I wot it was so, it cannot be denied. What? (...).
Did not Johannes Geilerius a famous Popish Preacher at Argentorate, oftentimes
complain to his trusty friends, (not daring to acquaint otheres therewith) that
the Thomists and Scotists had brought auricular confession to such a miserable
point, as none possibly could perform the same? He did so, their own good
friend Beatus Rhenanus does contest the same with me. What? Did not Franciscus
a Victoria, (...) annot. in (...). de potest. (...) and ^onc. (...). 4. p. 139
that ^amous Popish Schoole-doctor, complain grievously in his time, of Popish
intolerable dispensations? Did he not publish to the view of the world, that
the Church was brought to such a miserable state, as none were able to endure
the same? Did he not cry out against the late Bishops of Rome, and desire
Clements, Lines, and Siluesters? His own Book is extant in print, the world
knows it to be so. What shall I say of the Popes errors in Faith and
Doctrine? Was not Pope Liberius an Arrian Heretic? Was not Pope Anastasius a
Silestorian Hereretique? Was not Pope Celestine condemned for erroneous
doctrine? (...) John's esie con^nned with sound of ^^^^pets.
did not Pope John the 22. of that name, teach publicly a most notorious
heresy? Did he not command the university of Paris, that none should be
admitted to any degree in Theology, but such as would swear to defend that
heresy perpetually? Did not the King of France with the advice and consent of
the whole university, for that end, cause his damnable opinion to be condemned
with the sound of Trumpets? Adrianus.
Adrianus (who was B of Rome himself) Alphonsus a Castro, Melchior Canus, and
Viguerius, all four being very learned and famous Papists, are constant
witnesses of this truth. Lyr. in 16. (...) Mat.
Does not Nicholaus de Lyra, a famous and learned Popish Writer, boldly and
constantly affirm in his learned Commentaries, that many Popes have swarued
from the Faith, and become fl^t Aposta^aes in their Romish seats? He does so,
it cannot be gaine-said. What shall I say of the Popes lives and conversation?
Was not Pope John the eight of that name, belying her sex, and clad in Man's
attire, with great admiration of her sharp wit and singular learning, chosen
to be the Bishop or Pope of Rome? Did she not shortly after by the familiar
help of her beloved Companion, bring forth the homely and shameful fruits of
her Popedom? Is this true? Is it possible? Then farewell Popish Succession,
the chief Bulwark of Romish Faith and Religion. For seeing no Woman is, or
can be made capable of holy orders; that succession which is deryued from our
holy Mistress John Pope, The Pope with child. 1. Tim. 2. 12.
cannot possibly be of force. Yet is this story confirmed to be true, by the
uniform assent of many Papists of great esteem, even in the Church of Rome,
(viz:) of Sigebertus Gemblacensis, Seven Pop witnesses, (...) pope John was a
wo^^
Marianus Scotus, Matheus Palmerius, Martinus Polonus, Philippus Bergoniensis,
Baptista Platina, Bartholomeus Carranza, and others. Was not Pope John the
twelft, made Pope by violent means? Did not his Father Albericus being a man
of great power and might, enforce the Nobles to take an oath, that after the
death of Pope Agapitus, they would promote his Son Octauianus to the Popedom?
Was not the oath accomplished, and be named John? Was he not a great hunter,
and a man of licencious life? Did he not keep women openly, to the notorious
scandal of the Church? Did not some of the Cardinals write to Otto, Behold Po^
John the vi gin.
King of the Saxons, to come and besiedge Rome so to afflict him for his sins?
Did not the Pope perceiving it, cause the Cardinals nose to be cut off that
gave the counsel, and his hand that wrote the letter? Martinus Polonus a Popish
Archbishop, and sometime the Popes own Penitentiary, affirms this to be a
constant truth? Did not Pope Siluester the second, a Frenchman borne,
Gilbertus by name, promise homage to the Devil, so long as he should
accomplish his desire? Did he not so often express his desire to the Devil,
as he made homage unto him? And was he not first made Archbishop of Rhemes,
then of Rauennas, at the last Pope of Rome? Did not the Devil knowing his
ambitious mind, bring him to honor by degrees? When he was made Pope, was he
not desirous to know of the Devil, how long he should live in his pontifical
glory? Did not the Devil answer him, (...): Dom: -- ^07.
so long as he said no Mass in Jerusalem? The story is long, he that can read
and desires to know it at large, may find it in Martino Polono, above named?
Did not Pope Benedict the eight, appear corporally after his death, as it were
riding on a black Horse (the Devil?) Did he not desire the Bishop that saw
him, to cause some Money to be given to the poor, because all that he gave
before time, was gotten by robbe^y and extortion? Petrus Damascenus affirms
it. Was not Pope Formosus, a perjured person? Did not Pope John degrade him,
(...) is now (...) indeleble Character?
after he had been Bishop of Portua? Did he not take him sworn, that he neither
should be Bishop, nor ever return to the city of Rome? Did not Pope Martine
absolve him of his oath? Came he not to Rome, and shortly after was made Pope?
Did not Pope Stephanus the sixth, persecute Pope Formosus? Did he not cause his
dead body to be brought forth into his consistory, the papal ornaments to be
taken away and a laical habit to be put on the dead corpse, two fingers of his
right hand to be cut off, and so his body to be put into the grave? Did not
Sergius the third, cause Pope Formosus, (who now had been dead almost ten
years) to be taken out of his Tomb, and to be set in a Chair with
pontifical attire upon his back, most bru^^ cruelty!
and then his head to be cut off and cast into Tyber? Platina, Carranza, and
Polonus affirm it for a constant and known truth? Did not Pope Vrbanus the
second absolve subjects, from their fidelity and allegiance which was dew unto
their Sovereign, so that whosoever obeyed the King, was reputed
excommunicated, and they that took part against the King, were resolved from
the ^^ime of perjury and Injustice? Did not Pope Boniface the eight, challenge
the right of both Swords? Did he not deprive Phillip the French King, and
give his Kingdom to him that could get it? ^^uclerus.
Sigebertus and Nauclerus proclaim it to the World. If I should enter into the
full discourse of these Mysteries, time would sooner fail me, then matter
whereof to speak. Let it suffice for the present, to call to mind the ladder
of eight steps, by whch the late Bishop of Rome did climb up to their
tyrannical primacy; the killing of Christ in the Popish Mass; the pluralities
of bodies ascribed unto him; the sensible touching, breaking, and chewing of
Christ's Real and natural body without teeth; the absurdities,
impossiblities, and contradictions, which necessarily ensue upon their falsely
and fondly imagined real presence; their intolerable and blasphemous
dispensations; the Brother licenced to marry his own natural Sister; persons
joined in wedlock by God himself, and dissolved by the Pope; Saint Paul's flat
doctrine of Concupiscence to bereiected; Condign merits of Man's works
established; damnable sins to be made Venial; Bishops must swear to be true
to the Pope.
Bishops not to have voices in Counsels, until they first swear to de^end the
Pope and his damnable decrees; that Papists can keep the Commandments, and
add thereunto works of supererogation. These and many like execrable
assertions, the Gentle Reader shall find in this small Volume, to be truly
justified against the Pope and his Iesuited Popelings. Many years are expired
since I first wrote against the Papists. They have desperately a^firmed, that
my Books were answered many years ago, yet this is the first answer
indeed, that ever was published against any of my Books; Our holy Jesuit must
needs have a forerunner.
which was pretended to be such a worthy thing, that it must needs have a
forerunner to come before it, to exhort Men to prepare themselves worthily to
receive it; as if forsooth, this saucy Rebel S. R. were Christ himself, and
his fore-ru^ner Saint John the Baptist. What he has performed in his
supposed answer, and my self in this my Reply; The truth (...) prevail in
time, and Po^^pery wholly overthrown
I refer it to the judgment and censure of the indifferent Reader. The work
such as it is, I have Dedicated unto your Honor; as an external sign of
thankfulness, for the Honorable favors received at your Lordships hand. The
Almighty increase your Christian zeal toward his Gospel; and so bless your
faithful service to your Prince and Country, as your most Honorable place and
calling does require.

Your Honors Servant in Christ Jesus, Thomas Bell.

The first Article.
Of the Popes falsely supposed SOVEREIGNTY.
Chapter first.
Of certain Aphorisms, for the better instruction of the Reader.
Aphorism 1.
MAny reasons might be alleged, why so many at this day, do so greedily,
(though foolishly and indiscreetly) embrace the late Romish religion; but these
few to give a taste, shall suffice for the present. The first reason is, because
they expect a day as profane Esau did, Gen^, 27, 41 See my Anathomy of Popish
tyranny. Hest, 7, 10.
when they may kill their true and natural Sovereign, Gods sacred and
anointed Lieutenant (as I have proved elsewhere at large) and so aspire and be
advanced to great wealth and dignity: But let them remember proud Hammons
end, least they be hanged on the gallows, which they intend and prepare for
others. The second, because our gracious Sovereign, (as did his noble
predecessors K. Edward and Queen Elizabeth of famous memory) labors to win
Papists with lenity and long sufferance, and by reading and preaching, to bring
them to the light of Christ's Gospel: whereas the Pope never cease, to burn
burn with fire and faggot, whosoever holds and defends, any one article,
contrary to his late hatched Religion: yea, if one pass by an Image, or their
house of Inquisition (which they term the Holy-house) and do not reverence
thereunto, it is enough to cast that man into the said disholy prison: Which
kind of punishment, if it were upon just cause, executed within his Majesty's
Dominions, shortly, few or no disloyal subjects would be found within his
kingdoms. August, epist 48, Tom 2 3 Cap, quicunque de haeret, lib 6
Which is not my bare opinion only, but even Saint Austens in the like
subject; as it does and may appear to the indifferent Reader, in his learned
Epistle to Vincentius the third, because for the better success and more free
passage of the late Romish Religion, the laicall people are commanded by Popish
Canon Law, under pain of Excommunication, not to reason at all, in matters of
Faith and Religion; and the learned semblably, not to examine or discuss, how
far the Popes power does extend, whatsoever or howsoever he command them to
believe. For the Popes law has made it Sacrilege, to dispute of his power, or
to call it into question; so writes their own dear Doctor and popish Friar,
Franciscus a Victoria, the first man that brought the Popish School-doctrine
into Spain: yea the Popes own decrees are consonant to the same, these are
the express words: Relect, 4, de potest, papae and conc, propos, 16, cause,
17, q, 4, cap, ne^ini.
Similiter de iudicio summi pontificis alicui disputare non licet. In like
manner, no man may dispute of the judgment of the Pope, or high priest. The
fourth, because neither any of the layty, nor yet of the Clergy, can under
pain of Excommunication, read either the old or the new Testament translated
into the vulgar tongue, or any other book of Controversy or Divinity, set
forth by any not professed Vassal unto the Pope; unless such person or
persons be especially licenced of the pope so to do.

Aphorism second.
The multitude of the vulgar and rude people, become Papists, upon this false
and sandy foundation, supposed of them to be a received Theological Maxim,
viz: that the late start up Romish Doctrine, is the ancient Catholic faith,
and the old Roman religion: And therefore, when soeucr they speak of any
Papist, meaning to express his sect and profession; they tell us, he is one of
the old Relion: but they are grossly deceived herein; they may have zeal, I
grant with the Apostle, Rom, 10, 2
but not acording to knowledge. For, the doctrine this day taught and defended
by the Pope, his Jesuits, and Iesuited Papists, is indeed the new Religion,
and far different from the true, catholic, and old Roman religion. Would to
God all simply seduced Papists, would deeply ponder this point, and seriously
meditate upon the same. I do with all my heart reverently receive and admit,
the old Roman religion preached by Saint Paul and S. Peter, in their days at
Rome; but withal, I utterly abhor and detest, that Doctrine, which the late
Popes and Bishops of Rome deliver for the same. In regard hereof, I never in
any one of my Books, oppugn simply and absolutely the Roman faith and
religion, but the late Romish faith and doctrine. Where I wish the Reader to
observe and mark attentively, Mark well this word ( Late.)
this word ( Late) for it does significantly declare a clear difference
between that doctrine which is now taught in the church of Rome, and that
which S. Paul and S. Peter, delivered to the Romans in their life time. Which,
because the common vulgar sort of people cannot distinguish (such is their
ignorance) they are perforce carried away with the sway of the time. Mark the
next Aphorism.

Aphorism third.
We know, and the Papists know, that their reformed Franciscans (now commonly
called Capuchenes) can tell right well, that their other dissolute Franciscans
have swarued from their ancient order, albeit they can neither tell when,
where, nor by whom, that dissolution first began; yet they prove it a
posteriori, by their ancient rules evidently. And even so do we prove, by the
holy scriptures (the true touch stone of truth) that the Papists have swarued
from Apostolical doctrine, albeit we could not (as yet we can) assign the
time, place, and persons; when, where, and by whom, such Antechristian
alteration first began. Let the Reader mark this point well, that, that Sect
of Papists which is called Franciscans, do boast of their succession and
continuance, and by reason of their antiquity, will needs be the true
Franciscans, but the Capuchens (which are nothing but reformed Franciscans)
tell them, that they are the true Franciscans, who have ^ely put away and
abolished all superstition and dissolution, which by little and little crept
into their order. Even so say we, that we are the old and true Catholics or
Romans, who keep still that says and doctrine which saint Paul preached to
the Romans; and have only put away and abolished, that superstition, Idolatry,
and erroneous doctrine, which by little and little, crept into the Church. They
will needs be the true and old Catholics, as is said of the dissolute
Franciscans; but we tell them, as their Capuchens tell their disordered
Franciscans, that they are the deformed and bastard Catholics, unworthy of the
name of Catholics.

And that we are the reformed and legitimate Catholics, who keep still and
hold fast all Apostolical doctrine, and have only abolished out of the church
of God, al Superstition, Idolatry, and errors, contrary to the scriptures and
the Gospel, which the Apostles preached, and left in vvriting to all
posterities. Observe diligently the next Aphorism.

Aphorism fourth.
First, Popish primacie began, in the year 607. Secondly, Priests marriage was
never prohibited, till the year 385. Thirdly, Popes pardons were never heard
of, till the year 1300. Fourthly, popish Purgatory took no root in the
Romish Church, till the year 250. Fifthly, invocation of Saints, and adoration
of Relics, was not known, till the year 370. Sixthly, Popish pilgrimage began
in the year 420. Seventhly, the merit of Works de condigno, was disputeable
about the year 1081. Eighthly, the communion under both kinds, was never
thought unlawful, till the year 1414. Ninthly, the Popes Bulls were not
authentical, till the year 772. Tenthly, Auricular confession was not
established, till the year 1215. Eleuenthly, General Councels, were ever
summoned by the Emperors. That all these heads of Popish doctrine, crept into
the Church, by little and little in the years above named, I have proved at
large ten years ago, in my Book of the Survey of Popery, as also partly in
my Book of Motives, to which books I refer the Reader, for better
satisfaction therein.

This creeping of late Romish religion into the Church by little and little,
Victoria a Popish friar and famous school-Doctor, witnesses in these words;
Victor: de potest. papae and conc. rel. 4. page 151
Paulatim ad hanc, etc. By little and little we are brought to these inordinate
dispensations, and to this miserable state, where we are neither able to endure
our own griefs, nor remedies assigned for the same: and therefore must we
perforce invent some other way, for conservation of the Laws. Give me
Clements, Lines, Siluester, and I will commit all things to their charge. But
to speak nothing grievously against these latter Popes, they are doubtless
inferiors to Popes of old time, by many degrees: Thus writes this learned
Popish Friar; who if he durst have spoken plainly, would have told us
mirabilia. But it suffices that Popes were worse and worse, and that errors by
little and little crept into the Church.

Aphorism fifth.
The usual practice of Papists in their Commentaries, Books and Glosses, have
been such, and so intolerable, in wresting the holy scriptures, that their
own dear brethren and great Doctors, cannot for shame deny or conceal the
same. Polydorus virgilius, a famous Papist, has these words; Non secus isti,
etc. Polid. Virg. lib. 4. cap. 9, page 39
These (Popish) Legists, and Canonists, do now and then so wrest and wrieth
the holy Scriptures, to that sense which themselves like best; even as Cobblers
do gnaw with their teeth, and stretch out their filthy skins. This is that,
which the famous Papist Doctor Fisher, the late bishop of Rochester, did freely
confess, in his answer to the Articles of may. Luther, which he could not
in truth withstand or gainsay; These are his express words: Contendentibus
itaque nobiscum haereticis, nos alio subsidio nostram oportet tu^re causam,
quam scriptura sacra. Roffensis art. 37. adu. Luth. page 11
Therefore when heretics contend with us, we must defend our cause by other
means then by the holy Scripture. These are the express words, (I neither
add any thing, nor take any thing away) of their famous popish Bishop; of
their holy saint; of their glorious martyr; a learned man indeed, who labored
with might and maine for the Popes usurped sovereignty, and defended the same
in the best manner he was able, and to the uttermost of his skill; and yet for
all that, he has bolted out unawares, and against his will (such is the force
of truth) so much in plain terms, as is enough to overthrow all Popery for
ever, and to cause all people that have any care of their salvation, to
renounce the Pope and his abominable Doctrine, to their lives end.

For our learned Popish bishop being put to his best Trurmpe, tells us very
plainly, and without all dissimulation (his mouth being now opaned by him who
caused Balaams Ass to speak,) that they must not (because forsooth they
cannot) defend and maintain their popery by the authority of the Scripture,
but by some other way and means (viz:) by man's forged inventions, and popish
unwritten vanities, which they term the Churches Traditions.

Now (gentle Reader) how can any Papist (who is not given up in reprobum
sensu, for his former sins and just deserts) read sueh testimonies against
Popery, freely confessed, and plainly published to the world, and that by the
pens of most learned and renowned Papists, even while they bestir themselves
busily, to defend their Pope and his popish doctrine, and for all that continue
Papists still, and carried away headlong into perdition, believing and obeying
that doctrine, which (as themselves confess) can not be defended by the holy
Scripture? Methinkes they should be ashamed, to hold and believe that doctrine,
in defense whereof, they can yield no better reason.

Covorruvius a famous Canonist, Couar: Tom. 1 part 2. cap. 7 par. 4. ^. 14. in
medio.
and reverend Popish Bishop, has these words: Nec me latet, etc. Neither am
I ignorant, that Saint Thomas affirms, after great deliberation, that the
bishop of Rome cannot with his dispensation, take away from Monks their
solemn vow of chastity: this notwithstanding, we must defend the first
opinion, least those things which are practiced every where, be utterly
overthrown.

Behold here (gentle Reader) that howsoever the popes opinion be, the same we
must defend of necessity: and the reason is added, because otherwise, popery
cannot consist. Fie upon that Religion, which must have such poor and beggarly
shifts for the maintenance thereof. Much like stuff I might recount of Popish
pardons and Purgatory, etc. but for those matters, I refer the Reader to my
Book, Entitled, The woeful cry of Rome.

CHAP. 2.
Containing a sound confutation of the Jesuits answer, framed to my
arguments against the Popes primacy.
THe Jesuit S. R. in the first Chapter against my first Article, is so
troubled to answer my reasons, grounds, and authorities, that one while he
affirms, In the first Article.
otherwhiles denies the selfsame thing, so mightily confounding both
himself and his Reader. In the downfall of Popery, I proved evidently, that
the Pope takes upon him to depose Kings and Emperors from their royal
thrones, and to translate their Empires and regalities at his good will and
pleasure. To which S. R. answeareth, that I belie the Pope: but let us hear
his own words.

S. R. I must needs tell him, Page 4
that he untruly avouches us to say, that the Pope is spiritually above all
powers and Potentates on earth.


T. B. I must needs tell you (May. Jesuit) that you untruly charge me with
untruth: yea, that you roundly control your self, and give your self the
lie. I prove it; first, because Bellarmine, Page 7
that Popish and Jesuitical Cardinal, to be truly fathered upon him (viz:)
that when any Prince, of a sheep is made an heretic, or swarueth from the
Romish religion, which is all one with you Papists; then the pope may drive him
away by excommunication, and withal command the people not to obey him, and
therefore deprive him of his dominion over his Subjects.

Zachary did justly depose Childrick King of France. Page 55


Henry the eight, Page 75
and Queen Elizabeth, and for better assurance hereof, Page 26
you tell us the same tale in another place. Page 17
But let all indifferent Readers hearken seriously, what the Popes own dear
Friar tells us, his words are set down in the Downfall of Popery, but S.
R. could not see them, because he knew not what to say to them: Sigebert. An.
1088.
thus does he write. Vt pace omnium, etc. To speak by the favor of all good
men, this sole nouelty. I will not say heresy, was not yet known in the
world, that his priests who makes an hypocrit to reign for the sins of the
people, should teach the people, that they owe no subjection to wicked Kings;
and that although they have taken the Oath of fealty, yet do they owe them no
allegiance, neither are perjured that think ill against the king: yea, he that
obeys the king, is this day reputed an excommunicate person: and he that
takes part against the king, is absolved from the crime of Injustice and
perjury. Thus writes Sigebertus a Learned popish Friar, Sigebert, i^ Chron.
An. 1088.
so lively painting out our very case this day in England, as if he were
living even now amongst us. Where we see, that the popes own Monks and friars
have thought as il of the popes dealings in former times, as we think of his
proceedings in these latter days; as also, that to absolve Subjects from
their allegiance, is not only a Nouelty, but even a flat Heresy. Let all
popish Recusants mark this point well, See my Anathomy
and defy the Pope and all his absolutions from their allegiance: for as the
secular popish Priests have truly written, Popery is this day inseparably
linked with Treason. But what says S. R. Let us hear him again.


S. R. And much less did we ever tell you, that the pope has temporal
superiority over all Princes on earth, Page 5
but teach the quite contrary. Page 6
Again, if Bell reply, that some Cannonists have affirmed the pope to be Lord
temporal over the world, let him challenge them, and not like a wise man
strike his next fellows the English papists, who maintain no such opinion.


T. B. I proved first out of the Popes own decrees, did. 22. can. omner.
that pope Nicholas affirmed Christ to have committed to S. Peter, and
consequently to himself, the right both of earthly and heavenly Empire.

Secondly, out of the popes gloss, that the Popes has both the Spiritual and
Temporal sword, and by right thereof, did translate the Empire. Thirdly out
of the popes decretals, that pope Boniface challenged the Royal right and
Authority of both swords, and made a flat decree for the confirmation thereof.
Fourthly, out of Appendix fuldensis, that the same pope Boniface the 8.
affirmed himself both Spiritual and Temporal Lord of the whole world, and
thereupon he required of Phillip king of France, that he would acknowledge his
Kingdom from him, which thing the King scorned to do. All this
notwithstanding, our Jesuit S. R. answers roundly, that I must challenge
them, and not strike their fellows. Marry sir, this is a short answer
indeed; but as much to the matter, as if you should say, your heart does pant
and bleed: But let us be content with this answer, seeing the silly
Jesuitical Friar, was not able to afford us any better.


S. R. English Papists attribute to the pope, Page 6
no other authority over Kings then spiritual, but do with tongue and heart,
and with the popes good liking confess, that our Sovereign Lord King James
has no superior on earth, in Temporal matters.


T. B. What a Masked, lying, and Traiterous Jesuit is this? We have heard
already, that the Pope deposed both King Henry the 8. and most Noble Queen
Elizabeth, and yet here the ly^ng impudent Jesuit tells us boldly without
blushing, (for his face is of brass) that King James has no superior on
earth. It is true indeed, but not in his sense. For I pray you Traitorous
Jesuits, are not earthly Kingdoms and Dominions, Temporal matters? It cannot
be denied. Had not King Henry the 8. and Queen Elizabeth of famous memory,
the same superiority in their Kingdoms and temporal affayrs, which our
gracious sovereign King James has? His Majesty will not deny it. But so it
is, that your Pope deposing them, (as you have told us,) was their superior as
you hold and teach. For doubtless, no inferior can depose his superior, and
consequently, your Pope by your profession, is superior to our King. This is
but your Hypocritical Cozenage; your cogging and lying, your Diabolical
Equivocation. If your power were correspondent to your will, his Majesty might
speedily loose his Crown and dignity. GOD save our Noble King, and confound
your Antichristian Pope.


S. R. Because Bellarmine teaches, that the Pope may excommunicate and depose
Princes for heresy; Page 7
Bell says, he may depose them at his pleasure: As if matters of Heresy,
were the Popes pleasure.


T. B. Here we have freely granted once again, that the pope by Popish
doctrine, may depose Princes for heresy: only this is denied, that he deposes
them at his pleasure. To which, I thus reply; First, that every heresy is
voluntary, and consequently, seeing many popes have been heretics, (as Pope
Adrian himself, Alphonsus de Castro, Melchior Canus, Vignerius, Nicolaus de
Lyra, and many others freely grant) it follows of necessity, that heresy is
the Popes pleasure. Secondly, that when I say, the pope takes upon him to
depose Princes at his pleasure; I mean nothing else, but that the pope will
depose Princes, whenever they refuse to embrace and believe, his late start
up Romish religion; that is to say, that doctrine, which is added to the old
Roman religion at his pleasure. For all that which the Church of England this
day rejects of the Romish religion, is added, to the old Romish religion at
the Popes pleasure. This subject is proved at large in my Motives and Survey.
Page 8
But our Jesuit urges further, that Bell disproueth himself in these words:
Secular Priests (says Bell) write plainly and resolutely, In my Anathomy, in
the Caveat to the Reader. and libr. 2. cap. 4. and cap. 9.
that the pope has no power to deprive Kings of their royal sceptars and
regalities, nor to give away their kingdoms to another: in which opinion
likewise the French Papists concur and iumpe with them. Item, the Seculars,
although they acknowledge the popes power supereminent in Spiritualibus, yet
do they disclaim from it in Temporalibus, when he takes upon him to depose
Kings from their Empires, and to translate their kingdoms. And least we
should think these few priests who write so, were no Papists, Bell himself
testifies, that they are the Popes dear vassals, and profess the same
Religion with other Papists. ^^pist. to the King.
By these words, our masked Jesuit, (as we see) would gladly impose upon me,
that I have slandered them and their Pope. First, because the secular priests
deny the Popes power in deposing Kings. Secondly, because I grant those
seculars to be papists, but this slander is easily returned to the Jesuit
himself. For first, our Jesuits hold, that the Pope may depose Kings from
their Dominions and regalities. Again, the secular priests are of a contrary
opinion. Neither for all that does it follow, that they are not papists: For
it is very usual and common to Papists, to dissent one from another in matters
of Religion. This is proved in my Motives. Our masked Jesuit spends the
whole chapters following; (viz) the second, third, and fourth, not in answering
me and my proofs, but in mere impertinent matters; of the opinion of Knox and
his fellow-ministers in Scotland, and such like stuff: wherefore omitting his
impertinent verosity in the said three Chapters, I come unto the fifth next
following the same.


CHAP. 3.
Containing a confutation of S. R. his answer to the proofs of my assumption.
S. R. POpe Gregory says Bell, Page 27
writing to the Emperor Mauritius, calls him soueraign Lord, and professes
himself subject to his command, and to owe him obedience. Whereupon Bell
infers, that for 600. years after Christ, popes lived in dutiful obedience
under Emperors.


T. B. I proved out of Pope Gregory's words, these three special points;
(viz) that Pope Gregory freely and willingly acknowledged the Emperor to be
his sovereign Lord. That he confesses himself to be the Emperors subject.
That he yielded loyal obedience to the Emperor, and for that respect, thought
himself bound in conscience to publish the Emperors law, although in some
part it seemed to disagree with Gods Law; and that forsooth, least he should
be found guilty of disloyalty toward his prince.


S. R. As for the place which Bell cites, Page 28
he speaks not there of the subjection, duty, or obedience of a subject to
his prince, but of a servant to his master, (as he had been to Mauritius
whiles they were both pruiate men) which himself plainly professes in the
beginning of his Letter in these words; In this suggestion I speak not as
Bishop, nor as subject, by reason of the commonwealth, but by private right of
my own, because you have been my Lord since that time when as yet you were
not Lord of all. And therefore by the foresaid words he means no otherwise,
then a loving servant does, when upon courtesy to his old master, though he
have left him, yet he still calls him master, and offers himself and his
service at his command.


T. B. My reply stands thus. First, that Pope Gregory or Gregory then Bishop
of Rome, spoke of that obedience which a subject owes to his prince. I prove
it; first, because he says, he rendered his obedience to the Emperor, and
concealed not what he thought on Gods behalf. Secondly, because a few lines
before, he tells the Emperor what preferment Christ had bestovved on him,
and what honor he had done unto him; among which this was one, that he had
committed his priests to his charge, Sacerdotes meos t^aemanui commisi, and tu
a meo seruitio milites tuos subtrahis? Christ will say unto you, says Gregory;
I have committed my priests unto your hands, and do you vvithdrawe your
soldiers from my service? By which words it is apparent, that Gregory yielded
his obedience, as he was a Bishop or priest; and it skilleth not, that he
says in the beginning of the Epistle, I speak not as Bishop, but in mine
own private right: the reason is evident, because the publishing of a wicked
Law, did not pertain to him as he was a Bishop (whose office is to preach
Gods word, and to administer his Sacraments) but as a private man subject unto
his prince: And therefore he answered in his own private right, that it was
not agreeable to Gods will, yet did he publish the same, to show his
allegiance to his soueraign.


S. R. Moreover, Page 30
Bell writes that Barbarians possessed all Italy from the year 471. until
Charles the great 801. how then says he here, that Popes lived under Emperors
until the year 603.


T. B. First, our Popes live not always at Rome, for they have many times
been driven from thence, and lived else where: and shall we thereupon conclude,
that therefore they ceased to be Popes? no papist will admit it.

Secondly, though the Aliens and Barbarians did a long time possess all Italy,
yet did the Bishops of Rome ever acknowledge their duty and allegiance unto
the Emperor.

Thirdly, when the Pope is dead, in the Interim while another is chosen, do
not the papists acknowledge the Popes supremacy? I ween they do. If S. R.
shall deny it, I will use another argument against him. Even so, when the
Emperors were not at Rome; yea, when there was no Christian Emperor at all,
the Bishops acknowledged the right of his sovereignty.

Fourthly, when I say, that Popes or Bishops of Rome lived in duetifull
subjection, to the Emperors of Rome, more then six hundred years after
Christ's sacred incarnation, every child knovveth the meaning; viz. that no
Bishop during that time, denied the Emperors supereminent power over him.

Lastly, the Jesuit to further his lying, has falsified both my words and my
meaning. Now, where I cited S. Ambrose, Euthymius, Hugo Cardinalis, Lyra,
Aquinas, and the popish gloss; our masked Jesuit answers roundly, though
impudently and vnclerkly, that all the said writers speak of superiority in
Temporal matters; but he can bring for himself, neither Scripture, Counsel,
Father, nor reason. We must accept and be content with his bare word: For to
the Pope and his Jesuits, no man may say, Curitafacis? Why do thou so? The
Popes own decrees tell us plainly, that though the Pope be never so wicked,
though he carry thousands of souls with himself headlong into hell; yet for
all that may no man take upon him to judge the Pope, unless he be an
Heretic: the reason is yielded by their own dear Doctor Gerson, did. 40.
cap. si papa. Gers. de pot. eccle. cons. 12. part. 3. Hugo Cardin. ps. 50.
because forsooth Christ has written in his thing, ( the King of Kings and
Lord of Lords) to whom no man may say, why dooest thou so. Of whose power it
is sacrilege to reason or dispute. To thee alone (says Cardinal Hugo) have I
sinned, because there is not any above me, but thy self alone, that has
power to punish me. For I am a King, and so besides thee (O God) there is none
above me. All the aforenamed writers teach the felfesame Doctrine, viz. that the
Pope or Bishop of Rome, is so far from having power to depose Kings and
Emperors, that he himself ought to be subject to them, and has no authority
at al to punish them.

What can be more plainly spoken? What Testimonies can be more manifest? What
Doctrine can be clearer? for if none but God be superior to the king; See my
profes in the downe-fall of popery.
if none but God can judge the King; if none but GOD can punnish the King, all
which, both Ancient Fathers and the Popes own dear Doctors affirm, as I
have often proved at large in the Downfall of Popery; then doubtless can not the
Pope depose the king; then can he not absolve his subjects from their
allegiance; then can he not translate Empires and Kingdoms, and bestow the
same at his own pleasure. This notwithstanding, the popes parasites to his
good liking, tell us another tale in these words. G^rs. de potest eccles.
consid. 12. part. 3
Sicut non est potestas nisi a Deo, sic nec aliqua temporalis vel
ecclesiastica, imperialis vel regalis, nisi a papa. As there is no power but of
God, so is there neither any temporal, nor Ecclesiastical, neither imperial
nor Regal, but of the Pope.


S. R. ONly I say, Page 33
that Iosue was no king, nor the Scripture affords any color of saying, that
any High Priest was deposed by any of the said Kings, except Abiath^r by
Solomon: and yet as it is gathered out of the fourth chapter 3. Reg, 2, verse. 35,
27 3 Reg. 4, 4 Cap. 2, 35
(where he is accounted priest in Salomons reign) Solomon deposed him not, but
only for a time confined him to his house, for his conspiracy with Adonias, and
so debarred him for executing his priestly function: And though he had deposed
him, he had not done it as King, but as Prophet, fulfilling (as the scripture
testifies) the prophecy against the house of Hely, from whence Abiathar
descended.


T. B. AFter I had proved at large by many authorities, that Kings have
supereminent power over Bishops, not Bishops over Kings; I added for a
confirmation thereof, that the good Kings, Iosue, David, Solomon, Iehosophat,
Ezechias and Josias, knew ^ight well, that they had authority above all the
priests; and therefore they took upon them, not only to command and control
the priests, but also to depose them from their places and functions: yea,
even the Highpriests themselves, when their deserts did so require. Which
point I avouched to be proved at large, in my Golden balance of trial.

To this discourse S. R. answers four things.

First, that Iosue was no king.

Secondly, that no High Priest was deposed by any of the said Kings.

Thirdly, that Abiathar the High Priest, was not deposed by king Solomon, but
only confined to his house.

Fourthly, that if king Solomon had deposed Abiathar, yet had he not done it as
king, but as Prophet.

My reply is this. First, that to deny Iosue to be king, is a vain cavil, and
argues lack of matter in our Jesuits answer: for Iosue had the thing,
though not the name: he was the Civil independent Magistrate, and had the
chief and supereminent power over the Isralites his Subjects; as Moses whom he
succeeded had, Number. 27, 17
and the other Kings, David, Solomon, Iosaphat, Ezekias, and Josias. In regard
whereof, he was and may be truly reckoned, with and among the other kings.
But when good reasons cannot be had, such Beggarly cauils must supply the want.

Secondly, that it is a most notorious slander against the holy Scripture, and
consequently a notable blasphemy against God himself; to say, and desperately
to avouch in a printed Book, that no High Priest was deposed by any of the
said Kings. These are the express words of holy writ. Eiecit ergo Solomon
Abiathar, 2 Reg. 2, 27
vt non esset sacerdos domini. Therefore Solomon cast out or deposed Abiathar
(the high Priest) that he should not be the Priest of the Lord. Again holy writ
has these express words. Et Sadoc sacerdote posuit pro Abiathar, and the
King put Sadoc the Priest, vbi supra. verse 35.
in the room of Abiathar.

Lo the holy scripture tells us two things most plainly and expressly; and
that is done even in that Latin Vulga^a editio, to which the Pope has tied all
his Jesuits and Iesuited Popelings. The one, that King Solomon deposed
Abiathar the High Priest. The other, that he placed Sadoc the priest in
Abiathars room.

Thirdly, that it is most absurdly avouched of our Jesuit, that Solomon only
confined Abiathar to his house for a time. Concerning this deposition and
casting out of Abiathar from his place, and putting Sadoc the priest in his
room, our Jesuit is at his wits end what to say: and why I pray you? For this
end doubtless, because hence it is proved evidently, and by a necessary
consecution, that Kings both have and may depose priests, even the hie priests,
and greatest priests of all. But it can never be proved out of the holy
scriptures, that any Priest deposed any King; no, not the meanest king in all
the world. The Jesuit contradicts himself mightily. For first he says,
that none of the Kings deposed any priest, Secondly, that Solomon deposed
Abiathar. Thirdly, that Abiathar was not deposed, but only for a time confined
to his own house. What hors^e would not break his neck, to hear this sweet
melody? The scripture tells us, 3 Reg. 2, v. 27. and v. 35.
that king Solomon deposed Abiathar, and for confirmation hereof, the same
scripture adds, that Sadoc the priest, was set in his room.

Fourthly, to say as the Jesuit does, that Solomon deposed Abiathar not as
King, but as prophet, is to speak at randon, and to make of scripture a nose
of wax, for no one Text from the first of Genesis to the last of the
Apocalipse, does justify this fond and sottish answer of the masked Jesuit;
albeit, I know this to be true, that he wanted not the advice and counsel of
his best learned Brethren. Whosoever desires further in sight into this
subject, and of the sovereignty of kings over priests and Bishops, which are
their subjects; if he peruse my Golden balance of trial, I hope in God, it
will satisfy his desire.


CHAP. 4.
Containing a confutation of the sixth Chapter of the masked Jesuit.
THe Jesuit in his sixth Chapter and first article, is wholly occupied in
impertinent matters, and foolish demands, not once touching directly ought
that I have written: but let us hear him once again, and so proceed to
another Chapter.

S. R. Because the question is not, Page 38
upon what cause Kings and Emperors humbled themselves to the Popes, but
whether they did or no: And because they have so done (as Bell confesses)
Catholics infer the Pope to be their superior. Unless perhaps Bell think
blind zeal to disanul every fact or gift; and so say, the Jews persecuted
not the Church, because they did it upon blind zeal; nor our Catholic
ancestors gave any livings to Churches, because they did it upon blind zeal
(as Bell must think) for maintenance of Papistry.


T. B. O shameless and impudent Jesuit? Is the question only what was done?
Where is thy wit? Where is thy faith? Where is thy Religion? Does not your
Angellicall Doctor Aquinas teach you, that all moral Acts have their
specification of the end and final cause? Does not Scotus, Ockamus, Gabriel,
Josephus, Durandus, and all the rest approve the same Doctrine? How say thou
then, O blind Jesuit, that the question is not upon what cause kings humbled
themselves to the Popes, but whether they did or no, o Tempora! o Mores! Does
not alms (otherwise a commendable act) degenerate into sin, when it is given
for vain glory? And this only, because the end and cause for which it is
given, is naught and unlawful? Does not Christ's Apostle tell thee, that
whatsoever is not of faith is sin? Rom 14, 23 1 cor. 10, 31
That whatsoever is done, ought to be done to to the glory of God? Alas, alas,
every child that has but learned the rudiments of Christianity, can roundly
tell our Jesuit, that we must not so much respect what is done, as what ought
of right to be done. We may not reason as our Jesuit Parsons does (for he is
the man) the thing was don, therefore lawfully done. Kings yielded supreme
authority to the Pope, therefore they did it lawfuly. By that kind of Logic
or rather Legierdemain, all theftes, all robberies, all Rebellions, all
mischiefs under heaven, may be justified and defended. You Jesuits, and your
Iesuited pope-lings, do take part with the Pope against your anointed
Sovereign; and so by this new (no Divinity) the pope is our King and
Superior. For thus you reason, because Kings have so done, the Pope is their
Superior. For the question is not, upon whose ground they did so, but whether
they did so or no. For by your Theology, if the thing be done, it is lawfully
done, but what? Bell perhaps thinks, that blind zeal dissanulleth every
fact, and so neither the Jews persecuted the Church, nor our papists gave any
living to the Church, because they did it (as Bell must think) upon blind
zeal. O monster of al Monsters? o Child of perdition? o son of the Devil?
Bell says not, that blind zeal disanulleth any act. Bell says not, that
papists gave no livings to the Church. Bell says not, that the Jews did not
persecute the Church. No, no, it is the devil in our Jesuit, that mooues him
thus falsely to slander Bell. It is one thing to say, the papists gave liuinges
to the Church upon a blind zeal; another thing to say, they gave nothing at
all. The former I say, the latter I deny: and therefore, when you papists
labor to prove the popes sovereignty over Kings, because some Kings, have
acknowledged it, upon a blind zeal; I answer, that your proof is of no force,
not for that such things have not bin done; but because they were not done, as
they should, and ought to have bin done. You papists have submitted your selves
to be the Popes, and the King of Spaines subjects, as Story alleged for
himself at his arraignment; and consequently by Popish Divinity, you may take
up arms against king James our most gracious Sovereign, and be no Traitors
in so doing. For as you write with your pens, so do you believe in your
hearts, and practice in your lives. Your late Treason of Gunne-powder, to say
nothing of all the rest, makes it evident to the world. God save our Noble King
James, and deliver him from your bloody hands: for though you speak well of
him with your tongue, yet do ye wish in your hearts to do him the greatest
wrong.


S. R. THat Emperors have acknowledged the Popes superiority, Page 37
Bell himself confesses, where he says, that some Christian Kings and
Emperors, have upon a blind zeal^e humbled themselves to the Pope; yea,
(which is more) have yielded up their sovereign rightes unto him. And shall not
the Pope be Superior unto them, who have humbled themselves, and yielded
their Sovereignty to him?


T. B. This is my reply. First, See the second chapt. for this point.
that one may yield up some part of his Sovereignty to another, and for all
that remain and still continue that others Superior. The case is clear, it
needs no proof. If the Jesuit will not yield to this, he must perforce
yield to that, which will confound both him and the Pope, viz: that the pope is
superior to the Emperor, even in Temporalibus. The reason is evident, because
the Pope challenges the Temporal sovereign right of Italy, and the free
donation of the Emperor.

Secondly, if every one that humbles himself to another, becomes by and by
that others inferior; then doubtless, the priest that is confessary to the
Pope, becomes the popes superior: For to answer, that the Pope does not
humble himself to his ghostly father, is not only absurd, but flat against
the Popes religion: And yet our Jesuit disputes thus. Catholics argue, that
Kings and Emperors have acknowledged Popes their superiors. Page 37
This Bell grants, in confessing their humiliation to Popes, which is never
done but to superiors. Alas, alas, I pity the Jesuits folly. For first, in
Popery, every king humbles himself to a silly priest: Ergo, the priest is the
kings superior.

Again, every papist humbles himself, to Images* dead bones, and especially
to the wood of the cross; yea, sometimes to the bones of an Heretic, as I
have proved in the Article of traditions. Ergo, Images, dead bones, wood, etc.
are superiors to the Papists. Thirdly, the Papists are commanded to humble
themselves to that, which the Priest holds over his head at Mass; which by
their Doctrine, if it lack consecration, (as it may many ways fall out,) is
but a bare piece of bread. Ergo a piece of Bakers bread, is their superior.
Fourthly, Pope Siluester the second sometime a Monk, a Frenchman borne,
Gilbertus by name, humbled himself to the devil, and yielded homage to him,
so long as the devil accomplished his desire. This story is set down at large
in my Survey of Popery. Now, that the devil of hell was and is his superior,
both to this Pope and to many others, I admit your argument with all applause.

Fifthly, kings do often humble themselves to their subjects: Ergo, their
subjects are their superiors. Sixthly, the Emperor humbles himself many times,
even unto those that owe duty to him: Ergo his inferiors, 2 Samuel 15, 5. 6
become his superiors. Lastly, Absalom when any man came near unto him and did
him obeisance, put forth his hand, and took him, and kissed him, and on this
manner did Absalom to al Israel, that came to the King for Judgment. Ergo,
every man in Israel, was Absaloms superior. But the contrary is the truth,
and our Jesuit a most notorious liar.


CHAP. 5.
Containing the confutation of the seventh Chapter of S. R. that masked Jesuit.
S. R. VIctoria says, Page 42
that the glossers of the Law have given this Dominion to the Pope, they
being poor in substance and learning. Here insteede of proofs, I find an
untruth. For neither does Victoria in these words speak of many things, but
only of Dominion, meaning Temporal over the whole world; neither yet does
he call it absurd.


T. B. I answer; first, that I cited Victorias words truly after my wonted
manner, never adding or changing one word in my Author.

Secondly, that I added these words ( and these Lordly Titles) not in the
Latin, but in the English; not simply, but with a parenthesis; that the
Reader might know, I did it for explication sake: which thing is usual, not
only to our Jesuit, but to all other writers.

Thirdly, In my Motives.
Victoria (as I have expressly showed elsewhere) speaks of many Lordly titles,
ascribed to the Pope. But our Jesuit grants enough, (viz:) the dominion over
the whole world, and all power both Ecclesiastical and temporal on earth. For
if the Pope have all, Kings can have none.

Fourthly, master Gerson, a man of high esteem in the Popish church, says
plainly, (as our Jesuit grants) and I affirm; that all power both in heaven
and on earth, which Christ himself had, is given to the Pope. What needs
more? This is flat blasphemy against the son of God.

Fifthly, Page 44
our Jesuit denies in one page, that which he grants in another,
concerning the Popes power. The sound of the Bell, Page 47
makes him forget himself.


Chapter. 6.
Containing the confutation of the 8. and 9. chapters of the Jesuit S. R.
touching eight steps of the Popes ladder.
S. R. COnstantine (says Bell) at his departure did as the popes Parasites
tell us, Page 49
give large gifts to the Pope, even his whole power, dominion and territories,
both in Rome, Italy, and all the West. Behold a man having a Wolf by the care,
which he dare neither hold, nor yet let go. For, The first step.
if he grant, that Constantine gave the Pope his whole power and dominion,
over Rome, Italy, and all the West, he must needs grant, that the Pope of
right has Imperial power over all the west: if he deny it, he shows not how
Constantines departure, was a step for the Pope to climb to higher authority.


T. B. If Robert Parsons that Traiterous Jesuit, who dares not tell his name,
but hydeth it under S. R. be a wolf indeed, as I suppose he is; then
doubtless I have him by the ears, legs, nose, and all, and so fast bound
with linkes and chains of iron, as the Pope and all his Iesuited Vassals, are
never able to deliver him out of my hands. For albeit Constantine that most
Noble Emperor, gave not the Pope his whole power and Dominion over Rome, Italy,
and all the West, nor any part thereof; yet does it follow consequently, that
his departure from Rome to Constantinople, was the first step to Popish falsely
supposed Primacie. The reason is evident, because the Emperor being far off
at Constantinople in the East, the false pretended donation from Constantine
was holden and believed for a truth. The multitude in the western parts, being
too too credulous, gave credit to false reports, and rashly and inconsiderately
believed, that the Emperor had made a decree, that the Pope and his successors
should wear the crown of pure gold and precious stones which he had given him
from off his own head. So that lying, and cogging, was the first step of the
Popes exalting. For, who would not give honor to him, who was so honored of
the King? Although in truth the Popes rising, was nothing else but a mere
leasing.

I have proved soundly out of famous Popish Writers, that Constantines
pretended donation was a mere fable, and that Bellarmine himself, stands in
doubt thereof, and therefore for his last refuge appealeth to prescription.


S. R. Bellarmine affirms, that the Pope has two just Titles to hold his
estate. The first, is the free gift of Princes, whereof he can show
Authentical evidences; the other, prescription of time.


T. B. I answer, that for the first Title, though some of the Popes parasites
affirm it, yet do learned and wise Papists, Laurentius Valla, Raphael
Volateranus, Paulus Cathalanus, Nicolaus Cusanus, and many others, repute it a
mere Fable and flat leasing. And for the second, that where the Original is
unjust, and the possession holden Mala fide, prescription will not serve the
turn. Howsoever this be, Constantines departure was the first step to Popish
primacy. For, if he had tarried still at Rome, such feyned and falsely
pretended Tytles, could never have taken place.


S. R. Besides that, not Constantines departure, Page 49
but his gift should have been made the step.


T. B. Not the gift good Sir, which was none indeed, yet falsely pretended to
be; but his departure from Rome to Constantinople. For if Constantine had made
his abode still at Rome, the Popes parasites durst never have given him such
feyned Tytles.


S. R. The second step (says Bell) was the fall of the Empire in the West, The
2. step. Page. 51
in the year 471. and the vacancie thereof for almost 330. years. But how
this fall and vacancy of the Empire, was a step for Popes to climb; neither he
shows, nor any can imagine; especially, if (as he writes straight after) in
this vacancy of the Empire, Rome was spoiled with fire and sword, and the walls
thrown down to the ground, and all Italy possessed of the Barbares until
Carolus Magnus, who was the first Emperor after the vacancy. If in this
vacancy, Rome was destroyed, and all Italy possessed by Barbares, (who for the
most part were heathens or Heretics) how could it be a step for the Pope to
climb, and not rather to fall?


T. B. Our Jesuit seems to be wise in his own conceit, thinking nothing
to be true, which his grossum caput cannot apprehend. The great difficulty is
this; how Rome being spoiled with fire and sword, and all Italy possessed of
Aliens and Barbarians, could be a step for the Pope to climb and not to
fall.

I answer, Mark. 3, 24
that when a kingdom is divided against it self, it cannot long continue; and
consequently, the Visigothes ruling in Spain, the Aliens in Gutan and Gascoyn,
the Frenchmen in the residue of France, the Vandales in Affricke, the Saxons in
Britain, the Ostrogothes in Hungary, the Hecules and Turdilinges in Italy
and in the City of Rome; the Emperor remaining in the East, was not able to
defend his imperial right in the West, but by little and little was
dispossessed thereof. Then the Popes friends possessing the Empire by his good
help and furtherance, and willing to requite one good turn with another,
sought by all means possible to advance and exalt the Pope. And so the fall of
the Empire, was a step for the Pope to climb up to his Lordly primacy. This may
be made manifest, by the daily practice of the Pope and his Jesuits. For the
Popes and Jesuits never cease to stir up foreign potentates to invade the
Empire of great Britain, and the kingdom of Ireland; and that only for this
end and purpose, that the fall thereof may tend to their advancement. Insomuch,
that they have promised great gifts, to such as would employ their labors, for
the overthrow and fall of this Noble kingdom, which thing is proved at large,
in my Anatomy of Popish Tyrany.


S. R. Bell before said, Page 52
Popes lived in duetifull obedience under Emperors, until the 603. how does he
now say, that they climb to Tyranny from the year 471.


T. B. I answer; first, In the downfall. page, 3.
that our Jesuit belyeth me in wresting my words, which is his usual manner.
For my words are not (under Emperors) but (to the Emperors.) Again, I said
not (in duetifull obedience,) but (in subjection.) Now, every child knows,
that there is great difference between under and to. As also, between
obedience and subjection. For our English Jesuits, are our Kings subjects
against their will, and yet they live not in obedience to him. Secondly, many
live in external obedience to the King, as do our English Jesuits, in
acknowledging the Kings superiority over them; who for all that seek to climb
up on high, by poisoning and murdering his Majesty, if God would permit.
Thirdly, to live in obedience or subjection to Emperors, is nothing else in my
sense and true meaning; but to confess and freely grant, that of right they
ought to be subject to Christian Emperors, as to their lawful Sovereigns.
Which subjection our Jesuit can never prove any Pope to have denied, for the
space of 600. years and odd. Here I cannot but tell our Jesuit of his
arrogant sauciness, joined with a notorious lie. For though he say more
boldly then wisely, that Bell wrongly says, the Empire to have bin dissolved
in the year 471. yet is it a mere truth, Page 54
and the Jesuit denying it, shows himself to be ignorant in Chronology.


S. R. The third step (says Bell) was the voluntary Charter which Constantine
the Emperor of Constantinople made to Pope Benedist the second (viz;) The 3.
step.
that whosoever the Clergy, Page 52
people, and Roman soldiers, should choose to be Bishop, all men should
believe him to be the true Vicar of Christ, without any tarrying for any
authority of the Emperor of Constantinople, or the Deputy of Italy, as the
custom and manner was ever before that day. Thus (says he) writes Platina.
And the Popes almost for the space of 700. years could have no jurisdiction,
nor be reputed true Bishops of Rome, without the Letters pattentes of the
Emperor. Behold, the impudency of this fellow. Platina says, Vt antea fieri
consueuerat. Bell affirms him to say; It was the custom ever before that
day: Where is in Platina the word ( Ever?) Where, till that day? Nay, does not
Platina say, that Pelagius the second was created iniussupri^cipis, without
command of the Prince? That Silnerius was made pope, at the command of Theodate
a Gothish king? Did not Bell himself tell us, that Barbarians ruled in Rome,
and possessed all Italy for 330. years, until Charles the great? How then
could it be, that before Benet the second, never popes could have jurisdiction,
and be accounted true bishops of Rome, without letters patents of Emperors;
who were professed enemies, and made wars upon most of the Barbarians?


T. B. If the Jesuit Parsons (for he is the libeller, and Author of this lying
and slanderous pamphlet) were not at a Non plus, and unable truly to answer me,
Platina in vita Bened. secund.
he would never for shame utter so many lies and notorious untruths. For
first, Platina is wholly on my side, affirming resolutely, that none could be
made bishop of Rome, without the letters pattents of the Emperor, until the
time of Benedict the 2.

Secondly, where our impudent Jesuit laboreth to make his tale good, because
Pelagius the second was created without command of the Prince, he passes
impudency it self. I^ vita Pelagii. 2
These are Platina his own words; Haec autem vna fuit causa, quare Pelagius
iniussuprincipis, tam pontifex creatus sit, cum extra obsessam abhoste vrbe,
mitti quispiam non posset. Nil. n. tum a clero in eligendo pontifice actu^
erat, nisi eius electione^ imper. approbasset. This was one cause, why Pelagius
was the^ made Pope without the command of the Prince, because none could go
to the Prince, the enemy besiedging the City, for nothing done by the Clergy
at that time was in force, unless the Emperor had approved their election.
Lo, Gentle Reader, our Jesuit would prove, that the choice of the B. of Rome
was good, without the voice of the Emperor, because Pelagius was created
without command of the Prince; and he alleges Platina for his Author. What a
fond fellow is this? Platina first tells him plainly, that no election of
any Pope was good, without the Letters pattents of the Emperor. He tells him
secondly, that Pelagius was made Pope without the command of the Prince. That
is true: But what follows; Forsooth, that he was so made for necessity sake,
and (as all men know) necessity has no law. But what necessity was it? We
have heard already out of Platina; because the City was besieged of the enemy,
so as none could have passage to the Emperor. The Jesuit therefore is a fond
disputer, bringing that for him, which makes wholly against him, and
confounds both himself, and his pope everlastingly.

Thirdly, where foolish and Traitorous Jesuit Parsons, labors to defend the
Pope by the creation of Siluerius, because he was created at the command of
Theodate a Gothish King; it makes as much against him, Platini in vita
Siluerii.
as his former sottish, and senseless affirmation. For after that Platina has
told us that Siluerius was made Bishop or Pope, at the command of Theodate
a Gothish King, he by and by adds these words. Cum antea non regum, sed
imperatorum autoritas, interveniret, whereas in former times, not the Authority
of Kings, but of Emperors was required. Mark these words, Gentle Reader, and
detest the deceitful dealing of all Traiterous and cozening Jesuits. The
Jesuit Parsons says, Page 53
that Platina speaks of the time since Pope Virgillius: But we see, that
Platina speaks of the time before Siluerius; which Siluerius was before
Vigiius. Yea, Pelagius the second was also after Vigilius: and so our Jesuit
is turned vpside-downe, and beaten with his own rod. To the fourth step, which
was the deposition of Childericke King of France, The 4. step.
by Pope Zachary. Our Jesuit answers roundly, but nothing clarkly, that the
deposition was most just) which foolish and shameful doctrine I deem
sufficiently confuted, by the bare recital thereof;) especially, seeing I have
else where written at large of this subject.


S. R. The fifth step (says Bell) was the decay of the Empire The 5. step.
in the East, about the year 756. Page 57
at what time Pipin being called into Italy by Pope Steven 2. to deliver Rome
from the siege of the Lombards; and over coming, gave up the government of
Italy into the Popes hands. Here Bell hudleth up store of untruths, that the
Empire decayed in the East, about the year 756. for it decayed long before,
about the year 635. under the Heretical Emperor Heraclius.


T. B. Here our traytorous Jesuit, full of nothing but Rebellion, wind, vanity
and lying, cries out with open mouth against untruths, when all untruths
proceed from his own pen. Nothing in this step of the Popes ladder, is
worthy of examination, save that only which concerns the time of the decay of
the Empire in the East. I say, as I truly said before, that the decay of the
Empire in the East, was about the year 756. I add this word ( about) not
precisely meaning any one certain year. For Historiographers and
Chronographers, do sildome or never iumpe in the certain or precise time,
Page 57.
or year. Our Jesuit says, that it decayed long before, about the year 635.
We both have and use, this word ( about) as it may seem, for that end and
purpose which I have already named.

Mark now the proof, and then judge who is the Liar. Matthaeus Palmerius, in
his Chronology in the year 756. has these express words: An. 756.
Deficiente sedulo in Orient Romanorum imperio, and imperatore Christianos
persequente, Stephanus pontifex imperiales titulos ac dignitates Francorum
Regibus concessit, and Pipinum suosque tantum a stirpe successores in eorum
reges confirmauit; caeteris vero omnibus interdixit. When the Roman Empire in
the East was indeed dissolved, and the Emperor persecuted the Christians, then
Pope Stephen granted the imperial tytles and dignities to the French K. and
confirmed Pipin and his lineall successors only to be their kings, excluding
all the rest. Thus writes that famous Historiographer; affirming directly,
that the Empire in the East, was dissolved in the year 756. as I do hold.
Johannes Nauclerus has these express words; Anno salutis 800. in die
natiuitatis Dom* prohabita matura deliberatione, Nautle. genesis 27. page 678
Leo pontifex Rom considerans imperatores Constantinopolitanas agree ad nomen
tueri, and ob eam rem vrbe^ Romam atque Italiam magnis calamitatibus pressam,
simulque retr^ctans errores Graecorum frequentes, in obedientiam, and
occidentale imporium quasi pro derelicto a Graecis haebitum; erigione vero
perpendens Carolum Francorum regem potentissimum and optime de Ecclesia
meritum, qui ecclesiam ab oppressione Desiderij regis Longobardorum liberauit,
sicut pater eius Pipinus ab Aistulpho, sic est avus Martellus ^ Gothis and
Saracenis; da propter inter missarum solemnia eo die in Basilica S. Petri
pontifex populi Romani consensu Carolumimperatorem Romanorum declarat, a^
diadema^e coronat ter acclamante populo Romano. In the year of our salvation
800. upon the day of the Nativity of our Lord, after mature deliberation, Leo
Bishop of Rome, considering that the Emperors of Constantinople could hardly
defend that name, and that for that cause the city of Rome and Italy was
subject to great calamities, and withal correcting the frequent errors and
disobedience, and that the Greeks did make no reckoning of the West Empire; on
the other side pondering that Charles the French King was most mighty, and had
deserved well of the Church, and had delivered the Church from the oppression
of Desi^erius King of the Lombards, as his father Pipin from Aistulphus, and
his graundfather Martellus from the Goths and Sarazes: Therefore in the time
of great solemnity that day in Saint Peter's Church, the Bishop by the consent
of the people of Rome, declares Charles to be the Emperor of Rome, and
crowns him with the Diadem, the people of Rome making a threefold acclamation
thereunto. Thus writes this famous Papist, a man of high esteem in the Church
of Rome.

Sigebertus a popish Monk, iumpeth with Nauclerus, in the year: So does
Arnoldus Pontacus Bnrdegatensis, iumpe with Matthaeus Palmerius in the year
756. and they all differ greatly from our Jesuits supputation, 635. That is to
say; no less then 121. years. Wherefore, I wish the Reader to believe him at
leisure, and never to give further credit to him, then his profes deserve.

Here by the way let us observe seriously, that Leo the bishop of Rome with the
consent of the people of Rome, took roundly, (though unchristianly) upon him,
to depose the Emperor, and to put Charles king of France in his place. And thus
every child may see, how the decay of the East Empire, was a step to Popish
primacy: for the decay thereof, brought him into the room, who protected the
pope in all his Lordly pontificality.


S. R. The sixth step Bell makes the translation of the Empire, The 6. step.
Page 64
by Pope Leo the third from the Greeks to the Frenchmen or Germans, in the
person of Charles the great. This translation is rather a notorious act of the
popes superiority over Emperors, then a step thereunto.


T. B. I willingly grant good Sir, that it was a notorious act of your Pope;
but yet (as we use to say) he is a notorious murderer, a notorious Theee, a
notorious Traitor. For as Sigibert the Popes dear Friar tells us, the
Romans, Sigebert. in Chron. An. 801.
who a long time had in mind and affection revolted from the Emperor of
Constantinople, seeing now a fit occasion offered them, (because a Woman did
govern them, her son the Emperor being made blind,) did with one assent
sound out imperial acclamations to King Charles, calling him Caesar, and
Augustus, and crowning him by the hand of Leo the Pope; yea, they did collaud
his Son Pipin, and made him King of Italy. Thus writes Friar Sigebert. Out
of whose words I observe these points of great consequence.

First, that 800. years after Christ's sacred birth the Bishops of Rome were
subject to the Emperor, as their own dear Monk Sigebert tells them; and as
we have heard already, Pope Gregory acknowledged his fealty to Mauritius the
Emperor, in the year 603.

Secondly, that the Pope and people of Rome endeavored a long time, to shake off
the yoke of obedience unto the Emperor, and in the year 801. put the same in
Execution.

Thirdly, that the Translation of the Empire employed flat Treason, both in the
Pope and all his Romish Popelings. For as Friar Sigebert tells us plainly,
they surrendered up the right of their sovereign to another man. Bellarm. tom
1. col. 831
And hence comes it, that the Iesuitical Cardinal Bellarmine appealeth to
the law of prescription, affirming Titles gotten by robbery to be lawful by
that means. And indeed by stealth and robbery, it may well be^eeme a Jesuit,
to justify Popish late start-vp regality.


S. R. The seventh step (says Bell) was the constitution of the The 7 step.
7. electors of the future Emperor, but this was rather an act of superiority
in the Pope over Emperors, then a step unto it.


T. B. Every thing with our Jesuit, is an act of the Popes superiority; but
yet by his favor, not such a notorious act, as is the notorious act of murder
or rebellion, Phil. Berg. page 277 Auton. 3. partit. 22. cap. 5. 13
as is already proved. For Gregory the fifth being a German borne, and a
near kinsman of Otho the Emperor at that time, did by his favor and free
grant, appoint seven electors of the Empire for ever. (viz:) the Archbyshoppe
of Mentz, the Archbishop of Treuerse, the Archbishop of Colen, the Marquis of
Brandenburgh, the County Palatine, the Duke of Saxony, and the King of Bohemia.
This goodly constitution was enacted by the Pope and Emperor, (being both of
them not only Germans but also kinsmen) that the Empire might be
established in their posterity, and their blood thereby advanced for ever.


S. R. Seeing this constitution has ever since been inuiolably observed, Page
70
and the Emperors so elected accounted as true Emperors throughout all
Christendom; a sign it is, that Christians think the Pope has Authority to
appoint Electours, who may choose what Emperor they please, by Authority given
them from the Pope.


T. B. I answer; first, that many things are holden for good generally, which
for all that are indeed counterfeite and false. Two most notable marks we
have hereof. The one in Pope John the woman, as is proved at large in my
Survey. The other in the Acts of Pope Stephanus and Pope Romanus, as I have
proved in my Book of Motives.

Secondly, that the Emperor has not his authority from the Pope but from God.
Per me reges regnant. Prou. 8, 15 16. Romans 13, 1
By me kings reign, and princes decree Justice. By me princes rule, and the
Nobles, and all the Judges of the earth. Let every one be subject unto higher
powers; for there is no power but of God, and the powers that be, are ordained
of GOD. Therefore the Emperor cannot have his power from the Pope, unless he
be (as some impudently have written) both God and man.

Thirdly, the constitution for the electors of the Emperor, was not
established so much by the Pope, as by the authority of the Emperor, the Popes
near kinsman, as is already proved.

Fourthly, from the time of Otho the third, when Henricus had stirred up a
great contention about his succession, and all Germany was divided into parts;
it was provided by public authority, that there should be seven electors
appointed, who should from time to time elect a king and place him in the
Empire, and that the Pope should set the imperial crown upon his head. And
so the insoluble so supposed Dilemma, is fully answered.


S. R. The eight and highest step of this Ladder (says Bell) The 8. step.
did reach up even to the highest heaven, and to the veric throne of our Lord
Jesus. Because (says he) they challenge the Royal right of both swords,
throughout the Christian world.


T. B. I say so, and I proved it in the Downfall of popery; neither is any
Jesuit in the world able, truly to confute the same.


S. R. But first I deny, that the Pope as Pope, challenges royal right of
either sword.


T. B. Appendix fuldensis has these words; Hic papa constitutionem fecerat,
etc. This Pope (he speaks of Boniface the eight) made a constitution, in
which he affirmed himself to be both spiritual and temporal Lord in the
whole world. Note this point well.
Whereupon he would have had Phillip King of France, to have acknowledged his
kingdom from him; which thing the King scorned to do. Yea, the constitution is
expressly related in the Popes Extrauagant, which begins thus; Vnam
sanctum, Bonifac. 8 In extr.
set down in the sixth book of the Decretals. And as Gratianus reports, Pope
Nicolas taught the same Doctrine. How impudent therefore is our fund Jesuit,
did. 22: can omnes. lib: 7. epist: ^
which denies such a manifest truth? But let us hear, what their famous Pope
Gregory says. Si ego servus eorum in morte Longobardorum me miscere valuissem,
hodie Longobardorum, gens nec regem, nec duces, nec con^ites haberet, atque in
summa confusione esset deuisa. Sed quia deu^ times, in mortem cuiuslibet
hominis me miscere formido. If I their servant would have entangled my self
in the death of the Lombardes, the Nation of the Lombardes, should this day
neither have had a King, nor Dukes, nor Counties, but should have been in the
greatest confusion. But because I fear GOD, I am affraide to intrude my self
into the death of any man. Lo Gentle Reader, for the space of 600. years and
odd, the Bishops of Rome durst not deal in absoluing subjects from their
alegeance, nor in murdering of Kings and Emperors. And why I pray you? This
their own dear Saint, Gregory (surnamed the great) tells us, because he
feared God, and consequently, the late Bishops of Rome dare embrue their hearts
and hands in the blood of Gods anointed, because they have not the fear of GOD
before their eyes. Yea, the Popes own Monk (as we have heard out of Sigebert
already) pronounced it flat Heresy, Sigebert. An. 1088. fol. 117. K
to absolve subjects from the allegiance due unto their Sovereign. And what
says their Pontaus Burdegalensis? these are his words; Hic primus caepit
francos iuramento fidlitatis absoeluere. This Pope ( Zachary) was the first,
that absolved the Frenchmen from the oath of their fealty and allegiance.

This Pope lived about the year of our Lord God 752. so that it was never
heard of among the Frenchmen for the space of 750. Chron. An: 1088
years, that the Bishop of Rome took upon him to absolve subjects from their
oath and allegiance to their Sovereign. And Sigebertus proceeds further, and
reproves it as a Nouelty, or rather Heresy, lately crept into the Church. And
who I pray you can do this, but Christ Jesus, as true God, so true man? Does
not he challenge the right, at the least of the spiritual sword, that takes
upon him to absolve subjects from the oath of their allegiance? Nay, does he
not take unto him the right of both swords? For absolution I am well assured,
is even by popish Doctrine, an act of spiritual jurisdiction; and to serve the
prince, is a secular and mere civil act? Antoninus sometime Arch-byshop of
Florence, Anton: 3: partit. 22: cap: 5. 8.
and a Popish cannonized Saint, tells us without blushing, that the Pope is
Christ's Vicar on earth, and has equal power with God almighty. These are his
express words; Cum aute^ Vicarius Christi si papa, etc. For seeing the Po. is
the Vicar of Christ, none can lawfully withdraw himself from his obedience, as
none can lawfully withdraw himself from Gods obedience. And as Christ received
of his father, the Dukedom and scepter of the Gentiles arising of Israel, over
all principality and power, and above every thing that has being, that to him
every knee may bend; even so Christ has committed most full power, to Peter
and his successors. Thus writes our holy Arch-byshop Antoninus. Out of whose
words I observe first, that as Christ is the the head over his Church, so is
the Pope or Bishop of Rome head of the same.

Secondly, that as Christ received of God the Dukedom over all power, so has
the Pope received the same power of Christ.

Thirdly, that as Christ has power above and over every thing, whatsoever has
any being; so has the Pope.

Fourthly, that as to Christ every knee must be bowed, so also to the Pope.

Now, if this be not to challenge the royal right of both swords, let the
indifferent Reader judge. Neither is it to the purpose, to say that he
challenges not Royal right. For I ween, our Jesuit will not deny Royal
right unto Christ, who is Lord of heaven and earth, true God, true priest, and
true King. And yet does Antoninus ascribe and yield unto the pope, all power
over all that has any being, in as ample and large manner as Christ himself
has it. Yea, that Omnia genna, al knees must bow to the pope, And the usual
practice of papists do confirm the same, even to the popes good liking. For he
must be carried upon men's shoulders, and men kneeling, must kiss the shoo of
his foot, or else not be thought to love Christ or S. Peter. This my self
being an eyewitness thereof, am able to testify. When Gregory the thirteenth
of that name, came to the English College in Rome, all the Students were
appointed by the Jesuit then master of the College, to come two after two
before him, sitting in a ^haire, and to kneel down on both knees in a great
chamber, three several times, before they offered to kiss his foot. And while
they kissed his foot (or the shoo of his foot) one after another, the rest
followed as it were in procession, falling down three times as is already said.
But let us hear the Verdict of Friar Austen de Ancona. The Pope (says he) as
he that is the Vicar of the son of the heavenly Emperor, In summam, page 152
has Universal jurisdiction over al kingdoms and Empires. And is not this
power over both swords? Is not this to challenge power proper to God alone? I
ween it is, let others judge.


S. R. But the words which Bell most urges are, Page 78.
that the Pope can make something of nothing. For says he, it is a thing
propper to God alone, to make something of nothing, in all cases and at all
times.


T. B. I say so good Jesuit, neither are you able with the help of all your
Jesuitical brood (whom for all that I confess to be very learned) to prove
the contrary while the world stands.


S. R. But besides that the gloss neither says, Page 78
that the pope can make De nihilo aliquid, but, de nullo aliquid, neither yet
in all cases, and at al times, as Bell adds; the foresaid words are taken our
of Justinian. C. de rei vxor. act. lib. 1. where the Emperor says, that
because he can make to be accounted a stipulation, where none is, much more he
can an insufficient stipulation to be sufficient. And the like authority in
humane contractes touching spiritual matters, the gloss attributes to the
Pope. And this he meant, when he said, the Pope can de nullo facere aliquid,
of no contract make one. Which Bell would apply to creation, and making
creatures of nothing, as God made the world.


T. B. For Christ's sake gentle Reader, be here an indifferent judge between
our Jesuit and me. Which if thou shall truly affirm; thou can not but
clearly behold, that our Jesuit is at his wits end, what to say or write in
defense of late start-vp Popery. His Doctrine smells of nothing, but of
wind, The first lie.
vanity, and leasinges. His first lie is this? That the gloss says not, de
nihilo, but, de nullo.

The second lie is this; The 2. lie.
that I affirm the gloss to say, in all cases, and at all times.

The third lie is this; The 3. lie.
that the words by me alleged are taken out of Justinian.

The 4. The 4. lie.
lie is this, that the gloss speaks of Civil contracts. Lies abundant for
one short sentence. And why does our Jesuit thus shamefully heap lies upon
lies? Doubtless because he now sees the halter about the Popes neck, and the
Pope ready for his treachery to be hanged on the Gallows; as one that is
convicted, by the flat Testimony of his own sworn Vassals, of most notorious
blasphemy against the son of God.

For first, to make of nothing something, is undoubtedly propper to the blessed
Trinity, the Father, the son, and the Holy Ghost, three in distinction of
persons, and one in Unity of substance. And consequently, if the Pope can make
something of nothing, he must perforce be another God. This consequence our
Jesuit and his Pope dare not admit in verbal phrase, although they practice it
in real act; and that the truth may evidently appear, because it is a matter
of great consequence, I will examine every parcel of the Jesuits answer,
severally by it self.


S. R. The gloss says not, the Pope can make de nihilo aliquid, but, de nullo
aliquid.


T. B. This is a most notorious lie, and I refer my self for the truth
hereof to al indifferent Readers, that have the popes decretals, Glos. lib. 1.
decr^t^tit. 7. ca. 3.
and can read and understand the same. And if the gloss say not de nihilo, as
I affirm, but de nullo, as our Jesuit says; let me be discredited for ever.
Oh sweet Jesus? Who could ever think that the Papists would be so impudent,
as to deny the express words of the text. Nay, I will prove it by the
circumstances, to the Jesuits everlasting shame and confusion.

For first, if the assertion were borrowed from the civil law, and meant of
civil contracts, pacts, or stipulations, as our Jesuit impudently avouches,
(but against his own conscience, if he have any left) then should it not be
aliquid, but aliquod; as every mean Gramarian, can and will testify with me.

Again, the gloss says, the Pope can change the Nature of things, by
applying the substance of one thing to another. But doubtless, when the
Emperor makes that to be a civil contract, which before was none; he does
not apply the substance of one thing to another, but only commands his
subjects to accept that for a law, which before was none.

Thirdly, no mortal man can apply the substance of one thing to another, and
so change the nature thereof. Although the Pope take upon him, to change
bread into Christ's body. And therefore, when the gloss adds immediately;
(and of nothing he can make something,) he means of that divine power, which
is propper to GOD alone. Like as Antoninus affirmed, (as is already proved)
that the Pope does challenge power, super omne quodcunque est, over every thing
whatsoever is and has any being; and consequently, over God himself. And so,
whether he be Antichrist or no, I refer it to the judgment of the Reader;
for if the Pope be above God, Anton. 3. page tit. 22: cap: 5. 8.
I dare not take upon my self to be his judge. Neither will it serve to say,
that Saint Antoninus does not affirm the Pope to be above God. For though he
say not so expressly, yet does he affirm so much virtually; when he tells
us, that he is above every thing that has being. For God has not only a
being, but such a supereminent being, as surpasses all intelligence, and is
the cause of the being of all creatures.


S. R. Neither yet in all cases, and at all times, as Bell adds.


T. B. If our Jesuit were not intrinsecally as it were made of lying, he would
never for shame delight so much therein. These are my words in my Book; In
the downfall of popery. Page 16
and yet the truth is, that as man can in some cases at some time make one
thing of another; so in all cases, at all times, to make something of nothing,
is proper to God alone. Yet the lying and impudent Jesuit, not able to
encounter me, nor to gainesay my proofs and reasons, laboreth with might and
maine to disgrace me with the Reader, and to get the victory with flat lying.
Our slanderous and railing Jesuit, reports my words in this manner; for
says Bell) it is a thing proper to God, to make something of nothing in all
cases, and at al times. So then, all that I said was this; (viz) That though
man can at sometime in some cases, make one thing of another; yet to make of
nothing something, is proper to GOD alone, neither is man able to perform the
same.


S. R. The foresaid words are taken out of Justinian, where the Emperor says,
that because he can make to be accounted a stipulation, where none is, much
more he can an insufficient stipulation to be sufficient.


T. B. The foresaid words cannot be found in Justinian: it is a lie with a
witness. The Popish Religion cannot be defended, but with falsehood, deceit, and
leasings. The residue is confuted already.


S. R. Which Bell would apply to creation, and the making of Creatures of
nothing, as God made the world.


T. B. I both would and have applied it so in very deed; and I have proved it
so sufficiently, as the Jesuit cannot tell what to say to the same: and
therefore did he bethink him, to betake himself to his accustomed art of Lyeng.


The second Article;
Touching the Mass.
Chapter first.
Of the real presence of Christ's body in the popish Mass.
S. R. THough saint Thomas teach, that Christ's quantity is also in the
Sacrament; yet affirms he it not as a point of faith. In like manner
Bellarmine, in the place which Bell cites, teaches (and truly) that Christ's
quantity is in the Sacrament, but not with Bells addition, As a point of Faith.


T. B. Here I perceive, I have an Eele by the tail; Anguis est, elabitur. Do
our Papists teach that, which they believe not to be true? And do they that in
the Sacrifice of their most holy so supposed Mass? Who would have believed it,
if our Jesuit Parsons had not said it? But good Sir, tell me this? Do you
teach that of your real presence, in your holy Mass, which ye believe not to
be true? Then doubtless your silly subjects, your Iesuited Papists, have need
to look to your fingers. Then must they remember Christ's rule; Mas. 7, 15
Beware of false prophets, which come to you in sheep clothing, but inwardly
are ravening Wolves. And if you teach us as ye believe, then must your doctrine
be an article of your faith. Again; two Popes, Vrbanus the fourth, and
Innocentius the fifth have confirmed Aquinas his Doctrine for Authentical; and
strictly commanded to admit and receive all that he has written, for a mere
undoubted truth. It follows therefore by a necessary consecution, that the
quantity of Christ's body to be in the Popish Mass, is an article of popish
faith.


S. R. Let us see therefore, Page 92
how Bell disproueth it: Forsooth, because it implies contradiction for a
greater body as Christ's is, to be contained in a lesser, as in a Cake. Behold
the foundation of Bells faith. We bring Christ's express words, that what he
gave to his Apostles at his last supper, was his body given, and his blood
shed, for remission of sins.


T. B. Our Jesuit flies quite from my argument (because it strikes him dead)
and labors to prove that Christ's body is in the Sacrament. But all in
vain: For first, that is not now in question. Again, he is to answer me, and
not to wander about impertinent matters. Thirdly, I have answered all that he
obiecteth here, as also all that can be objected on their behalf, in my Survey
of Popery many years ago: to which no Papist durst ever frame an answer unto
this day. Fourthly, I willingly grant, the holy bread in the blessed Eucharist
to be Christ's body, and the holy wine to be his blood; yet not really and
substantially, as the Papists hold; but mystically and sacramentally, according
to the truth of Gods word. And I retort the Jesuits reason out of Christ's
words, against himself. For, if Christ had not meant, that his body was then
given sacramentally, and not really; he would have said (which shall be given)
not which is given, in the Present tense. I prove it; because, if Christ's body
had then been given really, and his blood then shed really for the sins of
the world; no other Sacrifice, atonement, satisfaction, or reconciliation had
been needful on our behalf: which how absurd it is, every child can
discern. Christ's meaning therefore is this; This is my body sacramentally, Or
this is the sacrament of my body and blood: but not, This is my natural body,
and my real blood. He that desires the proof hereof at large, I refer him to
my Survey of Popery.


S. R. But to come to Bells reason: Page 95
How proves he it to be contradiction, for a greater body to be contained
in a less?


T. B. Here our Jesuit bestirreth himself to prove if it would be, that
Christ's body is not both contained and not contained in their Sacrament; but
all in vain. For his proofs (if they were true, as they be falfe) would only
conclude this, and nothing else; viz. that God is able to do it.


S. R. For albeit it be contradiction for a greater body occupying a place
proportionate to it greatness, to be contained in a less, (for so it should
both be contained and not contained in the less,) yet no contradiction at all
it is, for a greater body retayning it greatness, to be so coarcted by Gods
omnipotency, that it fill a place far less, then is naturally due or
proportionate to it greatness. For in this case it follows not, that it should
both be contained, and not contained in the lesser body, (as in the former
case,) but contained only. And thus we say, has Christ disposed of his body
in the Sacrament. We prove it by many ways.


T. B. I answer, with all subjection and due reverence unto Gods omnipotent
power, that God cannot do any thing which either implies contradiction in it
self, or imperfection in God. Not because there is any defect in GOD himself,
(God forbid we should so think) but because there is defect in the thing that
should so be done. By reason of the former, God cannot make a dead man
remaining dead to be living; albeit he can raise a dead man to life again. So
neither can God make a blind man remaining blind to see, nor a deaf man
remaining deaf to hear; nor a dumb man remaining dumb to speak; albeit he
can restore seeing to the blind, hearing to the deaf, and speech to the
dumb. By reason of the latter, God can neither make another God, nor any
creature equal to himself, nor commit any sin, nor fail in his promise,
nor repent of any thing that he has done. Now, to coarct a great body so,
retaining it greatness still, that it may be contained in a less body, implies
flat contradiction; not for the reason which our Jesuit brings, but because
it is against the intrinsecall reason and the very Essence of quantity, which
is to have parte^ extra partem, one part without another. And consequently, our
Jesuits supposed coarctation, implies flat contradiction. For it is impossible
to conceive or understand, how a body eight cubits long, and eight cubits
broad, remaining so long and so broad, having every part without other, to be
contained of another body, being but seven cubits long, and seven cubits broad.
It implies as flat contradiction, as to make a deaf man remaining deaf to
hear. It is therefore impossible to all power, both create and uncreate; to
make Christ's body to be contained in a little round cake, in the Popish Mass.


S. R. First, Page 96.
because Christ's body in his nativity, opened not his Virgin-mothers womb.
Ergo, then it occupied not a room, naturally proportionate to the greatness.
The consequence is evident, and the antecedent is proved by many fathers.


T. B. I deny both the consequence, and the antecedent. The consequence,
because if it were as the Jesuit supposes, (which I deny) yet should Christ's
body have occupied a room, naturally proportionate to the greatness thereof.
And our Jesuit denying it, unawares affirms all Children to be unnaturally
in their mothers wombes. The antecedent, because Christ opened his mothers
womb as other children do.

For first, Luke 2, 23 Exodus 13, 2 Number. 8, 15 Heb. 2, 17 and 4, 15. Survey page
474.
Christ was presented to the Lord according to the Law, as the Holy Ghost does
record; yet the Law required such presentation, only of them, which opened
their mother womb. Secondly, Christ was made like unto his Brethren in all
things, sin only excepted. Thirdly, the ancient Fathers, Tertullian, Origin,
Ambrose, and Hierome, are of the same opinion. Their express words are set
down at large in my Survey of Popery. And it will not serve the turn, to say
as some do, that though Christ was borne of a Virgin, yet should she have been
corrupted, and no Virgin, if her womb had been opened in the birth of Christ.

For first, not only holy writ, but the ancient Fathers also, and other
learned Deuines, are to be heard before all Physicians, in the mysteries of our
faith.

Secondly, Fernetius makes nothing for the Papists, as who speaks only of
the dilatation of the Matrice, and that after the natural and ordinary course.

Thirdly, albeit it be most true, (as all holy Writers with uniform assent do
contest) that Christ's holy Mother the blessed Virgin Mary, was ever a pure
Virgin, before his birth, in his birth, and after his birth; yet it is likewise
true, Aquin. 22, q. 52. ar. 1. ad. 3
that her womb was opened in his birth, as is already proved. For as their
own Angellicall D. says, (whose Doctrine sundry Popes one after another have
confirmed) Virginity is not lost by fraction of the signacle, but by corruption
of the mind, and purpose of the will.

Saint Augustine has a learned and large discourse, concerning this only
point of Doctrine; wherein he shows gravely, Aug. lib: 1 de ciuit. dei cap. 18
that the apertion of the matrice, may be done, sundry ways; (viz:) either by
Art in the way of medicine, or by violence of the corrupter, or by other
accidental means; and that Virginity this notwithstanding, may be free from
all corruption. Much more might Christ's most holy mothers womb, be opened by
his divine power, and nevertheless her most sacred womb, still remain
inviolable.


S. R. God can by his omnipotency bring a Cammell through a Needles eye, Page 99
as well as a rich man into heaven; but he can bring a rich man to heaven
keeping his riches: Ergo, a Cammell, keeping his greatness through a Needles eye.


T. B. I answer first, that this sillogisme is unfitly couched, and hangs
together, as York and foul Sutton.

Secondly, that the consequence is so against all rules of Logic, as the
framer thereof, is worthy to be hissed out of all schoooles.

Thirdly, Mat. 19, 24
the Gospel says indeed, it is easier for a Cammell to pass through the eye
of a Needle, then for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of heaven. But no
Prophet, no Apostle, no Epistle, no Gospel says, as our Jesuit does. For as
these words, (keeping his riches) are the Scripture of our saucy Popeling,
but not the holy scripture; so also are these words, (keeping his greatness,)
the invention of his own brain. And therefore I must salute him with these words
of the holy Apostle; though we, Galat. 1, 8.
or an Angel from heaven preach any other Gospel to you, then that which we
have preached to you, let him be accursed.

Fourthly, that by the word ( Camel) may be understood a cable rope, and not a
beast. For the Greek word is indifferent to them both. Vide tu Theophil: in
humo locum:
Cauinius obseruerh out of the Thalmudists, that it is a prouerbial phrase, by
which Christ does insinuate unto us, that rich men do not without great
difficulty enter into heaven.

Fifthly, that a Camel keeping his greatness still, cannot possibly by any power
pass through a Needles eye, the Needle still keeping the former quantity. The
reason is evident, because it implies flat contradiction, as is already
proved. Not for that there is any defect in the omnipotency of God, (who is
able to do more, then man's wit can comprehend) but because there is repugnance
in the thing that should be done.

Sixthly, that God can dilate the eye of a Needle so, as a Camel may pass
through the same, and that without any prejudice to the natural quantity of
his body.


S. R. GOD made the furnace of Babylon, Page 99
though never so hot, Dan. 3, 35
not to heat, yea to refresh the three children. Why then can he not make a
great body, to occupy but a small room? For to occupy place is an effect and
accident of quantity, as to heat, is of heat.


T. B. I thus reply; first, Scripture is to our Jesuit as a nose of wax. He
adds to it, and takes away from it, as seems good in his own conceit.
For, that fire did refresh the 3. Haebrewes, no Scripture does affirm.

Secondly, whether to occupy place be an effect and accident of quantity, or
no, because it is diversely holden of diverse learned men, and nothing pertinent
to our controversy, transeat for the present. For, whether occupying of place
be intrinsecall or extrinsecall to quantity, it skilleth not for this matter,
and this question now in hand. The reason is evident, because to have partem
extrapartem one part without another, is by uniform assent of al learned
Writers, as well of Philosophers as of Divines, so intrinsecall and essential
unto quantity, as it can by no power, neither create, nor uncreate, be taken
away from it. And this is the cause, not occupation of place, why christ's body
being greater, cannot be contained in the Popish round cake.

This was my former reason, and it stands still untouched, neither can all the
Jesuits in the world, ever yield a sound answer to the same. For if they
could, it should now have been performed. Because our Jesuit has had the
best advice and help, that any of them could possibly make him. Here by the
way I m^st tell our Jesuit of another monster in the Popish host or Cake,
(viz:) of their accidents without subjects. Which their position is against all
Philosophy, all reason, all learning. It is a constant axiom generally
received in all Schools: Accidentis esse est inesse. The essence and being of
an accident, is the inherence and being in the subject. No Text in the law of
Moses; no sentence in the Prophet; no word in the Psalms; no affirmation out
of the Gospel; no Testimony out of the Epistles of the Apostles; no verdict
out of the holy Fathers; no note out of the Ancient Counsels can ever be
found; which once makes mention of accidents without subjects. This may
suffice for answer to sundry other impertinent bibble babbles, which our
Jesuit powers out by ladle fuls in this Chapter.


CHAP. 2.
Containing a confutation of the Jesuits answer, to my reasons against the
real presence.
S. R. CAietane affirmed, as Josephus Angles (says Bell) reports; that there
is no Text that conuinceth the Reader, to understand these words, this is my
body, properly. But Bell greatly wrongeth both Caietan and Angles, in changing
the word Heretic into Reader.


T. B. Let us hear Josephus Angles speak for himself, and then shall we know
Bells dealing in that behalf. ^o. Ang. in 4 sent. part. ^^ page 144.
Thus does he write. Exconclusione posita and probationibus, quae a pre^ a
Castro affermiter, coligiter, cante legendum esse Caietanum dicente, non
apparere ex euangelio aliquod, coactinum, quo possimus conuincere haereticos ad
intelligenda verba haec, hoc est corpus meum proprie^: sed tenendu^ hoc esse
solum authoritate Ecclesiae, quae ita verba consecrationis declarat. We gather
out of the conclusion and proofs which father a Castro brings, that Caietane
must be read warily, who says, that there appears not any coactiue thing in
the Gospel, by which we may convince Heretics to understand these words,
This is my body, properly. But we must hold this to be only of the authority
of the Church, which so declares the words of consecration. Thus writes
Josephus Angles, out of whose words, I note first, that Caietane who was a
learned man, a Domincan Friar, and sometime Cardinal of Rome, must be read
warily. Secondly, the cause for which he must be warily read, and that
consists of these two heads. First, that no Text in the whole Gospel can be
produced, which conuinceth these words ( This is my Body) to be understood
properly.

Marry sir, it is high time indeed, to read this Cardinal warily, for if his
words were well known and marked of all Papists, I ween they would forsake the
Pope, thick and threefold; If these words ( this is my body) be not understood
properly, as Cardinal Caietane tells us; then doubtless farewell the Popish
real presence: then down with the Pope, then down with Popish Mass and at
all. Secondly, Cardinal Caietane tells us plainly, that it is not the
scripture, but the authority of the Pope or Church (which is all one in effect)
that causes us so to understand these words ( this is my body.) If this
Cardinal durst have said all he thought against the Popes doctrine, it
seems, he would have told us more. Now, let the Reader Judge, whether I have
wronged Caietan and Angles, or the Jesuit has wronged me.


S. R. Aquinas (says Bell) affirms constantly, Page 20
corpus christi non esse in pluribus locis simul, secundum proprias
dimensiones. That Christ's body is not in many places at once, according to the
proper dimensions thereof. Whose assertion (says Bell) is my flat position.


T. B. It is most true, that both Aquinas teaches so, and that Bell flatly
holds the same Doctrine. And it is also true, that Aquinas elsewhere
contradicts himself, as God willing, shall by and by appear.


S. R. But Bell herein, 1. contradicts himself. 2. belyeth S. Thomas. 3.
understands him not.


T. B. Let us hear his dispute, And mark it well.


S. R. He contradicts himself. For before he said, Aquinas hold constantly
as an Article of the Christian faith, that the true body of Christ is truly
and really in the Sacrifice of the mass; and now he says, that he affirms
constantly an assertion, which is Bells flat position to the contrary. How can
Aquinas hold constantly two contradictorie points?


T. B. Mark gentle Reader, for Christ's sake, and then shall thou see, that
our Jesuit has nothing in him but falsehood, lying, and Hypocrisy. The Jesuit
will needs have me to contradict my self, because Aquinas contradicts
himself. What equity? What charity? What reason is in this man? I charge them
in my Motives and elsewhere, with manifold dissentions and contradictions:
plainly telling them, that if they would be consonant to their writings, then
we and they should soon agree. But our Jesuit cannot endure, to hear
himself and his fellows confounded by their own writings.

Now let us see, who understands Aquinas aright. Aquinas holds, that
Christ's body is in the popish cake, and withal, that one body cannot be in two
places at once. Our Jesuit would reconcile this apparent contradiction thus.
Aquinas meaning says he, is plain and evident. For he thinks Christ's own
dimensions to be the cause of his being in that place, where he is naturally;
Page 102
and the dimensions of the body which is Transubstantiated, the cause of his
being, where he is Sacramentally. Here our Jesuit first takes upon him, to
tell what men think; which is proper to God alone. Then he feyneth a
distinction, of a double being of Christ's body. For if we once take away
feyning, Popery will soon come to mourning.

Christ's own dimensions, says our Jesuit, are the cause of Christ's natural
being; but the dimensions of the bread changed and Transubstantiated into
Christ's body, (O horrible blasphemy,) are the cause of Christ's sacramental
being. The Papists hold generally, that the accidents of bread in their
consecrated host or cake, remain there without a subject. But here we have
another tale: viz. That they are in Christ's body. Most miserable is that
Doctrine, which must be maintained with such beggarly shifts. Well, I will
prove with one insoluble argument, that Christ's body cannot be in many places
at once. Vnum est indiuisum, in se, and diuisum a quocunque alio. One, (as all
learned men do grant,) is that which is undivided in it self, and divided from
every other thing. An argument unstable.
But, if Christ's body can be in many places at once, it is both divided in it
self, and undivided from other things; Ergo, it neither is nor can be in many
places at once. When our Jesuit shall truly answer to this argument, he will
deserve a Cardinals hat; and I verily think, that the Pope for the time
being, will willingly bestow it on him. Marry withal I add this; that I
would not for the Popedom, be bound too fast till that time. Here for the
better clearing of this controversy, I will propound an Objection, which
seems to make for the Papists, at least in Popish sense and meaning.

The Objection.
Two adequate bodies may be in one place at once, and yet neither the place be
divided into two places, nor yet the bodies transformed or confounded into one
body: Ergo, a simili, one body may be in two places at once (as Christ's body in
many thousand Altars at popish Mass,) and yet neither the body divided into
two places, neither the two places contracted into one.




T. B. When you (O Jesuit) shall be able to prove the Antecedent, which will
be ad Calendas Graecas, when men use to clip Pigges and Rats) I will yield unto
you.


S. R. First, in Christ's nativity, two bodies were in one place at once,
because Christ's body opened not his mothers womb.

2 Again, Christ arose out of the sepulcher, the stone not being roled away.

3. Christ came to his disciples when the doors were shut, and so both his
body, and the wood of the door, were in one place at once: Ergo, two bodies
may be in one place at once: and consequently, one body may be in two places
at once.


T. B. Concerning the opening of the Virgins womb, I have answered
sufficiently already. For the rolling away of the stone from the Sepulcher; I
answer, that the Angel of God had done it away before Christ's resurrection,
Mat. 28, 6.
and had brought it to the mouth of the sepulcher again. What need many
words? the answer of the Angel to the women, does fully determine this
question. He is not here (says the Angel) for he is risen as he said. Lo,
Christ's body was not in the Sepulcher, because Christ was risen: so does the
Angel reason. But Gods Angel must go to the school again, to learn to
frame his argument in better manner, if one body can be in two places at once.
And why? for the women might have said to the Angel. What if he be risen? Yet
may his body be here still in the grave. For one body may be in two places at
once. But the Angel reasoned thus. He is risen, therefore he cannot be here. Or
he not here, because, he is risen. These are the words of the Ang. oukestin
oode, egerthe gar, kathoos eipe. He is not here, for he is risen, Mat. 28, 6.
as he said. Where I observe, first the assertion simply in it self. Secondly,
the cause and reason of the same assertion. The assertion is this; Christ is
not in the Sepulcher. The reason hereof is this; because Christ is risen.

Now then, since Christ cannot be in the sepulcher, because he is risen; it
follows of necessity, that either the Angel of God inspired with Gods holy
spirit, made a very foolish and frivolous argument (which to affirm is void of
all Christianity) or else, that Christ's body cannot be in two places at once;
which is that indeed, which I intend to prove. For, if it were not as I say;
the women might have replied effectually against the Angel thus; albeit Christ
be risen as you say, yet may he be also in the sepulcher still; for he may be
in two places at once. But the Angel of GOD reputing it a thing clear and
evident, that Christ's body could not be in two places at one and the
selfsame time; concluded directly and forcibly (as he thought) Christ's
absence in the sepulcher, because he was risen again.


S. R. Bell cites Durand, whom he says holds the same opinion. True it is,
that Durand thinks the quantity of Christ's body not to be in the Eucharist,
yet he both affirms and proves the substance of his body to be there.


T. B. Durand holds indeed, that Christ body is in the Eucharist; yet after
another manner, then the Pope and his Jesuits do at this day? for he
affirms, that the matter of bread remains still. Nevertheless, as we
here see, Durand denies the quantity of Christ's body in the Popish Mass;
and even so do I with Durand, and with other learned Papists. The Jesuit
confesses here enough, to his utter shame and confusion. (viz:) That their
doctrine is so foolish and unsound, that the best learned of them cannot agree
therein.


S. R. Bell alleges Saint Austen, Page 103
that Christ as man is in some place of heaven, for the manner of a true body.
Again, that his body must be in one place. Item, that he cannot be at once in
the Sun, the Moon, and on the cross, according to his coporall presence. In
all which places, he speaks of the natural manner of bodies being in place.


T. B. This is a short answer, but as unsound as short. Let the Reader peruse
my Book, ( the Downfall of Popery) and he shall see the Jesuits folly. Aug.
epist. 57. tom. 2
Saint Austen writing to Durandus, has these words; cu^ ergo sit corpus aliqua
substantia etc. When therefore any substance is a body, the quantity thereof
is in the magnitude of the bigness; but the health or soundness is not the
quantity, but the quality thereof. The quantity therefore of the body could not
attain that, which the quality could. For the parts being so distant, which
could not be together, because all severally keep their spaces of places, the
less, lesser places; and the great, greater places; there could not be in all
the places severally, the whole, or so much; but there is a larger quantity in
the larger parts, a shorter in shorter parts, and in no part so much as in the
whole. For if spaces of places be taken from bodies, they shall be in no place;
and because they shall be in no place, neither shall they have any being at
all* Out of these words of this holy father, and most grave writer, I observe,
first that every quantitatiue body, has one part distant from another.

Secondly, that the same parts occupy distinct places.

Thirdly, that two quantities cannot be in the same place, and at and the same
time.

Fourthly, that a greater quantity must have a greater place, and that it
cannot be contained in the lesser.

Fifthly, that no one part can contain so much, as the whole.

Sixthly, that when bodies are without places, they then loose their Natures and
beings. I therefore conclude, that it is impossible for Christ's Natural body,
to be contained in a little round Popish cake, and his whole body in every
little part thereof. All which for all that, the Papists this day, most
impudently and blasphemously do avouch


CHAP. 3.
Containing the confutation of the Jesuits third Chapter, of the second
article.
S. R. NOw let us hear Bells, Page 108
or rather the devils Arguments against Mass.


T. B. Our Jesuit before he come to my Arguments, has many fond and
impertinent digressions of the Popish mass; for answer whereunto, I refer
the Reader to my Survey of Popery; where he shall find answered, whatsoever
can be said in that behalf. It is now impertinent, and nothing to the question
in hand, to stand upon those points. But our Jesuit will not aim at the
mark, because he knows, he cannot give the vpshot. Now in Gods holy name, I
defy both the Jesuit and the devil, speaking (as it may seem) within him;
and heartily pray God (if it be his holy will) to forgive him, Credidi propter
quod loquutus sum. I defend nothing, (God is my witness) but that which as I
am persuaded in my conscience, is the truth.


S. R. The Apostle tells us, that Christ rising from the dead, dies no more;
the Papists tell us, that Christ dies every day, nay a thousand times a day
in the daily sacrifice of their mass. But better might we say, that Bells tale
of the Papists contains a thousand untruths.


T. B. Go on Jesuit; plead for thy self, what thou can; delight not in
lying, for the truth in time will preuail. If your Doctrine be true, Christ
dies a thousand times, nay ten thousand thousand times a day in your most
blasphemous Mass.


S. R. Bell will wring the contrary out of Bellarmine: as water out of a flint.
First, because he grants, that a sacrafice implies intrinsecally the
consumption of the thing sacrificed. Page 10^
But this is answered out of Bellar. teaching that Christ has two kinds of
being; to wit, naturally, and sacramentally. And the consumption of his
sacramental being in the Mass, is no killing, because is is not by real
separating his soul and body, but only by consuming the Sacramental forms,
in which he was sacramentally.


T. B. We see here freely granted to us, that a sacrifice implies
intrinsecally the consumption of the thing sacrificed. Let us hold this while
we have it, or else our Jesuit will out of hand take it from us. Then let us
add this unto it; viz: That no living thing after it be consumed, can still
have life in it. And consequently, either Christ is not truly sacrificed in the
Popish Mass, (contrary to the doctrine of the Pope and his Jesuits) or else
he is there consumed a thousand times a day, and so often killed in the Mass.
For to be consumed is more then to be killed. The case is clear, every child
may perceive it. But what? has our Jesuit no evasion? Yes forsooth, but it is
a very silly one. Christ (says he) has a double kind of being; a being
natural, and a being Sacramental. According to the latter, he dies in the
sacrifice of the Mass; but according to the former, he still lives in heaven.

What a wonderment is this? Christ is both living and dead at once; both
sacrificed and not sacrificed at once; both consumed and not consumed at once.
If these be not flat contradiction, my skill is naught, let the reader judge.
Now, methinkes this is in deed and in plain terms, the Jesuits answer; and
consequently, the best answer that all the Papists in Europe can make; for he
has learned and heard the best advise of them all, (viz:) that Christ in the
Popish Mass, both is consumed and dies; yet not really, but Sacramentally.
All which my self will most willingly admit, and agree unto. But our Papists
will say and unsay. They say that Christ is in their Mass, truly and really
sacrificed, and not only Sacramentally. For otherwise, we should agree to
them, and they to us. And then must they needs say, that he is really, not
only sacramentally sacrificed in their Mass; and consequently, that he is
killed and consumed in the same really.


S. R. Again, Bellarmine (says Bell) tells us, Page 110.
that Christ's body and blood are offered truly and properly in the Mass. That
a true and real sacrifice, requires true and real killing, seeing the
Essence of the sacrifice consists in killing. But this proof relyeth only,
upon Bells false translating the word, ( Quando, seeing,) which he should have
translated, ( When.)


T. B. Here our Jesuit would have his Reader believe, that Bell has falsely
translated Bellarmine. And why, I pray you? Because forsooth (says he) Bell
has translated, (seeing) the Essence of the sacrifice) for (when the Essence
of the Sacrifice.) Let us examine this point to the bottom. First, that Quando
does as well signify seeing, as when, I refer my self to all skillful
Grammarians.

Secondly, that it is so taken in Bellarmine, Tom. 2. col. 1063. A.
I prove by the circumstances of the Text. These are Bellarmines express
words; Denique vel in missa fit vera and realis Christi mactatio and eccisio,
vel non fit. Si non fit, non est verum and rea^e sacrificium missa.
Sacrificium. n. Verum and reale, veram and realem occisione^ exiuit, quando in
occisione ponitur essentia sacrificij. Si autem fit, ergo verum erit dicere, a
sacerdotibus Chrstianis vere and realiter christum accidi; at hac sacrilegium,
non sacrificium esse videtur. Finally, there is in the Mass either a true and
real killing of Christ, or there is not. If there be not, neither is the Mass
a true and real sacrifice. For, a true and real Sacrifice, requires a true
and real killing, seeing the Essence of Sacrifice consists in killing.
Again, Bellarmine has these words; Per consecrasionem, res quae ofertur, ad
veram, realem, and externam mutatione^ and destructionem ordinatur, Vbi supra.
D.
quod erat necessarium, ad rationem sacrificij. By consecration the thing that
is offered, is ordained to true, real, and external mutation and destruction,
as being necessary for the Essence of a Sacrifice. Again, thus; Nam oper
consecrationem, etc. For by consecration Christ's body receives the form of
meat, Vbi supra. D.
and meat is ordained to be eaten, and so to mutation and destruction. Again,
in these words; Neque obstat, quod corpus Christi nullam in se laesionem
patiatur, neque esse suum natural amittat, Vbi supra. D.
cum manducatur eucharista. Nam amittit esse sacramentale, and proinde desinit
realiter esse in altari, desinit esse cibus sensibilis. Neither is it any
hindrance, that Christ's body receives no hurt in it self, neither loses it
natural being, when the Eucharist is eaten. For it loses it Sacramental
being, and therefore it cease to be really on the Altar, it cease to be
sensible meat. Out of these words of Cardinal Bellarmine, I note first, that
a true and real Sacrifice, requires a true and real killing. Bellarmine
proves it, because otherwise the Mass should not be a true and real
Sacrifice. He adds the reason, because the Essence of a Sacrifice consists
in killing.

Secondly, that by consideration the thing which is offered, is ordained to
true, real, and external destruction, as a thing needful to the Essence of a
Sacrifice; and consequently, that if Christ's body be really in the Mass, it
must be really killed or destroyed.

Thirdly, that Christ's body suffers no hurt in the Mass, because only it
loses the Sacramental being, in ceasing to be really on the Altar. These
observations being well marked, it will appear as clear as the Sun shining
at noonday: that Bellarmine grants the Essence of every true and real
Sacrifice, to consist in killing or destruction. Tom. 2. col. 1063.
And therefore does he grant freely, that Christ is killed in the Mass
sacramentally, though not really. Christ's body (says he) although it suffer
no hurt in it self, neither lose it natural being; when the Eucharist is
eaten; yet it loses it sacramental being, and cease to be really on the
Popish Altar. But every one knows, that when any thing loses the being or
life, the^ it is killed and destroyed. In regard hereof, Bellarmine (as is
already proved) affirms resolutely, that either there is a real killing in
the Mass, or else no Sacrifice there at all. Marry he expounds this real
killing in the Mass, to be nothing else indeed, but the sacramental
destruction of Christ's body in the Eucharist. But therein he contradicts
himself; because neither a sacramental body is a true and real body, neither
a sacramental killing a true and real killing. And so when all is said and
done, Bellarmine can conclude no more indeed, but that Christ's body is in the
Eucharist sacramentally. And therefore when Christ says, ( This is my body,)
the true sense and meaning is this, and no other; This is my body
Sacramentally, or the Sacrament of my body.


S. R. Bell fondly infers Christ to be killed, Page 111.
if his body and blood be put apart in the Mass; because not to put body and
blood apart where they were not before, but to separate them where they are
united, is to kill: Else GOD should kill a man, if he created a Soul and body
apart.


T. B. The Crow thinks her own Bird the fairest, and every fool thinks
himself a wise man. How fondly soever Bell infers, and how wisely soever
our Jesuit disputes, this must ever be true, (viz:) That the Popish Priest
in the Popish Mass, does what in him lies to kill christ in the Mass, so
often as he pronounces their supposed consecration words; if it should be true
which the Pope and his Popelinges hold, that by virtue thereof Christ's body
is put apart from his blood, and his blood apart from his body. For most
certain it is, that no true man, and consequently Christ, can live any longer,
then his body and blood be united together, and it is a meerfoolery to say as
our Jesuit does; that to put a ma^s body and blood apart where they were not
before, is not to kill the man. For example sake, because our Jesuit seems
very gross (I will not say a fool) if it will please his worship to call a
Butcher to him, to take all his blood from him, as he does from an Ox or
Calfe, and to receive it into a great vessel, so as no part thereof fall upon
the ground; and that done, to carry the same to Saint Peter's Church in Rome,
and to put it under the high altar there; and when he has so done, to carry
his body to Hexam, in the north parts of England, there to be solemnly
buried; if then (I say) our Jesuit remain alive, and be not killed, I will
subscribe to this his doctrine. And yet is it clear, that in this case his
body and blood should be put apart, where they were not before. But our Jesuit
seems to aim at a farther mark. What is that? at the creating of Christ's
body and blood. Is it so indeed? Is it possible so to think? It is very so.
For these are his words, as you hear, else God should kill a man, if he
created a Soul and body apart. Well, now I remember an old said saw, The
Papists have two Gods and two Christ's.
(which doubtless is as foolish as it is old) that the priest in the popish
mass can create his God. God so bless me and all good Christians, that we
never harken to such Theology.


CHAP. 4.
Containing the confutation of the lesuites fourth Chapter of the second
Article.
IN this fourth Chapter, Page 113.
our Jesuit rehearses sundry absurdities, which are found in the Popish
Mass. But the more he busieth himself to discharge their Mass thereof, Page
115.
the more the same absurdities do increase. Let us take a taste of one for all.
Bell (says he) infers, that either Christ's Sacrifice was imperfect in his
last Supper, or else that it was needles in his bitter passion on the cross.
To which he answers, that neither of both does follow. For (says he)
Christ's Sacrifice at his Supper, was a most perfect unbloody Sacrifice; and yet
his Sacrifice on the Cross was needful, as the peculiar price which GOD
exacted at his hands, for the redemption of the World. Lo, O horrible
blasphemy.
he grants freely, that Christ's Sacrifice at his Supper was most perfect, and
yet the heathen Philosopher can tell him, that Perfecto nihil addi potest; To
that which is perfect, nothing can be added. This notwithstanding, he
affirms these three things.

First, that the Sacrifice on the Cross was needful.

Secondly, that it was the peculier price which GOD exacted.

Thirdly, that it was for the redemption of the world. Which three points being
as truly marked and remembered, as they are truly granted; all but such as are
Sensus communis inopes, men without all, both sense and reason, will plainly
perceive, and constantly hold, that Christ's Sacrifice at his last Supper, was
either imperfect (which our Jesuit denies;) or else no real sacrifice at al
(which I defend.) All the rest of the chapter is full of the like vanity; for
consideration whereof, it is enough to peruse The Downfall of Popery.

CHAP. 5.
Containing the Jesuits confutation, touching Berengarius.
Where in The downfall of Popery, I related truly the cruel dealing of the
Pope and his Popish council with Berengarius; our Jesuit would gladly excuse
the Pope and his Sinod, but it will not be.

S. R. Bell exclaimeth mightily, Page. 126.
because Berengarius was compelled to believe, that Christ in the Eucharist is
sensibly touched, broken with the hands of Priests, and torn with the teeth of
the faithful.


T. B. Bell does so, Idque merito. He has just cause so to do.


R. S. Nevertheless Christ's body is said to be touched, broken, Page. 127.
and chewed in the Eucharist, because the sign of bread in which it really is,
is so used. As GOD is said to have been crucified, because the humanity in
which he was, was so handled; and Christ touched, when his garment was touched.


T. B. Here is all that confessed, which I intended for to prove. (viz:) That
the bread of the Eucharist is called Christ's body, because it is the sign and
Sacrament of his body; And therefore, that Berengarius was most cruelly and
villanously dealt withal, when he was enforced either to be burnt with fire
and Faggot, or else to swear, that he believed in his heart, that Christ's body
was truly touched and broken with the hands of Priests, and truly torn with
the teeth of the faithful. When for all that, many learned Papists,
Bellarmine, Melchior Canus, and others, with this our Jesuit, (who would and
does say the best he can for the Popes defense,) do freely grant, and
plainly confess, that Christ's body can neither be broken with hands, nor
yet torn or chewed with teeth. Lo, Berengarius was compelled to believe, as
an article of his faith, that Christ's body was truly, ( in veritate,) broken
with the hands of Priests, and torn with teeth; and yet the truth is far
otherwise, as both Bellarmine; Canus, and our Jesuit do confess. Fie on such
religion, hang up such Popish Faith, accursed be such doctrine.


S. R. The holy Fathers, Saint Cyprian, Saint Chrysostom, and others, do teach
us plainly, that Christ's body is broken with hands, and chewed with teeth:
yea, Christ himself says, This is my body which is broken. Will Bell now
condemn Christ and these holy Fathers of wickedness, villainy, blasphemy, and
horrible impiety? Nay, will he condemn both English and many foreign
Protestants, whose doctrine (says he) is, that Christ's body is broken, torn,
and consumed with mouth and teeth. Behold (good Reader.) For Papists to say,
Christ's body is touched, broken, and torn, is villainy and horrible impiety;
but for Protestants to say the same, and add consuming too, is good doctrine.


T. B. I proved out of Cardinal Bellarmine, that famous Jesuitical Friar,
that Christ's body cannot be broken and torn, save only in a figure or
Sacrament. And that by his doctrine, Read the Downfall.
it may be said to be broken and torn, when the sign thereof is broken and
torn. Out of whose doctrine, I inferred this golden Colorrary: (viz:) that if
it be true to say, Christ's body is broken and torn, because the sign of his
body is broken and torn; then truly may we say, and truly do we say, that
Christ's body is in the Eucharist, because the sign of his body is there,
because the Sacrament of his body is there, because the representation of his
body is there. And much more truly might Christ himself say, The Jesuit is
stricken dead.
This is my body, when he gave the sign and Sacrament of his body. I then
added, that it is the constant doctrine of the church of England, (which also
many other reformed Churches approve therein) that Christ's body is received,
broken, torn, and consumed with mouth and teeth, figuratively, significantly,
mystycally, sacramentally. And consequently, if the Papists would be judged by
this doctrine, which by the pen of the Jesuit Bellarmine they here deliver,
the controversy would soon be at an end. Now, I refer my self to the
indifferent Reader, whosoever he be; whether the Jesuit S. R. be an honest
man, or no. For first, he bears the Reader in hand, that I condemn Christ
and the holy Fathers.

Secondly, that I condemn both the English Church, and many foreign
Christians.

Thirdly, he charge me to hold the same Doctrine, which I utterly condemn
in Popery.

Fourthly, he justifies the condemnation of Berengarius; whose doctrine for
all that, both Bellarmine and Melchior Canus do justify, and himself unawares
in this chapter. If I should deal with the Papists in this manner, all the
world would exclaim against me. If any indifferent Reader shall duly and
truly, (all affection and partiality set apart) read both The Downfall of
Popery, and the Jesuits answer to it, I persuade my self, he will detest
both the Pope and popery, until his lives end.


S. R. Saint Austen (says Bell) tells us, Page. 132.
that the bread which the Apostles ate, was our Lord. I would Bell had marked
this himself: for it is the vpshot of this Controversy, and unanswerable by
any Protestant. For, if (as Bell notes out of Saint Austen) the bread which
the Apostles are was our Lord; How can Protestants deny it, and say it was
bare bread? Or if (as S. Austen speaks) they are bread our Lord, how can Bell
say, they are not our Lord, but bare bread?


T. B. Here our Jesuit triumphs before the victory, and boasts that that
which I said, was the vpshot on my side, is the vpshot on his side, but how
truly, he says, he will declare. Saint Austen says, the Apostles are Panem
Dominum. The bread our Lord, but that Judas ate Panem Domini, the bread of our
Lord. Mark well the words, gentle Reader. Saint Austen puts a clear
difference, between that which the Apostles are, See the Downfall.
and that which Judas ate. The Apostles (says he) are the Bread which is our
lord but Judas the bread of our lord. This assertion of this holy father, say
I, confounds the Papists; for, if our Lord and maker be present really in
flesh, blood, and bone, under the accidents of bread, and that so long as the
same accidents remain vncorrupt, as the popish faith holds; the doubtless,
Judas should have received his redeemer; the^ perforce Judas should also have
received Pane^ dominu^; the^ Judas could not by any possibility, have barely
received Pane^ Domini, which yet S. Austen affirms most constantly. For
first, if it were true, (as it is not) that after Popish supposed consecration,
the substance of bread were transubstantiated into Christ's body natural, as
it truly consists of flesh, blood, and bone; And again, if it were also
true, that the self-same body remained under the form of bread, until it were
corrupted, as Popish Doctrine tells us; then say I, (and it will be proved
an undoubted truth) that all the Papists in Europe, and elsewhere, are never
able to show me, how Judas did not receive Panem Dominum, the bread which is
the Lord, but Panem Domini, The bread of our Lord. That is to say, how Judas
could receive the form of bread, with the Flesh, blood, and bones of Christ's
Organicall and natural body hidden under the same; and for all that, not
receive Christ himself, and Panem dominum, as the other Apostles did. This
indeed is the vpshot of this Question, and strikes the Papists stark dead:
they can never answer it truly, while the world stands. Now, where our fond
Jesuit asks me, how I can say, the Apostles are bare bread, seeing they are
the bread which Saint Austen says is the Lord; I answer, that though perhaps
he have a great head, yet seems he to have but little wit. For I willingly
grant with the same Saint Austen, T^m. 2. p. 474.
that Judas ate the price of our Redemption; with Saint Cyprian, that the bread
which Christ gave to his disciples, was his true flesh; with Saint Chrysostom,
that Christ offered to Judas the blood which he had sold; but all this,
sacramentally, Acts, 3. v. 21.
mystically, figuratively, and significantly. For his sacred, true, and
organicall body was, is, and must be really in Heaven, until his second
Aduent; yet is it Sacramentally in the holy Eucharist. Alas, alas, must
Berengarius be enforced with fire and Faggot, to swear that Christ's body was
truly broken, and truly torn with men's teeth; and that only, because the
figure of his body is broken and torn; and we for all that and the holy
fathers, may not once say, that christ's body and blood is in the holy Eucharist
Sacramentally. Yea, the holy Fathers do often call it the unbloody sacrifice,
and the blood that issued out of Christ's side, and whatsoever else is truly
verified of his natural and organicall body indeed; and this they do, because
it is the sacrament and representation of that most sacred body and Sacrifice,
which was offered for our sins upon the Altar of the cross. All that possibly
can be objected in these cases. For these matters see my Survey.
is fully and soundly answered in my Survey of Popery.


CHAP. 6.
Containing the confutation of the Jesuits sixth Chapter, touching
co^radictions in the Mass.
S. R. THe Papists say, Page 136.
that Christ's body is the same in the Mass which was on the cross, and yet
confess it to be a figure thereof. This Bell proves to be a contradiction,
because Bellarmine says, a figure must needs be inferior to the thing figured.
But I deny every figure to be inferior to the thing figured. For God the Son is
the figure of the substance of his Father, Heb. 1. v. 3.
and yet true God. And Seth an Image of Adam, and yet true man: and such a
figure of Christ is the Eucharist.


T. B. Our Jesuit may learn in the Schools, that Nullum simile est idem, no
similitude is the same with the thing, whereof it is a similitude. Which if it
be true, (as true it must be granted, or else farewell Schoole-Doctrine,)
then doubtless, Christ's body being the same in the Mass (as Papists tell
us) which was on the cross, cannot possibly be a figure thereof. But our
Jesuit obiecteth, that the Son of GOD is the figure of GOD, and yet true God
withal. Likewise that Seth was the Image of man, and yet true man withal. I
answer to the former, with the ancient Father and reverend Bishop Haymo
Halberstatensis, Heb. 1. 3. Haymo in hunc locum.
whose express words are these; Quantum ad homin^s pertinet, aliud est
figura, aliud est substantia, quia dum pingitur, imago and figura alicuius
hominis in pariete, non est illud figura quod est substantia. Apostolus autem
figura^ in hoc loco pro ipsa substantia and pro aequalitate essentiae posuit.
Concerning men, a figure is one thing, and substance another thing; because
whiles an image and figure is painted in the Wall, the figure is not that which
the substance is. But the Apostle in this place put the figure for the
substance, and for the equality of Essence. And the Popes own dear Doctor
Nicolaus de Lyra, Lyr. in hunc loc.
teaches the selfsame Doctrine. These are his words; Dicitur imago vel
figura substantiae. 1. Eiusdem substantiae cum patre. He is called the Image
or figure of his substance; that is to say, He is of the same substance with
his father. By which doctrine thus delivered by these two learned writers, we
see evidently, that the Apostle understands by figure Substance, so as this
is the sense; he is of the same substance with the Father. For as the same
Haymo says in the same place; as in the fire, three things are inseparable,
the fire, the heat, and the brightness, and in the brightness is showed to us
the fire and heat, (though human things may not be compared with things
divine;) even so the nature of the Father, and of the Son, and of the holy
Ghost, is united inseperably; and by his word, as by brightness, he has
vouchsafed to show himself unto us. Fondly therefore does our Jesuit dispute,
when he would prove Christ's body, to be both the figure and the thing figured
out of the apostles words; wherefore by the word (Figure) understands the
Essence and equality of God. He uses a Metaphorical speech, for the dulnes
of our capacities; who can understand nothing in the admirable and divine
mysteries, but by similitudes drawn from Creatures.

To our Jesuits second Objection, Genesis 5, ver. 3.
that Seth was both a true man, and withal the figure of a true man, I make
this answer, (viz:) That it makes against himself. The reason is evident,
because (as I have proved out of Haymo) the figure of the thing figured, in
human Creatures are different, and the one distinguished from the other. And
the Jesuit must needs grant so much, or else say, (as I think he will not
for shame;) that Seth was Adam, and his own Father. But in Christ's body the
case is otherwise; for the Papists hold, that Christ's body in the Eucharist,
is Idem corpus numero, the same body in number with his body on the cross, and
his body now in heaven. If they shall say otherwise, then perforce must they
say, that which they dare not; that Christ has more bodies then one.


S. R. I return Bells Argument upon himself, because if figures must needs
be inferior to things figured, the Eucharist is some nobler thing then bread.


T. B. Our Jesuit cares not what he say, so he seem to say somewhat; so
gladly would he and his fellows have the vulgar sort to think, that they have
answered The Downfall of Popery. But God be thanked, they still fall down,
that strive against it. I answer; First, that albeit all figures were not
inferior to the things figured; yet should my manner of disputation be good
against Bellarmine, because my argument is deduced out of his own ground, and
therefore called after their use, Argumentum ad hominem. Secondly, that our
holy Eucharist is far nobler then bare Bakers bread, (viz:) Christ's true and
real body sacramentally; even that very body, which was nailed on the cross,
and that very blood, which with the spear issued out of Christ's side. All which
I have proved at large, in my Survey of Popery; and there have answered all that possibly can be said, for the Popish real presence.


S. R. Neither Christ's whole body, Page. 139.
nor part thereof, is in the Eucharist before the pronuncication of the last
word; yet are not the former words superfluous. For the last works the
transmutation, not by his own virtue alone, but with the virtue of them also,
or rather God works all when the last word is pronounced.


T. B. Behold here gentle Reader, what uncertainty is in popish faith and
Doctrine. For first, our Jesuit tells us, that either the last word in their
supposed consecration works transubstantiation alone, or with the help of the
rest; or else God works all, when the last word is spoken. Marry, which of
these is the truth, that he cannot tell us.

Secondly, Aqui^as, part. 3. q. 75. art. 4. and. art. 7. ^^
their Angelical Doctor, and Saint Aquinas says, that this conversion is not
like to natural conuersions, but is altogether supernatural, wrought by the
only power of God. Thirdly, the same Saint Aquinas tells us, that this
conversion is done in an instant. Fourthly, if either fit matter want, or any
word of consecration, or the intention of the Priest, nothing is changed, it
still remains bread. Now then, on the one side, every action that God does,
is done in an instant; the reason is evident, because God is of infinite power,
to whose action no resistance can be made: All learned papists grant this to
be so. On the other side, every action that man does is successiue and in time,
because man is of finite and limited power: the words therefore of consecration
either work nothing at all, (and so they are ciphers, which to hold is absurd
in popish doctrine) or else transubstantiation is effected in time, which is
repugnant to Gods infinite power. Here I must tell our Jesuit, that he
passes over with silence two most notable contradictions, whereof he speaks
not one word for fear of biting. I told him in the Downfall, that Berengarius
was compelled to confess and believe, that Christ's body is broken with hands;
and yet does Bellarmine grant, that it is not broken with hands: Ergo, it is
broken with hands, and not broken with hands. What can be a plainer
contradiction? None at all.


S. R. Catholics think indeed, that when the Priest wants both actual and
virtuall intention, Page. 142.
or omitteth any essential word, that there is no Consecration, and the
priest sins therein grievously; but the people worshipping erroneously upon
invincible ignorance, offend no more, then did Saint John, when he worshipped
an Angel as God; or as did Jacob when he lay with Lia who was not his wife,
thinking verily she had been his wife Rachell.


T. B. This is horrible impiety, that by Popish Religion, men and women are
compelled to adore that with divine worship, as the everliving God; whith
perhaps, even by the Popes own faith and belief, is nothing else but a piece
of bread: Yet is it far greater impiety and slat blasphemy against the son
of God, to excuse the people from sin, which commit openly such palpable and
gross Idolatry. But invincible ignorance (says our Jesuit) does excuse them
as it did S. John and Jacob. Howsoever the case stand with S. John and the
Patriarch Jacob, (whereof I am not now to dispute) ignorance can never excuse
Idolatry. He (says Christ) that knows the will of God and does it not;
shall be beaten with many stripes. He that knows not the will of God, Luke, 12,
5, 48
and yet does things worthy of stripes, shall be beaten with few stripes. Ezech.
3. 18.
And we are taught in Ezechiel, that the wicked shall die in his iniquity,
though the watchman gave him no warning. The man of God which believed the old
Prophet that lied unto him, sinned grievously, as appeared by his punishment,
1. Reg. 13.
because he transgressed the word of the Lord; albeit he offended ignorantly,
thinking he had done the will of God.


S. R. What makes it against the mass, Page 114. He speaks of the counsel
of Trent.
that three or four Catholics did in a difficult matter, before it was
defined by the Church, dissent from the rest? Let Bell if he can, show this
diversity now since the Council.


T. B. In the Downfall of Popery, I proved out of Durand, that only the form
of Bread is changed in the Eucharist, and that the matter of Bread remains
still. Out of Rupertus the Popish Abbot, that the bread is united Hypostatically
to the son of God. That Caietanus, Henrieus, Capreolus, are of another
opinion. That Johannes Parisiensis, held also that the bread was assumpted,
but in a different manner from the opinion of Rupertus. That another opinion
affirms the annihilation of the bread: And that Bellarmine holds with the
counsel of Trent. Now, to this pleasant harmony, our Jesuit adds this
goodly Corollary, (viz:) that the Church of Rome never knew how to think of
their real presence, for the space of one thousand, five hundred, forty
years, and odd; until the late days of their counsel of Trent, in which
Counsel, they received (as it may seem) some new (no Revelation from heaven,)
concerning the being of Christ's body in their mass. And here may the
indifferent Reader clearly behold, the original of late Popish Mass; which
the Papists for all that, would make the common people believe to be the old
Roman religion. I say (the late Popish religion) because (as we hear) it was
but determined and found out in the late counsel of Trent. For the old Roman
mass or communion (which is all one in effect) was the same in substance, with
the communion this day used in our English Church.


S. R. We say after Saint Hierom and Saint Pontian, Pa. 142, et 143
that priests Conficiunt Corpus Christi, make Christ's body; but dream not of
making God. But where is the contradiction? forsooth because Innocentius
holds, that all such priests do consecrate; Durand thinks, that he only who
first pronounces the words; and Caietan is of another opinion. I grant these
contradicte one another. But what is this to the Mass? Are these
contradictions in it? The matter (...) which these three Authors contradict one
another, is no point of faith. For with catholics it is no more matter of
faith, whether all the said Priests or one only Consecrate; then it is with
Protestants, whether all or one should Christen the Child, if many at once
should dippe him into the Water, and pronounce the words of Baptism.


T. B. Here is first granted, that priests make Christ's body, but not GOD. To
which I say first, that such making is great villainy against the son of God.
Secondly, that I know not how popish priests can make Christ's body, and not
make God: Unless perhaps they be Arrians, and so deny Christ to be God. For
where Christ's body is, there is Christ, true God, and true man. And therefore,
when they make Christ's body apart from Christ, then they either make a distinct
body from Christ (and so Christ must have two bodies) or else they take christ's
body from the Godhead, and so make him no God at all.

Here is secondly granted, that one Papist contradicts another in the hye
mystery of the Mass. But forsooth it skilleth not, because it is no matter of
faith. This is our Jesuits short answer, but as much to the matter as a poke
full of Plumes. Marry sir, this is a jest indeed, For he must be a right wise
man indeed that can tell what Popish faith is. Many most godly men and women
have been burnt, for denial the Popish Transubstantiation, and yet could not
the Papists tell what it was, until their late Counsel of Trent. God keep us
from such Popish faith.

Here is thirdly confessed, that it is no more matter whether many Priests do
make Christ's body one after an other, then whether many Christen a child one
after an other. Behold here, how roundly this Jesuit hudleth up many sacred
mysteries, as things of small or no account. I must tell him, that with Godly
Christians of all ages, rebaptization was ever reputed a grievous sin: and
yet we see here, that one may be baptized of many, one baptizing after
another, as one consecrating, after another; for so is the case in this
controversy. I must tell him likewise, that it is not only great irreuerence,
but also execrable idolatry, and more then Heathenish Villainy so to abuse
Christ's most sacred body. And I cannot but wonder, if any that shall know
truly their faith and opinions, do not detest their late start-vp Religion.


The third Article of the Popes dispensations.
COncerning this Article, I think two things only needful.

First, that though our Jesuit cannot deny contracted matrimony to be de iure
Diuino, and a sacrament with them before carnal copulation, neither that the
best learned Papists do hold it indispensable; yet does he not blush to say,
that the Pope can dispense with the same.

Secondly, that he repeateth Pope Martius dispensation with the Brother and his
own natural sister, as his brother or rather himself (for Robert Parsons, is
the Author of both) had done before in the forerunner of Bells Downfall. But
that which he should have done, and which he would undoubtedly have done, if he
had been able to have performed it, that has he not done, viz: he has not
replied to my answer, neither said one word to my large confutation of the
said forerunner. I there proved by the express verdicts of three famous
Popish writers; (viz:) Siluester Prieras, Bartholomaeus Fumus, and Angelus de
Clauisio: that the Popish famous Archbishop and canonized Saint See the Popes
funeral.
Austoninus affirmed resolutely, that pope Martin dispensed with one to marry
his own natural and full sister, of the same father and mother. I proved
likewise out of Cardinal Caietan, that the Pope can disspence in all the
degrees of Consanguinity, save only with the father and his daughter, and with
the mother and her son. It is therefore no strange thing to charge the Pope
to grant license for marriage, even between the brother and sister. For
larger discourse hereof, I refer the reader to my book, entitled the Popes
Funeral, where this point is so handled, as neither this Jesuit nor any of his
fellows, is ever able to answer the same: and therefore it is an undoubted
truth, that the Pope takes upon him, to license a brother to marry his own
sister.

S. R. I omit Bells error in affirming that Austen of Ancona, Page, 186
dedicated his book to Pope John the twelft, who was dead almost 400. years
before him.


T. B. I cannot omit to tell you and the Reader, that he may take heed of you
hereafter, that you are a liar more impudent then impudency it self. For
Augustinus de Ancona, the Author himself says plainly, in the very title and
dedication of the Book, that it is Dedicated to Pope John the twelft of that
name. Now, whether the Author of the book, or Robert Parsons that Traiterous
and shameless Jesuit (as the secular Priests termed him) knew better to
whom the Book was dedicated, let the Reader judge. Would not this fellow trow
ye, gladly find a hole in my coat? If we had a good matter in hand, he would
not use such miserable shifts.


The fourth Article, of orignall concupiscence in the regenerate.
THe state of this Question is this. The Pope and Jesuits deny original
concupiscence to be sin in the regenerate, because if they should grant it
to be sin, it would follow against their doctrine, that none could be saved
by the merit of his works. I have therefore proved it sufficiently in The
Downfall of Popery to be sin, and therefore will now only confute by way of
reply, such answers and authorities as he thinks make for his purpose.

S. R. Nothing done against our will is sin, Pape 165.
but diuer acts of concupiscence be such; Ergo no sin.


T. B. Sin (as the holy Apostle defines it) is Anomia, that is to say,
iniquity or transgression of Gods law. 1. John, 3, 4. Aug. de cos, evang. cap.
4. Tom. 4.
Here we see what sin is. Let us proceed. The eternal law (says Saint
Austen) is the reason or will of God, commanding the natural order to be
kept, and forbidding the same to be perturbed. Thus does S. Austen describe
Gods law. So then, whatsoever is against Gods Law is sin, and whatsoever is
against Gods will, is against the law; Ergo whatsoever is against Gods will is
sin. Let this foundaon thus laid, be remembered, for by it, all Objections
will soon be answered. I therefore deny the proposition of the Jesuits
Argument, when he says, nothing done against our will is sin, and they are
enforced to confess the same against their wills, in Children not regenerate.
For (as the Popes law teaches us) Children dying without Baptism, are damned,
and therefore they are not buried in any Churchyard with the Papists. Now must
they tell me, either what sin they did with their will, or else confess with
me, that some thing done against man's will is sin. And the reason is
yielded already (which I wish the Reader ever to remember) (viz:) that
whatsoever is against the will or law of God is sin, whether it be voluntary,
or not voluntary. For Saint John placed not voluntary, in the definition of
sin.


S. R. In regeneration, Page 173.
either we remain guilty of damnable sin, or become guiltless of all such
sin. If we remain guilty, then is not our sin forgiven. For it is impossible
to be guilty of sin, and to have sin forgiven.


T. B. I distinguish the proposition. The regenerate are guilty by nature, and
in respect of sin which still remains, for which they might justly be damned;
and yet guiltles by way of acceptance in Christ Jesus, for whose sake and
merits, God does not impute sin unto them. And this is Saint Austens mind,
when he says. The concupisence of the flesh is forgiven in Baptism, Aug. de
nup. et concupisc. li, 16 cap, 25, t^ 7
not so that is remain not, but so as it is not imputed for sin. In which
words Saint Austen shows plainly, That concupiscence remains, though not
imputed for sin. It follows in S. Austen. Non ergo aliquid remanet, quod
non remittatur. Not any thing therefore remains, which is not forgiven. Where
the Reader must well observe, that he says not; nothing is sin, that
remains; or thus, no sin remains; but thus: Not any thing remains,
which is not remitted or forgiven. As he had said; Sin indeed remains
still in the baptized, but shall not be imputed to the faithful.


S. R. A justified or regenerate man cannot be guilty of damnation, Page 173.
Rom, 8, 1,
because there is no damnation to them, who are in Christ Jesus.


T. B. It is one thing good Jesuit, not to be damned or not to receive
damnation; another thing, to be guilty of damnation: for Gods elect Children
may be guilty of damnation, that is, deserve damnation, as David, Peter, and
Paul did, but there is no damnation to such, because they shall never be
damned.


S. R. Bell confesses, Page 173.
that a man cannot be justly condemned for sin remitted.


T. B. I grant it. What then? Albeit original sin truly remain in the
elect, yet because it is forgiven and not imputed to them, they shall never be
condemned for it, for otherwise God should be unjust and unfaithful in his
promise.


S. R. If involuntary acts done against our will be true sins, Page 167.
much more the acts of fools and mad men, yea of beasts, which are not done
against will, but only without will, and they true Malefactors and Sinners
before COD and men, which I think, none but a mad man will grant.


T. B. There is great disparitie (by your leave good Master Friar) in these
subjects which you name. Omnes er^^u^ in Adamo, se^ in principio and ^adice
totius humani (...).
For Gods commandments were never given to the brute beasts, neither were
they ever made capable of doing the same. But all men were once enabled to have
kept Gods ordinances, even in the protaplast Adam, in whom we all were
originally. And the Pope and his Jesuits must needs confess so much, or else
condemn God of injustice, in punnishing eternally the unregenerate Infantes,
for that sin which they never consented unto, neither possibly could avoid.
And therefore gravely says Saint Austen, that every sin is voluntary, Aug.
retract. lib. 1. cap. 15 Page 16.
either in the act, or else in the Original.


S. R. Saint Austen is so far from thinking, Page 170 Aug. ep. 200 Tom. 2.
that we sin by inuoluntary motions of the flesh; that he says, if we
consent not unto them, we need not say; forgive us our trespasses.


T. B. Saint Austen says not, if we consent not unto them, we need not say,
forgive us our sins; but if we were thoroughly renewed, and were as Adam was in
Paradise before his fall, we should have no debts to be forgiven; and
consequently, have no need to say, forgive us our sins. But our case is
otherwise, because that perfect renouation cannot be had in this life, but
only in the World to come. And for this cause does the ancient council
Mileuita^ accurse him, Conc. Mileu. can. 7. and 8.
that says he is so holy, that he need not say the Lords prayer for
himself, but for others.


S. R. Saint Austen says, D^ ciuit. lib. 1. cap. 25.
if concupiscentiall disobedience be without fault in the body of one sleeping,
how much ^ore in the body of one not consenting.


T. B. I answer, that Saint Austen and other Fathers do comparatively, as it
were extenuate and excuse innate concupiscence, but not simply make it no
sin. When they seem to make it no sin, then they so speak, either for
that it is not imputed to the regenerate, who manfully fight against it; or
else, because it is an ingrafted prauity of Nature, and not a voluntary
transgression of Gods law. Breefely, the Fathers call it sin, yet not simply,
but comparatively in respect of actual sins. Saint Austen in the place which
our Jesuit cites, disputes against the fond opinion of some persons, who to
avoid those sins, to which they thought their original raging concupiscence
would draw them, resolved to commit one sin for all, in murdering
themselves, and so be delivered from many sins, to which they feared their
concupiscence would allure them. Saint Austen therefore dissuading from such
heinous crimes, encourages such timorous consciences by way of extenuation,
telling them that concupiscence is without fault, in those that strive against
it, and do not consent unto it. Not for that it is no sin in it self, but
because it is not imputed to the godly. For, (as we have heard already, and as
I have proved at large in the Downfall of Popery) whatsoever deflecteth, or
swarueth from the will of God, the same is most properly sin. The reason is
evident, because not to be correspondent and agreeable to Gods will, is the
very intrinsecall reason, essence, and nature of sin. Yet so it is, that the
Ataxia, disorder, and concupiscence in the regenerate, is repugnant and
disagreable to the will of God; and consequently, it must be sin indeed. And
as for the opinion of Saint Austen, See the Downfall of Popery.
I have proved at large in the Downfall, out of five several places of his
works, that it is both the punnishment of sin, the cause of sin, and sin
it self.


S. R. As blindness of heart (says Bell out of Austen) is sin, Page, 185.
punnishment of sin, and cause of sin, so concupisence of the flesh is
sin, punnishment, and cause of sin. But I answer, that Saint Austen
compares concupisence with blindness of heart, in the material disorder of
sin.


T. B. I answer; that I know not whether I should pity the ignorance of our
Jesuit, or exclaim against his malice. For first, Saint Austen cannot be
expounded, as Master Friar says, though Bellarmine his Brother has lent him
his solution. For if Saint Austen had meant materially, and not formally, he
would never have called it sin the third time, after he named it twice sin
matterially before, (viz:) when he called it the cause of sin, and the
punnishment of sin. Yet after both these, he adds, that it is sin
formally. For else he had said no new thing.

Secondly, because our Jesuit confuteth himself unawares, when he writes
thus; Saint Austen proves by the blindness of heart, that it was not only
punishment and cause of sin, Page. 186.
but also sin; that is, naught, cuill, and disorderly; because it is against
the rule of reason, which is to be sin materially, though it want the form of
sin, which is voluntarines. This is his answer: Now I pray you Gentle Reader,
judge indifferently between me and this Friar. First, he grants that
Original concupisence is naught, evil, and disorderly. Secondly, that it is
against the rule of reason, and all that he can say for himself is this, that
it is indeed sin materially, but not formally. Where if I may find an
indifferent Reader, the victory is mine own: GOD is my judge, I speak as I
think. For to be against the rule of reason, is formally sin. August, vbi
supra.
Which Saint Austen (as is already proved) declares evidently, when he
defines the eternal law to be nothing else, but the reason or will of God.
The reason is confirmed, because Saint Austen compares it with the blindness of
heart, which (as every good Christian knows,) is sin most formally. For if
master Friar Parsons, shall deny blindness of heart, thorough which man
believes not in God, to be sin formally, he will be hissed out of all good
schools; howsoever our holy Father the Pope, sitting in his chair upon men^
shoulders, give him ten hundred thousand years pardon for the same. Nay, I
will yet say more to our holy Friar master Robert Parsons, (the Author of this
fond presensed answer to the Downfall of Popery,) (viz:) that in the last
precept of the Decalogue or Ten commandments, ( Thou shall not lust,) is
prohibited not only actual and voluntary concupiscence, but the very
Original and Fountain of all concupiscences with all her involuntary branches.

I prove it first, because that concupiscence actual, wherewith we covet
that that is another man's, and not our own, is forbidden, by all the sixth,
seventh, and eight precepts of the second Table. This does our master Christ
teach us, when he says; That whosoever shall see a woman to lust after her,
Mat, 5, 29
has already committed adultery with hi^ in his heart. The same doctrine
teaches S. John, when he shows the hatred of our brother to be agaiust this
precept; Thou shall not kill. I. John, 3, 5, 15.


Secondly, because if no other thing were prohibited in this commandment, but
actual concupiscence, there should be but nine precepts in the Decalogue;
seeing the last should be no new Commandment, but only a bare recital or
repetition of the nine former precepts.

Thirdly, because S. Paul grants himself to be carnally sold under sin, Rom,
7, 14 5, 19, 20.
by reason of original concupiscence, and not actual; against which he fought
stoutly, and never gave consent unto it.

Fourthly, because that which the Saints of God detest, and call sin by the
judgment of the holy ghost, must needs be sin properly. But so it is, that S.
Paul in the name of all the Saints of God, detesteth this Original
concupiscence, calls it sin, and mourning, terms himself unhappy for it,
and desires to be delivered from it: Ergo, it must needs be sin properly.

Fifthly, to say that it is called sin figuratively and improperly, is against
that general rule which all Divines have delivered, when the scriptures must
be understood properly, and when figuratively, viz: that then they are taken
figuratively, when the sense, which the words in their proper signification
yield, do not agree with other scriptures, and the Analogy of faith, but are
repugnant unto the same.

Now, no scripture can be produced, which denies that Original concupisence
with the involuntary motions thereof, Romans, 7.
is properly sin: Nay, the Apostle above twelve times in one Chapter, plainly
and simply calls it sin, neither will it help to say, that the scripture
freeth Gods children from sin. August, vbi supra.
For as saint Austen says, they are not delivered from sin so, that it is
not in them, but that it is not imputed to them. And the Prophet teaches the
same doctrine, when he pronounces The man blessed not who has no sin, but to
whom the Lord imputes no sin. Psalm, 32, 2.
And the Papists must either recall their doctrine in this point, or else cry
fire and faggot for their chief master Petrus Lombardus, sur-named the
Master of sentences (whose Book to this day is publicly Read in the school
of Divinity, Lombard. lib. 3 sent. did. 19. c.
for thus does he write:) Secundum animas vero iam redempti sumus etc. But
touching our souls, we are redeemed in part, not wholly; from the sin, not
from the pain; neither wholly from the sin or fault: For we are not so
redeemed from it, that it be not ( in us) but that it rule not ( over us.) Lo,
Master Lombard that famous Writer, grants first, that we are redeemed in
part, but not in the whole.

Secondly, that we are not wholly redeemed from sin.

Thirdly, he tells us, how we are redeemed from sin, viz: that albeit sin
shall remain in us, yet has it not such dominion over us, that it can enforce
us to consent thereunto. Lo, the greatest and best learned Papists, teach the
same doctrine that I do.

Sixthly, Saint Austen affirms plainly, that Original Concupiscence is
prohibited by this Precept ( Thou shall not Lust;) and not only the habitual
concupiscence it self, but also all the actual involuntary motions thereof;
Bellar^. tom. 3. col 400. vide Aug. de spir. and liter. cap, vlt. tom. 3.
Thus does he write, as the Iesuire Bellarmine alleges him; These things
(says Bellarmine) are spoken after Saint Austens mind, who by this precept (
Thou shall not Lust) understands all the motions of concupiscence, even the
involuntary, to be prohibited in some sort; and that the consent to these
motions forbidden by that other precept; follow not thy concupiscence. Thus
writes our Jesuitical Cardinal; by whose doctrine it is evident that S.
Austen affirms the first motions of concupiscence, which pervert reason, and
cannot be avoided, to be condemned by S. Paul, as sinful and against the law
of God. Which doctrine of S. Austen, does so sting and confound all Papists,
that Bellarmine knows not in the world what he shall answer to the same.
And therefore he adds deceitfully in his exposition of S. Austens words, this
word. ( Quodam modo, after a sort,) which word for all that, is neither in S.
Austen, nor yet agreeable to his meaning. For S. Austen says plainly, simply,
and absolutely, without all ands, or ifs, or other qualifications, that such
motions are forbidden by this commandment ( non concupisces.) If I (gentle
Reader) should thus deal in reciting or expounding my authors, what
exclamations, what outcries would be made against me? all the cursed brood of
Jesuits and Iesuited Papists would pursue me with hue and cry, as if I were a
rank Traitor. But S. Austens words are so plain, as no denial or
Legierdemaine can have place: for he says, that Original concupiscence with
the involuntary motions thereof are forbidden by the last precept of the
Decalogue, and the consent to the same, by that other precept, Go not after thy
concupiscence. Let this be well marked
Here S. Austen utters his own meaning, concerning this great controversy.
For he plainly and flatly distinguishes, between original concupiscence it
self, and the consent that is given to the same. He tells us simply and
resolutely, that the concupiscence is prohibited by one precept, and the
consent to it, by another. Which the Jesuitical Cardinal seeing to be an
invincible Bulwark against him, and against the very essence of all Popish
doctrine; he thought it stood him in hand to invent some (though never so
miserable) Legier demain to dazel the eyes of the reader withal. and for this
end, he added to Saint Austen text, this word ( Quodam modo, in a sort.) Which
( In a sort) though it be granted him, yet will it not serve his turn. For,
if it be prohibited in a sort, and in a sort be against Gods commandment,
then must it needs follow, that at least in a sort, it is sin; and so the
victory is mine own.

Lastly, it is a constant Axiom, generally received of all Logitians in all
Schools; that the cause being taken away, the effect must needs be taken away
also. But death is the effect of original sin, Ergo if Original sin, Ablata
causa tollitur effect^s. Romans 6. v, 23*
which is the cause, be taken away in baptism, then death which is the effect
thereof, must be taken away with it. Wherefore, seeing both old and young
after Baptism still dye, as we daily see; it is an evident Argument, that the
cause thereof (which is original concupiscence) is not taken away.


S. R. If in regeneration we become guiltless of all damnable sin, Page
173. Lib. 1. de imp. and concu. cap. 26. tom. 7.
then have we no such sin in us. For as Saint Austen says, to be not guilty
of sin, is to have no sin.


T. B. I answer, that we are guilty in the nature of the thing, yet guiltles
and freed by Gods mercy in Christ Jesus. And I tell our Jesuit, that he
inverteth Saint Austens words, as one that never read the same. Thus writes
Saint Austen; Hoc est. n. Non habere peccatum, reum non esse peccati. For this
is to have no sin, not to be guilty of sin. And what is this? Forsooth S.
Austen says, he may be thought or said to have no sin in him, (though his
sin remain in act) whose sin is not imputed to him.


S. R. Sins remain but by their guilt: as adultery once committed, Page 177.
remains in the committer, only because he is still guilty of the adultery
that he did, until it be remitted.


T. B. Some sins, as Adultery, pass in act when they are done, and remain
in guilt. Others pass in guilt, and remain in act, as original
concupiscence in the regenerate, which remains in the unregenerate, both in
guilt and in act.


S. R. Though it were true which Bell says of the reprobates, yet would it not
follow thereof, Page. 184.
that concupiscence in reprobates is formal sin, but only that original
sin is not truly forgiven in baptism to any reprobate: which is false.


T. B. I proved by the testimony of the Rhemists, See the Downfall.
that original sin still remains in the baptized; and consequently, that it
is sin formally in the regenerate. And so I have my purpose, (viz:) that
sin still abides in the regenerate, though it be not imputed to them. For,
if original sin be truly remitted in baptism, and be not truly sin
indeed in the Baptized; then can none be justly damned, that are baptized.
For how shall they be justly condemned, for that which is remitted? It cannot
be. And this notwithstanding, to grant that all baptized shall be saved, is
most absurd. For larger discourse hereof, I refer the Reader to the Downfall
it self. I study to be brief.


S. R. When Saint Austen asks, Page. 188.
why concupiscence is sin in the child, if it be in the parent baptized without
sin, he supposes that it is no true sin in the baptized, contrary to Bells
allegation.


T. B. S. Austen worthily demanded, how concupiscence can be sin in the
Child, if it be none in the baptized Parent. For how can any man impart that
to another, which he has not himself? and thereupon Saint Austen concluded,
that original sin still remains formally in the baptized Parent, though not
imputed for sin. This reason is unanswerable.


S. R. Saint Austen answered, Pape 189.
that by baptism Non imputatur in peccatum, It is not imputed for sin. In
which answer, unless he did by not imputing for sin, mean, making no sin, he
had not answered the question, why concupiscence was no sin in the baptized
Parent. Therefore with him, concupiscence not to be imputed to or for sin, is
to be made no sin.


T. B. If you Master Friar Jesuit, or Iesuited Friar, may expound Saint
Austen at your pleasure, and without either Scripture, Father, Text,
Circumstance, or Reason, say this is his meaning; it must be as you say, I
shall in vain dispute against you. But I hope the indifferent Reader will not
afforde you that freedom. The Question which Saint Austen moves, Mark, for
the lesuite is stricken dead.
is this: Why original concupiscence is sin in the Child, and no sin in the
Baptized Parent. And Saint Austen himself, answers himself, because it is
not imputed for sin in the Parent. Thus stands the case; this is the
question; this is the answer: The difficulty is this; How the Child can
contract and receive of the Parent, that which is not in the Parent; because no
man can bestow and impart that, which he himself has not. The answer to the
difficulty is this; that original concupiscence is still in the Parent after
baptism received, as truly and formally sin in it own Nature, as it is
truly and formally sin in the unbaptized Child: and so the Child contracteth
nothing of the Parent, but that very same which was in him. This
notwithstanding, there is this difference between the sin formally in the
Parent, and the sin formally in the Child, (viz:) that though it be
formally, really, and truly in them both; yet is it is in the one after one
manner, in the other after another manner. It is formal sin in the Parent, but
not so imputed, yet in the child before Baptism, it is both formal sin, and
so imputed. So that the difference is not in the thing, but in the manner and
modification of the thing. And this is the true meaning of S. Austen, when he
says; Non imputatur in peccatum, It is not imputed for sin. As if he had
said, it is still sin as well in the Parent as in the Child, (or else the Child
could not receive and contract it of his Father) in the nature of the thing it
self: Nevertheless, it is as if it were not in him, because of mercy it is
not imputed to him for sin. Breefely, it is sin in the Parent, but not so
imputed; In the Child it both is sin, and for sin imputed.


S. R. Neither indeed can God otherwise not impute sin, Page. 189.
but by taking it away: For his judgment is according to truth; and therefore,
if there be sin in us, he must needs impute it to us, and account us Sinners,
else he should not account us as we are, and according to truth.


T. B. It is time to say with Christ's holy Apostle; Apoc. 22. 20.
Come Lord Jesus. For, if the World shall continue, and Iesuitisme be
permitted to reign, Luke 9, 58,
Foxes may have holes, and Fowls of the Air Nestes, but the Son of man
hardly where to lay his head. For I pray thee, gentle Reader, does not our
Jesuit, who terms himself S. R. (Saucy Rebel, if ye will so interpret it,
and know Robert Persons for the man,) take upon him saucily and arrogantly to
appoint bounds and limits to the power of God omnipotent? Does he not say here,
God cannot, and God must? Even where there is no necessity at all.

First, it is most false, and great blasphemy against the son of God, to say
that God cannot otherwise not impute sin but by taking it away. If this fond
assertion were true, none could ever be loved of God in this life, seeing all
men are full of sin, which God ever hates as a thing most odious in his
sight. Who but Jesuits will ever say, that they are not Gods enemies in truth,
if God respect them after their deserts? Who but Jesuits will refuse to say
with the Prophet; Psalm, 143, 2.
Enter not into judgment, with thy servant (O Lord) for none living shall be
justified in thy sight. Therefore wisely, and most christianly says Saint
Austen; Aug. conf. libr. 9. cap. 13.
Woe even to the best liver on earth, if thou O Lord examine his life, (thy
mercy set apart.) What? Must GOD needs impute sin, where he finds it? Then
a sharp Vae vobis will fall upon our Jesuit, unless he be holyer then
either Saint Peter or Saint Paul. Mat* 18, 24.
But Sir; Heard you never of a King, whose Servant ought him ten thousand
Talentes, which he was not able to pay? Know ye not, that the King his Lord
imputed not the debt unto him? But ye will say, the King forgave it him. True
it is, but how did he forgive it him? Forsooth by not imputing it to him. For
neither did he pay, neither was he able to pay the debt. So then, as that
King (the King of Heaven if ye will,) did impute the ten thousand Tallentes
as paid, though they remained unpaid indeed, and esteemed him as no Debtour,
who had his debt still unpaid: even so, our merciful God, both can deal, and
does deal with us, in not imputing our sin to us, though they still remain in
us.

Secondly, Gods judgment is ever according to truth, even when he imputes
not our sins to us, as well as when he imputes them to us. For, as the
King knew right well that the debt was unpaid, judging rightly that it was
unpaid, and vvithall accepted of it as if it had been paid, not imputing
the debt to the debtour; even so, our merciful GOD and loving Father, knovveth
right well, Original Concupiscence remains really and formally in us,
rightly judging that sin to be in us, and vvithall accepting us as if we
were no Sinners, not imputing our debts unto us. And this he does of his own
free mercy, for the merits of his dear Son CHRIST JESUS, 1, Cor, 1, 30*
in whom he is well pleased. Tit, 3, 5.


So then, we see here, Mat, 3, 17.
not only the Jesuits blasphemy against GOD, but also of his fond manner of
disputing every where. For every Child can tell him, that it is one thing to
know and judge that man owes him Money; another thing, not to impute the debt
to him that owes the same. For example sake, (because sensual things work
most with sensual men,) if Thomas Bell were bound in an Obligation of one
thousand pounds unto S. R. for the payment of one hundred pence upon the
first of July next, at which day Thomas Bell should make default of payment,
and the said S. R. should not impute the default and Non payment unto the said
Thomas Bell, (as I think he would not) should not the Obligation be still in
force, and Thomas Bell still remain indebted to S. R? Should not Thomas Bell
stand still in the curtcs^e of S. R? Might not S. R. commence suite against
Thomas Bell, for his debt, notvvithstanding his forbearaunce in not imputing
the breach of day unto him? I cannot tell, I am not skillfull in the Law; but
I fear me, Thomas Bell might be entreated of S. R. as the Fellow-Seruant
that ought an hundred pence, Mat, 18, 28,
of whom we have mention made in the holy Gospel.


S. R. The second thing which Bell infers, Page 193*
and bids us mark it well, is, that the tenth Commandment forbids
Original lust without consent, and habitual Concupiscence. Did every man
read more markeable folly? First, he makes Original lust to be committed,
which is to make Original Actual, because what is committed is actual, as
commission is action. Secondly, that habitual and Original, inclination to
evil, is forbidden by the tenth Commandment, and calls the contrary most
absurd.


T. B. Doubles, Bell will confess plainly, that he has not often read more
markeable folly indeed, then our markable Friar utters in this place, who
will never gain any thing at T. B. his hands, unless it be with his markeable
folly, and deceitful dealing. He first leaves out my words, in the beginning
of the sentence; then adds he his own, as if they were mine, in the end of
the sentence; that done, he discourses of them and me, at his own good
pleasure: But I answer. First, that not only actual, but also habitual
inclination to evil, is forbidden in the tenth precept. Bellarmine shall be
witness against Robert Parsons, whose words are these; Bellarm. tom. 3. col.
400. Aug. de spir. and liter. cap. vlt. tom. 3.
Haec dicta sunt ad mentem, S. Augustini, qui precepto, non concupisces,
intelligit prohiberi aliqua modo matus omnes concupiscentiae, etiam,
involuntarios. These things are spoken after the mind of Saint Austen, who
understands all the motions, even those which be involuntary, to be
forbidden in some sort by this Commandment, ( Thou shall not Lust.) Where
we see, that not only Bellarmine their Cardinal, but Saint Austen that
worthy Pillar of the Church, affirms both Original concupiscence, and the
involuntary Motions thereof, to be forbidden in this precept. Where I may not
forget to tell the Reader, that though Bellarmine to make his matter good, (if
it would) adds to Saint Austens words ( In some sort,) yet does Saint
Austen write very simply, and says flatly, that they are prohibited, and
adds not ( Quodam modo, In some sort.) That is Bellarmines addition, it is
not in Saint Austen.

Secondly, that habitual Original Lust is not idle, but woorketh ill desires
in us continually against our will.

So says S. Austen, Aug. de nup. et concup. lib. 1. co, 2. 27.
in these words; Agit. n. Aliquid concupiscentia carnis, etc. For concupiscence
of the flesh works something, even when there is not given unto it, either the
consent of the heart, where it may reign; or the members as Weapons, which
may accomplish what it appoints. And what does it, but the very wicked and
filthy desires? For if they were good and lawful, the Apostle would not forbid
to obey them.

Mark these words, gentle Reader, for they are of great consequence, and give
a deadly blow to the Papists. Two things are cleared by this Testimony of
Saint Austen; the one, that Concupiscence to which consent is not given,
brings forth ill desires; the other, that the said desires are unlawful,
and prohibited by the Law of GOD. And so we have evidently proved, that
habitual Concupiscence, to which the regenerate yield no consent, but stoutly
resist the same, is so far from being meritorious, as the Papists would have
it, that it is sin formally, and properly so called. And we have further,
that habitual concupiscence works ill desires in us against our will, and
therefore that those desires are truly called original, because we do them
not, but rather suffer them to be done in us.

Thirdly, that though the Law in saying, Thou shall not lust, seems by the
force of the word which signifies action, to prohibit only the voluntary act
of concupiscence; yet does it forbid the very Original Concupiscence it
self, withal the branches, effects, and involuntary motions thereof, as is
already proved at large: Yea, Saint Austen does understand it, as Bellarmine
himself does grant.

Here for the help of the Reader, I note, that a threefold Concupiscence is
forbidden by the tenth Commandment. The first, is merely called Original.
This is that which we all contracted of Adam, and which is the Fountain of
all concupiscences and sins, and therefore truly called of the Apostle sin.
Rom, 7,
The second, is partly Original, and partly Actual. Original, because it
yssueth naturally from the Original prauity of our nature. Actual, for that
we covet in act, albeit against our will, and because it is against our will, it
is more properly and truly called Original, then actual. The third, is
merely actual, because it is voluntary.


S. R. I must note Bells important untruths. First, Page. 202.
that Pope Urban and Pope Innocent confirmed Saint Thomas his doctrine for
authentical. Secondly, that Pope Urban gave it the first place after
cannonicall scripture.


T. B. This Friar seems to be framed of lying, and as he has usually spent
his whole dispute, so in the end of the article he closes it up with leasing.
Whosoever shall pervse The Downfall of Popery, will soon espy, how this Friar
loadeth my back with slanderous speeches and false reports. I will here in
regard of breuity, only set down the Testimony of a famous Papist Augustinus
Hunnaeus, by name, in that Epistle which he sent to Pope Pius the fifth. These
are his words; Vrbanus etc. Vrbanus that worthy Prelate of the Apostolic sea,
admiring the excellent doctrine of this man, (he speaks of Aquinas) and
beholding it as fallen from heaven to drive away the natural mist of ignorance
from men's minds, does gravely exhort to the study thereof, and commands the
university of Toulouse to follow it as the chief, in all their disputations
and aunsweres concerning faith and manners. Innocentius the fifth of that name,
esteemed the same man's Doctrine so greatly, that he doubted not to give it the
first place after the Cannonicall scripture. Thus writes Hunnaeus. By whose
words it may appear, in what reverence the Doctrine of Aquinas is with the
Papists; as also that our Jesuit cannot answer me, but by lying. And thus I
will end this article, Page, 161*
with these words of our Jesuit; Habitual concupiscence includes not only
pronesse to evil, but also difficulty to do good: and want of habibituall
order in the inferior powers, and therefore is both positive and privative
evil. Thus writes our Jesuit; who after he has long wearied himself in
struggling against the truth, does at the length unawares confess the same.
For doubtless, when he grants, that habitual Concupiscence in the
regenerate, includes want of habitual order in the inferior powers, and
therefore is both positive and privative evil; he grants in substance and
in the truth of the matter, as much as I desire. He denies in words, that
Original concupiscence, is formally sin, but in effect and substance, he
grants the very same. Whosoever shall seriously ponder both my discourse
here and in the Downfall, especially concerning the Nature, definition, and
essence of sin; he will perceive with all facility, that the Jesuit would
say as I write, if he were not affrayde to displease the Pope.


The fifth Article, of the merit of Good works.
S. R. Bells first position contains two parts; the first is, that good
works, Page, 212
neither do nor can go before Justification. Behold Bell even where he would
prove himself a friend to good works, shows himself to be an enemy, and
excluding them from any going before, or any way concurring to justification;
to which they so concurred in Saint Mary Magdalen, as our Savior said, Many
sins are forginen her, because she loved much, making her love a kind of
cause, Luke 7, 47
(viz:) disponent of her Justification.


T. B. Our Jesuit would gladly persuade his reader, that I am an enemy to good
works. The best mean he has to defend himself and Popery withal, is
cogging, lying, and false dealing. I must needs be an enemy to Good works,
because, I will not admit evil works for good. I say with S. Austen;
Sequuntur, iustificatum, non precedent iustificandum. Aug. de fide and oper.
cap. 14, tom 4.
Good. Works follow him that is justified, but they go not before him that is
to be justified. Behold here, gentle Reader, that S. Austen is the same enemy
to Good works that I am. He affirms them to follow justification, and so do
I. He denies them to go before justification, and so do I. What a thing is
this? Our Jesuit dares not call Saint Austen an enemy to Good Works; and yet
does he call me so, who defend and hold the same doctrine that Saint Austen
does. Nay, how is it possible to have Good Works, before we have faith?
Seeing (as the Apostle teaches us) Without faith it is impossible to please
GOD. Heb, 11, 6
Who so lists to pervse my Survey of Popery, shall there find every thing
soundly answered, whatsoever can be said for Popery in this kind of
subject. But our Friar will prove Good works to go before justification,
because Christ said to Mary Magdalen; Luke, 7. 47
Many Sins are forgiven her, because she loved much. I answer, that Christ's
Argument is not drawn from the cause, but from the effect. As if Christ had
said; we may know by her great love, that great gifts are bestowed on her,
that many sins are forgiven her. For, that no remission of her sins proceeded
from her love, but her love of the forgiveness of her sins, appears by the
similitude of the debtors. For Christ told Peter of two debtors, whereof the
one ought five hundred pence, the other fifty, and that when they had not
wherewith to pay, the Creditour forgave them both. He therefore demanded of
Peter, whether of the Debtors loved the Creditour more? Peter answered, that
he to whom more was forgiven. Christ approved Peter's answer, and concluded
thereupon, that seeing Mary Magdalen loved more, he might know that she had
more forgiven her, because says Christ, To whom little is forgiven, the same
loves little. Neither is it possible, to draw any other meaning out of christ's
words. The reason is evident, because christ says plainly, that the debts were
freely forgiven the debtors, who were not able to pay the debts. For otherwise,
Mary's forgiveness should have no coherence with the similitude of the
debtors.

The second part of his position is, that good works ever follow (as fruits the
tree) the persons that are freely justified. This is most manifestly falfe in
infants, whereof many justified in baptism, dye before they do any good work.
And if his comparison of the tree be good, some justified, never do good work;
and al, want them long time, some give over doing good, as some trees are
barren, some cease to bear fruit, and none bear always.


T. B. This Friar thinks he can dance in a net naked, and yet no man see
him; but I ween, every indifferent Reader does easily espy his manner of
dealing, (viz:) that he has nothing in him, but Cauils, Slanders, and
notorious leasings. Good works, says he, cannot ever follow justified
persons, as fruits follow trees, because some trees never do good, and all want
a long time, and none bear always. Is this Friar trow ye, well in his wits?
Has not malice so blinded him, that he cannot see wood for trees? Has the
Pope dispensed with him, to say what he list? Good works say I, ever follow
persons freely justified, as fruits follow the Tree, by Gods mercy in Christ
Jesus for his merits and condign deserts. Now what does our Jesuit? he aplies
himself wholly to cauils and extreme folly. He perceives, that truth will
preuail, and therefore strugleth with cauils and deceitful dealing against the
same.

First, he leaves out GODS mercy, and the merits of Christ Jesus.

Secondly, he infers a fond conclusion of his own making, and bears the
Reader in hand, that it is mine.

Thirdly, he triumphs before the victory, boasting that he has confuted my
position, when indeed he has only confuted himself, and fought the combat
with his own folly. For I do not say, that Good Works do ever and continually
without all interruption, follow persons freely justified. Let the Reader duly
and truly pervse my words, and then tell me, if our Friar Jesuit be not a
notorious liar. I say Good Works do ever follow but not simply, absolutely, and
at all seasons; but as fruits follow trees. Now, I pray you gentle Reader, how
do fruits follow trees? Our Friar tells us. Some trees never have any fruit
(says he) some want a long time, and none bear fruit ever. Alas, alas, what a
fond fryer-Iesuit is this Robert Parsons? Where were their wits, that made him
the Provincial of England? If good works follow persons justified no
otherwise, but as fruits follow trees, which is my position; then doubtless
are they not to be expected every hour, but when the due circumstances of time,
place, and persons do require. For good trees do not ever bring forth their
fruits, but in due times and seasons.


S. R. His first argument is taken out of Saint Paul, Romans Page 22^
6. 23. But the gift of GOD is life everlasting in Christ Jesus our Lord. He
argues in this manner; Eternal life is the free gift of God, therefore it can
no way be due to the merit of man's works. I answer, that the Antecedent is
false, and neither here nor any where else taught by S. Paul.


T. B. Our Jesuit shall answer and confute himself, Page 230
for these are his own words a little after. Because (says our Jesuit) as
works are rewarded even above their virtual and proportionate equality, as
Divines say* vltra condignu^; no marvel, if S. Paul called eternal life
rather Grace, or Gift, then Stipend, seeing it has much more of Grace, then it
has of Justice; yet he no where calls it mere grace. Beside that, as Saint
Austen writes, he might have called it a Stipend, as hec calls Death in
respect of Sin, but forbore, least we should think it were so justly
deserved by Good Works, as death is by evil. Thus discourses our Friar.
Where we have first by his own free grant, that Works are rewarded above
their desert. Albeit before he called them condign, and of condign merit.
These are his words: Good works (says he) done in Gods grace, are condignely
meritorius of eternal life. Secondly, Page 221
that Saint Paul calls eternal life rather Grace then Stipend, because it
has much more of Grace, then it has of Justice, where unawares he confuteth
himself doubtless; because where there is more of Grace then of Justice, it
is impossible to establish condign merit. For as the Apostle teaches us; To
him that works, the reward is not reckoned of Grace, Rom, 4, 4.
but of debt or duty. And the same Apostle declares it more plainly in
another place. For by Grace (says he) you are saved through faith (and that not
of your selves, Ephesians, 2, 8:
for it is the gift of God) not of works, least any man should boast
himself. Tit. 3, 5.
And again in another place thus; Not by the works of righteousness which we
did, but according to his mercy he saved us.

Thirdly, that the Apostle calls eternal life, rather grace then stipend, as
S. Austen writes; because it is not so justly deserved by Good Works, as
death is by evil works. No, no, S. Austen says plainly; Cum Deus coronat
merita nostra, nihil aliud coronat quam munera sua. When God crowns our
merits, Aug. Ep. 105. tom. 2.
he crowns nothing else but his own gifts. First therefore, seeing Good
Works are rewarded above their deserts. Secondly, seeing Good Works have more
of grace then of Justice. Thirdly, seeing Good Works cannot so merit heaven;
as ill works merit hell. Fourthly, seeing the best merits are nothing else,
but the mere gifts of GOD; I must needs conclude, that Works are not
condignely meritorious of eternal life.


S. R. Bell cites Theophilact, Page, 236.
because he says, Saint Paul called eternal life Grace, and not a Reward, as
though he had said, It is not the reward of our labors. But this is nothing
against us, who willingly confess erernall life to be grace, and not to
proceed of our own labors done by our selves, but done and wrought also by
the grace of Christ.


T. B. Our Jesuit is so pinched and nipped by my Authorities and reasons, that
he had rather say any thing then acknowledge the truth that I defend. Here as
we see, he is become a Semi-pelagian Heretic, for he affirms eternal life
to be wrought and done of our selves, yet not wholly of our selves, but
partly also of the holy Ghost. And after such a silly manner, he is enforced to
answer all the rest, viz: ever against himself.


S. R. True it is, that Augles as a follower of Scotus, Page 247
seems to think that the condignity of Good Works, rises not of any
equality which is in them unto glory, but of Gods promise to reward them.


T. B. It is well, that ye will once seem to grant a truth. The truth is this;
that both Josephus Angles, and your Cardinal Bellarmine, do freely grant being
overcome with the force of truth, that Good works can merit nothing, but by
reason of GODS promise freely made unto men. I have proved the Controversy so
evidently, that our Jesuit does nothing else but weary both himself and his
Reader, in writing most friuolously against the same. I refer the Reader to
The Downfall it self; where he shall find every Argument and piece of reason
soundly answered, before our Jesuit had published the same. And therefore for
me to use any further reply therein, were but Actum agere. For doubtless,
whosoever shall duly (all partiality set aside,) peruse The Downfall as it came
from my pen, and lay down this Jesuits answer to it in every place, and
compare them together; he will (I am fully persuaded) freely confess, that no
further reply is necessary in that behalf.


The sixth Article, of the destinction of mortal and venial sins.
S. R. ALl his proofs may be reduced to this Syllogism. What is against Gods
Law is mortal sin; Page, 269
all sin is against Gods law, Ergo all sin is mortal. Behold, Bell here
absolutely concludes all sin to be mortal, and after calls our venial
sins cursed and deformed: which argues, that he thinks all sin to be
indeed mortal, notwithstanding Gods mercy. The proposition he supposes, the
assumption he proves out of scripture, fathers, and schoolmen.


T. B. This controversy consists wholly in this viz: whether every sin be of
it own nature mo^al, or no. I hold the Affirmative, our Jesuit the Negative.
And for all that, he freely grants unawares as you see, that I have proved
mine opinion and doctrine, both out of the holy scripture, and also out of the
fathers and schoole-Doctors.


S. R. Christ (says Bell) tells us, Vbi supra.
that we must give account for every idle word; and S. John says, that every
sin is Anomia, that is, Transgression of the law. Saint Ambrose also defines
sin in general, to be transgression of Gods law, and S. Austen describes it,
to be every word, deed, or desire against Gods law. Yea, Bellarmine arffimeth
every sin to be against Gods law. The Rhemists also confess, that every sin is
a swaruing from the Law. Likewise Josephus Angles and Durandus, teach venial
sins to be against the law. To this argument Catholics answer differe^tly,
some by denial of the proposition, others by denial of the assumption. Some
say, that every sin which is against the Law is not mortal, but only that
which is perfectly against it. Others say, that venial sins are not against
the Law, but besides the Law.


T. B. Here is an answer, aunswerelesse. For first, our Friar grants, that
I have proved by the Scripture, by Saint Ambrose, by S. Austen, by Bellarmine,
their famous Cardinal, by the Rhemists, their learned brethren, by Josephus
Angles, their religious Friar, and reverend Bishop, and by Durandus, their
famous Schoole-Doctor; that every sin, more and less is against the Law of
God; and consequently, mortal of it own nature.

Secondly, our Friar freely confesses, that this argument of mine, does so
trouble the Papists, that they cannot agree among themselves, how to answer
the same. Some says he, deny the proposition, some deny the assumption, other
some say they cannot tell what: and our Jesuit himself stands amazed,
whether it is better to yield to the truth, or to face it out desperately, and
impudently with Legierdemain, iugling, falsehood, and deceitful dealing.


S. R. Yet better it is to say, Page, 270.
that venial sins are beside the Law, then against the Law.


T. B. Our Jesuit being in perplexity, (like as Buridanus his Ass) what to
answer to my argument, resolves to take the best way as he supposes: for, he
thinks as felons and Traitors standing at the bar in their arraigment, that
it is the best to plead (not guilty.) But I must tell him two things: The one,
that to be beside the Law and against He that is not with him, is against him,
and consequently, Mat, 12, 30.
if he do besides Christ's commandment, he does against the same.

The other, that Durandus, and many Popish Schoole-Doctors confess resolutely,
that every sin is against Gods law. And Josephus Angles affirms constantly,
that Dwrands opinion is now adays the Doctrine of their Schools. Where I wish
the Reader to note by the way, the mutability of late start up Romish Religion.
Read the Downfall, where this point is set down at large.


S. R. Therefore if Bell grant indeed (as he does in words) that by Gods
mercy some sins are made venial; Page 271.
he must also confess, that by Gods mercy, they are not against his charity
and friendship.


T. B. I grant, that as all sins is mortal of their own nature, (which I
have proved copiously in The Downfall, even by the testimony of very famous
Papists:) so are all sins venial by Gods mercy for the merits of his son
Jesus, to the regenerate his elect children, and consequently, though all sins
be against Gods friendship (who hates and detesteth all sin) in their own
nature, 1, Cor. 6, 11,
yet are all the sins of Gods elect, Ephesians, 1, 7.
reputed not only as venial, but none at all in Christ Jesus, 1, Cor. 1, 30.
and they received into Gods favor for Christ's sake. 2, Cor, 5, 21.



S. R. Bell proves out of Saint Ambrose, Page. 276.
that sin is defined the transgression of the law. And out of S. Austen, that
it is divine reason, or the will of God, commanding the order of nature to be
kept, and forbidding it to be broken. But these Fathers define only mortal
sin.


T. B. Mark for Christ's sake, and behold our Jesuit at a great Non plus. I
have proved both by the Scripture out of Saint John, and by the testimony of
the holy Fathers, and famous Popish Writers; that the very Essence, Nature, and
formality of sin, is the transgression of Gods Law. That Gods law is nothing
else, but his eternal reason or will decreeing what ought to be done, or not
to be done, and consequently, that every sin is mortal, as being against Gods
reason, Will, and Law. Now, our Friar being indeed at his wits end, knows
not what answer to make; but says at Randon, that the Fathers only define
mortal sin. He neither has Rhyme nor Reason thus to say; but we must (if ye
will) admit his bare word, for he is an honest man, I warrant you; his word is
as good, as no Obligation. The Fathers define sin generally, they make no
exception at all, yet our Jesuit will needs have them, to define only
mortal. What a thing is this? Who ever has heard the like? The Question is,
whether every sin be mortal, or no. I affirm every sin to be mortal; and I
prove it, because the holy Scripture, the Ancient Fathers, and the Doctors
do define sin to be so; yet our Jesuit thinks it enough barely to
answer, that they all speak of mortal sin, not of venial. O sweet Jesus?
Our Jesuit is either too too foolish, or else too, too malicious. His fond
answer is termed in Schools, Petitio principij, the begging of the Question.
He will needs have the Fathers to except venial sins, and to acknowledge such
sins, although they take no notice of such sins, neither once name such sins;
but contrariwise affirm, all sins without exception to be mortal. These
Fathers (says our fatherly Jesuit) define mortal sin, not venial. Even so
sorsooth, for why should they define that, which is not? The Fathers were wise;
they knew that every sin in it own nature deserved death and therefore defined
sin accordingly. They knew, Rom, 6, 23,
that Saint Paul says; The reward of sin is death. They knew, what God
says by his Prophet Ezechiell; The Soul that sins, Eze, 18, 20,
shall dye the death. They knew what God says by his Prophet David; Psalm, 5, 4,
Thou art not a GOD that loves wickedness, neither shall evil dwell with
thee. They knew what Christ will say, at the day of dome; Depart from me ye
cursed, into everlasting fire. But our Jesuit says, Math, 25, 41
that venial sins break not friendship with God. Well, Page 271.
let him stand in judgment against God for his venials; Psalm, 143, 2*
I will say with the humble Prophet: Enter not into judgment with thy Servant
(O Lord) for no flesh can be justified in thy sight.


S. R. I admit, Page 275.
that by sin Saint John understood all kind of Actual sin, and deny that
Anomia Iniquity, is taken for wickedness, and perfect transgression of the
Law; but generally as it is common to perfect transgression, and only swaruing
from the Law.


T. B. I answer, First, that Anomia is the transgression of the Law, according
to the nature and proper signification of the word, as their most famous
Linguist, Arias Montanus grants.

Secondly, that iniquity is perfect sin and wickedness, Psalm. 6, 9.
as the Prophet tells us; Discedite a me omnes, qui operamini iniquitate.
Depart from me all ye, that work iniquity. So the Latin Vulgata editio
reads, which the papists must approve perforce, because the Pope has so
enjoined them. Here iniquity, must needs be taken for mortal sin: for as
our Jesuit says, Venial sins do not break friendship with God: and I may
presume to affirm of holy David, that he commanded not them to depart from
him, who were in favor with God. No, no, God loves not those that work
iniquity.

Thirdly, Page 273.
that Saint John speaks of mortal sin, by our Jesuits own confession.

Fourthly, that Saint Bede, Lyranus, and Carthusianus, do all three with
uniform assent, expound it of mortal sin.

Fifthly, Page, 278
that our Jesuit unawares grants no less. These are his words; For
iniquity requires only want of equity, and conformity to Gods Law. Lo,
he grants iniquity, to want conformity to Gods Law: and so (say I) unawares
he grants, iniquity to be against Gods law, seeing it is here confessed of
our Jesuit, that it wants co^formity thereunto: for that is to be against Gods
Law.


S. R. Durand and Angles (I confess) did think venial sins to be against
the Law; Page 280.
but neither is this a matter of Faith, neither do they intend to favor Bell
any thing.


T. B. Here our Jesuit grants me the victory, confessing that his own
dear friends, Durand and Angles defend mine opinion. But he adds two things
for his defense, as he thinks, yet I deny them, and so I think will the
indifferent Reader, to be very ridiculous, and altogether childish. First, he
says, it is no matter of faith. What then good Sir? Is nothing to be regarded,
but matters of Faith? Is it a matter of faith, that your Pope cannot err? That
he is above a general Council? That he can depose kings? Nay, that either he or
your self be an honest man? And what is a matter of faith? Forsooth,
whatsoever the Pope will have a matter of faith. Secondly, he says, Durand and
Angles intend not to favor me. This is brother-folly to the former. How far
to London, a pokefull of Plumbes.


S. R. All formal sin is formal iniquity, but not contrariwise. Page 278.
As Adultery or murder committed by a fool or mad man, is iniquity, but no
more sin, then it is in Beasts.


T. B. First, Iniquity is wickedness, and consequently sin, as is already
proved.

Secondly, Iniquity is formally against equity, as our Jesuit has granted.

Thirdly, it is formally transgression of Gods Law, Page 278
as I have many ways confirmed. Ergo, it is formally sin.

Fourthly, If Adultery or murder done by a fool or mad man be iniquity, it
is also sin; for all iniquity is sin, as is already proved.

Fifthly, to say that Adultery done by a fool or mad man, Ignorantia iuris
diuini vel naturalis, non excusat. cans. 17. q. 4. cap. siqui^.
is no more sin then it is in beasts, seems to me a beastly affirmation.
Our Jesuit barely says it, he proves it not. I know his supposed ground;
because forsooth, it is not voluntary. But I would have him to tell me, how it
is not as well sin in Fools and mad men, as Adams fault is sin in Infants
against their will. Because (says he) they cannot avoid it. The same say I,
of Infantes. I add, that Beasts never had it in their power, to avoid
sin, and sinful acts; but Fools, mad men, and Infantes, were all at
once enabled to have kept the Law, when they were in Lumbis Adae; which is
enough for their just condemnation. And it is confirmed, because they may as
well be freed from Original sin, as from murder and Adultery. It is a common
saying, that if a drunken man, kill a man, Aristotle, libr. 3. ethic. cap. 5..
72.
when he is drunk; he must be hanged, when he is sober: Yea, the Ethnicke
Philosopher can tell us, that a murderer in his drunkenness, is worthy of
double punishment. First, for his drunkenness, then for the sin that
follows upon the same. For though the sin consequent, be not voluntary in
the act and deed done, yet is it voluntary in the cause.


S. R. Bell notes the Romish Religion of mutability, Page 280. 281.
confessing that the old Roman Religion was Catholic, sound, and pure,
with which he will not contend. But seeing you have granted the old Roman
Religion to be pure and Catholic, and slander the late, I bring an action of
slander against you, and charge you to bring good witness, when, wherein, and
by whom, the late Roman Religion corrupted the purity of the old.


T. B. This is the point indeed, that seduceth the silly ignorant sort
throughout the Christian world. For the Pope and his flattering Parasites bear
them in hand, that the late start up Romish doctrine, is the old Roman religion,
which S. Peter and Saint Paul, preached to the Romanies in their life time:
But my life and salvation I gage for the trial, it is not so. No, no, It is a
New Religion, crept by little and little into the Church of Rome. To which
doctrine if the vulgar people would once hearken, all partiality and sinister
affection set apart; they would undoubtedly utterly forsake the Pope, and
detest from their hearts all Popish faction. Here our Friar Jesuit threatens
me, to bring an action of the case against me; for that (as he says) I
slander their Religion. He would have me to tell him and his Pope, when,
wherein, and by whom, the late Romish Religion corrupted the purity of the old.
I answer, first, that I desire to know our Jesuits name, because we may
perhaps agree without suite in Law. Secondly, that I have in a printed Book
published many years ago, to the view and judgment of all the Christian world,
showed in plain and express terms, at what times, in what points, and by
what persons, the old Roman Religion taught by Saint Paul, (as holy Writ
tells us) and by Saint Peter, (as Histories Ecclesiastical do relate,) was
successively corrupted, errors embraced, superstition nourirished, ignorance
countenanced, and false Doctrine decreed for the truth. This Book is entitled
the Survey of Popery, published about ten years ago, in the year of our
Lord God, 1596. I have challenged all Jesuits and Iesuited Papists, jointly
and severally, to answer it, and all my other Books. They have oftentimes in
many of their slaundrous Libels, made mention both of the Survey, and of my
other Books, and promised aunswers to the same, but while the Grass grows,
the Horse dies. This is the first answer, that ever I received to this day.
Which how silly it is, let others judge. For their late forerunner did but
snatch here and there, and answered directly nothing at all. Our Jesuit here
insinuates something, which he cannot well tell how to shuffle up. I also
alleged out of Josephus Angles, a famous Popish Schoole-Doctor and Bishop,
Ios. Ang. ^. ^2. s. Page 175.
that the Popish Doctrine daily alters in their Schools. S. Thomas (says
he) and his followers hold; That a Ven^all sin is not so much against the Law,
as besides the Law. But Durand, and many others impugn this opinion, and
avouch Venial sins to be against the Commandments. And this opinion
(says he) seems now adays to be more common in the schools. Here I wished
the Reader to note by the way, out of the word (Modo, Now adays) the
mutability of the Romish Religion.


S. R. Angles insinuates School opinions to be mutable. Page 280.
Bell applies it to the Roman Religion, as if it consisted of School
opinions, which may be held Pro and contra with unity of Faith.


T. B. If School opinions be mutable, then Popish Religion is mutable of
necessity. For how dare the Schoole-Doctours teach publicly, contrary to the
Popes mind? Was not your famous Doctor Michael at Louain, threatened to frame
his opinion to the Popes liking, or else ye w^^e what would have followed? Did
not the Pope send Toledo the Jesuit, to confer with him, and tell him what
the Pope thought, and therefore he must, and so forth? You know it was so. Be
not grieved I pray you, Rhenan. in annot. ad libr. Tertul.
to hear Beatus Rhenanus, one of your dear friends, speak a truth of your
Schools and Schoole-Doctou^s. These are his words? Thomas Aquinas and Scotus,
etc. Thomas Aquinas and Scotus, men too much delighted with subtilties, have
brought confession this day to such a p^sse, that Ioannes Geilerius, a Grave
and reverend Diui^e, and a Preacher a long time at Argentoraium, said many a
time to his friends, that it was impossible for a man to make his confession,
according to their Traditions. Thus writes Rhenanus. Out of whose words I
note. First, that the vain, curious destinctions of the Schole-doctors, have
brought much mischief into the Church of GOD. Which thing if a Papist had not
spoken it, would seem incredible to the world.

Secondly, that it is impossible for a Papist to make his confession, acording
to the Popish law; and consequently, that all Papists by Popish doctrine, must
perish everlastingly. Mark well my words (Gentle Reader) the Papists teach us
to hold for an article of our belief, that we are bound to make our
confessions as the Popish law prescribes; that is, as Aquinas and Scotus have
set down the same. And for all that Gielerius a Papist himself and a great
divine, Lo, Papists dare not say al they think.
complained often to his friends, that no man could possibly perform the same.
Now then, since on the one side, Popish confession must be made under pain of
damnation; and since on the other side, none possibly can make the same as it
is required; it follows of necessity by Popish Doctrine, that all Papists
must be damned eternally. O miserabie Popery, coufounded by thy self! O late
start-vp Religion, patched like a Beggars cloak! Thine own Doctors, O Popery,
(such force has the truth) have bewrayed thy treachery to the world. Thirdly,
that many likewise among the Papists, do externally obey the Popish Law; who
for all that, in their hearts, detest the late hatched Romish Religion. This is
evident by the secret complaint of the learned man Gielerius, who told that to
his trusty friends, which he durst not tell the pope.


S. R. Their canonized Martyr Bishop Fisher (says he) and their Popish Bishop
Gerson wrote, Page, 281.
that Venial sins were such only by the mercy of God. Behold the O^iginall
of Venial Sins.
Here Bell for one truth, utters two untruths. True it is, that Bishop
Fisher and Gerson were in that error; but that was both before it was
condemned in the church, as it was since by Pius the v. and Gregorius, 13.
Neither did they account involuntary motions of Concupiscence for Venial
sins, as Bell does; but such as Catholics account Venial. But untrue it
is, that either Bishop Fisher, is cannonized, or Gerson was a Bishop.


T. B. Here our Jesuit grants freely, that both the famous learned Bishop
Fisher, and that excellent Doctor Gerson of high esteem in the Counsel of
Constance, held for a constant position and sound Doctrine, that every sin is
mortal of it own nature, our Doctrine therefore is the same, which great
learned Papists do defend. And I must needs here put the Reader in mind, of
the newness of late Romish religion. (viz:) that Venial Sins were never
known to the Church, until the late days of Pius the fifth, and Gregory the 13.
that is to say; about forty years ago. An: Dom: 1566.
O Popery! thou art but a child, thou must never from this day, Venial sins
were hatched.
be called the old Religion, for here our Jesuit confesses thine Nonage, and
proclaims thee to be the New religion. I must likewise insinuate to the
Reader, another point of great importance (viz:) that the popes act is reputed
the decree of the Church, and that no part of Romish religion is a matter of
faith, until it please the Pope so to apoint it. Now, for Fisher and Gerson,
the one is a cannonized Popish Saint, the other a Popish Bishop. But these are
not matters to stand upon, though they help our Jesuit to pass over the time,
and to dazzle the eyes of the Reader.


S. R. He concludes this Article with this goodly reason. Page, 281
One steals just so many Eggs, as are necessary to make a Mortal sin;
another steals one less. But there can be no reason, why God may justly
condemn the one to hell, and not the other. Therefore they both sin Mortally
alike. To this I answer, by demanding a reason, why the Judge may condemn
him to death that steals thirteen pence half penny, and not him that
steals one penny less. If he answer, because the law condemns one and not
the other; I ask again, what reason was there, that the Law was made against
the one, and no^ against the other? And if Bell can find a reason in this, he
will find one in his own Question. The reason of both is, because such a
quantity, is a notable injury to our neighbor, and consequently, it is against
charity, and so breaks the Law; and a less quantity is not.


T. B. The destinction between Mortal and Venial Sins lately invented by
the Pope, does so trouble our Jesuit after his consultation with his best
learned friends, that he can shape me no answer, touching a few Eggs.
Gladly he would seem to say something; yet after he has wearied himself
with struggling against the truth, he is where he first began. Not knowing how
to answer, he demands two Questions; and that done, he tells me, I must
answer my self. This notwithstanding, after better aduisement and
consideration had of the matter, he pretends to show a reason of both his own
questions. But howsoever that be (which is indeed a mere mockery) he leaves
my argument untouched. Let us suppose for explication sake, that Eggs worth
thirteen pence half penny makes a Mortal sin, and that God may justly
condemn him that stole them; as also a Mortal Judge, among Mortal men. Let
us likewise suppose for example sake, that neither the Civil Judge, nor God
himself can justly condemn him, that has stolen but so many Eggs as are
worth twelve pence half penny. Now, this is my Question; Nay, this is mine
assertion; that there can no good reason be yielded, why God may justly
condemn the one to Hell, and not the other. To answer as the Jesuit does,
after he has deeply pondered the matter, that one is a notable injury to our
neighbor, not so the other, is too teo childish and frivolous. For, if
thirteen pence half penny be a notable injury, so is also twelve pence: One
penny doubtless, cannot make Mortal and Venial difference: neither is it to
the purpose, to say as our Jesuit does; viz. that the civil Judge cannot
condemn the thief, that steals one penny less. The reason is evident,
because the civil Judge is under the law and subject to it, but God Omnipotent
is above his Law, and may dispense with it at his good pleasure. So did Christ
answer the Pharisees, on the behalf of his disciple. The sabboath says
Christ, Mark, 2, 27.
was made for man, and not man for the sabbath. Therefore is the son of Man,
Lord of the sabbath also. The Jesuits reason thus rejected as frivolous, and
nothing to the purpose, let us examine the matter to the bottom, for it is a
point of great consequence. First then, this is an undoubted truth, that the
supreme civil Magistrate, may as lawfully appoint death for stealing of twelve
pence, as for 13. pence half penny, for the penalty of death, is wholly
arbitrary to the judge. He must frame his laws, as serve best for the peaceable
government of his people. Whereupon it comes, that in diverse countries,
diverse punishments are designed for the same faults, and all agreeable to Gods
law. This is likewise an undoubted truth in Popery, (viz:) that some Sins are
Venial of their own nature, other some mortal. Against this false ground of
Popery, do I now contend. We have seen already, that a thief may as well be
condemned to dye for twelve pence, as for more, even so then, God a fortiori,
may as justly condemn one for a Popish Venial sin, as for a Mortal, for
every sin deserves death of it own nature, be it more, be it less. Yea,
if any sin should of it own nature, be Venial, the^ should Original sin
in an infant, be Venial most of all, because the Infant neither can avoid it,
neither has any will to do it. I therefore conclude, that it is against all
sense and reason, to say, that God may justly condeme a man, for stealing so
many Eggs as in Popery make a Mortal Si^n^, (let them name what number they
will,) and that he cannot likewise condemn him, that steals but one Egg
less. And it is absurd to say or think, that the least sin that can be
named, does not break off amity and friendship with God, Psalm, 5. 4
if we respect the sin in it own Nature. Psalm, 6. 8
I prove it, because the least sin that can be named, does auert and turn
the doer from the face of God; Ergo, from the amity and favor of God. I prove
the Antecedent, for the consequence is good, and cannot be denied. No sin
whatsoever, more or less, can be referred unto God, who detesteth all sin;
Ergo, every sin, be it never so small, turns us away from the favor of
God. Truly therefore wrote Bishop Fisher and Master Gerson, that every sin is
mortal of it own nature. And so is that proved, which I defend.


The seventh Article, of Unwritten Traditions.
THe Jesuit uses many impertinent digressions, and needless Ta^tologies in
this Article. I standing to be brief, will only answer to such
allegations, as shall seem necessary for the contentation of the Reader,
referring him for the rest to the Downfall, where he may find all necessary
points, virtually confuted, though not in express terms.

S. R. All such points of Christian faith, Page 284.
as are necessary to be actually believed, of every one that has use of reason
though he be never so simple, are actually contained in scripture, either
clearly or obscurely.


T. B. This doctrine is good, I approve it with all my heart, and willingly
subscribe unto it with my pen. If our Jesuit will stand to this Doctrine, we
shall soon agree.


S. R. For surely, Page. 285.
the Prophets and Evangelists, writing their Doctrine for our remembrance, would
omit no one point, which was necessary to be actually known of every one;
especially, seeing they have written many things, which are not so necessary.
(...). in Joan. tract. 49. to. 9.
And this thing teaches S. Austen, when he says; those things are written,
which seemed sufficient for the salvation of the faithful.


T. B. This Doctrine I likewise approve; it is the very same that I defend.
Keep thee here Jesuit, and we shall not contend.


S. R. Methinks S. Austen plainly avouches, that God has procured every thing
to be clearly written, Page 286
which to know is necessary to every man's salvation. The same teaches S. Syril
saying; Aug. de peci. mer. lib. 2, c. vlt tom. 7.
Not al things which our lord did are written, but what the writers deemed
sufficient, Ciril. in Job. lib. 12. cap, vlt.
as well for manners, as for Doctrine; that by right says and works, we may
attain the kingdom of Heaven. S. Chrysostom says; Chrisost. in 2. These.
Hom. 3.
what things soever are necessary, the same are manifest out of the scripture.


T. B. This doctrine I still approve, as which the Reader may find, to be taken
out of the Downfall. And so our Jesuit does here subscribe unto my Doctrine,
though he take upon him to oppugn the same. For the truth is mighty, and will
in time prevail. This being so, I have no need to stand long upon this point.
For as the Reader sees, the Jesuit approoueth that Doctrine, which I in the
Downfall do defend.


S. R. Truly said Saint Ephiphanius, Page 291
that we may tell the invention of every question, out of the consequence of
Scriptures. Epipha. here is. 65
He said not, out of the Scripture. For all cannot be taken thence, as himself
writes; but of the consequence of them. Here Is. 61.
Because all questions are resolved out of the scriptures, or out of that which
follows of them, as the effect of the cause.


T. B. This also is sound Doctrine, and the very same which I defend in the
Downfall. And consequently, the very weapons which our Jesuit has put into our
hands, are sufficient to defend us and our cause against him. For if the Reader
shall remember these grounds, and these positions freely of him granted, and
withal have recourse unto the Downfall; he shall be able with all facility, to
answer to all that the Jesuit obiecteth in this Article.


S. R. All points of Christian faith, cannot be sufficiently and immediately
proved out of scripture. Page 293
For there is no place of all the scripture, which sufficiently proves all the
rest to be cannonicall; our B. Lady to be a perpetual Virgin, and. the Sabbath
to be lawfully translated from Saturday to Sunday.


T. B. Now our Jesuit forgets himself, and what doctrine he has already
delivered. It were a sufficient answer to tell him, that he here confuteth
himself. But for the Readers help, I will breefely answer his particulars.
To the first I say, Page. 134.
it is soundly and largely answered in the Downfall of Popery. In regard of
breuity, I refer the Reader to the place quoted in the Margent. To the
second, I answer first, that I willingly acknowledge the most blessed Virgin,
to be the Mother of true God and true man, and to have bin a perpetual Virgin,
both before Christ's birth, and in his birth, and after his birth.

Secondly, that albeit I defend (as our Jesuit also has granted) all things
necessary to be believed unto salvation to be contained in the holy scriptures;
yet do I not deny, but willingly grant, and reverently admit many things,
received by the perpetual consent of the church, and not repugnant to the
written word, Aug ad Iam^ar. ep. 118
as true, wholesome, and godly. For I am persuaded with S. Austen, that
whatsoever is neither against Faith, nor against good manners; may
indifferently be observed for their society amongst whom we do converse.
Again, it is one thing to say, that all necessary points of faith and
Doctrine, are contained in the holy scriptures; another thing to say, that
nothing not contained in the scripture, has bin received by tradition, and may
be admitted for a truth. It cannot be convinced out of the scriptures (and
therefore no matter of faith) that Saint Peter and S, Paul dyed together at
Rome; yet do I admit it for a truth, as received by Tradition from the
Primative Church, and testified by uniform consent of al approved antiquity.
To the third, I have already said enough both in my Book of Survey, and also
in the Regiment of the Church. For in things indifferent, the Church may
determine what is most expedient, for the due circumstances of times, places,
and persons.


S. R. God (says Bell,) forbids us to add to his word. Page, 295
I answer, that such places make nothing against Traditions, which are
necessary to man's salvation, because such are indeed Gods word, though
unwritten.


T. B. I answer our Jesuit with his own words, which follow immediately, and
are these; for the two first places only forbid, adding to Gods word any thing
of our own head, or which is man's word, as may be proved by the reason of the
forbiddance; Prou, 30, 6
viz: least we be disproued, and found liars as no doubt we might, by adding
man's word which is subject to lie; but not by adding Gods word, which never
can prove untrue, though it be not written; Thus writes our Jesuit, confuting
himself so sufficiently, as more needs not be required.

In these words he tells us two things, the one quite opposite to the other.
First, he truly says (confuting himself) that the Scripture forbids, to
add of our own head, any thing, which is but man's word, and subject to
falsehood and lying.

This is good. But secondly he adds, that to add Gods word though
unwritten, is a lawful thing: but this is a silly begging of the question, as
the Schools term it. For I deny that unwritten Word to be Gods Word, which
our Jesuit should prove, but cannot. And our Jesuit has already confessed,
that all necessary points of faith, Page, 284, 285.
are contained in the Scriptures and written Word. And consequently, it is to
late to tell us now, of adding or admitting the unwritten Word. I admit his
former assertion, as consonant to the Scriptures; this latter I reject, as
childish, vain, and frivolous. I prove it, because every word of God is to be
admitted as a matter of faith; and yet all matters of Faith are written, as is
already proved and granted. This therefore not being written, must be hissed
out of the School of Christians.


S. R. Bell alleges the Prophets words; To the Law rather, Page 301.
and to the Testimony. Esa, 8, 20.
This place makes nothing for him. First, because the Prophet names not only
the Law, but Testimony also, which comprehends Gods unwritten word. Secondly,
because Esaias does not absolutely bid us recurre to the Law and Testimony, but
rather to them, then to Witches; of whom he had immediately forbidden us to
enquire.


T. B. I answer, that our Jesuit makes no conscience how he interpret the
Scripture, so he may any way make it seem to serve his turn. For he
desperately here affirms without all reason and authority, that by
Testimony, is understood the unwritten Word. Whereas indeed it is the written
Law, added only for explication sake: as if he had said; Ye must not seek
help at the dead, which is the illusion of Satan, but ye must seek remedy
in the word of God, where his will is revealed: ye must in all doubts and
difficulties have recourse to the Law of God, which is the testification of
Gods will toward man. In it ye shall find, whatsoever is necessary for you to
know. Breefely, as if he had said; Ye must ever have recourse to the Law, as
to the Testimony of Gods holy will. Saint Hierom yields the same exposition
of this place, Hier. iu hune locum.
in these words; Si vultis noscere quae dubia sunt, magis vos legi and
Testimoniis tradite Scripturarum. If ye will know the things that are
doubtful, ye must have recourse to the Law, and to the Testimony of the
Scriptures. Lo, he joins the Testimony with the Law, not as a thing
distinct from it, but as an explication of the same. This reason is confirmed,
by the coronation of King Ioas; 2. Par. 23. 11.
who received at his coronation these three things; Unction, the Testimony, or
the Law; and the Diadem, or Crown. Where the Latin Vulgata editio (to which
the Pope has tied all Papists) expounds the Testimony to be the Law. Which
gloss strikes our Jesuits exposition dead. So then, by the Popes own
approbation, the Testimony is taken for the written word of Gods Law, and his
Jesuit has here proved himself, to be a very Daw. And where our Jesuit
weeneth to find some help in the word ( Rather;) It seems to me, that it
does him hinder: For, if his sense be admitted, it will be lawful in some
cases and times, to have recourse unto Witches. But I will leave him to
himself, as a careless and fond Disputer.


S. R. Esaias indeed bids us go to Gods written word, Page 301,
which we refuse not to do in all doubts, wherein it resolves us, but forbids
us not to go to any other, which is as he says, agreeable to this word.
Wherefore either must Bell prove, that the Churches Traditions are not agreeable
to Gods written Word; or he must know, that God not only not forbids us, but
rather commands us to seek after them.


T. B. Here our Jesuit seems to correct himself, and to grant, that the
Prophet speaks of the Written Word. But he adds of his own head, that the
Scripture will not resolve them in all things; and that therefore they must
have recourse, to their Unwritten Traditions withal. Yet like a good Fellow,
he makes one exception, which is this; Unless I prove their traditions not
to be agreeable to Gods word. Which thing God be thanked, This is done in the
Downfall of Popery.
is already done in the Downfall it self. Touching the time, when Saint John
the Apostle dyed; seven famous Chronologers will contest with me, that he
lived an hundred years after Christ's sacred incarnation (though the Printer
negligently put down Ascension amiss, as many other things;) (viz:) Eusebius
Caesariensis, Johannes Nauclerus, Rhegino Prumiensis, Marianus Scotus, Martinus
Polonus, Pontacus Burdegalensis, and Hermannus Contractus; that Saint John the
Apostle was living almost 32. years after that our Jesuit says he was dead.
Now, whether our Friar be skillful in Chronology, or no; that will not I
define, let the Reader judge. He himself boasts of his skill; what he has
performed, we see: But whatsoever his skill be, his lying is in the highest
degree.


S. R. But omitting these errors, as Testimonies of Bells, Page 304.
ignorance in Histories, which I regard not, to his Argument I answer.


T. B. They are not mine errors, but your own lies. You are full of boasting
and bragging, but truth have ye none, and all good conscience from you is quite
gone. Let us hear your grave answer.


S. R. I answer, that those words ( These are written) are meant only of
Miracles done by Christ, and written by Saint John, to move us to believe that
Christ was God.


T. B. It troubles our Jesuit more then a little, Aquinas understands these
words, both of Christ's sayings and doings,
that I affirm Saint John to have written his Gospel, about 100. years after
Christ's ascension into Heaven. And for that end (as we have heard) he has
addicted himself wholly to cogging, falsehood, and lying; in so much as he would
needs have Saint John dead, while he was living: and wherefore is all this huge
Mass of lying? forsooth, P 3. q. 42. art. 4. ad primum.
because these words of Saint John (These a^e written) are thereby proved to
be meant of the whole corpse of the holy Bible. For Saint John writing after
all, when the Cannon of the scripture was complete, perfect, and fully
accomplished, must needs mean of all; and that for two respects. First
because all the rest of the Scriptures tend to one and the same end, which
Saint John aymeth at, (viz:) that we may believe, That Jesus is the Son of
GOD. Secondly, because Miracles alone without Doctrine, are not able to work
the effect, whereof Saint John speaks. For Faith is not grounded in Miracles,
but in the promises and word of God. M^racles cannot beget Faith, Mar, 16, 20,
they only are helps and means to confir me it in us. Therefore says Saint
Luke, The Apostles went forth, and preached the word of God, and the Lord
wrought with their preaching, and confirmed it with Miracles following. And so
do Saint Austen and Saint Cyrill, understand these words of Saint John,
affirming all things necessary for salvation, to be contained in the holy
scriptures. Their words are set down, in The Downfall of Popery.


S. R. We confess scripture to be an infallible rule, Page 308,
but not the total rule, but as Bellarmine says, the partial rule.


T. B. What is this, but to confess Christ an imperfect workman? But to
confess Christ, to have set down an imperfect rule of Faith? But to confess,
that the Scripture contains not all things necessary for salvation? Which for
all that, Page, 284.
you have confessed again, and again. As before like a Pelagian, you said,
Eternal life was not mere grace, Page 285,
nor the mere gift of God, Page, 286.
but depends partly to man's merit; So now you say here, Page 230.
That the Scripture is not a total rule of Faith, but must have some help
from men's Traditions. But I will confound you with your own words, which
before came from your own Pen. Thus do you write; For surely, Page 285.
the Prophets and Evangelists writing their doctrine for our better
remembrance, would omit no one point, which was necessary to be actually
known of every one; especially, seeing they have written some things which
are not so necessary. Again, Page 284.
in another place you have these express words; All such points of Christian
Faith, as are necessary to be actually believed, of every one that has use of
reason, are actually contained in the Scripture. Now, out of these words I
note: First, that the Scriptures were written for our remembrance and good.

Secondly, that nothing is omitted in the Scripture, which is necessary for our
salvation.

Thirdly, that the Prophets and Evangelists wrote many things not so necessary
for us, and therefore, would in no case omit those things which were necessary
for our souls health.

Fourthly, that all things which every one is bound to believe actually, are
actually set down in the Scripture. This being true, as it is most true
indeed; I am content to stand to the censure of every indifferent Reader,
whether by the Jesuits confession and free grant, the Scripture be a total
rule of our Faith, or no. For doubtless, that which contains all necessary
points of Christian Faith, cannot be a partial rule, but a total and
consummate rule of our faith.


S. R. The most that Bell has out of S. Cyprian, is, Page 314.
That what is no true Tradition, Page 315.
must be proved by Scripture, which I willingly grant. Saint Cyprian thought
the Pope only to er^e in a Commandment to be done; Cypr. lib. 1. ep. 3.
Bell condemns him, in his judicial sentences of Faith. Whereas S. Cyprian
professes, that false Faith can have no access to S. Peter's Chair.


T. B. I have proved in the Downfall, that though our Papists of late days
do impudently affirm, that their Pope cannot err, when he defines
iudicially; yet this notwithwithstanding, Saint Cyprian teaches and tells us
plainly and roundly, that in his time the Bishop of Rome had no such authority,
as this day he proudly, and Antichristianly takes upon him. For he roundly
withstood the decree of Pope Stephanus, who was then the Bishop of Rome, and
both sharply reproved him, and stoutly contemned his falsely pretended
authority. And for all that, Saint Cyprian was ever reputed a very holy
Bishop in his life time, and a glorious Martyr being dead. But, if the
Bishop of Rome had been Christ's Vicar, and so privileged, as our Papists
bear the World in hand he is; then doublesse Saint Cyprian must needs have
been an Heretic, and so reputed and esteemed in the Church of GOD, For, if
any Christian shall this day do or affirm, as Saint Cyprian did in his time,
or publicly deny the Popes falsely pretended prymacy in any place, Country,
Territories, or Dominions, where Popery bears the sway; then without all
peradventure, he must be burnt at a stake, with fire and Faggot for his pains.
Now, what does our Jesuit answer to this discourse? Forsooth, that whatsoever
is no true Tradition, the same must be tried by the Scripture. Alas, alas,
Who sees not, that our Jesuit, (and consequently all Papists, seeing he
has the advice of all the learned among them,) is at a Non plus? I contend,
that Traditions ought to be tried by the Scripture, whether they be true and
sound, or no: Our Friar answers, that false Traditions, and such as be not
true, must be so tried. What a jest is this? The Scripture is the Touchstone,
by which we must try false and true Traditions; and so we cannot know them to
be true Traditions, before we try them by the Scripture. How fondly therefore
answers our Friar, that if they be not true, they must be tried by the
Scripture? We deny these, and these Traditions to be true, and therefore
appeal to the Scripture for the trial thereof. No, no, says our Jesuit,
these may not be tried by the Scripture, because they are true Traditions.
Marry Sir, this is indeed an answer answerlesse. For ye take all the trial
to your self, and leave none at all to the Scripture. You will first set down
in your judgments, which be true Traditions, and which be false; and that
done, we must go try those to be false by the Scripture, which you hold for
false; but with the other, we must not deal at all. By this kind of dealing, I
must needs say, the Scripture is but a partial rule of Faith indeed. And what
shall be the total rule of our says? Our Jesuit here tells us, that it is the
Popes judicial sentence, whose faith cannot fail. For false Faith (says he)
can have no access to Saint Peter's chair: as though forsooth Saint Cyprian
did think, that the Bishop of Romes Faith could not fail, where he means
nothing less, then to ascribe such a privilege to the Church of Rome. For, if
he had been of that mind, he would never have urged Pope Stephanus, to be
tried by the Scriptures. No, no, Saint Cyprian speaks not of error in Faith
or Doctrine, but of neglect of discipline and false dealing of Schismatiques,
to whose false tales and reports, the Romans would never yield their
consent. As if he had said; The Schismatickes which we have driven out of
Africa, seek intertainement at Rome, but the Romans (whose Faith the Apostle
praised,) will never hearken unto them, or give credit to their reports. He
speaks of one Felicissimus, and other bad fellows his Companions, whose
naughty dealing Saint Cyprian thought Cornelius and the godly Romans would
never favor. But such beggarly shifts as these be, are good enough for Popish
falsely pretended prymacy. Of which subject I have written at large, in the
Hunting of the Romish Fox.


S. R. Bell cites Saint Ambrose, Page 319.
who bids us not believe Argument and disputations, but to ask the
Scriptures, Apostles, Prophets, and Christ. But it makes for us, because it
allows enquiring of others besides the Scriptures: namely, of Apostles, from
whom the churches Traditions came.


T. B. Our Jesuit is a notable covetous Fellow; he will have all to make for
him, though it be never so much against him. Because Saint Ambrose, after he
has willed us to have recourse to the Scriptures, and there to know the
resolution of all doubts, does forthwith name the Apopostles, Prophets, and
Christ, he will have S. Ambrose, ( Will he, Nil he) to send us to others
besides the scriptures, whereas Saint Ambrose does only explicate himself,
telling us what Scriptures we shall search; (viz:) not O^ids Metamorphosis,
nor Tullies Offices, but of the Prophets, of the Apostles, of Christ himself.


S. R. Bell cites S. Chrysostom, Page 318.
who says, that if any thing be spoken without Scripture, the hearers mind
wauereth, sometimes doubting* sometimes assenting, otherwhiles denying. But
marvel it is, that he would touch Saint Chrysostom who Hom. 42. Thessal. Upon
these words, ( Hold Traditions) says. Hence it appears, that the Apostles
delivered not all things by Letters, and that one as well as the other are
worthy of the same credit. Wherefore we think the Churches Traditions to
deserve belief. It is a Tradition, ask no more.


T. B. Here I might tell our Jesuit, that Saint Chrysostom has but five
Homelies in all, to the second of the Thessalonians, though he name it the 42.
Our Friar would exclaim, if he could ^ind such a fault in my writings. True it
is, that Saint Chrysostom and other of the Fathers, and my self with them,
do willingly admit, and greatly reverence, many unwritten Trad^tions being
consonant to the Holy Scriptures; but neither as matters of Faith, nor as
parts of necessary doctrine, but as things tending to order and comeliness
in the worship of God, and administration of his sacraments. In this kind of
Traditions, I willingly agree with Saint Chrysostom, Saint Basil, S. Ambrose,
and other fathers. Neither would I wish any to be too curious, in this kind of
Traditions. It is enough to hear of the^, to whom the chief care of the
church is committed, that it is a Tradition of the Elders: and so have I
answered enough to all frivolous objections of our Jesuit; especially, if The
Downfall be well marked. The rest which I let pass, is sufficiently confuted
there. Saint Chrisostoms meaning, is plainly (as I have said.) Hence it may
apeare, because, in the former part of this Objection, he will admit, nothing
without the scripture; ( In things concerning faith, and Doctrine, ever under
stand;) in the latter part of the Objection, he admits unwritten
Traditions, and will not have us too curious in receiving them; ( In thing
which are indifferent, ever understand.)


S. R. Bell cites Bishop Fisher because in one place, he calls the
Scripture the storehouse of all truths, Page, 324.
necessary to be known of Christians: and in another says, that when
Heretics contend with us, we must defend our cause with other help, the^ by
the holy scripture. His meaning is, that when we dispute with Heretics, we
ought to have other helps beside scripture.


T. B. His meaning is as you say, and I approve the same. But why does he
require other help then the scripture, seeing the scripture as he grants,
is the storehouse of all necessary truths? Shall I tell you? You will not
thank me for my pains. I have set down at large in my Book of Motives, what
this your holy Bishop has written of Purgatory and Pardons. I will now
recount the argument, See my Motives, in the 7. Preamble.
only referring the Reader to the place.

First, Master Fisher tells us, that the Greek church never bell eeued
Purgatory.

Secondly, that the Latin Church and Church of Rome did not believe the said
Purgatory, for many hundred of years after S. Peter's death, whose successor
for all that, the Pope boasts himself to be.

Thirdly, that this Purgatory was not believed of all the Latin Church, at one
and the same time; but by little and little. Where I wish the Reader to note by
the way, that Popery crept into the Church by little and little, and not all at
one time, which is a point that galleth the papists more then a little I ween.

Fourthly, that Purgatory was believed in these latter days, by special
revelation of the holy Ghost.

Fifthly, that Pardons came not up, till Purgatory was found out, for in
Purgatory rests the life of Pardons; as which (if there be no Purgatory,) are
not worth a straw.

Sixthly, that Purgatory was a loug time unknown.

Seauenthly, that Purgatory could not be found in the Scripture, of a very long
time.

Eighthly, that it was not wholly found out by the scriptures, but partly by
Revelations. And here we see that verified, which our Jesuit out of
Bellarmine tells us, (viz:) that the holy Scripture is but a partial rule of
faith. For, if it be a total rule of faith, the Pope (as Master Fisher
affirms) must both want his Purgatory, and be bereaved of his pardons.

Ninthly, that pardons were not heard of, or known, to the Primative Church.

Tenthly, that then Pardons began, when men began to fear the pains of
Purgatory.

This is the sum of that worthy Doctrine, which Bishop Fisher has published
to the world; even at that time when he defended the Pope and Popery, after the
best manner he could. He that shall read his words in my Motives at large,
cannot but detest the Pope and all popish faction. Hence it is most apparent,
why the Bishop said that they must use other helps then the holy Scripture,
for the maintenance of their Religion, for the Scripture is but a partial rule
of popish faith, as we have heard already.


S. R. Bell cites S. Thomas, that whatsoever Christ would have us to read of
his doings and sayings, Page, 328.
he commanded the Apostles to write, as with his own hands. But this makes
nothing against us, both because S. Thomas says not, what Christ would have us
believe, but what he would have us read, and Traditions be such, as Christ
would have us believe, though we read them not. As also because S. Thomas
speaks not of all points of belief, but only of Christ's sayings and doings,
besides which the very sayings and dooinges of the Apostles recorded in their
Acts and Epistles, or testified by Tradition, are to be believed.


T. B. I answer; First, that Popery is this day a most miserable Religion, and
woe unto them that do believe and obey the same. This is, or may be evident to
every one, throughout this whole discourse. Secondly, that Aquinas avouches
very plainly (as I said in the Downfall) that all things necessary to our
salvation, are contained in the Scriptures. For in Christ's deeds are contained
his miracles, his life, his conversation; in his sayings Semblably, are
contained, his preaching, his teaching, his doctrine, and consequently,
whatsoever is necessary for us to know. If then this be true, as it is most
true, (for the papists may not deny the doctrine of Aquinas) that whatsoever
Christ would have us to know, of his miracles, of his life, of his
conversation, of his preaching, of his teaching, of his doctrine, the same is
written in the Scriptures; then doubtless, none but such as will Cum ratione
in sanires, can deny all things necessary for our salvation, to be contained
in the holy scriptures. Yea, if our Jesuit will stand to his own doctrine,
plainly avouched in this present Pamphlet, this Controversy is at an end, for
we agree therein. These are his express words: For surely, Page 278
the Prophets and Evangelists writing their Doctrine for our better
remembrance, would omit no one point, which was necessary to be actually
known of every one; especially, seeing they have written many things, which
are not so necessary. And this teaches S. Austen when he says, that those
things are written which seemed sufficient for the salvation of the faithful.

Thus writes our Friar Jesuit: Out of whose words I note first, that the
Prophets and Apostles wrote their doctrine for our good.

Secondly, that they left no point unwritten, which was necessary for us to
know.

Thirdly, that he yields a reason why all things necessary are written;
(viz:) because the Prophets and Evangelists have written many things which were
not so necessary for us to know.

Fourthly, that S. Austen teaches us the same doctrine, (viz:) that all things
necessary for our salvation are committed to writing and set down in the
Scripture; yea, the Jesuit affirms in another place, out of the same Saint
Austen, Page 286.
that all things are plainly set down in the Scripture, which concern either
faith or manners.

Fifthly, that our Jesuit grants al things to be written of Christ's both
sayings, and doings, which Christ would have us to read. Marry, he adds
three worthy exceptions. First, that though all Christ's sayings and doings, be
written, which Christ would have us to read, yet not all which he would have us
to believe. As though forsooth Christ would have us believe something, which we
may not read. What a fond saying is this? Nay, what a fond Religion is Popery?
All things necessary for us, are written (says our Jesuit,) and yet he
tells us withal, that we must believe things which are not written. And
consequently, we must believe things which are necessary for us. Nay, which
is more, that Articles of the Christian faith are not necessary for us. Lo,
Popery is a very strange Religion.

Secondly, that we must believe Traditions, which Christ would not have us to
read, and consequently, that Christ would not have us to read our belief. Lord
have mercy upon us, and keep us from this doctrine.

Thirdly, that we must believe many unwritten Traditions of the Apostles, which
are neither contained in Christ's sayings, nor in his dooinges. But the holy
Ghost came down from Heaven, not to teach the Apostles new Revelations, save
those things only which Christ had foretold them, and which they did not
perfectly understand. John 14, 16.
But the comforter the holy Ghost (says Christ) whom the Father will send in
my name, he shall teach you all things, and bring all things to your
remembrance, whatsoever I have said unto you, so is the Original in Greek.
Panta ha eipon humin. But the Latin Vulgata editio, to which the Pope has
tied all Papists, reads thus; Whatsoever I shall say unto you. And hence it
is, that they would establish their unwritten Traditions. But the truth is, as
we have seen, (viz:) that Christ has commanded his Apostles to writ^ all
things, both of his miracles and of his Doctrine, which he would have us know
and believe; as also, that Christ's Apostles received no new Revelations of the
holy ghost, but the perfect understanding of those things, which Christ before
had taught them, and here we may note by the way, John ^0, 31*
that Aquinas understands Saint John's words, ( These things are written)
as well of Christ's Doctrine, as of his Miracles.


S. R. Bell cites an Apocryphal sentence out of Esdras, Page, 327.
3. 4. under the name of the wise man, as if it were Salomons.


T. B. If our Jesuit were not at a Non plus, he would never be so friuolously
occupied. I name the wise man, of whom I spoke; even Esdras, as our Jesuit
grants. If our Friar, deny all men to be wise ( Solomon only excepted;)
then doubtless, not only himself is a fool, as it well seems by his
Writing; but his Pope also (for he is not Solomon) and so all Papists must be
ruled by a Fool, and believe that a fool, cannot err. And in the end, they
shall have a fools Babble, and a Fox tail for their pains.


S. R. Bell cites Victoria thus; I am not certain of it, Page 329
(says Victoria) though all Writers affirm it, which is not contained in the
scripture. But Vistoria means of things spoken, not by Tradition, but by
propable Opinion, as the conception of our Lady without Original sin, and
such like; or he means of things, neither actually nor virtually contained
in Scripture, as Traditions be, according to our second conclusion.


T. B. If I should answer fully to all our Jesuits fond sentences; my reply
would grow to a bigger book, then is the great Bible. For our Jesuit thinks
himself a very wise man, though before he would have none wise but Solomon.
First, our Friar tells us, that Victoria means not of Traditions, but of
probable opinions, yet secondly he grants, that he cannot tell what
Victoria means, But perhaps (says he) he means of things, neither
actually nor virtually contained in scripture.

Lo^ here, Gentle Reader, Popish Traditions be neither virtually nor actually,
contained in the Scripture. Ergo say I, they are no points of Christian faith.
And I prove it, by our Jesuits own express words: Page 290
All points (says our Friar) of Christian faith, are virtually contained in
scripture. Thus I now frame an Argument, A sillogisme unanswerable.
against Popish unwritten Traditions, to which when our Jesuit shall answer
soundly, I will think him worthy to be Pope of Rome. All points of
Christian faith, are virtually contained in the Scripture; but Popish unwritten
Traditions are not contained virtually in the Scripture, Ergo Popish unwritten
Traditions, are no points of Christian faith. The consequence is good, and
cannot be denied. It is in the second figure, and mood, called Baroco. The
assumption is the Jesuits own, 2. Figura. Baroco,
in the Page quoted in the Margent; (viz:) 329. Page 329
The proposition also is the Jesuits, in another place; (viz:) Page 290. Page,
290*
and so I infer this Golden and inevitable Corollary; (viz:) that Popis^
unwritten Traditions, are no points of Christian faith. Well therefore may
they be parts of Turcisme, of Iudaisme, of Atheism, but parts of
Christianity they cannot be. Apage, Apage, they smell of Infidelity.


S. R. Bell again cites Victoria, who says, That for Opinions we no way
ought to depart from the rule of scriptures. Page, 239
What is this to the purpose? Let Bell prove, that we either for Opinions, or
any thing else depart from Scripture.


T. B. Bell has proved your departure from the holy scripture, in many of his
Books many years ago published to the view of the world, yet to this day,
this is the first answer, the last, and al, that ever came from your pens. But
to satisfy your itching ears a little, I must put you in mind, what lately
you have heard in this short reply.

First, that the Greeks never believed your Popish Purgatory, as which cannot
be proved, out of the Scriptures.

Secondly, that the Bishop of Rome to challenge power to depose Kings, is
against the holy Scripture.

Thirdly, that to acknowledge sins Venial of their own Nature, is to depart
from the scripture.

Fourthly, that to give Pardons as the Pope does, is to depart from the
scripture.

Fifthly, that to establish Works of condign merit, is to depart from the
Scripture. And so in the rest, as I have both here and else where proved at
large. For the Reading of Holy Scripture, and the facility thereof touching
things necessary for salvation, our Jesuit bestirreth himself more then a
little; but the bare pervse of the Downfall, will be a sufficient reply to
the same. Once let us hear him in this point.


S. R. The first point is not against us, Page 34^*
who grant that in Reading the Scripture, we may find all things necessary.


T. B. You told us even now, (Good Sir Friar,) that your popish unwritten
Traditions, Page 329*
are neither actually nor virtually contained in the Scripture; Ergo, by your
Doctrine now delivered, they are not necessary. Behold here, (Gentle
Reader,) how uncertain Popish Doctrine is, and into what Fooleries and
Contradictions the Papists fall, while they busy themselves to fight against
the truth.


S. R. Bell Obiecteth out of Theodoretus, that the Haebrewe Books were
Translated into all Languages. This is nothing against us, who deny not but
Scripture has bin and may be, upon just and urgent causes, translated into
all languages, so it be not vulgarly used, and common to all kind of vulgar
people.


T. B. You say, you deny not, but Scripture has been, and also may be
Translated into the vulgar Languages: yet you add two restrictions, by which,
you in effect unsay that, which you had said before.

First, you say, it may be in the Vulgar languages, so it be not vulgarly
used. What is this? Fast and loose, your Legierdemaine? To what end I pray you,
shall it and may it be turned into the vulgar Languages? That the vulgar
people may Read it, or no? If you say, yea; then may it be vulgarly used. For
that is to be vulgarly used, to be read vulgarly. If you say, no; then in
vain do you grant it to be Translated into the vulgar tongue.

Secondly, you say, it may also be Translated, so it be done upon just and
urgent causes. You should have done well, to have named those just and urgent
causes. But Sir, seeing the thing may be done, and seeing also there may be
just and urgent causes, why it should be done; how comes it to pass, that
none may do it, unless the Pope license him thereunto? How happens it, that
none may read it when it is translated, unless he have the Popes license so
to do? How chances it, that it was never done, since the Bishop of Rome
aspired to his usurped prymacy? This would I learn.


S. R. The Holy Fathers affirm, Page 364.
that there are unwritten Apostolical Traditions; Bell and some few start-vp
Heretics deny it. Whether believe ye Christians?


T. B. Bell denies not simply, that there be no unwritten Apostolical
Traditions. It is a notorious calumny; sor I willingly admit unwritten
Traditions, as is apparent by my Books published to the World. But I
constantly reject all unwritten Traditions whatsoever, which are obtruded as
necessary to salvation, or as necessary parts of doctrine, because al such
things are contained in the written Word. Other Traditions not contrary to Gods
Word, which the Church observes, I am so far from condemning them, that I
both willingly admit them, and highly reverence the same. And if you were
constant to your own writings, Page, 284. 285. 286. 290. 291.
you would subscribe to this my doctrine. For you grant in many places, that
all things necessary for salvation, are contained in the holy Scripture. Which
being granted, you contradict your self, when ye urge unwritten Traditions,
as necessary points of Christian Faith.


S. R. There are certain and undoubted Apostolical Tradions. Page 385.
This is against Bell.


T. B. It is not against Bell, for Bell admits (as we have seen already)
such unwritten Traditions, as are repugnant to the holy Scripture, and have
ever been approved of the whole Church. But such neither are Articles of the
Chrian faith, neither necessary to Salvation.


S. R. But I prove it, because the Traditions of the Bible to be Gods word,
Page. 385.
of the perpetual virginity of our blessed Lady, of the transferring of the
Sabboath, and such like, are certain, and undoubted.


T. B. Crambe bis posita mors est, says the Proverb. This Cuckoo song,
sounds often in our ears. This irksome Tautology of yours, does you good
service. The perpetual virginity of the most blessed Virgin, I admit with all
reverence; and semblably, I approve the translation of the Sabboath. As this
is not the first time ye urged the^, Page, 364.
so neither the first time I answer them. Page 292.
But neither are they repugnant to the holy Scripture, nor necessary points of
Doctrine. To the Tradition of the Bible (which is ever your last and best
trump,) answer shall be made God willing, in the end of this Article. It is
the most colorable thing, you can allege, and the only foundation, upon
which you continually rely. I therefore reserve it for the vpshot, and to
entertain you with such a collation, as may be to your best liking.


S. R. Bells conclusion is, Page 386.
that Traditions are so uncertain, as the learned Papists contend about them:
and he proves it, because S. Victor contended with the Bishop of Asia; Saint
Policarpe with Saint Anicetus. Surely, he means, that these men were Papists,
or else his conclusion is unproven: and consequently, Papists and Popery were
1400. years ago.


T. B. Two things our Friar urges, neither of which will do him any service,
(viz:) my meaning, and the proof of my conclusion. My meaning is clearly
uttered, See the place* Page 129.
when in the Downfall I affirmed Saint Policarpus, Saint Policrates, and other
holy Fathers, to be so far from acknowledging the Bishop of Rome to be the
supreme head of the Church, and that he could not err; that they all reputed
themselves his equals, touching government Ecclesiastical; that they all
reproved him very sharply; that they all with uniform assent, affirmed him
to defend a gross error, and to hold a false opinion; and therefore they with
might and maine withstand his proceedings. Whereas this day, if any Bishops,
Magestrates, or other Potentates in the World (where Popery bears the sway)
should do the like; they might all roundly be excommunicated, and not only
deposed from their jurisdiction, but also to be burnt with fire and Faggot for
their pains. Thus I then wrote, so as our Friar could not doubt of my meaning,
but that malice carries him away to lying. Well, but how is my conclusion
proved? Thus forsooth; I alleged this great contention among the holy Fathers,
to prove the uncertainty of obtruded unwritten Traditions in these our days.
My Argument was, A maiori ad minus, as the Scooles term it, (viz:) that if the
Fathers of the most ancient Church, when she was in good estate, and stained
with very few or no corruptions at all, could find no certainty in unwritten
Traditions; much less can we trust to unwritten Traditions in these days,
when the Pope and his Iesuited Popelinges, employ all their care, study, and
industry, to bury the truth of Christ's Gospel under the ground. And so have I
both proved my conclusion, and also our Friar to be either full of malice, or
a very fool.


S. R. Bell denies the keeping of Lent to be Apostolical, Page 389.
because Saint Crysostome writes, That Christ did not bid us imitate his fast,
but be humble; and to be certain, because Eusebius out of Jeremy writes;
That in his time some thought we ought to fast one day, some two days, others
more, and some forty. Here Bell shows his lack of judgment, in citing a
place clearly against himself. For here Saint Ireney and Eusebius affirm
clearly, that at the beginning there was one manner of fasting Lent appointed,
though some afterward, either of ignorance or negligence, did break it. Which
proves not the said Tradition to be uncertain in the whole Church, unless
Bell will impute the fault of some few to the whole. And by this is answered,
what he brings out of Socrates touching the diversity of time and meat used
in the fast of Lent. Albeit what Socrates says of the Roman Church, fasting
but three weeks before Easter, Did. 8. cap. si consue^udine.
and not on Saturday, is an untruth. See the eight distinction of the Popes
decrees, and note it well.


T. B. I proved in the Downfall out of Eusebius Caesariensis, the uncertainty
of Popish unwritten Traditions, by the great diversity about the keeping of
Lent. Because some thought they ought only to fast one day, some two days,
others more days, and some forty. I proved semblably out of Socrates, that
the people did differ no less in their manner of eating, then they did in
their days of abstayning. For some (says he) would eat no living thing;
othersome of living things, eat only Fish; some together with fish, did ate
also Birds; but some ate only Bread, and others at night eat all kind of
meats without difference: yea, he tells us in the same place, that the
Romans fast three weeks before Easter, besides the Sabbath and the Lords day.
And that the Illirians and Alexandrians do fast six weeks, and yet do they
all term their fast, Lent. Here I inferred in the Downfall, the uncertainty
of Popish unwritten Traditions. Now our Friar thinks to answer all this
(though a Bulwark invincible) with his only bare Word; (viz:) in telling his
Reader, that Bell shows his want of judgment, in bringing a place clearly
against himself. Mary Sir, this is a ready answer indeed. If such answers
will serve, in vain is all disputation. But our Friar would seem, to yield a
reason of this his answer. And what is that? Forsooth, that in the beginning
all observed one manner of Fast, though some afterward, either of ignorance or
negligence (he cannot tell whether) did break it. To my Testimony out of
Socrates, he says it is an untruth, because the Romans fasted the Saterdaies.
But I answer thus; First, that the uncertainty of Traditions is hereby so
apparent, as it is great impudency to deny the same. For how can there be any
certainty, where not only the time of fasting, but also the meats that must be
eaten, is uncertain? Both which happen is this case.

Secondly, that the ancient Cannons of the Apostles confirm Socrates his
affirmation; for there is it thus written; Si quis dominicu^ diem, aut
Sabbathu^, vno solo dempto, Can. 65. ^postlop.
ieiunare deprehendatur, deponitor. If any shall be convicted to fast the Sunday
or Sabbath, one only excepted, let him be deprived. So then, either our
Friar must grant, that Socrates spoke the truth, and that he has falsely
accused him; or else (if he like this better) that the Pope contemned the
cannon Apostolical. Yea, the sixth Synod general of Constantinople, affirms
it to be against the Tradition of the Church, Conc. constu^^ can. 55.
to fast on Saterdaie. Behold here, the comely certainety of Popish Traditions.
The Tradition of the church says, We must not fast on Saturday; the Pope
holds the contrary; and yet says our Jesuit, Traditions are most certain.


S. R. Popish Traditions (says Bell) tell us, Page 393.
that all the Bishops of Rome, one after another, have taught successively the
same Doctrine with Saint Peter: howbeit their own dear Friar and learned
Doctor, Nicholaus de Lyra, avouches plainly, roundly, and boldly, to the
whole Christian world; that many Bishops of Rome have fallen away from the
faith, and become fit Apostataes. But well may one be an Apostata, and yet
teach the Doctrine of his Predecessor. As S. Peter denied his Master, and yet
taught no contrary Doctrine. Saint Marcellin offered sacrifice to Idols, and
yet taught no Idolatry. Ioh. 11. 51.
Caiphas murdered Christ, and yet prophesied.


T. B. Mark Gentle Reader, the case is so plain, that Popes have swarued from
the right faith of Christ, that our Friar cannot deny the same. They may (says
he) be flat Apostataes, forsake the Faith, yet never preach a false faith. They
may sacrifice to Idolles, yet never preach Idolatry. They may deny Christ, yet
never preach against Christ. And indeed for preaching, it may be true, in an
usual Popish sense and meaning. For since they came to their Lordly primacy,
they have abandoned preaching with solemnity. Well, he that list to know what
your Popes have been, and what Faith they held, I refer him to my book of
Survey, and to my Motives. For I desire to be brief, especially, since our
Jesuit brings nothing to be answered, which was not in effect confuted
before it came to light.


S. R. Bell tells us of Constantius baptism, Page 394.
but it is a mere Historical Tradition, and concerns no matter of salvation,
and it is unawares contested by Bell himself, when he says, that he has seen
at Rome the Font, and that Constantine is worthily called great.


T. B. I wrote in the Downfall, that by Popish Tradition the Emperor
Constantine was baptized at Rome, in a Font remaining there to this day; and
that my self have seen the Fons in which (as they say) he was baptized.
Howbeit, Hyeronymus, Eusebius, Socrates, Theodoretus, Sozomenus, Cassiodorus,
and Pompontus, do all affirm very constantly, that he was baptized at
Nichomedia. But our Jesuit thinks it enough to say, that it concerns no
matter of faith, and that my self confess unawares, that I have seen the
Font, in which they say Constantine was Baptized. I answer to the former,
that if a man shall go to Rome, and there reprove any Tradition which the Pope
holds, or practices, he shall be burnt as an Heretic. To the latter, that I
only report what I have seen; I neither say, Constantine was christened in it,
nor deny the same. This I constantly affirm; that since so many learned men
deny it, it must needs argue great uncertainty, in Popish unwritten Traditions.


S. R. The Papists (says Bell) by their Popish Traditions, Platin. in vita
Bonifacij. 8. and Martin. polon. p. 237. in append.
make some to honor Heretics for Saints. For both their own dear friend
Platina, and their famous Bishop Martinus Polonus do tell us, that the dead
corpse of Hermannus were worshipped for a Saints Relics at Ferrara, the space
of twenty years together, who for all that ( Oh impious Idolatry, and
Idolatrous impiety) was a known Heretic, as the same Platina avouches. Is
not this a strange thing, to make the error of common people a Popish
tradition? Besides, Platina affirms no such thing himself, but only that
some others write so.


T. B. Platina writes as other Historiographers do, that which he has learned
by credible report. And he adds, that he verily deemed that Hermannus to be
one e fraticellis, whose sect at that time abounded. But their Bishop Martinus
Polonus, or whosoever was the Author of the appendix joined to his Chronicle,
tells us plainly; that the Masters of the Inquisition sought out the truth
of the matter, and caused Harmannus his body to be dug out of the Grave, and
to be burnt as an Heretic, and his sumptuous shrine to be pulled down. O
holy Worshippers of Devils! But this was but the error of the common people
and no Tradition from the Pope. Alas, alas, could such a public concourse
of people be in such a famous place as Ferrara, and flock together to adore
and worship an Idol in the Church, and the Governors of the Church be
ignorant thereof? Nay, would the people have yielded any such worship and
adoration, if their Pastors, or the Popes Catch-poles had not induced them so
to do? It is impossible, they received it by Tradition. And whosoever shall
enquire such matters of them, shall find that their ready answer, (viz:) that
their ancestors have been taught to do so.


S. R. The Scriptures (says Bell) are called Canonical, Page 398. Read the
Downfall.
because they are the rule of Faith, therefore all things are to be examined
by them: And for this cause (says he) Esaias sent us to the Law, and to the
Testimony to try the truth, etc. Answer. The Bible alone is called Canonical
Scripture, because it alone of all Scriptures the Church follows, as an
infallible rule in believing or defyning any thing. But it neither is, nor is
called the only Cannon of Faith.


T. B. First our Jesuit grants, that the Scripture is the only rule and
Cannon which we must follow in believing and defining any thing. That done, he
by and by tells us, that it neither is, nor is called the only Cannon of
Faith. This is a wonderment doubtless. The Scripture is an infallible rule to be
followed, in believing or defining any thing. This is true, hold thee here good
Friar. But what follows? The Friar will have one foot further, though it cost
him dear. But it neither is, nor is called the only Cannon of Faith. Lo,
first he grants the Scripture to be an infallible rule of Faith, and then
he denies it to be the only rule of Faith. Is not that worthy to be the only
rule of Faith, which is the infallible rule thereof? Shall we forsake the
infallible rule, and betake our selves to a fallible rule? There is no remedy,
the Pope will have it so. The Scripture therefore by Popish grant (GOD reward
them for their kindness) is the infallible rule of our faith, but not the only
rule of the same, for unwritten Traditions, must be a ioynt-rule of Faith with
it.

The scripture is an infallible rule, yet not the total but partial rule of
the Christian faith^ Well, let us hold fast that which our Jesuit has
granted before, (viz:) that all things necessary for our salvation, are
contained in the Scripture. And let us thereupon conclude, Page 284. Page, 285.
Page 286.
that Popish faith is as unconstant as the wind, and let us add withal, that
it is execrable blasphemy against the son of God, to make man's Traditions a
partial rule of our faith. For, as Christ teaches us, they worship him in
vain, that for doctrines, deliver the Precepts of men. Read the Downfall. Mat.
15, 9 2 Timothy, 3, 15.
Saint Paul tells us; That the Scriptures are able to make us wise unto
salvation. Which being so, we stand in need of no more, it is enough. Let us
reply upon the written truth, and let the Papists keep their unwritten
vanities to themselves. Nay, let us remember what our Jesuit has told us
already, even in these express words; For surely the Prophets and Evangelists
writing their Doctrine for our better remembrance, Page 285.
would omit no one point, which was necessary to be actually known of every
one; especially, seeing they have written many things not so necessary. These
are the Jesuits own words, in the Page quoted in the Margent. And yet they
contain fully as much as I desire, and the whole truth now in Controversy,
whereby the Reader may persuade himself, that it is the truth that I defend,
and which the Papists oppugn maliciously, confessing the same unawares.


S. R. Bell says, Saint John bids us Try the spirits; Page 400, 1, John, 4.
but he speaks not of Apostolical spirits, nor of Traditious. Besides, he
bids us not try them only by scripture, and therefore he makes nothing for
Bells purpose.


T. B. What an answer is this? Saint John says our Jesuit, speaks not of
Apostolical spirits, nor of Traditions. Saint John speaks of doubtful
spirits, and consequently of al spirits and all Doctrines, not grounded and
contained in the holy scriptures. Again, our Jesuit says, He bids not try
them by the scripture. Saint John indefinitely bids try the spirits, and seeing
he names not the way, (though after he gives some general marks thereof) we
have to follow the infalliable rule of Judging aad defining every thing, which
Rule or Canon (as our Jesuit has freely granted) is the scripture.


S. R. Bell says, the Berhaeans examined the truth of S. Page 399.
Paul's Doctrine. I ask of him whether they were faithful whilst they examined
it, or faithless? If faithless? why proposes he them to us, an example to
imitate? If faithful, How could they examine whether that were true or no,
Acts 17, 11.
which they assuredly believed to be Divine truth? Wherefore they examined not
the truth of S. Paul's Doctrine, but searched the scriptures for confirmation
and increase of their faith. And this kind of examining, which disallow not.


T. B. I answer, that the faithful though they believe the Articles of the
Christian faith, yet may they without doubting or staggering, examine unwritten
Traditions and what Doctrine else soever, not expressed in the Holy scripture.
Take heed of false Prophets, which come to you in sheeps clothing. Mat, 7, 15.
John 5, 39. 1. These. 5, 21 1 John 4, 1. 1 Cor. 2, 15,
Search the scriptures: try al things: hold fast thaet which is good: Believe
not every spirit, but try the spirits if they be of God. The spiritual man
Judges all things. By these Textes of holy writ, it is very clear, that we
are not bound rashly to believe all preaching, and much less all unwritten
popish Traditions. If we do, we shall unawares adore the devil in Hermannus,
as is already proved. Neither did the Berhaeans search the scriptures, only
for the confirmation of their faith; but for the Trial of the truth, as the
Text avouches. And they searched the scriptures daily, if those things were
so. Lo, they examined the Doctrine, if it were consonant to the scripture. But
here it may be objected, that if every one be a Judge, confusion will abound
in the Church. To this Objection I have answered at large, in my Book
Entitled the Golden Balance. To which place, I refer the Reader, which
shall desire satisfaction in that behalf.


S. R. Bell faith, that in S. Cyprians days, Page, 40^.
neither tradition was a sufficient proof of Doctrine, nor the Popes
definitive sentence a rule of faith. These be both untruths. For he only
thought, that humane and mistaken tradition was no sufficient rule, as has bin
showed before.


T. B. S. Cyprian was resolute, that all traditions must be exactly tried by
the Holy scripture, as is proved at large in the Downfall, and partly in this
reply already. It is needless here to iterate the same.


S. R. S. Hierom writing to Damasus, says thus; Page, 403.
Decree I pray you, if it please you; I will not fear to say three Hypostases,
if you bid. And he requested him to give authority, either to affirm or deny
three Hypostases: and dare thou Bell, make no account of the Popes sentence,
when so great a Doctor so highly esteemed it?


T. B. I answer, first that if we believe Friar Austen de Aneona, the Pope in
these days, In summa Page 152.
has Universal jurisdiction over all Kingdoms and Empyres. Secondly, that as
Antoninus says, He has power over all things, that have any being. Aquin. in
sup. q. 25. art. 1.
Thirdly, that as Aquinas says, He has as much power as Christ himself had,
and can give as large Pardons, as Christ himself gave. Fourthly, that as
Siluester says, Silv. de indulg. 33.
One may have so large a Pardon from the Pope, Great. did. 22. can. omnes.
that if he chance to die the same hour he has it, he shall go to heaven out
of hand. Fifthly, that as Gratianus tells us, He bears the keys of
eternal life, the right both of earthly and heavenly Empire. Sixthly, that as
the Popish Gloss says; He has both swords, the spiritual and the
Temporal, Lyr. in 16. cap. Mat.
and by that means, he can translate Empires. Seauenthly, that as Nicolaus de
Lyra his own dear friar tells him; He may be an Apostata, and forsake the
faith, as many of his predecessors have done. Eighthly, that as Friar Caranza
says, He may enter into the Popedom as a Fox, live in it as a Wolf, and dye
as a Dog. Carranz. in tom, 1. council, Did 40. cap. si papa.
Ninthly, that as his own Decrees tell us, though he be so wicked that he carry
many thousands to Hell with him, yet may no mortal man Judge him. No marvel
therefore, if our Jesuit demand of one, how I dare control his dealing. Yet
by his favor, I may tell him with humility, that Damasus was a Virtuous, Wise,
and Learned Bishop, and of great Authority by reason of his place, and for that
end did S. Hierome think it fit in the troublous state of the Church, (when
the Arrians did every where molest the Christians) to have his counsel and
assistaunce, in the cheifest point then in controversy. Like as in these our
days, greater personages, and better learned, will not sometime disdain, to
have the opinion and Judgment of meaner men. I add, that Sa. Hierome knew
right well, that it was a thing merely Adiaphoron, and therefore was therein
resolved, to do as Damasus should give advise.


S. R. Bellarmine (says Bell) tells us, that the greater part of voices must
bear the sway in Counsels. Page 409.
But Melchior Canus a learned Popish Bishop, does roundly tell us another tale.
It is not (says he) with us as it is within human assemblies, where more
voices ever prevail. For these matters are not to be judged by number, but by
weight. And the Counsels receive their weight from the gravity and authority of
the Pope. Ergo (says Bell.) There is no certainty in Counsels. A goodly reason
surely, as if nothing in counsels were certain, because two Bishops cannot
agree of the Popes authority.


T. B. The reason is strong against you, for in these late days the Pope
takes so much upon him, that we see, the best learned Papists know not,
what to think of the decree.


S. R. Bellarmine (says Bell) in one place says, Page 411.
that the Consistory of Bishops in lawful councels, is the true assembly of
Judges, and that their decrees and Laws must be observed of necessity. Yet in
another place he says, it is all one, whether the Pope disanul the Council
expressly, or the Council do against the Popes mind. This is no
Contradiction, for though he affirm Bishops to be Judges, and their
judgment to be necessarily followed, yet must not that be, before it be
confirmed by the Pope.


T. B. Let the Reader give his censure; The case is evident.


S. R. Bell cites M^lchior Canus, Page 415.
affirming that the Pope cannot communicate his judicial power to his Legates,
whom he sends to Counsels; and therefore infers, that the Pope abuses
the World, whereas the Pope abuses the World no more, then does the Prince
abuse the Parliament, when sending thither the Lord Chancellor to supply his
place, will nevertheless approve nothing what the Peers do^, or decree,
unless himself judges it convenient.


T. B. The Popes dealing is shameful, and this manner of defending him more
shameful. For first, human things and divine are not alike, as your own
Doctor Canus tells us. Secondly, all Princes I think, come in their proper
persons to all their Parliamentes. Thirdly, though Princes negatiuely casheire
and disanul such things, as they deem not convenient for Gods glory, and the
good of their people; yet do they never affirmatively establish any Law,
without the joint consent of the Lords Spiritual, Lords Temporal, and the
Commons. Fourthly, there is great disparity in the Persons, for, the Prince may
do much more in his Kingdom, then the Pope in general Councels.

First, because the Pope of right, neither can call councels, nor yet confirm
the same. This is proved in my Survey of Popery, and in my Golden balance of
trial.

Secondly, because every King is supreme head over all persons in his
Kingdoms; not so the Pope over all Kings and people, in the Christian World.
Neither does the Pope in person, come to Councelles at all of late days.


S. R. Bell cites Bell^rmine, Page, 413.
for the Emperors sitting in Councelles above the Pope: Ergo, the East Church
never acknowledged his primacy. Who sees not the weakness of this reason?


T. B. Our Jesuit falsifieth my words, and then descanteth at his pleasure
upon them. Page 121.
These are my words, as it may appear in the Downfall. The pope was never
present at the Councelles in the East Churches, by himself, and in his own
person. The conclusion is freely confessed by Bellarmine, who alleges two
reasons, for the Popes absence. The one forsooth, because it was not
convenient, that the head should follow the members. The other, because the
Emperor would ever sit in the highest place. Out of these words I noted two
points of importance; the one, that in the Ancient Church, the highest place
in the Councels, was ever reserved to the Emperor. The other, that the East
Churches did never acknowledge the Popes prymacie, which he this day
challenges over all Kingdoms and Regalities most arrogantly. To which
twain, this pleasant adiunct perforce must be annexed: (viz:) that our humble
Father the Pope (who hypocritically calls himself Sernus seruorum Dei,)
would never come to the Councels, because forsooth he could not endure to see
the Emperor sitting in the highest place. Now the Reader has the truth, let
him him give his censure accordingly.


S. R. Bell infers diverse things requisite to be answered. Page 416.



T. B. But ye both propound them as is best for your own advantage, and
answer them either with silence, or nothing to the purpose. But let us be
content with that we can get, and make our best commodity thereof. Say on good
Friar, thou shall be heard with all favor.


S. R. First, Bishops before they can be admitted in councels (says Bell) must
swear, Page 416.
that the Pope can depose all Emperors, and Kings in the Christian world.
Secondly, they swear to admit the Popes decrees, who^ they freely grant may
be an Heretic. Thirdly, they swear obedience to him in matters of Faith,
whom (as themselves confess) they can depose for heresy. Fourthly, that the
pope is not supreme Judge of controversies, seeing Bishops may examine and
judge, whether what he commands be agreeable to Gods word, and the Canons.
Lastly, that they swear flat rebellion against their soueraigns, seeing they
swear to defend the Popes primacy, against all men whomsoever.


T. B. Let us examine this honest tale, made in the behalf of the Pope, and
for the benefit of the Reader, let us both hear it, and answer it
particularly.


S. R. As for the first point, it is untrue, as appears by the answer to the
first article.


T. B. The first point is, that the Pope can depose Emperors and Kings. Our
Friar denies it, and sends the Reader to the first Article. I agree also,
that the Reader peruse my reply with the Downfall, and then yield his censure
accordingly, for that the Pope challenges such power (though the Jesuit for
shame here denies it) it is as clear as the Sun shining at noonday.


S. R. The second and third contain no inconvenience. The Popes doctrine must
be obei^d, though he be an Heretic.
For we must obey what he decrees or defines iudicially, as sitting in S.
Peter's chair; though in heart he were an Heretic: as our Savior commanded
the Jews to follow what the Scribes taught out of Moses Chair, but to
abstain from their private Leaven.


T. B. The second point was, that the Bishops swear to admit his Canons and
decrees, whom they freely grant, may be an Heretic. The third point was,
that the Bishops swear obedience to him in matters of Faith, whom they can
depose for heresy. These points which our Jesuit proposes covertly (because
he would not have the Reader to understand the^) must never be forgotten. We
must (says our Friar) obey and believe what the Pope decrees iudicially,
though in heart he be an Heretic. This is strange Doctrine to a Christian heart,
though approved of all Papists. It is not amiss here to add, the Testimony of
their grave Quodl betist. These are his words; As the prudent Greek appealed
from Alexander furious, to Alexander sober; and Bishop Crostate from Pope
Adrian private, to Pope Adrian public, and as Summus pontifex in Cathedra
Petri, so may the Seculars appeal from the Pope as Clemens, unto his holiness
as Peter. These words are expressly set down. Quodl. 6. art. 10. By this
Doctrine so plainly delivered (which is a constant position in the Romish
Church) the Secular Priests give us to understand, that execrable and never
enough detested fallacy, wherewith the Pope and his popelings, have a long time
seduced a great part of the Christian world, (viz:) that the Pope may err as a
private man, but not as a public person. Of which absurd Doctrine I have
written at large in my Treatise, entitled The Hunting of the Romish Fox. I
will therefore for the present only speak thereof, as these words give me fit
occasion.

First then; we see here, that if we mean to wring any truth out of the Popes
nose, we must have recourse to his holiness, at such time as he is sober; not
when he is furious least he become stark mad, and forget for ever the
knowledge of the truth.

Secondly, we must have his advise, when he is a public person, not a private
man.

Thirdly, we must go unto him, not as he is indeed, this or that Pope, but as
he is S. Peter, that blessed Apostle of our Lord Jesus. Thus much is deduced
out of this popish Doctrine, by evident and necessary consecution. These
points, if they be well marked, will utterly confound all popish Doctrine, and
turn it vpside down. For first, it is a constant Axiom in all popish
Doctrine, that the Pope and none but the pope, must be the Judge in all
controversies of faith and Doctrine.

This notwithstanding, we see by this popish doctrine (which is current in the
Romish Church) that if the Pope Judge of any matter, as he is furious and not
sober; as he is a private man, and not a public person; as he is Clemens,
Sixtus, Adrianus, or some other like pope, and not Saint Peter himself; then
may he err, and so both be deceived himself, and deceive all others.
Whereupon it follows of necessity, that every one must well examine the popes
Doctrine and Judgment, before he believe it, otherwise doubtless, he may
receive poison for medicine, falsehood for truth, and erroneous, for Orthedoxe
Christian doctrine. Nay, otherwise he cannot possibly tell, when he shall
appeal from the pope, as a false teacher and seducer of the people.

Secondly, the time cannot be named, in which the Bishop of Rome, shall be the
Bishop there, and not a public person at the selfsame time, for even then
when he is a sleep, he is a public person, or else no Bishop doubtless.
For once a Bishop ever a Bishop, by Popish indeleble Character. Yet I willingly
grant, that a public person may do some act, which may be censured the act
of a private man; but that cannot serve their turn.

Thirdly, If the Papists will never apeale to the pope, nor have any
intercourse with him, until he be Saint Peter, they shall never do it, till
the worlds end.

Fourthly, if he be Peter by Office or calling, then is he always Peter;
unless perhaps he be sometime Lucifer, which were a rare Metamorphosis.

Fifthly, this Popish distinction, may fitly be termed a trick of fast and
loose. For, if the Pope define a truth, they may the^ say, he defined as a
public person. But if he define an error, then they say, he defined as a
private man. So doubtless it may be said indeed, that he can never err, but some
man in his robes, or some Devil under his pall. Briefly, on the one side (as
we have heard already) the Pope commands upon pain of Sacrilege, not to
dispute of his power, nor to examine his doings, and yet on the other side, we
must know whether he speak and define as a public person, or as a private
man, before we believe his decrees: which knowledge for all that can no way be
had, but by due examination of the popes doings. What remains but to exclaim
and complain to our trusty friends (as the great learned Papist Gielerius
did) that by this Popish Doctrine no man can go to heaven.


S. R. For we must obey and believe what he decrees iudicially, though in heart
he be an Heretic.


T. B. Then sir, we must examine the doctrine which the pope delivers, to
know whither it proceeds from the Pope as a public person, or as a private
man. For otherwise we may as soon receive deadly poison, as wholly medicine;
and as soon worship Harmannus the Heretics bones, as the relics of S.
Peter, or S. Paul. But this examination the Pope forbids and your self
(Master Friar) tells us the same tale in your next words, which are these;
Because Bishops must not examine the Doctrine, which the Pope delivers
iudicially out of S. Peter's chair, as supreme pastor of Gods Church, but only
that, wherein he utters his own private Opinion. Thus writes our Jesuit,
truly telling us the Popish faith. Which Doctrine, if any but a Papist had
delivered it, few or none would have given credit thereunto. O sweet Jesus! I
wonder how any Papist hearing such Doctrine published in print, by our
Jesuits, so dear and so near to the Pope himself, and duly pondering the
vanity thereof, and the blasphemy therein contained, can still be a Papist, and
not defy the Pope and his damnable doctrine. What shall we do with holy
scripture? Is it the infallible rule of faith? Is it superior to the Popes
judicial sentence? No, no, if the Pope define against it, his sentence must
be obeyed, neither may any Bishop, (much less every private man) examine the
same, or else call it into Question, Apage, Apage, fire and faggot for such
rotten Popery, God will vomit it out of his mouth.


S. R. As our Savior commands the Jews to follow, Page, 419 Mat, 23, 3
what the Scribes taught out of Moses chair, but to abstain from their
private leven.


T. B. You pope sits in Cathedra pestilentiae, and not in Cathedra petri. I
have proved it elsewhere at large; here I will add one point or two, In the
Golden Balance of Trial.
for the Readers better satisfaction in this behalf. Johannes Gerson a famous
Papist and chansellor of Paris teaches so plainly, that Popes may err not
only as private men, but even as public persons in their public and judicial
decrees of faith and manners, as none for very shame can deny the same, that
shall either read or hear his words. Gers. in sermon. de pase. page, 3
Thus therefore does h^e write; Propter quod insuper apparet falsitas doctrinae
papae Iohannis 22. quae damnata fuit cum s^no buccinarum coram ^ege Phillippo
per Theologos Parisienses, and credidit potius Theologis Parisiensibus, quam
^uriae. By reason whereof appears further the falsehood of the Doctrine of
Pope John, which was condemned by the sound of Trumpets, before king Phillip by
the Divines of Paris, and the king believed rather the divines then the court
(of Rome.) Out of these words I note first, that the Doctrine of pope John the
22. of that name, was condemned at Paris, as false and erroneous.

Secondly, that his Doctrine was condemned with the sound of Trumpets.

Thirdly, that it was condemned, in the presence of the king of France.

Fourthly, that the king gave more credit to the Divines of Paris, then to the
Court of Rome; that is, then to the pope and his Cardinals.

Fifthly, that the great Learned Doctors of the most famous University of
Paris, gave sentence against the popes Opinion.

Sixthly, that neither the king, nor the learned papists, did in those days
grant such authority to the Pope, as now adays the Pope arrogantly
challenges to himself, whereupon it follows consequently, that the Pope
taught false Doctrine, even in a weighty matter of faith. To which is
consectary, that his Doctrine was public, as which was publicly condemned at
Paris, and that in the presence of the King. But now kings must not deal in
such matters, where the Popes holiness bears any sway. Yet thus dealt the
King of France with the Pope, almost 300. years ago. I think it not amiss
here to insinuate to the Reader, how the kings of France have used the Popes
Messengers. Boniface the eight falling at variance with King Phillippe the
fair, would needs excommunicate him, but there was never excommunication
cost Pope so dear, as that did him, for his Nuncios were committed prisoners
his B^l^es burnt, and Bonif^ce himself being taken by Naueret Chancellor of
France, presently after dyed for very sorrow. Wherein king Phillippe did
nothing, but by the Counsel and consent of the whole Clergy of France. So
Bennet the 13. otherwise called peter de Luna, interdicted Charles the sixth and
his Realm, but the king sitting in his Throne of Justice in the Parliament or
high Court of Paris, the 21. of May. 1408. gave sentence, that the Bull should
be rent in pieces, and that Gonsalue and Conseloux the bearers thereof, should
be set upon a pillory, and publicly notified and traduced in the pulpit
Which decree was accordingly put in execution in the month of August, with the
greatest scorn that could be devised, the two Nuncioes or Legates having this
inscription upon their Miters; These men ^re (...) to the Church, and to the
King. These words are put down by the French papists, in their book called the
Jesuits Catechism, (...) 3. cap. 17, fol, 182.
translated into English by the secular priests. But because our papists stand
so much upon this ^ond and most foolish distinction of the popes double
person, and that he cannot err in his public sentence and decrees, I will
have once a bout again, to beat it better into the Readers head, that the
Pope both may err, and has De facto erred, in his judicial sentence and
public Decree. Mark well my discourse. Pope Adrian (says Alphonsus,
Alphons. ^ Castro. lib. 3 advers. hoer. prope fine^.
a very learned man and a zealous Papist) has these express words; Nou ss^^e
fertur de Ioh^nne (...). q^o^ public docuit, (...), and ab omnibus teneri
mandauit, quo^ (...) purgatae a^te fiuale iudicium non habent stolam, quae
(...) facialis visio Dei; and vn^uersitatem Parisieasem ad (...) duxisse
dicitur, quod nemo in ea poterat gradum in Theologi^ adipisci, (...) primitus
hunc errorem iurass^tse de^ens^r^m, and porpetuo ei adhaesurum.

Last of all, it is reported of Pope John the 22. that he publicly taught,
declared, and commanded all men to hold, that the souls of the just before
the day of judgment, have not the Stole which is the clear and faciall vision
of God. And he is reported to have induced the University of Paris to this;
that none should take degree in Theology, but he that did first swear to
defend this error, and to adhere to it for ever. Thus writes Adrian, who
himself was Bishop of Rome. And Alphonsus a man of high esteem in the
Church of Rome, after he had reckoned up five Heresies, sets down this
for the sixth; (That the souls of the just do not see God till the day of
doombe) ascribing the said Heresy to the Arm^nians as to the Authors thereof,
and to the Greeks together with pope John, as to the patrons and Defenders of
the same. Here the Gentle Reader must observe seriously, lest he be sedused
with the colorable gloss of the Jesuit Bellarmine, who seeing the force of
this Testimony, to overthrow, the highest point in popery, bestirreth himself
mightily in defense of the popish faith. He tells us forsooth, if we will
believe him, (as none will that have either any wit or reason) that pope John
erred in deed, as Adrian and Alphonsus witness, but he did that as a private
man (says our Jesuit) not as pope of Rome. Which distinction doubtless,
wants not only a good foundation whereupon it should be built, but also
it flatly destroys the plain Text; the reason is evident, even to every
child.

First, because it is said, Docuit, he taught.

Secondly, because it is said; Public, publicly.

Thirdly, because it is said; Mandauit, he commanded all to hold it.

Fourthly, because none could be made Graduates in the Schools of Theology,
which held not this Opinion.

Fifthly, because every graduat was sworn to defend it, and to hold it for ever.
So then, the pope may err, and the pope has erred De facto, and that not only
in his private opinion, as a private man, but even in his judicial and public
sentence, as a public person and pope of Rome. This argument is insoluble; it
will never be truly answered, while the world stands. This is enough, yet we
will be content, in way of congratulation to our Jesuit, to say a little more.
Alphons. lib. 1. cap. 4. adu. haeres.
Pope Celestine the third of that name, erred as Pope and public person in
his judicial sentence and public decree.

This to be so, Alphonsus before named, is a constant witness, in these
express words; Celestinum papam errasse circa Matrimonium fidelium, quorum
after labitur in haeresim, res est omnibus manifesta. Neque h^c Celestini error
talis fuit, qui soli negligentiae imputari debuit, ita vt illu^errasse dicamus,
velut priuatam personam, and n^n vt papam, qui in qualibet reseria definienda
consulere debet viros doctos, quoniam huiusmodi Celestini definitio habebatur
in antiquis decretalibus, in cap. laudabilem, titulo de conuersione infid^lium;
quam ego ipse vidi and legi? that Pope Celestine erred about Matrimony of the
faithful, whereof the one is fallen into Haeresie, is a thing so manifest, as
all men know the same. Neither was this error of pope Celestine such, that it
cannot be imputed to sole negligence, so as we may think him to have erred
as a private man, and not as pope, who ought in the Decree of every serious
matter, to ask Counsel of learned men. This point st^keth dead
For that definition and Decree of Celestine was in the old Decretals, in the
Chapter Laudabilem; which I my self have seen, and read. Out of these words
of Alphonsus, (who was a man both very Learned, and a zealous papist) I observe
many worthy lessons, for the good of the thankful Reader.

First, that pope Celestine erred, and that, not as a private man, but even as
pope and public person. Mark this, (Gentle Reader,) for it strikes dead,
and clearly takes a ^ay the frivolous distinction of the popes double person.
The words are very easy and plain; He erred, (says the Text,) not as a
private man, but even as he was pope and Bishop of Rome, no denial can be made.

Secondly, that the Pope erred in a very serious matter, even in a matter of
Popish faith; (viz:) that Matrimony was so dissolved by reason of Heresy, that
the faithful man or woman might marry again, the Heretical party living.
Which thing, says Alphonsus, was manifest to every man to be an Heresy, and
the late Counsel of Trent, has defined it to be so.

Thirdly, that this Decree and definition of Pope Celes^^^e, was in those days
enrolled in the popes Deorctals.

Fourthly, that Alphonsus saw and read the same.

Fifthly that the said Decree cannot this day be found, among the Popes
Decretall Epistles. Where I wish the Reader to note by the way, that the
Decrees of our holy fathers the Popes, have been such and so much against
late Popery, that they are ashamed to bring them now to light. Canus de loc^
lib. 6, cap. ^. in fine. pagina. 189.
Yea, Melchior Canus, though otherwise he be a great learned Papist, tells us
plainly and roundly, that Johannes Gerson, Iacobus Almanus, and Thomas
Waldensis, all three being famous Papists, and very learned writers, do
constantly hold and defend, that the pope as pope and public person, may err
iudicially in a matter of faith. Now, where our Jesuit obiecteth Christ's
words, commanding the Jews to follow the Doctrine which the Scribes taught
out of Moses chair; Mat, 23, 3.
I answer, that our Savior Christ seeing many things amiss in the Scribes
and Pharis^es, thought it m^ete and convenient to give the people warning
thereof, and he wisely tempereth his admonition, least they should reject the
good together with the evil. For to teach the Law and the prophets, which was
to sit in Moses Chair, or to ex^cute Moses Authority, (which was all one in
effect) was a thing very honest and lawful. Christ, therefore commanded the
people to obey them, and to do whatsoever they bid the^ do; but this must be
understood with this limitation; so long as they taught and commanded ex
cathedra, that is; agreeable to Gods Law, not otherwise. This to be the true
sense and meaning of Christ's words, I have proved not only out of Saint
Austen and Saint Hylary, but also out of Nicholaus de Lyra, and Dionysius
Carthusianus, two learned Papists, and Religious Friars. The Reader may find
their words at large, in my Golden balance of trial; with solutions to all
other Objections, that can be made in this behalf. But I must needs put the
Reader in mind of one thing, that even now comes to my remembrance, (viz:) of
one of the Popes own decrees, in which I find these express words; Did. 40.
cap. multi sacerdotes.
Multisacerdotes, and pauci sacerdotes. Multi in nomine, and pauci in opere.
Videte ergo fratres, quomodo sed^tis super cathedram. Quia non cathedra facit
sacerdotem, sed sacerdos cathedra^. Non locus sanctificat homine^, sed homo
sanctificat locu^. Non omnis sacerdos santcus, sed omnis sanctus est sacerdos.
Qui been sederit super cathedra^, honore^ accipit cathedrae. Qui male sederit,
iniuriam facit cathedrae. Many Priests, and few Priests. Many in name, and
few in work. Therefore my Brethren, beware how you sit upon the Chair. For,
not the Chair makes a Priest, but the Priest makes the Chair. The place does
not sanctify the Manne, but the manne sanctifies the place. Every Priest is
not an holy man, but every holy manne is a Priest. He that shall sit well in
the Chair, receives the honor of the Chair, but he that sits evil, does
injury to the Chair. Thus says the Popes own Decree; which would to GOD the
Pope and his Iesuited Popelings, did this day put in practice christianly. Let
not the Popes henceforth, boast of sitting in Peter's Chair. Let them know that
they be many in name, but few in work. They have not these hundred years,
preached an hundred Sermons. What? say I, an hundred Sermons. For, so far as I
can learn, not one at all. Therefore as the Popes own Cannons tell us, the
Popes dishonor Saint Peter's Chair.


S. R. Bell avouches an untruth upon the Rhemists, Page 418.
affirming them to say, that the determination of Councels, is needless,
because the Popes judgment alone is infallible.


T. B. Bell charge both you and your Rhemists truly; and your religious
Friar, Alphons. lib. 1. cap. 2. fol. 4. c.
Alphonsus de Castro, shall be the vmpire in this mystery. These are his words;
At papam, solum absque congregatione concilij, posse in ijs quae ad fidem
spectant errare, multi non contemnendae authoritatis theologi asseruerunt; imo
aliquos pontifices summos in fide errasse, comper^uns est. Deinde, si tanta
esset solius Papae authoritas, quanta totius concilij plene and recte
congregati, frustra tantus labor pro conciliorum congregatione sumeretur. That
the Pope alone without the assembly of a Council, may err in things
pertaining to the Faith, many Divines of high esteem, do hold and affirm;
yea, it is most certain, that some Popes have erred in the Faith. Again, if
the Popes authority alone, were as sure and sound, as the whole Council fully
and lawfully assembled; then doubtless, in vain should such pains be taken,
in calling a Council together. Thus writes this learned Popish Friar,
affirming stoutly and resolutely mine illation against the Rhemists. For this
which I have often told the Papists, will in the end be found an undoubted
and invincible truth, (viz:) that I defend no point of Doctrine against the
Papists, which the best learned Papists do not approve in their printed
Books. And here by the way, I note out of this Popish Doctor, that many great
learned Papists do constantly affrim, that the Pope may err in matters of
faith; as also that sundry Popes have De facto, erred already. Now in Gods
name, let us proceed to the mighty Traedition, (viz:) of the Bible it self.


S. R. Whence have we the Apostles Creed, but by Tradition, as testify Saint
Hierome, Page 365.
Saint Austen, and Ruffinus? Whence the perpetual virginity of our blessed
Lady? Whence the lawful transferring of the Sabbath day from Saturday to
Sunday? Whence many other things, as testify S. Hierome, S. Cyprian, and
others, but by Tradition? But especially, whence have we the Bible it self?
Whence have we, that every Book, Chapter, and verse of it, is Gods word; and
no one sentence therein corrupted in all these 1600. years?


T. B. This is nothing else, but ridiculous and irksome Tantologie. It is
answered again, and again. The Apostles Creed we have by Tradition in
compendious manner, but it is contained in the written Word. As the Fathers
admit many Traditions, so do I with the Church of England. For we reject no
Tradition, unless it be either repugnant to holy Writ, or else obtruded as a
necessary point of Salvation. Which if the Reader mark seriously, he shall
find the Jesuit at a Non plus. Concerning the Bible, that it has not been
corrupted for these 1600. years; I answer, that this blessing comes not
from the late Romish Church, but from the GOD of Heaven, who preserved the old
Testament from corruption, when it was longer in the hands of the wicked
Jews. How we know it to be the word of GOD, I have showed at large in the
Downfall, and think it needless here to iterate the same. Yet as our
Jesuit shall give occasion, some more shall be added by way of reply.


S. R. Bells first answer is, that there is great difference betwixt the
primative Church, Page. 365.
and the Church of late days. For the Apostles heard Christ's Doctrine, saw
his Miracles, and were replenished with the Holy Ghost; and consequently, they
were fit witnesses, of all that Christ did, and taught; which adiunctes the
Church of Rome has not. Here Bell blasphemeth Christ's Church of late days,
auouching her neither to be replenished with the Holy Ghost, contrary to our
creed professing her to be holy and Christ's promise, Ioh. 14, 16. 1 l^. 3. 15.
that the Holy Ghost should remain with her for ever. Nor to be a fit Witness
of his truth, contrary to Saint Paul, calling her the Pillar of Truth.


T. B. The blasphemy proceeds from your selves, and from your pope, to whom
you ascribe such a prerogative as is proper to God alone, when you tell us he
cannot err. I therefore answer, that the true Church of God is holy, has the
assistance of the Holy Ghost, and is a constant witness of Christ's truth. But
these promises pertain not to the church of Rome, but to the whole
congregation of the faithful. This Congregation is the pillar of Truth; this
Congregation has the Holy Ghost; this Congregation is holy; this Congregation
cannot er^e, in things necess^^y to eternal life. This proposition is proved
at large, in my Survey of Popery. It is now enough, to admonish the Reader
thereof. For I have proved it, both by the Testimony of the holy Fathers, and
of the best approved Popish Writers. One or two shall now suffice. Alphon. adu.
haer. lib. 1. c. 6
Alphonsus that famous Popish Friar, has these words; Ecclesiamil^tans est
fidelium omnium, congregatio, quae corpus vnum est, cuius caput est Christus.
The Church militant is the Congregation of all the faithful, which is one
body, whereof Christ is the head. Thus writes our religious Friar. Who would
have thought, that a Popish Friar should or would, thus have defined the
Church? The Jesuits will not thus define it. Here is no mention of the pope,
and yet of the Popish Church he is the head. He that opened the mouth of
Balaams Ass, opened now the mouth of our Friar Alphonsus. The truth must and
will in time prevail. Panormitanus a Popish Abbot, Panor. de elect. cap.
signif.
a Popish Arch-^ishop, and a Popish Cardinal, has these express words;
Licet concilium generale representet totamecclesiam uniuersalem, tamen in
veritate i^i non est vera ecclesia un uersalis, sed repr^sentatiue quia vniuer
salis ecclesia constituilur, excollectione omnium sidelium; vnde omnes sideles
orbis constitunt istam ecclesiam vniuersale^, cuius cap^t and sponsus est
Christus. Sequ tur, and ista est illa ecclesia, que errare non potest. Although
a general Council represent the whole universal Church, yet in truth, there
is not the true universal Church, but representatinely: for the Universal
Church consists of the collection of all the faithful. Wherefore all the
faithful in the world make this Universal Church, whose head and Spouse is
Christ. And this Church is it, that cannot err: yea, the Popes own gloss
upon his own Decrees, does most lively describe that Church which cannot
err, to be the congregation of the faithful. Thus is it there written in
express words; Quaero, de qua ecclesia intelligas, Cause. 24. q. 1 cap. arecta.
quod hic dicitur, quod non possit errare. Siipso papa, certum est quod papa
errare potest. Respondeo, ipsa congregatio sidelium hic dicitur ecclesia, and
talis ecclesia non potest nonesse. I ask thee (O pope Luci) of what Church
thou understands that, which thou tellest us in this place? To wit, that the
church cannot err. For if thou understand it of the pope himself, it is
very certain that the pope may err. I answer therefore, that the church is
here taken for the congregation of the faithful, and such a church can never
err (indeed.) Out of these words of these great Papists, I note: First, that
the Church is the Universal Congregation of the faithful, throughout the
whole World; whereof the head is not the Pope, but Christ Jesus our Lord.

Secondly, that this is that Church, which cannot err.

Thirdly, that when the Pope says, the Church cannot err, then his own dear
and faithful interpreter tells him, that that privilege is not granted to
the Pope, but to the whole congregation of the faithful. And the said Gloss
proves the same, by many Canons of the popes own Decrees.

Fourthly, that the church in which the truth always abides, is the
congregation of the faithful: and therefore truly said Durandus; that the late
popish church is not comparable to the primative. Church, which heard Christ's
Doctrine, saw his Miracles, and was replenished with the Holy Ghost.


S. R. But suppose, that the present Church could not be a fit witness, Page
36^.
as the Primative was. What is this to the Argument, that proves necessity of
Tradition, because without Testimony of the Church, we cannot discern true
Scripture from false.


T. B. The visible external church, is only an external mean, Instrument, or
outward help, whereby we are induced to give human credit, to one Scripture
rather then to another. But the formal cause why we believe any Scripture to
be Gods word, is God himself, and the inspiration of his holy spirit. Hereof
occasion will be offered, to speak hereafter more at large.


S. R. Bells second answer is, that as Papists admit the Jews Tradition of
the old Testament for Gods word, Page 367.
and withal refuse many other Traditions of theirs; so Protestants admit this
Tradition of the Bible, and reject all other. We contend against Protestants,
that Scripture is not sufficient to prove all points of Christian faith, but
that Tradition is necessary for some: and Bell here confesses it. Where is
now the Downfall of Popery? Methinkes, it is become the Downfall of
protestantry. Where is now Bells first exposition? That Scripture contains in
it, every Doctrine necessary to man's Salvation? Where is now, that we must
not add to Gods word, if this Tradition must needs be added thereunto? Where
is now, that this present church can be no fit witness, if by her testimony
we come to know the truth? Where is now the curse, which S. Paul pronounces
against him, that preaches any Doctrine not contained in the Scripture? Where
is now, that Scripture is the sole and only rule of faith?


T. B. Here our Jesuit in all bravery, tryumphing before the victory,
exclaimeth six several times, where is now this, and where is now that? And
when all is done, his exclamation is not worth a dead Rat. Whosoever shall
duly peruse the Downfall, will easily perceive therein, that all which our
Jesuit has brought in all this his great glory, was soundly confuted before
it came to light. Nevertheless, for the better contentation of the Christian
Reader, I thus reply upon our Lordly Friar.

First, Alphons. aduers haer^s. lib. 1. ca. 8
with their own dear Friar Alphonsus a Castro, in the words; Hocn. habemus ex
ecclesia vt, sciamus quae sit scriptura diuina: at cum Scripturam ^sse diuinam
nobis constiterit, iam ex seipsa habet, vt ei per omnia credere teneamur. It
comes from the Church, that we know which is holy Scripture: but after we
know it to be the holy Scripture, henceforth it has of it self, that we are
bound to believe it in every point. Thus writes this famous Papist; and he
does illustrate his assertion, by a similitude drawn from a Creditor and a
Debtor. As if (says he) witnesses should be brought for the proof of an
Instrument, in which Peter stands bound to pay to John 100. crowns, the
witnesses do not make Peter to be bound to John. For although Peter should deny
it, and no Witnesses could prove it, Peter for all that should owe the debt.
But the Witnesses effect so much, that he may be convicted to owe the debt.
Much more to this effect has Alphonsus, but I desire to be brief. This I
infer out of his words, that though we grant the Scriptures to be known by
the Testimony of the Church; yet after that notification, it deserves credit
of it self, for every jot contained in the same.

Secondly, that seeing the Scripture acknowledged for Gods word of all
Christians, contains by the Jesuits confession (as is already proved) all
things necessary for christian belief unto Salvation; it follows of
necessity, that no unwritten Tradition is necessary to Salvation. For
doubtless, if every Article, and all things necessary to salution be written;
then can nothing at all be necessary, that remains unwritten.

Thirdly, I constantly avouch and christianly affirm, (mark gentle Reader
attentively) that the holy Scripture dow show it self to be Gods word; even as
the Sun and the Candle by their light, do show themselves what they are. I
prove it: First, because the Prophet calls the Scripture a Lantern. Psalm. 119,
105.
Thy word O Lord (says holy David) is a Lantern to my feet, and a light unto
my paths. And the Apostle confirms the same, 2. Pet. 1. 19.
when he says; We have a right sure word of prophecy, whereunto if ye take
heed, as unto a light that shines in a dark place, ye do well, until the
day dawne, and the day-star^e arise in your hearts.

Secondly, because Christ himself tells us, that his Sheep do hear his
voice. John, 10. 27. John, 10, 14.
My Sheep (says he) hear my voice, and I know them, and they follow me.
Again thus; I am the good Shepherd, I know my Sheep, and they know me. But
C^rtes, if it be true, (as it is most true, because the truth it self has
spoken it) that Christ's Sheep hear Christ, and know Christ's voice, then must
it needs be true in like manner, that when they either read the scriptures, or
hear them read, then they know Christ speaking in the same, and hear his
voice. Toletus a Jesuit and Cardinal of Rome, T^^^t. in I^han cap. 10.
has these express words; Electi and praedestinati dei infallibi^er
cognoscunt pastorem Christum, quae (...) ad tempus errent, tamen tandem suum
verum agnoscent pastorem. Sequitur, at Christum necesse est agnoscere. Est
autem haec nota effectus prioris, propterea. u. oues cognoscunt me, quia ego
cogn^sco eas. Gods elect and predestinate Children, do know Christ their Pastor
infallibly; because albeit they err for a time, yet in the end they will know
their true Shepherd: for of necessity they must know Christ. For therefore
do my Sheep know me, because I know them. Thus writes our Jesuit, out of
wose words I note first, that all Gods children are not effectually called at
one time, but err and wander as sheep without a s^epheard; but ever in the
end they acknowledge Christ their true Shepherd.

^^condly, that Christ's Sheep know Christ, not because the Church shows
Christ to them, but because Christ knows them. This point must be well
marked, that Christ's sheep therefore know Christ, because Christ first knows
them; not because the church make Christ known unto them. Ergo they know the
scripture to be Gods word, because Christ, not the church, shows it unto
them.

Thirdly, because the spiritual man (as the Apostle writes) judges al things,
1 Cor. 2, 15
and himself is judged of no man. Ergo he can judge the holy Bible to be Gods
word. For doubtless, he that can Judge every thing, can especially Judge that
thing, which is most necessary for him. And consequently, He can Judge truth
from falsehood, Gods word from the word of every creature. This reason is
confirmed, by the constant Testimony of many famous papists. Dionisius
Carthusianus has these words; Spiritualis autem hom^ in quo est spiritus dei,
iudicat, id est, Carthus. in 1. Cor. 2
ben^ discernit omnia adsalutem pertinentia, de singulis talibus verum iudicum
proferendo, inter bonum and malum, veru^ and falsum veraciter distinguendo. The
spiritual man which has the spirit of God, indgeth and truly discerns all
things, which pertain to salvation, prououncing true judgment of every such
thing, and truly distinguishing between good and evil, truth and falsehood.
Lyran. in hunc loc^^.
Nicolaus de Lyra affoordeth the same exposition to this Text of scripture. The
famous popish writer Aquinas is of the same mind. Aquinas in 1. cor. 2.
These are his words: Apostolls hic dicit, quod spiritualis iud^^at omnia; quia
(s^lt) homo habeus intellectum illustratii, and affectum ordinatum per spiritum
sanctum, de singulis quae pertinent ad salutem rectum indicium habet? The
Apostle here says, that the spiritual man Judges all things, because
forsooth a man having his understanding enlightened, and his affection ordered
by the Holy Ghost, has a right Judgment of all things which pertain to
salvation. Johannes Hosmeisterus has these words; Hosmeist. in 1. cor. 2.
Spiritualis fide sua eo penetrat, vt omnia quae sunt spiritus Dei dijudicare
possit, nec iudicio su^ fallatur, vt bonum dicat malum, vel stultum (...) est
sapientissimu^. The spiritual man does penetrate so far by his faith, that he
is able to judge al things that are of the spirit of God, neither can he be
deceived in his Judgment, that he either call Good, evil; or that foolish,
which is most wise. Out of the words of these great popish Doctors, (who are
ever the best witnesses against the papists, I observe these instructions for
the Reader.

First, that every regenerate person and child of God, (for all such are
Spiritual) is able to Judge of every thing, that concerns his salvation; and
consequently, which is falsehood, which is Gods word, which is not; because that
especially pertaines to his salvation.

Secondly, that every child of God is able by his faith to wade so far, that
he can judge of all needful truth, and whatsoever is convenient for his
souls health, and never be deceived in his Judgment.

Fourthly, 1. Ioh. 2. 27.
because S. John tells us, that the unction which the faithful have received,
does teach them all things; Ergo to discern Gods word from man's word.
Melchior Canus a learned Schooleman and a famous Bishop, teaches us the
selfsame Doctrine in plainer terms. These are his express words: Praestanti
quod in se est, Deus fidem ad salutem necessariam non negat. Cam^^ de lo. cis
theol. lib. 2. cap. 8. fol. 29. b. et. fol. 30, ^.
Sequitur; non. n. vnctio que^cunque simpliciter docet de omnibus, sed quemque
de his quae sunt cipropria and necessaria. Sequitur; concedimus liberaliter
doctrina^ cuique in sua vita and statu necessariam, illi fore prospecta^ and
cognitam, qui fecerit voluntatem Dei. Sicut n. gustus been affectus,
differentias saporum facile descernit: sic animi optima affectio facit, vt homo
doctrinam dei ad salutem necessaria^ discernat ab errore contrario qui ex deo
non est. To the man that does what in him lies, God never denies faith
necessary to salvation. For the unction does not simply teach every one every
thing; but it teaches every one so much, as is proper and necessary for him.
And we grant freely, that doctrine necessary for every man's life and state, is
sufficiently known to him, that does the will of God. For like as the well
affected taste, does easily discern the differences of sauors or tastes; so does
the good affection of the mind bring to pass, that a man may discern the
Doctrine of God necessary to salvation, from contrary error which is not of
God. Thus writes the grauest Papist for learning, in the universal world; and
consequently, it is and must be of great force against the Papists,
whatsoever has passed from his pen. And I protest unto the (Gentle Reader)
that nothing has more estraunged me from Popery, and set me at defiance with
it, then the clear and prospicuous Doctrine, of the best Learned and most
renowned Papists, for whosoever will seriously pervse the Books which I have
published to the view of the world, shall therein find by the Testimony of the
best approved Papists, every point of settled Doctrine in the Church of England.

Out of the words of this learned Popish Bishop, that when S. John says, The
unction teaches us all things: He means not the difficult Questions in
Religion, but all, 1. John 2. 27.
such points as are necessary for every man's salvation.

Secondly, that no man wants this knowledge and judgment of Doctrine, but he
that is willingly ignorant, and will not apply himself to live Christianly.

Thirdly, that every private man, is able to discern true Doctrine from
Falsehood and Error, so far forth as is requisite for his salvation; as well
as a sound and good taste is able to discern differences of tastes. Ergo, every
faithful Christian is able to discern Gods word from man's word; because it is a
thing necessary for his own souls health. The case is so clear, as it can by
no reason be denied.

Fifthly, because the formal object of our faith, is Veritas prima or God
himself, De diuinis nomi^^b^ca. 7
as Dionisius Areopagita tells us. Yea, Aquinas the Popish Angellicall Doctor
teaches the selfsame Doctrine. Non. n. fides inquit, diuina alicui
assemitur, Aquinas 22. q. 1. art. 1
nisi quia est a deo reuelatum. For Divine faith (says Aquinas) will not yield
assent to any thing, unless it be revealed of God. The truth of which
doctrine, Aug. in Ep. Ioh: tract: 3. tom. 9.
S. Austen confirms in these Golden words; Iam hic videte etc. Now
brethren behold here a great sacrament. The sound of our words pierces your
ears, but the Master that teaches you is within. Think not, that man
learneth any thing of man. We (Preachers) may admonish you by sound of words,
but if he be not within that teaches, in vain is our sound. The outward
teachings, are some helps and admonitions, but he sits in his chair in
heaven, that teaches the heart. The master is within that teaches. It is
Christ that teaches. It is his inspiration, that instructs. Where his
inspiration and unction is not, there the outward noise of words is in vain.
Thus writes this holy, ancient, and Learned father, with many more words to
the like effect. By whose doctrine together with that of Dionisius and Aquinas,
we may learn sufficiently, if nothing else were said, that howsoever Paul
plant, or Apollo water, yet will no increase follow unless God give the same.

I therefore conclude, that we do not believe this book or that Book to be
Cannonical, because this man or that man, or the church says so, but because
the Scripture is ' axiopistos; because it has in it self that dignity, that
verity, and that Majesty, which is worthy of credit in it self. The
declaration of the church, does make us know and believe the scripture; but is
only an external help, to bring us thereunto. We indeed believe the
Scripture, and this or that Book to be canonical, because God does inwardly
teach us, and persuade our hearts so to believe. For Certes, if we should
believe this or that book to be canonical, because the Church says so; then
should the formal object of our faith, and the last resolution thereof, be man,
and not God himself; as Areopagna, Aquinas, and the truth it self teaches us.

Sixthly, because we cannot be assured, that the Church tells us the truth.
For how can the Church persuade us, that she knows it to be Gods word? If
answer be made, that she knows it of another Church; then I demand
again, how that other Church can perform it? And so, either contrary to all
Divinity, Philosophy, and right reason, Dabitur processus in infinitum; Or else
they must say, they received it by Tradition from the Apostles, and the^ are
they where they began. For first, they cannot make us know that assuredly.
Again, Page 387.
our Jesuit confuteth that answer, when he liberally tells us, that many
parts of the Bible were long after the days of the Apostles doubted of, and
consequently, their Apostolical so supposed Tradition, is of no effect. If
answer be made, that the Church knows it by Revelation, then their famous
Bishop Melchior Canus tells them plainly, Canus de Iocis, lib. 3. ca. 4 Page
101.
and roundly, that it cannot be so. These are his express words; Nec vllas
in fide nouas reuelationes ecclesia habet. For the Church has no new
Revelations, in matters of Faith. If answer be made, that the Scripture says,
the Church cannot err, and so her testification is an infallible rule thereof;
we admit the answer, we hold the same, the controversy is at an end, the
victory is our own Only we must add this, which is already proved, that that
Church which cannot err, is not the late Romish church, but the congregation
of the faithful.

Lastly, the Scripture it self in many places tells us expressly, that it is
the word of God.

First, we have in the four Evangelists these words expressly set down.
The Holy Ghost of Jesus Christ according to Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John.

Secondly, Saint Luke affirms, in the beginning of the Acts of the Apostles,
that he made a Book of al those things which Jesus both did and taught;
meaning that gospel which is the third in number.

Thirdly, 2. Peter. 1. 21.
we are taught by Saint Peter, that no prophecy of Scripture is made by any
private motion, but that holy men of God spoke, as they were moved by the
Holy Ghost.

Fourthly, 1. Cor. 11. 23.
S. Paul tells us, That he received that of our Lord God, which he delivered
in the Scripture.

Fifthly, the same Apostle affirms, that That Gospel of God (...) written,
which was promised by his Prophets in the holy Scriptures.

Sixthly, Romans 1. 12.
S. John received his Revelation from Christ, which he was commanded to write.

Lastly, Apoc. ^. 10.
(and this strikes dead) When the rich Glutton tormented in Hell, desired of
our holy Father Abraham, Luke 16. 29. Luke. 24. 44.
that one might be sent from the dead to his Brethren then living; Abraham
answered, that they had Moses and the Prophets, whom there ought to hear and
believe. And Christ himself told his Apostles; that all things must needs
be fulfilled which were written of him in the Law of Moses, in the Prophets,
Luke. 16, 13, 15, 25, 27.
and in the Psalms. Yea, Christ told the two Disciples going toward Emmaus,
that they ought to believe all things which the Prophets spoke: and therefore
beginning at Moses and all the Prophets, he did interpret to them in all the
Scriptures, the things which were written of himself. And consequently, the
Scripture it self does plainly tell us, that it is the word of GOD. For out
of these words of the holy Scripture, we have these points of Doctrine most
clearly delivered.

First, that our Savior Christ spoke them.

Secondly, that all things must be believed, which are written in the Law in
the Prophets, and in the Psalms.

Thirdly, that all things foretold of Christ in the Law, the Prophets, and the
Psalms, were fulfilled indeed.

Fourthly, that Christ did interpret the chiefest parts of all the Law, the
Prophets, and the Psalms. I therefore conclude, that it is the word of GOD. As
also, that the dignity, the excellency, and the Majesty thereof, does
insinuate no less unto us.


S. R. Neither is Bells comparison true. For we believe not the Old Testament
to be Gods word, Page 369.
for any Tradition which the Jews have; but which the Catholic church has
from the Apostles and their successors. Who delivered to the church, and she to
us, as well the Old as the New Testament for Gods word.


T. B. You contradict your self good Master Friar, Page 387. 2. Peter. John.
2. 3. Jacob. Apocal Eusebius. libr. 3. cap. 19.
as who tells us right plainly in another place, that many parts of the Bible
were doubted of, a long time after the Apostles. For, if you had received by
Tradition from the Apostles, all the Scriptures, both of the Old and New
Testament, ye could never so long after the Apostles, have bin in doubt of many
parts thereof. For by your supposed Tradition, you had the same assurance for
the whole, as for the parts. And consequently, seeing you grant your
uncertainty for many parts, you must perforce grant the same uncertainty for
the whole. And so you confess unawares, and against your wills, so much in
effect and true meaning, as I contend to prove, (viz:) that your unwritten
supposed Apostolical Traditions, are as uncertain as the wind, and not an
infallible rule of faith.


S. R. Bells third solution is, Page 370.
that the New Testament is but an exposition of the Old, and therefore may be
tried and discerned by the same. But Sir? Will you indeed try the New
Testament? Will you take upon you to judge Gods word? And if you will try Gods
word, A very fond saying.
by what will you try the Old Testament? Surely by Tradition, or by nothing.


T. B. I answer, that I admit both the Old Testament and the New, because I
believe God speaking in the same. This is proved already. Again, seeing the
Law, and the Prophets, and the Psalms, are approved by Christ's own
Testimony, as we have heard already; and seeing withal, that the New Testament
is but an exposition of the Old, as I have proved in the Downfall; it
follows of necessity, that the Old being received, the New cannot be
rejected. Neither is he Judge of Gods word, that discerns one Scripture by
another^ because he makes not himself, Aug. de trinit. 3. cap. 26.
but Gods word the judge thereof. No more the^ he, who conferring Scripture
with Scripture, expounds one place by another. Which kind of exposition S.
Austen prefers before all other.


S. R. Bell says, Page 371.
canonical Scripture may be discerned of it self, as light from dark. He
proves it, Psa 119 105.
because Gods word is called a light and a Lantern which shines to Men. 1.
Pet. 1, 19.
Because spiritual men judge all things; because the unction teaches Gods
children all things; 1. Cor. 2, 15.
And Christ's Sheep both hear and know his voice. 1. Ioh. 2, 27.
But this is easily refelled. First, because though Samuel were a faithful
and holy man, John. 10, 3. 4, 27.
and God spoke thrice to him, yet he took his word for man's word, until Hely
the high Priest told him it was Gods word. Gedeon was faithful, ^. Reg. 3.
and yet knew not at first, that it was God that spoke unto him by an Angel,
and therefore demanded a Miracle in confirmation of it. Likewise Saint Peter
was faithful, and yet at first he knew not, that it was an Angel that spoke
and delivered him. Secondly, Iudic. 6.
Gods word consists in the sense and meaning, which the faithful oftentimes
do not understand. Act. 12.
Thirdly, the distinction of Scriptures from not Scriptures, is not so evident,
as the distinction of light from darkness is, for then no man could err
therein.


T. B. This answer of our Friar is frivolous, and childish. That which he
obiecteth of Samuel, Gedeon, and Peter, is not to the purpose. For, as I have
proved out of Melchior Canus and others; every one of the faithful knows
not every thing, but only so much as is necessary for his salvation to know;
neither is such their knowledge at every hour and moment, but then only and
in such measure, when and in what degree it pleases God to give it. Some of
Gods children are effectually called at the first hour, Mat. 20
some at the third, Luke 23
some at the sixth, some at the last. For though al Gods children, be elected
and predestinate before all time, Romans 9, 10.
yet are they al called both generally and effectually in time: some sooner,
some later, Ephesians. 1, 12.
according to the good pleasure of the caller, who calls freely without
respect of persons. Ephesians. 2, 9
Now, where our Friar denies the distinction of Gods word from man's word, to
be so evident as the distinction of light from darkness, Act. 10, 34
because then none (as he says) could err therein. Romans 2, 11
I answer, Ioh. 15, 5
that as he that is blind corporally, 1, Cor. 3
cannot discern colors, nor behold the bright beams of the sin, 1, Cor, 12
so neither can he that is blind spiritually, 2, Cor. 3
discern Gods word from man's word, nor behold the brightness of eternal truth.
For as the Apostle teaches us. If Christ's Gospel be hid, it is hid in them
that perish: in whom the God of this world, 2, Cor. 4, 4
has blinded the minds of them which believe not, least the light of the
gospel of the glory of Christ, should shine unto them. And the same Apostle
tells us elsewhere, 1, Cor. 2, 25
That the spiritual man judges all things, but the natural man perceives
not the things, which are of God.


S. R. Saint John (says Bell) affirms that the Unction teaches us all
things) which we deny not; Page. 375.
but no where (says he) that it alone teaches us without the testimony of the
Church, which is it that we deny, and Bell should prove.


T. B. I have proved at large, even out of your own reverend Bishop Melchior
Canus; that as the well affected taste, can easily discern the differences of
savors; so can the good affection of the mind, discern the Doctrine of
salvation. And therefore as the testimony of the church is not necessary to the
one, no more is it to the other. Yea if that sense of our Friar, had been the
truth of the text, all the grave expositors of S. John, would never have
omitted the same. But our Friar could bring no expositor for himself, and
therefore no reason, that we should admit this bare denial, against the
plain words of the Text.


S. R. That of the Spiritual man is not to the purpose, Page. 375
both because all the faithful are not spiritual, but some carnal; and
therefore may we better infer, 1 Cor. 3, 1. 2, 3
that the Gospel is not evident to all the faithful, Gal. 6, 1.
as also because Saint Paul explicateth not, by what means the spiritual man
judges all things; whether by the euidency of the things, as Bell would have
him to Judge scripture) or by some outward Testimony.


T. B. I answer; first, that all the faithful rightly so termed, are
spiritual and not carnal, 1. Co. 3, 1, 2, 3
neither do the places quoted by our Jesuit, Gal. 6, 1.
prove any thing for his purpose. For if he will have none to be spiritual
that are sinners, then must he deny the Apostles of our Lord to have been
spiritual. For as S. James grants freely, Iam. 3, 2.
They all sinned in many things.

Secondly, that if the Apostle had not explicated, by what means the
Spiritual man judges all things, as he did indeed, yet would it not follow
thereupon, that our Jesuit may expound it to his best liking.

Thirdly, that the Apostle says plainly in the words before going, 1. Cor. 2,
10, 12.
That the spiritual man judges by the spirit of God that is in him.

Fourthly, that our Jesuit belyeth Bell here, as he does many times
elsewhere. For Bell would not have the spiritual man to Judge the scripture
by the euidency of the things, but by the spirit of God, which is ever at hand,
even within him to teach him all necessary truth.


S. R. Bell alleges the Scripture, Page 375.
That Christ's Sheep hear and know his voice, Ioh. 10, 3, 4, 24.
which no man doubts of. But the question is, whether they hear it of
himself alone, or of his church.


T. B. This is but irksome Tautologie, it is answered again and again.

First, the late Romish Church, is not the church that cannot err: this is
already proved.

Secondly, I have proved, even out of their own Cardinal Tolet, That Christ's
sheep know him, because he first knows them. Yea, the Text does plainly
yield that sense. I know my sheep (says Christ) and they know me, As if he
had said, My Sheep therefore know me, John. 10, 14.
because I first know them. Christ therefore, not the church, makes his sheep
to know and discern his voice.

Thirdly, the church is an outward help, as is the preaching of the word. To
beget a kind of morral certitude or humane faith in the hearers, but neither of
them either does or can, beget faith Divine in any man. Paul may plant, and
Apol'o may water, but only God can give the increase. 1. Cor. 3, 6.
Experience may confirm this to be so. For no testification of the Romish
church, can make the Turk or Jew bebeleeue or acknowledge Christ's Gospel. If
it were otherwise 10000. Jews this day in Rome, would become christians I will
say more, August* Vbi supra.
and it is S. Austens Doctrine; Many come to the Church, and hear the word of
God read and preached unto the^, but believe it not, as their lives declare,
Mat. 7, 17.
for every good tree brings forth good fruits, as our master christ tells
us. And what is the cause? Forsooth, says S. Austen, because they only hear
a sound in their outward ears, but not the heavenly Preacher sounding in their
hearts.


S. R. Well said S. Austen, Page ^77
I would not believe the Gospel, unless the Authority of the Church did move
me thereto. This place so stingeth Bell, as he windeth every way to avoid it.


T. B. Howsoever in your opinion it stingeth me, yet have I so sufficiently
answered it in the Downfall, as there is no need here to add any thing in
defense thereof. Nevertheless, some few Annotations I will add for
explication sake.

First, when S. Austen says, I would not believe the Gospel, unless the
Authority of the Church, did move me thereto, He means of himself as being a
Manichee, not as being a christian. As if he had said; If I this day were not a
Christian, but a Manichee, as I once was, I would not believe this Gospel,
(which I wish thee to embrace) unless the Churches Authority did move me to
the same. For these are S. Austens own words; Cap. 5. cont. Epist. Funda men.
tom. 6. page 80
Si ergo invenirem aliquem, qui Euangelio nondum credit, quid faceres dicenti
tibi; non credo? Ego vero Euangelio no^ crederem, nisi me Catholicae Ecclesiae
comm^veret authoritas. If therefore I should find one, that yet believes not
the Gospel, what would thou do to him, saying to thee, I believe it not? I
doubtless would not believe the gospel, unless the authority of the
Catholic church, did move me ther^unto.

Lo, he speaks of him that believes not the gospel, and of himself not
being a christian, not of himself, or any other that professes the gospel.
Where I am to admonish the Reader, that here, as in many other places of my
Books; I was almost 200, miles from london.
this period last recited, is imperfect in the Downfall. For my self being
absent from the Press, as dwelling far off, many faults escape the Printer.
That this is the true meaning of S. Austen, I prove it first, because in the
very same Chapter he confesses, that the Authority of the Gospel, is above
the authority of the Church.

Secondly, Cap. 4.
because in the Chapter aforegoing, after he has discoursed of many notable
things in the church Consent, Miracles, Antiquity, and Succession; he adds
that the truth of the Scriptures, must be preferred before them all.

These points and reasons, Page 381.
I cited before out of Saint Austen; which because they confound our Jesuit,
he impudently denies them; affirming that Saint Austen says not so. These
therefore are S. Austens own words, in the first Chapter; Quod si forte in
euangelio aliquid apertissimum de Manichaei Apostolatu (...) p^tueris,
infirmabis mihi catholicorum anthoritatem, qui iubent, non credam. If happily
thou can find in the Gospel, any manifest thing of the Apostle-ship of
Manichaeus, thou shall discredit the authority of Catholics to me, who
command me not to believe thee. Again, in the fourth Chapter he has these
words; Apud vos sola persona^ veritatis pollicitatio, quae quidem si tam
manifesta monstratur, vt in dubium venire non possit, praeponenda est omnibus
illis rebus, quibus in Catholica teneor. With you only sounds the promise of
truth, which if it be proved so manifest, that it cannot be doubted of, it is
to be preferred before al those things, that hold me in the catholic church.
Lo, in the former place Saint Austen grants freely, that the authority of
the Scripture, is above the authority of the church; And in the latter, that
the truth of the Scripture must be preferred before all other things
whatsoever. Away therefore with our lying Friar, Vide Aug. ep. 165.
and give hearing to his fables no longer.

Secondly, the faith that proceeds from the Church for Testificatio^, is but
human, and not divine. For none save God only, can beget faith divine in us.
It pleases GOD to use external means and Ceremonies, for the confirmation of
our Faith; but the grace, power, and virtue, is from himself alone. The Law
was given by Moses, John. 1. 17.
but grace and truth came by Jesus Christ. I prove it: First, because a
supernatural effect, must needs be produced of a supernatural cause; and
consequently, divine faith being a supernatural effect, cannot proceed from
the Romish Church.

Secondly, a corporal agent, cannot ascend and penetrate a spiritual object;
as a material Sword cannot penetrate an immateriall Spirit; and consequently,
neither produce an immateriall effect, as is faith divine.

Thirdly, no immateriall and spiritual accident, can be received into any
corporal subject; and consequently, no corporal subject is apt to produce a
spiritual effect.

Fourthly, Aug. tract. 72. in Johan. Aquin. p. 1. q. 45. art. 5.
Saint Austen says plainly, that it is a greater work to justify a man,
then to create the World; but no power (says the Popish Angelical Doctor
Aquinas) which is upon earth, can concur to creation; Ergo, neither to
justification; and consequently, neither to the producing of Faith divine.

Thirdly, when says is wrought and begotten in us, we may not divide the
work; giving part to God, and part to the Church; but we must ascribe the
whole to GOD, the true Author of the whole. Therefore, after S. Paul had told
the Corinthians, that he had labored more abundantly then all the Apostles;
he forthwith added these words. 1. Cor, 15. 10.
Yet not I, but the grace of God, which is with me. For though man be not in
his actions as a brute beast or block, but free from all coaction and
constraint; yet has he no power but from above, neither has he any part more
or less, in producing Grace, Faith, or the supernatuall effects. For though it
be Gods pleasure to use man's external acts and operations, for the exercise of
his faith, when he means to produce supernatural effects; yet does he
himself solely and wholly of himself, produce the same effects. And here I
must tell the Reader of a great defect in the Latin Vulgata editio; which the
late Council of Trent extolleth to the Heavens; and withal Papists are bound
to use and believe. 1. Cor. 15. 10
It says thus: Yet not I, but the grace of God with me; as if forsooth, part
were imputed to grace, and part to the act and work of Saint Paul. Vide
Hier? lib. 2. aduers. Pelag. fol. 129. D.
Whereas indeed, the Apostle ascribes the whole to God, and utterly refuses
to take any part to himself. Which the Article (^) in the Greek left out, in
the Latin Vulgata editio, makes plain and evident. For after Saint Paul had
said, That he had labored more then all the Aopostles; he by and by adds
this correction; Yet not I, but the grace of God, which is with me. And here
(because sensible things work most in sensile persons) let us take an example
of the Napkins and Partlets, which were brought from Saint Paul's body unto the
sick, for the Napkins by touching Saint Paul's body, Act, 19, 12, 11.
received no inherent virtue to work Miracles. The Text says plainly, that
God wrought the Miracles by the hand of Paul. The Napkins and Handkerchiefes
were but outward tokens, to confirm the faith of those that were to be healed
in the absence of the Apostle; that they might thereby know and perceive, that
the gift of healing (which God for his own glory had bestowed on him) was not
tied to the presence of his body. The like may be said, Of touching Christ's
Garment, and of the Clay which Christ used in restoring the blind man to his
sight. Mat. 9, 21. John, 9, 6. Luke. 8. 46.
For the virtue was not in the garments, but in Christ himself. Christ said
not; Virtue is gone out of my Garments; but (as Saint Luke adds) I perceive
that virtue is gone out of me. And all men know, that Clay was rather an
hinderance, then a furtherance, to effect that was wrought in the blind man.
For, if we respect the nature and operation of Clay, we shall find it more
apt to destroy sight where it is, then to restore sight where it is not. But it
pleased Christ, this way to try the faith and obedience of the blind man. For
there can be no better trial of true faith, then when a godly mind being
content with the simple word of God, does promise that unto it self, which
otherwise seems incredible. Much more might be said, but the Reader, (if he
shall join this with the Downfall) shall find sufficient matter, for the full
confutation of the Friar. And now I proceed in Gods holy name, to bicker and
grapple with the Jesuit, concerning the last Article being the eight in
number.


The eight and last Article, of the impossibility of keeping Gods Commandments
in Popish sense.
S. R. WE daily acknowledge our sins, as Bell confesses, but so as we be free
from deadly sin, Page 422.
which destroys charity the end of the Law, and keep the Commandments in
all great, though not in small matters. As who steals but trifles keeps the
Princes Laws, though not perfectly; but if he steal great matters, he is said
no more to keep, but to break them.


T. B. I answer; First, that I have proved sufficiently, every sin of it own
nature to be mortal, and flatly against Gods Commandments.

Secondly, that whosoever steals but those things, which with our Jesuit
are trifles, transgresses both Gods Laws, and the Laws of his Prince. Gods
Laws, Exodus 20, 15
because God absolutely without exception forbids to steal: The Princes
Laws, because he that steals but our Jesuits trifles, must be stocked and
whipped for his pains; and that is inflicted, by due execution of the Princes
Laws. But our Jesuits are so acquainted with notorious Treasons, that
stealing with them is but a trifle, yet not only their Angelical Doctor
Aquinas, but S. Austen also writing to Consentius, Aquin. 22. q 110. art. 3.
Aug. ad Co^sent^u^, cap. 8. 9. 10. tom. 4.
affirms most christianly; that an officious lie (which is the least lie that
can be committed, and one of our Friars trifles) may not be made to save the
whole world. And our Master Christ tells us in his holy Gospel, Mat. 12, 36
That we shall give account of every idle word. Well, howsoever our Friar
flatter himself in stealing strifles, Unless he have a dispensation.
or in trifling stealing, yet whosoever (unless perhaps a Jesuit) breaks
the Popes Law by eating an Egg in Lent, commits a deadly sin. Yea, that
man, or that woman, that shall tell a hundred lies in one day, shall not be so
hardly censured with the Papists, as one godly Christian eating an Egg in
Lent, Page 423
with thanksgiving to God for the same. Note that our Jesuit here emboldeneth
to steal trifles, affirming it, not to be against the Princes law.


S. R. First, therefore I prove it, because a young man told Christ, Mat. 19,
20
He had kept all the Commandments from his youth. Bell answers, that S.
Hierom says, he lied, and S. Austen thinks he spoke more proudly, then
truly. Nevertheless more probable it is, that he spoke truly, because not
only our Savior did not rebuke him, Mark 10. 21
(as likely he would have done, if he had told him a lie) but as S. Mark
testifies, beheld him and loved him.


T. B. I answer first, that our Jesuit is so troubled with the Downfall of
Popery, that he begins to prove when of right he should answer, but in truth
can perform neither of them both.

Secondly, that where I have proved in the Downfall by the Testimony both of
Saint Austen and S. Hierom, that that the young man lied, when he said he had
kept the Commandments: our Jesuit returns this answer, that it is
probable he spoke truly. Because forsooth, S. Mark says, Christ beheld him
and loved him. But this answer is not to the purpose, (to say nothing of our
Jesuits pride, who so roundly rejects both S. Austens and S. Hieroms opinion)
because S. Mark speaks only of external show of love, and not of true love
indeed. The like Phrase we have in S. Matthew, where Herod is said to be
sorry, when he was glad indeed. And therefore does S. Hierom censure him in
these words. Exodus 1, 17, 20, 21 Christ as true God did this.
In face tristitia^, in cord habebat laetitiam. In his face sorrow, but
gladness in his heart. Our Savior Christ, as he prospered the Midwiues, and
made them houses, not for their lying, but because they feared him; even so,
did he look chearefully upon the young man, and in loving manner set before
his eyes, what a vain conceit he had of himself; not for the lie which he
boldly avouched, but because he had a desire to go to heaven. Our Jesuit
adds, that S. Chrisostom says, the young man was no dissembler; and that S.
Hierom says, Christ loved him, because he said he had done all. But our
Jesuit is addicted to lying, and falsely surchargeth the holy Fathers. Their
assertions are truly cited, in the Downfall of Popery.


S. R. Secondly, S. Paul. says, not the fearers of the Law are just with
God, Page 424
but the doers of the Law shall be justified; Ergo, there are some doers of the
Law: And it is possible to be done.


T. B. This objection I both propounded and answered in the Downfall, so as
our Jesuit may well struggle against it, but never truly confute it. He
makes a gallant show of many verses, cited out of the 119. Psalm, that the
commandments may be kept, and were actually kept of the Prophet David. I have
not (says the Prophet) declined from thy Law. I have kept thy law. I have not
declined from thy judgments. I have not erred from thy Commandments. Verse
51. 55 102, 110, 157.
I have not declined from thy testimonies. But to al these and the like I
answer with all facility, that the selfsame Prophet David confesses freely,
that neither himself nor any mortal man, is able perfectly to keep Gods law.
When the Prophet Nathan told him of his Adultery and murder, 2. sam. cap: 11.
and ca. 12
he humbly confessed the same, and presently received remission at Gods hands.

Again, in many Psalms he confesses his own sins, and withal, constantly
affirms, that none living can be justified by his best works. Have mercy on
me O God, wash me from my sins, and cleanse me from mine iniquity. Psalm 51
I know my sin, and mine iniquity is ever before me. I was borne in sin,
and in sin has my Mother conceived me, Again, in another place thus; If
thou O Lord, straightly markest iniquities: O Lord, Psalm 130
who shall abide it? But with thee is mercy, that thou may be feared.
Again in another place thus: Enter not into judgment with thy servant, Psalm
143.
for in thy sight shall none that lives be justified. So then, as we have in
one Psalm, that David did keep Gods commandments, so have we in many other
Texts of holy writ, both in the Psalms, and else where, that neither himself
nor any living, can perfectly keep the same. What must we now do? One scripture
is not contrary to another. The spirit of God speaking in David, says in one
place, That he kept Gods Law; in another place he says, That neither he nor
any other can keep his Commandments. How stand these two together? This is
the resolution and true sense of holy writ. David (as every child of God in
like manner) is truly said to keep Gods Commandments, when he has an
inward fervent desire to do the will of God, and chearefully applies his heart
and all his affections to that end, How Gods children though sinners, keep his
commandments.
so far forth as stands with man's infirmity, and the state in which we
live, although he be a greeuons sinner indeed, and Trangresse Gods law many
ways. This I prove to be so by many arguments: first, because the sins of
the faithful, are not imputed to them for the merits of Christ Jesus. Therefore
(says the Apostle) Being justified by faith, we are at peace with God, through
our Lord Jesus Christ. Again thus; Romans 5, 1. Rom, 4, 7, 8.
Blessed are they whose iniquities are forgiven, and whose sins are covered.
Blessed is the man, to whom the Lord will not impute sin. By these places it
is clear, that Gods children are said to keep his Commandments, not because
they keep them exactly and perfectly, but for that the want and defect is not
imputed to them. This is it that S. Austen says, in these golden words; Omnia
ergo mandata facta deputantur, Aug. lib. 1 (...). cap. 19
quando quicquid non sit, ignoscitur. All the Commandments are then reputed as
done, when whatsoever is not done ( Is of mercy) forgiven. Again, the same S.
Austen in another place has these words; Beatus vir, cui no^ imputauit dominus
peccatu^. Hoc prestant viae domini, ac per hoc quonia^ ex fide iustus viuit, ab
ista via domini illa alienat miquitas, Aug in Pso, 118. conc. 3. page 925.
quae est infidelit as. In hac ante^ via domini, id est, in fide pia quisquis
ambulat, aut peccatum non operatur, aut si quid a deuiante committitur, propter
viam non imputatur, and tanquam non fuerit operatus accipitur. Blessed is the
man, to whom the Lord has not imputed sin. This the ways of our Lord
perform, and by reason hereof, because the just man lives by faith, that
iniquity estraungeth from this way, which is infidelity. For in this way of the
Lord, that is, in a godly faith, whosoever walks, he either sins not, or
if any thing be done amiss, it is not imputed by reason of the way, and is so
taken as if he had not done it. Thus writes this holy father upon that very
Psalm: out of which our Jesuit has borrowed certain Textes, which (as S.
Austen shows plainly) are altogether applied, contrary to the Prophets
meaning, and to the truth of the matter in hand. For therefore (as we see by S.
Austens Testimony) is not only the Prophet David, but also all the children of
God, thought to keep Gods commandments, because they aplying themselves
cheerfully with heart, voice, and all their power to keep them, 1 Cor, 1, 30.
Phil. 3, 9 2 Cor, 5, 12 Romans 5, 19.
the defect and want is not imputed to them. Briefly, by Gods grace, not of
our selves, we keep his Commandments, though not in such perfection as his
Justice requires; yet, in such measure, as he of his mercy in Christ accepts.

Secondly, because the son of God, has truly appeased the wrath of God, Mat.
26, 27 Mark 14, 14
by once offering upon the Altar of the Cross, a perfect, sufficient, and
absolute satisfaction for the sins of all the faithful and elect people of
God; Heb. 10, 14
and as a Creditor having received the just and full payment of that which was
due unto him, though by the hands of another, yet in behalf of him who was the
debtor, cannot with Justice require the same at the Debtors hands; no more can
GOD almighty, (who is not only just, but justice it self in the abstract)
justly require satissaction of his elect for their sins, for whose
transgressions he has received a most perfect, absolute, Mat. 3. 17. Apoc. ca.
7. 14
and consummate satisfaction, and atonement for ever, at the hands of his
dear Son, In whom he is ever well pleased. This is it, that one of the
Elders said to Saint John; These are they which came out of great tribulation,
and have vvashed their long Robes, and made them white in the blood of the Lamb.

Thirdly, to acknowledge our sins, and to confess our selves to be grievous
Sinners, and not to trust in our own righteousness (which is none at all
indeed) but in the righteousness of Jesus Christ, who (as the Apostle teaches
us) Is our Wisdom, our Righteousness, our Sanctification, 1. Cor. 1. 30.
and our Redemption is in the scripture to be righteous, and to keep Gods
commandments. Therefore says S. John, 1. Ioh. 1, 8, 9. Philip. 3. 9. 2. Cor.
5. 21. Romans 10. 3.
That if we say we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and the truth is not
in us. But if we knowledge our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us
our sins, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness. Lo, to confess our
sins, and to acknowledge our selves to be Sinners, is to be righteous in Gods
sight, Hier. lib. 1. ad^. Pelag tom. 3. sol. 120. D.
and to keep his Commandments. This Saint Hierome confirms, in these
Golden words; Tunc ergo iusti sumus, quando nos peccatores fatemur; and
iustitia nostra non ex proprio merito, sed ex dei consistit misericordia. Then
therefore are we just, when we confess our selves Sinners, and our
righteousness consists not in our own merit, but in Gods mercy. Thus
writes this holy and learned Father, showing most evidently to all that have
eyes to see it that we may both be breakers and Keepers, of Gods
Commandments at once; both Sinners and Righteous at one and the same time,
though not in one and the same respect. Sinners, in respect of our selves, and
our corrupt Nature; Ezech. cap. 18, 21. Esa. 1, 18.
Righteous in the sight and judgment of God, who of his great mercy pardons
all penitent Sinners, and for Christ's merits does not impute their sins unto
them.


S. R. I omit Moses, Page 426
Aaron, Samuel, David, Iosue, Zachary, Elizabeth, and the Apostles, who are
said to have kept Gods Law, and some of them in all their heart: only Saint
Paul I cannot omit, because Bell grants, that he was most free and innocent
from Actual sin, therefore surely he kept Gods Law perfectly.


T. B. I answer: First, (...) all these holy men, were in their life time
sinners, and Transgressors of Gods holy Laws, which I could easily prove by
many Texes of holy Writ, if I deemed it needful so to do: this only shall
suffice for the present, Iam. 3, 2.
that the Apostle says, The best Livers of all offend in many things. And
that the Prophet David tells us, Psa. 143, 2.
That none living can be justified in Gods sight. Secondly, to Saint Paul I
answer, as in the Downfall; That the raging vnvoluntary motions of
Concupiscence were sin in him, although he did not actually yield his
consent unto them. And thereupon I inferred then, and now again; That that sin
which Saint Paul lamented in himself, affirming himself to be sold under
sin, Romans 7. 14.
was truly and properly sin indeed, but not Actual, because he gave no
consent unto it; Ergo, he must needs speak of Original. This point I
delivered so plainly in the Downfall of Popery, as none, but eitherfooles, or
malicious Readers, can be ignorant thereof. Of other Actual sins I spoke not.


S. R. Christ (says Bell) being asked what good a man should Page 427.
do to attain eternal life, answered; If thou will have eternal life by
doing good works, Mat 19, 17.
then must they keep Gods commandments; but this is impossible (says Bell.)
Here is most shameful abuse of Gods word, and this shows Bell to have a
scared conscience: For neither in the man's Question, nor in Christ's answer,
is there any word how a man should come to Heaven by this way, or that way,
(viz:) by believing, or by working, or by both; but only what was the mean in
general to come to Heaven: which the man supposing to be good, asked what
good he should do to come thither. Which Question of his is common, either to
Faith, or Works, or both; foral include doing good. And our Savior answered
him, If thou will enter (not this way, nor that way, but absolutely) Into life,
Keep the Commandments.


T. B. What a one is this Friar? He charge me to have a seared conscience,
which may more justly be imputed to himself. I willingly acknowledge my self
to be a great Sinner, GOD forgive me; yet may I stand at defiance with this
Jesuit, and withal the Jesuits in the World, for any corrupt or falfe
dealing, either in the Scripture, or in the Fathers, Councels, Histories,
Chronicles, or other Writers whosoever, they are alike to charge me withal.
Nay, in this very point, wherein he desperately accuses me, I am able to
charge him too deeply, and justly retort that agianst himself, which he would
most falsely and unjustly impose upon me. He avouches most impudently, that
there is not any word, neither in the man's question, nor in Christ's answer,
how a man should come to Heaven this way, or that way. Let us therefore ponder
the man's words seriously, and then yield our censures according to the truth.
Math. 19, 16.
S. Matthew has these words; Good Master, what good thing shall I do, that
I may have eternal life? Mark. 10, 17
Saint Mark has these words; Good Master, what shall I do, that I may have
eternal life? Luke, 18, 18.
Saint Luke has these words; Good Master, by doing, what shall I possess
eternal life? Now, I pray thee Gentle Reader (whosoever thou art) to be an
indifferent Judge between the Jesuit and me. Thou see evidently, that the
man demanded of Christ, what he should do to possess and enjoy eternal
life. For he said plainly; What shall I do, and by doing? What, shall I
possess eternal life? Does not he ask to go to Heaven this way, or that way,
who asks to go thither by doing Goodworkes? Yes doubtless, it cannot be
denied. For to go to Heaven by doing this or that, and to go to heaven this
way, or that way, is al one in effect. So likewise, he that says, shall I go to
Heaven by doing this, or by doing that; and he that says, shall I go to heaven
this way or that way, says one and the same thing in effect. Truly therefore
did I answer to the Objection, by my self propounded cut of the Gospel (viz:)
that our Savior Christ did not show in that place, how men may attain eternal
life, but showed plainly unto the man, who trusted much unto his works and
good life, that perfect observation of the Law is required of him, that
thinks to be justified by the works of the Law. The man did not say, how
shall I go to Heaven? Or how shall I attain eternal life? But thus; by doing
what, shall I have eternal life? Christ therefore answered directly to his
manner of demanding; If thou trust so much to thy works and thine own doings,
that thou thinks thou can go to Heaven by doing, then do I tell thee, that
thou must look well unto the matter, and see thou keep the Commandments. This
answer is directly and clearly deduced, out of the very text it self.


S. R. Bell says, Page 429.
that Goodworkes are so necessary to attain eternal life, as the usual,
ordinary, and undoubted means, by which God decreed from eternity, freely for
his own name sake, to bring his elect to salvation: and that without them,
none have been, are, or shall be saved, if time be granted to do them. How
are they now become an impossible mean to come to Heaven? How did the man
enquire of an impossible way to heaven, by Goodworkes? What need this
challenger any adversary, who thus overthrows himself?


T. B. If our Jesuit had either eyes to see, ears to hear, or wit to
understand; he could not but both see and perceive, that he confounds
himself in his own dispute. For, albeit the best liver upon earth, cannot for
any merit of his best works, by any possible means attain eternal life,
(for it is the gift of God, Ephesians. 2, 8, 9. 10.
not of works) yet has GOD decreed to bring us to heaven by good works,
which he of his great mercy freely works in us. For these are the Apostles
express words, as the Rhemists have put them down. For by Grace you are
saved by Faith, and that not of your selves, for it is the gift of God, not of
works, that no man glory, for we are his work, created in Christ lesus in
goodworks, which God has prepared that we should walk in them. Thus writes
the Apostle, even as our Papists allege his words. Out of which holy discourse
of the chosen vessel of our Lord Jesus, I observe these golden lessons.

First, that we are saved By grace.

Secondly, that salvation follows not only our first justification so called
of the Papists, which they confess to be of Grace, but their second falsely
supposed justification also, which they would have to come of Works. For (as we
see here, our salvation, which is after al manner of justification (if there were
as many as the Papists imagine) is only of grace, not of Works. You are saved
says Saint Paul, mark well the word ( Saved.) He says not, you are justified
by grace, which goes before salvation, but you are saved by grace, which
follows your justification.

Thirdly, that the Apostle says Negatiuely ( We are not saved of Works,) and
consequently, that he confounds our Papists, who say that their second
justification and their salvation come of their works. But as their second
falsely so named justification, was never known to any of the holy Fathers, nor
to any ancient counsel; so will their salvation never be known to Gods elect,
unless they repent and revoke this their damnable Doctrine.

Fourthly, that God works our Good Works in us.

Fifthly, that God has ordained Good Works for this end, that we walk in
them. This doctrine is confirmed by the same Apostle in another place, Tit. 3, 5
where he has these words. Not by the Works of Justice which we did, but
according to his Mercy he has saved us. Lo, the holy Apostle is still
constant in his former position, (viz:) that We are not saved by the Works of
Justice, but of mercy and grace. For this cause says S. Austen, Aug. lib. 9.
con. fession. cap. 13. Chrisost de co^punct. cord. lib, 2. tom, 5. col. 592
Woe unto the best liver upon earth, if God examine his life, his mercy set
apart. For this cause says S. Chrysostom, and si millies moriamur etc. Though
we die a thousand times, and though we accomplish all virtues of the mind, yet
do we nothing worthy of those things, which we receive of God. For this cause
says S. Theophilact; Seruauit nos aeternum, non ex operibus, etc. He has
saved us eternally, Theophil. in 3. cap. Tit.
not of the works which we have done; that is, neither have we done the works
of Justice, neither are we saved by them, but his goodness and his clemency,
has wrought our salvation wholly. Yea, Berna. in cant. sermon. 68. tom. 1 pagina
1006.
for this cause says their highly renowned Abbot Bernardus; Sic non est etc.
So there is no cause, that thou should now ask, by what merits we hope for
glory, especially since thou hear the Prophet say; I will do it (says the
Lord,) not for your sake, but for mine own. It is sufficient to merit, to
know that our merits are not sufficient. Thus write these holy fathers, with
the famous popish Abbot, whose words are so plain for the truth which I
defend, as every child may with facility discern the same. For I did not say,
(as our Jesuit would deceitfully persuade his Reader) that Good Works are an
impossible mean to come to heaven; No, nor that the young man did enquire of an
impossible way to heaven. For I know, and I have constantly affirmed the same
in the Downfall; that Goodworkes are a mean, and the way that leads to
heaven. But withal, I said then, and now again; that neither can the best
liver on earth, keep the Commandments so exactly as the law requires;
neither can any man for any works he does, condignly merit eternal life. And
this is the point indeed, which I defend against the Papists. Whosoever shall
with a single eye pervse the Downfall, will find it to be so. For, it is one
thing to say, that Good Works are a mean, or the way to heaven; another thing
to say, that a man can fulfill the Law, and by his Works condignely merit
heaven. The former I grant willingly, the latter I deny constantly; neither is
any Papist able, to answer my reasons in that behalf. For example, the Pope (
Boniface) sick at Rome, of his mere good will bequeathed by his Testament
7000. crowns of Gold, to Robert Parsons the Jesuit, lame of hands and legs at
Paris (his lamenesse not known to the Pope) to be given to the said Parsons,
when he comes to Rome in his own person to demand the same. Now, the said
Parsons having inteligence of the said Legacy, provides a good Gelding, a
strong man-like fellow, and so takes his journey toward Rome, where he no
sooner demands the said 7000. Crowns, but he in friendly manner receives
the same, acording to the true meaning of the Popes will. In this case, the
Gelding* the tall fellow, and the journey it self, were good and necessary
means to receive and possess the said Crowns: Howbeit, neither did they
merit the said Crowns, Romans 6, 23
neither were they the cause of bequeathing them Even so in our case, Ephesians. 2,
8
Eternal life (as the Apostle says) is the free gift of God, Ephesians. 2, 10
it is of grace, Mat. 7. 17
not of Works: Romans 8, 30
nevertheless, Goodworkes (as the same Apostle tells us) are the way which
God has ordained for us to walk in; and the usual, ordinary, and undoubted
means, by which God intends to bring his elect to heaven. This
notwithstanding, this must ever be a constant and undoubted position, with all
the children of God, (viz:) that none ( not the best liver upon earth) is able
exactly to keep Gods commandments, and by the merit of his works to enter
into heaven.


S. R. Will not Christ say in his last sentence; Page 428.
Come ye blessed of my father possess the kingdom provided for you, Mat. 15.
34, 35
from the constitution of the world? I was hungry, and ye gave me meat. As
well as he will say, Go you from me you cursed into everlasting fire? For I was
hungry, and ye gave me not to eat.


T. B. I answer; first, that the word ( For) is not here taken Causaliter,
but Consequutiue, to speak as the Schoole-doctors do, that is to say; It does
not Connotate the cause but the event, as was said before of Mary Magdalen. So
that the sense is not for giving meat to Christ, when he was hungry, or drink
to him being thirsty, they did merit heaven, but that by doing such charitable
works, (which are the effects of a true justifying faith, they showed
themselves to be the children of God, and the heirs of his kingdom. And this
sense is deduced, out of the very text it self. For seeing the kingdom of
heaven, (as Christ here avouches) was prepared for them before the
foundation. and consequently, before they were borne, and so before they could
do any Good Works, it follows of necessity, that their works could not
merit heaven, but only signify to the world, that the inheritance of heaven
was due unto them, as to the children of God the heirs of the same. For (as
the Apostle says) If we be sons, then are we also heirs; Romans 8, 17
heirs of God, and ioynt-heires with Christ. Yea (as the same Apostle says in
another place. Ephesians. 2. 4.
) As he chose us in him before the foundation of the world, that we should be
holy and immaculate in his sight through love, who has predestiuated us into
the adoption of children by Jesus Christ unto himself, according to the good
pleasure of his will. To which I must needs add that, Romans 8. 50.
which the same Apostle says yet in another place; Whom he did predestinate,
them also he called: and whom he called, them also he justified; and whom he
justified them also he glorified. Out of this holy discourse of the Apostle of
our Lord Jesus, I observe these golden lessons. Psa. 59, 12


First, that we are the sons of God, not by nature (for so we are his
enemies, and the children of wrath) but by grace and adoption in Jesus Christ.

Secondly, that God chose us to be his Children before we were borne.

Thirdly, that he chose us, not because we were holy, but that we might be
holy and immaculate in his sight.

Fourthly, that he predestined us to be his Children by adoption, not for
any Goodworkes we either had done or could do, but for his own good pleasure
to the glory of his grace. For, as to do any works at all before we are
borne, is altogether impossible, so to do Goodworkes when we are borne (seeing
we are conceived in sin, born in sin, and by nature the Children of wrath) is
impossible in like manner.

Fifthly, that all our Goodworkes, are the effects and fruits of our
predestination. For, Psa. 51, 5.
if it be true, as it is most true, (else the Apostle should be a liar) that
we were elected to be holy, Esa. 59, 2.
and to do Goodworkes; it is also true, (it cannot be denied) that holy life
and Goodworkes, Ephe. 2, 3, 5.
are the effects and fruits of our election and predestination in in Christ
Jesus. For this cause (says the Apostle) that predestination proceeds freely
of Gods eternal purpose; Justification, of predestination; and glorification,
of justification. For first, he chooses us in Christ; then, Romans 8, 30.
he justifies us in Christ. Thirdly, and lastly, he glorifieth us for his own
names sake. For this cause says that famous Papist, Nicholaus de Lyra, in this
manner; Dicendum, quod predestinatio diuina est preparatio gratiae in presenti,
and gloriae in future and ides cu^sit aeterna, Lyra. in cap. 6. Mat.
sicut ab aeterno predestinauit al^que^ ad beatitudine^, ita preordinaui^ modu^
que^ daret sibiilla^ beatitudinem. I answer (says this Popish Doctor) that
Gods predestination is the preparation of grace in this world, and of glory in
the World to come. And therefore, seeing it is eternal, as he has
predestined any one from eternity to endless bliss or beatitude; so has he
also fore-ordayned the mean, by which he would bring him to the same. For
this cause says the Popish Angelical Doctor Aquinas, that predestination
includes Gods will of bestowing both Grace and Glory. Aquin. p. 1. q. 23. art.
3. ad 2.
And he adds these words; Nam praedestinatio ect causa, and eius quod
expectatur in futura vita a praedestinatis (selt) gloriae, and eius quod
percipitur in presenti, (selt) gratiae. For predestination is the cause, both
of that which is expected in the life to come, that is to say, of Glory, and
also of that which the predestinate receive in this life, that is to say, of
Grace. For this cause says our Jesuit Bellarmine, that Goodworkes follow
predestination, as effects follow their causes. These are his express words;
Itaque sunt opera bona effectus praedestinationis. Therefore Goodworkes are the
effect of predestination. Again, Bellar. tom. 3. col. 627. and col. 628.
in another place thus; Itaque illa propositio, (deus ab aetet no praedestiaaut
hominibus dare regnum per opera bona praeuisa) potest and vera esse and falsa.
Nam si illud (per opera praeuisa) referaetur ad verbu^ (praedestinauit) falsa
erit, significabit. n. Deum praedestinasse homines, operaillorum bona
praeuiderat; si referatur adverbum (dare,) vera erit, quia significabit
executionem futuram esse per opera bona, sieve quod est idem, glorificationem
effectum esse iustificationis and operum bonorum; sicut ipsa iustificatio
effectus est vocationis, and vocatio praedestinationis. Again, in another
place thus: Non ideo pendet praedestinatio ab operibus, sed opera a
praedestinatione. Therefore predestination does not depend of works, but
works depend of predestination. Again, Bellar. tom. 3. col. 626. and col. 628.
in another place thus; Alia ratio est praedestinationis, alia exequutionis;
constituit. n. in praedestinatione regnum caeloruu^ dare certis hominibus, quos
absque vlla oper u^praeuisione dilexit; tamen simul constituit, vt quo ad
exequ^^tionem, via perueniends ad regnu^ essent opera bona. There is one reason
of predestination, another of execution; for in predestination, God decreed to
give the Kingdom of Heaven to certain men, whom he loved without any
foresight of works; Howbeit he decreed withal, that in respect of the
execution, Goodworks should be the way to come to the Kingdom. For this cause
say our Rhemists, that our first justification is of Gods Grace, and not of our
deseruinges; because none of all our actions that were before our
justification, could merit or justly procure the Grace of justification. Out
of this discourse of the famous Popish Doctors, I observe these memorable
Lessons for the great good of the Reader.

First, that all the Grace, Faith, and Goodworkes, which we have in this world,
and the glory which we expect in the World to come, do wholly proceed from Gods
predestination without all deserts of man.

Secondly, that as God prepared the kingdom of heaven for his elect, before
they were borne, or had done any Goodworkes; so did he also prepare the way and
means, by which he intended to bring them thither.

Thirdly, that no works either done, or foreseen to be done, did move God to
predestinate any man to the joys of heaven.

Fourthly, that Goodworkes are not the cause, but the effect of predestination.

Fifthly, that Goodworkes are the way and means, which God ordained for the
execution of predestination, and for the accomplishment of glorification.

Sixthly, that not only predestination, but also justification, proceed of Gods
mere favor, grace, and good pleasure, without all deserts of man.

Seventhly, that our vocation, our justification, and our glorification, are
the effects of predestination. I therefore conclude, that Good works are not
the cause, why Gods Children possess Heaven as their inheritance, seeing it
is the effect of Gods predestination; yet that they are the ordinary way and
means, by which God decreed in his eternal purpose to bring his elect to
Heaven. For as he ordained the end, that is to say, the kingdom of heaven or
eternal life; so also ordained he the way and means to attain the same; that
is to say, vocation, justification, faith, and Goodworkes.

Secondly, that there is great disparity between salvation and damnation, and
therefore that Goodworkes cannot merit Salvation, though evil works be
enough for damnation. The reason is evident, both in Philosophy and Divinity,
because as Saint Dionysius Areopagita says (and the Popish Angelical Doctor
Aquinas approoueth the same) Bonum ex integra causa existit, A^^op, de divine
(...), cap. 4 p 267.
malum ex quolibet defectu?) Good, is of an entire and whole cause, but evil,
comes of every defect: yea, that more is required to good then to evil,
Aquinas, 12. q. 18. art. 4.
daily experience teaches us; for one may soon do that hurt to his Neghbour,
which cannot without great cost and long time be cured again. This S. Austen
well observed, August. tract. 72. (...) Ioh. tom. 9. Page. 262.
when he left in writing to be read of all posterity, that it is a greater
thing to justify the wicked man, then to make heaven and earth.


S. R. I prove the conclusion, Page 429.
because Christ says, My yoke is sweet, and my burden light. And Saint John
says, his commandments are not heavy: Ergo, they are possible. Bell
answers, that these words are not meant in respect of us, Aug. lib. 1. retr.
c. 19. tom. 1
but of Christ, whose keeping the Commandments is imputed to us. Which Saint
Austen (says he) meant, when he writ thus; Then are all the Commandments
reputed as done, 1. John. 5. 3.
when whatsoever is done, is forgiven. But this is easily refuted, for Saint
John spoke in respect of us assisted by Gods Grace, when he said; This is the
Law of God, that we keep his Commandments, and his Commandments are not
heavy. He says not ( Christ) but ( We) must keep Gods Commandments.


T. B. I answer: First, that whosoever reads and marketh the Downfall, will
soon perceive, that our Jesuit is at a Non plus; for there were these his
silly Objections solued and refuted before they came to light.

Secondly, that our Jesuit belyeth me, after his wonted manner, when he says;
that I affirm the words to be meant in respect of Christ, and not of our
selves. For after I had proved by many arguments drawn out of holy Writ, that
the yoke of Christ is sweet to the faithful, 1 Cor. 1, 30
I added these words. Phil. 3, 9
This being so, we may truly say, that in Christ we fulfill the Law: Colos. 2,
14
Because he is our righteousness, our sanctification, 1 John 5, 4
and our Redemption; because he has overcome death; because he has clothed
us with his righteousness, Acts 15. 11
because he has covered our nakedness with his garments; 2 Cor. 5, 21
because in him we have gotten the victory, Romans 5, 19
over hell, death and damnation. John 16, 33
Thus I answered in the Downfall. Psalm 32, 1


Now I refer my self to the censure of the indifferent Reader, how
sufficiently I have refuted the Jesuit, and how unjustly he has slandered me.
For it is one thing to say, we fulfill the Commandments in Christ, another
thing to say, the words are spoken in respect of Christ, not in respect of our
selves: The latter are his, the former are mine, viz: that in Christ we fulfill
the law: and I learned them, of Christ's holy Apostle and chosen vessel S.
Paul. Omnia possum in eo qui me confortat. I can do all things (says he) in
Christ, that strengthens me. Phil, 4, 13
Again in another place, the same Apostle tells us, That as by the
disobedience of Adam, Romans 5, 19
many becam sinners; so by the obedience of Christ many shall be made
righteous. Again in another place thus; That I may be found in him not having
mine own righteousness, Phillip, 3, 9
which is of the Law, but that which is through the says of Christ, the
righteousness which is of God through faith. Again in another place thus; They
being ignorant of Gods righteousness, Romans 10, 3
and seeking to establish their own, were not subject to the righteousness of
God.

Again thus; He made him sin for us, which knew no sin, that we might be
the righteousness of God in him. Hereupon S. Austen that worthy pillar of
Christ's church, 2 Cor. 5, 21
gives this gloss and true meaning of these words of Saint Paul. Christum
pro nobis peccatum fecit Deus, Aug. in enchir. cap. 41. tom. 3 pagina 118
cuireconciliandi sumus; hoe est, sacrificium pro peccatis, per quod
reconciliari valeremus. Ipse ergo peccatum, vt nos iustitia; nec nostra, sed
dei; nec in nobis, sed in ipso; sicut ipse peccatum non s^um, sed nostram, nec
in se, sed in nobis constititutum, similitudine carnis peccati, in qua
crucifixus est, demonstrauit. God made Christ sin for us, to whom we are to
be reconciled; that is, a sacrifice for sins, by which we might be
reconciled. He therefore was made sin, that we might be made Justice; not our
Justice, but Gods Justice; neither in us, but in him; as he declared, sin
not to be his, but ours; not placed in him, but in us, by the similitude of
sinful flesh, in which he was crucified. Thus writes this ancient, holy, and
learned Father. Out of whose grave Testimony, together with the Texts of holy
scripture produced already, I observe these memorable documentes, for the
comfort of the well affected Reader.

First, that albeit we are not able of our selves, nor in our selves, to
fulfill the Law of God, and to keep his commandments; yet are we able to
keep them, and to fulfill the Law, in our Lord Jesus Christ.

Secondly, that as we were made sinners by the disobedience of one, even Adam;
so are we made righteous, by the obedience of one, even Christ Jesus.

Thirdly, that our formal righteousness is not inherent in our selves, but in
God, for the obedience of Jesus Christ his only son and our only savior.

Fourthly, that as the sin for which Christ suffered, was ours, not his; in
us, not in him; even so that justice by which we are made righteous, is not
ours, but Gods; not in us, but in him. I therefore conclude, that we fulfill
the Law in Christ, not in our selves. And I add with S. Austen, O lesuite
confess thou art confounded.
(to the everlasting confusion of our Jesuit and al Iesuited Papists in the
world) that that Justice, by which and with which we are formally justified in
Gods sight, is not inherent in our selves, but in God; not ours, but his; not
in us, but in him; and yet ours by imputation, as our sins by imputation were
his. So as all the faithful may joyfully say with the Prophet David; Blessed
are they whose iniquities are forgiven, and whose sins are covered. Blessed
is the man, to whom the Lord will not impute sin. And with the Apostle Paul:
Psalm, 32, 1, 2.
As many by the disobedience of Adam, were made sinners; Romans 5, 19.
so many by the obedience of Christ are made righteous. And here I wish the
reader to mark well: that to be justified by imputation, is to be made just
truly and indeed; though not by Justice inherent in our selves, but by the
Justice of Christ. 2 Cor. 5, 21
For as our sins were truly and indeed imputed to him, so is his Justice
truly and indeed imputed to us. I also admonish the Reader, to remember well
these words of S. Austen, Aug. in ench. cap. 41. tom. 3. pagina 118.
Ipse ergo peccatum, vt nos iustitia, etc. He was made sin, that we might be
made justice: not our Justice, but Gods justice; neither in us, but in him. To
remember well (I say) these words, because they are words of great
consequence. These words strike dead.
For they prove evidently, that our formal justice is not inhere^t in our
selves, but in God; which confounds the Papists, and strikes them dead. They
convince man's inherent Justice to be imperfect; and their supposed condign
merit of Works, to be plain Hypocritical.


S. R. S. John gives us a sign to try, Page 430 1 John 2, 3, 4.
if we know God (viz;) if we keep his commandments, and verse 3. affirms,
That who keeps not his Commandments, knows not God. Wherefore either Bell
keeps the Commandments, or he knows not God.


T. B. I answer; Luke 18, 13
first, that Bell humbly acknowledges himself a great sinner, and desires
pardon for his sins with the poor Publican. Howsoever our Jesuit like the
Pharisee, glory in his condign merits, and Works of Supererogation.

Secondly, 1 Cor, 13, 9.
that as we know God imperfectly, so do we keep his commandments imperfectly.
If our Jesuit say, that he knows God perfectly: S. Paul condemns him for
an arrogant fellow: If he say, he keeps Gods Commandments perfectly, lames
3, 2
S. James reproves him as a proud Pharisaicall Friar.


S. R. As for S. Austen, Page 430.
he said our defectuous keeping is counted a full keeping, when the defect is
pardoned; which is a far different thing from saying, that Christ's keeping is
counted our keeping. And he means, that our keeping is defectuous, because we
keep not the commandments ad vnum apicem (as he says) to the last jot or
title, but thorough Venial sins have need to say, Fogiue us our Trespasses;
which Venial Trespasses being pardoned, we are accounted to do all Gods
Commandments.


T. B. I answer; first, that it is a mere calumny to charge me with saying,
that Christ's keeping is our keeping. I only said then, and now say again;
that we fulfill the Law in Christ, which is such a truth, as you are never
able to refute the same.

Secondly, that I have proved already, that every sin is deadly of it own
nature: and consequently, that it is too great arrogance in our Jesuit, to
expound S. Austen after his own fancy, having neither authority, nor reason so
to do.

Thirdly, that when our Jesuit confesses that their Venial sins are
pardoned, he unawares confesses, that they cannot keep Gods Commandments. I
prove it, because God either has forbidden their Venials, or is well pleased
with them. If he be well pleased with them, then are they no sins at all, for
God is not well pleased with sin. Psalm 5, 4 This Dilemma is insoluble.
If he have forbidden them, then are they against his precept, and
consequently, seeing the Papists grant that they cannot live without their
Venials, they must also grant of necessity, that they cannot keep Gods holy
Precepts. And therefore it is time for all Jesuits and Iesuited Papists, to
say with S. James, We all offend in many things. James 3, 2
And with the Prophet David, Enter not into Judgment with thy servants, Psalm
143, 2
O Lord, for none living shall be justified in thy sight. Aug. lib. 1. retract.
cap. 19.
I therefore conclude with Saint Austen; that all the Commandments are then
reputed as done, when whatsoever is not done, Is of mercy forgiven. And with S.
Hierome; that the true wisdom of man is, Hier. lib. 1. aduers. Pelagioones
fol. 121. Lib. 1, fol. 120 lib. 2. fol. 130
to know that he is imperfect.


S. R. Saint Hierome confesses, that God has given possible Commandments,
least he should be Author of Injustice. He says likewise, that he is to be
detested as a blasphemer, that says, God has commanded any impossible thing.
S. Austen also says, that God could not command any impossible thing, because
he is just.


T. B. This Objection is as a Bulwark, for Popish supposed Condign Merit of
works. I therefore both proposed it in the Downfall, and answered it in the
same place. My answer is there to be seen at large, to which I refer the
Reader. This is the sum and effect thereof, (viz:) that God commanded
nothing, which was either impossible in it self to be done, or to be done of
man as man; The same ie there proved at large. Touching S. Hierome, I will
add a little, because our Jesuit affirms him to be on his side. The truth
is this; that S. Hierom in 3. whole books against the Pelagians, has no other
scope, purpose, or intent, save only to prove against them out of the holy
Scriptures, that none living does keep Gods Commandments, which he proves
no other way, but because all have sinned, and done evil in Gods sight. Three
things therefore are clear and certain with S. Hierome.

First, that all have sinned, and cannot be justified, but by the mercy and
favor of God. These are his words; In multis offendimus omnes. Lib. 2.
aduers. Pelag fol. 130.
Non pauca peccata, sed multa; non quorundam sed omnium posuit. Omnes n. quae
sua sunt quaerunt, and non ea quae dei sunt. We all offend in many things. He
put not a few sins, but many; not the sins of some, but of all. Vbi supra,
lib. 1. sol. 123. D.
For all seek the things that are their own, and not the things that are Gods.
Again thus; Neque. n. homo potest esse sine peccato, quod tua habet sententia;
sed potest si voluerit deus, hominem seruare sine peccato, and immaculatum sua
misericordia custodire. Hoc and ego dico, quod deo cunct^ possibilia sunt;
homint autem, non quicquid voluerit possibile est, and maxim idesse, quod
nullam, ^egeris habere creaturam. For man cannot be without sin, as thou
think; but God is able, if it please him, to preserve a man from sin, and
to keep him immaculate by his mercy. This I also grant, that all things are
possible to God; but it is not possible for man to do, whatsoever he would;
especially to be that, which thou have not read any Creature to have. Again
thus; Vbi supra, lib. 2. fol. 129. D.
Hec cuncta percurro; vt oftendam a nullo legem, esse completam, and per legem;
mandat a omnia quae continentur in lege. Sequitur; ergo non liberi arbitry
potestate sed de clementia conseruamur. I run over all these things, to show
that none has fulled the Law; and by the Law, all the Commandments contained
in the Law: Ergo, we are preserved ( Or saved) not by the power of free will,
but by the clemency ( Or mercy) of God.

Secondly, that all the elect people of God, though they be sinful in
themselves, Vbi supra, lib. 1. fol. 120. c d. tom 3. eccles. 7 22 3. reg. 8. 46
by transgressing Gods law, yet are they just by the mercy of God in Christ
Jesus. Psalm. 19. 12.
The former p^rt, Psalm. 43. 2.
Saint Hierome proves thus; Non est homo iustus, etc. There is none just
upon the earth, none that does good and sins not. Again, There is no man
that sins not. Again, Who knows his sins, cleanse me from my secret
faults. Again, Enter not into judgment with thy servant, for none living can
be justified in thy sight. These and many like places (says S. Hierom) are
every where in the Scriptures, by which it is manifest, that none living can be
without sin.

The latter part, Vbi supra.
the same holy Father proves thus; Audi eundem euangelistam; si confiteamur
peccata nostra, sidelis and instus est, vt dimittat nobis peccata nostra, and
mundet nos ab omni iniquitate. 1. John. 1, 5.
Tunc ergo iusti sumus, quando nos peccatores fatemur; and iustitia nostra non
ex proprio merito, sedex dei consistit misericordia: conclusit. n. ^^euso^ma
sub peccato, vt omnibus misereatur. Romans 11, 31
Et haec hominis summa est iusti^a. quicquid potuerit habere virtutis, non suum
putare esse, sed Domini qui largitus est. Hear the same Evangelist; If we
confess our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us all our sins, and
to cleanse us from all iniquity. Then therefore are we just, when we confess
our selves; and our Justice does not consist of our own merit, but of Gods
mercy. For GOD has shut up all under sin, Vbi supra fol. 121. ^.
that he may have mercy on all. Again, in another place thus; Haec est hominis
vera sapientia, imperfectum esse se nosse; atque (vtit a loquar) cunctorum in
carne iustorum imperfecta perfectio est. This is the true wisdom of man, to
know that he is imperfect; and that the perfection of all the just in the
flesh, is imperfect. Out of this discourse of this holy and learned Father, I
observe these worthy documents.

First, that all men, even the best livers upon earth, have committed not a
few, but many sins.

Secondly, that we never read of any man, who never had done any sin.

Thirdly, that it is not possible for any man, to lead his life without sin.

Fourthly, that no man can be saved by his free will and holy life, but by the
mercy of God.

Fifthly, that no man fulfilleth the Law, nor keeps the Commandments
contained therein. Mark this point well.
This is a point of great consequence, it would be remembered.

Sixthly, that though all men be Sinners in respect of themselves, yet are the
faithful just in respect of Gods mercy, who imputes not their sins unto them.

Seventhly, that man is the^ justified, when he acknowledges himself to be a
Sinner; and then perfect, when he acknowledges his own imperfection. This is a
most excellent and golden Lesson. For here we see, how Sinners are just and
perfect in Gods sight. Mark well, gentle Reader. None (says Saint Hierom) can
fulfill the law; none can keep the Commandments; none can live without
sin; and yet the greater Sinner, the more just man, if he with the lowly
Publican do humbly confess his sins. For (as Saint Hierome tells us) to
acknovvledge our imperfection, Luke. 18, 13.
is our perfection before GOD, and to confess our selves sinners, is our
justification before him in Christ Jesus. Away then with all Popish inherent
justification; away with all Popish falsely supposed satisfaction; away with all
Popish Condign merits; away with all Popish supererogations.


S. R. Saint John says, Page 429. 1. John. 53.
This is the love of GOD, that we keep his Commandments, and his
Commandments are not heavy. He says not ( Christ) but ( We) must keep Gods
Commandments, and to animate us thereto, he adds; that they are not heavy, (
Viz:) to us.


T. B. This is answered already, August. lib. 1. retract. cap. 19 tom. 1.
where I proved out of Saint Austen, Vbi supra, lib. 2. fol. 130. B. Ibidem. C.
that all the Commandments are then reputed done, when whatsoever is not
done, is ( Of mercy) forgiven. Nevertheless, it shall not be amiss, to add
Saint Hieroms censure to the latter member, for explication sake. These are his
words; Vis audire facilitatem preceptorum dei? Ausculta quod dicitur; quam
arcta via and Angusta est, quae ducit ad vitam, and pauci sunt, qui inveniunt
eam. Non dixit, quigradiuntur per eam; hoc. n. difficillimum est, sed qui
inveniunt eam. Pauci. n. inveniunt, and multo pauciores ingrediuntur per eam.
Sequitur; hac dico, and iterum iterumque ac per singulaingeram; vt erubescas ad
sententiam tuam, facilia esse dei mandata. Will thou hear, how easy Gods
Commandments are? Mat. 7, 14.
Hearken what is said; Strait and narrow is the way, which leads unto life,
and few they are that find it. He said not, which go by it, for that is a very
hard thing, but which find it; for few do find it, and far fewer enter in
by it. These things I say, and will urge them again and again severally; that
thou may be ashamed to say, that Gods commandments are easy. Thus writes
this holy and most learned Father. Out of whose doctrine I note thus much.

First, that the way to heaven (that is to say Gods commandments) is very
straight and narrow, not wide and long, or casie.

Secondly, that it is so straight and so narrow, that few find it, and fewer
enter in by it.

Thirdly, that this way of Gods commandments, is so very hard; that in S.
Hieroms opinion and judgment, he may be ashamed, that says it is easy. Our
Jesuit therefore may be ashamed of his Doctrine, Page 432
and twice ashamed to make S. Hierom a Patron of the same. Page 433



S. R. If Bell say, Page 432
that it is impossible to love God, as we ought to do: this is reproved,
because he loves God as he should do, Deuteronomy. 6, 5
who loves him With all his heart, all his soul, and all his power. But Iosue
so loved God, of whom it is written, 4 Reg. 23
that he returned in all his heart, in all his soul, and all his strength.
Psalm 119
Likewise David sought God in all his heart, 3 Reg, 14, 8.
and followed him in all his heart. And God has some servants, 2. par. 6, 14
that walk before him in all their heart, with whom he keeps his covenant and
mercy, Deuteronomy. 30, 6
and God promises to circumcise the Jews hearts, that they might love him in all their hearts, and all their soul.


T. B. Bell says so, and that truly, and is already proved in this discourse,
4 Reg. 23, 25
and more at lage in the Downfall. Now to your particulars. King Josias (whom
our Jesuit falsely names Iosue) returned to God in all his heart, al his soul,
and al his strength. Which is nothing else indeed, but that hereturned to God
with a sincere heart, and unfeignedly, not Hypocritically. Not that he was pure
and free from sin, and no part of his heart or soul defiled with corruption,
which our Jesuit might have perceived, to be employed in the word ( Return.)
For, from what did he return, save only from sin. If he had ever been with
God in all his heart, all his soul, and all his strength; then doubtless
could he not have returned to him. For he that is ever with one, cannot be
truly said, to return to him. But the scripture decideth the Controversy, 2.
Par. 35, 21 22.
when it tells us, that Josias hearkened not unto the words of Mecho, 2,
Par. 15, 17.
(king of Aegipt,) de Asa. notetur
which were of the mouth of God, but came to fight in the valley of Megiddo,
where he was slain for his pains. K. David likewise (says our Jesuit)
sought God in all his heart, which must needs be understood, as I said of K.
Josias. For he was both an adulterer, and a murderer, 2. Sam. 12.
though also the child of God. This is already proved, and plainly confirms
the doctrine which I defend. Psalm, 51
The same may be said of king Ezechias, who was a great sinner, 2. Par. 22, 25
and yet is said to have served God with all his heart, and to have kept his
commandments. 4 Reg. 18. 6. 7, 8.
The same answer serves to the rest, that God has those, that will serve him
with their whole heart; De Asa vide
that is, unfeignedly and chearefully. 2 Par. 16, 7, 13 and cap. 15, 17 and vda.
For, as we have heard already out of the scriptures, None living is without
sin. Again, The faithful are said to keep Gods Commandments, and to
serve him with all their heart; Because to such as serve God unfeignedly and
chearefully, whatsoever is left undone, is of mercy pardoned and forgiven. It
is the flat doctrine both of S. Austen and of S. Hierom, as I have already
proved. And here I may not forget, to put our Jesuit in mind, that concerning
the circumcising of the Jewish hearts, it may please him to read the verses
following, for there shall he find his silly objection fully answered, even in
the text it self. These are the words: Deu. 30, 8, 10
Return thou therefore and obey the voice of the Lord, and do all his
Commandments, which I command thee this day. Lo, the Jews, whose hearts
God promises to circumcise, have gone from him and disobeyed his voice, and
therefore must have their hearts circumcised, that they may return to him
again, and serve him with their whole heart, that is to say, chearefully and
unfeignedly. Whosoever can and will read S. Hierome (in the place quoted in the
Margent) seriously and at large, Hier. lib. 2. adverse. Pelag. fol. 133. tom. 3
shall find this controversy so fully decided, as he can no longer stand in
doubt thereof. For ever must this Apostolical Doctrine, James 3, 2.
be holden for a most constant position: 3. Reg. 8. 46
In multis offendimus omnes. We all offend in many things. 2. Par, 6, 36
And this likewise for a received Axiom, 1. John 1, 8
in the School of all right Christians; Non est homo, qui non peccauit. 2.
Par. 15, 17 and cap. 16. ver 7. and 12.
There is no Man that sins not. If therefore our Jesuit sin not, he is
no man, if his pope sin not, he is not man, but either God or the Devil. GOD
(I am sure) he is not, if the Devil, God bless us from him. In like manner,
it is said of King Assa that his heart was perfect al his days, and yet is he
reproved both for resting upon the king of Aram, and for not seeking God in his
disease. The speech is Sinedochicall, because he was upright in many things.


S. R. Saint Hierome curses this blasphemy of Bell; Page 443
God has given us those commandments, Hier. epist. ^ Damas. tom. 2 fol. 57
which we cannot possibly keep. Likewise Saint Austen says, that God could
not command any impossible thing, because he is just.


T. B. I answer; first, that the Symbol or Creed (from whence our Jesuit will
needs borrow a curse, A. Aug. sermon. 61 de temp. 1.
and father it upon S. Hierom) is not his, as the censure upon the same does
declare. The like I may say of S. Aistens sermons de Tempore Secondly, Saint
Hieroms meaning, and S. Austens also, is nothing else indeed, but that Gods
commandments are possible to be kept of man as man, though not of corrupt man
after the fall of Adam. This point is handled more at large, in the Downfall
of Popery. That this is Saint Hieroms opinion indeed, I have already proved at
large touching S. Austen, these are his own express words; Certe iustus
Deus, negari non potest. Imputat autm Deus homini omne peccatum. Et hoc quoque
confitendum puto, quia neque peccatumest, quicquid non imputabitur in peccatu^.
Et si est aliquod peccatum quod vitari non potest, quomodo iustus deus dicitur,
si imputare cuiquam creditur quod vitari non possit? Respondemus, iam domini
contra superbos esse clamatu^; Psalm 32, 1.
beatus cui no^ imputavit dominus peccatum. Non. n. imputat his qui sideliter
ei dicunt; dimitte nobis debita nostra, Aug. de persect iustit. ratiocin, 15.
pa. 968. tom. 7.
sicut and nos dimittimus debitoribus nostris. Et just non imputat, quia
instum est, quod ait; in qua mensura mensi fueritis, in eadem remetietur vobis.
Peccatum est autem, cum vel non est charitas quae esse debet, vel minor est
qua^ debet, sieve hoc voluntate vitari possit, sieve non possit; quia si potest,
presens voluntas hoc facit; si autem non potest, praeterita voluntas hoc fecit;
and tamen vitari potest, non quando voluntas superbalaudatur, sed quando
humilis adiuvatur God doubtless is just, it cannot be denied. He also imputes
every sin unto man. I also think that this must be granted, because it is no
sin, whatsoever is not imputed for sin: and if there be any sin which
cannot be avoided, how is God called just, if he impute to any man, that which
cannot be avoided? We answer, that of old it was proclaimed against the
proud; Happy is the man, to whom the Lord has not imputed sin. For he imputes
not sin to the^, which faithfully say to him, forgue us our debts, as we
forgive our debtors. And justly he does it not, because it is just which he
says; In what measure your selves shall measure, in the same shall it be
measured to you again. And it is sin when either there is not that Charity,
which ought to be, or when it is less then it ought to be; whether this can
be avoided with will, or it cannot: for if it can be avoided, then present will
has done it; if it cannot be avoided, then will past did it.

Again, the same Saint Austen has these words; Ante omniainquit,
interrogandus est, Vbi supra raciocin. 1. p. 965
qui negat homme^ sine peccato esse posse, quid sit quodcunque peccatum; quod
vitari potest, an quod vitari non potest. Si quod vitari potest; potest homo
sine peccato esse, quod vitari potest. Nulla. n. ratio vel institia patitur
saltem dici peccatum, quod vitari nullo modo potest. Respondemus, vitariposse
peccatum, si natura vitiata sanetur gratia Dei per Iesum C. D. N. In tantum. n.
sana non est, in quantum id quod faciendum est, aut caecitate non videt, aut
infirmitate non implet, dum caro concupiscit aduersus spiritum, and spiritus
aduersus carnem, vt ea quae non vult homo, faciat. He (says Celestine) that
says man cannot live without sin, must first of all be demanded, what he
will have sin to be; whether that which can be avoided, or which cannot be
avoided. If that which can be avoided; man may be without that sin, which can
be avoided. For neither reason, nor Justice suffers that to be called
sin, which no way can be avoided. We answer, that sin may be avoided, if
corrupt Nature be healed by Gods grace through Jesus Christ our Lord. For
infomuch it is not healed, by how much it either through blindness sees not, or
through infirmity fulfils not, what ought to be done; while the flesh lufteth
against the spirit, and the spirit against the flesh, so as man does the things
he would not. Thus discourses this holy and learned Father, the most Noble
Champion of Christ's Church. Out of whose Doctrine, these excellent
observations may be gathered.

First, that that is no sin, which GOD imputes not for sin: and
consequently, that when GOD does not impute our sins to us, then are we
truly said to be without sin, ( In Gods acceptance ever understand)
although sin be still inherent in us.

Secondly, that they are to be condemned for proud and arrogant persons, who
think themselves to be without sin.

Thirdly, that our merciful God imputes no sins to his faithful Children,
who in the Lords Prayer humbly desire pardon for the same. This is a point of
great moment; it must be well remembered, and never forgotten. The Papists
most desperately and damnably affirm, that some sins are Venial of their
own Nature; whereas the truth is this indeed, (viz:) that albeit all sins
be mortal and deadly of their own Nature, (as I have proved in the
Downfall) yet are all sins (as Saint Austen gravely and Christianly in this
place unfolds) Venial to Gods Children; who in true Faith invoke his holy
Name, and humbly crave pardon for the same. So as it may truly be said; that
some sins are Mortal, and some Venial, though not in Popish sense and
meaning. For, though sins be mortal in their own Nature, and not at all
Venial, yet are all sins Venial to the Faithful, by the great mercy of
GOD, who imputes no sins to his elect Children, 1. Cor. 1, 30.
when he beholds their Robes washed and made white, in the blood of the
immaculate Lamb. 2. Cor 5. 21.
These (I say) must be well marked, Rom 10. 4.
and firmly imprinted in our remembrance, (viz:) Non^n, Phil 3. 9.
imputat his qui fideliter ei dicunt, dimitte nobis debita nostra. Ephe. 1. 4.
For he does not impute their sins to them, Tit. 3. 7.
who faithfully desire pardon for their sins. Apoc. 7. 14.
Sins therefore are Venial, but to whom? Not to Atheists denying God; not to
Pharisees boasting of their Condign works; not to Infidels denying Christ's
merits; not to impenitent persons, who either despair, or take delight in
sin; but to the faithful, who ever have a fervent desire to do Gods holy
will, and to keep his Commandments. And though of ignorance or frailty they
often fall into sin, yet do they forthwith bewail their sins, humbly
crave pardon for the same, and apply themselves wholly to worthy fruits of
repentance.

Fourthly, that when we either want charity, or have it not in that degree and
perfection, which the Law requires; we forthwith commit sin, and become
guilty in that behalf.

Fifthly, that we sin even in doing that, which we can no way avoid. Hereof
Saint Austen yields this reason, (viz:) that if we can avoid it, then our
present will is culpable and in default, if we cannot avoid it, the^ will past
was the cause thereof. For (as the same holy father says elsewhere and is to
be seen in the Downfall,) every such sin of ours is voluntary, eytheir in the
work it self, or else in the Original; that is to say, in the Protoplast
Adam; whose will in Gods just judgment is reputed ours, Heb. 7. 10.
because we were in his loins as in the beginning, Lib. 3. ethicor. cap. 5.
and root of all mankind.. 27.
To which I add; that though the Devil cannot avoid sin, yet cannot our
Papists deny, but he both sins heynously, and voluntarily: yea, the
Phylopher tells us, That the drunken man deserves double punnishment. For we
must ever have in mind, that our necessity of sinning, is punishment justly
inflicted upon us, as proceeding from our voluntary sin in Adam. I likewise
add for a complement and consummation of the doctrine which I now deliver and
defend; that Celestine (against whose errors Saint Austen wrote this Book,
Deperfectionciustitiae) defended Mordicus as a resolved and undoubted doctrine;
That whatsoever Man could not avoid, but do of necessity, could not truly
be called sin, nor for sin be justly imputed to him. To whom Saint Austen
answered; that albeit we cannot in this corruption of Nature live wholly
without sin, but so far only as our nature is healed; yet might we have
avoided sin perfectly and wholly before Adams fall, which is enough to make us
truly and formally sinners in Gods sight. Let his words be well marked and
remembered, and this controversy will soon be at an end. For it is all one, as
if S. Austen had said; Though we cannot now live without sin, but sin of
necessity; yet are our sins justly and truly imputed to us, because we
sinned voluntarily in Adam, and by that means most justly brought this
necessity upon us. This Doctrine the Papists, Volentes, Nolentes, must admit;
or else accuse God of Injustice, for condemning Infants eternally, for that
sin which they cannot possibly avoid. For infants dying without Baptism,
they affirm to perish everlastingly.


S. R. As for Bells dilernma, it is easily answered, and might have been better
left out (as himself writes in the margent.) For though Infantes after they
have sinned, and eaten the Apple in Adam, cannot avoyde the guilt of Original
sin, but must needs contract it by origin from Adam: Yet becautse as Infants
sinned in Adam, so they might have not sinned in him, but have avoided the
guilt of sin; falsely does Bell say, they could not possibly avoid it. And
I wonder, why Bell having taught before, that Concupiscence (the effect of
Original Sin) is voluntary, he will now say, that Infants could not
possibly avoid Original sin. But it is his custom to gainsay himself.


T. B. I answer; First, Page 436.
that in the Downfall of Popery, these words are written indeed in the
Margent; ( Omittatur haec clausula meo indicio.) But I protest, that neither
did I write them, neither did they please me, when I espied them. Many like
faults are in many of my Books, which I cannot deal withal. If I had Money
at my will, (as our Jesuit has) to defray my charges, while my Books were at
the Press, I could then so handle the matter, as such faults should not offend
his worship. How this Marginall note crept into the place, I may conjecture and
be deceived. This I am assured of, that our Jesuits can do greater matters.
This every child may know, that I wrote it not, but our lesuite will needs
have it so. For, if I would have had it left out, it was in my power to have
effected the same; this supposed (which I deny) that it was mine own act.

Secondly, that our Jesuit kills himself with his own sword. For, I contend
against him, that all sins are voluntary in Adam, and the Law possible to
have bin kept in him, which the Jesuit unawares, does here confess against
himself. This is the maine point in Controversy, (viz:) whether that which we
cannot avoid, may be sin in us or no. I hold the Affirmative, out Jesuit
the Negative. I reply, that infantes are guilty of that sin, which they could
not avoyde; and consequently, that that may be sin in us, which we cannot
avoyde. But withal I constantly affirm, that infants sinned voluntarily in
Adam, because they were in his loins; as also, that we might have kept the
commandments in innocent Adam, Heb. 7, 10
though after corrupt Adam, we cannot possibly perform the same. This
notwithstanding, I deny that infantes could any way have avoided Original sin.
For I cannot conceive, how a child can avoid that sin, Qui potest capere,
capiat.
which was committed before he was borne. For though it was once in Adams
power, to have avoided all sin, and so to have freed all his posterity from
all sin, yet was it never in any Infants power, to have caused Adam to keep
Gods holy precept; which seeing no Infant was able to perform, neither could
any Infant possibly have avoided sin. Our Jesuit therefore must learn to
know, that it is one thing to say, that it was in Adams power not to have
transgressed Gods Law, another thing to say, that it was in our power before
we were borne, to have kept Adam from that transgression. Which seeing it was
never in our power, neither were we ever able to have avoided the same; and
consequently, neither to have avoided sin.

Thirdly, where our Jesuit says, it is Bells custom to gainsay himself; if
it may please his reverence to put Jesuit for Bell, the truth then will be on
his side.


S. R. Gods Children as long as his seed abides in them, Page 44^
sin not, 1 John 3, 9 James 2, 10
nor offend deadly in any one point, but abide both in the whole Law, and in
every point thereof. Saint James speaks of deadly sin, and of offending
deadly. But there he Venial sins (which Bell denies not) in the which just
men may offend, Page 438.
and not break Gods Law deadly.


T. B. I answer first, that every sin is mortal of it own nature (which
I have already proved. Secondly, that all sins are Venial and pardonable
(which is all one,) to Gods children and faithful servants; not of their own
nature, but of Gods great mercy and favor toward them; who for Christ's
merits and satisfaction (in whom he is ever well pleased) pardons all their
offenses, and imputes no sin unto them. Mat. 3, 17
This is the constant doctrine of S. Austen, whose words are these; Omnia ergo
mandata facta deputantur, quando quicquid non fit, ignoscitur. All the
Commandments are then reputed as done, when what soever is not done, Aug.
lib. 1. retract. cap. 19.
is ( Of Mercy) forgiven. The famous Popish Abbot Bernardus, is consonant to S.
Austen. These are his words; Omne quod natum est ex deo, non peccat: sed hoc
dictum est de praedestinatis ad vitam; non quod omnino non peccent, sed quod
peccatum ipsis non imputetur. All that is born of God, Bernard, de gra and lib.
arbitr. page 1189
sins not. But this is spoken of the predestinate to life; not because they
sin not at al, but for that sin is not imputed to them.

Again, in another place he says thus: Vtique quod factum est, non potest,
non fieri: ipso tamen non imputante, erit quasi non fuerit. Bernard. sermon, 3,
in annunc.
Quod Propheta quoque considerans, ait beatus vir cui non imputabit Dominus
peccatum. The sin doubtless that is done, cannot be undone, yet because God
does not impute sin unto us, we shall be as if we had not sinned. Which the
Prophet considering says; Blessed is the man to whom God shall not impute
sin. Out of these words, this Corollary is clearly deduced (viz:) that the
regenerate are said not to sin, not because they do no sin indeed, or have
no sin in themselves (for that were against the flat Doctrine of S. James,
James 3, 2
) but because God of his mere mercy for the merits of Christ Jesus does not
impute their sins unto them.


S. R. It is an unjust law which is impossible; and to punnish the breakers
were against right and equity. As Bell himself would grant, if upon pain of
death he were bid to fly to heaven, and executed if he did not.


T. B. I answer; First, that the Commandments of God are not simply and
absolutely impossible, but accidentally Per accidens. They are not impossible
in themselves, because Christ himself kept them, neither impossible to man, as
man, because Adam might have kept them: Only they are impossible to cortupt
man: which impossibility, comes Per accidens, Deuteronomy. 30
and not Ex natura rei. Man had free will to have done Gods will, Eccles. 15.
to have kept his Commandments, and to have lived without sin perpetually;
Ephesians. 4, 24.
thorough whose disobedience we are sold under sin, Romans 5, 18
and brought to that necessity, Romans 7, 14
that we cannot possibly avoid sin. Heb. 7, 5.


Nevertheless, we are justly punnished for our sins, because the necessity
and impossibility, which was befallen us, was brought upon us thorough our
own default, when that we were in the Loins of Adam.

Secondly, that our Jesuits argument of my flying to Heaven, is both
unchristian and very childish: Unchristian, because it does equalize man's
precepts with Gods: childish, because it was never in my power to slye to
heaven, as it was once in man's power to keep Gods commandments. Our Jesuit
accuses God of injustice, in condemning infants for Original sin.


S. R. After the fathers, he brings two reasons. The one out of the Lords
prayer, where we are taught to ask forgiveness. But (says he) Where pardon must
be demanded, there the Law is not exactly observed. The other is out of our
daily confessions, where we acknowledge our faults, and most great faults. I
Answer, as the petition of forgiving our sins, does evidently convince, that
we do not so exactly keep the Law, as that we never swerve from it; so the
other petition of doing Gods will here on Earth as it is in Heaven, evidently
conuinceth, that we can do it without deadly breaking it. As for our
confessions, we do not confess that our daily offenses are most great faults,
but daily confess our most great falts, whether done then or before.


T. B. I answer: first, that our Jesuit grants as much as I desire, as
every child may perceive. For his words are plain, that they do not keep
the law so exactly, as they never swerve from it. Hold thy self here good
Friar, and we shall soon agree. For if you swerve from the Law, then
doubtless, ye does not keep it. This is all, that I require at your hands,
(viz:) that ye will confess, that ye swerve from the Law and keep it not.

Secondly, that the other petition proves not, that you Papists can keep Gods
commandments, and live without sin, as the Saints do in heaven. For every
mean Logician can tell you, that the word ( As) does Connotate a similitude,
but not an Identity (viz.) that as the Angels and Saints do Gods will in
heaven, and live altogether without sin, acording to the condition of the
perfect state; so we may do his will in some measure and proportion, according
to the imperfect state in which we live. And thus much the word ( as) does
import unto us, so often as as say the Lords Prayer.

Thirdly, that your answer is so Aenigmaticall, as my sle^der capacity is not
able to penetrate the depth thereof. You freely grant, that you daily confess
your most great faults, but not that your daily offenses are most great
faults, O the depth of Jesuitical wit! Qui potest capere, capiat. The great
God Apollo must come down from Heaven, to unfold this high mystery. Well,
seeing it will be no better, let us make the best of it we can. Let us hold
fast that, which is freely granted us, (viz:) that our Jesuits commit most
great faults sometimes, though not every day Let us likewise hold this fast;
(viz:) that our Jesuits confess those most great faults every day, which
they commit sometimes, but not every day. This done; let us out of these two
assertions plainly and freely confessed, infer these two most Golden and
memorable Corollaries.

First, that seeing our Jesuits freely grant, that they commit sometimes most
great faults, though not daily; it follows of necessity, that sometimes they
break gods holy commandments, though not daily; and consequently, that
sometimes they sin damnably, though not every day; as also, that they are so
far from loving Condign Merits of Glory, as they woorthily demerite
eternal torment in hell fire.

Secondly, that their Sacrament of Penance does not confer Grace Ex opere
operato: neither are their most great faults therein forgiven; seeing after
their auricular confession and absolution received of their ghostly Fathers,
they still stand in such fear of remission of their most great faults, that
they must needs confess the same daily in time of Popish Mass. To which two
Corollaries, I cannot but add this delicate Post-past for his holiness, viz:
That the supposed certainty of the operation of Popish sacraments, is as
uncertain as the wind. For though all Papists of all sorts be bound to
believe, that Popish absolution ministered by a Popish priest, after Popish
auricular confession, does undoubtedly purge them from all their sins, (though
never so many, and never so great;) yet after such confession, and such
absolution received from the Priests mouth, they are bound by Popish law and
Doctrine, immediately to confess their most grievous ^aults in time of Popish
Mass. Whereupon follows of necessity, that Popish late start-vp Religion, is
able to bring all Papists headlong into desperation.


S. R. If you love me (says Christ) keep my Commandments, Page 421.
but how can we keep them, if they damnably, 1 John 14, 1^^
and deadly break them? Can true keeping (thinks Bell) and true breaking
stand together?


T. B. True keeping and true breaking in diverse respects, both may and do well
stand together. For as the faithful in respect of their sins inherent in
them, do break Gods Commandments and are in state of damnation; so, in
respect of Christ's merits imputed to them of mercy, they are just and keep
Gods commandments perfectly. For as the disobedience of Adam, made all men
sinners; so the obedience of Christ, Phil. 3. 9
made all the faithful holy and just. This is it that S. John says: He that
is borne of God sins not, 1 Cor. 1, 3
which is not meant, 2 Cor. 5, 21
that he sin not indeed, but (as we liaue heard out of S. Austen, Romans 5. 19
and Abbot Bernard) That his sins be pardoned, 1 John. 3, 9
and not imputed to him. Hitherto, we have seen and viewed our Jesuits
Divinity: now a word or two of his great charity, and there an end.


S. R. What sir? Page 345.
are these speeches S. Chrisostoms cited by your selse? What need a Sermon?
What need a Preacher? Surely then your preaching is needless, and
consequently the fifty pound pension given to you for it, may be well spared.


T. B. Behold here our Jesuits charity. He took in hand to answer the
Downfall of Popery, but having broken his back with the fall thereof, and taking
to heart that he was put at a Nonplus, as not able to defend the Pope and
Popery: he devised with himself how he might be avenged of me, and so took
occasion to quarrel at my pensio^. A rare Metamorphosis doubtless: a digression
of mere foolery, to what end, it were wisdom to divine. The question in
hand, was of the Popes souer aignety: Of Religion: Of Faith: Of Salvation. All
which things (though of great consequence being set apart: our Jesuit, (as one
forgetful of the text, begins suddenly to preach against my pension,
telling his Reader with all gravity, that it may be well spared. It may seem,
our Jesuit would have a begging Friar, and so to spend my time in seeking my
dinner. Bells pension greeueth the lesuite.
But as it pleased most Noble Queen Elizabeth of famous memory, of her Royal
bounty, to bestow the fifty pound pension on me; and as it has hitherto well
pleased his most excellent Majesty, to continue the same for mine honest
maintenance; so I hope, that notwithstanding all the Jesuits prattling, (I
would say preaching,) I shall still enjoy the same. Soli Deo vni and trino,
honor and Gloria.


FINIS.
GEntle Reader by reason of the Authors absence and misunderstanding the Copy
in the 49. page, these two lines are thus rightly to be corrected. Ex
conclusione posita, and probationibus, quae a patre a Castro affirmantur,
colligitur, caute legendum esse Caietanum dicentem, etc.


