A Brief Collection and compendious extract of strange and memorable things,
gathered out of the Cosmographye of Sebastian Munster.

Where in is made a plain descrypsion of diverse and strange laws Rites,
Manners, and properties of sundry nations, and a short report of strange
histories of diverse men, and of the nature and properties of certain Fowls,
Fishes, Beasts, Monsters, and sundry Countries and places.

Imprinted at London in Fleetstrete near Saint Dunstanes Churchs by Thomas
Marshe. Anno Domini^ 1572.

To the Reader.
IT is well noted of the wise Philosopher in his seventh book of moralls, our
nature to be such through the conbinacion of contrary things, that we cannot
take continual delectation or pleasure always in one kind of thing, but
naturallye we are inclined and desire to be pertakers of news, of strange
and unaccustomed things, of variable and diverse matters which may breed
some admiracion to any of our senses. And if we at any time hear or see any
thing that is egregiouslye dishonest, or syngulerly good, almost incredible or
moving delectable laughter: to the desire of such things most commonly we are
not only rapte and vehementlye inclyned, but also we take such pleasure in
them, that we do long remember them and recreate our^ minds with
oftenthinking of them. (...) if we see any things of small importance, or such
as com every dai in use, those we do not^ so greatly esteem, but sode^l^ ^uffer
to slide away with ob^^uion. VVherof it may be well perceived that our minds
take the greateste pleasure, and are most earnestlye moved with strange
novelties and marvelous things. And therefore when I for mine own recreatio^,
had gathered this brief^ extract of strange novelties out of the cosmography
of Sebastian Munster, being a work as yet, not heretofore showing it self in
our vulgar tongue, and yet for the delectable varieties and famous histories and
examples therein, as mete as the best to show it self in english attire, I
could no less do for the satisfying of minds desirous to hear of strange
things, but needs I must communicate unto others the same kind of pleasure and
oblectacion, which I my self in the readinge and traslating thereof have both
found and used, thinkinge it to be an ungrateful point even against nature
to keep secret and hidden to him self that commodity and pleasure^ which
with small pains he might distribute to others, being of no less natural
mocion, then he h^^ self vehemently declyned to desire the same. The work of
it self is not great but the examples and varieties are mani so that in a
short and small time, the reader may wander through out the whole world, and fill
his head with many strange and memorable things, he may note the strange
properties of di^erse Beasts, Fowls, and Fishes, and the description of far
countries, the wonderful example of sundry men, and strange rytes and laws
of far distante nations. The wholle work of Munster I have abridged into this
little manual, because to have translated so large a volume, would have been
tediouse to my self, superfluouse to the reader, and very chargeable to the
byer. Besides that no great pleasure or commodity could have ensued by the
readinge of the large and ample discourse thereof. Accept therefore my good will
gentle reader in good part, whose especial desire is to show thee the best
commodities of so great a work in few ly^es, in the abridgement whereof, as
thou shall ^ynde superfluous charges to be avoided, so shall thou perceive
tediouse paynes^ of readinge long and weary some matt^rs to be easyed. And if
thou fyndest herein any good things or exampls worthy the imitacion, refuse not
to employ the^ to some good use and purpose, taking this lesson with thee,
whatsoever evil or disloyal thing thou fyndest here setfoorth, the same to be
examples and errors to admonish and declare unto others, the open infamy and
continual reproach that always follows detestable acts and dishonest things.
And thus I commit this brief collection to t^y indifferent i^dgement. The 13.
of Apryll 1572.

Of Gold and Silver.
Gold through heat and fire is resolved, but not consumed nor wasted. For of
al kind of metalles it leeseth nothing of his magnitude and substance, but
the more often and longer that it burns with heat, or is altered with fire,
the better and more pure and excellent it is made. And therefore has it
always been accounted the most precious kind of metal: the weight of it
neither is diminished, nor eaten away by sharp things, as salt, vynegar,
Nitru^, and the juice of unripe grapes. It is not difformed, nor made worse by
ruste, nor in handling of it, or hands do gather any filthe, or uncleanness as
in other kinds of metalles, the which things may easily prove gold far to
surmounte all other metalles. It is more flexible and soft then silver, whereby
it is less frail and not so soon broken: being beaten with a mallet, it may
be driven so thin and so much dilated, that of every denary of it may be
made fifty, or more thin leaves or rays of gold. It may be framed and
wrought as small as threade, as it appears in gold wyar, and gold twyste.
And sometimes it is wouen and wrought with sylke, wolle, and sometimes without.
Of it many and goodly ornaments be made, and for many uses, as rings,
bracelettes, chains, crowns, tablettes, Iewelles, and diverse kinds and
fashions of plates and such like, yea (that which is scantly honest to be
spoken) of gold some have made vessels to receive the superfluous burden of
the belly, the which thing Heliogabalus the Emperor, Heliogabalus had his
chamberpots of Gold.
being a monster and spectacle of all beastlynes is reported of diverse authors
to have used. Silver will melt and be resolved with fire, but if it remains
any long time therein, it leeseth some thing of his substance. Sharp
things also have power to waste and eat yt, and therefore it is not so
preciouse as Gold: but yet it is of an harder substance than gold. Silver.
And that kind of Silver which is more flexible and soft, is the better
because it is not so easy to be divided, and to be broken, it is less
ponderous then Gold, and cannot so well be dilated.

Of Spirits appearing in Mines.
IT is not unknown to such as have been occupied in deep digginges of
Mines, yt a kind of sprytes does frequent and haunt in many Mines, whereof
some do no harm nor damage to the laborers in Mines, but wander in ye
du^geons, and where as they do nothing in deed, yet they seem to exercise
themselves in working, sometimes in razing and digging the mine, sometimes in
gatheringe together that which is dug up, and many times they seem to
turn the instrument which draws up the metal from the mine, and diverse
times a man would think they did urge and excite the laborers, and drive them
to work.

And this do they especially in such quarries and mines where in much Silver is
found, or else where some good hope is of fynding it^ There be some of these
sprites very hurtful, as that which in the mine at Anneberg, was so noisome,
that he destroys a dosen laborers wherefore the said mine was utterly
forsaken and left notwithstanding the wealth of it.

Of Ireland.
THe earth in Ireland is so fruitful and so good of pasture, that there
cattle except they be restrained some times from pasture in Summer, are like
to be in danger through sacietie. There is no hurtful thing nor noisome
beast: No venomous beast i^ Ireland.
no spider, no toade nor such like either breeds there, or else being
brought from other countries thither, continues or lives there. The earth
of this country cast in powder upon any dangerous beast or venemouse serpent
of any other country, destroys and kylleth them. There be no Bees in this
country, the temparatenes of the air is meruaylous, the fertility and
fruitfulnes of the country is notable: the people of the country be void of
hospitality, they are uncivil and cruel, and there fore not unapt for warlike
affairs, they attribute great honor to martial acts, and knightly prowess.
The sea betwixe Ireland and England, do rage almost continually, so that
there is no safe passage but at certain times.

Of England and Scotland.
IN England there be no Wolfes, and if any be brought thither they do not
continue, and therefore their herds of cattle keeps well together, without any
great attendaunce of men. The sheep have horns contrary to those of other
countries.

In Scotland there be certain Trees which bring forth a fruit folded and
wrapped up in the leaves, Ba^nacles coming of a tree
and that fruit when in conueniente time it falls into the water running by
the tree, it reuiueth and takes life and is transformed into a living foul,
which some call a goose of the tree or a Barnacle. This tree also grows in
the ysle of Pomonia, which is not far from Scotland toward the North. The
ancient Cosmographers and especially Saxo the Grammarian, makes mention of
this tree likewise, and therefore it is not like to be any feigned or devised
thing of late writers.

Aeneas Siluius writes of this tree in this manner. We hard say there was a
tree in Scotland which growing upon a banck, and by the waters side brings
forth fruit much like in form to ducks, and the fruit of that tree when it is
ripe to fall of it self, some upon the land and some into the water, and those
that fall upon the earth, to putrifye and rotte, but those that fall into the
water, straighte ways with life to swym out of the water, and to fly in the
air with feathers and wings, of the which thing when we made more dilligent
search being in Scotland with king James, a wise sad and grave man, we learned
to fly from wondering and making such things miracles as were common, and that
this famous tree was not only to be found in Scotland, but also in the isles
called the Orchades.

Of an Isle in Spain named Gades.
THere is a little Isle in Spain called Gades or Erythrea, ye pastures whereof
do feed cattle so well that they can not draw or sever any whaye from milk,
but they must needs pour water, when they will have their milk to curde.
Their cattle also be like to dye at every thirty days end, except they be
let blood and so leese some quantitye of their blood. The grass whereon their
sheep feed, is somewhat dry, but yet it increases a marvelous fatnes both
in their flesh, and also in their milk.

Seneca the scholemaister of Nero the Emperor.
SAynct Hierome says that he was a man of most continent life, and therefore
he accompteth him in the number of holy men, but especially for the often
letters that he wrote to. S. Paul and S. Paul to him. This Seneca being the
scholemaister of Nero, was of great power and authority, he wished himself
to be in the like degree with his country men, that Paul had amongst the
christians^ amongst diverse of his excellent gifts and properties, he had so
singular and notable a memory, A singular memory.
that he could rehearse ii. thousand men's names in ye same order that they
were told him, and also he was able to rehearse ii. hundredth verses being
said of.ii. hundredth scholars, from the first to the last most perfectlye.
It is written that Nero his cruel and cursed scholar, in recompense of his
pains and teachinge, put him to death.ii. years before the martyrdom of
Peter and Paul. When Seneca waxed old, Nero calling to remembrance the
punishment of the rod, wherewith Seneca corrected him in his childhode,
admonished and commanded him to chose what kind of death he would dye, An
easy kind of death.
whereby Seneca understanding the Emperors will and pleasure, desired that he
might be ^et in warm water, and that his veins might be cut and opened in it,
and so they were, and he bled until al his vital spirits issued out of his
body, and thus he desired to finishe his life, because he thought it an easy
kind of death, to lose ^is life in cutting of his veins.

To diverse nations in aunciente times were objected diverse vices and
deformities.
Envy to the Jews. Disloyalty and unfaithfulness to the Persians Craftines to
the Egiptians. Deceitfulnes to the Grecians. Crueltye to the Sarracens. Leuitie
and lightness to the Chaldeans. Uarietie and chaungeablenes to the Affricans.
Glottonie to the French men. Uayne glory to the Lombardes. Unmercifull
severity of the Hungaria^s. The uncleanness and filthiness of the Sueuians. The
foolishnes of the Saxons. The hardines of the Pictes. The luxurye of the Scots.
The drunkenness and violencie of the Spaniardes. The anger of ye Brittons. The
rapacitie and gredines of the Normans. And as those vices were noted in these
kinds of nations seuerallye, so diverse virtues and honest properties were
attributed to them severally.

As prudence to the Hebricians. Stedfastnes to the Persians. Subtilitie and
wittines to the Egiptians- Wisdom to the Grecians, Gravity to the Romans.
^agacitie to the Chaldeans. Wit to the Assirians. Strength and fortitude to
the French men. Faithfulness to the Scots. Subtle sophistry to the
Spaniardes. Hospitality to the Brittons. Mutual participacion to the Normans.
These properties were of aunciente writers, ascribed to diverse nations in old
time, the which now in these our days seem to be much changed, and to have
had great alteracion.

Sugar grows in a part of Italye.
IN Calabria which is a part of Italye there growethe Sugare, which is a
kind of honye gathered out of great canes or redes. First of al it is like
unto a kind of marie resolved into licour which some call white gum, a
thing easy to be separate and divided, afterward this licour being boiled and
sodden after the manner of Salt, is resolved into a spume or froth, until at
the length that which is good, falls to the bottom, and then the corruption
and dregs may be clean taken away by the froth.

A Mountain always castinge forth flames and smoke.
THE Mountain called Vesuuius Mons, being nigh unto the great water Sarnum
not far from Naples, sends forth continuallye flames of fire and smoke like
unto Aetna in Sicily. This hill in the raygne of Titus ye Emperor, being
broken in the very top, di^ cast forth so great flames, that it set the
countries adioyninge on fire. The wrytere of Histories say, such abundaunce of
ashes and hot imbers to have been thrown out of this hill, that the fields
round about have been filled with the said ashes, even to the tops of the
trees. It is also found in ancient wrytinges that Plinye the second, being a
very grave and wise man, in the raygne of Traianus the Emperor, was
suffocate and destroyed with the flames and ashes of this hill, when that for
the desire he had to see and note the nature and mocion of it, he presumed to
go to near. This mountayn also burned with flames of fire, when T. Vespa^ian
and F. Domitian were consuls, and breaking out in the top, first it cast for
the stones aloft, after that so great flames of fire followed, that through the
feruente heat thereof.ii. towns were consumed with fire ^ the smoke thereof
was so thick that it took away the light of the son, and in the day time
made the darkness of the night, casting forth both Pumice stones, and diverse
other kind of black stones. Last of all ashes sprang out so thick and in such
a multitude that the countries hard by, were covered therewith as it were with
snow, and these ashes were driven by the force of the wyndes, partly into
Affricke and partly into Egypt and Syria. The which outrageous burninge as the
elder Pliny did contemplate and behold, the smoke did so obstructe and stop
his wind pype, that in the restraint of respiracion, he was suffocate and
strangled,

The properties of the Egle.
IN Italy there be many Egles, this foul is a rapaciouse, cruel, and a
deuourer of flesh, she is so much given ^o greedines and to her pray, that
she ^oth not only seek for prays in necessi^ie of fode, but also when she
has enough ^e seeks for superfluities, she does gre^elye invade and set upon
Hares, Hearts ^eese, and Cranes: the eyes of the Egle ^e so sharp and quick
of sight, that being in the very highest part of the air, ^he can easly see
what falls on the land. A quick sight.
Amongeste all fowls only, the Egle ^an move her self straight upward and
^ownwarde, perpendiculerly with her ^yinge without any collateral declining.
The Egle is commended for his faithful ^es toward other birds, when he has
^otten meat or feedinge, for he does fa^iliarly comunicate the same unto
such ^owles as do accompany him, and when ^e has no more to make distribution
of, ^hen he attacheth his gel^e, and dismeni^reth and deuoureth him: All Fowls
^remble when they see the Egle, having ^s it were some understanding of his
ty^anny against them. He loves his young ^ith great affection, so that the
Egle put^eth his own body in danger for them, ^earing his young on his back
when he perceives them to be assaulted with arrows. When he laboreth to drive
the Heart headlong to ruin, he gathers much dust ^s he flies, and sitting
upon the Hearts horns, he shakes the duste into his eyes, and with his
wings beats him about the mouth, until he brings him to fall down
headlong.

He has great conflictes with the Dragon: the Dragon most gredely coueteth
the Egles eggs, and for this cause they fight whersoeuer they meet. It is said
that the Egle of all kind of fowls, can keep the sharpenes of his sight, and
his eyes ^^edfaste against the son beams, and that he is never hurt by
lightninge.

A description of the Raven.
THe Raven is a foul geeuen to rapacitie and deuouringe of flesh, great of
body, slow in flight, shar^ in sight, and frequenteth much in Italy^ in the
Alps, in Spain and in Egipte. And this is to be understood of the great kind
of Ravens. The skin of the Raven is prepared, and dressed ar^ificially^ of
the white tawyers, with the feathers remaining upon yt, Stomach Digestion
and that so laid to a stomach not well or sicklye does meruelouslye help
digestion. This foul does greatly above all other covet men's carcases, and by
a singular wit and natural gift it understands of man's death, presaging it
few days before. With his sharp eye sight also it perceives a far of, his
most desired fode. There be some that writes merueylouse things of this foul,
that in the time of war seven days before hand, it smells and perceives
by cente, the place where the battle shall be, and commonly does associate it
self to that part, which it perceyueth shall perrishe with sword.

And therefore in ancient times, Princes had their Sothesayers, and beholders
of birds, that did most diligently look up on the eyes of the Ravens, and
mark to what part they turned their eyes, and which ^ide they did presage to
perish in battle. S. Ambrose writethe that a Raven conceiueth without the
seed of ye male, and to have generation without conjunction of males and
females, and that they live exceeding long, so that their age is full complete
with an hundredth years, and when they come to extreme old age, that then the
upper part of their bylls, does so ouergrowe the lower part, so y^ it
hinders and restrayneth it, that they cannot open their bylls to take fodde,
and therefore are compelled to dye by famyn, for he does not sharpen his bill
against a stone as the Egle is wont to do.

Certain rytes and laws of the old^ Romans.
ROmulus made a Law that the wife should be equal fellow with her husband,
in money and other things, in holiness and sacrifices, and yt she should live
according to the manner of her husband, and as he was Lord of the house, so
should she be Lady of the familye, that she should succeed her husband dying
with out issue, and that with her children, she should have her equal
portion. If the wife were conuicte of adulterye, that then her husband and
kinsfolk might punish her, with what kind of death they would. It was not
lawful for the women of Rome to drink wine, and this was observed many
years, where of was invented an instrument of dower, in the which the Husband
promised the father of the wife, as often as she brought for the children,
that he should give her as much wine to drink the first viii. days as were
decent and convenient, Wine forbidden to vvome^.
and also so long as she was sick, that she should have wine by the counsel
of the physician, and that upon every solempe festival day, she might
lawfully recreate her self with one draught of wine.

Cato the Censor made a decree, that they which were of propinquitie to the
wife might kiss her, whereby they might learn if she sauored of wine: and that
seemed to be done by thexample of Egnatius Metentinus, Kissinge.
of whom it is said that he slew his wife with a clubbe, because she drunk
wine from the barrel, and that Romulus pardoned him of her death: and this
grew to such a custom amongest^ them, that when soever the husband returned
home, he would kiss his wife and his daughters, marking by the odoure and
cent of their breath, if they had druncke wine or not. They were very severe
against women surcharged with wine, ^br^etie.
because they did perceive that drunkenness was the original cause of corporal
corruption, Romulus permitted and gave to the parents all power over their
children, yt by their own judgment they might compel them to any kind of
duty, whether they would restrain, beat, or keep them bound to rusticall
worckes, or fell them, or kill them. Numa made a law yt prohibited any
lamentations or mourninges to be made for a child, if that he dyed within
three years of age, but y^ he were past three years of age, that the he
should be lamented as many moneth^ as he had lived years, and many other
strange orders they had, the which be at large set forth in Munster.

The lively and quick wit of Adrianus the Emperor.
Adrianus was ye fiftene Emperor of Rome, of whom it is said that he would at
one time, both wryt^ and declare his mind, and hear others, and talk with
his friends.

M. Curious.
THere was in Rome about three hundred years before Christ's time, a strange
and horrible gapinge of the earth, even about the midst of the market place,
with so vaste a depthe and infinite holownes, that it might well have been
compared to the gapinge of Hell mouth, the spectacle continuing thus for a
time, made great terror amongst ye people, at the length the Sothsayers by
their interpretations, persuaded yt this horrible depthe might be stopped, if
the most preciouse thing in the City were cast therein. Wheruppon diverse of
the Matrones of Rome, of their own free will cast in diverse goodly Jewels, but
al was in vain. Wherefore M. Curious a knighte of Rome coming of a noble
house, being decked and adorned with his warlike furniture and ornaments,
ryd h^adlong into that horrible depthe and holownes of the earth, and so
immediatli it closed together again and was stopped. Some say that he
demanded this one thing before he would grant to ride and lepe into that
depth, Unlawful demand.
that for a wholl years space it might be lawful for him every night to lie
with what woman he would choose, and that then of his own mind he cast him
self suddenly down headlong into that den, and so the earth closed again.

Sardinia.
IN the country of Sardinia, there is a certain beast which they call Mufl^
the like whereof is not in all Europe beside. It has the skin and hears
like unto a dear or an Heart, horns like unto a Ram, not long but crooked and
bending backward about the ears, in bygnes he may be compared to a Bucke, y^
feeds upon grass only and herbs, and keeps most about mountains,
very swifte in running, and his flesh is good to be eaten. There be no
wolves in this country, nor no hurtful kind of vermin, f^wle, or beast beside
the Fox, which of all four footed beasts there, is most hurtful, being of
like bygnes to other foxes of Italye. In Sardinia a Fox will kill a very
strong Weather or Ram, a Got, and a Calfe. Foxes.
Some write that in this country there is no serpent, nor any venomous thing,
but pestilent air which comes through corrupt puddels and waters. Also
there is found in this country a certain herb like unto Baulme gentle,
whereof if any man shall eat much, he shall perish and dye laughing. Some say
that there is a fountain and spring in Sardinia whose waters does reprove
thieves and robbers after this sort. If a thief swereth that he has not
committed the theft, and washes his hands or ^yes with the water of that
fountain, by and by he is made blind and so he may be known, but if he
has not done the felony, his eyes are made more brighte and clearer then they
were before. The notice of this spring is grown out of memory in this our
age.

The making of Sugar at Palermo in Sicilye.
IN the fields about the city of Pale^mo, grows great plentye of sweet
reeds, of whose juice being well boiled Sugar is made. First they dung well
their fields being not much distant from the sea, and then do they make
forrowes and ranges somewhat high and eminent, afterward in the month of March
they take the highest knots of the sweet redes made bare and void of leaves and
rindes, the which they do so set and plant, tha^ they pearce through the
sides of the ranges with three or four having double knots even at one dynte,
and so do they fill all the ranges of the field, the earth is watered in
Summer and is kept from rancknes daily, about the Winter solstice, only the
rotes left for another plan^tinge (for it lasts two years) the rede^ are
broken and taken away, of whos^ ripe and sweet joints and knots deuide^ and
knit into small parts, by the same arti^^ciouse means that oil is made, the
joyce that comes thereof is purged an^ putrified in one cawdron of three
whych^ are ^et in a stewe, and afterward is stra^^ned through a course cloth,
the^ they tak^ a part of the juice so strayned, and put it in another cawdron
(for so they use to make it boil again) and out of this straight ways they
power it again into the third cawdron and they beat it and stir it boiling,
whereof a kind of Sugar somewhat black is drawn and made thereof, the same
being sodden again three times moore and after that once again boiled will be
most fine and white Sugar. The other harnest which comes of the rotes o^ the
reeds, except the field be dunged in May month, will hardly come up to any
profit. This kind of reed^ is full of knots in the stalk as our common redes
be, but yet not so emptye within as they are, for it is full of spungiouse
matter like unto a bulrushe^ it has a thynne bark and is full of sweet juice,
which is pressed out in this manner. They cut the body and stock of it into
many small parts and the^ put it in the pre,sse and the juice that is pressed
there out, they pour into a very clean caudron and set it up in earthen pots,
and so when it is waxen cold, it is congeled into a very commendable Sugar.

The mountain called Aetna in Sicily.
AEtna is a meruaylous hill for continual burning with flames of fire, because
it is full of Brimstone matter. It has been often times set on fire with
terrible flames as Mu^ster makes mention: the flames of it are in the night
time horrible to be seen, because it ^hineth not as other fyers do. In the day
time it burns obscurely much like to the flame of brimstone whereof the Hill
has great store. The aunciente writers have uttered many strange things of
this and especially Strabo who says, yt he was in the top of the Hill, and
there m^rked all things diligently. In the very top they affirm to be
merueylouse mutacions and chaunges, for some times it casts forth great
store of fire, and somtymes great flames and obscure smoke And it is to be
wondered at the heat of ye fyar, because it cannot be tempered with any cold
nor cold be dissolved through that heat. The higher part of the mountain is
full of ashes which in winter are covered with snow: the very top of the hill
is plain and is in compass about.xx. furlonges. In the night time fire may
plainly be seen in the hill top, and in the day time a certain obscure smoke
ryseth up: Many times continual thundering is hard, being a terror to the
people, and black and burnte ashes are dispersed into diverse places, and the
air is made noisome with a most terrible smoke.

The philosophers assign a reason hereof because this Isle is in his inferior
parts full of cauerns and brimstone, of Alum, fire and water, and such like,
that are able to feed and nourishe fire. And fire cannot be without some vent
or respiracle but it will lift up it self, and therefore many hot bathes be
found in Sicily.

The air also entering into the pores and cauerns of the earth, stirs up a
flame which seeking for issue and eruption, vomiteth and casts forth smoke
and fire, and in many places sercheth for ventinge holes and respiracles.
Sometimes in ye inward parts of the earth such is the violence of the fire,
that it expelle the and casts forth with flames, burnt stones and sand and
the heat which is included does merueilously shake and move every syd^ of the
privy holes and cauerns.

Thus much out of Munster.

Election of a King.
THere be that writes the Goths to have made this decre and caucion, that
none should be chosen a king ^mongest them, except he were gross and ^at of
body. Contrary wise the Sarrace^s would not chose any to be their king except
he were of a tall and lean body. The Carthaginian^ ^lwaies in the election of
their king, did attend only his virtue and magnanimity and not his nobility
nor properues of body.

Fear and care hinders the growthe.
FOr to be void of fear and care, it is a great help to mayntain the stature,
it does corroborate the strength, and ^onfirmeth the sine was: for fear and
unquietness of mind in youth does much eneruate and weaken the strength of the
body, and a sad and heavy spirit dries ye bones to much, so that such a body
cannot take his just increase.

Munster in his third book fol. 283.

Printing first found out amongeste the Maguntines
FIrst this noble Art to Prynte with letters of Tynne, was invented and found
out almost in our age: a divine and heavenly invention truly, and a thing
memorable and worthy to be remembered, and no less worthy of great
admiracion, Common things be not strange.
but truly i^ would have been a great deal more merneilous, if it had not
chanced to be so common. It is strange and scantly credibe to be spoken but
yet more truer then truth it self, that one Printer may printe so many letters
in one day, that the swifteste Scriuener, or writer is not able to do so much
in two years. This is an Almayne invention, which was at the beginning in
great admyration, and of no less lucre and profit. The inuentor and first
deviser of this, was one John Gutenbergius, a man of worship equal with a
knight and at Magunce The thing was first taken in hand with more boldness and
confidence then hope, about xvi. years before it began to be common in Italy.
The first beginning was at Magunce, the Germans being the authors, with
small and little principles and foundations, but shortly by the industrye of
man's wit, it grew to that perfection, that now in our time it has. Truly it
had gone ill with all good discipline in these later days (if it were now to
have his beginning) seeing that all are given to their bellies almost, and to
insatiable coueto^^nes, for now they will scantly take up very good books in
the high ways, which in times paste they could scantly by for great sommes of
money. And of a truth before the inuencion of this art, when they began to
abject and neglect good authors, all good discipline might have perished with
the authors thereof, if this art had not been found out in convenient and happy
time. By this all kind of learning has increase, and the noble acts of all
nations are manifest to all the world: In like manner the memory and
remembrance of ancient antiquity is restored hereby, and the divine wisdom
of the Philosophers, and what soever has lain hidden in few written copies
these many ages in a few places, is now by this set forth to all immortality.

The inuentor of great Gunnes.
THe great Gunnes came first in use in the year of our Lord.354. and the first
author and inuentor there of was one Bertholdus Schwartus a Monk. Surely this
man found out a merueylous woorcke, and that so many sharp wits could not
find out before in so many hundredth years: the which divine and necessary
invention, many have thought and judged it to be a deuelishe and most
perniciouse devise: the arguments on both sides be these. It is evident that
for covetousness, malice, and want of charity, in the end of the world, the
evil people cannot be kept down by laws, nor that a man may safely
travail without some danger of iniuriouse people: for before ye inuencions of
gu^nes, the seditiouse tumultes and factions of wicked and mischeuous men, did
spoil and destroy the labors of good men in many places, and no man was able
to assault and batter the fortes and holds of such rebels and robbers where
they did enclose them selves, without the healpe of such gunnes and great
ordinance: therefore they do not well that condemn the inue^tor of these
Gunnes, without the which neither the good could live in safegarde, nor yet
cities could be of any force and keep their riches, nor marchaunts could
exer^ise their merchandise and traffic, who are in deed the special parts
of mighty and great Cities. Wherefore let the enemies of bombardes and
great Gunnes cease to contemn the gifts of God, except a man will imagine
the ga^ing mouth of the Dog, and his teeth made for to byte, and so to be
condemned, and the horns in a Bull, or an Ox, not to be the good work of the
creator.

But no wise man will condemn these parts of nature given in the stead of
weapons: let them reiecte the abuse as in an Ox and a mad Dog, it is better to
lack ^oth horns and teethe. For there is no ^inde of creature the which evil
men will ^ot abuse. Some detest this as a plain ^euilishe devise, and that
nothing could ^e more wickedly devised under heaven, because all flagitious
and wicked ^atio^s as the Turks and Tartarians, being the common plagues and
scourges of the world, do occupie^ them for the destruction and consuming of
good men: in this case no manhood, no fortitude, nor strength of body, no
warlyke policy, no weapons nor instruments, no strong holds, nor ^owers of
stone, can profit or do good. For these torments which shote stones, and
iron pieces, and great flames of fire do wast, destroy, and overthrow all
things, and brings them to nothing. One shot destroys an hundredth, or
two hundredth men in an army be they never so well harnysed. Therbe ma^y
kinds of Bombardes and great Gunnes which are to be learned nominately of
the^ that for warlike affairs have employed great pains in the use and
experience of such things.

A notable historic of a thing done at a town in Germany called Bingi^m.
NIgh unto the town of Bingium, almost in the middle of the water of Rhene, a
certain turret called the Tower of Myce, the name whereof was attributed to it
upon this event.

In the year of our Lord.914. When Otto the great had the Empire and rule,
there was a certain bishop of Magunce named Hatto, who was the Abbot of Fulden
before, in whose time there was great famine in that country: this Bishop when
he perceived the pore to be oppressed with great famine, did congregate and
gather together, a great number of the pore into one great barn, No humane
pol^icy can vvithstand Gods just ^^dgeme^t.
and ^et the barn on fire and so burnt them: For ^e said that they did not
differ from Myce, which consume and wast corn being profitable for nothing:
But God suffered (...) so great tyranny unrevenged for he commanded the myce
by great^ ^ockes ^^ and with a multitude to invade this Bishop without pity,
and to afflicte and vex him both day and night and to ^^^^ue him quick. But
this Bishop fliynge into this tower (that I spoke of before) for refuge,
thinking himself to be safe in the midst of the water of Rhene and free
from all gnawing and bytinges of myce, was much deceived, for all this profited
him nothing, because the Myce came without number, through the water of Rhene
swimming and ready to execute the just judgment of God: The which thing the
miserable Bishop perceiving, at the length yielded and gave up his life amongst
the Myce. There be some that writes more over of him, that the Myce did gnawe
and eat out and utterly extinguish his name from the walls and banginges. The
like and more horrible historye, you shall find in Polonia, where the King and
the Queen and their children were consumed of Myce.

The Bathes called Bade^ses in Germany
THe waters of the bathes of Baden, have this property, that feathers of
fowls being boiled in this water, may be clean taken away from the skin,
and Swynes hears from their skins, whether that they be cast living into
this water or chafed with it being dead These waters have ye property of alum,
salt, and brimston: therefore they be good for such as have hard fetching of
their breath and stopping of the breast, which things rise of cold fluxes of
the brain: they be medicinable for moist eyes, and hissing and ringing of the
ears, for trembling parts and astonished, for the crampe, and other dis^eases
touching the sinews, which com^ of cold humidities: they be good for such as
have a cold stomach, moist and ill o^ digestion, and those that suffer grief
of y^ liver and spleen through cold. Also for such as are troubled with the
dropsye, or have any griping in the guts, they help^ such as be troubled with
the stone, and wo^men barren and unfruitful, they take a^waye the grief of
the mother, and do re^presse the evils of the womb, and the in^flacion of the
thighs, they heal scabbs wheales, and scarres, and have a very good
property in helping the gowt.

See the third book of Munsters cosm^^graphie, for the nature, virtue, and
hol^some properties of the bathes in Valesi^^

The Hernesewe.
THe Hernesewe is a Foul that lives of the water, and yet she does abhor
rain and tempests, in so much that she seeks to anoyde them by flying on
high. She has her nest in very high trees, and shows as it were a natural
hatred against the Gosse hawk and other kinds of hawks, as the hawk
contrary wise seekethe her destruction continually: when they fight above in
yt the air, they labor both especially for this one thing, that the one
might ascend and be above the other, if the hawk gets the upper place, he
overthrows and vanquishethe the Hernesew with a meruaylous earnest flight,
but if the Hernesewe get above the hawk, then with his dung he defiles the
hawk and so destroihim, for his dung is a poison to ye hawk and his feathers
do putrifye and rotte after yt.

A monster borne nighe unto Worms in Germany in the year.1495.
A Woman was delivered of two female children, whole and perfect in bodies,
but in the top of the forheade they were joined and grew together unseperably
so that they must needs behold one the other. I my self says Munster did se
them at Magunce in the year of our Lord.1501. and then were they almost six
years of age. They were compelled by force of this natural conjunction to go
both together, to sleep and rise together, and when one went forward the other
went backewarde: their noses did alnost touch together, their eyes did not look
straight and forward but only sideways, because a little above their eyes
their forheads cleued and did stick fast togethe^, they lived until they were
ten years of age, and then when the one of them dyed and that was cut a way
from the other living, she that lived dyed also within a little after, of a
wound that she took in the head, by cutting away of her fellow, or rather by
a corruption in the brain, which came of the stink of the wound and
putr^faction.

The occasion of this mo^ster was thought to be this. Two women talked together
whereof the one was with child, the third woman coming suddenly upon them and
unlooked for, thrust the heads of those ii. which were talkinge together, so
that they dashed and touched each other, whereof the woman that had conceived
already, being made afraid through strong imagination gave and printed the
sign of the rushing of their heads in her two children.

How scrupulous the Jews be to do any thing on their Sabbath day.
IT chanced that at Magdeburge in Germany about the year of our Lord 1270. A
certain Jew upon the Saturday fell into a Iakes, out of the which he could
by no means deliver himself, he cried therefore pitifullye for the help of
his fellows, at the length some of his companions came, and they with
lamentable voices showed yt it was their Sabbath day, and therefore not to be
lawefull for them to use or exercise the labor o^ the hands. Whereupon they
exhorted him patiently to bear the thing until ye next day, that it might be
lawful for the^ to traueyle in the helping of him out.

This matter at the last came unto the eeares of the Bishop of that place,
who was nothing favorable to the Jews.

The Bishop understanding that the stub horn Jews for the scrupulous
observation of their Sabbothe day, would not help their brother out of the
Iakes, commanded upon pain of death that they which did so ^uriously observe
their own Sabb^th day, should in like manner as religiously observe and keep
with ye like solemnit^e the next day after, being the Christians Sabbath
day. This was an hard case: what should they now do? upon pain of death
they must obey. In the mean time the miserable Jew in ye Iakes was enforces
to continue ^ii days and ii. nights in great filth and stink, and danger of
his lyfe^ The like history you shall find in Fabians Chronicle.

How the Torneymentes and ^ustes began first in Saxony.
HEnry Duke of Saxony in the year of our Lord.934. being much assaulted and
incu^bred with infidels, The Tor^neyme^ts ^er first invented in the^yme of
Henry auceps the ii Emperor of Germany in the year of our Lord 934.
and heathen nations, made an assemble of a great multitude of the nobility
to assist him in his wars against the Sarracens, wherein he had so good
success, that triumphantly he had the victory over the^ Thus after that he had
given the repulse to the Infidels, considering what a number of the nobility
he had, dailye exercising themselves in martial acts, thought it meet that
after the end of his long and great wars, to recreat them with some honest
and pleasant exercise: He had compassion over them, because some of them
inhabitinge amongst Citizens should be occupied with civil business, and not
in the exercise of noble and honorabie pastimes, meet for such personages as
they were, and therefore he prescribed certain articles according to the
which they should live, and if they did tran^gres them, that then they should
be punished in the open Turniament These articles were twelve in number.

The first whosoever of the Nobility should say or do any thing against the
holy faith, he should be restrained from y^ torneyment, and if under the
color or excuse of the noblenes of any of his ancestors any does presume to
enter the lists or the Torneyment, let him with shame be driven away.

The second, whosoever coming of noble blood, does attempt any thing
against the Royal majesty of Cae^ar, let him be punished openly in the
Torneyment, and of this article was the author Conradus a prince of Palatyne.

The Duke of Franconia was the author of the third which is this. Whosoever
coming of a noble house betraieth his Lord or forsakes him, or exciteth to
fly away in an army, without any necessary cause or sleath his innocent
companions, let him have punishment in the open Torneyment.

The Duke of Sue^eland made the fowerth after this sort. Who so ever coming of
noble parentage, does violate or diffame by words or deeds, virgins or women,
let him be openly corre^ted in ye Torneyment.

The fifte article the Duke of Bauaria made in this man^^r. If any of the
nobilitye be apprehended or reproved, to to have corrupted or falsefyed the
seal, or to have violate his oath or has been noted of infamye, let him as
unworthy be kept from the torneyment.

The sixth is if any noble man did either secretly or openly slay his wife and
bedfellowe, or had helped by his counsel or deed to the destroying of his
Lord, that the law of the Torneyment should take place against him.

The seventh, If any did spoil and rob churches, chapples, widows or war^es,
or kept by force that which was ^heirs from them, where as they were rather to
be helped and mainteyned, that he should be duly corrected for it.

The eight If any noble man were be^ome an enemy to an other, and did not
^ayntayne his cause by lawful order^ or by martial law, but would hurt his
adversary by robberies, or by destroying of ^is goods, especially his wines and
corn, ^herby the common wealth is endama^ed, let him be tormented in the
Torneymente. The ninthe. If any did presume to make any alteracion, or set
any heavy burden upon others, otherwise then of ancient times were used,
how so ever it were done. etc. that he should have his correction in open
Torneyment.

The tenth, if any were canuicte of adulterye. etc. in like manner let him be
amended.

The eleventh. What so ever Noble man, does not live as a noble man should do
etc. in like manner let him be punished.

The twelfe. He that will be at the torneyment not coming o^ noble parentage or
cannot prove his nobility in four descents, he may not enter into the exercise
of the Torneyment

Thus in a brief sum you may see ye manner of the Tor^eymente in Saxony, the
which Munster most largely does set forth, with every article in his order.

Of wild Bulls iu Prussia.
THere be wild Bulls in the woods of Prussia like unto the common sort of
Bulls, saving that they have shorter horns and a long beard under ye ^hinne.
They be cruel and spares ney^he man nor beast, and when any snares, or
disceite is prepared to take the^ or they ^e wounded with arrows in the woods,
they labor most vehemently to revenge their wounds upon him that gave them,
the which thing if they cannot do, rushing and stumbling on trees, they kill
the^ selves. They be of such bigness that two men may sit betwixt their horns.

Of Iselande.
IN this country from the.x. of June, for a month space or moore they have no
night at all, and about the tenth of December, they have no day at all. The
people lives in dens and holowe places in hills sides, with them mountains,
and ^illes are in steed of Towns, and spring waters for delicate drinks.

An happy nation whose poor estate none does envy, and so much the more that
is ^at^ received christiannitie. The merchants of England and Denmark, do
not suffer the^ to be content with their own but by reason of the good
fishing^ there, they repair thither often times and with their marchaundize
they carry thy^ther their vices and enormities.

They have learned now of late, to brewe with malt, and have left the drinking
of plain water. They have also gold and silver in admiracio^ as well as other
nations. The king of Denmark that rules also Norway, makes a ruler amongst
them yearly, all things be common amongst them saving their wives: they
esteem their young cattle as much as their children, and of the pore sort you
may sooner obtain their child then their cattle. They honor their Bishop as a
king, to whose will and pleasure all the people has great respect, whatsoever
he determines by law, scripture, or by custom of other nations, that they do
curiouslye observe: and yet now the king has co^pel^ed them to take a ruler.
They have so great store of ^ishe in this isle that they make their ^ales of
them in piles as high as ^ouses: they live most commonly there by fish, for
the great penurye of wheat and corn, which is brought unto them from other
nations that with great lucre and gaynes, carry away fysh for it.

There is a notable Hill or Mountayn ^alled Hecla not far from which be mines
of brimstone ye singular merchandise of that country: A strange hill.
for diverse marchaunts lo^eth their ships with it, when this hill ^oth rage,
it thundreth terrible noyses, ^t casts forth stones, it belchethe out
^rimstone, it covers the earth so far ^ound about with the ashes cast
forth, that unto the twentye stone it is vnhabi^ed: they that desire to
contemplate the nature of so great flames and therefore adventure more nigh unto
the Hill, are suddenly swalowed and consumed with some notable gulf or vorage,
for there be many such blastes so covered and hidden with ashes, that none can
sufficientlye beware ^or take heed of them, and there comes out such a fire
from that hill that consumes water, but stubble or straw it does ^ot burn.
This place is thought of some to be the prison of unclean souls: for the ^se
being divided and broken into many parts, swimmeth about the ysle almost
eight months and being broken and bruised with rushing upon the banckes, with
the beatinges and noise of the cracking^ against the banckes and rocks, gives
so horrible a sound almost representing^ the miserable lamentation of humayne
voice and weepinge, that it makes the ruder sort the more simple, and unwise,
to believe that men's souls be tormented there in cold. The inhabitants use in
steed of bread where of they lack store, fyshe dried, made hard, and ground
to meal: and yet out of diverse conntryes wheat is brought unto them but not
so much as may suffice. There be spyrites commonly see^e, she winge them
selves manifestly in doing such things as belong to men, but especially they
appear^ in the forme^ of such as have been drowned or destroyed by some other
violent^ chance, and thus do they appear commonly in the company of such
men as have had familer acqueintance with the departed, and do use them so in
all points that they be taken many times for the living persons in deed, of
such as be ignorant of their deaths, offering their right ^andes for
acquaintance, and this falsehode and erroniouse sight cannot be perceived,
before the sprite it self vanishes out of sight and consumes away: being
required of their friends and familiars to come home, and to see their friends
again, with great sighs and weepinge they answer that they must go to Hecla
the mountain, and so suddenly they vanishe out of sight.

Of the country called Laponia.
IN Laponia the people be of a mean stature, but they have such agilitie of
body that being gyrded and prepared with a sheafe of arrows and bow, they
will suddenly pass through an houpe or circle, whose diameter is but half a
yearde. They be taught the art of shoting from their childhode, and a Boy
there shall have no meat before he can touch his mark with his arrowe. When
the Son goes down after the Equinox in September, they have one continual
night for three months, almost al which time they have no other light, but
as it were a twiter light, and when the Son comes to them before the Equinox
in March, they celebrate that day as a festival day with much solempnitie.

Whales.
THere be great Whales as big as hills almost nighe unto Iselande which are
sometimes openly seen and those will drown and overthrow shyps, except they
be made a fearde with the sound of trompets, and drums, or except some round
and empty vessels be cast unto them, wherewith they may play and sport them,
because they are delited in playing with such things. Sometimes many ^^ste
their anchors upon whales backs thinking them to be some is^es, and ^o become
in great danger. Many in Iselande of the bones and ribs of such monstrous
whales, make posts and spars for the building of their houses.

Munster says this a good remedy against such dangerous whales, to take
that which the Apothecaries call Castoreum, and temper it with water, and cast
it into the sea, for by this as by a poison they are utterly driven and
banished to the bottom of the Sea.

How a marueilouse horrible dragon was destroyed in Polonia.
IN Graccouia a city of Polony, there was a meruaylous horrible and huge
Dragon, which consumed and devoured all things, and was the cause of great
damages, for when he came out of his den under the mountain, be dy^ rape
and snatch all kind of cattle, and men wandering uncircumspectly, devouring
them with his horrible jaws

Grac^hus being very sad and lamenting this matter, commanded three several
bodies to be cast unto him every day: for being contented with those he
would look for no more. The which thing although it was grievous, yet he
persuaded, that three either of Sheep or of some other cattle should be
offered him every day, wherein brimstone and some fyery powder or devise of
flame, should be included, bidden, and mingled with wax, and pitch ^riuelye,
for so that beast and dragon being prouoke^ with natural gredines, or with a
rapaciouse fammine and hunger, devouring without respect or choice the offered
pray, by little and little was weakened and extinguished. The like example is
read, in Daniell the prophet.

A ^traunge history of a king devoured of Myce.
THere was in Polony a king named Pompilius who was wont in all his
execracions and curses to say^ I pray God the Myce may devour me^ ^rulye with
evil luck and for speaking^ evil to ^imselfe and to his, for the Myc^
devoured his son, who was also called Pompilius after his father. This sonn^
after the death of his father being left^ in his childehood, his uncles
administre^ and governed the kingdom, until he came to man's years and was
married then suddenly as he was in the middeste o^ his feasts, ouercharged with
wine, be^ing adorned with coronets and garlands dawbed with his ointments,
oppr^ssed (...) luxury and surfeiting, a great number of myce coming from
the carcases of his uncles did invade him, the which he and his wife the
queen did destroy: but they came forth so fast, and in such a multitude,
assaulted and set upon this tirant in his banquets, and his wife and his
children with most cruel gnawinges and bytinges, so that a great band of
soldiers and harnised men could not drive them away, because man's help being
defatygate and made weary, yet the myce remained strong without any werynes
both day and night. There was therefore, devised and built burning and hot
fornaces and ouens, and in the midst of the^ this Pompilius was placed with
his wife and children, but the myce came thither also passing through flames of
fire, not ceassing to gnaw and consume this paricide: at the length was devised
another means, by another element. This Pompilius a murderer of his own
uncles, was conveyed in ships, with his children and family into the midst of
a deep water, and yet the myce most earnestly without ceassing followed him,
and did gnaw and byte both those that were carried away, and their ships,
insomuch that the water entringe in at the holes gnawen by the Myce, did
threaten and ^ignifye danger of drowning, and therefore the shipmen fearinge
suffocation in the water and drowninge, brought the ship to the bancke on the
land, where another great army of myce meeting wi^h the other, did moore
vehemently ve^e him than the first: these things being openly seen and
known, they that before was defenders of him and his children, perceiving this
to be Gods punishment and revenging fled away.

Now Pompilius being withoutal such as might comfort and help him, went into
an high tower in Crusnicza where the Myce ^liming up, with mose swifte course,
did consume and devour his two sons, his wife and the flagitiouse body of
Pompilius. Behold and mark, there is no counsel or power can take place
against God the Lord of all: little small vermin, weak and timorous myce did
miserablye destroy Pompilius, as Lyce being a very little and small vermin, and
of lesser force then Myce did bring to ruin and de^^ruction Arnolphus the
Emperor, eating and wasting his flesh, An emperor eaten with lic^.
his mary, and guts, so that the phisicians could do no good at all, the
whole substance of the body being so eaten, yt there was nothing but gri^tles,
and only bones left.

A Bear seking for honey, was the cause of delivering a man out of an hollow
tree.
IN Moscouia there is found great store of honye in holow trees, and that
which is old honye, is left and forsaken of t he Bees, so that in the stocks
of merueylous great trees, the diligent serchers may find wonderful plenty
of honey combs. Demetrius, sent as Embassadoure to Rome, declared there before
a company of learned men that a year or two before he came out of his cou^trye
to Rome, a pore countryman being a Fermar in the next village by him serched
the woods and trees for the gain, and profit of honnye, and espyinge at the
length a very great hollow tree, clymed up into the top of it; and lept down
into the hollownes, so that he suncke and did stick fast in a great heap of
honye even to the breast and throat almost, and so remained fast in that
sweet poison that all hope af an ye deliverance was clean gone, when he had
continued two days and fed and maintained his life only by ^onye,
consideringe that with himself yt he was now so restraynt from the liberty
and healpe of his hands and feet, yt with them he could make no shifte to get
out, and if he should cry out with open mouth and full voice, that this could
nothing prevail in such a solitude and vast place of wood and Trees, because
it was not possible that the sound of his voice and cry, could go far out of
that holow tree, so that it might come to the ears of traueilers and passers
by, all these things, when he had deliberated in his mind, now destitute of
al help and consolacio^, he began utterly to despair: and yet by a merueylous
and incredible chance, he escaped, being delivered and drawn out by the
benefit of a great Bear, when yt by chance this Bear very desirous and
searching for honey, most hastily scaled ye ^re, and let her self down into ye
holownes thereof, with her hinder feet first downward after man's fashion, about
ye reyns and loins of the which beast, the man claspinge and taking fast hold,
moved and stirred the said Bear to leap out, and violently to enforce her
self out of the tree, being driven so to do for very sodeyne fear, and for
the strange handling and holding about her, and also through the great
outcries and noyses that he made. And thus the bear by violence delivered
herself and the man also, from the hollow tree, and from great fear.

Of Bears.
IN the country of Muscouia there is^ great plenty of bears, seking and
prayinge every where for honey and Bees, not altogether for the filling of their
bellies, but also for the helping of their eye sight, for their eye^ wax ^im
and ill often times, for the which cause they do especially desire the honey
combs, and that their mouths stunge and wounded of bees might ease the
heaviness of their hedes in bleding. The head in Bears is very weak the
which in Lions contrary wise is most strong. And therefore when necessity
vrgethe that they mu^te needs tumble from some high rock they tumble and roll
down, with their head covered between their claws, and often times by dustes
and knockes, in gravel and sand, they are almost exanimate and without life.
They scale trees backward They molest and vex Bulls, with their claws
hanging about their mouths and horns. A Bear brings for the young
according to Pliny, after thirty days past and that commonly five. The young
Bear at the first coming forth as y^ were a white piece of flesh with
out form or shape, some what bigger the^ a mouse, it is without eyes, or
hear, only nails and claws do appear outward. But the she Bear never
leaves lyckyng this rude and difformed young flesh, until by little and little,
she bring^th it to some form and shape: when she go^the to the den, that
she has chosen for her she comes creping with her helly up ward least the
place might be espied through her steps, and there she being with young,
remains fourtene days without any mocion as Aristotle says. But without meat,
she continues.40 days, only being sustained with the lickinge of her left
foot, then after this when she chances upon any meat or food she is
filled beyond measure, and this satietie is helped by vomittinge with eatinge
of antes, the young for fourtene days space is oppressed with such heaviness or
sleep that they cannot be awaked or stirred up from their drowsy heaviness
neither with pricking nor with wounding, and in this mean space of sleepinge,
they wax fat meruaylously, after fourtene days space they awake from
sleep, and begin to lick their former paws, and so live they for a time, and
it is not manifest with what kind of meat they should live until the spring
time, but then they begin to run abroad, and feed of the young springes and
trees, and soft tender herbs, meet for their mouths. In this country of
Moscouia, there is great store of the best furs and skins, and that is their
chief marchaundize in that country.

Licurgus.
LIcurgus was a notable philosopher of Sparta in Greece, who erected a civil
estate of the ^ittie with his noble institutes and laws, whereas before times
of all the Grecians, the Lacedaemonians were worst nurtered. Licurgus taking the
matter boldly in hand, did abrogate al their laws, institutes and old ry^es of
living, and did erect a great deal more civil ordinances and more
commendable. First there was xxviii segniors elected, which should provide
that the po^uler estate should not grow out of frame altogether, and also that
they which had the rule, should not go about any tyrany. He took away utterly
all use of gold, and ^iluer, and brought in money of Iron, and then was all
occa^ion of felonye and stealing taken away. The iron where of he made his
money, being as red as fire, he put out in vinegar, that it might be mete for
nothing afterward through his softenes. He cast out of the city all arts as
^^profitable for that purpose, and yet most part of artificers, when the use of
Gold was taken away departed from thence of their own accordes, seeing that
iron monye was not in use amongst other nations Then that he might the better
take away all luxury and ryoting out of the city, he appointed common meetings
at bankets and feasts, that poor and rich indifferently might meet together
at their feasts, and feed all upon the same kind of ba^ket. Hereby there was
inflamed great anger of those that were welthy and mighty, and they falling
upon Licurgus with great force, caused him to lose one of his eyes with the
blow of a staff. Wherefore a law was made that the Lacedaemonians should no
more enter into their feasts with a staff. Every one gave yerly to this
feast, one bushel of flower, viii. gallons of wine, five pound of cheese, five
pound and a half of figs. Children did frequent this as a schole or exercise
of all temperancie and civil discipline, there they did learn to accustom
theimselues with civil talks, and to use honest pasttymes, and to jest and be
merye without knavery. Their virgins were exercise^ wi^h running, wrestling,
barriers, come^ly m^uing, and gesture, with quaytinge^ casting of the bowl,
hamer or such like^ so that idelnes and effeminate delicatnes taken away, they
waxed the stronger to tolerate and suffer the pain of childbearing. Children
after they were seven years of age, had their exercises with their equalles,
and of necessity did learn let^ers, they were notted and shorn to the very
skin, they went barefoote at xii. years of age, they might put on one cote
after the country fashion, they neither knew bathes nor kome^tacions, they
took their rest in beds made with redes, they might go to the feasts of their
elders, and betters, and there if yt they did steal any thing and were taken
with the theft, they were corrected with whips, not because it was unlawful to
steal, but because they did it not privily enough with craft and subtilitie.
Licurgus removing al supersticion, permitted the dead bodies to be buried in
the City, and also to have their monumentes about the temples It was not
lawful to ingraue or wright the name of the man or woman upon any Grave, but
such as dyed manfully in war The time of lamentacio^ for the dead was
prescribed about xi. days. It was not lawful for citizens to make
peregrinations for fear they should bring in strange manners into the city.
Peregrinations.
But those which came from strange countries thith^r except they were
profitable and meet for the common wealth, were excluded the city least
that forreyn nations might taste of the Lacedemonian discipline.

Licurgus would not suffer young men to use one vesture all the whole year, nor
any to be more decked then an other, nor to have more delicate bankets the^
others He commanded all things to be bought not for money, but for eschaunge
and recompense of wares. He commanded also children toward xviii years of
Age, to be brought into the field and not into the market place or judgment
haule, that they might pass over the first years not in luxury but in all
kind of labor and payns, they must not lay any thing under them for to
sleep the easyer. And their lives they were driven to pass without ease and
to come into the City befoore they were men in deed. Maids he would ha^^
to be married without any dower, or rewards given by their parents. Tha^
wives might not be chosen for money sake and that the husbands should keep
their wives more straightly because they should receive nothing in marriage with
them. He would have the greatest honor and reverence to begeuen to old aged
men and not to rich and noble men, he granted unto kings the power of the
wars, to Magi^trates judgments and yearly succession, to the Senate the
custodye of the Laws: to the people the election of the Senate, or to create
what officers they would. These laws and new institutes because they seemed
hard and straight in comparison of their loose customs and laws before used,
he feigned Apollo of Delphos to be the author of them and that he had them from
thence. At the last to geeue eternity and perpetuity to his laws, he bound
the whole city with an oath that they should change none of those things
which he had enacted and prescribed before that he did return again saying,
that he would go to the oracle at Delphos to ask counsel what might be
changed or added to his laws.

He took his journey to the ysle of Crete, and there lived in banishment. He
commanded also dying that his bones should ^e cast into the sea least that the
Lacedaemonians if they were brought to Sparta should think them selves
absolved and discharged of their oath, that they made for the not changing of
his laws.

The ceremonies of the burialles, of the kings of Lacedemonia.
THe Kings of Sparta when they be dead, knights and purseuantes declares ye
death of ye prince, throughout all the wholle country, the women going round
about the city do beat and ring upon basins and pottes. And when this
chances it is mete tha^ out of every house, two which are free, the male
one, the female the other, should make a show of lamentation and mourninge,
and for the not doing thereof great punishment is appointed, and the lamenting
and cry^^g out with miserable outcries, say that the last king ever was the
best, whatsoever king perrisheth in war, when they have set forth his picture
and image, their b^^ng it into a bed very fair and well made and they consume
ten days in the funerralles of him^ and there is no meeting nor assemble of
magistrates, but continual weeping and lamentation, and in this they agree with
the Persians that when ye king is dead he that succedeth, discharges from all
dets whosoever owes any thing to ye king or to the common wealth. Amongst the
Persians he that was created king did remit to every city the tribute
why^he was due.

The Laws of Draco.
ALL the Laws which Draco made appointed death almost for a punnishment to
every offense. He made a law yt they which were co^uict of idleness and
slothfulnes, should lose their lives. In like manner that they which stole
herbs or fruit out of other men's grounds, that they should dye for it. The
same law of paracides. Whereupon Demades was wont to say that the laws of
Draco were written with blood and not with yucke.

The laws of Solon.
SOlon made a law that those which were condemned of paracide, and of
affected tyranny, should never be received into any office, and not only these
^e excluded from all kind of dignity but such also as would follow neither
part when any tumulte or sedition were in the City, thinking it to be the
part of an ill Citizen when he had provided well for his own safetye, to have
care or respect of common affairs. This also was a strange decree of his
making, that such women as had hus^andes nothing mee^e for vene re^use acts,
should take one who^ they would chose, of their husbands kins^ol^es without
d^unge^^ ^ee forbad lamentacion and mourning in another man's funer^ll^ and that
the son should not give any help or refreshing to his father if so be y^ he
caused^ him not to be brought (...) in some art necessary for ye use of life,
and that there should be no care betwix^ the parents and therm that were borne
bastardes, and in unlawful matrimonys. For he that does not keep himself
chaste from the company of harlots, does plainlye declare that he has no care
of the procreacio^ of children, but of libidiouse pleasures, and does deprive
him self of his just reward. He would have a common adulterer taken in
adulterye to be slain scot free and without any danger. Who soever did
violently misuse any maids, or virgins, he would have them mul^ted or amer^ed
with ten grotes, the which was a great sum of money of his coin Who soever
had brought a wolf by him o^ercome, should have five grotes to be^ gathered of
the comminalty, and if it were a she wolf, he should have but one grote, It was
a custom amongst the Athenians, to persecute that beast which was as well
hurtefull to their cattle as to their fields. He commanded that the children
of those which perished in wa^re, should be brought up and taught of the
common charge, wherewith many being encouraged, did stoutly and manfully fight
in battle. He would also that whosoever lost his eyes in battle, should be
brought up and kept of common charges. He made a Law also that he should not
have the wardeship of the child, to whom the inheritance might come after
the death of the child. And that whosoever thrust out another man's eye, that
he should lose both his own for it. Another law of his was, that no man should
take away that which he laid not there, and if any did ye contrary, it should
be judged a capital offense. If the Prince were taken or found drunken, that
he should dye for it. He permitted honey and wax to be carried in to other
countries. He thought no man meet to be free of a city, but the crafts man
which came with his wholl familye to Athens or else was banished from his own
country.

Of the wars and manners of the Turks.
THe Turks have a meruaylous celeritie in doing, a constancye in dangers and
observation of the empire. They will swym over very deep and daungerouse waters,
they pass over strange hills, and being commanded they go through thick
and thin headlo^g having no regard of their lives, but of ye empire. Most apt
and ready to suffer fasting and watching. There is no sedition amongst them,
no tumult. They use horrible sounds and not outcries in war, in their tents in
the night time, there is such diligent silence, that they had rather suffer
their prisonners to escape, then to move any tumul^e. The Turks of all kind
of people, are said at these days to use most lawful fighting, so that it is
no marvel why their common wealth continues so long, and increases so much
that their nation is almost invincible, except they be destroyed by some plague
or pestilence, or civil discord. The soldiers have an honest kind of apparel.
In their saddles, and bridels, there is no curiouse superfluity. No man goes
armed but in the time of war. Their weapons are brought after them in
burdens, they use no banners nor standerds, but in the tops of their Iauelins
they have certain threades of diverse colors hanging whereby one captain is
known from an other.

They use the drum and the fluite to call and move them to fight. They pray
for their soldiers in every congregation and solemn meeting, but rather for
such as have dyed for their country, calling them happy and blessed, that they
dyed not at home in the lamentacion of their wives, and children, but abroad
amongst their enemies weapons, and terrible noyses.

They wrighte and describe the victories of their ancestors, they sing and
extol them being written, for they think their soldiers minds to be much
encouraged by these means. They do so abhor pictures and engraued images,
that upon such causes they call the christians idolaters. They have no bells,
nor yet do suffer the christians abiding amongst them to have bells, They
never play for money or any other thing, but such as be found playing be
grievously staundred in every man's mou^h. No man of what state or degree soever
he be, desyrethe to sit on a benche, but they lie down and sit on the earth
like children, with a very comlye folding of their garments under them.

The table whereon they feed for the most part is prepared of an ox hide, or
an hearts skin, undressed and rough with hear still, having the roundnes of
four or five hand bredthes. No man enters in to any house, church, or other
place where in they must sit, unless his shoes be of, because it is accounted
an unhonest and indecent point for any man to sit with his shoes on his
feet, and therefore they use a kind of shoes, that may easly be put on and
of. The place where they sit either at home or in the Churches, is strewed and
covered either with tapestrye clothes, or broad clothe or rushes, and
sometimes for the moisture and uncleanness of ye place they have bourdes and
tables.

The garments both of men and women are large and long enough open in the
former part. They have great care in emptying the belly and making vryne, yt
they turn not their faces toward the South, which way they are always wo^t
to look prayinge. They take also great head least any man should see their
^ilthynes in discharging nature. They abstey^ from wine as their laws does
command them because it is a prouoker of al uncleanness and vice, and yet
may they lawfullye eat grapes. Thep absteyne also from swynes blood and
flesh, and from al flesh that dies of the murrayne. All other meats they do
eat.

How the Turks do believe and how^ they worship God.
THe Turks confess one God which has none like or equal to him whose
faithful Prophet they account Mahumet. Five times a day they pray with
their faces turned into ye South, and before they do this, they provide that
they have a most perfect cleanes of body, in every part: hands, arms,
mouth, ears, nosethrils, eyes, hears, washing their feet most decentlye,
especially after carnal copulation, and natural euacuatio^, except they have
been sick or trauayling abroad. If they want water to do this, which is
seldom seen, because in every city, they have bathes continually flowing,
then they wype and rub them otherwise. Every year they fa^^e a whole month and
a weke most straight lie, in the day time neither eatinge nor drinking any
thing, nor yet having any conjunction with women, but after the Son set
until the Son rising ye next day, they fill them selves with meat, and
drink, and venereouse pleasures, in the end of this solemn feast, they
celebrate the feast called the Pasch in remembrance of Abraham's Ram which
appeared in steed of his Son at the sacrifice, and of a certain night
wherein they suppose the Alcorane was given from heaven.

Their priests do not much differ from ye laytie, nor their churches from
common houses. It is sufficient to know ye book which is called Alcorane, and
such things as appertain to prayer and obserua^ce of the Law. They lack not
their readinges and studies of arts and sciences. They have no care of
churches nor souls departed. They have no sacraments nor observation of
relics, holy vessels nor alters, but they are attente and diligent in loking
to their children, their wives and familye, to tillage of the ground, to
merchandise, to hunting, and like exercises, wherewith life is mainteyned. They
be free from seruitute and exactions, these priests be honored of every body
as men that knows the ceremonies of the laws have the government of churches,
and can instruct others. They have many schools and places of exercise, wherein
such polyticke Laws are taught, as have been made by their princes for the
administracion of the common wealth, and defense of the country, wherein they
that pro^ite some of them are made rulers in eccle^iasticall matters, and some
be seculier magistrates, there be also in that sect many and diverse religious
sorts, whereof some living in woods, and solitude utterly refuse the company of
men, some keepinge hospitality in cities, do relieve the pore strangers with
hospitality, if they have not to refreshe them selves with all, for they
themselves also lives of begginge and alms, many of them wandringe about
cities carry good and always fresh water in certain bottles, of the which
they give to every one demaundinge for the same, freely and gladly, for the
which duetifull good will and work of mercy, if any thing be given they take
it, they coue^ nothing, but they make so great a show and ostentacion of
religion both in their deeds and sayings, and also in their manners and
gesture, that they rather seem angels then men, such is the disceite in men's
eyes. The Turks cease from all labor on the Friday, and keep it with as
much religion and devotion, as we do the Sunday. But the Jews do meruaylously
observe the Saturday. In every City there is one principal Church, wherein
they meet together after noone every body, and after their prayers solemplye
done, they have a sermon. They have large and sumptuouse temples, which are
called in their tongue Meschit, where in they have no Images at all, but it is
found written every where. There is no God but one and Mahumet his prophet one
creator and the prophets equal. And also There is none so strong as God.

There be in their churches a great number of burning lamps with oil. All the
church is white, the pauement is laid with mats and other things, and above
many clothes of tapestrye, and Arras be hanged. There is a great turret about
ye church, on the top whereof their minister when service time is, standethe
and puttinge his fingers in his Ears, with an high voice in his own tongue,
he repeteth these words thrice. One true God. when this cry is hard, the
nobles and ye meaner forte comes to the temple, only intent to devotion, and
the minister prays with them, and that he ought to do four times between
day and night by his office, and they which come to the prayers, ought to
wash their hands and fete and secret parts. They must put of their shoes, and
leave them before the church gate, and thus some enter barefote into ye
church, and some with very clean and fair shoes. The women fit together in
a secret place from the men, so that ye men may neither see them nor hear
them, albeit they come not so often to ye church. In their prayers they
cruciate and afflict their bodies meruey^ously with continual agitation and
vociferacions, so that often times they sown and faint in mind and strength.
They think it an horrible ^hinge and most wicked, that a christian man should
be present at their ceremonies and Sacrifices, having this Opinion that their
Temples are contuminate and defiled of unclean and unwashed men, their
minister gets him into the pulpit, and there about two hours, he
preaches, and when his sermon is don, ii, children ascend, thither which singe
their prayers sweetlye, after this the minister begins with all the people
to sing in a low voice, bendinge his body on every side, but his words are
nothing but these There is but one God. They keep thursday also as a festival
day, albeit the Friday is most devoutly and most religiously ^alowed of them,
because they have an opinion amongeste them that Mahumet was borne upon the
Friday.

The opinion of the Turks upon the world to come.
THe Turks attribute so much to Mahumet and his laws that they assuredly
promise everlasting happiness to such as keep their laws, that is (...) say a
paradise of pleasures, a gardeyne having most pleasant and sweet waters set in
a pure and temperate air, wherein they should have whatsoever they would, as
all kind of deintye dishes for satietie, silk and purple apparel, young and
beautiful maids, at their own will and pleasure, with golden and silver plate,
and Angels serving and ministering unto them, like Butlers bringinge milk in
golden plates, and red wine abundantly in silver cups. Contrary wise to those
yt break these laws, they threaten the danger of hell and everlasting
destruction. This also they believe, that how great offenses soever a man has
committed, if he will believe only in God and Mahumet when he dies, he shall
be ^afe and happy.

Some of their religion have this opinion that the law profits nothing, but
the grace of God whereby a man must be saved, which without merit or law is
sufficient to get salvation. There be some as it were ^uccessors of the
prophets, and fathers, ale^ging and affirming the tradicions of the elders,
which teach that men by merit may be saved without the law and Gods grace, so
that they be earneste in prayers, in watching and meditacions There be others
again that affirm every man to be saved in the law that is given of God,
because those Laws are equally good to those that keep them, and one ought
not to be preferred before another. So you may se where Christ is not how
inconstant minds waver in diverse ^rroes, the which thing also may appear
amongst some christians, as such as seek for salvation of any other then of
the Saui^ure o^elye.

Of the Fasting and Meats of the Turks.
THe Turks are wont to fast one month and one week every year, bu^ they do
not always keep one prefixe^ time, for if this year they fast in ^^mmary,
the next year they will do it i^ Fe^ruarye^ the third in March, and so
orderly of the rest, and when they do fa^^^, they taste and eat nothing all
the whole day not so much as bread or water (...) when ^^errs appear it is
lawful for them to eat al things, sauinge things which are suffocate and
swynes flesh.

They have vineyardes the fruit and commodity whereof they use diversely. The
Christians make wine, and the Turks do so prepare honye and raysons, that they
appear always fresh both in tas^e and sight, they have three manner of
drinks, the first of Sugar or honey mixte with water. The second of raysons
sod in water the stones castaway, and then rose water is added unto them, and a
little of the best ^ony. The third is made of wine well sodden, and represents
a kind of honnye both in taste and sight, this is tempered with water and
geeuen to servant to drink. When they should eat any thing they strewe their
floores and grounds with matts and other things, then they lay carpets and
tapestrye work or rushines, and some sit down upon the naked earth, their
table is of some skin, as I s^ide before^ it is drawn at large and shit
^^g^ther again as a purse, they sit not down after our manner, nor yet as
the people of old were wont to do leaninge on their elbowes, but with their
feet folde^ together in the forms of this letter. X. like unto the manner of
bo^^hers, and before they take take any meat, they hau^ their prayers or
thanks geuinge. The^ ^^te gredelye and hastelye with great silence, but al
their wives ^epeth the in ^elues in secret. Those which are captive (...)
never go abroad, nor can get license, but with other Turkishe women when they
go to wash them in bathes, ^r in any other place ou^ of the city for
recreation sake into gardens or vineyar^^^, ^^t always keep hoome at their
work, and it is not lawful for other women (...)sant wit^ their captives

Of the (...) of the Turks.
THe (...) not in (...) the manner (...) as the (...) eight years, and can
speak the (...) ^ell, the which (...) them for y^ (...) of (...) which are
(...) before (...), and (...) for this (...) in to the ^^^ple, but is
circumcised at home in his parents house There be assembled at this notable
feast al their friends, and commonly amongst the richer sort, they kill an Ox
and therein they include and put in a Sheep exenterate and ready dressed, in
the which Sheep there is a Hen, in the which hen there is an Egg, which are
all roasted together for the solempnitie of that day, then at supper time in
their banquet the child which must be circumcised is brought in, whose yearde
and privy member the phisician opens and apprehendethe the folded skinn with
a fine pair of pinsons, then to take al fear from the child, he ^aith that
he will make the circumcision the next day, and whileste he uses those
words, he sodeyn^ye cutteth the prepuce which is the skin that covers the
head of the yearde, layinge a little salt on the wound. They do not give names
to their children in the day of circumcision, but in the day of their
nativity, after three days space he that is circumcised, is led with great
pomp unto the has, when he comes home again, he is led throughout all the
gestes which offer unto him their prepared gifts, some give silk garments
some silver cups, others present him monye or horses. If any christian man of
his own accord confessing Mahumet, will suffer himself to be circumcised,
which thing chances often times for the greuouse exaction and burden of the
tribute, such one is ^e^ throughout all the streets and lanes of the city,
with great honor and triumph of the people, for joy playinge on the drums,
and to him many gifts are presented, and afterward he is made fre from their
payment and tribute Yet the Turks compel no man to the denial of his religion,
although they be commanded in the book of Alcoran to expulse the adversaries
and gainsayers, whereof it comes to pass that so many and diverse sects of
people are found amongst the Turks, al which do reuerrence and honor God
after their peculier rites and customs. Their priests do little differ from
the laity, and there is no great learning to be required in them, it is enough
if they can read the book of Alcoran, but those which can interpret the
book according to the text, are esteemed as most cunning, because Mahumet gave
his precepts not in the vulgar turkishe tongue, but in the Arabicall tongue, and
they think it a wicked and unlawful thing to have them interpreted or set
forth in the vulgar tongue, these ministers have their stipende and reward of
the prince for their pains, they have wives and apparel even as secular men,
if the stipend be not sufficient for the multitude and number of their
children, then may they practice and use al manner of arts, crafts and trades
that other men do, but yet they are free from exactions, and other
imposicions, and are greatly esteemed of the common sort. They have diverse
living solitarye like unto monks, which under the color of religion, inhabit
the woods and desert places, utterly renounsinge men's company, and some of them
have nothing of their own, but they go almost naked saving that their privy
parts be covered with Sheep skins, they traueyle and wander through out
countries askinge alms as well of the Christians as of the Turks. Some of
them go seldom abroad, but continue in temples having in the corners of
churches little cottages, their heads uncovered, their feet without shoes,
their bodies without garments bearing nothing about the^ but one shirt, they
fast many days and pray that God would reveal unto them things to com, and
the prince of the Turks is wont to ask counsel of them when soever he goes
about any wars.

What execution of Justice the Turk^ have, what kind of marriages, what manner
of apparel, and living.
THe Turks do execute justice mo^^ exquisitely, for, he that is guilty of
slaughter or bloodshed, is always punished with like vexacion and torment He
that is taken with a woman in adultrye, is stoned to death without mercy or
^arying. There is also a punishmente appointed for those which are taken in
fornication, for who so ever is apprehended for it, he must suffer eight
hundred lashes with a whip: a thief for the first and second time, is so
many times scourged also, but if he be taken the third time he loses his
hand, at the fowerth time his foot. He that does any damage to any body, ^s
compelled to make satisfaction according to the estimate of the loss.

They admit no witnesses but very mete and allowable persons, and such as may
be believed without any oath. It is not lawful for any man that is of full
age to live out of matrimonye, they may be married to f^ure lawful wives and
those whosoever they will chose except their mother and sist^rs, having no
respect at all to the propinquitie of blood, they may have as many
illegitimate and unlawful wives as they please and be able to keep, the
children both of lawefull and unlawful wives are equally heirs in their
fathers goods, so that they observe this order yt two daughters shall but
match and be equal with one son. They keep not.ii. or moore wives in one
house or in one city for fear of often contention and vnquietinge, but in
every city they keep one, the husbands have this liberty to put them away
three times and to take them again thrice, those wives which are put ^way may
if it please them continue and abide ^ith such men as receives them. The women
are very descent and honest in their apparel, they use on their heads a kind
of linen like unto youg damsels, and they have veyles over the same the
folding whereof is decent, that the topp of it hangs over the left or right
side, wherewith if they go from home or come into their h^^ba^ds sight they may
quicklye cover all their face ^auing the eyes, ye woman may never be seen in
the company of men, nor to go to market nor to bye or sell any thing, in the
churches they have their places separate from the men so closely that no man
may peep into the^ nor by any means enter into them, and yet it is not
lawful for every woman to enter in thither, but for noble men's wives and
never else but on Friday at xii of the clock only, they use their prayers, the
which is a solemn time with them, the talkinge of man and woman together
openly is so rare and against common cu^tome, that if you should tarry a whole
ye^re with the^, you could scantly se it once. It is thought a monstrous thing
that a man should openly talk with a woman, or ride in the company of any.
They that are married together do never use any wa^^on toys in the sight of
others, they never brawle nor chide, because the men do never omit their
gravity toward women nor wives, their reverence toward their husbands: great
Lords that cannot always be with their wives, have Eunuchs deputed to the
custody of them, which do so diligently observe, mark and watch them, that it
is impossible for any other then their husbands to speak with the^, or for
them to do a miss and otherwise then well. They contract marriage without any
oath, they take no sommes of monye with their wives, but are almost enforced
to bye them, contrary to the Romans fashion, where the son in Law was
wont to be bought and not the sonns wife. The wife has no ornamente nor
decking upon her body but that she is driven to get of her father. A cause of
deuorce with them is either barrennes, or intolerable manners, their judge is
pryuie to these things. The women use most simple apparel shewinge no kind of
excess in the world, they never come with open face into the sight of their
husbands or other men. The Turks deteste our hose and great breches, with
their Cod-pieces because they do to lively express and show the privy parts
Their heads be covered with linen, having a top like unto a turret, and
comes near unto a pyramidate form. They use bread not of the worst sort,
both black and white bread saving they cast a certain kind of seed upon
new bread, which brings a great plesa^tnes i^ eating. They have diverse
artificious wais in preparing meats, and variety of sauces, a solemn kind
of meat with them is a kind of pottage, made with ^yce, so thick that it can
hardelye be divided with hands, from fish they absteyn merueilously, they use
all kind of flesh saving swines flesh. There be no common tauerns, nor Innes
for gestes and strangers, nor common vitaling houses, but in the streets
diverse kinds of meats are to be sold and other things necessary for lyfe^
The townsmen cause their fields to be tylled by their servant, and they
pay tithe to their Emperor and ruler Crafts men mayntayn them with their
sciences, they that do love idleness do perish with famine, they exercise
merchandise most diligently, they pass and travel into Asia the less, Arabia
and Egipte, and they have their peregrinations also to the Uenecians. If they
make water, they wash their yard after it, if they emptye their bellies the
make al clean afterward, in like manner do the women, whom their servant
and bond men do follow bearing vessels full of water, the man servant following
the master, and the maid the mistres. They have one kind of Judge as well
Christians as Turks. And this judge is bound to minister equallye right to
every body.

Of dame Flora.
THe Lady which ye Poets call dame Flora, was a notable and common harlot, who
when she had gotten great riches by common ribaudrie, made the people of Rome
her heir, and left a certain sum of monye, with the yearlye use where of
the day of her nativity should be celebrate in the setting forth of goodly
plays, the which thing because it seemed detestable to attribute a certain
solemn dignity to a dishoneste thing, they feigned and surmised her to be a
goddess that had the rule and governance o^ flowers, and that it was meet she
should be reconciled with ceremonies, yt through her help fruits and trees
might flourish and prosper.

Of the Ieate stone.
IN some part of England and Scotland, there is great store of the best
kind of Ieat stone. If any body drinks the powder of this stoone in water,
if the same party be contaminate with lybidiouse acts, the same body out of
hand shall be enforced to make urine, and shall have no ability to keep it
back. But if a virgin drinks of it, there is no power to make vryne follow.
Munster in the^ 2 book. fol. 45.

Of the Burialles of the Turks, and of diverse obseruacions and customs.
When any dies amongst the Turks, they wash his carcass and cover it in
very fair linen clothes. Afterward they carry the body out of the city into
some place, for they think it an heynouse thing to burye one in the Temple.
Their monks go before the hearse with candels, the priests follow singing until
they come unto his sepulture and grave: if it be a poor man yt is dead, they
gather monye in every stret for the labors and pains of the religiouse, and
that they offer unto him. The friends of the dead comes often times to the
grave weeping and bewaylinge, and they set the sacrifice of their meats for y^
dead upon the monument, as bread flesh these, eggs, milk, and the feast is of
nine days space after the manner of the Ethnickes, and all this is eaten for
the soul of the dead, of the pore, or else of the fowls of the air, or ants,
for they say it is as acceptable unto God, to geeue and offer alms to bruit
beasts, and fowls neding it as unto men, when it is offered for the love of
God. There be some that set birds at liberty to fly, which were restrained and
shit up, giving monye according to ye v^lewe of the birds. Some cast bread to
fish in the waters for Gods sake, saying that they shall get of God a noble
reward for such ^ountye and pity toward those that need it. The Turks have
also three diverse manners of washing them, the first is a sprincbling of all the
whole body, with water, and that this should not be vain ^or frustrate, they
shave the hears from ^uery part of their body, saving only yt heardes in
men, and the hears upon women heads. And yet they wash them very curiously
and kembe them often, therefore in the more famous cities therbe baths which
they use continually. Where there be no such, they have some secret place
prepared to wash them in houses that they might be well clarified with water
before they go out of the house. They have another kind of washing nothing
necessary as when they ease nature of superf^uities For then in some secret
place they wash their secret parts, there is none seen standing or upright
when he delivers Nature of superf^uous burdens. The third kind of washing is
to purifye the instruments of senses wherein they wash both hands and arms
even to the elbowes, then their mouth, their nosethrils, and al their face.
Both men and women do make a scraping of filthye places every month twice or
thrice, but especially when they frequente the Temples, otherwise they should
be burnt as violaters and prophaners of a sacred place. They use such severity
in war, that no soldier dares take away any thing unjustly, for if he does he
shall be punished without mercy.

They have ordinary kepers and defenders of those things as be in soldiers
ways, the which are bound to mainteyn the orchardes and gardeynes, with their
fruits, about high ways, so that they dare not take an apple or any such
like, with out the license of the owner. For if they did they should suffer death
for it.

Of this writes one Barthelmewe Giurgeuitus, that was captive thirtene years
in Turkey, after this sort. When I was in the Turks army in his expedition
against the Persians, I did see a certain horseman headd^d with his horse and
servant also, because his horse being loose entered into the fields of
another man. None of the princes or Dukes possesses any province or city, as
rightful enheritance, nor they cannot leave any such thing after their death
to their children, or successors without the consent of the king and supreme
governor. But if any Duke desires to have any certain possessions, it is
granted to him upon this condition, there is a perfect note made of the price,
and of the rents, and revenues of those possessions. The Turk knowethe also
how many soldiers may be kept, with that yearly revenue, and so many soldiers
he enioyneth him to keep, the which ought always to be in a readiness at
every commandment, otherwise yt Lord shall lose his head, if he did not
answer his duty and office.

How the Christians taken of the Turks in war be handled, and tormented, and
how they are made fre.
THe Emperor of the Turks when he makes his expedicion against ye
Christians, he has always waytinge upon him a company of butchers and
sellers of Boys to abominable uses, who carry with them a great number of long
chains, in hope of bondmen and captives, wherein they lincke and bind fifty
or three score easlye by order. The same men do bye also of such as have
boties or prays, as many as have not perished with swoorde, the which thing
is permitted them upon this condition if they give unto the prince the tenth
or tithe of their bondmen prisoners and capti^es The other it is lawful for
them to keep to their own use and merchandise, and there is no better nor
moore plenteouse a mart amongst them, then of bondmen. The Emperor does so
seperace the old men and the youth of both kinds which comes to him in the
name of the tenth or tithes, that he sells them of ripe age, for the ploughe
and husbandry. Young maids and young men he sends away to a certain
place, to be instructed in certain arts, that he might use them after ward
moore commodiouslye, and first they go about this to make them deny their
christian faith, and then to have them circumcised, and when they are once
entered into their ceremonies, according to every man's disposition and wit, he
is appointed either to study the Laws of their nation, or else to practice
feats of war if more strength appears in the body than in his wit, they are
so instructed in the principles of warlike affairs, that for the weakness of
their strenght, first they use an easy bow, afterward as their strength
increases and they have moore exquisite knoweledge, they have a more strong
bow until they be meet for war. There is a master which calls seuerlye
upon daily exercise, as often as they swerve from the mark so oftentimes are
they whipped. Others are made meet and cunninge to fight with staves. But they
in whom there is a greater grace of beautiful form are so ma^gled that no
manlines appears in their bodies, they have been so abused with great danger
of life, and if they do escape they be mete for nothing else but ministers of
most flagitious voluptuousenes, and when their beauty waxes old, they are
deputed into the office of Eunuchs, to observe and keep matrones, or else they
are addicted to the custodye of Horses or Mules, or to kitchen drudgerie.
Maidens that are very comelye and beautiful, are chosen to be their
concubines, those of the meaner sort are given to matrones to wait upon them,
where they have some such filthye services and functions, that they cannot be
named with honesty, for they are compelled to follow them with a vessel of
water when they go to discharge the bellyr, and those parts. Other be kept at
maidens works, as spinning, and bakinge. When the Turks have gotten any young
prisoners, they urge them with threateninges, promises, and flateringes, that
their new bond men would be circumcised and when any has admitted that, he is
used with a little more humanity, but al hope of returning again into his
country is utterly taken away, and if he once goes about it, he is in danger
of burning. These because they are thought moore steadfast, and less given to
run away, they are preferred of their Lords to warlike affairs, their
liberty is then dew unto them, when they being unprofitable for years be
rather rejected of their Lords than dismissed, or else where their Lord has
given them liberty in war, for ye danger of death that he has escaped by
them. Matrimony is permitted unto the^ but their children are taken from them
at the Lords will, the which causes the wiser sort to abhor from marriages,
they use other extremely that refuse circumcision. They have a very hard life
that have not learned any art or craft: for such are in great estimation as are
cunning crafts men. Wherefore the noble men, the priests and the learned sort,
which pass over their lives in quietness and idleness, whenever they chance
into their hands, they are thought most miserable o^ all, for the merchant
seller of them can not abide when he sees no profit to com^ of them nor any
good sale to be made.

These go with their feet and head uncovered, and for the most part with
naked bodies, through the snow, and upon the stones, both winter and summer
they are enforced to travail, and there is no end of these miseries, before
that either they dye or else they find a foolish Lord in the byinge of ill
merchandise. No man is so happy of what condition so ever he be, or of what
age, beauty or art he be yt they will lay him, being sick in his journey, at
any Inn or lodginge house, for first he is compelled to go with stripes and if
he cannot so do he is set upon some young beast, and there if he cannot sit, he
is bound with his body flat even like unto a pack or a burden, if he dies
they take away his clothes and cast him into the next ditch or valley for dogs
and ravens. They keep their captives not only in chains, but also with
gyues upon their hands, as they lead them, the distance between the^ is
about a yearde, least they should one spurn and hurt an other, and this do
they for fear their bondmen hurl stones at them. For where as every one that
is a common merchant and seller of men, leads a great number of bondmen, so
that ten of them oftentimes have five hundred in chains, they fear the force
of such a great multitude, if their hands should be at liberty to throw or
cast any thing. In the night time they make their feet sure with chains and
irons, and lay the^ upon their backs, open to the injury of the the air, the
women are used with moore humanity, they that are able do go upon their feet,
and they that are less able, be carried upon young cattle, and those that are
so weak that they may not suffer the shaking of the horses, or asses, or such
like are carried in hampers and paniers, like unto geese and swannes. The night
is more heavy unto them, for then either they are shit up in strong holds, or
else are compelled to suffer the filthy lust of those that have bought them, and
great lame^tacion is hard in the night time both of young men and young women,
suffering much violence, so that they spare not them of six or seven years of
age in this misery, such is the cruelnes of that filthy nation, against nature
in the rage of voluptuousnes. When the day commethe they are brought forth
into the market as sheep and goats to be sold, when they that would bye them,
come, the price is made, if the captive pleases him, all his apparel is cast
of, that he might be seen of his master that shall be, all his parts and
members are vewed, touched, serched and tried, if there be any fault in his
joints or not, if he pleases not the byer, he is rejected again to the
seller, and this is as often done as any does cheapen or go about to bye, if
the byer likes the bondsman, he is carried away to a most grievous seruiuitude,
as to be either plowman or sheep heard that he might not remember the more
grievous sciences. If any be taken with his wife and children, noble men will
bye him gladlye, and make him ruler of his vilages, and geeue him charge of his
grounds, vineyardes and pastures, but his children must be bondmen, if they
persevere and continue in christian faith they have a determinate time to serve,
yt which being paste, they are made free, and yet their children except they
be redeemed continue in servitude and bondage at the will and pleasure of the
Lord.

With what burden and exactions the christian Princes are charged and
oppressed being overcome of the Turks.
When the Turk has taken any christian prince, he takes all their goods as
well moveable as vnmoue able as a pray and bootye, he puts away nobility
clean, especially of the kings stock, the clerks and clergy he kills
not, he spoyleth them of all wealth and dignity and makes them very mockinge
stocks in beggerie. The Turks take also out of the christian churches all
bells, organes, and other instruments of music, and after they have profaned
the churches they consecrate the^ to Mahumet. They leave pore and small
chapples to the christians, where they may do their holy service, not openly
but in silence, the which if they fall by any earthquake, or be ruinouse by any
sodeyn fire it is not lawful to repair them again, but through great sommes
of money given. They are forbidden to preach or teach the Gospel, and it is
not lawefull for any christian man, to bear any rule in ye common wealth,
nor to bear weapons or use like vesture with the Turks. If any contumelious
words be spoken of ye christian or of Christ, he must suffer it, and ^olde
his peace, but if the Christian speaks any thing irreverently of their
religion, he shall be circumcised against his will, but if any whisper any thing
against Mahumet, he shall be burnt. The christians geeue the fowerth part of all
their fruit, and commodity both of the pro^it of their fields and cattle,
and also of ye gaynes of their arts, and crafts, there is another charge also
where they pay for ^uery one in their familye a ducate, and if the parents be
notable to pay, they are compelled to sell their children to servile offices,
other bound in chains do beg from door to door to get their fees to
dyscharge the exaction, and if they cannot by these means pay it, they must be
content to suffer perpetual enprisonment. Those captives that go about to
fly away if they go into Europe, they have the easier flighte, saying that
nothing is to hinder their passage, but certain waters which are passed over
easlye, and this do they most attempt in harueste time, because then they may
hide them in the corn and live thereby: in the night time they take their
flight, and in the day time they hide them selves in woods and puddles or in
the corn, and had rather be devoured of wolves, and other beasts then to be
sent again to their old masters. But they which into Asia take their flight,
go first to Hellesspont betwixt Callipolis and ye two towers which were of old
called Seston and Abydon, but now they are named Bogazassar the castells of the
Sea, mouth, and with them they carry both an axe and ropes to cut down wood
and to bind them together, whereof they make boats or little ships to pass
over the sea, carrying nothing but salt with them, and in the night time they
convey themselves into the ship in the water. If the wind and the sea favors
the^, they pass over in three or four hours, but if the trouble some sea be
against them, either they perish in the water or else be cast again to the
coaste of Asia.

When they are gotten over the Sea, they seek unto the mountayns, and
beholdinge the Pole, they take their journey toward the North. In their
hunger they refresh the^ selves with salted herbs. If many run away
together, in the night time they invade shepeheardes and flea them and take
away all such meat and drink as they find, but yet many times they them
selves be slain of the sheepeheardes, or else taken of them and so delivered
to their old masters, to all kind of seruitute: and the greater number is
consumed with dangers, for few escape free and safe, because they perish
either by shipwreck, or by devouring of beasts or by their enemies weapons, or
else by famme, when as it chauncethe that they after their running away make
any long abode in the woods. Many kinds of punishments are prepated, devised,
and appointed for fugitives, and such as run away, for same being hanged by the
feet are most cruelly tormented with whips, and they that commit homicide or
murder, have the soles of their feet cut with a sharp knife in many slyces
and cuttinges and after they are so cut the wounds be ^ubbed and sprincled
with salt, and some have a great iron collar with a gallows of iron, which they
must bear for a long ^yme both days and nights.

Of Tantalus.
TAntalus was a king of Phrygia e^ceding couetouse, whom the Poets feign to
have bid the Gods to a ba^ket, and he being desirous to make a trial of their
deity, when they appeared a^ his house in men's likeness, did ^^ea his own
son Pelops and set him before the^ to be eaten as meat, giving the flesh an
other name unto the^, who understanding his horrible act, did not only abstein
from eating thereof, but also gathring the parts of the child together,
brought him to life again. For this offense Jupiter cast him into hell, and
enjoined him this punishment: that he should continue in most clear water,
and stand up in it eue^ to his nether lip, and that most goodlye apple trees
bearing most sweet and redolent fruit, should hang over him and touch his
mouth almost, the which things as soon as he should go about to taste of they
should fly from him, and so they did, that, between the apples and the water,
^e consumed with famine, and thy^^^^ (...) was tormented with great penury,
even in present plenty. Where of a proverb has sprung, to call it Tantalus
punishment, when as they which have goods enough, cannot use them.

Of the Temple of Ephesus.
IN the country called Ionia there is y^ noble city of Ephesus, which was
built in the 32 year of the raygne of king David by Androchus the son of
Codrus king of Athens. The Amazons did erect in it in ye honor of Diana a
noble temple y^ like whereof was not then in all ye world, and therefore it was
accounted amo^ngest the vii. wonders of ye world: it was. CC. and.xxv. years in
making and that of al Asia, and set in a miry ground, for the avoiding of
earthquakes, there were an hundred and xxvii. pillars in it made of their
kings one by one, which were in height iii. score foot whereof xxxvi. were
carved with merueilous workmanship. The length of the whole church was iiii.
hundred and xxv feet the breadth, ii. hundredth and xx.

All that took this church for sanctuary, (...) ^reate immunities and
privileges, (...) were also so many gifts and monuments given to this
church from all nations and Cities, that none in all the world might be
compared to it in wealth. S. Paul preached at Ephesus iii. years and converted
many to the faith. Saint Ihon also the Evangelist died in this city. But this
sumptuouse temple was destroyed and set on fire in the raygne of Galienus the
Emperor, by one Erostratus who doing many notable feats in war and
otherwise, when he perceived yt he got no reward nor renown there by, to leave
a continual remembrance of his flagitious and horrible act, did with great
fires and monstrous flames, consume this fair church, and brought it ta
ashes, thinking there by to be remembered in perpetuity: and yet he was
deceived, for there were general edices and proclamacions made, that no man
upon pain of death should presume once to put his name in any writing or
chronicle, to the enten^ that he might have been buried with ever lasting
oblivion.

Of Artemisia the wife of Mausolus.
IN the city called Halicarnassus, Artemisia the queen erected a sumptuous
tomb in the honor of her husband Mau^olus, which was done with such a
pomp and magnifice^cie, that it was nu^bred as one of the seven wonders of the
world. This woman merueilously lame^ting the death of her husband, and
inflamed with incredible desire and affection toward him, took his bones and
ashes and mingled them together and beat the^ to powder with swee^e spices, and
put it in water, and drunk it of, and many other strange signs of incredible
love are said to have been in her, after this for the perpetual remembrance
of her hus^ande, she caused to be made a sepulcher of merueylouse workmanship
in stone, which has been famous and much spoken of al men til our days, and
this was in height xxv. cubits, and compassed with xxxvi. goodly pillars.
This vayn comfort could not take away out of the queen's breaste ye conceived
grief and sorrow of her husband, but that shortly after she her self yielded
her soul and life, as unmeet to tarry after his death.

Sardanapalus.
SArdanapalus was king of the Assirians, whose epitaph had these words in the
Assirian tongue. Sardanapalus the son of Anecendarassis erected in one day
Anchiala and Tarsus ii goodlye Cities. Eat, drink, and play.

These words as Cicero says might have been written upon the sepulcher of an
ox, and not of a king. He was a most effeminate man given to all kind of
luxurye, and was not ashamed to spin amongst common harlots and in women's
vesture and attire, to excel all others in laseiuiousnes. Wherefore the
Assirians disdayninge to obey and subject them selves to such a feminine
prince rebelled and made war against him, who being overcome went into his
palace, and there making a great fire cast himself and all his riches into
the fire and so ended his life.

The people called Amazones.
PEntesilea the queen of ye Amazones which were women abhorring men and
practisyng all warlyke affairs did noble deeds af manlye prowess at the
destruction of Troy. Some say yt they had their beginning of the Scythians
after this sort. Certain Scythians being driven from their country with
their wives and remaining in the coasts of Cappadocia using to rob and spoil
the borderers, were destroyed at the length by conspiracy and disceit. The
wives that followed their husbands and saying that they were left alone, took
weapons and defended their borders and also moved war against their
neighbors, they had nomynde at al to marye with their neighbors, calling it a
seruitute and not matrimonye, a singular example of al ages, they increased
their common wealth without husbands, and that one might not seem more happy
then another they slew such husbands as remained at home.

At the length when they had gotten peace by force of arms, they used the
society of men in the countries by them, least their whole nation should
perish for lack of procreation, and if any men children were borne they
destroyed them, and their yo^g women and maids did not use spinning nor
carding, but hunting and handlinge their weapons, so that every female childs
breast was sered and burnt away lest they might be hindered thereby in shoting,
whereof they took that name and were called Amazones. They conquered a great
part of Europe and did occupy many cities in Asia, they had.ii. queen's,
Marthesia and Lampedo, which deuidinge their army into two parts, kept their
battles with great wealth and strength, defending their borders stoutly. They
did build Ephesus and Smyrna in Asia the less, and did inhabit the chief
city in Cappadocia. Some say that in some places amongst them they had
husbands, and that the women did bear all the rule and did al common business
and that the men did keep charge at home like women, obeying the women in all
things.

Of Hearts in Cyprus.
IN the isle of Cyprus Hearts are commonly seen to swim in flocks over the sea
in a straight order laying their heads upon the buttocks of those that go
before, and this they go by course. They se no land but yet they swim in the
sauoure of it, the males have horns, and of all kind of beasts every year at
an accustomed time in the spring they lose the^, therefore that day that they
lose them, they go into desert places and hide themselves as things that have
lost their weapons: in ^yght months the females bring for the young, they
exercise their young with running, and teach them to think upon flyinge away.
They lead them to hard and inaccessible places, and show them how to skyppe,
and leap: but yet it is a simple beast and astonished at the meruaylinge at
every thing, so that when a Horse or a Stere comes near, they do not mark
the man that is hunting at hand, or else if they perceive a man, they wonder
at his bows and arrows. They bear signs of their age in their horns, and
for every year they have the increase of a branch in their horns, until
they be vi. years of age, and after that time the like does ^pringe up
again. And after this their age can not be discerned, but old age is kno^en
by the (...): the horn^ do not fall away from such (...) a^e geld^^ ^or do not
spring again if they be gone. The hearts ha^^ a natural conflict with the
serpente, they search their ^^uerns and with the breath of their nosethrils
draw them out against their wills. And therefore the savor of hearts horn
burnt, Hearts horn against poison.
is good to drive away serpe^ts, and against their bytings a si^guler remedy is
made of the ruyn of an hy^de slain in the da^ms be^ly. The hearts live a long
time as an ^undred years and more, the end of the hearts tail has poison in
i^, and therefore is it throwed away, pow^er ^^^aped of the hearts hour and
drunk kills the wornies in the stomache, it is good also against the
Iaunders.

Of the Date tree.
THere is no country that brings forth more fruitful date trees then the
Holy land: there be date trees in Italy, but they are barren, about the the
sea coaste of Spain there be fruitful trees, but it is an unpleasant date, in
Africa there is a sweet kind of date, but it lasts not, in the East part
of ye world they make wines of them, and some use them as bread, and some
geeue them as meat to their cattle. Hereof be the dry dates most plentiful
in juice and meat, and of them wines are made very hurtful for the head, and
as there is plentye of them in the East, so are they a great deal better in
Iurye and especially in Hie^ico, It growethe in a light and sandye ground, it
is ^ushy altogether in the top and has not the fruit as other trees amongst
ye leaves, but amongst his branches. The diligent searchers of Nature say^
that there is both male and female, ye male has flowers the female springethe
without flowers, much like unto a thorn See Munster for more.

Of the dead Sea.
THe dead Sea which is nighe unto water of Iordane, is so called because
nothing can live in it, the Lake of itself is smookye, and the air causes
rustines to brass and silver and all bryghte things. This lake receives not
the body of any living thing. Bulls and Camels swym in it, and men that have
no knowledge of swimming. if they go into it unto the navel, they are lift up.

There is no ship can sail on it. If you put any live thing into it, it
leapeth out. A candell burninge will swym above, the light being put out, it
will be drowned, ye water of this Lake is always standinge still, and is not
stirred with the wind, it is merueilous dangerous and hard coming to it for
strangers, both for wild beasts, and serpentse, and also for a barbarous
nation that keeps there about, and troubles the places thereby with often
robberies. See Munster moore at large.

Of land transforming things into glass
IN Sydon there is a water that has Sand of easy alteracion into glass.

This Sand what so ever metal it takes, it changes into glass, and that
which is made glass, if it be cast into the sand, retournes again to sand.
And this is a strange thing at Sidon.

Of the Fish called a purple.
THere be that writes the Purple to have her color by reason of the
propinquitie of the son. Wherefore in Africa they have as it were a vyolet
color, and at Tyrus a red color.

This Purple is a fish of the kind of a shell fish, where of a juice is
gathered most necessary for the dying of garments This fish has this juice to
color and dye Garments, in the middeste of her mouth and jaws: it is gotten
and gathe^ed in the spring time, for at other times she is barren and lacks
this juice. She loses her life with the loss of this juice for she lives no
longer then she has any of this juice, and therefore it is good to take them
alive. She is a great deuourer of little shell fish, out of the which a
lytour is taken, wherewith Sylke is dyed purple. She has a long tongue, as it
were the length of a ^ingar the which she is always moving, by her tongue she
gets her pray that she desires. In Italye they discern true Purple from
counterfayte by pouring oil upon silk, for if it leaves any spots it is
counterfeit, but if the silk garment has no fault after the oil, it is good
and allowable purple.

The City of Babylon.
SEmyramis a noble woman and of great prowess, erected and built the pompouse
City of Babylon, the walls whereof were made of brick, sand, pitch, and
plaster, of a merueylous length and grossenes. The walls were in compass three
hundred and three score furlonges, with many and great towers beautified. The
bredthe of the walls was such that six carts might go to gether there on:
the height was thirty and two foot, the turrets in number were two hundred and
fifty. The breadth and length thereof was equal with the walls. She made a
bridge also of five furlonges in length, with pyllers in the depthe by
merueylous art, of ^tone, iron, and leadde wyned together. When Ninus her
husband was dead she took the administration of the kingdom and raygned xxiiii
years. For although she had a son called also Ninus, yet she considering
his young years unmeet for to rule feigned her self to be king Ninus son,
the which was easly credited, for ye great likeness of nature that was in them
This woman was of so noble a courage, that she had a singular emulacion to
excel her husband in glory: of whom it needs not now to speak any more,
because diverse authors have so largely renowned and set forth her noble acts.

Of the Phoenix.
THe Phoenix is a noble bird and is but one in the world which is not much
seen. Cornelius says that the Phoenix did fly into Egypt, when as Plaucius
and Paupinius were consuls. It is said that she is as byg as an Eagle, having a
glittring brightness like as gold about her neck, in other parts purple, and
Azured ^ayle with Rose colors, her head with a plume and top of feathers,
Manilius says that no man has seen her feeding. She lives six hundrethe
and three score years: when she waxes old, she makes her neste of Cassia and
branches of frankincense tree, to fill it with odoures and so dies upon it,
then of her bones and mary, thereof there springs first a little worm, which
afterward is a young Phoenix. This bird as Pliny says is commonly in Arabia,
where are found goodly pearls and of great estimacion. Cleopatra gave for one
pearl that was brought out of this country, Cleopatra.

Pearl.


ii. hundred and fiftye thousand crowns. The goodness of pearl is judged by
the whitnes, greatness, roundnes, playnnes, orie^t brightness and weight.

Of the Unicorn.
SOme say yt Unicorne is like unto a colte of ii. years and a half old.

In his foreheade there growethe an horn which is black, in the length of.ii.
or.iii. cubits, his color is tawnye like ^ weasell, his head like an heart,
his neck not long, his main very thin hanginge only upon the one side, his
shanckes be small and thin, his hoofes of his formar feet is divided like an
ox, and almost representing a goats foot. Of his hinder feet his outward
part is hearye and roughe. The king of Ethiope has some store of these
beasts, this beast is not commonly taken alive.

Of Mahumet the false prophet of the Sarracens, of his original, and
peruersitie
MAhometes was the Prince of all impietye and ^upersticion. Wherefore it is not
to be meruailed, if he has set the seeds of all evil, and such as will not be
rooted out. Some says that he was a Cyrenaic in nation, some, that he was an
Arabian, others that he was a Persian. He was borne in the year of our
Lord.597. A man of an obscure familye, and of no great wealth nor strength nor
manhood: some say that his father was a worshipper of devils, and that
limaelita his mother, was not ignorant of the laws of the Hebrews. wherefore
the chil^e being distrace and made doubtful because whyleste that his father
teached him one kind of religion, his mother suggested another, so that he
followed none of them throughlye. And thus being trained up in ii. several
manners he received and kept none of them at his full age, but he being brought
up amongst the good christians, being of a subtle and craftye wit, invented
and devised of both laws a most perniciouse and detestable sect for mankind.
After the death of his parents he was taken of the Sarracens which were
accounted notable amongst the Arabians in theft and robberies and was sold to
a merchant of the Ismael kind. He being a craftye fellow, rapaciouse,
dishonest, subject to all vice, a notable dissembler, and deceiuer, was at the
length mad^ ^he ruler of their marchaundize and wares. He did drive camels
through out Egypt, Syria, Palestine, and other strange places, with the often
travail in which places, he vsinge the company as well of the Jews as of
christians, many times ^tudied and went about not to learn, but to deprave the
old and new Testament being taught diverse sects of his parents: to this he
added the gaynes that came by theft, and daily imagined how to deceue his
master. Wherefore being suspected of his maistar and hated of others, of an
obscure servant and slave he became a notorious theife and robber. And being
made more famous with his continual theft and robberies, he got daily a great
number of companions of his vnthriftye doings. These things were also a
great help unto him, his strange and horrible countinance, his terrible
voice, and his desperate ruffenly boldenes, greatly to be feared. Thus coming
by little and little in admyracion of a barbarous nation, he got unto him no
small authority, so that his master being dead, with out children he married
and took to wife his mystres being a widow of yt Ismael stock and fifty
years of age, having great wealth and riches, who also brought him up This
pestilent man being puffed up with his wives goods, applied his mind to all
kind of detestable acts, through his corrupt and depraved wit, being of him
self otherwise prompt and geeuen to all kind of presumptuous boldness, his
cemeti^ie and malapertnes was also increased by the inconstancy and
unfaithfulness of one Sergius a pestilent monk, so that in a short space he
came to such estimacion amongst the Arabians, that he was called and believed
to be the great messenger of God and the great Prophet, and this in every man's
mouth. This Sergius being a Nestorian archeheritike banished from
Constantinople fled into Araby, and asociating him self unto Mahumets
familiarity, an ill master and governor with a most filthy and abominable
scholar was sone united together, he was a prater and full of words, bold,
rash, impudent, subtle, craftye, and in all things agreing with Mahumet, who
now was waxed mighty, and could help at a pinthe, and whose name began to be
famous and so at the length the runnagate found a filthy privy and dungeon of
all wickedness. Whom his unhappy master taught Nestorians madness, and persuaded
him to expulse and remove the christians and their priests from Damascus,
Syria, and Arabia, and so to corrupt the Judicial law and deprave the
Christian faith: it cannot well be rehearsed by how many craftye and subtle
means this most unfaithful Apostata and runneagate has deceived and seduced
the people. Now Mahumet being taught al kind of ungraciousness of his
detestable Master, through intemperant living and continual drunkenness,
Mahumet had the falling evil,
fell at the length into the fallinge sickness, the which his wife could not
well suffer for the often coming thereof. Wherefore the old dissemblinge knave
to deliver himself from that infamy, does hide and cloak his disease:
sayeinge it to be the marvelous brightness of Gabriell the aungel and messenger
of God, of whom he being put in that trau^ce did receive and learn most secret
and strange things, and that he was not able to abide the presence of him:
with a manifest lie be affirmed it. O my dear and wel-beloued wife he says,
marvel not that this comes to me when I conceive the spirit of God
himself, who suggestethe to me things to come, and to make me priuye of
many matters, he comes often to me. The fame hereof was spread abroad
immediatlye, and he was openly called the prophet of God, the which opinion he
increased with a new art and craft by the instruction of his master Sergius.
For he accustomed and taught a Dove to be fed, and fetch meat at his ears,
the which dove his most subtle and craftye master called the holy ghost. A
Dove.
He preached openly and made his braggs like a most lying vil^en that this
dove did show unto him the most secret counsel of God, as often as the simple
foul did fly unto his dares for norishment. His wife being now dead left him
her heir and all that she had, so that he increased in wealth and authority
daily, and began to make a ne^^ Law by the healpe of his master S^^g^^s and
certain Jews his companions, borowing some things of the Hebrews, and some
things of the christians discipline, he did write in a certain vo^ume all the
laws of his new sect, yt which ^ookes name is Alcoran: that koke no^ many
years ag^e has come into p^int: And that he might the more craftelye deceive
his people and nation geeuen ^o the bellyeane to sleep, he brought up and fed
a certain Bull which was used ^nely to take food at the hands of Ma^^met, he
bound a book betwyxte his ^ornes and the simple people lookynge a^oute, with
an high voice, A Bull.
he called the Bull out of a ^ecrete place, and when he with his bablyng tongue
had uttered madye things concerning his laws, suddenly the Bull start forth
and ouerthroweynge many in his have ye comminges, he ^ayeth down the book in
the hands of Mahumet as it had been a gift sent from heaven. The which he
receiving with much honor, did immediately interpret many things out of it
to the people, and with this forged and subtyle devise, he named him self a
Prince, and Sergius a prophet: For the dove brought a paper about her neck
written with golden letters, in this manner. Whosoever shall put ye yoke on the
bulls neck, let him be king. Sergius brought the yoke and gave it to Mahumet,
who did easly put it on ye bull, and by and by he was called king of the
simple people, thinking these things to be done by Gods providence, and that
he took the book no other wise. In this book they are commanded to be
circu^cysed not for any religyon, but for mere supersticion, or else as some
say that no filth should remain under the skyn of ye yearde when they did
wash and bath the^ There was also commanded abstinence of wine and flesh,
Wine.
that he might ye more easlye cloak his disease who felt himself oppressed
with wine of late, for wine taken more excessiuelye and intemperantly in
stopping the passages of the brain, yt no respiracion may be had, does breed
and norishe the falling sickness, and swynes flesh makes gross humors
wherewith obstruction of the brain comes quickelye, and many other diseases
springethe thereof. The Book of Alcoran commaunde^^ also the fasting of one
month wherein a man may eat at the night long so ye daily abstinence is
reco^pensed with night surfeting. Mahumet appointed also because he would have
his law to disagree from the Christians and Hebrews that the Frydaye should be
consecrate as holy day, because he was made king up on that ^aye and also
would not agree with any other sect. For the same cause do the Turks also turn
them into the south, at their prayers against the manners of other nations. He
has also granted to every man four wives ^f his own kindred: but concubines
and bond women bought it is lawful for every man to have as many as he can
keep, so that they may forsake them and make a divorce as often as they list,
and this was done to draw the common sort and rude multitude unto him more
easly. He taught also that the pleasures of the body did not hinder the happy
life to come, and he promised to the ^bseruers of his law, a paradise and
gar^den of al pleasures, wherein they should ^se their most desired joys and
all kind of pleasures, as maidens most beautiful adorned, and the embracinges
of Angels and al other kinds of pleasures that any man would desire, with the
which subtle ^raftines, be led the people flexible of their own nature
whyther he would, because he promised al kind of libidinous pleasures. He
reprehended the Jews, for that they denied Christ to be borne of the virgin,
seeing yt the prophet through divine inspiracion did prophecy the same He
reproved the Christians of foolishnes because they did believe Jesus to be
borne of the virgin and to have suffered al contumely and punishment of the
Jews patiently: for as much as that body conceived by Godds inspiracion, was
made vnpassible, and also seeing that Christ did ascend into the heavens, and
Judas was crucified in his place.

The Turks admit only three prophets Mahumet their law geuer, Moses the
prophet of the Hebrews, and Christ who^ they deny to be God. Mahumet made a
^^rsed law, that if any man should dispute against his mysteries, that he
should suffer death for it, in the which law he has manifestly taught, that
there is no sin^ere or good thing in Alcoran, the which he goes about to
defend by the sword only. Thus with Sergius he made this book full of
wickedness and corrupted the true scriptures with counterfeit interpretacions,
and that he might be accounted the prophet and conseruatour of both
Testamentes, he flattered ye christians in this that he was baptized o^
Sergius, and commanded his people to be washte often for the expiacion of
their offenses. He followed also the Jews, in that, that he appointed
circumcision, and abstinence from swynes flesh, and yet in deed he did
disagree from both. For circumcision which is commanded to be the eight day,
extends to the very full and complet age, and baptism that takes away
spyrytuall filthynes which ought not to be reiterate, is daily of them
reiterate.

The manners of the Assirians.
THe Assirians feed upon Dates, whereof they make both wine, and honye. They
keep their hear long and bind it up with hear laces and fyllets. They
annoynte them selves with fine ointments before they go abroad

Of their laws which they used this ^^e is memorable, that their maidens and
virgins being ripe for men, were ^rought into some open place, and there were
set to be sold yearly for them that would marye any wives, and first of all the
most beautiful ware set to sale. They which had not so comely beautye so that
no man would bye them nor scantlye take them frelye, were bestowed in
matrimony with that sum of money which was gathered of the selling the fair
maids.

They had no use of phisicians, but ther^ was a law amongst them that if
any^ did fall sick, he should ask counsel o^ those that had been visited
and trouble^ with the same sickness. Some say yt their sick folks were carried
abroad, and tha^ by the law they which had been sike a^ any time, should
vysit such as were no^ sick, and teach them by what means ^ remedies
especially they were delivered from their sickness. They had for their
priests, men of great knowledge in Astronomy, who could faythfullye
interpret dreams, and monstruouse things, and these were not taught nor
learned abroad, but the children took their discipline and learning, as
inheritance from their parents. With long and aunciente obseruacion of the
sterres they did prognosticate to mortal men many things to come, they did
attribute great strength to the planets, but other especially to Saturn. They
therefore told many things to princes, as to Alexander his victo^ye which he
had against Darius, and to diverse other in like manner.

The manners of the Persians.
THe Persians would not wash them in any river, nor never make urine in the
water, nor cast any carcass therein, nor so much as spet in it, for they did
most religiously reverence the water. Their kings they always created of one
familye, and he that did not obey the king lost his head and his arms, and
was cast away unburied. They had many wyu^s for the increase of their stock,
and many concubines also, they gave great rewards to them that had gotten
many children in one year. The children after they were borne, came not into
their Fathers sight, for five years space, but were kept amongst women, for
this cause: if any dyed in the bringing up, the father should take no grief
of the loss. Their maryages were solemnized about the tenth day of March.
From five years of age until they were xxiiii. they learned to ride to cast
the dart, to shote, and especially t^ speak well. They did practice to pass
o^uer brooks and waters, to suffer heat (...) cold. They continued in
harness and i^ moist garments, they fed upon acornes field pears, after their
exercise they ha^ very hard bread, and water for their drink^ Their beds and
cups were adorned am^^gest the common sort with gold and silue^ They never
consulted of any great ma^^ters but in the myddest of their bankets thinking
that to be a moore surer consu^^tacion, than that which was had of s^^ber men.
A dunken parlyame^t
Familiers and such as were ^^ acqueyntance when they met, they kiss
together, they which were of a baser ca^^ling, did worship him that they met
wit^ all. They buried dead bodies in ye grou^^ enclosing them in wax. They
though^ it an heinous offense to laughe or spet ^^^fore the prince. Some say
that they ca^^ryed their dead bodies out of the city, there laid them in the
fields to be d^^uoured of dogs, and fowls of the air. They would not have
the bones of dea^ bodies to be buried or reserved: and when any dead body was
not immediatlye consumed of dogs or wild Beasts, they thought it an ill
sign, and that he was a man of an unclean mind, and therefore not to be
worthy to be in Hell, and his next friends did meruelouslye lament him, as
one that had no hope of happiness after this life, but if he were quicklye
de^oured of Beasts, they thought him happy. The Emperor of the Persians is
at this day called the Sophy, who with his noble acts gets great Empire,
and glory.

Of the Panther and Tygre.
THe Panther is a beast like unto ^ Lybarde, he has variety of colors and is
very fierce and wild, so yt some call him a dog wolf, and yet he is gentle
enough if he be filled. He slepeth three days, and after the third day, he
washes himself and cries out, and with a sweet cente that comes from him,
he gathers al wild beasts together which are led and moved with his
sauoure, and he is friendly to all wild beasts saving the Dragon and serpent.
The she Panther is said to be a beast differinge from the male, because she
is cruel and full of spotts. Some say that al beasts are merueylously
delighted with the cent of them, but by their horrible lokes they are made a
frayde, and therefore hydinge their heads, they take and catch other beasts
allured with the pleasantnes of them, as gotes and such like, which being
taken with a fond desire of their pleasa^tnes comes nearer and nearer, but
the Lybard leaping out of her den, flies up on them.

In Caria and Lybia the panthers be of a good length and some what timorous
and not so full of agilitie in leaping, but they have so hard a skin, that you
can hardlye pearse it, the female is more common to be found. The Tygre is a
beast of a wonderful swyftnes, it brings forth many young, the which many do
steal away upon horseback very swyft: But when the female sees her young
gone, for the males take no care of the young, she runs headlong serching
by smelling. The taker of her young hearing her coming near with raginge,
casts down one of the young, the which she takes away with her mouth, and
after that she retourneth again with merueilous celeritye, so that she gets
another, and so the third time, and until that he has gotten into a ship,
and then she seeing her fiercenes frustrate rages on the banks S. Augustine
says there was a Tygre made tame at Rome in a den. Strabo says Megasthenes
writes that in India amongeste the people called Prasii, the Tygre is of
double bigness to the Lion, and of such strength, that one being led with four
men, if he should catch a mule with his hinder clawe, he were able to draw
the mule unto him. Some say when she has lost her young, she is deceived and
mocked in the way with a glass, s^t there by the stealer of her young, for she
folowinge with her smelling and swifte running, and fyndinge the glass
thinkinge her self to have found her young, taryeth so long in vewing the
glass, that he which took her young, has time enough to escape.

The conditions and nature of the Parthians.
THE Parthians have their armies commonly of the greater number of servant
and bondemen, as every man is more wealthy, so does he find a greater
number of horsemen to ye king for his war. They have mauye wives for the
auoydinge of lecherye, and they punish no fault more grievously the^ adulterye:
wherefore the women may not come to the Feasts of men, nor in their sight. They
eat no other flesh then such as they get by hunting, they be always on
horseback, they ride to their bankets and to war, they do merchandise, they
common together, they do all common and private affairs sittinge on Horse
back, their dead bodies are open Prays for fowls or dogs, they have a
special care of worshipping the Gods, they have fear full wits, sediciouse,
prattling, and disceitful. Florus writethe that the third bat^ayle that the
Romans made against ye Parthians, they sent a notable strong army, whereof
M. Crassus Consul was lieutenant, a man of wonderful avarice, and vnsaturable
cupiditie of Gold, who warring unfortunately against the Parthians, losing.xi.
legions, as he was flyinge was taken and slain, his head and right hand was
cut of and brought to ye king of the Parthians, where in contempt and
mockerye, gold was melted into his mouth, because he being so desirous of
booties and prays refused peace being entreated. Some say the Parthians when
they poured in the melted gold into his mouth said: Now drink gold thou
that have always thirsted for Gold, and as yet could never be filled with
gold. The which saying is also rehearsed of Tomyris the queen of the
Massagets in Scythia, Tomyris.
who warringe with Cyrus the mighty king of the Persians, Cyrus.
deprived him of life in the revenging of her sonns death, whom he disceitfully
killed being sent before hand. Wherefore she being in a wonderful rage after the
victory had against Cy^us, caused his head to be cut of and putt in a vessel
full of blood, saying these words. Thou have sucked the blud of my son, and
also thirsted after mine Cyrus, but I will fyl the wyche blood. Drink now and
fill thy self therewith.

Of the people of Carmania, and those which are called Icthiophagi.
IN Carmania no man may have a wife before he has brought the head of his
enemy cut of to the king. The king cutteth the tongue thereof into small parts
and mingleth it with bread, and afterward gives it to be eaten to him that
brought it and to his familiers, and he is a notable fellow that brings many
heads.

The Icthiophagi be so called because they eat fish most commonly and so do
their cattle, and they drink raynie and well water. They feed their Fyshe
with beasts flesh. They make their houses of whales boones and oyster shells,
of their fish being dried they make bread, putting a little wheat unto it,
for they have small store of wheat. It is read of this nation that many of
them going naked al their lives have their wives and children in common like
unto beasts, yt have no difference of honesty and dishonestye.

Of the property of suudrie Nations.
THE Tauroscithes be contenciouse people inhabiting ye woods, doing sacrifice
to the Devil. Such enemies as they take they cut of their heads and set
them upon an high pole in the tops of their houses. There be also in this
part of Asia certain people that have their women in common, ^and some so
rude and beastlye, that they eat man's flesh obeying no laws. There be others
called Agrippaei which are balde from their nativity as well men as women.

And another kind of people also ^alled Issedones, with whom the use is, when
any man's father dies, al his kinsfolks brings cattle and kills them, and
cutteth and mingleth the flesh of them, with the flesh of the father of him
that receives them to this banquet, and so they make a feast with these sundry
kinds of flesh together, they scowre and make clean ye head of him that is
dead, and use it as an image offringe sacrifice and ceremonies unto it yearly:
this does the son to the father, and the father to the son.

Of the Tartarians.
THE Tartarians are most deforme^ of al men, their bodies are but small, their
eyes be gross and bolstringe out, their faces be broad and without hear,
saving that in their over lyp and the chin they have thin and moisye hear,
they be commonly small in the middle, they shave their heads from one ear to
another, by the top of the crown to the hinder part and in the other part
keeping long hear like unto a woman, whereof they make ii. foldes and windinges,
and bind them both behind the ears: and so be al other shaven that tarry
amongst them. They be good horsemen and il fotemen, and therefore none goes on
foot, but rydes either on horseback or upon some ox. They have a glory to
hang good sounding bells about their horse necks. When they drink they power it
in until they be drunken, Drunkenness taken for a glory
the which is is a great praise amongst the^. They have no bread nor use any
baking, nor table clothes nor towels, they use no handkirchiefs, nor never wash
their hands, body nor apparel. They eat no potherbes nor pulse, but only
the flesh of al kind of living things, as cats, dogs, horse, and al kind of
great myce. They roste the bodies of such as they take in war to show their
cruelty and desire of revenging, and where many metes together at the eating
of them, they tear the^ with their teeth like wolves, and drink the blood
thereof, which they reserved before in cups, otherwise they drink cowes milk.
One of the^ eats the lyce from another head, saying: thus will we do to our
enemies. It is an heinous thing with them to suffer any drink to be lost or
any meat, and therefore they cause no bones to dogs before that the marie be
taken away, and many other things are reported of them which Munster sets
forth more at large. In war they have swords of a yard in length, their
horsemen are very skilful in shoting, their princes never enter into war but
standinge a ^ar of, they cry unto their own company and exhort the^ if they se
any thing needeful. They carrye their wives and their children, because their
wives be attired like to men, and also images of men on horsbacke to their
wars that they might seem a great number and more terrible to their enemies.
They think no shame nor ignominy in flying, if it be necessary and expedient
so to do. If they get the victory they spare none, neither women, nor
children, nor old folks, they slay all saving crafts men and artificers whom
they reserve to their uses. They are very incontine^t, and therefore they take
as many wives as they will, and may sustain, and they except none, but the
mother, the daughter, and sister, and yet they be much given to the
Sodomiticall sin

They do not make account of any woman as of their wife, nor yet think her
worthy of dower before that she has brought forth a child, and therefore
they may refu^e her which is barrayne and take another. They which are taken
in adultery both man and woman are put to death by the law. Every wife hate
her mansion, her own family and lives very chastely. This nation observes
many supersticio^s No man make the vryne in his mansion, but if he does he is
^layne without pitye, if necessity compels him, then his ten and al things
therein are purged with fire after a curious sort. When they choose and elect
their prince, they mete together in a fair field, and then they set him in a
golden throne and chair, to whom the kingdom is due, either by succession or
by election, and falling down before him they cry all after this sort, with
one consent and a loud voice. We beseech, we will and command that thou bear
rule ^uer us. He answers: If you will have ^his done of me, it is necessary
that you ^e ready to do all that I shall command: when I call, to come, and
whyther soever I send to go, and to commit and put the whole rule into our
hands, When they ^aue answered we be ready. He says a^ayne: Therefore my
word shall be my ^worde, and all the people clap their han^es with great
rejoicing. Then the noble men take him from the regal seat, and make him to
sit softelye upon a cushin or ^ cloth laid upon the ground, saying thus: Look
up and acknowledge God, and look ^ownwarde to the cushin where thou sit, if
thou do well govern and rule, thou shall have al things according to thy
desire: but if thou doeste ill rule us, thou shall be brought so low and so
bare, that this small cushin wherein thou sit shall not be left thee, at the
which saying they adioyne unto him his dearest and best beloved wife, and
lifting them both up with the cushin, they salute him Emperor of al Tartarians
and her the Empress.

Then to such as be present of other nations, he commaunde^h gifts to be given
dute of hand. There is also all the treasure and Jewels which the late deceased
Emperor left, where with this new Emperor rewards every noble man, and
that which remains he commands to be kept to his own use. In his hands
and power al things be, and no man dare say this is mine, or his. No man
ought to tarrye in any part of the land but where he is assigned. His seal
that he uses has those words engraued. God in heaven and Chuithuth Cham on
the land the strenght of God and Emperor of men. He has five great robust
armies. Five Dukes with whose aid he inuadeth all that withstand him. He him
self speaks not to strange ambassadors, nor they come at any time into his
sight, except that they and their gifts be purged before hand of certain
women deputed to that purpose. He gives his answer by other mean persons to
whom, when and how long so ever he speaks, they ought to give ear upon
their knees bowed, and so atte^d that they err not in one word. It is not
lawful for any man to change the Emperors words, nor to go or do against
his mind and sentence by any means.

Of India.
IN the country of Inde, they have two Summers, their air is mos^e gentle and
pleasant and temperate, great fruitfulnes of the soil and plenty of waters,
and therefore some live an hundred and thirtye years especially the Musitanes.

There be others whose life is longer, there be marvelous great beasts bred
in that country, and trees of such height that a man cannot shote to the top
of the^, this comes by the fertility of the soyl^ temperatenes of the air,
and plentye of waters. Their reeds are of such bigness and length that the
space betwixt every knot, may bear three men, sometimes in a little river.
There be stoore of Parrats. It brings forth Narde, Cinam, Pepper, Calamus,
Aromaticus, and other spyces, and also diverse pearl and preciouse stones.
Pliny says that in the country of Inde, al things are bred of a greater
magnitude then in any other country as men, beasts, and trees. The people
have a bushie hear, and a special decking with precious stones, they are very
diverse in apparel, some wear woollen garments, and some linen, many go naked
and some cover their privy parts only. The color of the body is commonly
black, being in their mothers womb, such through the disposicion of their
parents, they be of a good talle statute and strong They be thriftye in living
and very continente from theft. They know no Letters but do all things by
memory, and for their simplicity and Thriftines al things have prosperous
success, they drink no wine but in sacrifice, they make drink of rice and
harlye, their me^te is commonly ryce pottage, they give no perogatiue to old
age except they excel in wisdom. He that is reprehended as a false witness,
has the tops of his fingers cut of, he that depriueth any man of any member,
has the law Talio, that is to lose the like member, and also his hand is cut
of. And if any man puts out the ^ye or cutteth away the hand of an
artificer, he loses his life for it. If any woman kills a drunken king, she
has her reward to be conjoined with his successor. There be seven special
orders amongst the Indians,. The first is of philosophers, which being few in
number were prefered before the rest in honor and dignity, they are free from
all works, and neither serve any body, nor govern or rule, they take such
things of pryuate folks wherewith they do sacryfice, and they have a care of
the dead, and especially kn^w what is done in hell, and therefore many gifts
and hono^rs are bestowed upon them, they profit much to the life of the
Indians, for they mete together in the beginning of the year, and fore tell
drought rain, winds, diseases, and other things y^ knowledge whereof is
profitable, that philosopher which forsheweth any thing that is false, has no
other punishmente, but to keep silence forever. The second order is of
husbandmen, which exceeding the rest in multitude being free from wars and
other works, do only bestow their time in tilling the ground, no enemy
offreth any injury to them, because they are thought to be occupied about the
common profit, they live in the fields with their wives and children, and
come not in to the city, they give tribut to the king, the ^ifte part of
their profit. The third order is shepeheards, which neither inhabit in
cities nor towns, but have their tabernacles and their nets and things for
huntinge, and these keep the country from the danger of beasts and fowls.
The fourth degree is of arti^^cers, whereof some makethe weapons, some other
things meet for the countrye^ and other profitable things, these be free
from tribute and have their corn from the prince. The fifth order is of
^ouldiers exercised in warlike affairs, and they and al their horses and
Elephants be maintained by ye prince The sixth is of superintendeutes, who seeing
al things that be done in India, make relacion thereof to the king. In ye
seventh order be those that have the rule of common counsels being but a few
in number and such as most excel in nobility and wisdom, for of these some
be chosen to the kings counsel, and to the administracion of the common
wealth, and to be judges in doutful cases, Dukes also and captains be chosen of
them.

Thus Inde being distribute into these parts it is not lawful for any order
to marry with the men's wives of an other order, nor to change his trade of
living, nor for the soldier to play the plowghman, nor the Artificer, to
meddle in the Philosophers office. And because Inde, is so great a country,
there be many nations discrepant in form and tongue, and manners, for some
inhabiting about rivers and lakes do eat raw fish, and others raw flesh,
and when any fal^eth sick, his friends kill him saying: that if he should
wither and pine away with sickness that his flesh would be corrupt, and
although he denies him self to be sick yet they kill him and make a ba^ket of
him so he that lives in perfect health to his old age is slain and devoured
in like manner. And therefore few of them come to extreme old age. There be
some of the Indians that never kill any living thing nor plant nor sow any
thing, nor erect any houses but lives only with herbs, amongst who^ when
any falls sick he goes into a desert place, and there dies, no man taking
care either of him dyinge or being dead, they use natural conjunction together
openly like unto brute beasts.

Of the Bragmans.
THE people called Bragma^ni lead a simple life and are not led with any
inticementes, they desire no more then very nature does require, they have
plenty of al things for life the which their earth brings forth without
tillage. Their tables be furnished with wholesome dishes. And therefore they
nether know diversities of names in sickness nor their kinds, but they have
good health very long. One desires no healpe of an other for they live in
common, amongst those that are equal, there is no place for envy seeinge that
none is superior, they have no judgments because they do nothing worthy of
correction, their only law is not to do any thing against nature, which
norisheth labor, exercisethe no covetousness, and flies from filthy I^lenesse.
This nation hurts it self in ^he son, it gets moisture in the dew, ^t
extinguisheth thirst with water. The ground is in steed of beds, carefulnes
breaks no sleep, nor pensiveness troubles not the mind, they dwell in
dug caves, upon mountains sides, they feel ^o rage of wyndes nor tempests,
they think them selves better defended in a cave then in an house, from the
injury of weather, because their cave has two uses, one for a mansion place,
another for a sepulture or grave, when they dye. They have no preciouse
garments, but they cover their members with a thing like paper, rather for
shamefastness then otherwise. The women be not trimmed as they please but they
are ignorant how to incre^se beauty more then Nature geeueth, ^he man and the
woman use natural conjunction, not for libidinouse pleasures, but for love of
procreation. No parente follows the funerales of his child, the^ have no
sepultures in churches for the dead, but in vessels made of preciouse stones
they lay up the ashes of the dead. Their best remedy in Physic is
abstinence and sparing which does not only cure their griefs, Abstine^ce
but also prevent those which might come, they have no common plays nor games,
but when they assemble together they read the monuments of things done,
wherein if they hear any^ thing to be laughed at, they weep, the^ are not
delighted in old fables, but in ye goodlye disposicion of natural things they
learn no eloquence, but have a sim^ple kind of speech, only commanding not
to lie.

Of the Elephant.
THere be Elephants in Inde, which be rery wild and fierce, but the^ are easly
made tame after this manner. They compass some clean place, ^ ^eepe dische of
four or five furlonges, ^ey make the entry into it with a very ^eyght
bridge, then set they in three or ^^re females Elephantes, which are ^^me, and
they them selves lie priuelye ^atchinge in cottages, in the day time ye ^^ld
Elephants come not, but in ye night ^^me they enter, the which place of the
en^^ie the hunters shyt and stop priuelye, after this they bring in of their
strongeste ^me Elephants, to fight with them, be^^des that, they do punish
them with fa^iue and lack of meat, and when they ^^e weary with fighting,
they which are old carterly fellows, privily gets under the belly of the
Elephant and so so^enly steals under the belly of the wild Elephant, and by
these means do chain ^^d fetter them, and after this they move their tame
Elephants to beat the wild ^ntil they fall to the ground, and when ^hey are
down, they bind their necks, ^ith the necks of the tame Elephantes, ^ith such
thonges and bindinges as oxe^ ^e bound with, and this do they that they ^^uld
not cast of such as sit them ^they cut ^^eir necks about with raysings and
scissures and lay the c^aynes thereon that for p^^ they should give place to
their chaine^ go quietly, of such as are taken they ch^ ^ut such as are
unprofitable, either for ^ age or young age and the rest be led i^ the stables,
and they being bound bo^ feet and necks to a pillar to be tante^ hunger.
After that they be refreshe^ grass or green wedes, then they tear^ them to
be obedient, some with word^^ some with singing, and some with dru^ be made
gentle. The Elephante is ^ greateste amongst al beasts, and comes nearest
to humane sense, he hat^ some understanding as Pliny says of h^ country
talk, and especially a reme^^braunce an^ obedience of such duties ^ he has
learned. If ye Elepha^t by chau^^^ kills any of their kepers in a rage, the^
have so great a desire of him afterwar^ that some for sorrow abstain from mea^^
and some do pine them selves to death This bea^t is accustomed when he is (...)
of feeding to go to sleep and leaning a tree he sleeps, for he cannot bend
hy^ knees as other beasts do, the inhabita^^ perceiving the tree which is
worn a^ ^^de filthy with the Elephants leaning ^use the same tree to be cut
hard by the ^ounde so that it may not fall without ^usting and enforcinge,
then they put a^y the signs of their own sleps and so ^part quickly before
the Elephant com^eth to ^^epe. The Elephant coming ^^ the evening to his
accustomed place of ^^ste, and leaninge to the tree with all the ^eight of his
body, falls down straight ^ay with the tree even to the earth, so he ^th with
his belly upward al night for ^^ cannot lift up him self, then comes ^e
inhabitants in the morninge and sle^^ the beast without danger.

^he Elephants have such a kind of sham^s^nes, that the male never covers the
^^male but in secret, and that when the ^^le is five years old, and the
female ^^ years of age, they bring forth as ^ares do and most commonly
about the ^^ing, many of them live almost two hu^^ed years, they have great
pleasures in ^od waters, they be most impacient of ^lde, the two teeth which
hang outward ^^e so byg in the greater Elepha^ts, that ^ey are used oftentimes
as posts. And many other things be written of their which I thought good to
leave oute^ tediousnes.

Of the Dragons in India and Ethiop^^
THE Dragon is the greatest of ^ serpents, and has sharp teeth ^ like a saw
fashion, he has great^ strength in his tail then in his teeth^ has not so
much poyso^ as other serpe^^ have, if he windeth his tail about an^ he s^ea^h
him, and the Elephant with ^ the bigness of his body is not safe from him, for
the dragon lurkinge about co^^mon paths where the Elephants use go, does
wind and knot his tail abo^^ the Elephants legs, and kills him^
suffocation. He is bred in Inde and Et^^ope. Plinye says in Ethiope there b^
Dragons of.xx. foot in length, they a^ wont xiiii or xv. together with their
be^des erected to fly over the sea and great waters, forsome better food, the
drag^ poison is only in his tongue and gall. Wherefore the Ethiopes cut away ye
to^ and eat the flesh. Pliny says that through ^he strength of poison his
^ong is alwais ^ift up, and some times through the he^te of poison, he
inflameth the air so that he seems to breath fire out of his ^outh, and
some times when he hisseth ^ith his contagiouse blast he infecteth y^ ^ire, so
that the pestilence comes ther^f many times. He is some times in the ^aters
and lies often in his den, he slea^eth seldom, but watches almost
con^inually, he deuoureth beasts and fowls ^is eye sight is very sharp, so
that in the ^ountaines he sees his pray a far of, of ^entimes. Betwixt the
Elephantes and Dragons there is continual war, for the Dragon claspeth about
the Elephant with ^er tail, and the Elephant ouerthrow^th ^he Dragon with her
feet and snout, the Dragon with the folding of her tail ^wisteth her self
about the Elephantes ^egs and so makes him to fall.

The Elephant saying a Dragon under a ^ree goes about to break ye tree to
give ^he Dragon a blow, the Dragon leapeth ^ppon the Elephant and desirous to
bite ^etwene the nosethrills and to make him ^linde, sometimes the Dragon
gets be hind him bytinge and sucking his blou^ with ye loss of which blood
the Elepha^t being weakened, after long conflicte falls upon ye dragon and
so dyinge sleeth his own murderer. The Dragon is very desirous of the
Elephantes blood, for the coldness of it, wherewith she desires to be cooled.
And many other strange serpents are in India as scorpions with wings and such
like, of whose natures I omit to write, because their forms be not known
unto us.

Of the Gryphin in India.
SOME say there is in India a Gryphin which is a kind of beast, with four fete
having wings and as mighty in strength as a lion, with crooked tallants, black
on the back, and in ye forepart Purple, his wings somewhat white, his bil and
mouth like an Egles bill, his eyes fiery, hard to be taken except he be young,
he makes his nest in high mountains, and fights with every kind o^ beast
saving the Lion and Elephant, he diggeth up gold in desert places, and gives
a repulse to those that come near him, he makes his nest of such gold as he
finds, and some say that it cannot be taken away without a thousand or two
thousand men, and that as well with danger as with gain. Thus much Aeli^nus
writes.

The notes of a good Horse.
THere be some that writes, that an horse should not be broken nor tamed
before two years of age. But that he is to be rubbed and chafed with
flattring and gentle words, and that his ^table should be laid with stone,
and to use him by little and little to go on the stones, that his feet might
be made strong At the beginning let not him that shall sit him or break be to
roughe, nor wearye him with running: let him prove him with turninge gently on
both sides, and not so much with spurrs as with the stick he must touch
him: the horse should be of one color, of a thick main and standing up, of
strong loins, of a short head, his neck must be erect and standing up, his
ears small according to the proporcion of his head, abroad breaste, a mean
belly, short hips, a large tail and somewhat curled, straight legs, equal
knees, steadfast hoofes and gross, not big nor small that they be not worn,
his legs must be well stuffed with bones and not with flesh, the notes and
signs of years, in horses, are changed with their bodies.

When a horse is two years and a half old, his middle teeth both above and
beneathe do fall, when he is three years old, he casts those that are like
unto dogs teeth, and brings forth new, before six years of age his upper
double teeth do fall, at the sixth year he supplyeth those yt he wants, at
the seventh year all are supplied equally, from that time he has hollow
teeth, and therefore it is hard to discern their ages, at the tenth year the
temples begin to wax hollow, and the brows sometimes wax graye, and their
teeth stick out. Mares have their full increase in five years, but horses in
six years. Xenophon teaches these properties to be observed in an horse.
First to know his age, then if he will take a bry^^l ^r no^^ after this if one
may sit him, then if he will cast him that sits on him and if he will fly or
run away being let lose, or if he may be sone taken, or if he being smitten
with a stick will go the swifter or not.

Of certain monstruouse people in India.
Many are found in India both men women and beasts full of hear, and with
leaves and moss on them, which comes of the great heat that there is.
Pliny says that the inahbitants of this country be colored with the son, and
there by come to certain blacknes like unto the Ethiopes, not because they are
outwardly so black through the adustio^ of the son, but naturally in their
blood there is an inclinacion to blacknes, ye which the heat of the son does
seem to double. Our ancestors have feigned many monsters in this country, as
people with heads like unto dogs armed only with ^ayles, clothed with hides
and skins, having no kind of man's speech but only a kind of barking.
There be some that live at the fountain of Ganges, which take no benefit by
meat but live only by the savor of wild apples, and when they go far they
carrye them for their maintenance, and live by the smell and savor of them. If
they come into any filthy or stin king air, they must needs dye, and it is
said that some of them were seen in the tents and army of Alexander.

We read also that there be certain people with one eye in India, and some to
have so great ears that they hang down even to the feet, and many to have
but one foot, and that so great that when they lie down on their backs and
would keep them from the son, the shadow of that only leg does comfort
them. It is read also that there is a nation which has graye hears in
youth, the which in age waxes black, and also men say there is an other kind
of women which conceive at five years of age, but they live not above eight
years, there be some yt lack necks and have eyes in their shoulders, there
be wild men also with beads like unto dogs, with a rough and heary body
which make a terrible hissinge, but these and such like are not to be credited
and taken for truth, except great reason can persuade that such may be and
experience can prove the same. It is also thought that there is a certain people
called Pygmeis which be never in peace but when the cranes with whom they have
continual wars, Pigmeis.
fly into other countr^^s, these Pygmeis are short men of stature inhabiting
in the extreme part of ye mountains of India, where is a wholesome and good
air, who excede not.xxvii. inches in stature. For Pygmeis as much to say as a
cubite. These Pygmeis fight with Cra^es, but they have the foil, the report
goes that they sit upon the backs of rams or goats, and have arrows for
their weapons, and so in the spring time with a great army they come to the
sea, and there consume the Cranes eggs and young ones, and that this expedicion
is made in three months, for otherwise they were not able to resist ye
cranes, their cottages be made of clay, feathers, and egg shells But of the
nature of Cranes the authors write in this manner. Cranes^
When the Cranes take a flight, they consent together and fly very high for
to mark and behold, they chose a captayn and guide whom they follow, in the
later end of the company they have those that may cry, and may lead the whole
flock with their voice, they have their watches every night by turn which
hold a stone in their feet which fallinge from those that are wearye, for
lack of sleep argues and reproves their negligence by sound, the other
slea^e with their bills and heads under their wings standing upon each feet by
course, the guide looks forth with his neck straight forward and forsheweth
things to come. When they are made tame they wax lasciuiouse, and run and
fly in round compasses with shaking their wings.

See more strange things in Munster concerning this matter.

Of the Antes of India.
MEga^thenes writes of the Antes in India after this sort, there is an hill of
three thousand furlonges in compass in India, and many gold mines therein, the
which are kept with ants as byg as foxes, getting their living with a
merueilous celeritie in hunting, Antes as big as foxes.
they dig and s^rape the earth that brings forth gold, and heapeth it up at
ye hole of their dens, the which marchaunts do prive lie steal away, laying
flesh for a bayt to stay the ants if perhaps they should mark them. This is
thought of many to be a fable, and there fore I leave it at large to judge of
it as you think best.

Of Indian Apes.
ABout the mountains called Emodii there is a great wood full of great Apes,
the which as the Macedonians did se standing as it were thick together upon the
hills, and having weapons like men of war, for that kind of beast comes as
near to humane subtilitie as Elephants do, they would have set upon them as
ennemies, had not the inha^itantes of the country been present and showed unto
Alexander that it was nothing but an assemble of apes, which contend to
imitate such things as they see, and so that battle was turned to laughinge.
Apes are taken after this manner they that hunt apes, set dishes full of water
in the sight of the apes, and therewith they annointe and wash their eyes, and
suddenly with as priuye speed as they can, they take away the water and set
pots with birdlime, and such like stuff instead there of, the apes perceiving
them anointinge their eyes, being given to follow al things, come down
immediatlye from the trees, and thinking to do as the men did, they dawbe and
annoynte their eyes and mouths with birdlime, and so are they easy to be made
a pray and taken alive. They use also an other trade to take them They take
buskins and put them on in ye sight of the apes and so depart, leaving others
anointed inwardlye with birdelyme and and such like, and some what heary that
the fraud might not appear the which the apes pluckinge upon their legs are
so snared and entangled with yt, that they cannot escape the hands of the
hunters. There is in India also dogs of such courage, that two of them can
master a Lion.

Of the Diamond stone.
THe Diamonds be found amouge^^ the metals of India, Ethiope, Araby, Macedony,
Cyprus, and many other places. The Indian Diamonde shines with a more
orientnes then the others. There is one kind of this stone yt is somewhat of
an iron color, and differs not much from a crystal in color, for commonly
it is somewhat white, but it is harder then crystal, so that if it be laid
upon the Smythes anuile and most ^ehemently beaten with an hammer, rather the
anuile and the hammer will bre^ke asunder then that will be divided into parts,
and it does not only refist the blows of iron, but also the heat of fire, so
that it will not melt or give place thereto, for if we may geeue credit to
Pliny, it ^il never wax warm, and that because ^t cannot be more pure then it
is, for it is ^euer contaminate. But yet the strange ^ardnes of this stone, is
made so soft with ^he warm blood of a Lion, or a Goat, that it may be broken.
In scalding leadd (...) takes such heat that it may be dissolved: but this
hardness is not in every Diamonde, for that which is of Cyprus or called
Syderites, may be broken with a maitet, and pierced through with an other
Diamond. The Diamond does deprehend and detect poison and makes ye working
thereof frustrate, and therefore it is be^tre^ of Princes, and hadd in great^
price and estimacion.

Of Cal^chu^ the famou^e Mart of India.
THe compass of the city of Cale^chut is the space of six thousand
buildings, which be not joined together as our houses be, but are separate a
good space a sunder, the length of the city is a thousand paces, their
houses be very low, so that they are not above the heighte of a man on horse
back from the ground, they be covered in the topp with voughes and branches
of trees commo^lye. Their king is addict to the worshippinge of devils. He
do^the not deni^ God to be the maker of heaven and eart^ and the first cause
and author of things, but the says that God appointed the office of judgment
to an ill spyrit and to do right to mort^l men, and this spyrit they call
Deumo. The king has the picture of this devil in his chapel, sitting with a
diadem an his head, like unto the bishops of a Rome, but this diadem has
four hor^es about, and this picture gapethe with a wide mouth shows four
teeth. It has a deformed nose, grim and terrible eyes, a threatening
countenance, cro^ed fingers, with tallants and feet much like unto a cock,
they that look upon this horrible monster, are suddenly a fraid, it is so
loathsome and terrible a thing to behold. About the church are painted
devils, and in every corner Satan is made of brass sitting, with such
workmanship that he seems to cast flames of fire for ye consuming of so^les
miserablye, and in his right hand the picture of the devil, puts a soul to
his mouth, and with his left hand it recheth another. Every morninge their
priests do cleanse this Idol with rose water and other sweet waters, and they
perfume it with diverse sweet things falling down and worshippinge (...).
They put the blood of a cock weekelye in a silver vessel filled wi^h burninge
coals and a great number of sweet perfumes, and taking a cens^r they make it
redolent with frankincense, and have a little silver bell ringing all the while.
And the King eats no mea^e before that iiii. priests have offered unto the
devil somewhat of the kings dishes. The king at his dinner ^^tteth on the
ground without any cloth under hint, and the priests stands round about him
as he sytteth, neue^ coming nerer him, their within four pa^^s marking the
kings words most re^er^^^lye, when he has done eatinge y^ (...) ^he
relicques of the kings meat to young crows and birds, to be eaten, which
foul is an ^ey^ous thing to ^^ll, and therefore they ^lye every wherein safety.
When the (...) m^rieth a wife ^e ^seth not to go to be^ unto her, before that
this new married wife has been de^^loure^ of the most worthy pryeste. For
this who^edome the king gives him as a reward five hundred crowns.

The pryestes are in the first order of estymacion with them, then senators
which bear a sword and a buckler, a bow and a Iaueline, when they go abroad.
Thirdlye they esteem artificers. Fourthly fyshers. Fyftlye merchants for wine,
peper, and acornes, Last of al such as sow and gather ryce. They have no great
respect of apparel but to cover their priuye parts, they go barefoote and
barehead. When the king is dead, if there be any males aline etherchyldren,
brethren, or brothers children, they succeed not in ye kingdom but the sin^ers
son by their law must have the scepter, and if there be no such then he
succedeth in the crown which is nearest of consangninitie, and this is for
none other cause, but because the priests have defloured their queen.

When the king goes forth into some strange country, or to hunt, the
priests keep the queen company at home, and nothing can be more acceptable to
the king then that they should be acqueynted with the queen, in venereouse
acts, and therefore the king knows for a certaintye yt those children which
he has by his wife cannot be accounted his children, but he takes his sisters
children as most near unto him in lawful cons^guinitye, and takes them heirs
to the crown.

The merchants keep this order, such wives as they have, they may change them
in the color of a better conjunction, and the ^^e says to the other, seeing
tha^ you have been my best friend let us change our wives, Change of vviues.
upon that condition that you may have mine and I may have youres. Then says
the other: say you so in earnest, yea: says he by Pollux. Then ^ayth his
fellow let us go home to my house, whether when they are come the one
claymeth the others wife, saying: come hither woman and follow this man because
from hence forth he shall be thy husband, then the woman says do you speak in
earne^t, to whom her first husband says I do not mock, then the woman
says, gladly I will follow him. And this is ye way of changing their wives.
There be some women in this country that may mary seven husbands, and lie with
them every night by course, and where she is delivered of a child she may
choose to which of her husbands she will father her child, so that the man
may not refuse it by any means. Many other strange things is rehearsed of
this nation, the rehearsal whereof were very tedyouse here. There is much Peper
growinge in this country of Calechut, Pepper.
the stalk of pepper is but weak somewhat like to a vine stalk so yt it
cannot grow without a prop, it is not much unlike to yuie, for it wyndeth and
creeps as that does, and with a more deep claspinge it wyndeth about the
tree, this has many branches three handful long. They gather it in October
and November being grene as yet and lay it on tiles in the son, to be dried
wherein iii. days space it waxes black even as we have it.

Ginger growethe in Calechut, but much is brought out of Crauonor, thither,
Spyces.
Cynamon is in the Isle of Zaylon fyftie German miles beyond Calechut. Pepper
growethe in the fyeldes of Calechut, but great store is brought out of
Corimucol xii. miles beyond Calechut Cloves are gathred in a place called
Meluza a little from Calechut. Nutmeggs grow in Melaccha which is a great way
from Calechut. Musk or Castoreu^ comes from the country of Pego which is an
hundred miles from Calechut. Pearl and preciouse stone are found about the
city of Ormus, and sent to Calechut the general mar^ of all the East parts.
And many other spices silks and strange things are brought from these
countries into ours.

Of the bridges in Singui and Quinsai.
THere be numbered in the City of Singui about six thousand bridges of stone,
having so large arches yt great ships may pass through without bendyng of
the maste. There is another cittye called Quinsay in Asia which contains in
the circuit of it above an hundred Italian miles which make.xxv. German
miles, it is thought to be the greatest and most notable city in ye world It
has twelve thousand bridges of stone so high and large, that a ship may
pass upright through them.

Of certain illusions of Devils about Tangut.
THere is seen and heard about ye deserts of Tangut in the day time and
more commonly in the night diverse illusions of devils. Therefore trauelers that
way ought to take good head that they sauer not their companies, and least any
coming behind might hinder them, for, otherwise they shall sone loose the
sight of their companions for the hills and mountains. There be heard ye voices
of spirits and devils, which going solitarilye will call others by their names,
fayninge and counterf^yting the voices of their companions, the which, if they
can by any means, do lead men out of ye way to destruction There be hard some
times in the air the consents and harmonye of music instruments. There be
many worshippers of Idols, and they attribute much honor to the devils.

When their wives have a son, they commend him to some Idol, and in the honor
of it that year, the father keeps up a ram, the which a year after the
nativity of the child, at the next feast of that ydoll, he offr^th with his
son, and ma^ye other ceremoni^s. When the sacry^ice is done, they bring the
flesh which was offered to some certain place, and al his kinsfolks gathered
together, do eat of that with great devotion, keeping the bones reverently in
some vessel. In this country is found a Serpent called Salamandra, Salamandra.
which lives in the fire without any damage, those serpents are used for the
making of such cloth as may suffer ye fire without any corruption or harm, or
else when any spot comes to any garment, made of the hears of a Salamander,
yt may be cast for an hour in the fire, Garments, that will not be consumed
with fire.
and all the spots will be gone, no otherwise then if they had been very clean
washed.

Of the Cocatrice.
THere is in Afric a kind of Serpent called a Cocatrice, which has a white
spot in his head, having ye fashion of a Diadem. His head is very sharp,
his mouth red, his eyes somewhat black in color, as Pliny says with his
hyssinge he drives away all kind of serpents. He destroys with his breathe
young trees and plants, consumes herbs, break the stones, and infecteth the
air where he taryethe, so that a bird can not fly over that air or
through it without danger of death. Yet it is said that the poyso^ of a
Weasel is his destruc^ion. Achanus says that he has so sharp poison that
exceeding not in length a man's hand, yet he extinguisheth every great
serpent with his only breath. There is not a more hurtful or more pestilent
beast upon the earth, for this lying in his den may destroy a wholl cittye by
infection.

Of the Crocodile.
THe Crocodile is found commonly about ye water of Nilus and Ganges in India,
and waxes of a little thing to a very great beast. For his eggs are much like
unto goose eggs, but the young which comes of them takes increase to
sixtene or eyghtene cubits in length he lives almost as long as a man, he
lacks a tongue, his body is meruelouslye defended of nature, for all his back
is full of scales and wonderful hard, his tail is long, he has many teeth on
both sides of his mouth, whereof two do especially ha^g out, he does not only
devour man, but also other earthly beasts coming nere to the water, he
dismembreth them with his nails, which he has sharper the^ any weapon.
His bytinge is cruel and sharp, and he so rendeth with his teeth, yt it can
never be healed, there is great store of them about Nilus, because they are
very fruitful of themselves, having young every year, and also they are
seldom taken. It is a fearful beast flying from those that persecute him, and
persecuting those that fly away from him. It is said that when he goes
about to devour a man that he begins to weep, where of has sprung this
proverb. The tears of a Crocodile: that is when one doothe weep with his eyes
without compassion, and not with his heart and mind.

Plinye says that this beast only in his ^yting does move his upper iawe,
he lives in the day ty^e upon the land, and in the night time in the
water, his eyes be very dull in the water, and his sight is ^erueylous sharp
out of the water.

^ome say that he grows and increases as long as he lives.

Young fowls hatched and brought forth without the dammes, and females.
FOelix Vlmen^is and Britenbachius writethe in their books of common
peregrinacion and traueyle, that in Alexandria and in Egypt, there be Ouens
made full of holes, where in are laid three or four thousand eggs, some of geese
some of hens, some of pygeons, some of duckes, and that they are hydden and
covered in dung, and that whotte coals are set a far of about the dunge, so ye
through the temperate heat of these things, the eggs by little and little wa^e
warm in the dung even as it were under the hen. And at leng^h the young are
hatched and brought forth, so that they come by flocks out of the dung, and
from thence are taken and led a broad to be fed at lybertye.

The Rites and Manners of the Egiptians.
THere Egiptians were almost ye first in the world, whereof other nations
learned and took their laws, wisdom, manners, and living, and we read that
for learning sake Homer, Dedalus, Solo^ Plato, and many other went thither.

For although they were gentiles and not beleeuyng on God, yet they studied
much for honesty and goodness, and with their honest conuers^cion did allu^e
strangers and good men to come unto them, and to learn that which they could
not find in other places. Their women in times past did use merchandise and
all things appertayni^ge to chapmen, the men did we^ue and spyn within the
house, and ca^ye burdens on their heads, the which the women did use to hear
on their should^^s, the m^n did make ^ryne s^ttyng, but the women ^id
contrary. They did disc^arge their bellyes at home, b^t their b^nkets they
kept in high ways, they molded br^^d with their feet, and stired their
claye with their ^andes. They did use to write after the Hebrew fashion
begynni^g their letters on the right hand. When any of them met together at
dyn^er or supper, before they departed, there came in one that brought a
picture of a dead man, upon a staff made of wood of a cubite length or
somewhat more, and showed it to every one of the gestes, saying: behold and
look upon this, drink and be refreshed with pleasure, for such one shall thou
be after thy death. Their laws were such, that perjured men lost their
lives, as thought they had been giltye of two offenses: the one of violating
pietye toward God, the other of breakinge faith and promise amongst men,
which is the surest knot of humane society. If any traueyler found any man
beaten of thieves and would not help him if he could he should be found
culpable of death, if he were not able to help him, he was bound to detect
the thieves, and to follow the action against them: and ^e that did neglect to
do this, was punished with certain strypes, and kept without meat for three
days. If any father killed his sonne^ there was no punishment of death
appointed but for three day^s and nights concti^ually he was commanded to be
about the dead body, for they thought it no just thing to take away life
from him that gave life to his children, but rathe^ that he should be punished
with continual pain and repentance of his fact, that others might fear to do
ye like. Parricides they ^aused to be burned upon an heap of thorns, and
such as vttred any secrets to their enemies, they caused their tongues to be
cut out. And they that did counterfayte or clyp money had both their hands cut
of so that with what part of the body the offense was made, with the same he
should tolerate punishment. If any had violated a free woman, his natural
parts were cut of, because in one fault he committed three heinous things,
that is an iniurye, corruption and confusion of children. He that was taken in
voluntarye adultrye hadd a thousand ^^ripes with rods, and the woman was
ma^gled upon the nose. The prie^ts could have but one wife, but the laytye as
many as they could keep.

The bringing up of their children was with small cost, for it came not unto
the charge of twenty gr^ates the (...) education to their full ^ge, and this
is not to be^ m^rueyled at, because Egipte is a hot country, and therefore
they live naked without any kind of garmente, and they feed upon rotes, the
which they eat sometimes raw, and somtymes roasted, in imbers. The priests did
teach their children especially Geomatrie, and Arythmeticke. They did drive
away sickness either with fasting or with vomit, the which they used every
third day. Their opinion was that all diseases came of superfluity of
meats, and therefore that to be the best cure, which took away the matter
and causes. Many other strange things are at large sei forth of this nation
by Munster.

Of the Ostrydge.
THE Oystridge found especially in Africa, his head is covered with small
hears, his eyes be gross and black, his neck is long, his byl is short and
sharp, his feet has as it were a bypartite ^oofe. Pliny faith that he
exceeds the ^right of a man on ^orsebacke, and that his wings help him
little. But with his nails which are like hoofes, he takes stones and
throwethe against those which persecute him: he doothe digeste whatsoever he
deuoureth be it never so hard. He is of a meruaylous folishnes, for if he
has once hidden his head under a bushe he thinks him self safe and not to
be seen. It is said to be a simple and forgetful thing, and that as soon as
it has brought forte eggs, it forgets them, until the young comes forth,
which is thought to be easlye done, because they leave the eggs in the warm
sands, so yt the young may sone be hatched, the which the males do feed and
cherishe when they are brought forth.

When he sees that he cannot avoid taking, he casts stones against his
followers, and many times hurts them. His nest is commonly found in the
^and well made with bulwarks and banks, to keep away ray^e from the young.

Of the Empire of Cathay.
THe Empire of Cathay is ruled by the great Cham. With this nacio^ one man may
have many wives, and when the husband dies, every wife pledeth her own cause
before the judges, and shows her merits, so that which of the^ so ever is
adjudged to have been the most officiouse and dearest wife to her husband, she
in her best apparel and with all her jewels, as though she had gotten the
victory of the other, goes willynglye and merelye unto the heap of wood where
her husband shall be burnt, and lyinge down by his carcass and embracinge it
the fire is kindled, and so she is burnte with her husband: the other of his
wives after this live in great shame and obloquye. They match not together
for wealth or nobilitye, but for excellencye of beauty and procreacio^ sake.
The people of Cathay have this opinion that they think no other nation to see
with both eyes but the^ selves, they are persuaded also that they excel all
other in subtilitye of arts and scyences. It is a white kind of people,
without beardes, of small eyes, and lackinge true piety and due obeisance to
God: for some of them worship the Son, some the moon, others certain
immages of mettalls, and other some an ox, so that they be full of monstrous
supersticion. The Emperor keeps his court at his city called Cambalu,
which is the noblest mart in that part of the world, for there is almost
never a day through out ye year, but that a thousand carte lodes of silk
almost are changed and brought there amongst merchants. The Emperor keeps
in his court twelve thousand horsemen to keep his body. Their order of
watchinge is thus. One captain with three thousand gardeth the king wtin the
Palace for three days, and so does another, other three days following, and
thus they keep their courses. When the Emperor sittethe down to meat, he
has his principal and greatest queen on his left hand, and his children
which be of royal blood on his right hand in a lower place. No man that
sits down in this halle, drinks or is served in any other vessel but of
Gold, the princes and noble men that serve the king at his meat, cover their
mouths with most fine silk clothes, least they should breath upon the kings
meat or drink, and when the Emperor takes the pot to drink, all the
musicians begin to make great melodye, and the others ministers bend their
knees. More of this nation you shall find in the great book of Munsters
Cosmographye.

Of the Canniballs.
THE Canniballs are wild people feeding upon man's flesh which is a very sweet
kind of flesh. If they get or find any children within the age of fourtene
years, they feed them and cra^me them as we do Capons, but those which are
beyond fourtene years of age, they kill them out of hand, deuouringe their
whot guts immediately, and the other parts of their bodies they salt and lay up
as we do powdered flesh, they eat no women but keep them only for the
bearinge of children, as we do hens for eggs.

If any for age is past child bearinge, she does all drudgery like unto a bond
woman they have no houses, but they erect many trees together, and so combine
them in ye top that it serves for lodginge. Their beds be made of silk and
hay, they have no iron, but they use bones instede of yro^ they dress their
meats in earthen pots, mingling ye flesh of Parats, geese, ducks and man's
flesh together. They are now come to moore ciuilitye then they had in times
paste.

Of the Lion.
Lions live in many countries, in Africa they have a cruel and terrible look,
and thyn hears. Pliny thinks that his especial valiencye is, when his main
covers his neck and shoulders^ In Africa for the scarcetie of waters many
wild beasts meet together at some one puddle, where, females and males of
diverse kinds use natural conjunction, whereof comes monstruouse young.
Ar^stotle says that the she Lion has at her first generation five young and
that every year after she brings forth less by one^ until she wax barren
and that her young are without shape or fashion, about the bigness of a weasell.

Herodotus and Gellius thinks the contrary, that she brings forth one
every year. Democritus says that this beast only, is bred and brought forth
with open eyes, and that he is given to little sleep, as it may appear, because
h^s tail is often wagginge as he sleeps. The male Lyo^ makes vryne like
unto a Dog, which is strong in sauoure. The Lions drink seldom, they feed
every other day, after sacietie they be without meat for.iii. days, they
devour such things as they can whole, they live long. The Lion only of al
fierce and cruel beasts, shows clemencye towar^es the humble: for he spares
the prostra^e, and when he rages he uses his violence rather against men
then women. He never vttreth his force against infants and children, but being
driven with great famine there to. His tail is a note of his mind and
stomach, (as the ears be in a horse) for if his tail stirs not he is
gentle and peaceable, yt which is a rare thing, for he is most co^monlye
angry. He keeps his desire of revenging long against any man or bea^^ that
has hurt him, being wounded he does merueilously note and mark him yt gave
the wou^d, and in a great multitude will invade him. His bones are sound and
not holowe, whereof some wrytes that out of his bones fire may be stryken as out
of stones, and therefore sometimes he is so ragynge with anger, and in such
burning heat that he dies presently. He is never exasperate nor moved, but
either by famyn or hurt. This one thing is to be noted in so crnell a beast,
that wheels runned about, and emptye carts, and the combs, and singinges of
cocks doothe make him a fearde, but especially he is a fearde of fire.

Of the People called the Nigrites and others.
THere is a kind of people nighe unto the confynes of the weste Arabians
called Azaneg^, whose color is betwixt black and ash color, they live with
barlye, and dates, and Camel^ milk, and because they are near unto the
Nigrites, they feed sometimes upon diverse kind of pulse, they be no great
feeders, for the scarcity of victuals makes them to suffer and tolerate much
famine. The Portugalls use marchaundise with them in these our days.

They cover their heads with a linen roller, whereof one part hangs down
by the foreheade, so that they cover all their mouth there with. For they are
almost as much ashamed to show their mouths as their priuye parts, and
therefore they keep their mouths close never opening them except it be to
take meat, and that because they would not let any filthy air and vapoure
to slip out there by. They do greatly esteem fat and corpulent women, and
such as have large and fair breasts and dugs.

Within this country the traueyle of six days Journey will bring a man to a
place called Tagaza, from whence is brought much plenty of Salt the which
is carried away upon Camels backs into diverse places and especially to the
kingdom called Melli. The people called Mellitae be some what beyond the
Equinoctial and have most fervent heates, and therefore at certain times in
ye year their bloudde is infected, so that if they had no remedy by salt,
they could not live by any means, their salt is divided into such lumps,
that one salt stone is enough to be borne upon one man's shoulders. But when
they come to the country called Melli, they lode one Camel with two salt
stones, as for the po^rer sort that are not able to have Camels they carry their
salt upon their shoulders and some upon their heads, and that in such a
company, that they seem almost in multitude, like unto an army of men. This
salt they bring unto a great water where every one discharges his burden of
salt upon the land, and makes gre^te hylls thereof, leaving a certain sign
for the true knowledge of every manns he^pe, this done they depart: and then
^ommethe the Nigrites who will not be known, nor yet talk with any other kind
of people, they come near with their ^hips, and where they see and perceive
ye he^pes of salt, they lay great store of Gold nighe unto every heap of
Salt, even as they think it convenient for the merchandise, and agreeable to
equity for the eschaunge, and then they depart leaninge the gold and salt
together.

The Nigrites which went a far of return again, and every one looks upon
his own heap, and if the gold that was left by it pleases him, and seems
sufficient for the eschaunge, then he takes the said gold away, leaving the
salt behind him and not mindinge to return again. If the heap of gold
doothe not seem unto them sufficient for the eschaunge of the heap of salt,
then they leave both still, and depart again into some secret place mindinge
to come again within a little after. But those Nigrites which cannot abide to
be known, come again to the said place, and take away such heaps of salt
as they see the gold to be taken from, or else they add a little more gold
to the heap that was left before, or other wise they carrye away their Gold,
leauinge the salt still if the bargayne please not them. And this do they use
their merchandise, so that the one sees not another, and that by an old
custom.

It is a great labor with these Nigrites to carry their salt upon their
shoulders because they lack all manner beasts, meet for that carryage
almost, the which comes through the v^fruitfulne^ of the earth, for they
have very little store of Gra^^e, and that which they have, is pestilence also,
and therefore they daily ^rinke water, wherein a little Salt has been
resolved, and this is their greateste remedy and most especial medecin.

They never have no rain but in August September, and October.

But these men that come after this sort and eschaunge Gold for salt,
without any talk of bargain or sale, are thought to be meruailouse black,
having their lower lip hanging down to the breas^ somewhat read, and within
excoriate and chapped so that blood comes out, but the upper lyppe is ^mall
like unto ours, and for this cause all their teeth may be seen, which are a
great deals bigger then ours, their lyppes are also thought to putrify many
times for the heat of th^^r country, for the remedy where of they use the
benefit of salt.

Of Preto Johannes Land.
THe rule and dominion of Preto Ihon is large and of great compass, this
country excels in riches, in gold s^luer, and preciouse stones Some say yt
the Ethiopes living under Presti Ihoan, are very good Christians, and that
forty kings do homage and obeizaunce to the Emperor Presti Ihoan, where of
^ome be tributarie also to him.

The great Almener of Presti Ihoan promises himself to fight for the Holy
land It is written that Thomas the Apostle, was buried in the kingdom of
Ethiopia There be beasts also in this country yt have seven horns, in their
fore heads. There be white Camels, and white Bears, and horses with two
horns. It is said also that there be birds or fowls in this country,
which with their tale^ts and nails, will carry away an Ox, or an horse, to
feed their young. In some parts of this country, it is thought that there be
men with horns, and such as have but one eye before them and two eyes
behind them, and some people that feed (...) ^^eir own paren(...) ^ho^e which
are aged. (...) kind of people yt has feet (...)se ^eete and very round.
Th^^^ women dwell seuerallye and they have three kingdoms. The three queens of
the Amazones set forth and make prepara^ion to wars with three h^ndred
thousand soldiers of women.

The Pigmeis in Africa be good christians. The king of the Pigmeis war the
against fowls which destroy fruit and his people drives them away with
their voices. It is said also that there be certain monsters which above the
^oyne^ are seen fourmed like unto men, and beneathe the loins unto horses. The
Et^^opians have an artificiouse way to take Lions and unicorns. There have
been seen in times past Giantes of three score and ten cubits in compass,
and now in these days it is said that many great^ Gyantes be there seen of
thirty and five cubits in height. The bird which is ^alled a Phoenix, and
lives the hundred years and more, is said to be set on fire, and burnt
through the heat of the ^o^n^


