A DIRECT ANSWER UNTO THE SCANDALOVS EXCEPtions, which Theophilus Higgons has
lately objected against D. Morton. In the which there is principally discussed,
Two of the most notorious Objections used by the Romanists, viz. 1. M. Luthers
conference with the devil, and 2. The sense of the Article of Christ his
descension into hell.

JOB. 31. v. 35. 36. Though mine adversaries would write a book against me,
Would I not take it upon my shoulder, and bind it as a crown unto me?

LONDON, Printed for EDMUND WEAVER. 1609.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE RAPH LORD EVRE; LORD PRESIDENT OF the Principality,
Dominion and marches of Wales, and Lord Lieutenant of the same.
THe many tokens of that interest, which by your favor (right Honorable) I
have in your favor, has thus emboldened me in this little Treatise to
manifest my due acknowledgement of your Lordships love toward me, but much
more unto the truth of Christ, which does ennoble you both in the sight of
Angels and of men. 1. Cor. 1. 2.
Not many nobles, says the Apostle, (but he adds) according unto the flesh;
that we should not wonder at this defect, but deplore it: for we know that the
Spirit of Christ which called the faithful of Thessalonica Act. 17. 11.
noble, because of their diligent study in the sacred Scriptures, and zealous
inquisition of the truth of the Gospel, does teach us to esteem of all such
as the offspring of right Nobility, which issues not from generation but
from regeneration; the praise and glory whereof is not of men, but of God. My
special intendment in this dedication (right Honorable) was to give your
Lordship notice what kind of conflicts I am daily to expect, seeing that after
the assault of a Moderator, and a Mitigator, now one T. H. a Motioner is sent
to insult upon me, under a pretense of charging me with falsifications. But how
far my disposition has been from this wickedness, I have presumed to
appeal unto your Honors experience. What my desert is, the examination of his
particulars will best discover, which I refer unto the equanimity of your
Lordships censure; submitting my self either unto the abalienation of your
Honorable favor, or else your further approbation of me, according as I shall be
found in these points innocent or obnoxious. Our Lord Jesus preserve your
Honor unto the glory of his saving grace.

Your Lordships in all due thankfulness, TH. MORTON.

To the Reader.
THe special occasion of this Answer (Christian Reader) was in thy behalf,
lest thou should stumble upon me, as upon a Falsificator, who profess my
self a publisher of truth. I have read my Adversary his pretended Motives,
and have since also understood of his true motions, which occasioded him to
revolt; and comparing them together, I could not but reckon him among the
number of that people, who (as histories relate) did first execute men, whom
they called Malefactors, and then afterward examined their cause. For if T. H.
had not first run out in a passion, and afterward devised pretext of Reasons,
which he calls his Motives, the law of charity and of humanity would have
challenged him to have consulted with those Authors whom he does impugn, with
whom the Motioner did then stand in the terms of brotherhood. As for my self,
I perceive he has read my Apology, in which there are many hundreds of
testimonies alleged out of the Romish writers, wherein they are found to
contradict one another almost in every question, and to convince their own men
of manifest slanders against Protestants, and almost in every Article to
justify the grounds of our Religion: out of all which M. Higgons has singled
out only five, which (it may seem) he thought to be more singularly false
then any others. These have I examined, and after due trial am now provoked to
expostulate the matter with my Adversary, as Jacob did with Laban, saying:
Genesis 3. 1. v. 36. 37.
What have I trespassed, what have I offended, that thou have pursued after me?
Seeing thou have searched all my stuff, what have thou found (suffer me to
change a word) to charge me withal? Put it here before thy brethren and mine
(either Protestants or Romanists) that they may judge between us both. I can
say no more, but laying open the parcels, wish that the Brethren of both sides
would judge between us: and both are in some sort chargible hereunto, not
only by my Adversaries challenge, who intitleth this part of his book thus,
Try before you trust; but much more by the Apostles authority, exhorting all
men (concerning things of this nature) to 1 Thessalonians. 5. 21.
Try all things, and to keep that which is good. The Lord Jesus bless us,
and by his preventing Grace prepare us always for a comfortable appearance
before him in the great day of Trial.

Thy friend and servant in Christ Jesus, TH. MORTON.

A DIRECT ANSWER UNTO THE SCANDALOVS EXCEPTIONS WHICH Theophilus Higgons has
lately objected against D. Morton.
Theoph: Higgons.
THE PREFACE.
IF you consider the Sea before page 147.
deliberation of D. MORTON in the contexture of his APOLOGY, or his Ibid. and
page 99.
pretended sincerity therein, it may seem very strange, that this work,
which was borne after so long travel, should be surcharged with impertinent
trifles, or subtle collusio^s, or malicious untruths.

The Answer.
I doubt not but my sincerity will indeed seem strange unto any that shall
consider aright with what insinceritie and impiety it is impugned.

T. H.
For which respects, Defens. Bellarm. page 435.
James Gretzer (a very noble author) has exorned it with a special encomion:
viz. Hoc opus. etc.

This censure, because it proceeds from an adversary (and a IESVITE also;
with whose order, it pleases D. Morton to contend more eminently, then with
any other) may peradventure seem unjust; but yet the equity of it, or
credibilitie (at the least) may appear unto you by the sequel, which, being a
part, does delineate the condition and quality of the whole.

The Answer.
I cannot envy James Gretzer your exornation, of a very noble, if you add,
Rayler: for although I have seen many Doctors, yet never read I of any other
that was professor in that kind; whose only phrases and emblemes of uncivil
Rhetoric used against learned Protestants, in that one book here cited by
you, I have seen collected into such a swelling bulk, as may bewray that your
noble Author in writing it, labored of a tympanie; which since has been so
skilfully vented by the reasons of a learned Sibrandus Lubbertus in his
Replication against that cited book of Gretzer.
Protestant, that we stand in good hope of his better temper hereafter.
Concerning whose censure of me, you have said in my behalf, that it proceeds
from an Adversary, whom my self might have incountred with by the testimony
of a friend, even of his own Nation, The same Lubbertus with his own hand.
Omnes docti, qui hic sunt, etc. but I abhor this folly. Yet I wish that I
had been so much beholde^ unto you, M. Higgons, as to have examined the
particular exceptio^s which James Gretzer has taken against me, and to have
noted any one thing, wherein I have been justly charged of subtle collusion, or
of malicious untruths. I should think that you were unwilling to do me this
disgrace, but that I find by your practice how now adhering unto them, who hold
it a Catholicisme to brand me with only an imaginary imputation, you have
honored your noble Author by your imitation of him: and yet proceed, and
challenge belief.

T. H.
Believe me, Sir, that I write this out of my certain experience, not provoked
by any personal dislike of the Author himself (for I may freely say with the
Apostle; he has not hurt me at all,) Galat. 4. 12.
but moved thereunto by tender compassion of your estate, and others, lending
your credit unto them, who pay you with falsehood, and build up their fortunes
in the ruin of your souls.

The Answer.
I easily believe that I have done you no hurt: therefore if I shall be wronged
by you, the less will be my hurt, but the greater my injury, as is this
wherein I am charged to build up my fortunes with the ruin of men's souls.
Fortunes? (M. Higgons,) advise with S. Dixi quide^ hoc, verumtamen poenitet me
sic illie nominasse fortunam, cu^ videam homines habere in pessima
co^suetudine; and vbi dici debet, hoc Deus voluit: dicere, hoc voluit fortuna.
Augustinus Retract. li. 1. ca. 1.
Augustine concerning the lawful use of the word Fortune in Christianity* and
further consider whether the Roman Clergy, or the ministry among the
Protestants are, in regard of worldly interests (to requite you with your own)
more fortunate: and then confer you with your self, whether this fortune was
not the chief motive to him, of whom the Apostle said, 2 Timothy 4. 10.
Demas has forsaken me. As for me, I am sure there is nothing so dear unto me
in this life, which I shall not willingly lay down at the Apostles feet;
never entertaining any portion in this profession further then the religion it
self shall be found justifiable by the Apostles doctrine. But to the matter:
You profess to speak nothing but upon certain experience: This, I confess,
is a wise Mistress, I desire to hear what she will say.

T. H.
CHAP. I. D. Mortons untruth in his defense of LVTHER, and CALVIN.
. 1. How D. Morton diuerteth the scandal of the Devils dispute with Luther
against the Mass.
I will not handle this controversy now: wherefore I come unto D. Morton, who
expediting the same in six questions, proposes this in the third place, viz.
Ought the MASS to seem HOLY* because the Devil did reprehend it? He
answers; no: and yields this reason of his denial. Apud Del' rius, Jesuit.
lib. 4. de Magia, cap. 1. q. 3.. 5
Surium liquet, DIABOLVM in specie Angelica apparuisse, and statim Abbatem, vt
MISSAM CELEBRARET, HORTABATVR. Do you see how the infernal serpent does
implicate, and wind himself? He obiecteth the MASS unto Luther as a thing
execrable, and odious unto God; the same [Diuell] endeuoreth to allure the
Abbot unto it, as it were to kiss Gods dearest daughter. Therefore, the MASS
is no more to be accounted HOLY because Satan seemed to reprehend it, then it
is to be accounted EXECRABLE, because he seemed to allow it. And thus the one
may componderate with the other; the Devil is always a knave.

4 But, do you see how this glorious Doctor does implicate, and wind himself?
Before I go any further, I must put you in mind of his protestation; viz. I may
call God to be witness, and revenger against my soul, si sciens fallo.
Again, you may perceive here, that he cannot possibly derive the cause of his
error upon the weakness of his memory; for he is very exact in his quotation
of book, chapter, question, section: and therefore you will see, that I had
just cause to charge him with malicious untruth, when you have examined the
Authors discourse, which he has mangled by a rare deprauation. For thus
writes his Author: Item DIABOLI reuelatio censenda est, si suadeat aliqua
contra Canones, vel constitutiones, vel regulas, vel alia praecepta maiorum.
Hoc indicio B. Simeon, Monachus Treuerensis, eum deprehendit. Narratur historia
ab Apud Surium. 1. Iunij.
Euerwino Abbate. In verticem montis Sinai iussu superiorum cum missus fuisset,
ibi habitaturus; nocturnis horis illi specie Angelica Demon apparuit, and, vt
Missam celebret, hortatur. Ipse, nec plane dormiens, nec perfect vigilans,
contradicit; non debere SINE PRESBYTERII ORDINE hoc ministerium implere. NOTA.
Contra, inimicus instat, se Dei legatum esse, Christum hoc velle, nec decere
sanctum locum ministerio tali diutius priuari. Renitentem ergo, and
contradicentem, adiuncto sibi consortio alterius Daemonis, de lectulo educunt,
ante altar iam vigilantem statuunt, alba induunt, de stola vtrimque
altercantur, hostis more presbyteri, Simeon more diaconi contendebat sibi
imponi debere. Tandem Dei famulus, ad se reuersus, virtute orationis, and signo
Crucis inimicum repellit, seque delusum ingemiscit.

5 This is the narration of Delrius, concerning this matter. And now (all
circumstances duly weighed) I dare be bold to say, that, if D. Morton himself,
or any other in his behalf, can clear this corruption from the just
imputation of voluntary, known, resolved, determinate malice, then the
infernal Serpent ( as he speaks) did never tell a lie, for which he, or
they, may not likewise extort some colorable defense.

The Answer, relating the whole dispute.
ALthough you will not handle this Controversy now, yet give me leave to
report what I have already handled in that Chapter, wherein you insist. First
were produced the Romish Authors, as namely, Bellarmine, Feu-ardentius, Gregory
de Valent. Coster, and Serarius, who all vrgently and violently object against
Luther, that his Religion was received from the Devil. And did not the
Pharisees vpbraid our Savior, saying, that his virtue of Miracles came from
the power of Luke. 11. 15.
Beelzebub Prince of Devils? wherefore, this taxation gave me occasion seriously
to enquire into Luthers confession hereof, with a purpose, that if any such
thing should sensibly appear unto me, then utterly to abhor his name, and
suspect all his doctrine. For the manifestation of this matter, I examined all
circumstances by six Interrogatories; and supposing the conference had been
personal, and not (as it may be thought) only imaginary, I thus propounded

The first Interrogatorie.
Whether it be damnable in Luther to confer with the Didiuell? The truth is,
No, because both Christ had a Matthew. 4.
Colloquie with the devil, and many other men (in the opinion of our
Adversaries, godly) have done the like, as their Legends, and this Del'rio and
other Jesuits do copiously show.

The second Interrogatorie.
Whether Luther did not acknowledge the Devil to be a lier? This was satisfied
from Luthers own speech: As though (says he) I were ignorant that the Devil
is a lier, except you Papists had instructed me. So far was it from him to
entertain the counsel of the Devil as an Oracle of truth.

The third Interrogatorie.
Whether the Mass be therefore to be esteemed as holy, because the Devil did
reprehend it? I answered, No, because then may we as well say that the Mass is
naught, because the Devil did allow it: which I endeavored to prove from that
testimony of Del-rio, whereupon M. Higgons has so youthfully insulted, and
whereunto I shall presently return him (I doubt not) a satisfiable answer.

The fourth Interrogatorie.
Whether whatsoever the Devil speaks be therefore to be judged devilish,
because it proceeds from the Devil? This was determined from the confessions
of their own Jesuits, viz. that although the Devil be the Father of lies, yet
does he tell some truth. Which is proved by Scripture, where he is noted to
have cried out, saying unto Christ, Luc. 8. 28. g The Jesuit Tollet upon that
place.
What have I to do with thee, Jesus, thou son of the Almighty? and therein
to have* confessed two Articles of Christian faith, even the humanity and
divinity of Christ.

The fifth Interrogatorie.
Whether Satan in his Conference objected any Argument against private Mass,
which is not a certain and confessed truth? The points were these: First, that
the Sacrament of the Eucharist is to be administered in both kinds, bread and
wine. Next, that it is no Coommunion, wherein only the Priest does
communicate. Lastly, that the action of the Sacrifice of the true Mass, is the
Annunciation of Christ's death. Which were partly proved, by the confessions of
our Adversaries, to accord with Christ's institution, and might also be as
easily confirmed by the consent of the best antiquity. But what said Luther to
all this? He shows that the Devil is the most subtle lier, even then when he
speaks truth: as for example, in striking the heart of Judas with that
direful thought, I have betrayed the innocent blood; this (says Luther) Judas
could not deny, (for it was too true a truth:) but the lie of the Devil was
this; Therefore must thou, O Judas, despair of the grace of God. Therefore
brother Papist (says Luther) the Devil does not lie when he accuses a man,
for he brings with him two inconuincible witnesses, even Gods law and man's
conscience. The truth of which Assertion every conscience of man will readily
confess. Now follows

The last Interrogatorie.
Whether Luther in that conflict did conquer the Devils temptation, or no? This
needed none other answer then Luthers own Application. So (says he) I cannot
deny but that I have sinned, (meaning in celebrating private Mass, contrary
unto Christ's holy institution,) but the devil does herein lie in tempting me
to despair with Cain, I confessed indeed, eue^ before the Devil, that I had
sinned with Judas; but I turn my self unto Christ with Peter, I call upon
Christ, I believe in Christ, who has condemned all horrible damnation, and
blotted out my sin with his blood; whereof I doubt not, for to this end I
have received the Sacraments, his seals of grace. Which combat with the
Devil, I showed how semblable it was unto S. Bernards case, of whom we read,
that Author vitae S. Bernardi ^. 1. cap. 12.
in the fierce conflict which he had with the Devil, (tempting him to
despair:) I confess (says he) that I am unworthy, neither can I by my
merits obtain the kingdom of heaven: but Christ my Lord does possess it by a
double right, the one is by inheritance from the Father, the other by the merit
of his own passion: he is contented with the one, and the other does he impart
unto me. This being my discourse, whereby their ordinary slander against
Luther was sponged out, none need to marvel why M. Higgons forbear to handle
this controversy, and choose rather to scratch me by the face, by an
imputation of voluntary, known (M. Higgons wanted not his Inkehorne)
resolved, determinate malice. But I come to

The Justification of my self.
That which belonged unto me to prove, was, that the Devil does sometime exhort
unto good, although with a wicked intent: which, as our Adversaries will easily
grant, may be confirmed by his commendation of Alteri item Demon apparuit
imagine B. Vrsulae, crucis vexillu^ praeferens, cum multarum virginu^ comitatu,
atque ita locutus est: Videt Deus amatque istud tuum tuendae pudicitiae studium
etc. Del'rio. Tom. 2. l. 4. c. 1. q. 3. sect. 5.
chastity, and by innumerable other examples. But because the Objection made
against Luther was concerning the Mass, therefore did I endeavor to give
instance in the like example, and happened upon that sentence out of Del'rio
the Jesuit, which I my self afterward did discern, and in print in the end
of my second part of Apology did plainly Animiaduers. in lib. 2. cap. 21
acknowledge to have been much mistaken, acquainting my Reader therewith: and
therefore repaired that breach with another example out of the same Author in
this manner: I will show you (says the Jesuit Del'rio) an example worthy
your memory, wherein notwithstanding this is to be marvelled, that a Devil
did command one to buy a bell, and to bestow it upon a poor Church, whereby
the faithful might every Sunday be called unto Divine Service. By this
confession I fortified my former consequence, thus: If the Mass must be
therefore accounted sacred, because the Devil did reprehend it, then must it
likewise be judged to be sacrilegious, because the Devil does provide means
to call men unto it. Hereby manifesting how pitifully our Adversaries are
deluded, who will not discern the Devils subtilty, which is always to speak,
aut falsum, aut ad falsum, that is, either to teach that which is false, or
else a truth but with a false intent. The thing he delivers is often most
true, and truth (as their Jesuit Scrupulo us est, qui ex prophanis authoribus
nihil audet mutuari, cum omnis veritas a quecumque dicatur, a spiritu Sancto
dicatur. Salmeron Ies. Comm. in Tit. 1. Page 626 Tom. 15.
confesses) is originally from the the holy Ghost, whosoever be the preacher:
but his conclusion, Ergo thou must kill, or steal, or despair etc. is always
the daughter of him who is the father of lies. What remains but

The guilt of my Accuser.
Tell me now you that profess to speak out of certain experience, and yet
confess that I have exactly quoted the book, chapter, question, section of
this testimony, whether you ever knew in all your experience any voluntary
corrupter (especially being compassed about with so many lefteyed Adversaries)
to have directly pointed at the place, where his corruption might be certainly
found out? and then note me for a man voluntarily and resoluedly false.

Secondly, whether any determinately malicious could ever be induced to
acknowledge (as I did) his error, before he were publicly convicted.

Thirdly, whether he can call the answer resoluedly false in me, who could have
confirmed the same conclusion, viz. that the Devil will acknowledge some good,
See a little after.
both by other, and also by the same Author Del'rio, in the same story, from an
example of the same kind.

I would add a fourth, whether M. Higgons read not that my satisfaction in my
Animaduersions, and so with mine own heiffer would maliciously plough upon my
back. But I will not gall his conscience. God forgive him his wrong.

Although this his former precipitancie might move me to pity his
indiscretion, yet the last clause of his sentence deserved a smile, when he
says, that Except this be a resolved and determinate malice, then the
infernal serpent did never tell a lie (says he) for which he or they may not
extort some colorable defense. Hereby necessarily imagining, that there may
possibly be a lie, which wants all color of defense. Which indeed is most
true amongst all faithful Professors of Christ, but cannot hold firm in that
sect, which defends an Aequiuocation by a mental reservation: for say (good
M. Higgons in your humanity,) if I should have been so graceless, as in
alleging that misconceiued testimony taken out of Del'rio, to have used a
mental reservation, as thus; so says Del'rio -- -- for ought you shall know,
had I lied, or no? If I had not, how can you accuse me of lying? but if,
notwithstanding the mental reseruatio^, I had lied, then accursed by your newly
devised Art of lying, which is so notably devilish, that as long as it is
defended, it shall be impossible for any to give the Devil the lie, seeing that
he is taught by you to answer, I lied not, because I did aequiuocate.

T. H.
6 Finally, does D. Morton believe that this history is true, or does he
repute it to be false? If false; why does he urge it? If true; then he must
remember, that there is some efficacy in the sign of the Cross, to terrify
his infernal Serpent. If he say with Brentius, that the Devil does fly it in
subtlety, to draw men into superstition, I answer, that Pagans, and
Protestants do symbolize as well in this devise, as in many others. For
Theodoret. hist. l. 3. c. 3.
when Julian admired to see, that the Devils fled away at the sign of the
Cross, the Magitian answered, oh Sir; it was not for any fear of that sign,
but for detestation of your fact.

The Answer.
I am persuaded he thinks that by this Dilemma he has posed me: but I
answer, that although I can allow many reports of Del'rio no better then I can
do this story of S. Dunstane, who^ he believes to have Lasciua forma and motu
eundem (Daemonem) cognouit sanctus Dunstanus, and ignito forcipe arrepto, eius
naso lepide irrisit: Test Osberro Cantuatie^si. Del'rio Ies. disq. Magic. Tom.
2. li. 4. ca. 1. q. 2. sect. 5.
catched the Devil by the nose with a pair of pincers, (for I marvel what
metal his nose, and the pincers were of;) yet do I think that this other of
the cross might be true: but so, as that in repelling his consequence I shall
appear to be neither Iulianist, nor Papist, that is, neither profane nor
superstitious. For it may be observed, that in the days of Julian the Cross
was used in such cases by holy men in, at least, a secret invocation of Christ
crucified (whom that wicked Apostate contemned:) but not (as the Papists do) by
attributing (to use M. Higgons word,) an efficacy or virtue to the Cross it
self, as though the Devil could not possibly endure it. Which brings into
my remembrance a story which Banks told me at Franck^ford, from his own
experience in France among the Capuchins, by whom he was brought into suspicion
of Magic, because of the strange feats which his horse Morocco played (as I
take it) at Orleance: where he, to redeem his credit, promised to manifest to
the world that his horse was nothing less then a Devil. To this end he
commanded his horse to seek out one in the preasse of the people, who had a
crucifixe on his hat; which done, he bad him kneel down unto it; and not this
only, but also to rise up again, and to kiss it. And now (Gentlemen quoth
he) I think my horse has acquitted both me, and himself; and so his
Adversaries rested satisfied: conceauing (as it might seem) that the Devil
had no power to come near the Cross.

If M. Higgons be become a man of the same faith, to ascribe unto the very
sign such an efficacy, let him suffer me to spur him with a question. The
forenamed Jesuit Del'rio tells us of the Alteri item Demon ^e noctu
ostendit, imagine B. Vrsulae crucis vexillum praeferens, etc. Ide^ Tom. 2. l.
4. c* 1. q. 3. sect. 5. Paulo post. Illa, quod si Dei Legatione fungimini, has
sanctoru^ reliquias (habebat alligatas ad collu^) veneramini. Mirum dictu,
procubueru^t in genua laruae venerabu^dae. Del'rio Tom. 1. lib. 2. q. 27. sect.
2.
Apparitio^ of a Devil unto an holy Virgin, in the form of S. Vrsulae,
carrying a crucifixe before him, and accompanied with a train of other Devils,
representing Virgins: But she su^^ecting some delusion, If (says she) you have
any message from God, then worship these holy Relics, which are about my
neck. What then? Then, for I shall tell you a marvel (says Del'rio) those
infernal hagges prostrated themselves in worship of those holy Relics. Now
then, M. Higgons, either you believe that this Apparition was true, or not; if
you think it possible that the Devil did carry a crucifixe, and kiss holy
relics, then why may he not be said sometimes to use, or flit it in subteltie?
or how shall the Devil be thought altogether to fear the very sign? And if
you answer, that the story cannot be true, then must you necessarily stumble
upon Del'rio, and by acknowledgement of his fabulous book, return back
again, at least, one step from Babylon.

T. H.
. 2. How D. Morton defends Calvin from the note of Iouinianisme.
1 AMongst sundry errors of Iouinian (a Father of Protestants; whence Loc.
com. Luth. part. 4. page 44.
Luther says, that Hierome wrote pestilent books against Iouinian, but he, at
that time, had more learning and judgment in his little finger, then Hierome
in all his body) this was one; A man cannot sin after baptism, if he were
truly baptized: that is to say, if he truly received faith, and grace. This
error is imputed by De notis Eccles. cap 9.
Bellarmine unto Calvin; and the reason is, because Calvin teaches, that true
faith (which, in his opinion, is inseparable from grace,) can never be lost.
For though Calvin does not, by way of position, defend, that a faithful man
cannot sin, yet the question is now, whether it follow out of the aforesaid
principle, by way of necessary deduction. Bellarmine affirms it, Part. 1.
li. 1. cap. 34.
D. Morton denies it; and pretends, that this Iouinianisme may be imputed as
well unto Augustine or Campian, as unto Calvin.

2 The sentence which he produces out of De corrept. and g^at. cap. 7.
S. Augustine, is this. Horum fides, quae per dilectionem operatur, aut omnino
non deficit, aut reparatur, priusquam haec vita finiatur. I grant that S.
Augustine says so; but what is this unto Calvin? For first, S. Augustine does
not teach, that faith cannot be severed from grace. Secondly, he does not
affirm, that a man can never fall from faith, or grace. Thirdly, he does not
teach, that only the elect can have these gifts, but he shows the contrary
in that place; and who knows not that many have lost both faith, and grace?
Lasily, S. Augustine does there distinguish betwixt the elect, and reprobate;
and teaches that the faith of Horum sides etc. that is spoken of the elect.
elect, which works by Charity, either does not fail at all; or if it do
[as sometimes it doth] yet it is repaired again, before their departure; but
in the reprobate, the case is very different; for they may have faith, and
grace, but faith and grace endure not in them with perseverance, a gift proper
only unto the elect.

3 Wherefore, there is no correspondencie betwixt S. Augustine and Calvin in
this point. For Calvin annexing grace inseparably unto faith, and auerring,
that faith can never be lost; must ineuitably thence infer, that a faithful
man does never lose grace also, and consequently he does never sin mortally,
because a mortal sin excludes Grace inherent.
grace from the soul.

4 The sentence of Rat. 10.
Campian is cited in these words: Nisi Diui e coelo deturbentur, cadere ego
nunquam potero; and here your Doctor pretends that Campian, even as Calvin
himself, did believe constantly, that he could never fall from faith, but was
certain of his salvation. Which if it were so, then judge of the soundness of
your Divinity, according to the principles whereof, Campian, a resolute Papist
and opposite unto your Religion, might be infallibly secure of his salvation:
and the like all sectaries may (as many do) apply unto themselves with a
supposed certainty of perseverance. But as F. Campian does Rat. 8. Age*
somniet hoc: sed vnde etc. post medium.
elsewhere particularly reprove this conceit, and taxes your Calvin precisely
for the same, so in In the conclusion of his tenth Reason.
this place he is far from that imagination, howsoever it pleases D. Morton
to propose his words by the half, and to pervert his meaning in the whole. For
that blessed Martyr having yielded a reason of his confidence (which he
deriueth from all kinds of witnesses in heaven, earth, and hell it self) non
diffiteor, (says he) animatus sum, and incensus ad conflictum; IN QVO, nisi
Diui de coelo deturbentur, and superbus Lucifer coelum recuperet, cadere
nunquam potero.

5 Now I remit me unto your ingenuitie, and conscience, whether D. Morton did
not with voluntary, and determinate malice (as I said before) abridge the
sentence, and violate the intention Sciens fallit
of Campian, to deceive the Reader, with, and against his knowledge. For what
does F. Campian affirm? but only this; since I have these testimonies of my
religion, it is not possible that, relying thereupon, I should ever causa
cadere, be vanquished in that combat which I do seriously desire.

6 This may be a sufficient instruction for you; and by it alone, you may
perceive, whether his heart be single, and sincere in his impugnation of the
Catholic faith; which he labors to extinguish by these miserable
inventions. But it will flourish much more, even for his sake. God, of his
infinite mercy, will either mollify his affection, or cohibite his purpose.
And now (kind Master S.) I might ease my self, and you from any more pain in
this kind, if one more vast untruth the^ all the rest, did not compel me to
proceed yet a little farther; the matter being of great importance, and, for
many respects, not to be passed over in silence.

The Answer.
I wish to breath only so long as that the Catholic faith may flourish by
me. As for my Affections, I thank God, they are such, that if I had a window
in my heart, I would open it for M. Higgons, or any Adversary to look in and
see as much as I can my self; and then, am I sure, they could not judge me
either deceitful, or malicious. But to the point, first,

The state of the question, showing the slander which Cardinal Bellarmine
commits against Calvin.
The first heresy of Iouinian is, (says the Cardinal) that man cannot sin
after Baptism: which is the heresy of Calvin, who says that true faith can
never be lost. The falsehood of this accusation is not obscurely For he
redoubleth his blows upon Calvin almost in every chapter.
co^uinced by the Jesuit Maldonate, who discussing that heresy, durst not
impute it unto Calvin: secondly, by Caluins Apolog part. 1. lib. 1 ca. 42.
acknowledged sentences, wherein he requires repentance as necessary in all
that have been baptized, that they may be justified. But M. Higgons would cover
the Cardinals nakedness with a mantle of Deduction, thus: Because Calvin
annexeth grace inseparably unto faith, and anerreth that faith can never be
lost, it must ineuitably infer, that a faithful man does never lose grace
also, and consequently does never sin mortally, because a mortal sin does
exclude grace from the soul. This M. Higgons his Inference tells me that he
was never yet rightly catechized in the rudiments of faith: which I must be
persuaded of, until he make this consequence good, A man cannot lose a
justifying faith after Baptism: Ergo he cannot sin after Baptism. Can this be
enforced either from the doctrine of Calvin* or else of all the Romanists?
Calvin teaches that the justified man's good actions are polluted with sin,
and some of the Romanists have acknowledged, in effect, as much (as I there
Both by Vega and Lindan: see the Apology.
proved;) whom their Jesuit confesses to have been Caeterum ex doctioribus
Catholicis no^nulli graves etia^ and pij alia^ sententia^ improbabile^ secuti
sunt: dicunt enim differentia^ venialis and mortalis peccati no^ nasci ex
natura ipsa operationu^, led ex legedei ita statue^te, vt hoc sit veniale,
illud vero mortale. Quam opinionem docuerunt Gerson. -- Almaynus, -- Roffensis,
-- qui omnes contra Caluinu^ doce^t esse aliqua peccata venialia, quae Dei
amicitia^ non dissoluunt; and alia mortalia, quae iustitiam Dei omnino tollunt:
hanc tamen differentiam in Dei voluntatem and statutum ita reuocant, vt cum
alias omnia peccata a se mortalia essent, sola Dei misericordia ad aeternam
poenam non imputentur. Vasquez^es. Tom. 1. disp. 142. cap. 1.
grave and godly Catholic Doctors, who taught that all sins are in their
nature mortal, albeit those sins which are called venial, by the mercy of
God, do not dissolve the favor of God: but may consist together with inherent
Grace, as not imputed unto us for our eternal punishment. Here we see sins
in their nature mortal, and justifying Grace to be coincident in one man after
Baptism. But what need we any longer dispute? let M. Higgons, or any other man
show where any Romanist (except Bellarmine) laid unto Caluins charge this
heresy of Iouinian, which is thus expressed by Haeres. lib. 12. Tit. Peccatum.
Alphonsus a Castro: Iouinian held that a man, who once was justified by Grace,
could not sin any more. But Calvin taught such a faith, which after Baptism
obtains remission of sin. After, Alphonsus makes the heresy of the
Begwardi to be near of kin to the former errors of Iouinian, who taught, that
A man may attain unto that perfection in this life, that he cannot sin. Has
Calvin any alliance with this heretic? But I am chargeable to yield

A justification of my self.
After that I had infringed the consequence, which Bellarmine inferred upon
Caluins Assertion, it belonged unto me only to maintain the terms of Calvin
his propositition, viz. True faith cannot be lost. And does not S. Augustine so
distinguish, as supposing* that some men's faith either does not fail at all,
or not finally? and yet he never doubted but that the most perfect man is
guilty of sin, as his own August* in Psalm. 142. No^ iustificabitur omnis
viuens: Forte iustificare potest se coram se, non coram te: Quomodo coram se?
sibi placens, tibi displiciens: Noli ergo intrare mecumin iudicium Domine, qua^
tumlibet rectus mihi videar: producis tu de thesauro tuo regulam, coaptas me ad
eam, and prauus inuenior: ad te cum respicio, nihil aliud meum quam peccatu^
inuenio: nolo tecum habere causam, vt ego propona^ iustitia^ meam, and tu
conuincas iniquitatem meam; commemorate iustiti as vestras, ego noui facinora
vestra, inquit Dominus. Idem Confess. lib. 9. cap. 13.
confession does at large demonstrate. Which is all that concerned me to prove,
whereby to acquit Calvin from the imputation of the heresy of Iouinian, who
without all For the words of Alphonsus de Castro* haeres. 8. Tit. Peccatum, are
these: Augustine imputed unto Iouinian this heresy, that he taught all sins
to be equal.
distinction of sin said, that the once baptized, could never after sin.

That which he obiecteth out of the testimony of M. Campian, is so silly a
fly, that this his so greedy catching at it argues, that my Adversary is
not of the Eagles kind. It is true that M. Campian meant that he should not
fall in his cause; but does not M. Higgons see in that testimony an Ego? [I
(says he) shall never fall;] which might give me an apprehension of his
personal constancy in his cause: which sounded to me like the voice of S.
Peter, saying, Master, though all forsake thee, yet will not I. For I did not
imagine that M. Campians own defense could consist without a defender, or that
his confidence in the maintenance of the cause of Faith had not been founded
upon an assurance of his own perseverance in Faith. And other understanding
hereof then this (if there be any truth in me) I had none: so far was I from
violating his intention.

T. H.
CHAP. II. D. Mortons untruth concerning the Article of Christ his descent into
Hell.
. 1. The necessity, and weight of this Article.
1 AMongst sundry difficulties, which did sometimes afflict my conscience,
when I was a brother of your society, this was not the least, viz. What is
that, which does properly, and entirely make a man to be a member of your
Church, so that, precisely, for defect thereof, he ceasseth absolutely from
being of that communion?

The Answerer.
What is the matter?

T. H.
2 This position (with me) is an impregnable bulwark of my Religion: viz.
Whosoever does pertinaciously reject any point of faith (accepted by public
consent of the CATHOLIC Church) he is an HERETIC, and no member of her
communion. For which consideration, I am as tenderly affected in this article,
as in any other of my Creed, esteeming my self obliged thereunto for two
respects. FIRST, because the essential truth thereof, is clearly revealed
unto me by God, both in his word written; and by Apostolical Tradition. In his
word written; for what can be more perspicuous, then this saying? Act. 2. 27.
Thou will not leave my soul in hell, etc. By Apostolical Tradition; for what
can be more plain, then this Article? He descended in hell.

3 SECONDLY; I am moved by the authority of the Church. For who (says Epist
99.
Augustine) denies that Christ descended into hell, unless he be an INFIDEL?
And for the sense of this Article, Tract 78. in Ioh.
he has this clear resolution. Who is he that was not left in hell? Christ
Jesus: but in his SOVLE only. Who is he that lay in the grave? Christ Jesus:
but in his FLESH only. For the NATVRALL union of his body and soul was
dissolved, but not the HYPOSTATICALL union of either with his Person.

4 This truth being so patent, and perspicuous, I ask you now; what reason
have you for any part of your faith, if you have not assurance in this? And if
you fall from this, what See Luthers saying, before, page 40.
certainty have you in any other point? Therefore it imports your Church to
show a due conformity in this Article of the Creed. Finally you may remember,
that S. Athanasius in his Creed, (which your Artic. Re^ig. 8.
Church pretends to admit thoroughly, etc. having premised this denuntiation;
Whosoever keeps not the Catholic faith entire, and inuiolate, without doubt
he shall perish everlastingly; does afterward subnect this Article of Christ
his descent into hell, as parcel of that CATHOLIC faith.

The Answer.
No man may justly discommend M. Hiogons resolution, if he can make good all
that he professes. The heads be three: the first is the equal necessity of
this Article, with any other, and secondly the equal evidence for the proof
hereof: and lastly a general conformity of profession herein.

For the weight and necessity he pretends to be as tenderly affected in this
Article, is in any other. I would willingly believe him, but that in my book
of Apology, in the same Chapter, from whence he now makes his objection, I
propounded the judgment of their learned Professor and Jesuit Suarez, who
determined this question in these words: Sequitur breui dubiu^, etc. Suarez
Ies. Tom. 2. disp. 43.. 2. See my Apol. Cath. part. 1. lib. 1. cap. 59.
There follows (says he) a doubt, whether the truth of Christ his descent
into hell be not only a matter to be believed, but also an article of faith;
the reason hereof is this* because it was not in the Nicene Creed, nor set
down by the Apostles, and because the Fathers, as namely Augustine,
Tertullian, Irenaeus, Origin have omitted it in their expositions of the Creed.
I answer (says he) that it is not altogether certain, that the Apostles added
this Article, if by an Article of faith we understand a truth which all
faithful men are bound explicitly to know and believe: I think it not
necessary to reckon this among the Articles of faith, because it is not a
matter altogether so necessary for all men: and for this cause, peradventure
it was omitted in the Nicene Creed, the knowledge of which Creed may seem to
be sufficient for the fulfilling the precept of faith. This resolution M.
Higgons, doubtless, there saw, wherein an ods of necessary use of this article
is professed by your eminent Jesuit and Schoolema^; and yet does our young
Antagonist exact an equal necessity of this with any other Article.

The equal evidence of this Article is the second point, wherein he does
insist, requiring as good an assurance and certainty for this, as for any
other point, accounting it an essential truth clearly revealed unto him by
God, both by Apostolical Tradition, and by the word written, and by custom of
the Church: as though he had observed a certainty hereof among the Romanists,
which he could not find among Protestants; not understanding that their
foresaid Jesuit has said concerning his first hold, that it is not certain
that the Apostles added this Article. And as for the Scriptures which they
produce for the proof of the Romish sense thereof, the same Suarez says,
Nonnulli Catholici ita aas ( Scripturas) exponu^t, vt euertant, and rem ipsam
nege^t. Suarez Ies. Tom. 2. disp. 43. sect. 2.
some Catholics so expound these Scriptures as destroying and denying this
Article: and of the Article it self their Jesuit Salmeron durst pronounce
saying, Non dubitamus no^ ita aperte and express esse in sacris Euangeliis
declaratum, vt reliquos ad Christi humanitatem specta^tes: adeo vt Franciscus
de Mayor in 3. Sent. asserat Scotum putasse non probari descensu^ Christi ad
inferos per Scripturas: and idem docuit Dura^dus in eodem libro. Salmeron Ies
Tom. 10. Tract. 50.
We doubt not that this article is not so evidently declared in Scriptures, as
the other Articles are, which concern the humanity of Christ; insomuch that
Scotus and Durand thought (as he says) that it could not be proved out of
Scriptures: and yet their nouice M. Higgons presumed that all Romanists held it
as most perspicuously delivered in Scriptures. As for his ground taken from the
testimony of S. Augustine, this See hereafter at the letter. q
will prove maruellously prejudicial to the Romish sense.

The last point, which he professes, is conformity in this Article of the
Creed: whereby he would be thought to avouch their own consent herein:
notwithstanding he As was showed in the same place of my Apology.
knew that among their Romanists, there has been broached these differences,
one saying that Christ's descent into hell was only vertuall, and not
personal: the second sort of them, who held a personal descent, but some
applying it unto the real hell of the damned; others only unto a Limbus
Patrum, which will be proved out of S. Augustine to be no part of hell. As yet
the Romanists afford us neither an absolute necessity of the Article, nor
evidence of their sense either from Apostolical tradition, or from perspicuous
places of Scriptures, nor yet entertain among themselves a conformity of
consent. So that as yet we cannot persuade our selves of M. Higgons equal
tenderness of affection in this behalf: but now concerning my self.

T. H. His Accusation.
. 2. D. Mortons pretense of his Churches unity in this point, is clearly
refuted.
NOw see your Doctors syncerity, who may call God to revenge it upon his soul,
if he deceive any man with his knowledge. First* he cites the opinion of Lib.
4. de Christo. ca. 15.
Bellarmine in these words: Opinio Catholica haec est, CHRISTVM VERE SECVNDVM
ESSENTIAM FVISSE IN INFERNO. As much as to say, Christ, in his soul
substantially, did descend into hell. Then he adds: Hanc vestram sententiam
NOS quoque iuxta cum Augustana confessione libentissime profitemur; non tamen
quatenus vestram, sed quatenus veram: We also, together with the Augustane
confession, do most willingly profess this opinion, etc.

It is well that he left out the Scottish, French, Belgian, and Heluetian
confessions; for he knows, that the true Caluinists are heretics in this
behalf.

The Answerers Justification.
I concealed not the different expositions of some other Protestants, who
notwithstanding are no more guilty of heresy in this point, then are the
Romanists, as will appear. But first say your mind.

T. H.
But, I beseech you, do YOU (that is to say, your Church of England) most
willingly profess this Catholic opinion? Alas, that your Apologist has so
justly called God to revenge this falsehood upon his soul: let him entreat our
Lord to pardon that provocation of his judgment.

The Answerer.
First in general, I said indeed we, but I said not we all. If now that which
was spoken indefinitely in these words, We profess: (nothing the Common sense,
becaust as being taught by the then L^. Archbishop of Canterbury, D. Bilson,
Bishop of Winchester, and other Fathers of our Church, and by the tenor of the
Article it self (as by the convocation it was allowed) implied, As Christ died
for us, and was buried, so also it is to be believed that he went down into
hell.
common opinion of our Church) must necessarily be enforced universally (as M.
Higgons does,) to signify all, why did the Apostle without distinction
condemn the Corinthians for not sorrowing at the wickedness of the
incestuous? or generally reprove the Galathia^s as being bewitched and
revolted from the Gospel? Will M. Higgons his divinity conclude, that every
Christian man in Corinth, and in Galathia were reprehensible? If all such
indefinite speeches may be thus racked, then may all humane and divine writings
be condemned of falsehood: for Dico Prophetas and Apostolos saepereprehendere
vniuersum populum, quasi nemo sit bonus, cum tamen permulti sint boni. Bellar.
lib. 3. de Eccles* Milit. ca. 16.. Ad quartu^.
Both Apostles and Prophets (says Cardinal Bellarmine) do often reprehend all
the people, as though there were not one good, when notwithstanding diverse
good ones are among the^. I further demand, does he think the opinion of the
real descent Catholic, that is, universal? yes, he will say, it is among all
Romanists universal: and yet knoweh that their great and subtle schooleman
Durandus held it to be but a vertuall descent.

T. H.
And, in the mean time, I will demonstrate his falsehood by four evidences.
FIRST, if YOU be of this opinion (as he pretends) Act. 2. 27. some say life,
or person, some body, or carcass.
why are your Bibles infected with this absurd Translation? Thou will not leave
my soul in grave. Is this to submit your sense unto the Scripture, or it is
not rather to draw it unto your preiudicate opinion? This is to measure the
yard by the cloth: and thus, while you should be faithful Translators, you
become corrupt Interpreters of the Scripture. SECONDLY, why was your Church so
distracted in this matter upon the Sermon and Treatise of D. Bilson? How came
it to pass, that D. Reinolds his Caluinian resolution in this matter, was
confuted by M. Perks? and why did M. Willet (the Synopticall Theologue, as he
is phrased by In his epist. prefixed before the book of Conference at Hampton
Court:
D. Barlow) oppose himself against M. Perks his answer? Why do your Ministers
publicly in Sermons, and in print, impugn this true, and Catholic opinion?
THIRDLY, why is no Minister punished for his repugnancie unto this truth? which
is of greater consequence, then cross, cap, surplice, or any ceremonious
thing, or whatsoever institution of your Church, for which many have suffered
deprivation of their livings. FOURTHLY, the testimony of M. Rogers, (whose
book has a special approbation, as you may see page 160
before) will convince D. Morton of notorious falsehood. For though his purpose
was to deliver the That is the title of all his pages.
Catholic doctrine of YOUR Church, yet when page 16.
he comes unto this Article, he says, that in the interpretation of it, there
is not that consent which were to be wished; some holding one opinion thereof,
and some another. Wherefore, yielding no certain doctrine, but leaving men
unto their choice, he adds; TILL we know the native, and undoubted Faith
consists not in the words, but in the sense.
sense of this Article, etc.

The Answer.
Here are many questions, which may be answered by questioning. First, in our
Church-Bible it is read, Thou shall not leave my soul in hell: why then did M.
Higgons insist only in the Geneua translation? Notwithstanding if this one
place were in all Bibles translated hell, yet it is but a fond piece of
Sophistry to conclude a general from a particular, and that also negatiuely:
which is all one as if he should have said, Not long before my public revolt I
writ a book against the Romish doctrine of venial sin: Ergo before that time
I held not any point of popery. Again let him ingenuously satisfy us, if their
Church hold the Article by force of the word Hell in Scriptures; then why were
some of their Romanists suffered to say (as their Jesuit Valent. Ies. Tom. 4.
disp. 2. q. 4. punct. 3^ he adds: Dixerunt citra pertinaciam tamen.
Valentia affirms) that the word Infernus, [that is, Hell] in Scriptures is
nothing else but the grave? Why durst their Jesuit Pineda Ies. in Job. 7. v. 9.
Pineda confess, that the word Sheol (which many Romanists appropriate unto
hell) is sometimes in Scripture used for the grave? Or, why might Job. 17. 13.
Infernus domus mea est.] Aliqui interpretantur de cruciatibus inferni, and domo
Tartarea: sed non cohaeret sensus. Se^tentia plana est and lenis: Quid aliud
possit moribundus homo sperare quam sepulchrum vt Domicilium common cum aliis
defunctis in subterranea illa statione? Pineda Ies. in eum locum.
Pineda expound the vulgar Translation Hell (Job. 17. 13.) to signify Grave,
contrary unto their expositors, who (as he says) did interpret it to betoken
the pains of hell? Thirdly, why does M. Higgons charge me with the
foreknowledge of M. Willets opposition against M. Perks, or the testimony of
M. Rogers, whose books were published after my Apology? and he might well
think that I was no Prophet, to foresee what would afterward be written by
other men. Fourthly, (if such kind of conjectures may be called
demonstrations,) let him answer for their Council of Trent, which prescribed
(as it self says) Decretum de symbolo fidei. Haec sancta Tride^t. Synodus --
symbolum fidei, quo sancta Romans Ecclesia vtitur, tanquam principium illud in
quo omnes, qui fide^ Christi profitentur, necessario conueniunt, ac fundamentu^
firmum ac vnicu^ contra quod portae inferi nunquam praeualebunt* totidem
verbis, quibus in omnibus Ecclesiis legitur, exprimendu^ esse censuit; quod
quide^ eiusmodi est, Credo in Deu^, etc Con. Trident. Sess. 3.
A Creed used by the Church of Rome as the principle wherein all the professors
of Christ do consent, holding it as the only firm foundation (against which
the gates of hell shall never prevail,) in so many words as it is read in all
Churches, I believe in God, etc. why it did choose that form wherein this
Article of descent into hell is not expressly mentioned? which form Tele^^s,
and Acosta Ies. as they have been cited in my Apology.
two of your Jesuits did follow even then when they sought to catechize people
in the rudiments of faith. The most of these their own aboue-mentioned
differences M. Higgons did, no doubt, perceive in my book of Apology, whence
he took his objections; and yet has adventured to make this his assault,
being twice convicted in himself, both by the friuolousnesse of his reasons,
and also by the regest of their own like contradictions. But of this article
more remains to be delivered after that I have answered unto my last taxation.

T. H.
If this be not a sensible conviction of M. Doctors singular untruth, I must
confess that I have done him injury, and will be ready to make any
satisfaction, that he can reasonably demand. Meanewhile, he must give me leave
to detect another of his excellent sleights, and there I will refer him unto
his best thoughts. As it was a notable vanity in him to affirm, that YOU do
willingly embrace the Catholic opinion in this Article, so that is a delicate
collusion, which ensneth within the compass of three lines: a VOBIS etc, WE
[in England] differ from YOU [Papists] concerning the place, unto which Christ
descended. For WE say, that he descended unto the hell of the damned; hut YOU
say, that he descended only ad Limbum Patrum, the region of the Fathers.

The Author cited by him, is Theomach. lib. 7. ca. 1.
Feu-ardentius, whose opinion he imputes here as generally unto the Papists,
as he applied the other unto your English Church. But, forasmuch as M. Doctor
does continually deal with BELLARMINE, and in the words immediately precedent,
alleged him particularly also in this matter (as you Numb. 1.
see:) why did he now pretermit him, and select another? I will show you the
reason; for Bellarmine himself in the very next chapter, is of a contrary
opinion unto that, which M. Doctor deriueth generally upon the Papists. What
piety then, or humanity was in this preposterous device?

The Answerer.
I will tell you; even with that piety which truth it self did challenge of
my conscience, and which your humanity, I hope, will easily acknowledge, after
that I have informed your ignorance what among the Romanists is the most common
opinion.

Feu-ardentius (you know) delivering the Romish meaning of this Article held,
that Christ's soul went not into the place of the damned, but only unto the
place which is called sinus Abrahae, the bosom of Abraham, and is commonly
termed, Limbus Patrum: where, say they, the souls of Patriarcks were detained
until Christ his ascension into heaven. But Cardinal Bellarmine held thus:
Bellar. li. 4. de Christo. c. 1.
At probabile profecto est, etc. That is, It is probable that his soul
descended through all the parts of hell, both because the Scriptures do not
otherwise distinguish, and because S. Augustine, Fulgentius, Ambrose, Eusebius
Emissenus, Nyssenus, and Cyrill do signify as much. You now ask me why I did
pretermit this opinion of Bellarmine, and suggest the other of Feu-ardentius?
my reason was, because the opinion propounded by Feu-ardentius is the more
common as may appear by Salmeron Ies. Tom. 10. Tract. 50. Valentianus Ies.
Tom. 4 disp. 2. and Suarez Ies. Tom. 2. disp: 43. which is the same with
Salmeron.
Salmeron, and other Jesuits, saying, Ad Limbum Patrum reipsa descendit, ad
damnatos per effectum: that is, Christ went down into the Limbus Patrum in
deed, but only vertually or by the effects thereof, unto the place of the
damned. O but Bellarmine himself (say you) is of a contrary opinion. Take
heed what you say: he is of a contrary opinion: he was indeed, but now he is
not, because even Bellarmine himself has lately retracted that his former
opinion, and is become contrary unto himself in these express words:
Bellarm. Recognit. page 11. in eum locum ex lib. 4* de Chron. cap. 16.
Re m^lius considerata, etc. that is, after that I had better advised of the
matter, I resolved to follow the judgment of Thomas, wherein other Schoolmen
do consent. Do you not perceive how wisely your great Bellarmine had considered
of so many testimonies of Fathers, whence he concluded his probabile est with a
profecto, for his former opinion? Do you not also see how he reclaimeth
himself, and accords unto the common opinion whch I proposed from
Feu-ardentius to be the ordinary tenet of the Romish faith? Faithless
therefore had I been in setting down the doctrine of your Church, if I had
objected a private opinion in stead of a common. Whereby it is evident that I
have not been preposterous, but you (I forbear to give you your due) perverse.
For you confess that the different judgments of Bellarmine and Feu-ardentius
were both by me expressly set down: so that you could not justly interpret the
word you, to signify you all. Is this the man that cried Alas that your
Apologist has etc* See above.
Alas? etc. weep not for me, but weep for your self: who (if I had been so
unconscionable as to commit a slight) meant by this knacke to be even with me;
and yet calls his collusion a faithful conviction. But God forgive him this
also. I return unto that Article. This being the doctrine of your Church, I
will make bold to inquire,

Whether the sense of the Article of Christ's descent, now commonly maintained
in the Romish Church, does stand upon any sound foundation. T. H.
SECONDLY, that your difference is in the substantial sense and meaning of
this article, but our difference is a scholasticall disceptation in a matter of
greater or lesser probability; which, being a doubt not resolved by the
Church, may be indifferently accepted by her children, without breach of
charity, or violation of faith.

The Answer.
The place which the Romanists assign unto the real presence of Christ in his
descension into hell, is only that Limbus Patrum which they call Abraham's
bosom; which place Tert. lib. 4. aduersus Mar^ion. cap. 34.
Tertullian calls sublimiorem inferis, that is, higher then hell. Other
Fathers might be alleged, but because M. Higgons depends principally upon S.
Augustine, let us hear Quanquam and illud me nondum inuenisse fateor, inferos
appellatos, vbi iustorum animae requiescunt, and Christianimam venisse ad ea
loca, vbi peccatores cruciantur, vt eos solueret a tormentis, quos esse
soluendos occulta nobis sua iustitia iudicabat, non immerito creditur: quomodo
enim aliter accipiendum est, Act. 2. solutis doloribus inferni? Paulo post:
Inter sinu^ Abrahae and tormenta inferni legimus esse magnum Chaos, -- and
videmus inferni mentione^ non esse factam in requie pauperis, sed in supplicio
diuitis. -- Proinde, vt dixi, nondum inueni, and adhuc quaero, nec mihi
occurrit, Inferos alicubi in bono posuisse Scripturam duntaxat Canonicam: non
autem in bono positam esse illam requiem and sinum Abrahae, nescio vtrum
quisquam possit audire, and ideo quomodo apud inferos credamus esse, non video.
August. in Genesis ad lit. lib. 12. cap. 33.
him: for in his time this opinion of assigning the place of Abraham's bosom
unto a part of hell had some suggestors; but I confess (says S. Augustine)
that I have not found that place called hell, wherein the souls of the
Patriarks did rest. And then he reasons thus; We read (says he) of a great
gulf or distance set between the place of torment and Abraham's bosom, and
many observe that when mention is there made of hell, it is not applied unto
the rest of Lazarus, but unto the punishment of Dives. Therefore (as I have
said) I have sought and yet search, and cannot find in all the Canonical
Scripture, that hell is taken for any place of well-being. But who will say
that the place of rest (wherein the Patriarks were) was not good? The Argument
which was necessarily deduced from this doctrine of S. Augustine, is this: They
who believed that Christ's soul descended only into the place of the souls of
the Patriarks, called Abraha^s bosom, or Limbus Patru^, do not believe the
descending of Christ into the real hell. But the common and almost universal
doctrine of the Romish Church at this day is, to believe that the soul of
Christ went only unto that Limbus. Ergo (by the judgment of S. Augustine) they
hold not the real descent of Christ into hell. And can you, yielding unto S.
Augustine, call your now common exposition no violation of faith? The
differences of opinions thus standing, I add

A determination of this question, concerning Christ his descending into Hell,
whereunto our Adversaries are compellable to accord. I can truly say with M.
Higgons, that the difficulty of this Article did not a little perplexe me, to
hear of such differences of senses, not only among Protestants, whom he has
noted, but also among the Romanists: some of our Adversaries holding this
descension of Christ to be vertuall only, and not personal; and among these
who defend the personal, some to believe his presence in the real hell, and
the most to fancy only such a Limbus, which has been proved to be no part of
hell. And again, concerning the Romish sense of this Article, some of
themselves doubting whether it be an Apostolical Tradition; and some
affirming, that it is not proved by Scriptures. And finally (not to urge the
Council of Trent, and other Catechismes which have singled out that form of
Creed as the only foundation of faith in all Churches, wherein this Article is
awanting:) their own most accomplished Jesuit Suarez to account it an Article
of no such absolute necessity: I thought it necessary to diue deeper into
this mystery, and (as God should enable me) in some sort to compose the
distractions of all parts, which do arise from the foresaid differences of
expositions; so far as otherwise they are consonant unto Scriptures; by
conceiving that our Adversaries (if they will religiously acquit themselves)
must grant, that notwithstanding all these diversities of senses attributed
unto this Article, yet both sides generally do hold that which is most
necessary to salvation, and merely fundamental herein: because whatsoever
belongs unto such the foundation of faith, from the time of Christ his
passion unto his resurrection, consists in these two points, the truth of his
death and passion, and the power thereof; now to explane my purpose somewhat
more particularly.

The burial of Christ in the grave, was for the auouching and ratifying of the
truth of his death and resurrection. Suppose we now, that some Christian had
not the perfect revelation of this article of Christ's burial in the grave, and
should notwithstanding believe the truth of his death and resurrection, with
the powerful effect of both; should he not be thought to be a fundamental
Christian, and (though not literally, yet sauingly to believe his burial?
seeing the reason of the burial of Christ in the grave, was (as I said before)
to verify the certainty of his death, proving it to have been true, and not
fantastical. Not that the Article of his burial, being now so evidently
revealed, is not necessarily to be believed (far be it from us thus to
conceive:) but only supposing that there were no better evidences for this
Article then such as our Adversaries have for proof of their sense in the
other, which (as some principal Doctors among them have confessed) is not
evident by Scriptures, nor yet consonantly agreed upon in their Church.

Now then, the power which any ascribes unto his descension, is either Christ's
triumph over hell, or his deliverance of souls from hell. For his triumph,
every intelligent Christian will say, that as soon as it was revealed, that
Christ had consummated his glorious work of our Redemption, all the powers of
hell were at their last gasp. As for the deliverance of souls from hell,
every one does likewise believe and profess that there is no redemption
whatsoever of any from hell, but it is wrought by the virtue of the same Death
of Christ, either by subuention (as the Romanists hold) which is, by delivering
souls from hell, wherein before Christ's death, Patriarks and holy men were
imprisoned: or else (as the Protestants teach) by prevention, that is, (which
makes more for the glory of his power and grace,) in preventing the souls of
his faithful, that they should not come into hell: even by that power of his
death (he being the Lamb slain from the beginning of the world) whereby he
freed the same Patriarks and all his elect, that they should never suffer the
eternal pains of hell, according to the belief of all Christians in the
world.

This foundation of faith thus standing in the belief of all Christan
professors, the Romanists (notwithstanding all the forenamed different senses)
are chargeable to acknowledge in both sides an accordance in that which is
absolutely necessary and essential in this point of Christian faith, except
they will plunge themselves into the gulf of doubtfulnesse and distraction.

T. H.
Thus I have given you a little signification of those many untruths, which I
have observed in this Doctor. If it consist not with his credit, or profit to
yield; yet it concerns you to beware of his Sirenicall incantations. Your
benefit shall be my reward; if not so, yet this schedule may be a token of my
love; and be you well assured, that either, by following my counsel [TRIE
BEFORE YOU TRUST,] you shall prevent an heavy doom; or, by neglecting it, you
shall increase your judgment.

The Answer.
Nay, but these are not all the inditements which you prosecute against me; for
you have inserted in your book another taxation: * The Doctor (say you) is
pleased to color Book. 1. pa. 43
and cloak the exposition of Lombard with the name of Ambrose, and for this
purpose frames this quotation in the margent, ex Ambrosio. etc. If in the
margent of Lombard in Romans 11. ad finem primae paginae. Printed at Paris apud
Iohanne^ Foucher. Anno. 1537.
Lombard there be not quoted Ambrosius directly over this place, or if any one
in reading that place, could have otherwise understood it, then will I
acknowledge my self guilty of all the imputations, which M. Higgons has
deuolued upon me: by whose reproof I am admonished not to believe their own
Lombard, who was Master of the Romish School, in his marginall allegation of
Fathers. But I hold him in better regard, and therefore think that although
the testimony alleged, be not found in Ambrose upon the 11. Chap. ad Rom: yet
(for Lombard names no place) that it is extant in him elsewhere.

Thus we see that M. Higgons among more then twenty plain calumniations, and
slanders, whereof I convicted Cardinal Bellarmine, could instance but in one,
for justification of that Doctor: whereby appears his partiality in
swallowing of Camels, and straining out Gnats. Again, out of many hundreds of
testimonies, wherein I manifested the irksome contradictions of our Romish
Adversaries among themselves, and thereby the confirmation of our Religion in
the chief controversies, he has taken exception unto these silly few, whereby
to advance his clamorous insultation: and notwithstanding bewrays in his
proofs (as has been shown,) more will then wit, and yet more wit then good
conscience. Of whom I may as well challenge (according to his promise) a
satisfaction, as I may not expect it. I wish that he may conscionably satisfy
himself; and pray the Father of all mercy not to charge him with any wrong
done against me, but to illuminate his heart, and fashion it unto the obedience
of the Apostolic faith.

Amen.

