A Brief Chronicle, of the Success of Times, from the Creation of the World,
to this instant.

CONTAINING, The Original and lives of our ancient Forefathers, before and
after the Floude, As also, of all the Monarchs, Emperors, Kings, Popes,
Kingdoms, Commonweals, Estates and Governments, in most Nations of this
World: And how in alteration, or succession, they have continued to this day.

Printed by W. Iaggard, Printer to the Honorable City of London, and are to
be sold at his house in Barbican. 1611.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, SIR WILLIAM CRAVON, Knight, Lord Mayor of the City
of London; Sir HENRY MONTAGVE, Seriant at Law to his Majesty, and Recorder of
London: And to all the Knights, Aldermen, and Worshipful Brethren, the
careful Fathers and Governors of this Honorable Estate.
Having collected these brief notes (Right Honorable, Right Worshipful, and
my most respected) concerning the Success of Times (in most of the Kingdoms
through the World) even from the Creation, to this instant year 1611. and
modelled them all in this slender Volume, that such as favor Reverend
Antiquity, might receive both pleasure and profit thereby: I thought it part of
my duty (in regard of some favor and respect lately by me received) to
present your Honor and Worships therewith, as a token of my gratitude, and as
a promise of my uttermost employment, in these, or any other endeavors, whereto
my meannesse in ability by you shall be commanded. I know right well, and such
as know me, have heard me daily confess it, that I (of infinite others) was
the most vnmeetest to undergo such a serious business, which required, if not
the best able, yet those that therein are much better seen then my self.
Nevertheless, importunity of Friends, that grieve to see no willing hand put
to the plough, or at least such (even like my self) more forward then wise;
their persuasions, I say, and some regard had of the times necessity, every man
being borne for the good of his Country; has (under your Honorable and
Worshipful favor) made me thus aduenturous.

Concerning the helps I have had in this laborious travail, the Authors
themselves, who have best written, and discoursed of those several Kingdoms and
Nations; even them, and no other have I herein followed, borrowing beside some
such matters from them, as (to my knowledge) have not in any of our Chronicles
heretofore bin remembered, or at the least, not plainly revealed. In our home
affairs, especially the antiquity of this famous City, I have (with others)
delivered my opinion therein, yet swaruing from some, who have been thought
ouer-scrupulous, sometime straining at a Gnat, yet very ealy swallowing a
Camel. The Dignity that your Honor holds, of Lord Mayor of this City, and
those grave Senators, the Alder-men your Brethren, I have aimed at the Original
and Antiquity thereof; some Authors tearming them Domesmen, Eldermen, or
Judges of the Kings Court. But that the name of Alderman declares both very
Reverend Original, and great Antiquity; I find recorded, that in the time of
King Eadgar, one Ailwin, a man of the blood Royal, and, for the special great
authority and favor he had with the King (being Sir-named Healf-Koning, that
is, Half-King) was Alderman of all England, who founded that famous Monastery
in the Isle of Ely. Our learned and worthy Antiquary M. Camden, has observed
the Epitaph engraven on his Tomb, containing these words: Hic requiescit
Ailwinus incliti Regis Eadgari Cognatus, totius Angliae Aldermannus, et huius
sacri Coenobij miraculosus fundator. Here rests Ailwin, Cousin to the Noble
King Eadgar, Alderman of al England, and of this holy Abbey the miraculous
Founder. Whereby appears, that the Title of Alderman, in those ancient,
reverend, and respective times, was an addition of honor and high repute, as
distinguishing them that deserved that grace, to be men of greater, grauer, and
more sollide judgment, in matters appertaining to the Weale-publique, then
others, incapable of such especial dignity. Of such worthy Fathers has this
famous City been plentifully furnished from time to time, as in our
Chronicle may more at large appear, and to you those grave Senators and
worthily styled Aldermen (out of entire and dutiful affection) have I
consecrated the living memory of these my poor labors: wishing to you all
unfeignedly, that as heaven has bestowed this earthly honor upon you, so
(hereafter) it may crown you with never dying happiness.

Yours in all duty to be commanded, A. Mundy.

To the Master, Wardens, Assistants, and whole Livery, of the Honorable
Company of Merchant-Tailors, being the worthy Society of S. John Baptist,
anciently derived from S. John of Jerusalem, and the famous Knights of that
religious Brotherhood. Also to the Wardens Substitutes, and the sixteen men
of the same Company, etc.
IT has been my hap (worthy and worshipful Gentlemen) among the variety of
Collections, to build up the body of this brief Chronicle; to meet with an
ancient and much esteemed Record, of a Society and brotherhood, styled by the
name of S. John Baptist of Jerusalem, and how many Great Masters have
governed that Society, from Anno. 1099. to this present year, with some brief
observations of their lives and actions, as in Follio 187. more at large
appears. Concerning the original, progression, and several Fortunes of this
Military Brotherhood, being termed Knights Hospitallers, or Knights of the
Hospital of S. John Baptist of Jerusalem; next, Knights of Rhodes, and lastly,
Knights of Malta; I refer you there to be further satisfied: yet some things
being there accidentally omitted, may favorably (and not unnecessarily) here
be remembered. These Brethren (by solemn profession) were bound to serve
Pilgrims, and poor people in the Hospital of S. John at Jerusalem, and to
secure (by their manhood) their passages thither, they charitably buried the
dead, were continually in prayer, mortifyed themselves with Watchings and
Fastinges, were courteous and kind to the poor, whom they called their
Masters, and fed them with white Bread, when themselves did eat brown. They
grew to be loved and liked of all sorts, and, through the liberal bounty of
good Princes and private persons (admiring their piety and prowess) they rose
from this low degree, to so high an estate and great riches, that about An.
1240. they had within Christendom nineteen thousand Lordships or Manors, as
the Knights Templers had nine thousand, the Reuennewes and Rentes whereof in
England, fell afterward also to these knights Hospitallers of S. John Baptist.
And this estate of theirs (grown to so great an height) made way for them
likewise to as great honors. So that their Prior in England (living then in the
goodly Palace of Saint John Baptist of Jerusalem, in the street which
received name of that house, and is called yet to this day, Saint Iohns-street)
was reputed the Prime Baron of the land, and called the Lord of S. John's,
being able, with fullness and abundance of all things, to maintain a very
honorable Port.

In success of time, as this worthy City grew to increase, not only in large
extendure and beauty of buildings, but also in election of Companies and
Corporations, for better supply of the Magistracy, and conueniency of all the
aptest means thereto belonging; this Branch of your honorable Society of S.
John Baptist (derived of that ancient and memorable Stem, of Saint John of
Jerusalem) grew to burgen and spread it self in goodliest manner. Being
Tailors of the Linnen-Armory, and brethren of Saint John Baptist (as most
Companies, in those times, had a Saints appellation) they grew to be great in
Kings favors, who thought it no indignity to themselves, to be styled in the
Brotherhood of S. John Baptist, and from their Guildes first Creation by King
Edward the third, with authority to hold a feast yearly at Midsommer, and to
make choice of a Governor or Master (according to the order of a Great
Master, among the Knights Hospitallers, of Saint John Baptist of Jerusalem)
and Wardens, to assist and aid him in that weighty charge: they proceeded on
still (by the ensuing Kings) in further additions of gracious regard, till King
Henry the seventh confirmed their Charter, naming them Merchant-Taylors, of
the Brotherhood of Saint John Baptist, to continue still the memory of their
Original. Here may I not also forget, that as the Knights Hospitallers at
Jerusalem, were always respective in service to Pilgrims and Trauailers: even
so, as if such an humble condition did well merit not to be forgotten, in this
Brotherhood (at the beginning) they did use each year to choose a Pilgrim, who
attended the service of the Master of the Company, and travailed in behalf of
the whole Society. One of the Pilgrims names is recorded by John Stow, to be
Henry de Ryall, and that name of Pilgrim continued until the eleauenth year
of Richard the second, when the four Wardens, were then called Purueyors of
Alms, now called quarterage of the fraternity.

Seven Kings have borne Bretherens name of that Society (viz:) Edward the
third; Richard the second; Henry the fourth; Henry the fifth; Henry the sixth;
Edward the fourth; and Henry the seventh, and (as is credibly affirmed)
wearing the Liueryhood on their shoulders, they have gone on the election day,
from the Hall, to the Palace of Saint John's, in Saint John's Street, there to
hear divine service, and graciously permitted the Master to go on the
vpper-hand, such (in those times) was the mild nature of Princes, showing (by
their own example) how Magistrates, and other their meaner Ministers, ought to
be held in honor and respect.

Passing over the Dukes, Earls, Lords, Bishops, Knights, and Gentlemen, who
have likewise been Brethren of that honorable Society, and many other
memorable persons, of whom this little limit allows no speech: I will conclude
this Epistle, with a brief note of two or three worthy Brethren, among
infinite other, whose deserts do justly challenge perpetual acknowledgement.

Sir William Fitz William the elder, being a Merchant Tailor, and Servant
sometime to Cardinal Wolsey, was chosen Alderman of Bread-street-Ward in
London, in Anno. 1506. And going afterward to dwell at Mylton in
Northamptonshire; in the fall of the Cardinal his former Master, he gave him
kind entertainment there at his house in the Country. For which deed, being
called before the King, and demanded how he durst entertain so great an enemy
to the State: his answer was, that he had not contemptuously or wilfully done
it, but only because he had been his Master, and partly the means of his
greatest Fortunes. The King was so well pleased with his answer, that, saying,
himself had too few such Servant; immediately he knighted him, and afterward
made him a privy Counceller. This worthy Knight dying, gave an hundred pounds
to poor Maids marriages. His debs and debtors, over whose names he had written
Amore Dei remitto, he freely forgave. He gave to the Universities forty pound;
to the poor thirty pound; to mend the highways betwixt Chigwell and
Copersale in Essex 50. pounds; to mend other highways about Thorney and
Sawtrie Chapel, and the Bridge, fifty pounds more. And to the
Merchant-Taylors his Brethren, he gave his best standing Cup, as a friendly
remembrance of him.

Sir Thomas White, Lord Mayor of this honorable City, and a worthy Brother
likewise of that Society, being a lover of Learning, and an earnest furtherer
thereof; first purchased the Hall in Oxenford, called Glocester-Hall, for
Students and Scholars to receive there the benefit of learning. But his
private thoughts very often soliciting him, that he should (in time) meet with
a place where two Elmes grew, and that there his further forward purpose
should take effect: At length he found out the place, where (at his own cost
and expenses) he founded the famous College in Oxenford, called Saint John
Baptist College, and where those two Elmes (as I have heard) are yet standing,
endowing it with such liberal Gifts, Lands, and Reuennewes, as would require
too much time here to be remembered. Beside his provision for Learning in this
worthy place, he erected other Schools, as at Bristow, Reading, and a College
at Higham Ferries. More, he gave to the City of Bristow, the sum of two
thousand pounds, to purchase Land, amounting to the yearly value of an
hundred and twenty pounds, the Mayor and Citizens paying therefore yearly an
hundred pounds. Eight hundred pounds must be lent to sixteen poor Clothiers,
fifty pounds each man for ten years space, sufficient security being given by
them for the same. Afterward, that eight hundred pounds was to pass to other
sixteen Clothiers, according to discretion of them put in trust. Two hundred
pounds beside was reserved, for provision of Corn and needful occasions for
the poor, in the order and care of the Mayor, Aldermen, and Citizens, etc.

Then, according to his will, which remains yet to be seen, out of this
bountiful gift to Bristow, these memorable branches and beneuolences, were
by himself devised and ordered, beginning in the year ^577. and thence
forward they went on according to his own direction. Then was brought to the
Merchant-Taylors Hall, an hundred and four pounds, the hundred pound to be
lent (for ten years space) to four poor men in the City of York: And the
four pound over plus, to be employed about the charges and pains, that no man
(used in the business) might receive coffeehouse. Then in An. 1578. the
like sum was to be delivered thence to Canterbury, and so thence-forward the
same sums (yearly) to the Cities and Towns following orderly.

1579. Reading. 1580. The Merchant-Tayl^rs themselves. 1581. Gloucester. 1582.
Worcester. 1583. Excester. 1584. Salisbury. 1585. West-Chester. 1586. Norwich.
1587. Sothampton. 1588. Lincoln. 1589. Winchester. 1590. Oxenford. 1591.
Hereford East. 1592. Cambridge. 1493. Shrewesbu^ie. 1594. Ly^ne. 1595. Bathe.
1596. Derby. 1597. Ipswitch. 1598. Colchester. 1599. New Castle.
This sum of one hundred and four pounds, passing yearly to these
forenamed places, from the Merchant-Taylors Hall, and to the good intended
uses of the giver; that there might be no breathing while for so just a
Stewards Talent, but to have it kept on in continual employment for the poor:
the same order was to take beginning again (as before) at the City of York,
and so successively (while the World stands) to the Towns before named, in
selfsame course as it had the original, with great care and obseruaunce in
them to whom it belongs, that the dead may not be abused, nor poor men's
right injured.

But did he thus shut up his Pursse, and say to himself. I have given
sufficient? No, he did cast his pitying eye next on the City of Couentry,
distressed (at that time) in great and grievous manner. What his instant
benevolence was, he took it to be but as an hours Sunshine, after a whole
day of storm and tempest, although it might yield some comfort, were the
season never so short. But to establish a certainty, that no dismay or doubt
should ever after be able to remove, (even as a worthy Piramide, erected to
perpetuity) he gave to the City of Couentry 1400. pound, therewith to purchase
Lands, rising to the anuall value of 70. li. Twelve poor Inhabitants of that
City, were to have in free Alms twenty four pounds, each man forty
shillings yearly, on the eleauenth day of March. Four young men were also to
have forty pounds yearly, ten pound each man, and for nine years space,
upon sufficient security given; And their turns thus served, then four other
young men to have the like sum, and like limitation, and so from nine years,
to nine years, for ever. Afterward it was ordered to two poor men of the same
City, and lastly to one; in which nature (according to the several
limitations) it does yet, and doubtless shall for ever continue. Also the same
sum to one young man in Northampton; next, in the City of Leicester;
Thirdly, in Nottingham; Fourthly, in Warwick; Then returning to Couentrie
again for one year, it repasseth to the said Towns again, each after other
yearly for ever. And least his worthy intent should fail in the continuance,
he enlarged his first gift to Couentrie, of 1400. pounds, to 2000. and 60.
pound, to be employed as has been remembered, forty pound yearly being paid
out of it to Saint John Baptist College in Oxford: And allowances also by
himself given in each place, that bonds should be made without any charge to
the receiver.

Sir Thomas Row, Lord Mayor of this famous City, and a worthy Merchant-Taylor,
beside his charitable cost and charges, in building the new Churchyard in
Bedlem, for such Parishes as wanted benefit of burial: Gave forty pounds
yearly, to maintain ten poor men for ever, such as were not Brethren of
his own Society, but chosen out of five several Companies (viz.)
Clothworkers, Armorers, Carpenters, Tylers, and Plaisterers: As considering,
that by ouer-toyling labor, dangers, falls, bruizes, and such like
inconveniences, they were soonest like to become impotent, and unable to help
or maintain themselves. Therefore to each of these ten men, he freely gave
the sum of four pound quarterly, to be paid them at the Merchant-Taylors Hall,
during their lives; and then to succeed to other men in the same Companies,
according to due consideration, of just cause and most necessity.

Lastly, worthy Gentlemen, to hold ye no longer, in matter better known to
your selves then me, because it is in your own eyes and ears (almost)
daily, the never dying memory, of a yet living (and long may he so be) Brother
Merchant-Taylor, shall be my conclusion. This virtuous and Religious man,
knowing Death to be an vnindifferent Executor, and Life much more worthy of
trust and employment; has prevented that gripple greedy Tyrant, and made such
large Legacies to Life, that Death never deserved to be put in trust withal.
If men of this World, such as GOD has liberally bestowed his blessings on,
would (with this good-minded man) consider, that, let their wills be never so
wisely made, yea, all Art and Dexterity therein (to the very uttermost)
employed: yet death, and his long wide gaping Children, have many hangers on,
many means and devises, but many more tricks and unfaithful performances;
they would trust life the better, as this man has done, and let death have
only the reuersion, which is the easier to be considered on. It is not for my
pen to set down his praises, leaves of Marble or Brass are meeter for those
Carracters, that the devouring teeth of Time may never deface. Let this th^n
(...) ^ome addition to your honor, that you have such a ^orthy Brother;
mindful of the works of Mercy to the ^oore, among your selves, and many places
elsewhere* careful of offenders, whom law sentencing with Death, by the
Watch-bell of Prayer are encited to compunction; and hopeful of al goodness,
to pursue (...) virtuous determinations every where. So that when ^is Dooue
shall find no resting place for his foot* (...) reason of this Worlds
tumultuous waves; he may return to the Arc of blessedness, the happy home,
that he, you, and all else that fear God, should daily long for.

Yours ever, A. MVNDY.

TO THE ANCIENT, WORTHY, AND RIGHT Worshipful Company of the Goldsmiths; the
Master, Wardens, Assistants, Livery: and likewise to every loving Brother, and
member thereof.
LEt me not be thought (Right Worshipful Society) more bold then becomes me,
that in search of Antiquity, and Success of Times, guided by good
observation, and probable Authorities, I thus present you (in unfeigned
affection) what I have gathered, concerning your worthy Brotherhood. If I had
time here to set down (without prejudice to any other Mystery whatsoever)
that which Holy Writ records of you, and of men (then) most expert in your
profession; this poor Epistle would increase it self to a very large
discourse, and exceed the limit whereto I have tied my self in the whole labor.
I pass over the captivity of Gods chosen people in Babylon, and the Offices of
those three especial chosen men, Zerubbabell, Ezra, and Nehemiah: the first,
being their Captain to guide them home, and provided that the Temple was
builded: the second, reforming manners, and making a plantation of Religion:
the third and last, to build up the walls, and make a new City of Jerusalem
again: Yet let me tell you, that among the multitude of Officers and Offices,
appointed to this business, for building the walls, the Merchants and
Goldsmithes do bear a remarkable note, the very words in Scripture being
these: Between the Chamber of the Corner unto the Sheepe-gate, fortifyed the
Gold smiths and the Merchants. Beside, that which is spoken of Malchi^h the
Goldsmithes son, fortifying to the house of the Nethinims; And then, of
Bezaleell the Son of Vri, filled with the Spirit of God, in wisdom and
understanding, to work in Gold, Silver, and Brass; who had Aholiab joined
with him, to make all curious works (appointed by God himself) for the
Tabernacle of the Congregation, the Arc of the Covenant, and the Mercy-seat,
etc. If these be not Testimonies of extraordinary honor and respect, in the
very names of Merchants and Goldesmiths (but much more, in the matter of so
high an employment) confirmed by an assurance so unreprovable, and equalling
what can be said (in like case) of venerable Antiquity; I refer my self to
be censured by the very seuerest judgment.

Secondly, concerning the first workers in Gold, Silver, and other Mettalles,
in any place of eminence or note in Europe (under control nevertheless, of
such as have read and observed more then I have done) I find their Original
to be among the euer-curious and ingenious Veni^ians, even at the first
plantation of Venice, which justly may be termed Miracolo del Mondo. The
foundation of Venice, holds paritie and proportion of Antiquity, with the prime
estate of the Francs or French, as you may observe where it is more at large
expressed. Looking back then to the first Note of Divine observation, and
remembering (after the worlds division among the sons of Noah) that Iaphets son
Tubal had all Europe for his partition, with this last Collestion concerning
Venice; and then, as all Arts and Sciences have a place of Original, as Rivers
from the Sea, and extend themselves afterward to the remotest places of the
world: So may it likewise be gathered, that those respective times, admyring
and honoring Art and Invention, gave such way to their present, and succeeding
fame and passage, that all Lands became Partners of their predecessors
prerogatives.

Lastly, to speak but of our own Kingdom, and therein (for breuities sake)
but of this Noble City it self; I find, that when it had cast off the yoke of
strange confusion, endured under the sufferance of so many conquerings: After
(I say) it came to have command within it self, under the awe and gracious
favor of worthy Kings and Potentates, who made choice of Magistrates, to be
their Deputies, and to present their God-like persons for general obedience:
the very first man that attained to the place of eminence, and was styled Maire
of this renowned City, was called Henry Fitz-Alwine, Fitz-Liefstane,
Goldsmith, and held that supreme Office more then 24. years together. A
memorable Note, in regard of Priority, and as since then, carefully remembered,
so justly challenging continuance to utmost posterity.

But because this slender volume speaks more, (though briefly) of you, then
here can well be affoorded, and comes to you from a free heart, in kindness,
requiring but as free and courteous acceptance: this is all the charge by me
imposed on it. To tell the whole Golden band of your worthy Brotherhood, that I
have done nothing herein, either for flattery or vaineglorie, or in
expectation of mercinarie recompense; but according to truth, sincerity, and
honesty which is the best defense for any that speaks of Antiquity.

Yours to be commanded, A. Mundy.

A Table of the several Arguments, handled in this Book.
THe Original and Succession of our forefathers, from Adam to the general
Deluge. Fol: 1. From the Flood, to the Princes and Judges of Israel. 5 From the
Princes and Judges, to the Jewish kings. 12 From the Jewish Kings, to the Kings
of Judah. 14 From the Kings of Judah and Jerusalem, to the Monarchy, etc. 19 The
Monarchy of the Chaldeans, Assyrians, etc. 19 The Monarchy of the Persians. 20
The Monarchy of the Grecians. 23 The Kings of Macedon. 24 The Kings of Syria.
26 The Kings of Egypt. 29 The Monarchy of the Caesar's or Romans. 32 The
Emperors of the west from Charlemaign. 54 The Emperors of the East. 61 The
Ottomans or Turkish Emperors. 89 Original of the Sarazins. 102 Bishops and
Popes of Rome, from the original, and Ages of the Church. 108 Original of the
Knights of S. John's of Jerusalem, and all other Orders of Knighthood. 157 Of
the Emperor of Ethiopia, Pr^te Ian. 214 Of the Kingdom of Persia. 220 Of the
Kingdom of Thunis. 227 Of the great Province of Moscouia. 229 Of the Kingdom
of Poland. 233 Of sundry other Kingdoms Conquered by the Romans. 235 Of the
Kingdom of Portugal. 241 Of the Kingdom of Italy. 255 The Original of the
Venetians. 258 Of the Dukes of Venice. 269 Of the Kingdom of Spain. 300 Of
Germany, and the Princes Electors. 304 The Original of the French Nation. 305
Of Pharamond, the first king of France, and consequently of all the other kings
of France. 316 Of the Earls of Holland and Zeland. 382 Of the Kingdom of
Ireland. 427 Of the Governors, Lieutenants, and Deputies of Ireland. 435 Of the
Kingdom of Scotland. 442 Of Albion, before Brutes arrival, and what Kings
reigned there. 466 The Light of Britain, and of all the Kings succeeding
after Brute. 471 A Catalogue of the Princes of Wales. 522 Of Englands
Bishoppricks, and their circuits. 526 Foundation of the Colleges in Cambridge
and Oxenford. 532 Of the Shires in England and Wales. 535 Original Antiquity,
and modern estate of London. 537 Temporal Government of London, since the
Conquest. 573
A SHORT SVMmary or brief Chronicle of TIMES.
Containing the original and succession of our ancient Forefathers, from the
first CREATION of the World: As also of the Monarchs, Emperors, Kings, Popes,
and Famous men, with all the most memorable matters happening since the Worlds
beginning, to this instant time.

OUR Eternal GOD, al good, Years of the world
Almighty, and most merciful, in the beginning, created and made the World of
nothing: that is to say; Heaven, Earth, and Waters, as first and principal
matter, together with the Angels. He disposed and gave form in six days,
Genes. 1.
(for he rested the seventh, and blessed it) to all things enclosed within
the circle of Heaven. All which he did by his word, namely Jesus Christ, and
the blessed Spirit: these three persons being one Divine essence (for the
works of the sacred Trinity are inseparable) whom I most humbly beseech to
favor and assist me, in beginning and ending this short Summary.

After that this sovereign Architect had created (of nothing) in one instant,
this first mass or matter, and disposed in six days this whole round frame:
at length, and upon the sixth day he created Man of the slime of the earth (in
the Damascene territory situate in Syria, The Creation of man
or in Hebro^, according to the Haebrues Tradition, into which place he
withdrew himself after he had sinned) and made him after his own likeness,
as concerning his soul, which also he created of nothing: Genesis 1.
he named him Adam, that is to say, Red man, or Red-Earth, according to the
Hebrew language. Afterward, he took a rib from Adam, as he lay asleep in
Paradise, and thereof formed Heuah, Marriage and household life.
which signifies, as Moses writes (followed by Josephus) Soroow, and Mother
of the Living; and according to Zorarus, Woman. Thus began the institution of
Marriage, and household life together. Genes. 2, 3.


Adam and Heuah our first Parents, by persuasion of the Serpent (that is to
say, The fall of Man.
the Devil) transgressed the Commandment which God had given them, for effect
of their faith and obedience. In regard whereof, they were cast out of
terrestiall Paradise, that is to say, a Garden abounding in pleasures, where
GOD had placed them together: and (with their posterity) were subjected to
sin, death, and the Devil. The reparation of man in the promise of Jesus
Christ.
But our good God, being made all of mercy, perceiving the offense of Man, did
promise him, that the seed of the Woman, which is Jesus Christ, should break
the head of the Serpent, that is to say, his kingdom and power, delivering us
from the captivity of sin, death, Genesis 2, 3.
and the Devil. In this promise we may note the sourse or springhead of the
Gospel* Original of the Gospel.
which afterward was oftentimes repeated, and diversely signified by sundry
figures, for comfort of our holy Forefathers, even to the coming of Jesus
Christ.

When Adam was thrown forth of Paradise, 15.
30.
he began to labor in the earth with great pain. Afterward, he knew Heuah his
wife, who brought him a son called Caine, who was an husbandman, and the
first murderer of his brother Abell, the just Shepherd. Genes. 2, 3.
In whom began the first persecution of the Saints by the wicked, for the true
and sincere service of God.

In this man also began the Kingdom or city of God, and in the other, The City
of God, and of the world.
the city of the World and of the Devil, as shall be better manifested in
Nimrod. This murder being thus committed, Caine was abominable in the sight of
God, Genes. 4.
he withdrew himself from his father, and builded a City after the name of
his first son Enoch.

Adam had daughters also, 138.
and at the age of 230. years, he begat Seth.

Seth, at the age of 105. years, begat Enos. 2^5.


Enos aged 99. years, begat Cainam. 325.


Cainam, aged 70. years, begat Malaleel. 395.


460.
Malaleel aged 605. years, begat Iared.

622.
Iared aged 160. years, begat Enoch.

6^7.
Enoch, who at the age of 65. years, begat Methusalem, walked with God,
declaring his judgments, to ensue upon men degenerating from human and
reasonable Nature, into brutish and unbridled voluptuousness. For the Sons
of God (that is to say, the Saints, by the generation of Seth) beholding the
Daughters of men (that is to say, Genes. 5, 6.
the wicked by the generation of Caine) to be fair: took them to Wife,
without any regard, and celebrated marriages with the people of abomination,
of whom Giants were borne men* of might, Giants.
and great Renown.

874.
Methusalem at the age of 187. years, begat Lamech. 9^0.
Adam dyed aged 930. years: Just Enoch was carried alive up into heaven.

1056.
Lamech, at the age of 182. years, begat Noah the deliverer of Justice: whom
the Poets (not understanding the creation of the world) called Heavens Chaos,
Seed of the world, and Father of the Gods.

Noah, being 500. years of age, with his wife Thitea, that is to say Earth;
or, according to the Poets, Aretia, Cybele, Vesta, and Mother of the Gods,
begat Sem, Cham, and Iaphet: with whom by the commandment of God, in the
hundred year after, he entered into the Arc which had been built by him, and
was preserved from the Flood.

The General Deluge.
BY which inundation of waters, God brought an horrible vengeance, to punnish
the wicked lives of men.

Sem, who was Melchizedech, 1659.
Genesis 10, 11
two years after the flood, begat Arphaxad, 1695.
being then aged 100. years.

Arphaxad aged 35. years, begat Sale. 1725.


Sale, at the age of thirty years, begat Heber, Genesis ^1.
and builded the City of Salem (though some say it was Sem) that should be
called Jerusalem, the City of God, seated in the midst of Judea.

Heber, 1759.
of whom the Hebrews were after named, being aged 34. years, begat P^aleg:
The division or partage of the world. Genesis 10, 11 Berosus in 1. de Antiquit.
at which time the earth was divided between the sons of Noah. Sem and his
offspring enioied the East part of Syria, to wit, Asia. Cham Zoroastres had
Judea, Egypt, Arabia* and all Africa. Iaphet, who by the Poets is called
Iapetus, 1789.
had (with his people) all Europe.

Phaleg, at the age of thirty years, begat Reu, The kingdom of the Celts.

The kingdom of Italy.

The kingdom of Egypt.

Beros 4. et 5. The Kingdom of Spain, etc.


at which time, Nimrod the Babylonian Saturn, and hindmost Nephew of Cham,
began his reign; builded the Tower of Babell, where began the confusion of
tongues into seauenty two, the common language of the Hebrew remaining entyre.
Samothes or Dis, King of the Gauls, (of whom the Gauls or Celts, term
themselves to be descended, as Caesar declares in his sixth Book) began also
his reign in short time after: as Gomerus Gallus likewise did his in Italy,
and Tuball the Son of Iaphet his rule in Caltiberia, now called Spain.
Oceanus swayed in Egypt; as Tuiscon or Ascenas did in Allemain or Germany

1821.
Reu at the age of 32. years, begat Saruch.

1^^0.
Saruch, aged thirty years, begat Nahor, or Nachor, termed Fair Jupiter the
second, King of the Assyrians.

1879.
Nachor, at the age of 29. years, begat Thares or Terah, who is said to be
Ninus the third King of the Assyrians. He erected Temples, Altars, and Statues
to his dead father, which were a great occasion, Coin first found out in
Egypt. The kingdom of the Syconians.
and the very sourse of Idolatries. Osyris and Isis first found out the means
of Corn at this time in Egypt, and now did Aegia^eus become first King of the
Sicyonians, or Peloponnesus, now named Morea.

1950.
Thares, a maker and seller of Idolles, being 70 years of age, begat Abraham,
Nahor, and Aran the Father of Lot. Beros lib. 5. Diodor. lib. 3
Semiramis the wife of Ninus, (in habit of a man) reigned over the Assyrians,
in the name of her Son.

2007.
Noah, died aged 905. year old, 350. years after the flood. Genes. 9.
Saturn, Pluto, Cybele, Mother of the Gentiles Gods, Sol, Jupiter, Pallas or
Minerua, Venus, Cupid, Vulcane, Mercury, and all the crew of these feigned Gods
then began.

2025.
Abraham, boing aged 75. years, by the Commandment of God, departed from his
own Country and Kindred, Genes. 12. Genesis 21, 20, 25.
for God had promised unto him the land of Canaan, and blessing upon all
people, by his wisdom which is Jesus Christ: he begat Isaac. Saron King of
Gaul ordained public Schools. Druis his successor, being a very wise
Prince, (of whom the Druides are said to be derived) appointed Priests and
Philosophers among the Gauls. So do affirm Berosus in his fifth Book, Caesar
in his sixth Book, Berosus lib 5 Caesar. lib. 6. Cor. Tacit in mor. Germ.
and Cornelius Tacitus in the Manners of the Allemaynes or Germans.

Isaac, aged 60. years, 2109.
begat on his Wife Rebecca Esau and Jacob, twins. Abraham, Genesis 25. The
kingdom of the Argiues Beros. lib. 5 Diodor. lib 6
Sem and Heber dyed. Inachus was the ancient and first King of the Argiues. At
this time Bardus K. of the Gauls, became the inventer of Verses and of
Music, and Hercules ruled in Lybia.

Jacob, called Israel, at the age of 84. years, 2193.
married Lea and Rachel, and of them, together with their two Handmaids, had
twelve sons: Ruben, Simeon, Leui, Father of the Levites, and Priestly
lignage: Judah (of whom the Jews do hold their name) and the Royal lignage of
Jesus Christ descended: Issachar, Zabulon, Gad, Aser, Genesis 29, 30
Dan, Nephtalin, Joseph, and Benjamin, all Patriarchs, with Dina, one only
daughter, who was the wife of Job, according as Philo the Jew records.

Of these twelve Patriarchs, the 12. Tribes or Linages descended. Afterward,
22^9
Jacob being aged 130. years, went down into Egypt with all his family, to
his Son Joseph the Deputy to Pharaoh, who had bin sold by his Brethren.
Genesis 37, 41
In that place he gave up the ghost, being aged then 147. years: having
prophesied, that Jesus Christ should come, before that the Scepter were taken
from Judah, Genes. 49.
or a Duke of his generation. Galathes the Son of Hercules, was King of
Gaul, 2257.
whereof it took the name, Prometheus and Atlas at this time were very
excellent Astrologians.

2311.
Joseph dyed 54. years after his Father. The Israelites now began to be evil
entreated by the Egyptians. Genes. 50.
Moses the last Nephew of Leui, was borne 64. years after the death of Joseph.
2375.
Cecrops then builded the City of Athens, and was first King thereof: The
kingdom of Athens.
Also, he was the first Author of the most abominable idolatries, that ever
were among the Grecians. The Deluge of Deucalion.

Exodus.
Princes and Judges of Israel.
2454.
MOses, aged 80. years, by the commandment of God reproved Pharaoh;
Leuiticus. Numbers.
wrought many miracles in Egypt, withdrew the people of Israel our of Egypt by
the Red Sea, being in number more then six hundred thousand.

Exodus 12. Galath. 3.
This their departure thence, happened in the year 430. of the promise made to
Abraham, for the blessing of all Nations by his seed. Moses gave the Law to
the people (in the Deserts of Arabia) as a School-maister, until the coming of
the promised seed. For this cause he ordained for ye sins of the people, diverse
Ceremonies of sacrifices marriages, punishments, and solemnities of feasts. For
the action of War, Deuterono.
he numbered more then six hundred and three thousand, without comprehension of
the Levites, to whom he prescribed their charge. In the end, he instructed the
rude people in diverse commandments. For Gods ordinances he constituted Iosuah
his successor, and rendered up his spirit in the 120. year of his life: and of
the departing out of Egypt, the 40. read Exodus, Leuiticus, Numbers, and
Deuteronomy, all which are here thus briefly collected. Da^danus having
slain his Brother Jason, The kingdom of Troy.
was the first King of Troy. Ianigines was then King in Italy: the most cruel
Tyrant Busiris King in Egypt: and Mercurius Trismegistus, that is to say: three
times the most great King, Priest and Philosopher: See M. Ficinus in his life.

Iosuah passed the people dry foot thorough the River of Jordan, into the Land
of Promise. ^465.
The Sun stayed while he fought the battle: Iosuah.
he slew one and thirty Kings. And after he had distributed their Countries
amongst the people: he died thirty years after the death of Moses. The
Israelites then left God, and served Idols. Orcus, King of the Molosses made
then a rape of Proserpina: And Cadmus brought the Charracters of Letters into
Greece.

Othoniell, of the Lignage of Judah, 2526.
governed the people eight years, and was the third Judge of Israel in order,
and not the first, Judges 3.
as some have supposed. He delivered the people from the oppression of the King
of Mesopotamia.

Aiod or Ehua, slew the king of the Moabites, 2534.
Judges 3.
reigned eight years, and delivered the people from the idolatry of the
Moabites. In this time began, but much rather increased the Gods and Idolatries
of the Gentiles (according to Josephus) as Bacchus, Pandion, Radamanthus,
Aeacus, Minos King of Creet. Dedalus and Icarus, at this time made their
flight. Tantalus Amphion, founder and first King of Thebes. Linus.

2614.
Barach with Debora the Prophetess, judged 40. years, overcame with ten
thousand men only, the Army of Sisara, consisting of two hundred thousand men.
The Argona^tes sailed then to Colchos; then lived Areus and Thiestes, Pan also,
and Midas King of Phrygia, abounded in Treasures.

2654.
Gedeon a valiant Captain, judged forty years, and delivered the Israelites
from the servitude of the Madianites. In this time lived Circes, Medea,
Enchanteresses, with Medusa and Andromeda. The kingdom of the Micenes
Euristheus first king of Mycena, and was slain by Aeacides, having commanded
(well near) thorough all Greece, for the space of forty five years together.

2694.
Abimelech, the natural Son of Gedeon, was Judge three years, he slew 69. of
his natural and legitimate Brethren, only that he might reign. Sparta or
Lacedemon was the^ builded by Spartus the Son of Phoroneus: Others do
attribute the building thereof to Aristhenes, who was their first king.

26^7.
Thola was Judge 25. years: then lived Ruth Mother to the Grandmother of
David: Ruth.
then also were Castor, Pollux, Apollo the inuenter of Music, Aesculapius his
Son, Orpheus and Museus, who were the first Poets, according to Linus.

Iair judged 22. years, during which time, 2710.
the people lived in maruailous quiet, as they did before, in the reign of
Thola. But afterward there happened interregnum eighteen years together: in
all which time, the Israelites were servile to the Philistims, for their
idolatries. Pyrrhus then invented the Tennis Play: Theseus vanquished the
Minotaure, and Hercules came from Spain into Italy, 55. years before Aeneas.

Iephta the Bastard was Judge six years, 2760.
and being thereto compelled by his vow, he slew his only Daughter. Theseus
now made his rape of Helena, she being then a very young Maiden. Sybilla
Aericthrea, lived in this time, she that foretold the ruin of Troy, and of
whom Homer tells many goodly tales.

Abesan or Ibsan judged seven years: 2766.
The History of Ruth happened in this time. Pluto, Neptune, then were, and
Paris stole Helena, the wife to Menelaus king of the Lacedaemonians.

Elon was Judge ten years, 2773.
in whose time happened the War between the Greeks and the Troyans, The war
of Troy.
for the rape of Helena Wife to Menelaus, by Paris Son to Priam, the last
King of Troy.

Abdon judged eight years, 2783.
Aeneas with his companions came into Italy, and Francus (if we may believe
Manethous and others) the Son of Hector, with his followers also came into
Austria. Of the one descended the Latins, and kings of the Romans: and of
the other the Kings of France. In these days lived Pilades and Orestes the
two loyal friends.

2791.
Samp^on the strong, was Judge 20. years, he slew a thousand Philistims with
the iaw-bone of an Ass, Judges 20.
and was deceived by a Strumpet. The Lineage or Tribe of Benjamin was now almost
utterly destroyed, only through detestable voluptuousness.

2811.
Hely Priest and Judge, reigned forty years, and was punnished of God, for
his over great indulgence toward his children. The Ark of Moses was then taken
by the Philistims. B^ute the Son of Syluius third King of the Latins,
expulsed then the cruel Giants out of the Island, which (after his own name)
he called Britain, now England, and divided his Land to his three Sons, in
three several kingdoms, to wit, Loegria to Locrine: Cambria, now called Wales,
to Camber; and Albania, now called Scotland, to his third Son Albanact.

2851.
The kingdoms of Lacedemo^ and Corinth
Samuel the Prophet, and innocent Judge to those wicked children. He anointed
Saul to the Israelites, they desiring a King t And then began the Kingdom of
the Lacedaemonians, instituted by Euristhenes, and of the Corinthians founded by
Atletes.

Kings of all the Jewish people.
2851.
Saul, first King of the Israelites, with Samuel reigned forty years. He
pardoned Agag King of Amalec his Prisoner, and reserueth the spoil to
Sacrifice to God, 1. Kings.
contrary to his Commandment. He took counsel of Pythonissa the
Enchantresse: for which he was reproved of God, and was slain in the battle.

David, both King and Prophet, 2891.
in his youth he was a Shepherd, and feared God: 11. Kings.
but afterward forgetting himself, he committed both adultry and murder. He
reigned forty years, and being wearied with many molestations, he wrote his
Book of Psalms to the glory of God. To him was renewed the ancient promise of
Jesus Christ, and of his eternal kingdom: who (as concerning his manhood, and
according to the flesh) descended of him.

Solomon reigned forty years. 2931.
Of such provision as David (with mighty expenses) had prepared: 111. Kings.
in the fourth year of his reign he builded a Temple to God, which in seven
years after was finished, it being 80. years, Kings. 3, 6.
after ye coming forth of Egypt. He composed the Proverbs, Ecclesiastes, and
the Canticles. At length, spending his time in the delight of women and
strange Concubines: he, who was a holy man, elected of God as both Son and
King: fell into idolatry. In regard whereof, his kingdom (after his death) was
divided to the kingdom of Judah, which was for Rehoboam the Son of Solomon;
and to the kingdom of Israel, for Jeroboam the Son of Nabat.

Kings of Judah, or of Jerusalem.
2971.
REhoboam the Son of Solomon, King of Judah, despised his Elders, and adhered
to the counsel of young heads. He reigned wickedly 17 years. Jeroboam the
first King of Israel, induced the people to idolatry. In this time flourished
the Poet Homer.

2988.
Abiam the Son of Rehoboam, reigned three years. He trusting in God,
overcame Jeroboam king of Israel, who was accompanied with eight hundred
thousand chosen, strong and valiant men, yet lost five hundred thousand of
them, by the others Army, which consisted but of four hundred thousand.

2991
Asa, a very good King, reigned one and forty years: he took away the Idols,
and deposed his Mother from the Title of Lady, because she had erected them.
He, trusting in his Physicians, and not requiring help of God, being diseased
in his feet, dyed.

3032.
Iehosaphat reigned five and twenty years, he was a most debonaire Prince,
appointing every where Lawmakers and Magistrates, 1111. Kings. 4. Kings 2.
admonishing them daily to do their duty. In his time the great Prophet Helias
was wrapped up into heaven. Ahab a most wicked King of Israel, took to wife
Iezabel as wicked a woman: they were both reproved by the Prophet Elias: The
Priests of Baal were destroyed.

3555.
Iehorum, the wicked Son of a virtuous Father reigned eight years, being
the husband to Athalia the Sister of Achab. Now was the prophet Elizeus. In
these days Licurgus the Lawmakers, did cut off the excess of food and
garments: Hesiodus.

Othozias, importuned by his Mother Athalia, 3060.
the Daughter of Amry, reigned wickedly one year. He was overthrown by Iehu,
king of Israel, the last of Salomons line. Iehu also vanquished Iezabel, and
the wife and brethren of Achab, with all the Priests of Baal, in whose Temple
they made their Thefts and Robberies.

Athalia slew all the Royal seed or race, 306^.
except Ioas, who was nourished and kept by Iehoida. Afterward Athalia was
slain in the seventh year of her reign.

Ioas reigned justly forty years, 3067.
during the time of Iehoida the Priest: who being dead, he slew Zacharias his
son in the Temple. Sardanapalis king of the Assyrians being then vanquished,
threw himself into a fire. Afterward his Monarchy was divided among his
Officers, into the kingdoms of Assyria and Medea. The kingdom o^ Carthage.
Pigmalion being king of Tire, Dido his Sister builded Carthage, which she
reduced into a kingdom: she being a woman very magnanimous, and chaste, as
Iustine affirms, in his eighteenth Book, whatsoever Virgill and Ovid say to
the contrary.

Amasius reigned five and twenty years: he was admonished by the Prophet,
3107.
not to put his trust in humain strength: yet for idolatry he was taken and
slain by his enemies. Some do report, that at this time was the ending of the
effeminat Sa^^anapalu^, and so consequently of the first Assyrian Monarchy,
which continued after Nimrod, 1358. years.

3136.
Osias reigned justly two and fifty years. He undertook the sacrifycing
Priests office, for which he was switten with Leprosy, in the ^8. year of his
reign. In this time, Abdias, Amos, and Joel the Prophets lived. Belus, by some
termed Belocus, first King of the Babylonians, was translated to the new
Kingdom of the Assyrians, The kingdoms of the Medes and Macedonians.
and now was the beginning of the Olympiad in Greece. Then also began the
kingdom of the Medes, by Arsacus Lieutenant to the womanish Sardanapalus: And
that of the Macedonians by Gramaus.

3188.
Ioathan a good King, reigned sixteen years, in which time were Micheas,
Nahum, and Jonas the Prophets. Romulus and Remus, in the first year of the
seventh Olympiade, builded the City of Rome in Italy: For the beginning
whereof, it is necessary to read Dionisius Halicarnasseus in his first Book:
Solynus Cap. 2, and Pausanias, rather then Catoes Originals, and Fabius Pictors
fragments, suspected rather of Novelty, then antiquity: The kingdom of the
Lydians.
according to Beat. Reuanus. Some do refer it to the following reign: about
this time began the kingdom of the Lydians, by Ardis,

3204
Achaz the idolater, reigned sixteen years. Esaias then prophesied (as appears
in his seventh Chapter) of Jesus Christ, to be borne of a Virgin. And
Micheas, that he should be borne in Bethlehem: The kingdom of the Romans.
About this time began the kingdom of the Romans, by Romulus.

Ezechias a good King, reigned 29. years: 3218.
he brake the Serpent of Moses, whereunto the people had so many years
offered Sacrifice. Salmanazar King of the Assyrians (for Idolatry) ruined the
whole kingdom of Israel unto Samaria, which had continued 244. years. The
Angel of God did then overthrow an hundred and four-score M. men of war, in
the Army of Sennacherib, for their most exeerable blasphemies. Tobias was
captive then in Niniuy. Numa Pompillius, king of Rome, added two months to the
year, January and February, there being no more before, but ten, in regard of
them.

Manasses, being a wicked and cruel king, 3247.
reigned 55. years: he caused the Prophet Esaias to be sawed in sunder through
the midst. And being captiued by his enemies, he acknowledged God; and being
reduced to his kingdom, he demolished the Idols. Tullus Hostilius, third King
of Rome destroyed the kingdom of Alba, whence came the family of the Iulij to
Rome. Candaulus and Gyges were then Kings of Lydia.

Amon, a more wicked King then his Father Manasses, reigned two years, 3302.
4. Kings 11
and was slain by his own servants. Zaleucus was then Lawgiver to the
Locrians.

Josias a very good King, reigned 31. years: 3304.
he cut down the hallowed Woods and the Idolles. In this time the Books of
Moses, which for many years together had bin lost, were found again, and now
lived Sophonie, Abacuck, and Jeremy the Prophets: as also Archilocus,
Simonides, and Phocylides* Poets. Ancus Martius, was the fourth king of Rome,
Epimenides.

3335.
Ioacham, a very evil King, the third month of his reign, was led captive
into Egypt, and his Brother constituted king in his place, by the king of Egypt.

3336.
Iocim reigned eleauen years. For his abominations, he was chained and led
captive to Babylon, by Nabuchadonoser the great king of the Assyrians.
Tarquinius Priscus, was fifth king of the Romans. In Greece then lived Sapho,
Stesichorus, Pherecydes, Draco, Solon, and others of the Sages.

3346.
Ioachim, otherwise called Ieconias, being 18. years old, and besiedged by the
Assyrians, yielded himself with his Mother, his Princes, and the greater part
of his people, to Nabuchadonoser and was transported into Babylon, where (in
prison he begat Salathiell, Father to Zorobabell: then lived Ezechiell, Baruch,
and Daniell.

3^49.
Sedechias his Uncle, was constituted king in the place of Ieconias, by
Nabuchadonoser, by whom, after the eleventh year of his reign, he was taken
as a Rebel: his eyes were plucked out, and then he was led with the rest of the
people to Babylon. In this time, the Temple and City of Jerusalem was miserably
burned by the Assyrians

Then happened that lamentable captivity of Babylon, foretold by the Prophets,
and continued seauentie years: all which was occasioned by the contempt of
Gods word, false Doctrine, and avarice in the Priests and Prophets: conjoined
with the tirrany of their Kings, and sins of the people, but especially
idolatry: as appears in Jeremy, Cap. 19, 22, 23, 29, 32. Baruch 6. Ezechiell
13, 22. And then was this great Nabuchadonoser (for his arrogancy) thrust out
of his kingdom, and fed with the Beasts. Seruius Tullius was sixth King of the
Romans; Croesus in Lydia, Balthazar in Babylon, and, for abusing the Vessels
of the Temple, he was slain. The kingdom then deuolued to Darius the Medean,
Uncle of Cyrus, King of Persia and Medea.

The Monarchy of the Caldeans, Assyrians, or Babylonians.
NAbuchadonoser, 3362.
the great King of Babylon, in the 24. year of his reign, and of the world
3362. was he that established the great and first Monarchy, described with that
of the Persians, Grecians, and Romans by Daniell, Daniel. 2, 7
compared to the head of gold, and to the Eagle flying. It endured but seauenty
eight years, in three Kings, and he that reigned longest, it was but 43 years.

Euilmerodach, whom Herodotus calls Labynitus, reigned thirty years. Thales,
Clito, 3382.
Herod. lib. 1
Pittacus, Bias, Cleobulus and Periander, wisemen of Greece, are all referred
to this time. And it is an error to separate them otherwise, as some have done,
Solo^ being the most ancient.

3412.
Balthazar, the contemner of God, and renewer of the old Caldean idolatry
(abolished before) abusing (in his feasts) those vessels, Blasphemy the
ruin of the monarchy.
which had bin taken from the temple of Jerusalem, and making a mockery at the
true God of the Jews; was put to death by the Medes and Persians, who
possessed themselves of the Monarchy, in the tenth year of his reign. There
is great difficulty about this Monarchy, which cannot here be declared.

The Monarchy of the Persians.
3406.
CYrus sent home the Jews into their country, with Zerobabell their condu^er,
to repair the Temple. He made war against the Scythians for the space of
sixteen years: in which time reigned his Son C^mbyses. Daniell then foretolo
the passion of Jesus Christ, and the desolate ruin of Jerusalem under
Vespasian, Dan. 9. Matthew 24 Luke ^1
after seauenty Weeks were passed over, which were 490. years after the
repayration of the City: Tarquine the proud, for the violation of Lucretia,
was then chased out of Rome. Consulles were created the year 244. after the
building of Rome. Cyrus reigned 29. years. Read more of Cyrus and his son,
Herodotus lib. 1, 3. Xenophon 8.

Cambyses reigned alone eight years, 3435.
being a cruel man, he slew his Brother and Sister, and caused a Judges skin
to be flayed off, because he had judged falsely. Pythagoras the great
Philosopher sailed into Egypt, to learn Divinity, and to Babylon for
Astrology, and the course of the stars. Many do refer the History and
overthrow of Holofernes to this time: but according to Genebrard, it is reputed
to the time of Nabuehadonoser.

Darius, the son of Hidaspes, otherwise called Ahasuerus, the husband of
Hester, 3443.
reigned 36 yearee. He entered into Greece with six hundred thousand fighting
men, and afterward vanquished Miltiades, being accompanied only with eleven
thousand men. Coriosanus the Roman was now put into exile, and Esope composed
his book of Fables. Now lived also Anacharsis, An^ximenes, and Herac^^^us
Philosophers. Anaximander invented the Horo^oge and Sphere, and strong Milo
was in this time. Read more of Darius in Herodotus and Iustine. Lib. 1.

Xerxes reigned twenty years. He assailed the Grecians with a far greater
Army, 3470.
then that his Father had, which was repulsed by Themisto^les. In mean while,
his Son Artaxerxes hold the Kingdom, by whose commandment, E^^r^s restored
the Commonweal of the le^es; and Nehemias (by strong hand) repaired the
walls of the City. Now lived C^mon, Aristedes and Pindarus the Poet, as also
Pericles, that wise and valiant Athenian Captain: of whom, read more in his
life, set down by Plutarch.

3506.
Artaxerxes, or Darius Long-hand, held the kingdom above twenty years. Now
did the ten men write the law of the twelve tables at Rome; and now lived
Empedocles, Sophocles, Gorgias, Anacreon, Democritus, Euclides, Hippocrares,
and Herodotus. Greece became divided into two factions, The Pelaponesian war.
by reason of a great and contentious war. Read more thereof in Thucidides and
Xenophon.

3544.
Darius the Bastard reigned 19. years: in whose time lived Socrates,
Aristophanes, Thucidides, Alcibiades, Lysander, Conon, Epaminondas, Architas,
Timon, Dionisius of Siracusa the Tyrant. And now was the kingdom of the
Sicambrians, and Francus in Franconia (according to Trithemius) where reigned
forty Kings.

3565.
Artaxerxes Mnemon, reigned forty years, and exercised acts of Arms with his
Brother Cyrus. Thrasibulus chased the Lacedemonian Tyrants out of Athens. Rome
was taken by the Gauls, under the conduct of Brennus that bold warrior. Then
lived Xenophon the Captain, Philosopher and Orator, Plato, Phocion, Isocrates,
Polybius, Tit Liu dec. 4. Lib. 8.
Praxiteles, Metasthenes, Camillus, and Crates.

3604.
Occhus (a most cruel Tyrant) reigned six and twenty years. Phillip King of
Macedon, oppressed the liberty of all Greece. At Rome was then Curtius
Torquatus, Decius Corinnus: the hundred and sixty Matron Sorceresses. Iadus was
High-Pr^est of the Jews, and then lived Berosus the Historian.

Arses or Arsaces, reigned three years. 3625.
His tyrrannicall actions were the cause, that all the race of great Cyrus
perished. Alexander the great, the Son of Phillip, then vanquished and
demolished the City of Thebes: And then were Demosthenes, Diogenes, and
Epicurus.

Darius the last King, 3629.
was ungrateful and disloyal, he was also overcome by Alexander, in the sixth
year of his reign. The Samnites then subdued the Romans: and then was Ceius
Papyrius Cursor. M. Curious Dentatus, triumphing in his humility of mind,
refused the treasures of the Samnites, and he would neither be vanquished in
war, nor corrupted with money. Valor. Max. lib. 2. cap. 3.

The Monarchy of the Graecians.
ALexander the great, having one only Army, of two and thirty thousand
footmen, 3630.
and four thousand five hundred horsemen, marched through all Asia. In the
seventh year of his Monarchy, he was poisoned in Babylon. Read his life, set
down in Plutarch, and Iustine lib. 11.

After his death, there grew dissension between the Captains and Macedonian
Lords, who should be successor of this great Empire. At length it was
resolved on the person of Arideus, sur-named Phillip, the Brother of Alexander,
and Perdiceas was created Captain General. Soon after, the Provinces and
Governments were distributed among Alexanders Captains, who immediately
appropriated them to themselves, each one enjoying the title and quality of a
king. Thus this great Monarchy was divided into many parts and kingdoms: all
which (nevertheless) were (in short while) reduced into three principal
kingdoms, Macedon, Syria, and Egypt.

Of Macedon, and the succession of Kings there reigning
3641.
ARideus Phillippus, the Brother of Alexander, who had bin elected successor,
reigned in Macedon six years, governing wholly by Antipater, who managed all
the affairs of the kingdom. This king was slain by Olympias the mother of
Alexander.

3647.
Cassander the Son of Antipater, after the death of Arideus invaded Macedon,
having caused the Mother and wife of Alexander to be slain, Olympias and
Roxana: he reigned eighteen years.

3665.
Antipater and Alexander, the sons of Cassander, reigned together four years.
Antipater slew his Mother. Alexander made war upon Antipater, calling
Demetrius to his aid: who caused him to be slain.

Demetrius, after the death of Alexander, reigned seven years. 3669.
But having attempted to recover the Empire of his father Antigonus in
Asia-min^r, which Seleucus then held: he was vanquished and taken by Seleucus,
and dyed in prison.

Antigonus, Gomathes, 3686.
the Son of Demetrius, reigned afterward in Macedo^, for the space of 36.
years, having recovered the kingdom, which (after his Fathers death) had
been invaded by many, that held it for the space of eight years. For Pyrrhus
King of the Epirotes, held it first. Lysimachus next took it from him, while
he was seriously busied with the Romans. Lysimachus being dead, Prosom^us
Ceraunus invaded it: but in short while after, this Ptolomie was slain by the
Gau^^s, who came into Macedon, and (by this means) Antigonus re-entred upon
the kingdom of his Father.

Demetrius, who reigned eight years, 3721.
left his Son, named Phillip, very young in years, and one Antigonus was
made his Tutor or Governor, who marrying with the Mother of his Pupil, by that
means made himself king.

Antigonus Doson reigned twelve years. Aratus chief of the Achaian line, 3732
he called to his aid, against Cleomines King of the Lacedaemonians, who was
vanquished by Antigonus, and took the City of Spar^^.

Phillip the son of Demetrius, reigned 44. years: 3742.
and having made war against the Romans, he was vanquished under the
conduct of T. Quintus Flaminius, and all taken from him that he inioyed, except
the sole kingdom of Macedon: wherein succeeded

Pers^us who reigned eleven years. 3786.
He was vanquished and taken prisoner by Paulus Aemilius, Consul and Captain
General of the Romans, and led in triumph to Rome, the year of the Cities
building, 587. And then was Macedon reduced into the form of a Province.

Of Syria, and the Succession of the Kings there reigning.
3653.
AFter the death of Alexander the Great, Seleucus was the first king of Syria.
Perdiccas being dead, he regained the City of Babylon, and part of the
Indiaes, Soon after, by the help of Ptolomy king of Egypt, he made war
against Antigonus, who commanded in the lesser Asia: and having overcome him,
laid claim to the kingdom, and was made King thereof, and in short time
after, he joined al Asia-minor to Syria. Antigonus being slain in battle:
And thus by him was established the great Empire of Syria. He vanquished also
Lysimachus, and took from him the kingdom of Macedon. But soon after, he was
slain by Ptolomeus Cerannus, having reigned 32. years in Syria.

3684.
Antiochus Soter (that is to say, Savior or Preserver) the Son of Seleucus,
reigned 19. years, to whom succeeded.

37^3.
Antiochus, sur-named Deos, that is to say God, who reigned 15. years.

3718.
Seleucus Callinicus, the son of Antiochus, reigned twenty years. In his
time, Arsaces the Parthean, revolted from his obedience, and having vanquished
many of his neighboring Nations, he founded the kingdom of the Partheans,
which afterward became most potent.

Seleuchus, surnamed Cerannus, (that is to say, 3^3^.
Lightning) reigned three years: And after him came Antiochus the great, who
reigned 36. years. 3741
He was conquered by the Romans (under the Scipioes conduct) in two foughten
battles: with whom (afterward) he made peace, on condition that he should
leave the lesser Asia, from ye mountain Taurus, to the Romans. After whom
succeeded his son.

Seleuchus Philopater, that is to say, A Lover of his Father, who reigned
twelve years. 3^7^


Antiochus Epiphanes (that is to say, Famous) who also was son to great
Antiochus, 379^.
reigned twelve years. This is the King that took Jerusalem, and did so much
harm to the Jews, polluted and contaminated the Temple, and would constrain
them to change their Religion. He put the seven brethren most cruelty to
death, and made a most famous Martyrdom of them. His Army was vanquished by
Judas Machabeus, and after him, his son,

Antiochus Eupator, reigned two years. 380^
In which time, Demetrius the Son of Seleuchus Philopater (who had been
given in Hostage to the Romans, for the peace of Antiochus ye great, his
Graundfather) being fled from Rome, and come into Syria; caused a great number
of the people to revolt, that afterward delivered him into the hands of the
said King Antiochus, who caused him immediately to be put to death.

Demetrius Soter, after the death of Antiochus, 38^^
reigned x. years. In this time, the Jews were governed by the Machabees.

3813.
Alexander, the natural son of Antiochus Epiphanes, having gathered an Army,
and being seized of some Cities in Syria, vanquished Demetriu, in battle,
and slew him. This Alexander reigned five years.

3818.
Demetrius Nicanor, the son of Demetrius Soler, came into Syria with an Army,
and being aided by the King of Egypt, he invaded the kingdom. Alexander fled
into Arabia, where he was slain: and Demetrius reigned two years.

3820.
Antiochus Sedectes, the son of Alexander, (assisted by Triphon) expulsed
Demetrius, and invaded the kingdom, which he held 3. years.

3823.
Triphon slew Antiochus and possessed himself of Syria, where he reigned three
years: Demetrius being yet living, who was (in short while after) taken by the
Partheans.

3826.
Antiochus, surnamed Soter and Pinus, Brother of Demetrius Nicanor vanquished
Tryphon, who afterward was slain: And having reigned twelve years, he died in
a battle against the Partheans.

3838.
Demetrius Nicanor, who before had reigned two years, was let go by the
Partheans, and reigned afterward four years more: But being overcome in
battle by Alexander Zebin, he was slain.

3841.
Alexander Zebin, whom the King of Egypt had sent to the Syrians complaining
of the cruelty of Demetrius, reigned three years.

3844
Antiochus Grypus, the son of Demetrius, having vanquished and slain
Alexander Zebin in battle, reigned 29. years. During which time, his Brother
Antiochus the Cyzicenian, made war upon him, without intermission. After the
death of this Antiochus Grypus, mighty troubles were in Syria for some time,
because they of the royal race were in continual wars, killing and
ma^sacring one another. Until such time as one Antiochus (the sole remainder
of that race) dying without any successor: Tigranes K. of Armenia invaded this
great kingdom: whereupon. he was (not long after) surprised by the Romans,
under the conduct of Pompey, and the Country was then reduced into the form
of a Province: the year of the City of Rome, 693.

Of Egypt, and the Succession of the Kings there reigning.
PTolomeus Lagus, 3641.
Soter the most excellent man of all Alexanders Captains, was made King, and
reigned forty years over Egypt: Theophrastus, Zeno, Theocritus, and Menander
then living, and the Romans made War against Pyrrhus. Read more of this
King in Iustine, The kingdom of Scotland.
lib. 13, 14, 15. Orosius lib. 3, cap. 23. Fergusius was the first king of
Scotland.

Ptolome Philadelphus, reigned 38. years. 3682.
He first appointed that great Library in Alexandria, and caused the Books of
the Bible to be translated into the Greek tongue, by the seauentie two
Interpreters. Aristeus, Phalaris, Chrisyppus, Carneades, and Aratus then lived:
and at Rome happened the first Punick war, Regulus.

Ptolomey the Liberal, husband to his own Sister, ^^17.
reigned 26. years. At Rome then grew the second Punick War: and then lived
the Scipioes, Fabius Maximus, and Marcellus. Hanniball was vanquished by Scipio
Affricanus the eldest: And in this time lived the Author of the Book of
Wisdom.

3743
Ptolomey the Parricide, reigned 17. years. He slew his Mother and his Sister,
who also was his wife. At Rome began the war of Macedon, against King
Phillip; and the war of Asia, against the great Antiochus, and Hanniball the
Fugitive. Then lived great Cato, Ennius, Neuius, Plautus, Panetius: And Jesus
the Son of Syrach, Author of the Book of Ecclesiasticus: Simon the Just
being Bishop of the Jews.

3760.
Ptolomey Epiphanes, under the tutelage of the Romans, reigned 24. years.
The Brethren Macchabees did then valiantly withstand Antiochus, the most
cruel Tyrant of Syria: his great repentance is to be read in the second Book
of Macchabees, the ninth Chapter.

3784.
Ptolomey, called Matricide, reigned 35. years. Paulus Aemilius having taken
the Persian king, made Macedon a Province to the Romans. Then happened the
third Punicke War: The war of Achaia, and of Numantia in Spain, under
Scipio Affricanus the younger, and Lelius, Terence then living.

3819.
Ptolomey the Liberal, otherwise called Physcus, a very detestable man,
being Brother to Ptolomy the Matricide, reigned nine and twenty years. He
married his Brothers wife, and afterward her Daughter. The Sects of the
Pharisees, Sadduces, and Esseans then arose. Sects of the Pharisees.
At Rome was the servile war: And the laws for actions of the field by the
Gracchi.

Ptolomey Alexander, 3848.
having expelled his brother Lathyrus, reigned seauenteene years. Afterward he
was thrust out himself by his own people, for the death of Cleopatra, a
wicked woman. At Rome was the Iugurthine war, pli. l. 2. ca. 31
and three Suns visibly seen in this time. Functius does attribute these
seauenteene years, and this reign, to Ptolomey Lathyrus, preferring him
before Ptolomey Alexander.

Ptolomey Lathyrus, being repealed to rule again, reigned eighteen years.
3865.
At Rome was the Cimbrian war, Mithridates war, and the civil war
between Marius and Sylla. Then li- Lucullus, Antonius, and Crassus Orators.
War between Marius and Sylla
Lucretius the Poet, Varro: Sylla domineered cruelie, who retyring himself, to
live sollitarilie in the fields: Flor. lib. 3.
dyed of Vermin engendered in his own body.

Ptolomey Aule^es, reigned thirty years. ^883.
Being excluded by his own people, under Pompeyes authority, he was reseated
by Gabinius. Pompey ouer-came Hieras and Sertorius, the Pirates, as also
Tigranes and Mithridates. Then was the conspiracy of Cataline; Caesar
vanquished the ^aules: Cicero lived in exile: and Crassus was foiled by the
Partheans.

3913.
Ptolomey Dionysius, the last King, reigned 8. years: he caused great Pompeyes
head to be cut off. Then lived Catullus, Hortensius, Salust, Diodorus Siculus,
Cato Vtican, M. Lepidus, Marcellus, and Mark Anthony.

3920.
Cleopatra held the kingdom awhile with her Brother, and afterward (wholly
by her self) two and twenty years: She, understanding that Mark Anthony
was vanquished by Augustus, slew her self. Now was the civil war between
Pompey and Caesar: Civil War between Caesar and Pompey.
And that goodly Library, that contained two hundred thousand Volumes, was
burned in this time. Plutarch in vit. Antoni.

The Monarchy of the Caesar's, or Romans.
3918.
IVlius Caesar, a very gracious Prince, and one of the Worlds chiefest
Captains: reigned five years. He vanquished Pompey and his confederates:
Ptolomy he slew, and restored Cleopatra his friend (Sister to Ptolomy) to the
kingdom of Egypt. Returning home to Rome, he was slain in the Senate house,
by Brutus, Cassius, and other Conspirators. Dioscorides then lived: but if you
would have more of Caesar's life, read Suetonius and Florus, in the life of
Caesar.

3923.
Octauius Augustus, the last Nephew of Julius, by the Sisters side, and his
adopted Son, reigned 56. years: he was happy in war, moderate in peace, and
liberal to every one. Then lived Virgill, Horace, Tibullus, Propertius,
Vitruuius, Mecenas: And then dyed Cleopatra, and her husband Mark Anthony,
Egypt being then reduced into a Province. Herod a stranger (favored by
Augustus) was then King of Judea. So, the Scepter being wholly taken from Judah;
Jesus Christ, God and man, the Savior of the world, was then borne of a Virgin
in Bethlehem, according to the Prophesies of Jacob, Genes. 49, Esaias 7, Micheas
5.

Jesus Christ came in the year of Augustus forty two, and of the world, 3963.
3963.
Ovid was then in exile: the City of Lions founded: and then lived Titus
Liuius, Valerius Maximus, Strabo: and Francus King of the Sicambrians, in the
lower Allemaigne: Aquila, Tuberus, Galba, Labeus and Caius were then
Law-giuers, or Lawmakers. Herod the great murderer of Innocents, and there
were numbered then at Rome, four hundred, sixty four thousand men.

Claudius Tiberius, the Son of Liuia, afterward Wife to Augustus, reigned 23.
years, The years of Christ.
beginning very well, but proouing afterward to be most wicked. Jesus Christ,
for our salvation, was then crucified in Jerusalem, under Pilate the Provost
of Judea: he said, that A good Shepherd should clip his Sheep, and not devour
them.

C. Caligula, Son of Germanus, 17
a most wicked Man, reigned thirteen years. This beast, the ruin of men,
made himself to be adored as God: he poisoned his Uncle Tiberius, and
defloured all his Sisters, leaving them then to others like abusing. 39
T. Claudius, Uncle of Caligula, and Monster of Men, reigned fourteen
years. He preferred Nero before his own Son, by the treason of whom he was
poisoned with a Mushrome. Messalina, his first wife peerless in all labricity
and wickedness, then flourished: And Saint Peter the Apostle lived (reported to
be the first Bishop of Rome:) then lived likewise Philo the Jew, Perseus,
Mela, Pliny the elder, and Columella. Saint Paul the Apostle went then through
the World, proclaiming Jesus Christ, accompanied with Saint Luke. Then lived
Dionisius Areopagita: And then was the first Council of Jerusalem.

43.
Nero, the Son of Agripina, afterward the Wife of Claudius, reigned thirteen
years. He was the first Persecuter of the Church, and did put Saint Peter and
Saint Paul to death: he slew likewise his Master Seneca, also his own
Mother, and Lucan the Poet. Then lived Simon Magus, and Appolonius. Nero being
erpulsed from Rome, slew himself: after he had set Rome on fire, to make
himself pastime of a Bon fire.

57.
Sergius Galba the seventh month of his Empire, was slain by Otho. Suetonius,
Egesius, Lib. 4. Cap. 21.

70.
M. Siluius Otho, he also most wickedly slew himself, in the third month of
his Empire: confessing, that he had cruelly tormented the spirit of Galba.
According to Suetonius, and Tacitus, Lib. 7.

71
Aulus Vitellius, brought up at Bourdeaus de Caprea, being a vicious Man and a
glutton, was hewed in pieces, and cast into Tyber, having reigned eight months.
He caused himself to be served at his Table, with two thousand several kinds
of Fishes, and seven thousand of Fowls, all at one supper. Suetonius, Lib. 9.
Josephus, Lib. 5. de Bell. Judas.

Vespasian, a modest and gracious Prince, a lover of skillful men, and good
Artisans, reigned ten years, accompanied with his Son Titus, 71.
who ruinated Jerusalem: Josephus, Proclus, Epictetes. This ruin was the most
lamentable that ever happened, for therein dyed 110000. men: read Josephus in
his six and seven Books of the Jewish wars, and Egesippus.

Titus, the delight and sollace of mankind, 8^.
reigned two years. He used to say, That no man ought to depart from a Prince,
with a sad countenance: Casstus, Neracius, Proculeius and Pegasus were then
Lawyers, and Saint Bartholmew was then martired in India: Saint Matthias in
Judea: S. Andrew in Scythia: Saint Matthew in Aethyopia, Saint Thomas in
Bragmania. Jerusalem was then taken: the Famine being so extreme, as Mothers
were compelled to eat their own children.

Domitian, Brother to Titus, 83.
was a most wicked man, and persecuter of the Christians: he reigned fifteen
years: then lived Martial, Iuuenall, Statius, Trogus: and saint John wrote
the Gospel, as also Josephus did the Wars of the Jews. Domitian would
needs afterward be called God and Lord of his people, wherefore (being hated
of all men) he was slain.

97.
Nerua, a good Prince, and the adopted father of Traian, reigned one year: he
gave more than an hundred thousand Crowns, to relieve poor Citizens. He
took away extreme taxations, and (wanting money) he sold his garments, plate
and Palace, esteeming his own Parents and kindred much less, then he did the
public benefit. The Christians were in great quiet under him, and the banished
repealed, among whom was S. John.

Traian a good Emperor, but that he persecuted the Church: 99.
reigned 19. years. Being admonished, that he was over gracious to all men, he
answered: That he was such to his Subjects, as he could wish others should be
to him, if he were a Subject. Then lived, S. Ignatius, S. Eustachius, Pliny the
younger, Plutarch, Aulus Gellius, Suetonius, Tacitus Solinus.

Aelius Adrianus, a man studious and skillful in all Sciences, 118.
and the first Emperor that suffered a beard on his face, reigned 21. years:
Julius Celsus, Julian, and Neracius Priscus, were Lawyers, and counselors to
the Emperor. Then were living Ptolomy the great Astrologer, Phanorinus,
Dionisius the Milesian, and Heliodorus. Jerusalem was repaired by Adrian, who
therefore had his name changed, and was called Helias.

Antoninus Pius, reigned 23. years. He was a Prince of such esteem, 139.
as strange Nations would resort unto him, and make him Judge of their
differences; for he had always this saying ready: I had rather save one
Citizen, A divine saying of a Pagane.
then kill a thousand Enemies. In this time were Polycarpus, Ireneus, Iustine
Martire, Egesippus, Appian, Florus, Macrobius, Iustine, Gallen, and Palladius:
Lucian the Atheyst, also was then torn with Dogs. This Emperor took away
the wages or hire of strumpets, punnished idle Magistrates, and was called
Father of his country. Read Eutropius, Lib. 8. Thelesphorus the ninth Pope (as
some report) did then institute, or rather restore the time of Lent.

M. Antoninus, the Philosopher, 162.
called Aurelius, borne in Gaul, with L. Commodus Verus, and called Brethren
in the Books of the Pandectes) reigned 19. years. This good prince being
unwilling to oppress his subjects, made sale of all his fairest and richest
Jewels, plate, and wearing garments belonging unto him and his wife. Eutrop.
lib. 8.

Lucius Aurelius Verus, governed the empire with his brother Marcus Antoninus,
the space of eleauen years: By some Authors he is set down in order before his
brother, and by others after him.

L. Commodus, 181.
the most wicked son of good Antoninus, reigned 13. years. He was strangled
by his Concubine, and other Conspirators. Eutrop. lib. 8. Orosius lib. 8. cap.
18. Lampridius does most amply describe his life at large.

Ae^ius Pertinax reigned six months. 194.
He had refused the Empire, and being desirous to reform the government, he
was slain by Julian his successor; who bought the name of Caesar of the
Warriors. The people much bemoaned this Prince, crying out aloud: O father of
goodness; Father of the Senate; Father of al bounty: Farewell.

194.
V. Julian, reigned seven months, and being hated of all men, for sleying his
predecessor, him self was also slain by appointment of the Senate. Dissension
grew amongst the Christians, for the celebration of Easter; And the second
Council appointed the day of Sunday, and five other after, Eusebius. lib. 5, cap.
24. Metianus, S^euola, Martianus and Cassius, were now Iurisconsultes:
Aphrodiseus and Aphronius Sophysters.

Pescennius Niger, or Nigerius, the son of Annius Fuscus, indifferently
learned, fierce, proud, and inclined to all vice: was saluted as Emperor by the
soldiers of Syria, where he commanded, 195.
and was slain by Seuerus.

L. Septim^us Seuerus, reigned 18. years. He was a Persecutor of the Church,
but otherwise a valiant Prince, addicted both to good letters and Arms. He was
so well beloved, and governed so nobly, that the Senate said of him: Either he
should never have bin borne, or else he deserved never to die. Read Spart. and
Vict. Then lived Origin, Tertullian, Philostrates the Sophister, and Apuleyus.

Cl. Albinus, issued of the Romans families, of the Posthumians and Albines,
made himself Emperor in France. He was surprised by the Soldiers, and
brought half alive to Souerus: where having his head smitten off, he was
hanged on a gibbet, and being torn with dogs, he was thrown into the River.

A. B. Caracalla, the son of Seuerus, 213.
and husband to his stepmother, reigned seven years. He slew Geta his brother,
and Papinian the great and famous Lawyer, with diverse other. At last, himself
was slain by a souldior of his Guarde. Herod. lib. 4.

Antoninus Geta, the son of Seuerus and Iulia, borne at Milaiu, After the
Parthian war, wherein he wan great favor, was called Caesar Antoninus, in
the life time of his father.

Op. Macrinus, with his son Diadumenus, 220.
reigned one year. Both the one and other had their heads smitten off by their
men of war. Macrinus was learned and severe, but (withal) detestable and
crafty, causing his predecessor to be murdered.

Marcus Aurelius Antoninus Heliogabalus, 221.
the Bastard of Caracalla, who was a dishonest whore-hunter, and most
abominable in life beside: gave great estates to wicked Bawds, Pandors,
Iesters, etc. And being generally despised, he was slain by his soldiers, in
the fourth year of his reign: both his own body and his mothers being dragd
along the streets, and cast into the common laystall.

Alexander Seuerus, reigned peacebly without e^^usion of blood 13. years. He
was a good prince, ^2^
and did utterly forbid the selling of Offices. Vlpianus, Paulus, Pomponius,
Alphenens, Affricanus, Callistratus, and other excellent Civil Lawyers (the
scholars of Papinian) then lived, with Dion the Historian, The kingdom of
Persia
and Philostratus The Kingdom of the Persians was then founded by Artaxerxes,
and after transported to the Sarazens, and now commanded by the Sophi.

238.
Maximinus, a persecutor of the Christians, reigned three years. Being at
first but a silly shepherd, he was made Emperor by the Soldiers (without
authority of the Senate) and then by them slain.

Gordianus, a Prince of a Noble spirit, with his son named Gordianus the
younger, 241.
a good Prince, reigned six years, and was slain by Phillip his successor. In
his time was a wonderful Eclipse of the Sun. Read I. Capitolinus, who
places also Pupienus and Balbinus (created by the Senate) with Gordianus the
elder.

Pupienus Maximus, a new man, and son to a Smith, gave himself always to
virtue and Military services, proving fortunate against the Polonyans and
Germans.

M. Caelius Babynus, and Pupienus after they had been Consuls, and that the
Gordians were slain in Affryca, were created Emperors by appointment of the
Senate, against Maximinus, and both of them were undeservedly slain.

Gordianus the second, youngest son of Gordianus by his daughter, born at
Rome: was slain in a sedition of soldiers, by Phillip Prefect of the
Pretorians.

C. Valens Hostilianus, is not placed in this rank by some Historians, because
immmediately he died, smitten with the Pestilence, so that scarsly there
remains any memory of him.

Phillip, an Arabian by Nation, 247.
was the first Christian of the Caesar's, and reigned five years. He gave (by
his Testament) all his rightes and treasures to Pope Fabian, And here began
the riches of the Roman Church. He was likewise slain by his successor, as
he had kilde his Predecessor.

Decius Triaan, a persecuter of the Christians, 252.
reigned two years. S. Saturnine the Bishop was martyred at Toulouse. S.
Laurence, Hippolita, Cecily, Agatha, and Appollina.

Q. Herennius Hetruscus, is not by any Historian placed among the Emperors.
Nevertheless, in this rank is his picture found, in the book of Hubert
Goltzius, and there it is recorded of him, that he was the son of Decius, and
that he was slain in Hungaria, in a Battle against the Goths.

Vibius Gallus, with his son Volusianus, 254.
reigned two years: Being persecutors of the Church, were both slain by the
soldiers. At this time there was such a contagious pestilence, and almost so
generally dispearsed, that in many places, there was left no Creature living.
This pestilence continued fifteen years, and seemed to be partly occasioned
thorough the wicked government of this Emperor.

Aemilianus Lybienus, borne in Mauritania, in his young years followed Arms,
and soon after he was made Emperor. He was slain at Spoleta, being aged 40.
years.

256.
Licinius Valerianus, with his son Galien, persecuting the Church, reigned
fifteen years. He was Captive to Sapor King of Persya, who used him as a
footstool when he mounted on horsbacke. S. Cyprian and S. Cornelia, were then
martyred. Porphirius wrote against the Christians: The thirty Tyrants usurped
the Empire. Read Trebellius, Polyo, etc. S. Paul the first Hermit began the
solitary life.

Galien the son of Valerian, suffered the Christians to live in quiet, and
reigned nine years alone, after that his father was led captive into Persia
by Sapor. He was exceeding wise, but addicted to Lust.

Saloninus Valerianus, the son of Galien, was slain with his Father, being
retired to Millain, and was but ten years old.

Cassius Labienus Posthumus, from being a simple souldior, attained to great
dignities: and being in France was made Emperor in the time of Galien, where he
was slain.

2^1.
Flauius Claudius, (of whom issued the family of the Constantines) a good
Prince, of Noble lignage, and highly esteemed, reigned two years. Dyonisius
being then Pope, divided the Diocesses and Parishes of the Christians. Tom. 1.
de Council. Iamblicus, Plotinus, and Iuven^us priest, reduced the four Gospels
into Hexameter verses.

Aurelius Quintillius, brother to Claudius, after the death of his brother was
saluted as Emperor by the Senate, and slain 17. days after.

Valerius Aurelianus, a cruel man, reigned six years. He tormented the
Christians, 273.
and repulsed the Franconians, entering out of Germany into Gaul. He was ye
first that wore an Emperial Crown: a lover of Military discipline, and one
that rigorously punnished the vices of his Soldiers. He vanquished Zenobia a
very Warlike Lady, holding the Empire of the East.

Tacitus was slain the sixth month of his empire. 279.
This good Prince caused the books of Cornelius Tacitus to be received into all
Libraries. The Manicheans began (from the time of Aurelianus) to infect the
Church.

Annius Florianus, brother to Tacitus, being desirous to reign, usurped the
Empire as by inheritance: but in a short time, he was slain at Tharsus by his
soldiers.

Probus a good Prince, the Author of peace in the high and lower Germany or
Almain, 279.
reigned six years and four months. He said That he had no need of
Warriors, having no enemies; and that the souldior (not doing any thing) ought
not to eat up public provision.

Carus, a good and wise Prince, 286.
reigned two years, with his sons Carinus and Numerianus, two brethren of
very different nature. The first, was most wicked, and full of cruelty: The
other full of goodness, valor and knowledge. Then lived Volcatius, Herodian,
Lampridius, Spartianus, Pollio, Vopiscus and Capitolinus Historians.

288.
Dioclesian with Maximianus Herculius, reigned 20. years: he was a most cruel
persecutor of the Christians, and would have himself to be worshipped.
Katharine, Lucy, Agnes, Barbus, Sebastian, Vincent, Cosmo and Damian, and
innumerable other Martyrs through the world (in his reign, to the number of
17. M.) were put to death in thirty days.

Valerius Maximus, sir-named Herculius, a man of fierce and cruel nature, was
very outrageous in lust, especially with his own Sisters: blockish in giving
council, without ciuillity and government, and therefore had Dioclesian to
assist him in the Empire.

208.
Constantius Chlorus, father of Constantine and Galerius, the one governed in
the East, the other in the West four years together. Constantine commanded in
Gaul, Spain, Africa and Italy: The other in Greece. Arnobius, Lactantius,
Dorotheus bishop of Tire, Eusebius and other Learned personages lived at this
time.

Galerius Maximianus, termed Armentarius, because he was a Neat-heards son,
was made Emp. being a goodly person, and a fortunat warrior. Maximinus, nephue
to Armentarius by his sister was Emp. and persecuted the Christians in ye East.
Seuerus Prefect of Italy and Afric, was published Emperor by Galerius, and
fighting with Maxentius* was taken at Ravenna and slain.

Maxentius, elected Emperor by his soldiers reigned a Tyrant, and was like
unto his Father Maximinus. Being vanquished by Constantine near to
Pont-Miluius, he was drowned in a Gulf, and his body never after found.

Licinius Licinianus, borne of Country Parents, was fortunate in the wars
which he had against Maximinus. Afterward, he became a mocker of Christ, and
persecuted such as believed in him; and because he was ignorant, he was a
great enemy to all that were learned.

Martinianus, was created Caesar by Licinius against Constantine, he was in his
camp at night, but sled before next morning.

Constantine the great, son of Helena an holy woman, with Maxentius and
Licinius, 310.
reigned 31. years. He was religious and affable, and transported the Bible
into diverse Countries. He assembled the Council of Nice, The Council of Nice.
against Arrius the Heretic. He builded the City of Constantinople, calling
it after his own name: whither the Imperial seat was translated, and changed
from Rome into Greece, after he had granted Syluester to be Pope. Eusebius. lib.
10. Niceph. lib. 8.

Crispus was made Caesar by his father Constantine, but being afterward falsely
accused to his father, he was put to death, for that he would not consent to
the inordinate appetite of Faustine his Stepmother.

Constantine the second, 3^1.
with his brethren reigned 17. years, joining thereto the three years reign
of Magnentius. Themistius, Donatus, and Libanius the Sophister then ^iued: and
S. Anthony the Heremite was known in Egypt by many miracles.

358.
Julian the Apostata, held the true Religion ten years, and was named Emperor
by the men of war in Paris, against his will* He forbad the Christians the
study of letters: and being wounded to death, he cried out: At length thou
have vanquished, O Galilean, S. Cyrill, Optatus, Basile, Nazianzene,
Epiphanius, Hilarie, Didimus, Exuperus^ (all learned Divines) then flourished.

368.
Iouianus, a kind and learned man, reigned eight months, and made confession to
his Warriors, of the name of Jesus Christ. Now was the first order of Monks
instituted by S. Basile, under certain rules of living.

368.
Valentian, a good and Catholic Prince, and Valens his Brother, reigned
fifteen years. This man held the error of the Arrians, and constrained the
Monks to undertake Arms in war: he died unhappily.

381.
Gratian, the son of Valentinian, during whose whole life time, he was an
associate in the Empire. He reigned afterward with Valentinian the second, his
younger Brother, and Theodosius six years.

387.
Maximus termed Emperor by his Soldiers, slew Gratian, and held the Empire
four years: after which time, Valentinian returned to the Empire again five
years.

Theodosius, after that Gratian was slain by Maximus, 395.
reigned three years with his Brother Valentinian: the death of whom was
bemoaned by Saint Ambrose, for the great zeal he had to Christian Religion.
S. Hierome, S. Augustine, and P. Orosius then lived.

Arcadius and Honorius, 399
the Sons of Theodosius, reigned twenty nine years, as well in the East as in
the West. About this time, the great Empire of Rome began to decline (by the
infidelity of Ruffinus and Stilico their Tutors.) The very greatest part
thereof was used by the Scythians, Burgundians, Lombardes, Hungarians, Rome
four times surprised.
French, Goths, and Vandals: And Rome was four times taken by the Goths and
Vandals, within a 139. years. Then lived S. Chrysostom and Claudian.

Honorius reigned with Theodosius, 411.
Son to his Brother, sixteen years.

Theodosius the second, 427.
youngest Son of Arcadius, reigned at Constantinople twenty seven years,
after the death of Honorius; having afflited Valentinian the third, the Son of
Constantius, and Placida Daughter is Theodosius, who reigned five years in the
west. At this time, the Frenchmen leaving Franconia, began to enter upon the
Gauls, under Clodion their second King.

F. Valerius Martianus, reigned in the East seven years, ^53.
and Valentinian the third (at the same time) in the west: during their reign,
the Burgundians and other western Nations, were converted to the Faith. The
Vandals came out of Spayn into Africa, and afterward they took Rome, under
the conduct of their King Genserichus. Attila, King of the Hunnes, entered into
Gaul with five hundred thousand men: delivered battle to Meroueus their second
king, who had joined with Aetius Lieutenant to the Emperor. There he lost an
hundred and fourscore thousand men, and fled into Hungaria, not any man being
wounded behind. About this time was great Arthur King of Britain.

460.
Leo the first, reigned 17. years, associated by Leo the son of his
daughter; who after he had reigned one year alone, gave up the Empire to

476.
Zeno his Grandsire, who reigned tyrannically 17. years. The estate of the
Church was then very greatly troubled, as also that of the Western Empire.
Italy had then nine Emperors in twenty years, who all slew one another.

493.
Anastasius reigned twenty five years: He was an Eutichian Heretic, was
smitten with lightning, and dyed (as a just punishment) for his Heresy.
Fulgentius.

Iustine reigned 9. years: he was first a Swine-heard, 519.
afterward a Cow-heard, next a Carpenter, a Soldier, a Captain, and last of
all Emperor, governing very well and godly, and expelling the Arrian
Heretics. Then lived Boethius; and S. Bennet or Benedict began his order.

5^8.
Justinian reigned thirty eight years. All his care and study, was to repair
the decayed Empire, and re-establish civil right: in the execution whereof, he
was seconded by excellent personages, especially by Belfarius, Narses, and
Tribonianus. The first chased the Vandals out of Africa, which they had held
95. years: and delivered Rome from the Goths, who had conquered it, and yet
were once more expulsed thence by Narses.

Iustine the second, reigned ten years, 566.
beloved of al men for his liberality. Sophia his wife mocked him with Narses,
the Governor of Italy, whereat he being offended, called the Lombardes, The
kingdom of the Lombardes.
by whose help he revenged himself. Now was the Kingdom of the Lombardes
founded by Clebus, where reigned thirty two kings, until the time of Charles
the Great.

Tiberius the second, reigned seven years: 577.
he was a very charitable man, one that loved God and his Saints, and
therefore (no doubt) was beloved of him again.

Mauritius reigned twenty years: 584.
he was descended of very mean Parentage, and (in the end) was murdered for
his covetousness: a vice as much discommendable in a Prince, as liberality is
beseeming, and makes him renowned.

Phocas reigned eight years: 604.
And being the Murderer of his Predecessor, himself was likewise murdered,
withal his Race. Contention for Primacy of the Church.
Now was the contention for the Primacy of the Church, between Rome and
Constantinople, and now was Saint Gregory.

Heraclius reigned thirty years, 612.
who was the Murderer of Phocas. The fifteenth year of his reign, began the
rule of Mahomet, the false Prophet of Arabia, where were the Agarenes and
Sarrazins: to whom the Egyptian and Arabian Princes (called Soldanes) next
succeeded. After them came the Turks, about the year 1300. Mahomets false
Doctrine (by the negligence of the Emperors and Christian Princes) grew to
such a head: that it not only poisoned Asya and Africa, but also a very great
part of Europe.

640.
Constantine the third, reigned four months, being a good Prince, and very
young: He was poisoned by his Stepmother that her son might reign.

641.
Heraclion, who having his nose and tongue cut out, was banished two years
after.

643.
Constans, the Son of Constantine, reigned twenty seven years: And being
very covetous, he was slain by his own followers, in the Bathes of Syracusa.

670.
Constantine the fourth, reigned 17. years. He overcame in one Battle, thirty
thousand Sarazins, and afterward fell to great wickedness. The learned and
venerable Beda lived in this time.

687.
Justinian the second, a wicked man, reigned 16. years, but not without
interruption, being dejected by Leontius, and Leontius by Tiberius Absimaris,
who reigned other three years, therefore these three are said to reign
sixteen years. The State of the Venetians,
Now was the beginning of the Dukes of Vennice, which had been governed before
(for the space of 230. years) by Tribunes.

713.
Phillip Bardasanes, reigned two years. He was cast out of his Empire by his
Lieutenant, and after that, they plucked soorth his eyes. He had much talk and
little wisdom, disposing badly of the goods of the Empire: he became after a
schismatic Monk.

Anthemius, called also Athanasius the second, 715.
reigned three years: He was dejected from his Empire by Theodosius chief of
his Army, and turned into a Monastery. He had taken away the Empire, and then
plucked out the eyes of his predecessor.

Theodosius the third, reigned one year. 718
He left the Empire, seeing himself to be assailed by Leo his successor, and
became a Monk.

Leo the third, a wicked man, 719.
reigned twenty four years. He was called Iconomachus, a defacer of Images,
and would not suffer the Christians to have any in their Temples. He was
excommunicated by Gregory, and by authority of a Council held at Rome,
against his own of Constantinople. Blondus lib, 10. The Sarazins besieged
Constantinople three years together, in which time died three hundred thousand
of Pestilence and Famine.

Constantine, fifth of that name, 742.
the son of Leo the Isaurian, succeeded his father in the Empire of
Constantinople, the year of our salvation 742. He was surnamed Copronymus,
because he would discharge his belly in the Fonts, appointed for Christian
Baptism. He was an utter enemy, not only to the Images of Saints, but also
unto their relics, causing them to be burned. He did put to death many of the
best and most respected persons, and (among others) two Patriarchs of
Constantinople. He made war against the Bulgarians, both by land and Sea,
Fortune sometime smiling upon him, otherwhiles ^owring. In his absence, one
Artabasdus was made Emperor at Constantinople. But he receiving news thereof
returned, and either put out, or rent forth the new Emperors eyes, and caused
his children to be slain. In his time, there was so cold a Winter, that the
Sea of Constantinople was frozen. After many cruelties, this Emperor died a
Leaper.

743.
Artabasdus, albeit he was descended of mean birth; yet notwithstanding, for
the faithfulness, good virtues, and commendable qualities which were in him,
he was liked of the Senate and soldiers, and afterward was elected Emperor by
the zealous Christians, for the hatred that every one bare to Constantine the
fifth. He became a better lover of the Saints, and fortified the Cittye of
Constantinople against Constantine, who had bin expulsed thence. Nevertheless,
both he and it were besieged, and the City being surprised, his eyes were
plucked out, and his ch^ldren put to death.

775.
Leo the fourth, was Emperor after his Father Constantine the fifth. He was not
only heir to the Empire, but also to his Fathers vices: And his mother, who
was devout and one that loved God, would give no consent that he should be
Emperor. He made some attempts upon the Sarazins that dwelt in Syria. He took
the Crown which Mauritus had dedicated to God, and set it on his own head, it
being very richly beautified with rich precious stones: But soon after he had
an Impostume in his head, with a fiery Ague, whereof he died.

Constantine, sixth of that name, and son to Leo the fourth, was Emperor after
his Father: 780.
He reigned nine years (very young) with his mother, who with his consent
also, was persuaded by Therasius Patriarch of Constantinople, to call a
general Council of three hundred and fifty Bishops. In short while after,
Constantine excluded his Mother from the Empyres government. He caused the eyes
and tongue of Nicephorus to be pulled and cut out, hearing of a secret intention,
to make him Emperor. Also he did shut up in a Monastery his wife Mary, who was
the daughter of King Charlemaine, and then took a Concubine, by the council
of his Mother, who pretended that her son was hated of the people. Hereupon
not long after, she caused him to be taken, and plucking forth his eyes, shut
him up in prison, where he died, in the year 798. and then she reigned alone,
about the space of five years.

Irene, issued from Attica, 798
was wife to the emperor Leo the fourth, by whom he had Constantine the sixth
before mentioned, and reigned with him nine years, and afterward alone by
hirselfe five years, or little more, as has already been said. She was
thence expelled by Nicophorus, and sent in exile to the Isle of Lesbos, which
at this instant is called Mitiline. At the time when this Lady governed the
Empire of Constantinople, Charlemaine was sacred and crowned Emperor of Rome
(or of the West) for his virtues.

A brief Collection of the History and lives of the Emperors of the West,
from the time of King Charlemain, who was the first Emperor in the West.
803.
CHarlemaine, king of France, and the greatest Emperor (for all perfections)
that ever was: The restorer of Justice, equity and peace, among men, and
re-establisher of Commonweals, with honest Laws, and Religious doctrine, The
kingdom of England
learned in languages and al disciplines: reigned King and Emperor 14. years.
Gal. lib. 4. Emil. lib. 2. The Kingdom of England then began by King Egbert.

Jews his son, surnamed (the Meek) or Debonaire, 815.
was likewise King and Emperor 26. years. He caused a Council to be held,
wherein all Ecclesiastical persons were forbidden to wear any superfluous
garments, iewelles, and Ringes. In revenge whereof, they provoked his sons to
conspire against him two several times.

841.
Lotharius his son, contended with his Brethren, Jews Germanicus, and
Charles the Bald. After a war no less great and sharp, then unhappy and
lamentable, he remained Conqueror, and reigned fifteen years.

Jews, the second son of Lotharius, reigned 21 years: 8^6
he was at continual discord with his Uncle Charles the Bald, for the Kingdom
of Austrasia.

Charles the Bald, son to Jews the Meek, 877.
was Emperor and king of France, two years.

Jews the Stammerer, 879.
was made Emperor by the means of Pope John the second: he died at Compeigne
upon a good friday.

Charles the Gross, Emperor and k. of France, 880.
who degenerated from the Noble race of Charlemain, reigned ten years.

Arnold, whose body was full of vermin, 891
by the just judgment of God, he being addicted to so many several rapines.
He reigned 12. years.

Jews the third, or rather the fourth son of Arnold reigned x. years. 903
Some do hold that after Arnold, until the time of Otho, there was no true
Emperor of Rome, but vacation of the empire, for the space of threescore
years.

Conrade, 913
being the last of the race of Charlemain, reigned seven years.

Henry the first, called the Faulconer, who brought peace to all Germany,
reigned 18. years. 910
He was expert in Arms, began the pence or small money among the Almaynes,
and subdued the Vandals, who then received the Christ. faith.

Otho his son reigned ^6. years. 938
It was said of him, that he made good proof, that he who^ God will help, no
man can harm, for he had innumerable enemies, and yet very easily he subdued
them all.

Otho the second, his son, too severe, reigned ten years. He re-seated
Nicephorus his Godfather Emperor of Greece, 974
after he had bin driven out of his Empire.

984
Otho the third, reigned nineteen years: He was called (for his spirit) the
wonder of the world. In his time began the institution of the Princes Electors
of the Empire, The beginning of the princes Electors of germany.
in the year 1002. This is the common opinion, which (nevertheless) the
learned Onuphrius declares to be erroneous, verifying by certain authorities,
and testimonies of the Authors of times: that the Emperors (after this Otho)
were elected, not by seven Princes: but in general, by voice of all the
Archbishops, Bishops, Princes, Lords, and Gentlemen of Germany, and continued
so till the time of Rodolphus the first, which was in the year 1280. And he
says, that it cannot be certainly gathered, at what time the seven Electors
were instituted: not finding any one of the ancient Authors that speaks
thereof. And yet notwithstanding, he is of the mind, that they were
established, in the Interim of the interregnum and schism of the Empire, which
continued twenty three years after the death of Frederick the second, which
was in the year 1250. until the election of Rodolph of Haspurge.

1003
Henry of Bauaria the second, reigned twenty two years: He was a prudent and
victorious Prince: and he expulsed the Sarrazins out of Italy.

1025
Conrade the second, reigned fifteen years. In this time the name of a
Cardinal (as is said) came first in use.

1040.
Henry the third, surnamed the Black, reigned 17. years, he labored
earnestly to take away the Schisms of the Church, happening by the plurality
of the Popes: whereof he deposed three as unworthy, and ordained, that there
should be no more created, without his permission.

Henry the fourth, reigned fifty years. 1057.
He was present in 62. battles, and great troubles happened between him and
Gregory the seventh, touching the power to elect and confirm the Pope. The
Kingdom of Jerusalem.
Then was Jerusalem taken by Godfrey of Bullen, and the flower of Christendomes
Nobility.

Henry the fifth, reigned twenty years. 1107
He took Rome, and the Pope, who would not crown him, except he would
ordain his election to be without the Emperor, The Kingdo^s of Portugal,
Naples, and Sicily.
and contrary to the order of Henry the third. Now began the Kingdoms of
Portugal, Naples, and Sicily.

Lotharius the second, reigned 11. years, being very much respected for his
great valor in war, 1127
his love to religion, and reparacion of good laws, etc.

Conrade the third, reigned fifteen years, 1138
a good Prince, and made war against the Sarrazins, with King Jews the young.

Frederick the first, called Barbarossa, a Prince addicted to hardines,
magnanimity, and Justice, 1152
reigned 37. years. This is the man, upon whose overmuch humility, Pope
Alexander the third declared the insolency of his Luciferian pride: in treading
on the Emperors back, and then he began to sing: Super Aspidem and Basiliscum
ambulabis. Then lived Auicen, Auerroes, and Mesuus, The Kingdom of the Tartars.
Physicians: And Changius was first King of the Tartares.

Henry the sixth, reigned ten years, a good Prince, 1190
he subdued the kingdom of Pouilla or Apulia.

1100.
Phillip brother to Henry, a good Prince, reigned nine years. In his time
began the Friar orders of Mendicants, or begging Friars, Iacobins and Gray
Friars. Ab. Vspergens. hist.

1209.
Otho the fourth, reigned four years. He came to the Empire by the means of
Innocent the 3. and afterward lost it by his own occasion, being murdered in
the end, as he had done his predecessor.

1212
Frederick the second, reigned 37. years, being both wise and magnanimious.
He was expulsed the Empire, by the means of Pope Innocent the fourth. This
Prince was the restorer of Astronomy, by help of the Almagist of Ptolomy. The
factions of the Guelphes and Gibelines, now caused great harms in Italy.

1250.
Conrade the fourth, reigned three years, a good Prince. He was excommunicated
by Pope Innocent the fourth, according as (by him) his Father was deprived of
his Empire.

1254
Willielmus, reigned two years, a good prince. Albertus Maguus, Lullius and
Alphonsus, King of Spain, were then great Astrologers. There was interregnum
17. years.

1273.
Rodulphus reigned 19. years. He made Austria the Imperial seat, ordaining
his son Albert first Duke there, of whom is the house of Austria desceaded.

1292
Adolphus reigned six years. He was expulsed for his vices, by the Princes
Electors, and slain afterward in war, by Albertus his successor.

Albertus reigned ten years. 1299
Pope Boniface the eight, gave him the Realm of France, and the Papal chair
was transferred to Auignion, The first turkish Emp.
72. years. New was Othoman the first Emperor of the Turks.

Henry the seventh, reigned six years, 1309
a very grave and prudent Prince: But a Iacobine friar (being suborned by a
Florentine) poisoned him with the consecrated Host.

Jews of Bauaria, reigned 33. years. 1314
He used very great clemency toward his enemy and prisoner, Frederick of
Austria, restoring him to his Dukedom. Now began the Sects of the Flagellanti
or Whippers: Bartholomeus, Petrarch, and Boccace, then living.

Charles the fourth, Author of the golden Bull, 1347
reigned 32. years; Dante then lived.

Wenceslaus reigned 22. years, very carelessly. 1379
He was taken by his brother Sigismund, and put into prison at Vienna. They
were both sons to Charles the fourth. Lithuania then received the Christian
Faith.

Robert or Rupert, reigned ten years: 1400
then lived Chrysolaras, Laurentius Valla, Poge the Florentine, and Tamberlain
the Tyrant of the Tartares, led an Army of a million of men.

Sigismund reigned 27. years, 1411
a man renowned for wisdom and goodness. Then was the Council of Constance,
wherein three popes were deposed. John Hus, and Hierom of Prage, were then
burned.

1438
Albertus the second, reigned two years well and valiantly. He chased Amurath
the Turk out of Hungary.

1440
Frederick the third, a lover of Peace, reigned 53. years. Then was
Constantinople taken: The Art of Printing found out: Artillery more ancient
1380. Gaza, Victornius, Blondus, Aeneas Syluius, Platina, Bessarion, G.
Trapezoncius, N. Perottus, Pomponius Laetus, H. Barbaxus, A. Politianus, I.
Picus Mirandula, B. Mantuanus. Ph. Beroaldus.

1494
Maximillian, a lover of virtuous men, reigned 27. years. He was valiant and
learned, and could deliver his actions himself, in the Latin tongue. Then
lived I. Nauclerus, Volaterranus, G. Valla, Polydor Virgill, A. Sabellicus, I.
Reuchlinus, Iouianus, Pontanus, M. Ficinus, P. Crinitus, Amb. Calepinus,
Trithenius, P. Bembus, and others.

1514
Charles the fifth, a most magnanimous prince, reigned 35. years. In his time
happened marvelous mutinies in Germany, by Peazantes and Rusticke people, of
which were slain more then an hundred thousand, in less space then 3.
Months. Beside these strange wars, there insued civil dissentions likewise,
about matters of religion. Erasmus, Io. Lud Viues, Luther, Munster, Camerarius,
Fuctius, Latomus, Sadole^us, Pagninus, Eugubinus, Melancthon, Rhenanus, S.
Grineus, Zozius, Oldendorp, Alciat, Zuinglius, Oecolampadius, and others then
lived.

1558.
Ferdinando, a Prince wise, vigilant, liberal, kind, and a lover of
quietness: He made war upon the Turks in Hungary, for the space of 38.
years, and labored to accord the Christians, to the end that the enemy might
be resisted by general consent. He reigned seven years: and then lived
Gesner, Lycosthenes, Sturmius, Gualterus, Riuius, Pantaleon, Vadian, P.
Constantinus, Functius, etc.

Maximillian, the second son of Ferdinand, 1564
was a good and prudent Prince, not dissolute in habits, but living soberly,
having knowledge in many toogues, good judgment, speaking discreetly and
sententiously, and inclined to receive al requests, as also to give liberally:
Never curious of rich Cabinets, or sumptuous buildings. He reigned twelve
years.

Rodulphus the second, 1576.
son to the most virtuous Prince Maximillian, and reigning at this present.
To whom God give grace, as to al other Monarchs, Princes and Potentates, to do
those things that become a Christian Prince, blessing him with good Council,
faithful people, etc.

Now come we again to the Emperors of the East.
Nicephorus, who was kinsman to Irene, 803
got the Empire from her by craft, exiling her thence, as has been before
declared, and merely usurping the Empire of Constantinople. At his first
entrance, every one had a singular good opinion of him, because they grew
weary of a Woman's government. Nevertheless, he proved to be wicked, cruel
and covetous, and therefore felt quickly his deserved punishment. For entering
battle against the Bulgarians, he was discomfited and slain. His son
Stauratius (whom he had made fellow Emperor with him) was likewise then sore
wounded, and dismissed of the Empire with in three months after, by Michaell
Curopalates, who had married his sister Procopia. And so he was sent to finish
his days in a Monastery.

804
Stauratius, the son of Nicephorus, a man deformed and misshapen, having also
a simple spirit, was made companion and participant in the Empire with his
Father: And yet notwithstanding, very soon after his Fathers death, he was
chased from his Empire, his hair being shaven off, and he enclosed in a
Monastery, not reigning (after his father) above three months, or thereabout.

811
Michaell Curopalates, otherwise called Rangabus, was Emperor after Nicephorus
and his son Stauratius. This Emperor Michaell was better skild in the
affairs of peace, policy, and Justice, then in the action of war. For in
his first battle against the Bulgarians, he fled away like unto a Coward, and
hid himself in a Monastery, to which life he yielded himself, and quite
forsook the Empire, as not willing to meddle any more, either with war, or
the State of an Emperor. He, according as Nicephorus did the like, sent an
Ambassador to Charlemaine, the new made Emperor of the west, to treat of peace
and alliance with him. And it was agreed, that the Venetians should live
according to their own Laws, Customs, and ancient liberties.

Leo of Armenia, was Emperor of Constantinople, being the fifth of that name, 813
and the fourth after Charlemaine Emperor of the Romans, who began with
Nicephorus. He was Colonel of the warlike troops, belonging to the Emperor
Michaell Curopaletes, and aspyring to dominion, he raised a commotion, and so
was made Emperor by the Soldiers. He being thus elected Emperor, entering into
his Pallace-Royall, he caused the privy members of the Son of the said
Emperor Michaell, to be cut off, and then banished him. He Conquered the
Bulgarians, recovered Thrace, took many of his enemies, reprehended their
boldness, that had surprised Adrianapolis, and prepared also to besiedge
Constantinople. He would by no means suffer the Images of saints, but beat
down and defaced them. Not long after, himself was taken and slain in a
Church, as he was assisting Divine service, in the eight year of his Empire:
his wife was bestowed in a Monastery, and his Children closely conuaied away.

Michaell the Stammerer or stutterer, 820
a wicked man, and murderer of the foresaid Leo, was after him made Emperor of
Constantinople. He was descended of base and vile place, and there was one
called Thomas, a man also of as base Birth, that sought to usurp the Empire,
working so many disturbances thereto, that the Emperor being half in
despair, commanded a great chain of iron to thwart the arm of the Sea, even
from Constantinople, so far as Pera. But in the end, he took this Thomas,
and caused his hands and feet to be cut off. At this time the Sarazins
surprised Candy, had two several victories over the Greeks, and Michaell died
of a flux in his belly.

829.
Theophilus, son to Michaell the Stammerer, was Emperor of Constantinople
after his father. He was a good Iusticer, and well affected toward his
Subjects: but he held the Images of Saints in great detestation, and severely
punnished all such as worshipped them, being (therein) his fathers true
follower. Two several times he gave battle to the Sarazins, that wasted and
spoils the Countries of Asia: And as many times was he foiled, loosing there
all his Tents and Pauillions. Amorium, a little village of the higher Phrygia,
(being the place of his birth) was besieged, taken, and rifled by those
Sarazins. The Emperor grieved thereat so immeasureablie, that he refused to
eat, and would drink nothing but cold water: So falling into a Dysenterie,
he died.

842.
Theodora, after the decease of Theophilus her Husband, (as Tutresse or
Guardian unto her son Michaell, who was in his young years) governed the
Empire of Constantinople very sufficiently, comforting the poor distressed
Christians, and reuoking home such as lived in exile, about the question of
Images. She treated a peace with the King of Bulgaria, affiancing him unto her
sister, whereby both he and his Subjects were converted to the Christian
Religion. At length Michaell being able to guide the reins of the Empire; his
mother Theodora entered into Religion and left him to rule alone, in the year
856. 856


Michaell the son of Theophilus, succeeded his father in his infancy, his
mother and Gouernesse Theodora, holding (for him) the Empire of Constantinople.
But when Michaell grew to greter strength, he took the charge of the Empire
himself whereto his mother gladly consented. He more resembled his
Graundfather, then his Father, both in negligence and prodigallity, spending
great riches which his wars brought him in. He was sometimes so addicted to
the Circeiensian sports, as hardly he could be drawn from them. He made
Basilius the Macedonian, his equal companion in the Empire, by whom he was
soon after slain: having reigned eleauen years, nine months, and five
days, after that his mother Theodora had entered into Religion, which, with his
former time of rule, completed 25. years, ten months, and fourteen days.

Basilius of Macedon, 867.
who had slain the Emperor Michaell, entered presently upon the empire of
Constantinople, and was received and approved of all, in the Imperial
Palace. When he was a young infant, he had bin brought (among other captives)
to Constantinople* to be there sold: Nevertheless, he was in the end Emperor,
and Fortune so favored him, that his children, and his childrens children,
were also Emperors after him. First of all, he caused those sums of money to
be restored back again, which Michaell his Predecessor had prodigally given
away, and so they were delivered into the Treasury. He instituted his three
sons heirs to the Empire. He had many battles against the Sarazins, and
still proved victorious. Many Jews and Scythians (by his means) received the
Christian faith: yet such was his hard hap, to be slain (in hunting) by a
Heart, that ran his horns into his belly.

886
Leo, the sixth of that name, surnamed the Philosopher, began his reign in the
year 886. first, with the help of the Turks, he vanquished the Bulgarians,
who had revolted from him: but soon after, being abused by the Turks, through
vain suggestions, he sustained great loss. Notwithstanding, he failed not to
leauy an Army against the Sarazins, whereby (under the conduct of Nicetus) he
brought away a triumphant Victory. He was very vigilant over the Commonweal,
and oftentimes would walk alone in the night, (disguised in habit) only to try
his watches; who did beat him soundly, and also carried him to prison, whom
the next day he rewarded both with money and honors.

9^4.
Alexander, brother to Leo the forenamed Emperor, suc^eeded him in the Empire.
He was quite contrary in manners, both to Basilius his father, and Leo his
brother, for he was of badde government, given wholly to his pleasures, and
committed the charge of his State affairs, to Flatterers and Iesters, who were
his daily accomplices and companions, in all naughty and wicked actions. He died
of a flux of blood, issuing from his Nose and priuy-members, after he had
gurmandized and excessiuely played at the Tennis. For, mounting (in an extreme
heat) upon his horse, and violently stretching himself, he brake a vein,
whereof he died.

Constantine the seventh, son to Leo the sixth, 906
of whom we have already spoken, was at the age of seven years, left (by his
father) under the care and charge of his mother Zoa. And he began to hold the
Empire of Constantinople, after his forenamed Uncle Alexander, the year of
our Salvation, 906. A certain man, named Romanus Lecapenus, made great
resistance against him for space of 26. years, and purposed to deiect him
quite. But in the end, Lecapenus was seized by his own sons, and shut up
into a Monastery, for he was the sole cause, that Zoa the mother of
Constantine, was likewise made a recluse in a Monastery. Now, when the sons
of Lecapenus had devised to do the like to Constantine, as they had done unto
their father: the same stratagem happened to themselves, and they were enclosed
in a Monastery. So Constantine recovered his Empire, which he governed alone
very sufficiently; suppressing some Tyrants, and inducing diverse Princes of the
Turks to the Christian Faith. He made learning to shine in Greece, and left a
Book unto his son, discoursing the affairs of the Empire, which the
Venetians do yet keep as an especial Jewel. He reigned fourteen years with
his mother Zoa, with Lecapenus 26. years, and about fifteen years alone,
which was in all near 55. years.

920.
Romanus Lecapenus, a man of base descent, wrought so much trouble to
Constantine the seventh in his Empire, that he was constrained to receive him
as companion in the Imperial dignity, in the year 920. and Constantine
accepted his daughter Helena in marriage. But neither the sac^ed Oath which he
had sworn unto him, nor yet the near alliance in kindred with Constantine,
could restrain him from usurpation of the Empire, for himself and Christopher
his son: but he sought to thrust Constantine wholly out of all. But he was
deceived in his own disseigns, for, upon the bad success in war which he
had against the Bulgarians, and Simeon their Duke, he was taken by his own
sons, Stephen and Constantine* who despoiled him of his Emperie, and carried
him to a Monastery in a near neighboring Island, there to pl^te the
Philosopher alone by himself. Then, practicing to work the like device upon
Constantine Fortune turned her back toward them, and in the same snare which
they laid for another, themselves were cunningly caught: for they were shut up
within a Monastery, and so Constantine remained a peaceable Emperor.

959.
Romanus, the young son of Constantine the 7. held the Empire of
Constantinople after his Father. But he was governed under the disposition and
order of Nicephorus Phocas. This Emperor Romanus, excluded his mother and his
sisters: who, in grief and despite, that they should fall from so great pomp
and estate, concluded to support the^r weak condition, by the worst means
that could be, even the prostitution of their bodies. And as for him, he being
addicted to sports and Epicu^isme, died poisoned.

Nicephorus Phocas, ruled the Empire of Constantinople, in the year 963. 963
He fought often, and very fortunatly against the Sarazins, who usurpingly held
Calabria Scicily, Cyprus, Candy and Cilicia, which at this day is called
Caramania. In Scicily the affairs were not well managed, by his Committees
and Lieutenants: But concerning himself, he recovered Cilicia, and the greater
part of Asia, for a good beginning: And soon after, he went powerfully upon
Antioche, which he surprised in the night, and forced the Sarazins to fly for
refuge. This man was hated of all his Subjects, because that (under the color
of War which he then had) he laid great Imposts, exactions, and polings upon
them. He caused also a corrupt kind of money to be forged, and diminished
likewise the weight: by means whereof, being so out of favor with the
Citizens, he was the easi^r slain sleeping in his chamber, by John Zimiscus,
and Theophila, (wife to Nicephorus) gave favorable entrance to the murderer,
and all the stranglers that were with him.

John Zimiscus, the murderer of Nicephorus, was Emperor of Constantinople after
him. He was a man valiant in war; ^6^
he recovered all Bulgaria, which the Roxalians held, and Sphendollanus their
king submitted himself unto him. But after this victory, being returned to
Constantinople with triumph, he was poisoned. He made fellows with him in the
Empire, Basilius and Constantine, brethren, who were sons to Romanus, the
predecessor of Nicephorus Phocas.

976.
Basilius the second, and Constantine the eight, being brethren, and sons to
the young Romanus, were Emperors of Constantinople after John Zimiscus, in the
year of Salvation 976. Barda Sclerus made civil war upon them, intending to
usurp the Empire: but being foiled in the battle, he fled to the Persians.
The like did Phocas, when he was overcome, and for the same cause: for, taking
it in scorn to be misprized, after he had well declared his duty against
Sclerus, he sought to make himself Emperor. Basilius (afterward) vanquished
the Bulgarians in many battles, and as a punnishment for their Rebellion, he
caused the eyes of fifteen thousand Captives to be pulled out: reserving only
but one of them, to guide the rest to Samuel their Duke. For they had ouerrun
the Country of Thrace, Macedon, and Greece* and put all to fire and sword. Now
was all Bulgaria subjected to the Empire of Constantinople, which till then had
evermore been Rebellious. Duke Samuel lived not long after, but died with
mere grief and vexation. Constantine was companion with his brother Basilius
in the Empire, more in Honor then power: But after his death he was sole
Emperor almost three years, and died swallowed up in his pleasures and vain
voluptuousness.

Romanus of Argyra, 1029
or (as he was commonly called) Argyropilus, kinsman to Constantine the eight,
succeeded him in the Empire. At the beginning, he changed many bad matters into
better: But being unable to make head against the Sarazins, he gave his mind
to gather a huge mass of money. Afterward, by the Treason of Zoa his wife, and
her Adulterate companion: he was drowned as he bathed himself in his stoue, or
Hot-house.

Michaell the Paphlagon, 1034.
the Adulterat friend of Zoa the Empress, and who had suffocated her husband
Argiropilus, bathing in his Stoue: was by her made Emperor of Constantinople,
in the year 1034. He had been a seruant-straunger, having his head very
unfashionable, and every hour he was subject to the falling sickness,
foaming at the mouth. In brief, whatsoever deserved any respect in him, only
was, that he had a pleasing Complexion, which made Zoa extremely doat upon
him, she being well stepped into age. Yet (for all this) he did not misgouerne
the Empire, but took truce with the King of Aegipt for thirty years. He
delivered the City of Edessa, which was besieged, and was very benign to all
them of his Court; excep^ to Zoa, for the horride lewdness he knew by her. At
length, being full of the Dropsy, he appointed Michaell Calaphates (the
adopted son of his Wife Zoa) to be his immediate successor.

1^42.
Michaell Calaphates, the adopted son of Zoa, (after the death of Michaell the
P^phlagon) prostrated himself at her feet, swearing that he intended not to
hold the Empire, but in name only; and that all the power should remain in
her. By which flatteries and coined speeches, he was made Emperor of
Constantinople, in the year 1042. Soon after, he laid a plot against Zoa,
imposing falsely upon her, that she had devised to poison him: Whereupon, her
head was shaven, and she commanded to a Monastery. But the People growing
mutinous against him, made Theodora (sister to Zoa) Empress: repealed Zoa from
the Monastery pursued Calaphates, and plucked out both his and his sons eyes.
He was called Calaphates, because his father was a maker of ships, or a Ship
wright.

1042
Zoa repealed from her exile and Monastery, by the people, was re-placed in the
Sovereign Estate of Constantinoples empire, to enjoy the same with her sister
Thedora, which was in the same year, when as Michaell Caliphates had reigned
but four months. Thus the bad government of Emperors raised an opinion, that
the Empire might be better ruled by Women, then by men. But, as a woman is
evermore variable and unconstant, according to the Poets judgment: Even so Zoa
(albeit she was a woman, and aged threescore years) did yet nevertheless,
burn in carnal and voluptuous concupiscence. Whereupon, she re-called
Constantine Monamachus from exile, and taking him to be her husband, made him
Emperor. These two women having then held the Empire, scarsely three months.

Constantine the ninth, surnamed Monamachus, 1042
who likewise being of the Imperial line and race; was made Emperor by his
w^^e Zoa, at Constantinople, in the year 1042. He was very careless, and full
of his own pleasures, and kept a beautiful Strumpet in stead of his Wife:
nevertheless, he maintained and got the victory in two great civil wars,
and some others beside. It was then that the Turks began to extend their
powers very far in Asia^ and yet no withstanding, they were vanquished with
the Roxalians, and Patzinaces, which were two Nations of the Scythians. Zoa
died, being threescore and ten years old: and Constantine being full of the
gout, having also a pluri^ie, died thereof some few years after.

Theodora, sister to Zoa, who had formerly held the Empire of Constantinople,
1055.
as has been already declared in our speaking of Zoa: entered upon the Empires
rule again, but alone by her self, after Constantine Monomachus, in the year
1055. and governed about two years. And we hold it no shame, to place her in
the rank and number of the Emperors, considering, that she did not declare
her authority in the Empire, with an effeminate or negligent spirit: But gave
so good orders, and carried her self so manly, that she maintained peace and
tranquillity, as well toward strangers, as among her own people. Moreover,
all goodness and quietness so abundantly flourished in the time of her
government: as no occasion can be alleged, neither will any man of wisdom
misprise the Empire and Dominion of such a Woman. But as sickness (with age)
did ouer-charge her, by the pleasing persuasions and remonstrances of her
ordinary servants: she made partaker with her in the Empires sway, a certain
man (somewhat too aged) named Michaell, and then she lived not long after.

1057
Michaell, sir-named the Ancient, was Emperor of Constantinople after the
said Theodora, and only by her means. He was renowned both for Noblity and
riches: but in other affairs, concerning the support and charge of the Empire:
he was very unapt, in regard of his many years, which made him burthenous and
in-sufficient. And when he had scarsely ruled one year: Isaac Comnenes both
dismissed, and deposed him from the State of the Empire. So living solitarily,
and like a private man: he died soon after.

Isaac Comnenes, was Emperor of Constantinople, in the year 1058. 1058
He dejected from the Empire, Michaell the Ancient: nevertheless, he was a
man, valiant and courageous, renowned for his actions both in peace and war, of
great spirit, but somewhat arrogant. The Patriarch of Constantinople gave him
good aid, in raising him to the Empires Dignity: but he requited him very
badly, for he banished him and all his friends. He was derived of a Noble race,
diligent, ready and expeditious in all his business: But a disease in the side
took him as he was hunting, which, growing to desperation of any long life,
he made himself a monk, instituting as Emperor Constantine Ducas, with the
good liking and consent of the Senate and people. It is written of him, that he
was so chaste, that he would not accompany his wife after her first child:
albeit his Physicians advised him thereto, for help and mitigation of his
disease.

Constantine the tenth, called also Ducas, 1060
was Emperor of Constantinople, after the forenamed Isaacke, in the year
1060. At his first entrance there happened a great conspiracy against him,
which he suppressed, but with very great difficulty. He was devout toward God,
and a good iusticer: but insatiable avarice disgraced him, for which, he was
hated of his own people, and condemned by his enemies, who did much harm to
the Empire. In his time happened a strange accident, and yet no nouelty to
Constantinople, that many Churches and houses were overthrown by an
Earthquake. He died aged threescore years, leaving Eudoxia his wife, and three
of his sons heirs to the Empire.

Eudoxia and her sons held the Empire of Constantinople, 1067
after their father Constantine Ducas. This woman would have well governed the
Empires affairs, if wars had not much molested her abroad. As strangers
(then) came rushing in on all sides of the Empire, so was it conceived by
general opinion, that the ablest man that could be, had had his hands full,
in a charge of such import. And yet at length, Eudoxia (contrary to her Oath
and promise to her dying husband) having reigned seven months and some few o^
days: remarried with Roman Diogenes, which match she dearly afterward
repented, as being much wearied with the arrogance of this man, who would
needs govern all himself.

1068
Roman, surnamed Diogenes, took upon him the Empire of Constantinople, in
the year 1068. He made war two several times, and in the first attempt,
Fortune spoke him fair, but very unkindly in the second: for his people being
one part slain, and the other driven to flight, himself left alone (albeit an
Emperor) was taken: which accident had never been seen before, that the
Emperor of Constantinople, was taken prisoner in war. And yet
notwithstanding, it is said, that the Turk, Sultan Azan hearing those
tidinges, could not believe it, but stayed his iourn^y somewhat short of him.
And then sending for him, he had no sooner seen him, but he held him in honor
and estimation: and giving him great presents, sent him back again at
liberty, after he had concluded a peace with him. But in this interim, all
things were renversed at Constantinople, as it is a usual custom, so soon as
unwelcome news are brought: For Eudoxia, was expulsed, Diogenes dismissed, and
Michaell de Constantine chosen Emperor: who first caused the eyes of Diogenes
to be plucked out, and afterward banished him: in which miserable estate he
died, and was feign to be buried by his wife Eudoxia.

1071.
Michaell, who was termed Parapinacius, in reguard of the great Famine that
happened in his time, was made Emperor of Constantinople in the year 1071. He
was a man altogether unapt for so weighty a charge: for, being wholely
addicted to his Book, and to compose verses with his Schoolemaister Psellus,
the Turks assailed the Empire on all sides, especially on that part of Asya:
Whereupon, his chief Commanders and Captains, (through mere constraint) made
election of another Emperor over them, to wit; Nic^phorus ^otaniat who was the
more easily accepted of the Citizens, because they held their negligent
Emperor in high disdain and contempt. I understand that Michaell was put into
a Monastery, with his wife and son, and there he was made a Monk.

Nicephorus Bataniat, who was descended of the line of the Emperor Phocas, 1078
easily (as being the very noblest of all other) obtained the Empire when
Michaell was expelled thence. He took Constantine, the son of Constantine
Ducas, who would have usurped the Empire, and causing him to be shorn,
advanced him to the order of priesthood. Afterward, Nicephorus himself was
dejected by the brethren of Comnenes, (who before had assisted him in expelling
the usurpers of the Empire) and was shut up in a Monastery, where he lived but
a short while. Alexius Comnenes, the younger brother, but best beloved amongst
the soldiers, held the empire after him, and on the very day of Easter entered
Constantinople, which he spoiled as an enemy.

1081.
Alexius Comnenes, Son of the Emperor Isaac, took on him the Empire of
Constantinople, in the year 1081. He went with the Venetians against Robert
Guiscard, but he was repulsed and vanquished. Moreover, he strove to hinder and
break the memorable enterprise of the French, for the recovery of the Holy
land. But Bohemond, Duke of Apulia, levied an Army against him, and besieged
Baudras. Then Alexius, dreading his power, made composition with him, promising
to furnish the French with victuals, and all other needful things. Afterward,
he erected two goodly buildings, one for poor Orphants, and the other for a
College. He was also very charitable to poor aged men, discreet and moderate
in his manners, and not lightly induced to punish. He gave favor and support
to all men of merit and virtue, exalting them to places of dignity. In the
end, being ouerpressed with a long sickness, he died in the threescore and
tenth year of his age.

1118.
Caloian, Son to Alexius, held the Empire after his father, in the year
1118. He made many wars in Asia, vanquishing in diverse Battles, both the
Turks and Persians, taking sundry Cities from them. He was a contrary
opposite to the Venetians and the French, who were then united:
Notwithstanding, the Venetians took the Isles of Rhodes, Samos and Miteline.
He died of the prick of a Dart, which himself had poisoned, smiting his hand
(by chance) upon it, as he made offer with it against a wild Boar: He
advanced all his own friends to dignities.

Manuell, or Emanuell, brother, 1142
or (as some say) Son to Caloian, entered on the Empire of Constantinople
after him, in the year 1142. He entreated Conrade Emperor of Rome, to lend
him aid against Roger king of Scicily, who both troubled, and would have
usurped the Empire, each after other, and likewise to assist him against the
Turks, as thus his request severally pretended. But Manuell, having a
contrary, and another kind of leaven hid in the dow, sent Conrades men where
they were all famished. Nor did it suffice him to deal thus vilely with them,
but he did as much to the men sent by Jews (surnamed Gods gift) king of
France. So that in a short while, so great a number of the French perrished by
falsehood and Treason, that the name of Manuell became odious among the French.
Roger entered (in earnest) upon the Country of Greece, besieged Constantinople,
and with a gallant brauado) culled many flowers of gold and silver, out of the
Emperors garden. Manuell offered outrage to an Ambassador of Venice, and (in
one day, surprised all their Merchants, whom he had betrayed under the color
of peace: for which, the Venetians constrained him afterward, dearly to buy his
own peace. He made war against the Turks, wherein he was almost taken: And
after he had reigned eight and thirty years, he lived as a Monk, and died
of a grievous disease.

Alexius the son of Manuell, held the Empire after him, in the year 1180.
1180.
under Andronicus, his coosin-germain, who then was his Tutor, afterward his
companion in the empire, and at last his murderer, for secretly he caused his
head to be cut off, and threw his body into the Sea, he being but fifteen years
old.

1183
Andronicus Comnenes, the son of Isaake, entered on the empire of
Constantinople, after his coosine germain Alexius, whom cruelly he had caused
to be murdered, in the year 1183. William, king of Sicily* made war upon
him, to revenge the death of Alexius. And as he was assailed on all sides,
Isaacke, surnamed the Angel, (contrary to all opinion) came so suddenly upon
him, that he not only foiled him, but dejected him from the empire, and having
seized upon his person, he caused one of his eyes to be pulled out, and then
set him upon an Ass, with his face backward, crowning him with a wreath of
rotten Garlic or Onions, and holding the stalk of one of them in his hand,
in stead of a Scepter. In this order was he shown through the City of
Constantitinople, men, women, and children, doing many injuries unto him,
casting both dirt and filth in his face, smiting him also with stones and
staves. In this manner being cruelly bruised and murdered, he was hanged up:
when yet the women would not leave him so, but dismembered him into the smallest
pieces.

Isaac the Angel, took the empire on him after Andronicus, in the year
1185. 1185
He qualified the tyrranie of many, and entertained magnificently Frederick
Emperor of Rome, who passed into Syria. He redeemed (with a great sum of money)
his younger brother Alexius, who (most unthankfully) bereft him, both of his
eyes and Empire, because he seemed to favor the Venetians. He kept him
likewise in prison, until that Alexius, the son of Isaac, (in despite of his
uncles malice) by tears and fair entreats, obtained succor of the French and
the Venetians, wherewith he delivered his Father: who very soon after died,
having taken too much the fresh air, after his so long close imprisonment.

Alexius the Angel, 1195.
murderer of his Brother Isaac, held the Empire of Constantinople after him,
in the year 1195. He was most wicked, and cruelly handled his elder brother,
only to usurp the Empire. The like he would have done to his Nephew
Alexius, who escaping from him, was carried by Sea into Dalmatia, where he
found the Nobility of France, with Baldwin and the Venetians, whom he moved to
war against his uncle, promising them thirty thousand marks of gold, and all
kind of victuals, if his imprisoned father, or himself, might (by their
means) regaine the Empire. Hereupon, those valiant lords hoysed sail toward
Constantinople, and took it; having first broken the chain which thwarted the
Sea. Alex^us, saved himself by flight, Isaac was delivered out of prison, who
died soon after: and his son Alexius the younger, was elected Emperor.

Alexius the younger, being son to Isaac, was seated in the Empire, in the
year 1204. 1204
by an agreement made between him, and the French and Venetians. It is said,
that then it was sought to have the Patriarch of Constantinople subject and
inferior to the Pope of Rome: and that the Emperor should recompense the French
and Venetians, for the damages which Manuell had done unto them. But scarcely
was he entered into his government of the Empire, and employing his pains to
accomplish his promises, when as Murziphilus (no Noble man, yet one whom he
had advanced to great authority) killed him. And so this young and innocent
Prince died by Treason. Murziphilus finding his sin much misliked, in the
night time fled away, with his Wife, his strumpets, and treasure: yet, not
long after, he was brought back again from Morea, as a Captive to
Constantinople, where he died miserably. By this means, both the City and
empire of Greece remained to the French, and Baldwine was the first Emperor of
the French Nation.

1205
Baldwine Earl of Flanders, was after Alexius the younger, elected emperor of
Constantinople, by all the warlike soldiers of Flaunders, as also the
Marquess of Montferrat, of Sauoy, and of Venice, in the year 1205. Before this
election, there was a condition thus determined: That if the emperor (who was
to be elected) should be of the French, the Venetians should make a Patriarch;
as it happened. Baldwine then recovered all that belonged to the Empire of
Constantinople, except Adrianople: which Theodor, kinsman to Alexius the
murderer, held as his wives dowry, and kept there his Empire. But as the French
laid siege thereto, and were upon the very point of surprising it: Baldwine
was there taken and put to death, having scarsly governed one year.

Henry the brother of Baldwine, 1206
was made Emperor after him. He pursued the besieging and assault of
Adrianople, but the Sarazins coming to succor it, he retired to
Constantinople, which then he strongly fortified. He made peace and alliance
with the Vallachians, took their Dukes daughter in marriage, and (both far
off, and at home) guided all affairs prouidently. He constituted William,
(son to Boniface) K. of Thessaly, soon after his fathers death, leaving his
daughter Iolanta as his heir, who was married unto Peter of Auxerre, that
succeeded him in the Empire.

Peter de Courtnay, or (to speak better) of France, being the youngest son of
Jews le gros, 1216.
and Earl of Auxerre, (by the means and right of his wife Iolanta, in reguard
that Henry had left no heir male) succeeded in the Empire of
Constantinople, the year 1216. He returning to Rome after his Coronation,
besieged Baudras, in favor of the Venetians: But it proved in vain, for at a
gallaunt Banquet, he was beheaded by Theodor Lascarus, who called himself
Emperor of Adrianople, and of the Graecians. This treachery was performed under
the shadow of a feigned peace, with a faithful promise made upon a false Oath.
Others say, that Lascarus had laid ambushes in the Forest of Thessaly, in the
place called Tempe, and that he surprised Peter in such manner, shutting him up
in Captivity, and that so he died. His wife Iolanta during this his thraldom,
held the Empire two years.

1220.
Robert, son to the forenamed Peter, so soon as he heard the tidings of his
fathers hard adventure, departed presently from France, and went directly to
Constantinople, where he was received as Emperor, in the year 1220. There he
carried himself valiantly, until such time as he took to wife a young Lady,
who was promised and troth-plighted to a Gentleman of Burgundy, that neither
could or would endure such a shame. But he, boldly coming into the Palace,
did cut off the Ladies nose, and threw her mother into the Sea, because she
had been the procurer of this unjust marriage. To all which the Emperor durst
not say one word, but went to Rome to receive the Crown: And returning thence
not long after, with an intent to be revenged, he died of a strange disease in
Achaia,

1228
Baldwine the second, son to the said Robert, succeeded his Father in the
Empire of Constantinople, in the year 1228. But because he was ouer-young,
Brennus King of Jerusalem (in title only) was sent from Italy, to be joined
with him as his governor: whose daughter he married, making none account of
the daughter of the king of Pontus, whereby great wars ensued. Baldwine,
being but barely stored of money for these wars, and very hardly pressed:
engaged his son to the Venetians, and to the King S. Jews, a piece of the true
Cross, as it was reported to be, and many precious Relics of the Church. So
leuying a great Army, he planted it at the entrance of the strait of
Constantinople: But in the mean while (by secret intelligence) Michaell
Paleologus had gotten into the City. Then Baldwin flying thence, with the
Patriarch, betook themselves to Negropont, dreading only the outward harms,
while they within were ten times worse. Then did the Greeks recover the Empire
of Constantinople, which the French had held almost the space of threescore
years.

Michaell Paleologus, 1239.
having thus cunningly seized on the Empire, and got it into his own
possession: held it still very manfully, for the space of two and twenty years.
But he ran into his peoples hatred, for making agreement with pope Gregory the
tenth, in the Council at Lions, and acknowledging duty to him. After him, his
son succeeded.

Andronicus, who within a while after, 1261
took his son Michaell to be his associate in the empire. But Michaell being
dead, his son Andronicus the younger, made war upon his graundfather
Andronicus, and compelled him to accept him as companion with him in the
Empire. Whereat the Emperor Andronicus conceived such inward dislike, that he
soon after died, having reigned 43. years.

Andronicus the younger, 1304.
carried himself both wisely and valiantly in governing the Empire. He died of
a burning Fever, having reigned 33. years, his son succeeding.

1341.
John Cantacuzen, who was Schoolmaister to John Paleologus, and fellow also
with him in the Empires government, of whom more shall be said in the life of
John Paleologus.

1341
John Paleologus, called also Caloian, succeeded his father in the Empire of
Constantinople, the year 1341. He being very young, had for his Tutor and
companion in the Empire John Cantacuzen, who was expulsed by the seditious
devises and sleights of a man of mean birth, but yet quick, dexterious, and
full of courage, which made him the better accepted in Court: It is said also,
that the ambition of the Patriarch of Constantinople, was thereto a great
furtherance. But he being impatient at such an injury, made war for five
years, against the mother of John Paleologus, and against John the said
Emperor, and was the first man, that brought the Turks in Arms into Europe.
At length, Constantinople yielded it self unto him, and when he took it, he
did no wrong to any one, but carried himself as fellow Companion of the
Empire, giving his daughter in marriage to the said Emperor John. Afterward,
he made war upon the Genowaies, speeding one while well, and another ill,
having (nevertheless) with him the Venetians, and the men of Arragon. Then
John Paleologus, who had been banished, made war upon him, being
principally aided by the Turks, and to whom he gave first habitation in
Europe: by which means, he cunningly entered Constantinople, in the year 1357.
And then Cantacuzen (forsaking the Empire) entered into a monastery, and lived
there as a Monk. But Matthew, his son, seeking to be Competitor with
Paleologus, was constrained to desist. So Paleologus, having had the victory in
diverse wars, died in the year 1384. having reigned sixteen years with his
Tutour Cantacuzen, and 27. years alone by himself, in all 43. years. After
him was Emperor (for the space of three years) Andronicus the eldest son;
who nevertheless is not set in the number of the Emperors.

Manuell (by some called Emanuell) son to the said John Paleologus, 1387.
held the Empire of Constantinople, in the year 1387. And the most remarkable
matter in his life, was that he left seven sons: of which, John the eldest,
succeeded in the Empire, in the year 1421.

John, eldest son to Manuell, 1421.
entered on the Empire after his fathers decease. He being more addicted to
peace and quietness, then War, gave his assistance in the Council at Ferrara,
which was afterward transferred to Florence, Eugenius the fourth, then being
Pope. As Emperor of the East, he was graciously welcomed by both the
Churches, the Greek and Latin, which were then made one. Returning home to his
Empire, he lived no long time after, but died, not leaving any posterity of
him, in the year 1445.

Constantine the eleauenth, and son of Manuell, after the death of his
brother John, 1445.
held the Empire, called the Greek Empire, in the year, 1445. He having bin
King of Morea before, was called Draco, for the cruelty which he exercised
against the Turks. But when Constantinople was taken by Mahomet the second,
son to Amurath the second: Then, all trembling, and he retiring to a gate of
the City, to escape by flight, was stifled to death, in the prease and
confusion of people, that likewise fled away, the 29. day of May, 1453. His
head was carried on the point of a Lance, to be shown through the enemies camp
in derision. And undoubtedly, it is a matter worthy note, as also of some
marvel, that Constantinople, edified or re-edified, enriched, and exalted by
Constantine the first, son to S. Helena, and after the manner of Rome:
should under this Constantine the eleauenth (having his mother to bear the
same name of Helena likewise) be surprised, and kept under the power of the
Turks, even to this instant.

A brief History or summarie of the Othomans or Emperors of the Turks, for the
space of three hundred years.
OThoman, the son of Orthogules, was Emperor of the Turks, in the year of
our Salvation 1300. 1300.
He was the first of this Nation that carried this name; which he had, in
regard of a Castle that he took in Galatia, And he was the first also, that
renewed the glory and honor of his Nation. For these people had taken
Jerusalem, in the year 1008. but they were conquered by the Christians, under
the conduct of Godfrey of Bullen, and those that then remained of the Turks,
retired themselves to Nicea, having (never after) any one K. of renown until
this man; who made himself a Monarch, and has the first place in the History
of the Turks. He was but of mean descent, yet of great spirit, cunning,
dilligent, and ambitious: having evermore (in his heart) a desire to reign, and
pondered upon all means, that thereto might best advance him. In this high
disposition, he found Fortune very favorable to him: for he subdued the
greater part of Bithinia, and took many fortes near to the Pontick Sea. But
his very greatest honor, was, the surprising of Sina, a City anciently called
Sebastia. He died aged, in the first year of Phillip de Valois, King of
France, and Edward the third, King of England.

1328
Orchanes, Son to the said Othoman, was Emperor of the Turks after his
father. He would not alter a jot of this new authority, no more then his
father did, and whom he far surpassed in Warlike actions. By his liberality
and good carriage, he won the hearts of his people, pursuing on (very well)
what his father had begun. By his industry, vigilancie, and providence, he
won the Countries of Mysia, Lycaonia, Phrygia, and Caria, and took in War
Prusya (which is now called Bursia) and which was the aboade of the Kings of
Bithynia, where he received a hurt, whereof he died, in the first year of the
reign of Io. K. of France, Edward the third of England still reigning. He
reigned 22. years, leaving Soliman and Amurath his sons and successors.

1348.
Soliman, son of Orchanes, reigned 2. years after his Father. He made war
upon the Greeks passed from Asya into Europe* where he vanquished the
Bulgarians, and took many places from them: especially in Thrace, he got the
Cities of Adrianople and Philopolis. Some say that he died in his Fathers life
time, with a fall from his horse in hunting, and that (very soon after) his
father died with grief. And this is the reason, why some do not set him in
the rank of Turkish Emperors.

Amurath, first of that name, 1350
and son to Orchanes, was Emperor of the Turks, in the year 1350. Good
Fortune attended on him, as she did on his Graundfather, and on his own Father
likewise: But he was as contrary to his graund father by the mothers side, as
his father had been to his predecessor, who bereft him of a great part of
Cilicia, by killing his son. Amurath (incited thereto by John Paleologus)
sent twelve thousand Turks for service of the said Paleologus; which was the
source and beginning of the ruin of Constantinople. For, being allured with
the riches of Europe, to make another voyage, he passed (in the Genowaies
galleys) six thousand Turks, under color of (yet) giving fresh succor to the
Emperor of Constantinople, and to expel his enemies out of the Empire: But it
was with full intention, to usurp Greece. So he crossed the arm of the
Hellespont Sea to Abydos, seazing Calypolis, and other Cities. Afterward, with
a very strong power, he set upon the Emperor himself, who no way doubted him:
Then took he Seruia and Bulgaria, whose Princes he foiled, coming in good
manner against him. But one of the followers of Lazarus, Despote of Seruia, in
revenge of his Masters death (slain in the fight) killed Amurath in the year
1378.

Baiazeth, King or Emperor of the Turks, first of that name, 1378.
after the death of Amurath his Father, slew his elder brother Solomon by
Treason, and enjoyed the Empire of the Turks alone to himself. To revenge the
death of his Father, he made war against Mark, Lord of Bulgaria, both
vanquishing and killing him, and subduing beside a great part of his country.
In short while after, he ran through the Countries of Hungaria, Albania, and
Valachia, and doing great hurt unto them, took many Christians, whom he
carried Prisoners into Thrace. In regard of most bold attempts in his Martial
business (wherein he was both hot and sudden) he was called Baiazeth
Hildrin, that is to say, Heavens Lightning. He subdued almost all Greece, being
assisted with the gifts and graces of Nature, both in body and mind. He
besieged Constantinople, for the space of eight years, the Emperor whereof was
gone into France, to require assistance, which was granted him. Nevertheless,
Baiazeth had the victory over the French, Hungarians, Germans, Seruians, and
Mysians, at once assembled against him. And so returning to Constantinople with
a fresh besieging, and finding no means to preserve the Empire of
Constantinople: suddenly Tamberlain came against Baiazeth, and gave him battle
on mount Stella, where Pompey fought with Mithridates. There did Tamberlain
conquer him, bound him in chains of gold, and placing him in a Cage of iron,
led him in that manner thorough Asya and Syria. In which miserable estate
Baiazeth died, and after his decease, we find that there was interregnum, until
Mahomet one of his sons came.

1407.
Iosuah or Cyriscelebes, whom some wrongly name Calapine, the eldest son of
Baiazeth, after the foil of his Father, was defeated of Asya by Tamberlain,
and led Captive to Constantinople for the Emperor, as a singular prize. But he
was used as the son of a Prince, and soon after (with great humanity in the
Emp.) released, and sent home into Asya, where he recovered his Fathers
kingdom. After, when he had well reestablished his forces, he stoutly resisted
Sigismond King of Hungary, who came to assail him, and had won diverse
Provinces from him: presuming that the Turks could no way relieve him, after so
great an overthrow given by Tamb. But Fortune spoke no friendlier to Sigismund,
then she had formerly don to him, when he fought against Baiazeth at Nicopolis,
his people being al larded with arrows before they could fall into order of
battle. For the Horsemen turned bridle even at the first shocke and noise of
the Enemy, and Cyriscelebes remained conqueror, who was slain by his brother
Mustapha, otherwise called Musulman, in the very flower of his age, the year
1407.

Mustapha or Musulman, 1408
was Emperor of the Turks a very small time, for his brother Moses possessed
himself of the State, and expelled him. Some, name this Mustapha, Orchanes the
second; whom they term to be son and heir to Iosuah or Cyriscelebes, and
that he was slain by Moses, his uncle by the fathers side: but Moses quickly
did suffer his deserved punnishment. For loosing both goods and life together,
himself was also slain by his own brother Mahometh. There be that write, that
this Mahometh reigned next after his father Baiazeth, making no mention of
Iosuah, or Cyriscelebes, neither of Mustapha or Orchanes, nor of Moses: but
after Baiazeth, do make his son Mahometh, presently to follow.

1409
Moses was expulsed, and put to death by his brother Mustapha, or (as others
say) his nephue Orchanes, and soon after, he was likewise slain by his
brother Mahometh: And these twoe (by some) are not set in rank with the
Turkish Emperors, because they are said to reign very little time, or not at
all.

1409
Mahometh, first of that name, brother to Iosuah, Mustapha, and the forenamed
Moses, is said (notwithstanding the rest) to be Emperor of the Turks, in the
year 1409. There are some that do attribute only to this man, all those
matters which are reported of Iosuah or Cyriscelebes. He over ran the Countries
of the Bulgarians and Valachians, imposing great Tributes and Taxations upon
them. Then he entered on the Satrapes of Asya, recovering all those places which
Tamberlaine had taken. He chased out of Galatia, and the Countries of Pontus
and Cappadocia, his own kindred and Allies, without extending any pity, to any
Princes and Lords of his own blood: albeit it is true, that he left some in
their own entire dwellings. Being returned into Greece, he came to Adrianople,
(the Metropolitan City of Thrace) and there he constituted the seat of his
Empire, expelling thence the Christians that had there any abiding. He died in
the twelft year of his Empire, which is reckoned to be in the year 1418.
leaving his son Amurath the second, to be his successor.

Amurath the second, 1418
Son to the forenamed Mahometh, succeeded his Father in the Turkish Empire,
in the year 1418. He (understanding the death of his father, and desiring to
pass from Asya into Thrace) vanquished his Uncle Mustapha, to whom the Greeks
gave favor and succor. He was the first, that (for the guard of his person)
made election of Christian Renegados, to be his Ianissaries, by the power and
courage of whom, both he and his successors have subdued almost the whole East.
He assailed with his forces, and did great damages to the Countries of
Hungaria, Bosnia, Albania, Valachia, and Greece. He took Thessalonica from the
Venetians. He had victory against Ladislaus King of Poland, against the
Cardinal Julian, and against Huniades. He held the Empire or Kingdom of the
Turks, for the space of 32. years, and then left it to Mahomet his Son.

Mahomet the second, Emperor of the Turks, succeeded his Father Amurath in the
year, 1450. 1450
He began his reign as an Homicide, causing his younger Brother to be
murdered, because his fathers body should not be buried alone. He was a most
wicked and sinful man, not believing in any God. For he would say, that his
Mahomet was a false Prophet, like unto himself, and made a mockery of the
Saints, Prophets, and Patriarchs. He won, and left the surname of Great, to
the house of the Otthomans. He ruyned the Empire of Constantinople, which he
seized by assault the 29. day of May, 1453. as has been already declared, in
the report of the life of Constantine the eleauenth; together, with the Empire
of Trebisonde. He took twelve kingdoms, and two hundred Cities, from the
Christians, in the year 1479. He besieged the Isle of Rhodes, which was then
held by the knights of S. John of Jerusalem, but his labor was in vain, for
it was courageously defended by the said Knights, and their great master Peter
d'Aubusson, or d'Ambois, a French man. At length, he died of the Colic, the
fourth day after he sickened; having lived 58. years, and reigned one and
thirty.

1481
Baiazeth, second of that name, and son to Mahomet the second, by means of
the Ianissaries, was made Emperor of the Turks, in the year 1481. He
conquered and expulsed Zizim, his younger brother, whom the chiefest Lords
would have had to be Emperor: but he being fled for refuge to the Isle of
Rhodes, the great master of the Knights, sent him to King Charles the eight.
Baiazeth vanquished Caraman, and recovered all whatsoever he had gotten from
the Turks, on either side of the Mount Taurus. He subdued Valachia, and so
went on against the Sultane of Aegipt, who was too strong for him: For, having
received the fugitive Mamelukes, after the death of Caraman, and entertaining
(besides) a great number of Arabes, for his defense, oftentimes he conquered
and put Baiazeth to flight. Afterward, Baiazeth subjected the Inhabitants of
the Ceraunian Mountains, and took from the Venetians Lepanto, Modon and
Duraz. In the end, his youngest son Selim, who (by means of the Ianissaries)
had gotten preferment before the eldest, and was declared to be Emperor in his
fathers life time: enforced him to flight, and afterward poisoned him, in the
year 1512. at the very same time, when the battle of Rauenna was fought,
under the happy reign of King Jews the twelfth.

Selim having expulsed, 1512.
and after poisoned his Father, because he lived too long, was Emperor of the
Turks, in the year 1512. To this parracide, he added the murder of his
brethren Achmet and Corcuthus, and caused seven of his Nephews to be
strangled, that were the Children of his brothers. He conquered and expelled
the Sophi of Persya, and (in diverse battles) discomfited the two Souldanes,
Campson and Tomombeus, with the Mamelukes and Arabes. He added Aegipt and
Arabia to his Empire, and took the great Cayro. Then returning home to his
country of Greece, an ulcer engendered in his Raines, which increasing
continually like a Canker, procured his death, in the eight year of his
reygne, Anno 1519.

Soliman, whom some term to be the second of that name, Emperor of the Turks,
1510
carried that name (as is said) because he very wisely provided for all
affairs, whereunto the issue of them was also as correspondent. For this name
of Soliman (by some transposed sillables) delivers the name of Solomon, the
most renowned King for Wisdom. There was not any before him, nor of the race
of the Othomans, more severe and valiant. For the deeds and wars of
Soliman, came not one jot behind those of his Father: having recovered Syria,
vanquished Gazel that was reuoulted, and surprised Belgrade and Rhodes; then
afterward Buda two several times, and put to the worse the Army of Austria,
that fled away before him. And near unto Buda, had the victory over
Rokandolphe, who had a great Army. He vanquished the Spaniards at Castelnoua in
Dalmatia, and put to flight the Army by Sea, which seemed inuinsible. In the
year 1543. 1543.
he took Strigonia and Alba Regalis, two worthy Cities of Hungaria. He
conquered the kingdoms of Assyria and Mesopotamia, with the City of Babylon,
that might be compared with Memphis and Egypt, conquered by his Father. He
ouer-ran and wasted the frontiers of Armenia, Medea and Persia, and twice took
Tauris, the principal Cittye of Persia, chasing the Sophi (far off before
him) into the mountains. For the rest, the Turks themselves do confess, that
for 200. years before, they never had Lord that was a greater Iusticer, more
sober, wise, and humane, then he was. But this humanity ceased in him, when he
caused his eldest son Mustapha to be strangled, to please his Concubine
Rosa, who desired that her Son Selim might be Emperor after his Father. He
was repulsed by the Emperor Charles the fifth, when he came (with a powerful
Army) to besiege the City of Vienna in Austria. He besieged also the Isle of
Malta, in the year 1565. 1565
whether the Knights of S. John of Jerusalem had retired themselves, after the
surprisall of Rhodes. But the Isle was manfully defended by their great
master, being a Frenchman, named Peter Parisot, called also; le Valette, and
Soliman was compelled to raise his siege. In the year 1566. He died in
Hungary, at his siedge before the Castle of Sighet, having reigned 47. years.

Selim, second of that name, 1566.
Emperor of the Turks, succeeded in the Empire (by the means of Basha
Mehemet) after the death of Soliman his Father in Hungary, which for a time was
concealed, and he entered into possession of the Empire, before the death of
his Father was discovered. He subdued Ainan in Arabia, and took the Isle of
Cyprus, in the year 1571. 1571.
In the end, he lost his Nauall Army, in the battle of Lepanto, which he had
against the Christians, in the very same year 1571. But soon after, he came
upon them again, and then renewed peace with the Venetians and their
Commonwealth. Afterward, he recovered Thunis and the Goulette, which the king
of Spain had made use of in Africa: And he died in the year 1574. having
reigned eight years. But all the forenamed memorable actions, were performed
by his Bashaes, and not by himself: for he (all the while) took his
pleasure, being greatly given to women and wine.

Amurath, third of that name, 1574
and son to Selim, was created Emperor of the Turks, and enjoyed the Empire
after his fathers death, within eight days, in the year 1574. By a cruel and
barbarous custom of the Country, he caused five Brethren of his own to be
slain, and two Concubines of his Fathers, who were great with Child: to the
end, that he might solely reign alone, without fear or suspicion, and so be
avoided of all impeachments, which he well understood might ensue by parity, and
such as should lay claim to the like Fortune. He began his government
somewhat young, being aged but 28. years, being a wonderful lover of his
paternall Ma^ometane Religion, a great Iusticer, and imitator of his
Graundfather Soliman, He took some cities in Hungary and Sclauonie, which
afterward were regained from him. Some say, that he was dull and lumpish of
spirit, and fell (oftentimes) with the falling sickness, which made his face
to look blemished, and of a leaden color. He gave himself to women and great
feeding, for he was the Father of 102. children, and yet became very gross and
corpulent. He died in January, 1595. the 21. year of his reign, not having
attained to fifty years of age.

1595.
Mahometh the third, succeeded his Father Amurath the third, in the year 1595.
And to show himself the son of his father, and no whit to degenerate from
his Ancestors, he caused 19. of his brethren to be barbarously murdered, and
many of his Fathers Concubines to be drowned, that were found to be great with
child after his decease, so that no child should remain, to trouble him in
his government. But, as cruelty and barbarousnesse does commonly dwell in a
negligent spirit, addicted to sloth and pusillanimity: even so, did not he any
thing deserving memory, he being wholly given to his bodies voluptuousness. He
did put to death his eldest son, and the mother of that son, because they
had inquired of Astrologers, how long time he should reign. In the year
1603. the Sophi of Persya, regained Tauris and Bages, and those great
countries, which the predecessors of this Mahometh had invaded, as has bin
already declared, in our report of Selim the first, and Soliman the second. He
died of the Plague at Constantinople, in January 1604. having reigned nine
years.

Achmet succeeded his father in the Empire, being but seauenteen years old, in
the year 1604. 1604
In the year 1605. he took Strigonia, and some other places in the Kingdom
of Hungaria. It is said, that (in his Army) he causes his Fathers dead body to
be carried, embalmed and enclosed in a Coffin of Lead: holding opinion, that
his military deseigns and exployts shall thereby prove the more fortunat. He
has made peace with the Emperor Rodulphus, and those of the house of Austria
for fifteen years, which makes it therefore the more believed, that he will
convert his forces against the Sophi. He now reigns, this year 1611. and (by
outward appearance) couets to be feared.

A brief Discourse concerning the Sarrazins, the Original of their name, and
what People they have been, even to this day.
Having delivered a short Survey of the Turkish Ottomans, from their first
King or Emperor to the man that now governs: I thought it not impertinent to
my purpose, to say somewhat also of the Sarazins, who are held to be before
them, and much more ancient then they. Nor list I here to call in question,
those errors committed by Sabellicus, Blondus, the Tyrian Bishop, Volatteranus,
and many other grave Authors, who (in their writings) do term the
Mahumetists or Turks to be Sarazins: for they never knew any such name,
neither were at any time so called, but only Mulsulmans, Mulsulmans what it
signifies.
which is as much to say, as, people faithful in the Law. Some others, who
have thought their judgments to be much more pregnant, stick not to say: that
this name of Sarazin* did come of Sarra, the wife of Abraham, of whose race the
great Prophet Mahomet, (inuenter and deviser of the Law or Religion, held at
this present by the Sarazins and Turks) they say was descended. But this
opinion likewise is not receineable: for they desired rather to be called
Agarians, in reguard of Agar, handmayde to Sarra, Whence the S^^azins der^^e
their de cent.
and mother of Ismaeli; or else Ismaelites, because they judged themselves to
be issued of the said Ismaell, bastard son to the forenamed Abraham.

But let us leave these false etymologies, which neither carry or yield any
true likelihood, and come to the very Original of the name Sarazin. The error
grew from hence, that some short while before Mahomet (or Muhamet, as others
terms him) arose, and began to extend himself as well toward Suria as
Persya: there lived then in the Rocky Arabia and Idumea, certain Arabes, who
made their abode or dwelling (and yet do to this day) under small Tents or
enclosures, and had not any other trade or maintenance for their living, but
by thefts and robberies, Sarazins were people dwelling in the desert of Arabia,
and Idumea
which they daily exercised upon all passengers, were they Turks, Christians,
Pagans or whatsoever. Of which Robbers and Thieves, the Country could never
be freeed, nor can be at this day: as such do faithfully affirm, who have
travailed on pilgrymage to Mount Sinai in Jerusalem. And the Turks themselves
do confess, that when Devotion drew them forth on Pilgrimage, to the city of
Medinat al Nabi, that is to say: the City of the Prophet, situate in Arabia
foelix, where the Sepulcher of Mahomet is: and when likewise they do yet pass
through the very greatest solitudes and deserts, as many times the Christians
do: They find them to be peopled with these wicked kinds of Thieves, as
formerly has bin sa^^, who name themselves Sarracenis, not in regard of
Religion or blood, but by an ancient appellation of the said people, of whom
Ptolomey makes mention, and says, that their living is in Idumea.

Ami, Marcel, in vita Iul, Apost, lib, 14
Amianus Marcellinus, in the History of Julian the Apostat Emperor, makes a
description of them, and says: that Those places (more than two hundred years
before the Original of Mahomet, The antiquity of the Sarazin people
or of his Alcoran) were fully furnished with the said Sarrazins: and Assyria
afterward, even so far as the Cataracts of Nylus, or the kingdom of Prester
John, where they used the same courses, violences and thefts upon merchants,
and inhabitants of the neighboring Countries, according as the Arabes or
Alarbes do at this day. Whereupon, because that their chiefest habitation was
in the Deserts and Mountains, which are in Arabia and the neighboring
quarsers or Countries, as Chaldaea, Assyria, Mesapotamia, Suria and Aegipt,
when the Arabes arose with their new Religion, and had frequented the foresaid
Regions: the nearer Countries supposed that these people were those former
Sarazins, by ignorance of their Language, as also by rashness of some Writers,
who lived then in Suria, and since that time in Spain, seeming to have good
knowledge of those people, and therefore continually then called Sarazins.

Moreover to confirm that vain appellation, those Interpreters in Spain,
^rro^ in tra^slatio^ of the Alchoran
who (by commandment of S. Bernard) were appointed to interpret the Alchoran,
in every place where they found the vocable Mulsulman, which is as much to say
in the Arabian tongue, as, Peaceble, and faithful toward God: they
interpreted the same Sarraceni^, or Sarazins. This Mulsulman then is the
vocable, whereby all that believe in the Alcoran will be called; whether they
be Arabes, Syrians, Persians, Tartars, Turks, or Moors.

Whosoever then would enter into any peaceable and friendly conference with
them, (albeit none do hate their name more than the Turks) must call them
Mulsulmans, as we do our selves Christians, or faithful people. So are they
all named, by the Author of the Ismaell or Ismaelitish race, and by their
Bastard Prophet. Sarazins will be called Mul^ulmans
After our manner, and in respect of Religion, they term a man Mulsulmam, and a
woman Mulsulmina, or Mulsulminet: albeit some say Mussim, by a corrupt
pronunciation. As we may well conceive by our own selves, who do use to call
those disfigured wanderers, that walk among us with deformed faces, and long
ilfauored locks, using all subtle Thefts, pi^^eries, and legerdumaines they
can devise, we nickname them to be Sarrazins, Aegiptians, or Gypsies.

I thus conclude then, What people are meant by the Sarazins.
that when Hystorians write, that the Sarrazins invaded and made use of Rhodes,
next of Thrace, then of Italy, Spain, and other Countries: it is to be
understood of the Oriental people and Affricanes, that were of the Mohammedan
Religion, because they used the self same cruelties, thefts, and robberies, as
the Sarazins of rockie Arabia did. And to speak truly, all Europe would (at this
instant) have bin haunted with those people, if they had not been formerlie
expelled and spoiled. It remains yet fresh in memory, that the great
Graundfather to Phillip king of Spain (not long since deceased) named
Ferdinand, At what time the Sarazins were expulsed out of Spain.
expulsed them out of the Kingdom of Granado, with their king called Melen, and
he bestowed six whole years together in stout wars, only in foiling them: And
then the dominion, which the Sarazins and Moors held in Spain, had final
conclusion. After which time, those faith less Mahumetists durst never presume
any more upon Spain, where they had held the Kingdom of Granado eight hundred
years.

A great slaughter of the Sarazins in Spain.
Before the said Ferdinand, king Alphonsus, in the year of our Lord 1233. slew
in diverse places above two hundred thousand of them, when they held strong
forts and Cities in Spain, which he forced them to forsake, and since then
have been utterly ruined. Henry the Emperor made another great massacre of
them, Another in Italy.
in the year of Jesus Christ 1010. in Italy, expelling them wholly out of that
Country. Among the Sarazins* there were not only very generous persons: but
likewise some men of great learning: as Auicen, Mesuus, Isaac, Mansor,
Auerroes, and many others. Now, as all things have their vicissitude, and
alteration by courses: so after that the Sarazins had reigned in Africa, and
partly in Europe, for about the space of eight hundred years, there came a
people from diverse parts of Scythia, which at this day we call Turks, who in
less than twoe hundred years, The Turks (...) the Sarazins.
overcame in Arms those people called Sarazins, with many other Christians
beside, not only in Asya, but in Europe and Africa. And albeit that those
Turks were of the same Religion, to wit, Mahumetists: yet did they not abstain
from vexing and troubling them with war, even in like manner as they did the
Christians. For in the year 1012. they took Jerusalem and all Iudaea from
them: but the Sarazins of Aegipt recovered them again, and held them for three
hundred years after. Nevertheless, they were yet again dejected thence in
the year 1517 by the Turks, the Sarazins loosing then not only Palestine, and
the Holy Land, but likewise Egypt, Syria, Arabya, and the very same Country of
Idumea, where as the Sarazins had their original, and are there subject to the
Turks now at this instant. For Campson their King, lost the day against
Selim, Emperor of the Turks, and Tomombeus his successor, being next chosen to
be King in his place, was taken, The Sarazins last Ki. strangled.
and afterward ignominiouslie strangled in the graund Caire, the very
principal City of Egypt, where we may behold the end of the Sarazins, not any
part of them now remaining, except such few, as are in the Turks seruility.

This short discourse gives us to understand, that Sarazins were not all such
as are called Mahumetists, but they that had their beginning in the Countries
of Idumea, and the desert or rockie Arabia, and all those that (being joined
with them) commanded under them in diverse Countries, rendering other Nations
subject to them by Arms. Vncill such time, as they were exterminate by the
people, whose Countries they unjustly usurped, and planted their Religion by
war: As also (at length) by the Turks, although they be of the same Religion.
For war is maintained among them, for desire of sovereignty and ambition,
even as well as among us that are Christians.

A brief Collection of the Bishops and Popes of Rome, from the year 44. to
this instant 1611. With the several Ages of the Church, since the Ascension of
our blessed Savior Jesus Christ up into Heaven.
The years of Grace.
Our Lord Jesus Christ, the Nazarite, God and man, Messiah, Savior of the
world, Holy of holies, Sovereign and Eternal High Priest, head of the Church.

44.
1 Peter, called Cephas, borne in Bethsaida, the son of John, and first called
of the Apostles, is said to hold his seat seven years at Antioch, and
afterward at Rome, xxiiij. years, under the Empire of Claudius and Nero, who
caused him to be crucified in the same place. Simon Magus, being reputed to be
the first Heretic, was then condemned by him. Then was the first Council
holden at Jerusalem, and then also was the first Persecution.

2 Linus, the son of Herculanus, 57
born at Volterra in Tuscane, was said to be the Disciple to S. Peter, and his
Coadiutor. He held the Sea, eleven years, five Months, and twelve days: And
had his head smitten off under Nero.

3 Clement, the son of Romain Faustinus, 68
first Priest of the Romain Church, was designed by S. Peter his successor. He
was banished to Pontus, and was drowned, having an Anchor fastened about his
neck. He held the Sea, xij. Months, eleven days. Sede vacant, xiij. days.

4 Cletus, son to Emilianus the Roman, 77.
was martyred under Domitian. He held the Sea, xij. years, one month, eleven
days. Menander, Ebion and Cerinthus, were then Heretics: And the second
Persecution.

The first Age.
IN this first Age, lived and wrote, Philo the Jew, Dionisius Areopagita,
Josephus, and S. Ignatius. In this Age, were two several Persecutions of the
Church: The first under Nero, and the second under Domitian.

5 Anacletus, 84.
son to Autiochus the Athenian, a Priest of the Romain Church, was martired
under Nerua and Traian. He held the Sea, nine years, two months, ten days.
Vacant, thirteen days.

6. Euaristus a Greek, Son of Judas the Bethleemite Jew: 96.
was martyred under Traiane. He held the Sea, nine years, ten months, two
days vacant xix. days. Saturnine, Basilides, and Isidorus Heretics lived
then: And then was the third persecution.

7 Alexander, Son of Roman Alexander, was Martird under Traian. 109
He held the Sea seven years, ten Months, two days, vacant xxv days.

117
8 Sixtus, Son of Roman Pastor, a Priest of the Roman Church^, was Martyred
under Adrian, He held the Sea, ten years, three Months, and xxj. days.
vacant four days. Then lived, Carpocrates, Epiphanes, and Prodicus, author
of the Gnosticke Heretics. The fourth persecution.

127.
9 Telesphorus a Greek, son to Anachoretus, Priest of the Roman Church, was
martyred under Adrian. He held the Sea, eleven years, three months, xxij.
days. vac. four days. Aquila of Pontus, the Heretic, then lived.

10 Higinus a Greek, son to an Athenian Philosopher, 138.
was Priest of the Romain Church, under the Empire of Antoninm. He held the sea, 4. years, three months, four days. vac. 4. days.

242
11 Pius of Aquilea, son to Ruffinus, Priest of the Romain church under
Antoninus: He disputed concerning the feast of Easter, at Laodicia. He held the Sea, nine years, three Months, four days. vacant four days. Then were
heretics, Valentinus and his Disciples, Marcus, Secundus, Bassus, Colarbasus
and Heracleo.

12 Anicetus a Syrian, the son of John, 153
martired under the Emperor Antonius verus. He held the Sea, nine years,
four months, xiij. days. vacant xvij. days.

13 Sother, son to Concordius, a Native of Fundi, under Verus. He held the Sea nine years, iij. months, two days, Vacant xxi. days. Then was Tatian, of
whom came the Excratites, Seuerus and Ammonius Heretics.

14 Eleutherius of Nicopolis, son to Habundius, was Deacon of the Romain
Church, 171
under Commodus. He held the Sea, xv. years, iij. months, two days, Vacant
five days. Montanus the Phrygian, Author of the Cataphriges, Theod. Themist.
Alexander and Symmachus Heretics then living.

15 Victor an Affricane borne, 186
the Son of Foelix, under the Emperor Pertinax. He held the Sea ten years,
three months ten days: vacant xxi. days. A Synod was then at Rome; some
Counsels in Palestine, concerning Easter. Theodotus, Aesclapiodothus,
Hermopilus, and Apollonides, were then Heretics.

16. Zephyrinus a Roman borne, 198
Son to Habundius, under Antonius Caracalla. He held the Sea seven years,
seven months, ten days, vacant six days.

17. Calixtus, Son to Domitius a Romayne, 218
was martired under Aurelius Seuerus* He held the Sea six years, one month,
ten days, Vacant vi. days. Then was the fifth persecution.

The second Age.
2 In this second Age, lived Iustine the Philosopher and Martyr: Dionisius
Bishop of Corinth S. Policarpus, S. Ireneus; Clemens, Alexandrinus, and
Tertullian. In which Age, were three persecutions: one under Traiane: the
second under Marcus Antoninus, and the third under Seuerus.

223
18 Vrbane, Son to Pontianus a Roman, martired under Alexander. He held
the Sea four years, ten months, twelve days, vacant one month.

231
19 Pontianus a Roman borne, and son to Capurnius, dyed in exile in
Sardignia, under Alexander. He held the Sea nine years, five months, two
days, Vacant x. days.

236
20 Antherus a Greek by birth, son to Romulus, martired under Maximinus. He
held the Sea five years, one month, twelve days, Vacant xiij. days. Then
was the sixth persecution.

237
21 Fabian a Roman, son to Fabius, under Maximinus. He held the Sea,
fifteen years, eleven days, Vacant six days. Gordianus, Phillip and Decius
were then martired. The Aelchefites, and Nouatus chief of the Nouatians, with
some Arabian Heretics, were then. A Counsel was holden at Rome, against
Nouatus: The seventh persecution.

251
22 Cornelius a Roman, son to Castinus Priest of the Roman Church, and
martyred under Decius and Gallus. He held the Sea two years, two months, three
days: Vacant one month, and three days. Then was the Nouatian Antipope,
and first schism in the Church. Two Sinodes were held in Africa, against
Nouatian. The sea being vacant, a Synod was held at Rome, concerning them that
had denied the Faith.

23 Lucius a Romain, 253.
and son to Porphirius, was martyred under Gallien and Valerian. He held the Sea three years, three months, iij. days, Vacant one month, v. days. Two
councels were held at Carthage, one concerning the doubt, whether Heretics
ought to be rebaptized: and the other about baptizing of Infantes. Two other
Councels were likewise in Asya, upon the doubt, whether Heretics were to be
received, coming to resipiscence or knowledge of their error. Now was the
eight Persecution.

24 Stephen a Romain, son to Julius, 255
Archdeacon of the Romain Church, martyred under Valerian and Gallien. He held
the Sea, 7. years, five Months, and ij. days. vacant xxij. days. A Synod
was held in Africa, against Basilides and Martial, two renegate Bishops.

25 Sixtus the second, an Athenian borne, 257
son to a Philosopher, and martyred with S. Laurence, under Valerian and
Gallien. He held the Sea two years, ten months, xxiij. days: vacant one
month, five days. Then were living Noetus and Sabellius, Author of the
Sabellian heresy, with the heretic Paul of Samosata.

26 Denis or Dionisius, a Monk under Claudius the Emperor. He held the Sea,
six years, 260
two months, four days. vac. six days. Nepos the Heretic then renewed the
Chiliastes, Two Synodes were at Antioch, against Paul of Samo sata: And a
Synod at Rome, for the cause of Denis of Corinth.

271.
27 Felix a Romain, son of Constantius, martyred under Aurelian: He held the sea, 4. years, three months, xv. days. vacan. five days. The ninth
Persecution.

275
28 Eutichianus, son to Maximus, and borne at Luna in Tuscane, martired under
Aurelian, Tacitus and Florian Emperors: He held the Sea, one year, one Month,
vacant eight days. Then was Manes, head of the Manichean Heretics.

^83
29 Caius, the son of Caius, borne at Salona, in Dalmatia, martyred under
Carinus, Numerianus, Dioclesian and Maximianus Emperors. He held the Sea,
eleven years, four Months, xij. days, vacant eleven days.

296
30 Marcellinus a Roman, son to Proiectus, martyred under Dioclesian and
Maximianus. He held the Sea, six years, two months, xvi. days, Vacant
seven years, seven months, and xxv. days. Then was the tenth and bloody
Persecution: And a Synod holden at Sinuessa, for the cause of Pope Marcellinus.

The third Age.
3 In this third Age flourished Origin, Minutius Foelix, S, Cyprian, S.
Gregory, called the worker of miracles; Dionisius bishop of Alexandria,
Victorinus, Bishop of Poicters, Arnobius, and S. Methodius Bishop of Tire. In
this age were five persecutions. The first under Maximinus, the second under
Decius, the third under Valerianus and Gallien, the fourth under Aureliauus,
and the fifth under Dioclesian.

31. Marcellus a Roman, 304
the Son of Bennet or Benedict, Priest, Cardinal of the Roman Church,
under Constantine. He held the Sea six years, five months, three days,
vacant xx. days.

32 Euscbius a Greek, son to a Physician, 310
under Constantine, He held the Sea four years, one month, three days,
Vacant three days.

33 Miltiades or Melchiades an Affricane, 311.
Cardinal Priest of the Roman Church under Constantine. He held the Sea,
four years, seven months, nine days, vacant xx, days. Then was the
Schism of the Donatists in Africa: the Elibertine Synod in Spain; the Synod
of Rome and of Carthage.

34. Syluester a Roman, son to Ruffinus, 315
Cardinal Priest under Constantine. He held the Sea three and twenty years,
ten months, eleven days, vacant fifteen days, Then were the Synodes of
Ancyra and Neocaesaria: The general Counsel of Nice, wherein Arrius was
condemned, and the third Sinod holden at Rome

35 Marcus a Roman, the son of Priscus, Cardinal Deacon under Constantine,
33^
he held the Sea two years, eight months, twenty days, vacant twenty days.

336
36 Julius a Roman, son of Rusticius, Cardinal Deacon under Constantine and
his children. He held the Sea fifteen years, two months, ten days,
Vacant, two days. Then were the Asterians, Anthropomorphites, Eusebians,
Macedonians, Dulians, Luciferians, and Marcellian Heretics; with Photinus,
Acacius and Aerius: The Synodes of Rome, Cullen, Sardis, Jerusalem and
Alexandria.

353
37 Liberius a Roman, the son of Augustus, a Cardinal Deacon, was sent into
exile under Constance. He held the Sea, twelve years, three months, four
days: Vacant six days. Then was the persecution of the church by the
Arrians, and second Schism between Liberius and Foelix.

355
38 Foelix the second, a Roman, and Son of Anastasius, a Cardinal Deacon: was
created Pope in the life time of Liberius, under Constance and martired by the
faction of the Arrians. He held the Sea, one year, four months, two days.

39 Damasus a Portuguize, son of Antonio, Cardinal Deacon, under
Valentinian, Valens, Gratian, 366.
Theodosius and Arcadius. He held the Sea ten years, three months, eleven
days, Vacant xi. days. The third Schism between Damasus and Vrsicinus then
happened, and Synods were held at Rome, in Spain, and at Valentia in France.
As also the Euuomina, Entichian, Priscillianists, Apollonarian and Messalian
Heretics. A general Counsel at Constantinople, against Macedonius.

40 Siricius a Roman, son of Tiburtius, 384
Cardinal Deacon under Arcadius and Honorius. He held the Sea fifteen years,
eleven months, five and twenty days, vacant xx. days. Some Synods were then
held at Carthage: Heluidius, Dorotheus and Vigilantius heretics, were then.

The fourth age.
IN this fourth Age lived Lactantius, Eusebius of Caesaria, S. Athanasius,
Iuvencus, Sa. Hillarie Bishop of Poictiers, Optatus Bishop of Maltha, S.
Basile, S. Gregory Nazianzene, S: Ambrose, S: Hierom, S: John Chrysostom, S:
Epiphanius, S: Cyrill of Jerusalem, and Martine Archbishop of Tours.

41 Anastasius a Roman, 398
son of Maximus Cardinal Priest under Honorius: he held the Sea three years,
ten days, vacant xxi. days. Then were the synodes of Cyprus and Tolledo.

42 Innocentius a Native of Albania, 401.
or Scotland, son of Innocentius, Cardinal Deacon under Honorius: he held the Sea fifteen years, two months, five and twenty days, vacant xxij. days. The
heretics then were Arcadius, Theodosius, and Pelagius.

43 Zosimus of Cappadocia, son of Abraham, 416
Cardinal Priest under Theodosyus the younger: he held the Sea one year, iij.
months, xii. days. vaca. xi. days. Then was the sixth synod of Carthage

410
44 Bonifacius a Roman, Son of Iocundus, Cardinall-Priest under Theodosius: he
held the Sea three years, eight months, ij. days, vacant, nine days. The
Schism of Eulalius Anty-Pope.

45 Celestine a Roman, Son of Priscus, Cardinall-Deacon: 423
he held the Sea eight years, ten months, seauenteen days: vacant, 21. days.
Then was the general Council of Ephesus, against Nestorius, under Theodosius.

432.
46 Sixtus the third, a Roman, and Son of Sixtus, Cardinall-Priest under
Valentinian: he held the Sea 8. years, eighteen days.

4^0
47 Leo the Great, a Roman, son of Quinctian, Cardinal Archdeacon under
Theodosius: he held the sea one year, one month, 13. days vacant, 8. days.
Then was the general Council of Chalcedon, against Dioscorus and Eutichus.

461
48 Hilarious, borne in Sardignia, son of Crispinus, Cardinall-deacon under the
Empire of Leo. He held the Sea 7. years, three months ten days, vacant ten
days.

49 Simplicius, a Native of Tiuoli, son of Castinus, 467
or Castorius, under Leo, he held the sea fifteen years, one month, seven
days, vacant 26. days.

48^
50 Felix the third and younger, a Roman, son of Felix a Priest, Cardinal
under Zeno. He held the sea six years, eleauen months, seauenteene days,
v^cante five days.

51 Gelasius an Affricane, son of Valuerus Bisoppe,
under the Empire of Anastasius: he held the Sea five years, eight months,
seauenteene days, vacant seven days.

52 Anaestasius the second, a Roman, 496
son of Peter, under Anastasius. He held the sea 1. year, ten months,
twenty four days, vacant four days.

The fifth Age.
IN this fifth age lived Saint Augustine, Orosius, Cassianus, Eucherius of
Lions, Cyrillus Alexandrinus, Vicentius Lyrinensis, Socrates, Sozomenes,
Theodoret, Prosper, Petrus Chrysologus, Saluianus Bishop of Marseillis,
Sidonius Apollinaris, Gennadius, Petrus Diaconus, Boethius, and many others.

53 Symmachas, a Native of Sardignia, 498
Son of Fortunius, under Anastasius: he held the Sea fifteen years, six
months, twenty two days, vacant seven days. Then was the fifth schism
between Symmachus and Laurentius, who afterward was Bishop of Nocera.

54 Hormisda, borne in Terra di Lauoro, 514
or the Land of Labor, Son of Iustus, under Anastasius and Iustine: he
held the sea nine years, eighteen days, vacant six days. The Synods of
Geronda, of Caesar-Augustus, and of Constantinople.

55 John, a Native of Tuscane, 523
Son of Constantius, Cardinall-Priest under Iustine: He dyed in Prison at
Rauenna, having then bin taken by Theodoric king of the Goths; he held the Sea
two years, eight months, eight and twenty days, vacant one month.

526
56 Foelix the fourth, a Samnite borne, son of Castorius, Cardinal Priest of
S: Syluester, under Iustine and Justinian: he held the Sea four years, two
months, three days, vacant thirteen days. The second synod of Tolledo.

5^0
57 Boniface the second, a Roman, son of Sigultus, Cardinal Priest of S.
Cecily, under Justinian: he held the Sea two years, two days, vacant two
months. The sixth schism between Boniface and Dioscorus. Three synodes holden
at Rome.

530
58 John the second, sur-named Mercurius, a Roman, son of Proiectus,
Cardinal Priest of S: Clement under Justinian: he held the Sea two years,
four months, vacant six days.

534
59 Agapetus a Roman, son of Gordianus, Cardinal Archdeacon of the Roman
Church under Justinian: he held the Sea eleven Months, nineteen d^ies, vacant
one month, xxix. days. A synod holden at Constantinople.

535
60 ^^^uerius, borne in Terra di Lauoro, son of Pope ^ormisda, Subdeacon of
the Roman church under Justinian: he held the Sea one year, five months,
twelve days, vacant six days. Then he was expulsed and banished into the
Isle Pontia, where he died. The second synod of Orleans.

537
61 Vigilius a Roman, son of John that had (...) Deacon of the Roman Church
under Justinian. He held the Sea eighteen years, six months, six and twenty
days, vacant three months, five days. The seventh Schism between
Siluerius and Vigilius, and the fifte General Counsel of Constantinople
against the Origenists. Also the third Synod of Orleans.

62 Pelagius a Roman, son of John Vlearianus, Archdeacon of the Roman
Church, 553
under Justinian: he held the Sea six years, ten months, eight and twenty
days, vacant, three months, and six and twenty days. Two Synods at Paris.

63 John the third, Catelline a Roman, son of Anastasyus, under Justinian and
Iustine: 561
he held the Sea twelve years, eleven months, six and twenty days, vacant
ten months, three days. Then began the Lombardes to reign in Italy.

64 Bennet Bonosus, a Roman, 575
son of Boniface, under Iustine, and Tyberius Constantine: he held the Sea
four years, one month, eight and twenty days, vacant two months, ten days.

65 Pelagius the second, a Roman, 579
son of Vinigildus, under Tiberius and Mauritius: he held the Sea ten
years, two months, ten days, vacant ten months, x. days. The Patriar-chate
of Aquilea was then transferred to Grada.

66 Gregory sur-named the Great, 590
a Roman Monk, and Doctor of the Church, son to Gordianus the Senator, and
Syluia a most holy woman, Archdeacon of the Roman Church, Legate or Agent
for the holy see, at Constantinople toward the Emperor, called also the
Apostle of the English, under Tyberius, Mauritius, and Phocas, he held the sea
thirteen years, six months, ten days, vacant five months, nine days.

The sixth Age.
IN this sixth Age flourished Cassiodorus, Bennet Abbat, Fortunatus Bishop of
Poictiers, Euagrius, Michaell Syngelus, Gregory of Tours, and others.

604
67 Sabinianus, borne in Tuscanie, son of Bonus, Cardinall-deacon, and Legate to
the Emperor Phoeas at Constantinople. He held the sea, 1. year, 5 months, 9.
days, vacant 11. months 26. days.

605
68 Boniface the third, a Roman, son of John, Cardinall-priest under Phocas. He
held the Sea nine months, vacant one month nine days.

606
69 Boniface the fourth, borne at Maersia in Lombardy, son of John a
Physician, Cardinall-Priest under Phocas and Heraclius. He held the sea six
years, eight months, thirteen days, vacant seven months, fifteen days.

613
70 Deus-dedit, a Roman, son of Stephen Subdeacon, cardinall-Priest under
Heraclius. He held the sea three years, three months, 20 days, vacant one
month, 16. days. The Synod of Auxerre.

617
71 Boniface the fifth, borne at Naples, son of John, under Heraclius. He held
the sea five years, twenty days, vacant thirteen days.

622
72 Honorius, borne in Terra di Lauoro, son of Petronius, that had been Consul
under Heraclius. He held the Sea twelve years, eleauen months, sixteen
days, vacant one year, seven months, thirteen days. The four and five
synods of Tolledo.

73 Seuerinus a Roman, son of Labienus, 637
under Heraclius: he held the sea one year, 2. months vacant four months 29.
days.

74 John the fourth, borne in Dalmatia son of Venantius the Scholastic, 639.
cardinall-deacon under Heraclius: he held the sea one year, nine months,
nine days, vacant four months 13. days, the sixth synod of Toledo.

75 Theodorus a Grecian, 647
son of Theodorus the Bishop, under Constantine and Constans, he held the sea
six years, five months, 18. days, vacant one month 22. days. A synod at
Rome, and three in Africa.

76 Martine a Tudertine, son of Fabritius, 647
under Constans, by whom he was banished (for the faith) to Gersonna in the
Isle of Pontus, where he dyed: he held the sea six years, one month, 26.
days, vacant one year, two months. A synod at Romo, another in Spain,
against the Monotholites.

77 Eugenius a Roman, son of Rufinianus, 654
under Constans. He held the sea two years, nine months, vacant four months
fifteen days: synod eight of Toledo.

78 Vitalian a Latin, son of Anastasius, 657
under Constans and Constantine: he held the sea 14. years, six months, vacant
one year, one month, 8. days. A synod at Chaalons, and of Toledo 9. and 10

672
79 Adeodatus a Romain Monk, son of Iouinianus, Cardinal Priest under
Constantine: he held the Sea four years, two months, v. days, vacant four
months, twenty days. Synodes then at Hertford in England, Toledo the xi. and
at Bracharensys the third.

676
80. Domnio or Domnus, a Roman, son of Mauritius under Constantine: he held
the Sea, five years, five months, ten days, vacant two months, sixteen
days.

679
81 Agatho, borne at Palermo in Sicily, a monk, and son of Pannonius,
Cardinal Priest under Constantine: he held the Sea two years, six months,
fifteen days, vacant one year, five months. Then was the sixth general
Counsel of Constantinople against the Monotholites.

682
82 Leo the second, a Sicillian, son of Paul, Cardinal Priest under
Constantine: he held the Sea one year, vacant eleven months, xxi. days. The
xiij. Synod of Toledo.

684
83 Bennet the second, a Roman, and son of John, Cardinal Priest under
Constantine: he held the Sea ten months, twelve days, vacant, two months,
fifteen days.

685
84 John the fifth, borne at Antioch in Syria, son of Cyriacus, Cardinal
Archdeacon under Constantine and Justinian: he held the Sea one year, vacant
two months, nineteen days. The seventh and eight Schism between John the
fifth, and two Anti-popes, Peter and Theodor.

68^
85 Cuno, or Conon, a Native in Thrace, son of Bennet, Cardinal Priest under
Justinian: he held the Sea eleven months, three days, vacant, two months,
three and twenty days.

86 Sergius borne at Antioch, 687
son of Tyberius Cardinal Priest under Justinian, Leontius, and Tyberius: he
held the Sea thirteen years, eight months, and three and twenty days:
vacant one month, xx. days. The ninth Schism, between Sergius, Theodor,
and Paschall. Three Synods at Toledo.

The seventh Age.
IN this seventh Age, lived S. Isidore the bishop, Georgius Alexandrinus,
Andoemus Bishop of Rouen, Iulianus Arch-Byshoppe of Toledo, and others.

87 John the sixth a Greek, son of Paturnus, 701.
or Patronus, or Petronius, under Tyberius: he held the Sea three years,
three months, vacant one month, nineteen days. A Synod in England.

88 John the seventh, a Greek also, son of Plato, Cardinal Deacon under
Tyberius, 705
and Justinian: he held the Sea two years, seven months, seventeen days,
vacant three months.

89 Sysinnius, a Syrian, son of John, 707.
under Justinian. He held the Sea xx. days, vacant one month, eighteen
days.

90 Constantine a Syrian, son of John, 707
under Justinian and Phillippicus: he held the Sea seven years, twenty days,
vacant two months, ten days. A Synod holden at London in England.

91 Gregory the second, a Roman, son of Marcellus, Cardinal Deacon under
Anastasius, 716.
Theodosius and Leo: he held the Sea xvi, years, nine months, eleven days,
vacant one month. A Synod holden at Rome, about Images, and another synod at
Moguntia or Mentz in Allemaign.

731.
92 Gregory the third, a Syrian, son of John, Cardinal priest under Leo
Isauricus. He held the Sea, x. years, ix. months, xxiiij. days, Vacant
viij days. A synod at Augusta, under Bonifaco.

741
93 Zacharias a Greek, son of Polycronius, Monk and Cardinal, Priest under
Constantine Copronymus: He held the sea, x. years, iij. months, Vacant xij.
days. Synods at Rome, and in France.

752.
94 Stephen the second, Cardinal Priest under Constantine. He held the Sea
three days.

752
95 Stephen the third, a Roman, son of Constantine, Cardinal Deacon under
Constantine and Leo. He held the Sea v. years, one month, vacant one month.

757.
96 Paul a Roman, son of Constantine, and brother to Stephen the third Pope,
Cardinal Deacon under Constantine and Leo. He held the Sea x. years, x.
months, Vacant one month, the tenth schism between Paul and Theophylact:
synods in Bauaria, and in Allemayne.

567
97 Constantine the second Duke Nepesius son, being a Layman, was created pope
perforce. But he was afterward shut up in a Monastery, after yt they had plucked
out his eyes. He held the Sea, four months, iij. days vacant, ix. days. The
eleventh schism was between him and Phillip.

668
98 Stephen the fourth, a Sicilian Monk, the son of Olibryus, Cardinal Priest
under Constantine, and Leo. He held the Sea, 4, years, v. months, xxiiij.
days, Vacant, ix. days. A synod was at Rome, to take order for ensuing
schisms, and another synod was holden at Worms.

99 Adrian a Romain of a most noble family, 772
and son to Theod^r, Cardinal Deacon under Leo the fourth. and Constantine his
son. He held the Sea xxiij. years, x. months, xvi. days. Then was the seventh
general Nicene counsel, against the Iconomaches: and after that Didier was
taken, then ended the reign of the Lombards.

100 Leo the third, a Roman, son of Azzupius, 796
cardinal Priest under Constantine, 8. and Nicephorus: he held the Sea twenty
years first, and reseated xvi. years. v. months, xviij. days, vacant xvij.
days. In this Leos time, was Charles the Great, king of France, created
Emperor of the West, to whom he fled for refuge.

The eighth Age.
IN this eight age lived the learned venerable Bede, S. John Damascene,
German Partriark of Constantinople, Paulus Diaconus, Vsuardus, and Paulinus
of Aquileia.

101 Stephen the fifth, a Roman, 816
son of Inlius Marinus, cardinal Priest under Jews the meek Emperor: he held
the Sea six months, four and twenty days, Vacant xi. days.

102 Paschall a Roman, Monk and Abbot, 817
son of Maximus Bonosus, cardinal Priest under Jews and Lotharius. He held
the Sea seven years, three months, seventeen days, vacant four days.

824
103 Eugenius the second (sur-named the poores Father) a Roman, son of
Boemond, Cardinal Archpriest under Jews and Lotharius: he held the Sea four
years, six months, four and twenty days, vacant three days. The xij.
Schism between Eugenius and Zinzinus.

827
104 Valentine a Roman, son of Leontius, Cardinal Archpriest under the same
Emperors, he held the Sea one month, ten days, vacant three days.

827
105 Gregory the fourth, a Roman, son of John, Cardinal Priest under Jews
and Lotharius. He held the Sea sixteen years, vacant fifteen days. Two
Synods in Allemayne.

844
106 Sergius the second, a Roman, son of Sergius, Cardinal Archpriest,
under Lotharius: he held the Sea three years, vacant two months, fifteen
days.

847
107 Leo the fourth, a Roman Monk, son of Rodolphus, Cardinal Priest under
Lotharius and Jews the younger: he held the Sea, eight years, three months,
six days, vacant fifteen days. The Synod of Mentz under Rabanus.

855
108 This is the man that supplies the place for Pope Ioane.
Bennet the third, a Roman, son of Peter, Cardinal Priest under Jews the
younger, he held the Sea two years, six months, ix. days, vacant fifteen
days. The xiij. Schism between Bennet and Anastasius.

858
109 Nicholas the Great, son of Theodor, Cardinal Priest under Jews. He held
the Sea nine years, seven months, thirteen days, vacant seven months.

110 Adrian the second, a Roman, 859.
son of Talarus the Bishop, Cardinal Priest under Jews. He held the Sea
five years, nine months, twelve days: vacant twelve days. The eight general
counsel at Constantinople, against Photius.

111 John the eight, a Romain* 872
son of Gundus Cardinal Archdeacon under Jews the younger, Charles the
Balde, Jews the Stammerer, and Charles le Gros. He held the Sea x. years,
two days, vacant two days.

112 Martine the second, 882.
otherwise called Marine, borne in Tuscane, son of Palumbas, Cardinal Deacon
under Charles le Gros: He held the Sea one year, five months.

113 Adrian the third, a Roman, 884
other-wise called Agapetus, son of Bennet, under Charles le Gros: He held
the Sea, two years, two months, vacant xij. days.

114 Stephen the sixth, otherwise called Basile, 885.
son of Adrian, under Charles le Gros and Arnould: he held the Sea six years,
eleven days, vacant five days. A Synod at Cullen.

115 Formosus of Portua, son to Leo, 891
Bishop of Portua, under Arnould. He held the Sea, five years, six months,
Vacant two months. This is the first man, that (of a Bishop) was made Pope.
The xiiij. Schism, between Formosus and Sergius the third, who afterward was
Pope.

116 Boniface the sixth, a Roman, son of Adrian, bishop under Arnould, or
Arnulphus Emperor: He held the Sea, six and twenty days, Vacant fourteen
days.

896
117 Stephen the seventh, a Roman, Son of John the Priest, Bishop of
Anagnia, under Arnulphus. He held the Sea one year, 3. months, vacant 3.
days. A synod at Tiburtium.

118 Romanus, borne in Tuscany, Son of Constantine, 897
who was Brother to Martine the second Pope, under Arnulphus: he held the sea
three days, vacant eight days.

119 Theodorus the second, a Roman, son of Photius, 897
under the Empire of Arnulphus: he held the sea twenty days, vacant eleauen
days.

897.
120 John the ninth, a Tiburtine Monk, son of Remp^aldus, Deacon of the Romain
Church, under Arnulphus, and during the Schism of Sergius. He held the Sea
two years, fifteen days, vacant nine days.

The ninth Age.
IN this ninth Age lived Aymonius Monachus, Theophilact, Rabanus Maurus,
Ansegisius, and Anastasius.

899
121 Bennet the fourth, a Roman, son of Mammolus, under Jews the fourth,
son of Arnulphus: he held the sea three years, four months, Vacant six days.

122 Leo the fifth, borne at Ardea; he forsook the Papacy, 903
and became a Monk, under Jews the fourth. He held the Sea one month, ten
days.

123 Christopher, a Roman, son of Leo, 903
Cardinall-Priest under Jews the fourth. He gave over his dignity to Sergius
the third, and made himself a Monk. He held the sea, seven months. The xv.
Schism between Leo the fifth, Christopher and Sergius the third.

124 Sergius the third, a Roman, 903
Son of Bennet, one of the Earls of Tusculum, Cardinall-Priest under Jews
the fourth. He held the sea seven years, four months, six days, vacant
vij. days. Two Synods at Rheimes.

125 Anastasius the third, a Roman, 911.
Son of Lucian, under the Empire of Conrade, Emperor. He held the sea two
years, vacant two days.

126 Lando, a Sabine borne, son of T^i^nus, 913
under Conrade. He held the Sea six months, xxi. days, Vacant xxvi. days.

127 John the tenth of Rauenna, son of John: 914
Of Bishop of Bolognia, he was made Arch-Byshop of Rauenna, under Conrade and
Henry, surnamed the Byrder, Emperors: he held the sea, thirteen years, two
months, and thirteen days.

128 Leo the sixth, a Roman, 928
son of Christopher, under the forenamed Henry: he held the Sea seven
months, fifteen days, vacant one month.

129 Stephen the eight, a Roman, 928
Son of Teudemunde, under Henry: he held the Sea, two years, and one
Month, vacant ten days.

130 John the xi. a Romain, 930
the natural son of Sergius, third Pope, one of the Earls of Tusculum, under
Henry: He held the Sea, four years, ten months fifteen days, vacant twelve
days.

935
131 Leo, the seventh, a Roman, under Otho the Great, who was the first
Allemayne Emperor. He held the Sea three years, six months, ten days,
vacant three days.

939
132 Stephen the ninth a Roman, under the Empire of Otho: he held the Sea
three years, foure-months, twelve days, vacant ten days.

942
133 Martine the third, whom some others do term Marine the second, a
Roman, under Otho. He held the Sea three years, four moneth^, twelve
days, Vacant twelve days: A Synod at Bonnonie*

134 Agapetus the second, a Romain, under Otho: 946.
he held the Sea seven years, nine months, ten days. vacant twelve days.
Then was the Ingelheimensian Synod.

956
135 John the twelfth, a Roman, called also Octauian, the son of Albericus a
Roman Prince, and an Earl of Tusculum, Cardinal Deacon under Otho: having
was deposed in a Synod at Rome: he held the Sea ix. years, three months five
days, vacant one day.

963
136 Leo, a Roman, son of John, under Otho: he held the Sea, one year,
four months. The xvi. Schism after John the 12. between Leo the 8. and Bennet
the 5.

964
137 Bennet the fifth, a Romain, Cardinal Deacon, was elected in the schism
after the death of John the twelfth: he forsook the Papacy, by constraint, and
was exiled to Hamborough in Saxony, where he died: he held the Sea one year,
six months.

138 John the xiij. a Roman, son of John the Bishop: he was Bishop of
Naruia, 965
under Otho: He held the Sea six years, eleven months, five days, vacant
xiij. days.

139 Domnus the second, Donus, or Domnio, a Roman under Otho: he held the Sea
one year, 972
vacant two days.

140 Bennet the sixth, a Roman, son of Hildebrand, under Otho: he held the sea
eight years, 972
six months, vacant five days.

141 Boniface the seventh, a Roman, 974.
son of Franco-Ferrutius, Cardinal Deacon under Otho the second: he held the Sea seven months, five days, vacant twenty days. The seventeenth Schism
between Boniface the 7. and Bennet the 7.

142 Bennet the seventh, a Roman, 975
son of Deus-dedit an Earl of Tusculum, Bishop of Sutrium, under Otho the
second: he held the Sea eight years, six months, Vacant, five days.

143 John the fourteenth, called also Peter, 984
born in Pauia, and Bishop of the place where he was borne; under Otho the
third: he held the Sea, three months.

144 John the xv. a Roman, 985
son of Leo Priest under Otho the third: he held the Sea eight months,
vacant seven days.

145 John xvi. a Romain, son of Robert, 995
under Otho the third: he held the Sea ten years, six months, ten days:
vacant six days.

995
146 Gregory the fifth, a Saxon Allemayne, called Bruno, the son of Otho, under
Otho 3: he held the sea two years, five months, ten days. The xviij.
Schism, between this Gregory, and John the xvij. This is he, in whose time
the Princes Electors were first created in Allemaign or Germany.

998
147 Syluester the second, a Frenchman born in Aquitain, called Gerebert, Monk
of S. Flower, Abbot of Bobie, of Arch-byshoppe of Rheimes, he was made
Arch-byshop of Rauenna, a very great Philosopher, under Otho 3. He held the sea, four years, i. month, x. days, vacant xxiij. days.

1003
148 John the xvij. a Roman, called Sicco, of very mean descent, under Henry
the second. He held the Sea ten months, vacant twenty days.

The tenth Age.
IN this tenth Age lived Ado of Vienna, Odo Abbat of Clugnie, Suidas,
Luitprandius, Regino, and Wirichinde.

1003
149 John the xviij. a Roman, called Fasanus or Fanassus, under Henry the
second: he held the Sea four months, twenty days, Vacant nineteen days, A
great synod holden in Allemaign.

1009
150 Sergius the fourth, a Romain, called Peter, the son of Martine: he held
the Sea, two y^^res, and fifteen days, Sede vacant eight days.

1012
151 Bennet the eight, a Roman, son of Gregogory Earl of Tusculum under Henry.
He held the Sea, eleven years, one month, thirteen days. The nineteen
Schism, between Bennet, and one whose name is not truly known.

152 John the xix, a Roman, 1024
and Earl of Tus^ulum, son to Gregory, and Brother to Bennet the eight. Pope,
Bishop of Portua: he held the sea four years, four months, vacant xix.
days.

153 Bennet the ninth, a Roman, Earl of Tusculum, called Theophilact, Son of
Albericus, 1032.
Brother to Bennet the 8, and John the xix. Popes. Cardinal Deacon under
Conrade and Henry 3. He held the Sea, xiij. years, four months, nine days.
The xx. Schism between him and John the 20. called Syluester the third.

154 John 20. called Siluester the 3. a Romain, 1045
son of Laurentius Bishop of Sabina, under Henry 3. He held the sea one month,
xix. days.

155 Gregory the sixth, a Romain, called, 1045
John Gratian, son of Peter Leo, Archpriest under Henry 3. he held the Sea
two years, vij. months.

156 Clement the 2. a Saxon Allemayn or German, called Suidegerus, Bishop of
Bemburg, 1047
under Henry 3. He held the Sea, nine months. vacant nine months.

157 Damasus 2. of Bauaria in Allemaign, 1048
called Pope Bagniarius, bishop of Brescia: After that Damasus the second,
and Bennet the ninth, had been deposed, he held the Sea, six months,
according as he had held it nine months, and fifteen days, after Clement
the second, he held the Sea three and twenty days, vacant six months.

1049
158 Leo the ninth, an Allemayne, called Bruno, Count of Haspurg, otherwise
termed Egghisein, son to Hugh bishop of Toul, under Henry the third, and was
created at Frusina: he held the Sea five years, two months, six days,
vacant xi. months, xxvi. days.

1055
159 Victor the second of Swethen, called Gebhard Count of Gaba, son of
Arduigus, bishop of Eistat, Counselor to Henry the third, and his Kinsman, as
also to Henry the fourth his son, and was created at Mentz: he held the Sea
two years, three months, four days, vacant four days.

1057
160 Stephen the tenth, borne in Lorraine, called Frederick, son to Gozzelon
Duke of Lorrain, Cardinal Archdeacon under Henry the fourth: he held the Sea
seven months eighteen days, vacant thirteen days: The one and twentieth
Schism between him, and Bennet the tenth.

1^^8
161 Bennet the tenth* called John Mintius, son to Guy Count of Tusculum, Bishop
of Velitrae, under Henry the fourth: he held the Sea nine months, twenty
days.

1058
162 Nicholas the second of Sauoy, called Gerard the Burgundian, Bishop of
Florence, under Henry the fourth: he held the Sea three years, six months,
six and twenty days, vacant xij. days.

1061
163 Alexander the second, a Milanois, called Anselme de ^adagio, son of
Anselme a Chanon Reguler, Bishop of Luca in Tuscanie, under Henry the fourth:
he held the Sea eleven years, six months. The xxij. Schism between him and
Honorius the second.

164 Gregory the seventh, a Tuscane of Soaua, 1073
called Hildebrand, one of the Pitilian Countes, son to Bonicius Priour of
Cluny, Abbot of S. Paul at Rome, Cardinal Archdeacon, under Henry the
fourth: he held the Sea twelve years, one month, three days, vacant one
year* four months, seven and twenty days. The three and twenty Schism,
between him, and Clement the third, who was an Antipope, in the times of
Victor the third, Urban the second, and Paschal the second. And this Schism
continued for long time.

165 Victor the third of Beneuentum, 1086
called Didier, son to the Prince of Beneuentum, a Monk of Mount Cassina,
Cardinal Deacon under Henry the fourth: he held the Sea one year, four
months, vacant five months.

166 Vrbane the second, a Frenchman, 1088
borne at Chastillon in the Diocese of Rheimes, called Otho the son of Milo, a
Canon Reguler of Laterane, Monk of Cluny, and Bishop of Ostia; under Henry
the fourth: he held the Sea twelve years, four months, nineteen days,
vacant thirteen days.

The eleventh age.
IN this eleventh Age lived Burchardus Fulbertus, Bishop of Chartres, Petrus
Damianus, Lanfrancus, S. Anselme, Yues Bishop of Chartres and Bruno, etc.

1099
167 Paschall the second, a Tuscane of Bleda, called Rainerius, son of
Crescentius, Monk of Cluny, Abbot of S. Laurence and S. Stephen without Rome,
Priest Cardinal under Henry the 4. and Henry the fifth: he held the Sea xviij.
years, six months, seven days, vacant three days. Albert Atellan,
Theodorick a Roman, and Syluester Anti-popes under Paschall 2. who caused the
body of Clement 3. to be dug up, and after burned which had bin buried at
Rauenna.

1118
168 Gelasius 2. a Caietane, called John, son to Crescentius Monk of Mount
Cassina, Cardinal Deacon under Henry the fifth. He held the sea, one year,
vacant two days. The 24 Schism between him and Gregory the eight, a
Spaniard, called Maurice Bono^in.

1119
169 Calixtu^^* a Burgundian, called Milo, otherwise Guy, son to William Count
of Burgundy, Arch-byshop of Vienna under Henry the fifth: he held the Sea five
years, ten months, six days. vacant eight years. The general counsel of
Laterane, against these Anti-popes, whereat were present (almost) a thousand
Prelates.

170 Honorius 2. a Bolognian, called Lambert de Fagnano, 1124
Chanon Reguler of Laterane, Cardinal bishop of Ostia, under Henry and
Lotharius, Saxons and Emperors. He held the Sea five years, two months,
vacant, eight days. The 25. Schism between him and Celestine the second.

171 Innocentius 2. a Roman, son of John Guidon, Chanon Reguler of
Latterane, 1130
the first of the Cardinal Deacons under Lotharius of Saxony and Conrade. He
held the Sea, fourteen years, seven months, thirteen days. The 26, schism
between him and two Anti-Popes, Anacletus the second and Victor the fourth.
The second general counsel of Laterane, wherein assisted well near a
thousand bishops.

172 Celestine the 2. a Tuscane, 1143
called Guy de Castello, cardinall-deacon, and afterward Cardinal priest under
Conrade. He held the Sea, five months, and thirteen days, vacant thirteen
days.

173 Lucius the second, a Bolognian, called Gerard, Cecianimicus, son of
Albert, 1144
Chanon Reguler, Cardinal Priest, and Chancellor to the Apostolic See under
Conrade: he held the sea eleven months, and four days, vacant two days.

174 Eugenius the third, of Pisa, 1145
called Peter Bernard, a Cisteaux Monk, Scholar to S. Bernard, Abbot of S.
Vincent, and S. Anastasius at Rome, under Conrade and Frederick Barbarossa
Emperors. He held the Sea, eight years, four months, xx. days, vacant two
days.

175 Anastasius the fourth, a Romain, 1153
called Conrade of Subura, son of Bennet, Canon Reguler, Abbot and Cardinal,
bishop of Sabina, under Frederick Barbarossa: he held the Sea, one year,
four months, four and twenty days, vacant one day.

1154
176 Adrian the fourth, an Englishman, called Nicholas Break-speare, son of
Robert a Monk, Chanon Reguler and Abbot, Cardinal Bishop of Alba, under
Barbarossa: He held the Sea iiij. years, ten months, vacant three days.

177 Alexander the third, borne at Sienna in Tuscanie, 1159.
called Rowland Bondinelli, son of Ranutius, Cardinal Deacon, and afterward
Cardinal Priest, and Chancellor of the Roman church, under Barbarossa: he
held the Sea xxi, years, nineteen days, vacant, fourteen days. The
third general counsel of Laterane. The seven and twenty Schism, being most
great, during which time, against Alexander was created Victor the fourth,
next Paschall the third, then Calixtus the third, and Innocentius the third,
who (by constraint) renounced the Papacy.

1181
178 Lucius the third, a Tuscane of Luca, called Vbaldus Allucingolus, son of
Bonagiunta, Cardinal Priest, and afterward Bishop of Ostia, and of Velitrae,
under Barbarossa: he held the Sea four years, two months, eighteen days,
vacant twelve days.

1185
179 Vrbane the third, borne in Milaine, called Lambert Cribell, son of John,
Cardinal Priest and Arch-Byshop of Millaine, under Barbarossa: he held the Sea one year, ten months, fifteen days, vacant eleven days.

1187
180 Gregory the eight, of Beneuentum, called, Albert Spanachio, otherwise of
Mora Cardinal Deacon, and afterward^ Cardinal Priest, and Chancellor to the
holy See, under Barbarossa: he held the Sea one month, seven and twenty
days, vacant xx. days.

181 Clement the third, a Romain, 1188
called Paul the Scholar, son of John, Cardinal of Palaestrina, under
Barbarossa: he held the Sea three years, five months, vacant eight months.

182 Celestine the third, a Roman, 1191
called Haicinthus Bobo, son of Peter Cardinal Deacon under Henry the sixth:
he held the Sea six years, seven months, eleven days.

The twelfth Age.
IN this twelfth Age lived Sigebert, Zonarus, Cedrenus, Rupertus, Sa. Bernard,
Hugo de S. Victor, Peter Lombard, Peter Comestor, Euthimius, Nicetas Coniates,
and diverse others.

183 Innocentins the third, of Anagnia, 1198
called Lotharius, one of the Counts of Signia, son of Transimund, Cardinal
Deacon under Henry the sixth, Otho the fourth, and Frederick the second
Emperors: he held the Sea eighteen years, vij. months, sixteen days, vacant
one day: The 4. general counsel of Laterane, for reformation of the church,
where a thousand Prelates were present.

184 Honorius the third, a Roman, 1216
called Cen^ius Sabellus, son of Amerie, Cardinal Deacon, Chamberlain of the
church, and afterward Cardinal Priest under Frederick the second: he held the Sea ten years, seven months, thirteen days, vacant one day.

1227.
185 Gregory the ninth of Anagnia, called Hugolin, one of the Counts of Signia:
of a Cardinal Deacon he was made cardinal Bishop of Ostia under Frederick the
second: he held the sea fourteen years, three months, vacant one month, one
day.

1241.
186 Celestine the fourth, a Milanois, called Gaulfridus Castellio, of
Cardinall-Priest, was made Bishop of Sabina under Frederick 2. He held the sea
eighteen days, vacant one year, nine months.

187 Innocentius the fourth, borne in Genewaie, called Sinibaldus de Fiesca, a
Count of Lauinum, son of Otho, 1243
Vice Chancellor, was made Cardinall-Priest under Frederick the second,
Conrade the fourth, Henry the fourth, and William Emperors. He held the Sea xi.
years, six months, xii, days, Vacant three days. The general counsel of
Lions, under Frederick the second.

188 Alexander the fourth of Auagnia, called Rainald, 1254
one of the Counts of Signia, son of Girard Retraent, otherwise called
Phillip, of Cardinall-deacon was made bishop of Ostia, and Deane of the
Cardinal Bishops, under William, Richard and Alphonsus. He held the See-sixe
years, five months, five days, vacant three months, four days.

1261
189 Vrbane the fourth, a Frenchman of Troy in Champaigne, called Iacques
Pantaleon, Patriarcke of Jerusalem, under Richard and Alphonsus: he held the Sea three years, one month, 4. days, vacant five months.

190 Frances, by some called Clement, 1265.
of Narbona, called also Guy the Gross, son of Fulcodius, Arch-byshop of
Narbona, and cardinal Bishop of Sabina, under Richard and Alphonsus: he held
the sea five years, xxi. days, vacant, two years, nine months.

191 Gregory the tenth of Placentia, 1271
called Theobald Vicount, Arch-byshoppe of Liege under Rodolphus: He held the Sea four years, two months, ten days, Vacant nine days. The second
general Counsel of Lions, for recovery of the Holy Land.

192 Innocentius the fifth, a Burgundian, 1276.
called F. Peter of Tarentase, of the Order of the preaching Friars, of
Arch-byshoppe of Lions, he was made Bishop Cardinal of Ostia, and great
Penetentiarie, under Rodolphus. He held the Sea six months, two days, Vacant,
nine days.

193 Adrian the fifth of Genes, called Othobon, 1276
one of the Counts of Lauinum, son of Thedisius, Brother to Pope Innocent the
fourth, Cardinal Deacon under Rodolphus: He held the Sea one month, nine
days, vacant eight and twenty days.

194 John the one and twentieth, a Portugais of Lisbone, called M. John Peter
Iuliani, 1276
bishop Cardinal of Tusculanum, under Rodolphus. He held the sea eight months,
vacant six months, seven days.

195 Nicholas the third, a Roman, 1277
called John Caietane de Vrsini, Cardinal Deacon under Rodolphus: he held the Sea three years, eight months, fifteen days, vacant five months, xx.
days.

1281
196 Martine the fourth, borne in Tours, called Simon de Brie. Cardinal Priest
under Rodolphus: he held the Sea, four years, one month, vacant three
days.

197 Honorius the fourth, a Roman, called, Giacomo Sabella, son of Luke,
first, Cardinal Deacon under Rodolphus. He held the Sea two years, one day
vacant ten months.

1288.
198 Nicholas the fourth, a Native of Asculum, called F. Hierom; a general
Minister of the Friars Minors: he was made Cardinal Priest, afterward the
Praenestine Bishop, under Rodolphus, and Adolphus. He held the Sea four years,
one month, eight days: vacant two years, 3. months, two days.

1294
199 Celestine the fifth, borne in Isernia, called F. Peter de Morone, son of
Anglerius, under Adolphus: he voluntarily forsook the Popedom, and was the
beginner of the Celestines order: he held the Sea five months, seven days,
vacant ten days.

1294
200 Boniface the eight, of Anagnia, called Bennet Caietane, Son of Luitfroy,
who was borne in Spain, Cardinal Deacon, afterward Cardinal Priest, under
Adolphus and Albertus. He instituted the Iubilee of an hundred years, and did
first celebrate it, in the year 1300. He held the sea viii. years, nine
months, seuenteen, days, vacant t^n days.

The thirteenth Age.
IN this thirteenth Age lived S. Fraunces, S. Dominicke, Albertus Magnus,
Matthew Paris, Thomas* Aquinas, S. Bonauenture, C^basilas, Henry of Segusium,
Cardinal of Ostia, Nicholas de Lyra, Accursius and others.

201 Bennet the eleauenth, a Treuisane, 1303
called F. Nicholas Bocasino: of General Minister of the Preachers Order, was
made Cardinal Priest, and afterward Bishop of Ostia, under the Emperor
Albertus. He held the Sea, eight months, seauenteene days, vacant one year,
one month.

202 Clement the fifth, a Frenchman in Gascoigne of Bordeaux, called Raymond
Goth, 1304
son of Bertrand: of Bishop of Cominges, he became Archbishop of Bordeaux,
under Albertus and Henry the seventh: he held the Sea eight years, ten months,
fifteen days, vacant two years, three months, seauenteene days. The
general Counsel of Vienna in France, for reformation of the Church.

203 John the xxij. a Frenchman of Cahors, 1316
called Iacques d'Ossa, Son of Amauldo, Cardinal Bishop of Portua, under
Jews the fourth of Bauaria: he held the Sea nineteen years, four months,
vacant sixteen days. The ^8* ^chism between him and Nicholas the fifth.

204 Bennet the xij. a Frenchman of Tolosa, 1334
called F. Iacques Forneen de Sauardu^, a Cisteaux Monk, a Divine, Bishop of
Mirepoix, and Cardinall-Prieste under Jews the fourth, He held the Sea seven
years, three months, seauenteene days, vacant fifteen days.

1342
205 Clement the sixth, a Frenchman, borne in Lymosine, called F. Peter
Monstrie, son of Roger, Monk of Maumont, a Divine, Abbot of Fescamp,
Arch-Byshop of Arles, afterward of Sens, and lastly of Rouen, cardinal Priest
under Jews the fourth. He celebrated the second Iubilee, in the fiftith year,
1350. And held the Sea, eighteen years, six months, eighteen days.
vacant ten days.

1352
206 Innocent the sixth, a Frenchman of Lymosine, called Stephen d'Albert,
Bishop of Clermont, cardinal Priest, after made bishop of Ostia, and great
Penetentiary under Charles the fourth: he held the Sea nine years, eight
months, and six days, vacant one year, five months.

1362
207 Vrbane the fifth, a Frenchman of Lymosine, likewise, called F. Guillaume
de Grisac, son of Grimauld, Monk and Abbot of S. Victor de Marseillis, under
Charles the fourth: he held the Sea eleauen years, eight months, vacant
seauenteene days.

1370
208 Gregory the eleventh, a Frenchman of Lymosine, called Peter, Earl of
Beau-fort. He was (...) Cardinal Deacon by Clement the sixth, Pope and his
Uncle. He returned to Rome and brought the Sea thither again, which had bin
at Auignon for the space of seauenty years. And because the Romans stood in
some doubt, least the Sea might again be tranferred out of Rome, after the
decease of this Gregory, the eleventh, they took especial order, that not
any French Cardinal should afterward be elected Pope: which procured the
most pernicious schism that ever had bin in the Church, and continued for the
space of fifty years, beginning with Clement, called the seventh: he held the Sea seven years, two months, seven and twenty days, vacant eleven days.

209 Vrbane the sixte, a Neapolitane, 1378
called Bartholomew Prignano, Arch-byshop of Acherontia, and afterward of
Carre, under Wenceslaus. He held the Sea, eleauen years, eight months,
vacant seauenteene days. The nine and twentieth Schism, between him and
Clement, called the seventh, who was a Frenchman of Geneua, named Robert, one
of ye Counts of Geneua, Bishop of Cambray. This Vrbane the sixth, instituted the
Iubilee of six and thirty years.

210 Boniface the ninth, a Neapolitane, 1389
called Peter, or Perin Tom^celli, of Cardinal deacon, became Cardinal
Priest, under Wenceslaus, and Robert Emperors. In the year 1390. He celebrated
the third Iubilee instituted by his predecessor: and in the year 1400. the
fourth Iubilee, after the ancient manner. In his time were two Popes, at
Auignon, Clement, called the seventh, and Bennet the thirteenth: he held the Sea eleauen years, eight months, vacant fifteen days.

The fourteenth age.
IN this foureteenth age, lived William de Nangis, Nicephorus, Bartolus
Palanudes, Johannes Andreas, Petrarche, Franciscus Maronis, deviser of the
Sorbonne, William of Auxere, and others.

1404.
211 Innocentius 7. of Sulmona, called Cosmatus Melioratus; of Arch-byshop of
Rauenna, and of Bishop of Bolognia, he became Cardinal Priest, and Chamberlain
of the Church, under Robert Emperor: He held the sea two years, twenty two
days, vacant twenty three days. Bennet the thirteenth was (in his time) Pope
at Auignion.

1406.
212 Gregory the twelfth, a Venetian borne, called Angelo Corratio, Patriarch
of Constantinople, and Cardinall-priest under Robert and Sigismond: He held
the sea two years, seven months, five days, vacant ten days. Then was the
Council of Pisa, for avoiding of Schisms, where Gregory the twelfth, and
Bennet the thirteenth, were both deposed.

1409.
213 Alexander the fifth, of Creete or Candie, called Peter Philargo, of the
Fryers-minors order, a Divine, Archbishop of Millaine, and Cardinall-Priest
under Robert: he was created in the Council at Pisa (Bennet the thirteenth
being then Pope at Auignion.) And held the Sea ten months, eight days,
vacant twelve days.

214 John the twenty three, a Neapolitane, 1410.
called Balthazar Cossa, Cardinall-Deacon, under Sigismond. He held the Sea
five years, fifteen days, vacant two years. The general Council was then
at Constance, to take away all Schisms: where were deposed John the 23. and
Bennet the thirteenth again. Bennet would not obey the Council, but withdrew
himself into Spain, to Paniscola: and in the same general Council, Gregory
the twelfth (by his Attorney) renounced the Papacy.

215 Martine the fifth, a Roman, 1417.
called Otho Colonna, Son of Agapetus, Cardinal Deacon: he was elected Pope
in the Council of Constance, under Sigismond: he held the sea fourteen
years, three months, vacant two days. In his time, after the decease of
Bennet the thirteenth, Clement, called the eight, was created as Anty-pope at
Paniscola: But he forsook the Papacy, in the year 1428. and (by that means)
the twenty nine schism ceased, which had continued fifty years, or
thereabout. This Martine the fifth, in the year 1425. celebrated the fifth
Jubilee.

216 Eugenius the fourth, a Venetian, 1431.
called Gabriell Condelmer, Son of Angelus, a Celestine Chanon, Bishop of
Sienna, Cardynall-Priest under Sigismond, Albert, and Frederick the third.
This manne held the Sea fifteen years, eleauen months, one and twenty days,
vacant twelve days. The counsel of Basile was then, where Eugenius was
deposed: but he unwilling to obey, caused the general Counsel of Ferrara to
be assembled, which Counsel ended at Florence, for reduction of the Greek
Church. The 30. Schism between Eugenius 4: and Foelix the fifth, called Amades,
sometime Duke of Sauoy, who was elected in the Counsel of Basil, 1437. and was
Pope ix* years, five months. In the end, for good of the Church, he forsook
the Papacy, and continued Cardinal bishop of Sabina, and Legate in Germany.

1447
217 Nicholas a Native of Luna, called Thomas de Sarzana, or Lucana, son of
Bartholomew a Physician, Doctor in the Arts and Divinity, of Bysh of Bolognia,
was made Cardinal Priest under Frederick the third: he held the Sea eight
years, nineteen days, Vacant four days. In the year 14^0. he celebrated
the sixte Iubilee, and the Schism ceased by Felix the 5. renouncing the Papacy.

1455
218 Calixtus 3. a Spaniard of Valentia, called Alphonio Borgia, son of John:
of bishop of Valentia, became Cardinal Priest* under Fr^derick the third:
he held the Sea three years 3. months, and sixteen days, vacant
seauenteene days.

1458
219 Pius the second, borne in Sienna, called Eneas Syluius Picolhomini, son
of Syluius: of bishop of Sienna, was Cardinal Deacon, afterward Cardinal Priest
under Frederick the third: he held the Sea five years, eleven months, xxvi.
days, vacant xvi. days.

220 Paul the second, a Venetian, 1464
called Peter Barba, son of Nicholas, elect bishop of Vincentia, Cardinal
Deacon, and afterward Cardinal Priest, under Frederick the 3. He held the Sea
six years, ten months, vacant eleven days.

221 Sixtus the fourth of Sauona, called F. Frances de Rouero, son of
Leonard, 1471.
of Minister general of the Friars Minors, was made Cardinal Priest, under
Frederick the third. He celebrated the seventh Iubilee, in the year 1475.
and held the Sea thirteen years, five days: vacant xv. days.

222 Innocentius the eight, borne in Genewaie, called John Baptista Cibo, son
of Aaron: 1484
of Bishop of Melphes, was made Almouer* and Cardinal Priest, under
Frederick: he held the Sea eight years, six and twenty days, vacant two
days.

223 Alexander the sixth, a Spaniard of Valencia, called Rodericke Borgia, son
of Geffrey, 149^
Bishop of Valencia, Cardinal Deacon, after Priest, and lastly bishop of Alba,
Vice-Chauncellor and Deane of the Church, under Maximilian. He celebrated the
eight Iubilee, in the year 1500, and held the Sea eleven years, 8. days,
vacant four days.

The fifteenth Age.
IN this fifteenth Age lived John Gerson, Eneas Syluius, Froissard, Baldus,
Angelus, B^ssa^tion, Chalcondilus, Platina, Nauclerus. And not long after,
Martine Luther, John Eckius, Mo^e, Hosius, John Calvin, etc.

1502.
224 Pius the third, a Siennois, called Fraunces Todescin Picolhomini, Son to
the sister of Pope Pius the second, who married with Nannes: he was Arch-byshop
of Sienna, and Cardinall-Deacon, under Maximilian: and held the Sea sixteen
days, vacant twenty four days.

1503.
225 Julius the second, of Sauona, called Iuliano de Rouero, son of Raphaell,
Brother to Pope Sixtus the fourth, of Cardinall-Priest, became Bishop of
Alba, afterward Bishop of Ostia, and great Penitentiary, under Maximilian. He
held the Sea nine years, three months, twelve days, vacant seauenteen
days. The general Council of Laterane was then.

1503.
226 Leo the tenth, a Florentine, called John de Medicis, son of Laurence,
Cardinal Deacon, under Maximilian, and Charles the fifth: He held the sea eight
years, eight months, twenty one days, vacant one month, seven days.

1522.
227 Adrian the sixth, a native of Vtreicht in Galia-belgica, son of Florent;
of Bishop of Ertusa, was made Cardinall-Priest, under Charles the fifth, to whom
he was Schole-mayster: he held the sea one year, eight months, six days,
vacant two months, four days.

1523.
228 Clement the seventh, a Florentine, called Julius de Medicis, Knight of
Jerusalem, nephew to Pope Leo the tenth, elected Arch-Byshoppe of Florence,
Cardinall-Deacon, afterward Priest and Chancellor of the Church, under Charles
the fifth: he celebrated the ninth Jubilee, in the year 1525. And held the sea
ten years, ten months, eight days, vacant sixteen days.

229 Paul the third, 1534
called Alexander Farnese, son of Peter Jews, Cardinall-deacon, was
afterward Bishop cardinal of Tusculanum, Palaestrina, Sabina, Portua, and
Ostia, and Deane of the cardinals, under Charles the fifth and Ferdinand. He
held the sea fifteen years, nineteen days, vacant two months, 29. days.
The general council of Trent began Anno. 1525.

230 Julius the third, borne at Arezza, 1550
called John Maria de Monte, son of Vincent Arch-Byshop of Sipontum*
cardinall-priest, and afterward Bishop of Palaestrina, under Charles and
Ferdinand. He celebrated the tenth Jubilee, in the year 1550. and held the sea five years, one month, sixteen days, vacant seauenteene days.

231 Marcellus the second, a Tuscane, 1555
called Marcellus Ceruinus, son of Richard; of Bishop of Castello Nouo, he
was made cardinall-priest under Charles the fifth, and Ferdinand. He held the Sea twenty two days, vacant seauenteene days.

232 Paul the fourth, a Neapolitane, 1555
called John Peter Caraffa, son of John Alphonso, Count of Mataluna, of
Archbishop of Naples, he became Cardinal Priest of Alba, Sabina, Tusculanum
and Ostia, and Deane of the cardinals, under Charles the fifth, and Ferdinand:
he held the Sea, four years, two Months, seven and twenty days vacant,
four months, six days.

1559
233 Pius the fourth, a Milainois, called John Angelo de Medicis, son of
Bernardino, Cardinal Priest under Ferdinand and Maximilian the second: he
held the Sea five years, eleauen months, eight days. vacant nine and
twenty days. In his time the counsel of Trent was concluded, an. 1563.

1566
234 Pius the fifth, an Alexandrine Lombard, of the preaching Friars order,
called F. Michael Giller, of bishop of Surrina, and Nepesina, became cardinal
Priest, Graund Inquisitour, and bishop of Montr^all, under Maximilian^. He
held the Sea six years, three months, sixteen days.

1572
235 Gregory the thirteenth, a Bolonois, called Hugo B^n-compagnio, son of
Christopher, Cardinal Priest, under Maximilian the second, and Rodolphus the
second. He celebrated theeleauenth Iubilee, in anno 1575. and held the Sea
twelve years, xi months, xii. days, vacant eleauen days.

1585
236 Sixtus the fifth, De la March d' Ancona, cardinal de Montalto, called F.
Foelix Peret, of the Friars Minors order, cardinal Priest under Rodolphus the
second: He held the Sea, five years, four months, xxi. days, vacant
fourteen days.

237 Vrbane the seventh, a Roman, 1590
called John Baptista Castagnia, Son of Cosimo, cardinal of S. Marcellus,
under Rodolphus the second: He held the Sea fifteen days, vacant two months.

238 Gregory the fourteenth, a Milanois, 1590
called Nicholas Sfondratus, cardinal of S. Cecilia under Rodolphus the
second: He held the Sea ten months, ten days, vacant fifteen days.

239 Innocentius the ninth, a Bolognois, 1590
called John Baptista Fachineti, cardinal of SS. quatuor, under Rodolphus the
second, he held thee See two months, vacant two months.

240 Clement the eight, a Florentine, called Hyppolito Aldobrandino, Son of
Syluester, 1592
Auditor of Rota, and Datary or Almoner to the Pope: was made cardinal Priest
of S. Pancratia, and great Penetentiary. He was sent Legate into Poland, by Pope
Sixtus the fifth, in the year 1592. He was elected Pope under Rodolphus the
second, and held the Sea thirteen years, one month, five days, until the
third of March, 1605. and then died. During his Pontificacie, which deserves
to be noted, he procured peace between the two Kings most Christian and
catholic, and the Duke of Sauoy: he reduced Ferrara under obedience to the
S. See: and celebrated the twelft Iubilee, in the year 1600.

241 Leo the xi. a Florentine likewise, 1605
called Alexander de Medicis, Son unto Octauian, of the most famous house of
the Medici, of Bishop of Pistoya, became Bishop of Florence, and
Ambassador of Fraunces de Medicis, great Duke of Tuscany, unto Pope Gregory
the thirteenth. He was made Cardinal, being entitled with Saint Quirice and
Saint Iulita, after, of Saint John, and Saint Paul, and in the end, of Saint
Praxedes. Being sent Legate into France, by Pope Clement the eight: He
mediated the peace with the Spanyarde: and returning to Rome, he was made
chief of the Congregation of Bishops. And the second of April, 1605. he
was created Pope: But his Pontificate, was of small continuance, because he
held the Sea but seven and twenty days only, and dyed the seven and twenty
day of the said month, under the same Rodolphus the second.

1605*
242 Paul the fifte, a Roman, Originally descended from Sienna, called
Camillo Borghese, who had been Referendary unto either Signature: Vicar of the
Patryarchall Church of Saint Maria Mayor, Vice-Legate to Bolognia, General
Auditour of the Apostolic Chamber: and Nuntio from the S. See into Spain.
He was made Cardinal Priest of Saint Eusebius, in the year of our Lord,
1596. by Pope Clement the eight, and afterward Bishop of Esino, in the
Marchia d'Ancona. After the decease of Pope Leo the eleauenth. He was elected
in his place, the sixteenth day of May, 1605. As yet to this present year
1611. He remains living and has held the Papacy, the space of five years,
and somewhat more.

TO THE Honorable Company of the Merchant Tailors; being the Society of Saint
John Baptist.
A brief Collection of the Original and Progress, of the Knights of the
worthy Order of S. John of Jerusalem, who were afterward called Knights of
Rhodes, and Knights of Malta: Likewise their exployts in war, under the
conduct of their Great Masters, from the year 1099. until this present. With
some, as brief report also, of the Knights Templers, and all other Orders of
knight hood thorough the world.

THe Military Order of S. John of ^erusalem, 1099
had her birth and first Original in the holy City of Jerusalem, and passed
there her first years of Infancy, with a great part of her adolescentie. When
as the Sarazins were Masters of the holy City, and of the country all about
the sacred Sepulcher of our Lord, which was ruined about the year of
salvation, 1012. by the commandment of Equin Califfe of the Sarrazins, and
continued so ruined, until the time of Constantine Monomachus, Emperor of
Constantinople, who at the entreaties of the christians which then dwelte in
Jerusalem (with the consent of Bomensor Elmonius Stensabus, Califfe or Soldane
of Egypt) built it again at his own charges, in the year, 1048. About which
time, certain Gentlemen and Italian Merchants of the City of Melphes,
frequenting the Ports and Maritane Cities of Syria and Egypt, and bringing
good Marchandizes into those Countries, won themselves much love and liking,
not only of the cities Governors, but also of the Califfe of Egypt: and
being well disposed christians, they would oftentimes go to Jerusalem, to visit
the holy memorable places: and having no place of retirement in the city, they
obtained favor and permission of the Califfe, to build there a Church and a
Palace, for their own use and habitation, as also for others of their Nation,
in that quarter of the city, where the christians might dwell near to the
holy Sepulcher. There they erected two Monasteries, one in honor of the blessed
Virgin Mary, called S. Maria de la Latina (differing from the Greek churches
which were in Jerusalem, and placed there an Abbot of Mont-Cassina) and was
builte to lodge christian Pilgrims therein. The other was dedicated to S. Mary
Magdalen, as a place of entertainment of all such women, as should adventure
thither in pilgrimage, they being both Religiously governed. Not long after,
they builded an Hospital, wherein to lodge as well all sickly trauaylers, as
any other Pilgrims of honest disposition, with a Church also thereto
belonging, being both dedicated to S. John Baptist. These Monasteries,
Churches, and Hospitals, were long time mayntained by the care and cost of the
Amalphitanes, who founded them: and until such tune as the City was conquered
by the Christians from the Infidels, and that Godfrey of Bullen was there
elected King, which was in the year 1099.

1. The City being thus woonne, 1099
F. Gerard was the first Rector or Governor of the hospital of S. John, who,
when the City was besiedged by the Christians, was very ill dealt with by the
Infidels, and was long time (by them) kept a captive prisoner, because they
distrusted, that he had some secret intelligence with the Christians, which
beleagered the City. But after that the Christians were masters thereof, he
was delivered out of prison and governed both wisely and charitably the
Hospital of S. John, persuading and enduring Christian Kings and Princes, to
enrich and endow it with their liberality, which (indeed) they did in
bountiful manner, so that in France, Italy, Spain, and other Provinces of
christendom, the Hospital of S. John, found good Benefactors, and attained
(in short time) to great reuennewes and possessions. In the year 1113. 1113.
Pope Paschall the second, received F. Gerard, and the Knights of S. John under
protection of the Apostolic Seat, and granted them great privileges,
ordayning, that after the decease of F. Gerard, they should proceed cannonically
to the election of another Rector or Governor: who was afterward called Great
Master of the Order or military hospital, of S. John of Jerusalem, a name
which continues yet to this present after five hundred years from the
beginning thereof.

1118
2 In the year 1118. F. Gerard departed out of this life, in the Papacy of
Gelasius the second, and when as the order of the Knights Templers began. The
beginning of the Knights Templers.
After his decease, there succeeded him by election, F. Raymond de Puy, who was
a professed Knight of the Order: Albeit, some hold opinion that F. Roger
succeeded deceased Gerard, and governed the hospital of S. John, from the
year, 1118. until the death of Baldwine, second of that name, King of
Jerusalem, who died in the year, 1131. F. Raymond (in a general Chapter,
assembled in Jerusalem, with advise of the other Knights) made Statutes for the
Order, formed and instituted a rule of life, which all the following Knights
were to observe. He was called Great Master of the Order, and yet he
qualified that Title, by calling himself Servant unto the poor of Christ
Jesus, and Guardian of the hospital of Jerusalem. This Great Master,
perceiving that the reuennewes of the Hospital did daily increase, and that
he could not better employ such wealth, then against the Infidelles by making
war upon them: he made offer to the K. of Jerusalem, of himself, his strength,
and all his Knightly Brethren, who bare in their streamers and Ensigns, a
Cross Argent, in a field Gules. And thence forward, these religious brethren
were distinguished into three degrees: for one company were knights, another
Captains, and the third Servants, not having (from the beginning) any other
difference among them, but that some were Ecclesiastical persons, and the other
Layicks. And from that time forward, there was not any enterprise in Palestine
against the Infidels, but the Great-Maister was present thereat in person, with
his religious Knights: Knights Ho^pitallers of the Hospital of S. John in
Jerusalem: became afterward to be Knights of the Rhodes, and lastly Knights of
Malta.
who were first called knights Hospitallers, or of the hospital of S. John of
Jerusalem, afterward, knights of the Rhodes, and lastly, knights of Malta. They
grew into so great credit and reputation, that they were employed in the
managing and guiding al affairs of chiefest importance. Among others, Gerard
Gebert, Knight of this Order, was sent by Foulkes K. of Aniou into England, to
treat on the marriage of Constance (Princess of Antioch, Near to the Q.
Melisenda, and daughter to Prince Boemond) with Raymond son to the Earl of
Poicters, who was then in the Court of Henry King of England. In like manner
(this marriage being thus concluded, by ye ingenuity of this knight) at the same
time, Raymond Berengarius, earl of Barcelona, and Prince of Cathalonia (who had
conquered the isles of Maiorica and Minorica from the Mores, and (in single
combat) defended ye chastity and honor of Mahauld, wife to the Emperor Henry
the fifth, against two Allemaigne Knights, that had falsely accused her of
Idolatry) to shut up the conclusion of his days, resolved to take the habit
of this famous Brotherhood, and in that sacred profession, he perseuered al
his life time after, which was in the year 1131. 1131.
Not much differing from this time, it is reported, that three Knights of this
Order, being native Frenchmen of Picardie, and detained then by the Sultan of
Egypt in captivity, were admirably delivered, and trans-ported out of Egypt,
with Ismeria, daughter to the said Soldane, to the place where (at this
instant) is the church of Nostre Dame de Liesse, and this happened in the year,
1139. 1139.
In the year 1153. Raymond the Great Master, caused the siedge to be continued
before the city of Ascalon, which the Infidelles had defended against the
christians more then fifty years: and at length, it was yielded to the said
Master, the 12. day of August, 1154 which was in the tenth year of King
Baldwine the 3. In acknowledgement of a prize so signale, and beneficial to
all christendom, Pope Anastasius the fourth, gave and granted very great
privileges, to the Order of these Knights of S. John of Jerusalem, the first
day of November in the same year, exempting them from the jurisdiction and
control of the East Ecclesiastical Prelates, which was the cause of great
troubles, between the Bishops of the country there, and the knights of this
order: albeit the Pope and his Cardinals maintained them still stoutly. Some
have held, that this Great M. Raymond was a Florentine, but the most credible
opinion is, that he was a Frenchman, a Native of Daulphine, issued of a very
Noble house, called du Puy: whereof, namely, ^acques Bosius the Italian (who
has amply written the history of this order) is an ingenuous witness. He
died in the year, 1160. with this reputation; that he had bin a man of good
and virtuous life, fearing god, valiant, wise, and advised in the affairs of
the world, and one well approved in warlicke exercises.

3 After that Raymond was deceased, 1160
there succeeded in the Maister-ship and government of the Order, F. Auger de
Balben, of whom there is found nothing deserving memory: but that (in his
time) died King Baldwin the third, who was not only much bemoaned of the
christians, but likewise of the Infidelles, who said: That the Christians had
just cause to lament for the death of Baldwine, because they had lost a Prince,
that had not his equal in the world. This Great-Maister Auger, after he had
governed his charge in peace and repose about three years, died in the year,
1163.

4 Arnold de Comps, 1163
was next elected Master in his place, who was a man of great spirit, valor,
and council. And in short time after his election, he entered into Egypt, with
Amaulrie, the new King of Jerusalem, who made war upon the Califfe of Egypt;
because he refused to continue and pay the anuall tribute, wherein he had
bound himself to King Baldwine the third, for a perpetual payment to the
Kings of Jerusalem. Arnold after he had (with great wisdom and courage)
governed the Hospital of S. John about four years, died in the year 1167.
and then succeeded him

1167.
5 Gilbert d'Assaly, or de Sailly, who was of stout mind, and so liberal; that
he flowed in bounty, especially to his Soldiers, so that he fell into great
expenses, and wasted the whole treasure of the house. Insomuch, that he was
enforced to borrow Money at interest, with conditi^ion; that if he took from
the Infidels the City of Belbeis (anciently called Pelusium) he should stand
acquitted to his Brotherhood, as indeed he did, and victoriously performed his
promise, the third day of November, 1168. In which year he held a Chapter
general in Jerusalem, where perceiving that he was greatly indebted, and had
charged the Hospital, with more than an hundred thousand Crowns of mere
debts; being also much grieved, that his attemptes found not equal Issue to
his high desires: he determined to renounce his great Maistership, which he
did in the year 1169.

1169
6 By his resignation, or renunciation rather, another Knight was chosen Great
Master, named F. Gastus, or Castus; of whom there is nothing found, that makes
to any purpose of this our brief History. And the breuity of his time of
government was the cause, by reason he was not a full year in the charge, but
dyed in the very same year of his election, and had

7 F. Ioubert, a very religious man, 1169.
for his successor, who in the year 1176. joined himself with Phillip Earl
of Flanders, that was then come into Syria, to assist King Baldwine the fourth
against Saladine, who had a very powerful Army, miraculously vanquished by the
Christians, that were but few in number, in the month of November 1177. at
which time the Emperor Frederick Barbarossa, and Pope Alexander the third were
reconciled together. At length, Saladine withdrew himself from the Country
of Damas, in the year 1179. And then dyed Ioubert Master of the Hospitallers,
a man very charytable to the poor, and sickly. It is said, that mere
conceit of grief, to behold (so manyfestly) the ruin of christian affairs
in Syria, with the shameful and damageable truce, made between the King of
Jerusalem, and the Earl of Tripoli (by his example) with Saladine; was the
only cause of abridging his days, having governed the Order of Saint John,
about ten years.

8 In his stead was elected Roger de Molins, 1179.
a man of high discretion and courage. In his time happened a great dissension
between the Prince of Antioche, and the Patriarch of the said place: and this
Roger was chosen to be mediator of peace and agreement between them, which
followed in the year 1181. This Roger (with Heraclius Patriarch of Jerusalem,
and Arnald de Trogo, Master of the Knights Templers) was sent by the King of
Jerusalem (in quality of an Ambassador) into the West, to require aid of the
Christian Princes. These Ambassadors were kindly entertained by the Emperor,
King Phillip Augustus, Gods gift, surnamed the Conqueror, the Kings of Sicily,
England, and Hungary: they returned back again into Syria, all but the Master
of the Templers, who dyed by the way. In the year 1187. the Earl of Tripoli,
being leagued and confederated with Saladine; granted him passage, and
relieved his Army with victuals. And Saladine having besiedged the city of
Ptolomais, the Knights of Saint John and the Templers (joining together)
disordered the whole Army, and Roger the great Master, fighting valiantly,
there dyed, with the fall of his Horse upon him, and smothered in his Armor,
as also being much trodden on with the enemies Horses. His body being afterward
found among the dead, was buried with great woe and sorrow. And notwithstanding
this loss of the great Master; yet the Knights of Saint John and the
Templers, won the day of battle against the Turks and Sarrazins; of whom
died then in the field about fifteen thousand, the first day of May, in the
year 1187 After whom

1187
9 F. Garnier of Naples in Syria (which was the ancient city of Sichem in
Canaan) was elected great Master. In his time was a bloody battle fought
between the Christians and Infidels, wherein the King of Jerusalem (named Guy
de Lusignan) was taken Prisoner, with the very chief Lords of his Kingdom.
It is said also, that the Christians had then the true Cross in the battle,
but it was taken from them by the Infidels: and almost all the Knights of
Jerusalem, and the Templers, were one part slain in the battle, and the
rest beheaded in cold blood. F. Garnier, after he had fought very manfully,
yet being mortally wounded in many places of his body; by the goodness and
swiftnes of his Horse, escaped into the City of Ascalon: where ten days
after, he departed into a better life, the foureteenth of July, having been
great Master but two months and six days.

10 The twenty day of the said month of July 1187. 1187
the Knights that were in Jerusalem, chose F. Ermingard d'Aps, to be their
Master. The second day of October, in the same year, the City of Jerusalem
was submitted to the power of Saladine: 88. years, two months and seauenteene
days, after that it was delivered (by Godfrey of Bullen) from the hands of
the Infidels: Frederick the first, surnamed Barbarossa, then holding the Empire
of the West, and Isaac the Angel, that of the East, at Constantinople, Vrbane
the third being Pope of Rome, and Phillip the second, called Augustus, Gods
Gift and Conqueror, reigning in France. Then were expulsed out of Jerusalem,
the Knights Hospitallers, Templers, and all the Latin Christians, of which
Christians, the Hospitallers redeemed from captivity of the barbarous, to the
number of two thousand with their Money. All the Churches of the city were
then polluted and profaned, except the Temple of the Resurrection; which was
bought with a great sum of Money, by the Christians of the East. After the
loss of Jerusalem, the Knights Hospitalers were continually in Arms,
faithfully assisting the Christian Princes, that had put on Crosses, for the
recovery of the holy Land, and did actions (of high desert) at the siedge of
Ptolomais: which, after a long siedge of three years, was regayned from the
Infidels by the Christians, the twelft day of July, 1191. 1191
And in that City, the Knights of Saint John kept then their ordinary abode
and residence. And in the very same year, the Christians won a notable
victory against the Barbarians, and Saladine their chief: wherein they were
worthily assisted by the knights Hospitallers and Templers. The year
following, being 1192. 1192
in Winter, dyed Ermingard d'Aps the great master, in the city of Ptolomais,
and then was chosen in his place

11 Geoffrey de Duisson. In his time there was truce taken for five years,
between the Christians that were in the holy Land, and Saladine, by which
means, many Lords and Gentlemen of diverse Nations, who had worn the Cross,
and gotten great store of goods and possessions: returned home to their
Countries, and gave their goods to the Brotherhood of saint John, which greatly
did augment their renennewes. And after the death of Henry Earl of Champaigne;
the Hospitallers and Templers remained governors, and administrators of the
kingdom of Jerusalem: howbeit, that (by the fewer number of Christians there
abiding) election was made of Amaury de Lusignan, who had succeeded the king of
Jerusalem in the kingdom of Cyprus, with consent of the Patriarch, the Prelates
and Barons of the Realm, in the year 1194. when soon after died Duisson the
Great-Maister, and then succeeded him, by election

12 F. Alphonso of Portugal, ^194
a knight of the Order of Saint John, and of the Royal house of Portugal,
though it does not appear certainly, to what king he was Son. He made very
worthy and commendable statutes, whereof (to this day) there are some
inuiolably kept. But because he was of too stiff nature, ouer-rough, surely
and severe: he encurred the hatred of the greater part of the Knights
Hospitallers. Which was the cause that he renounced his Maistershippe, and
shipped himself for return home to Portugal, in the same year of his
election: But he dyed the first day of March, in the year 1207.

13 The same year that Alphonso renounced the Great Maistershippe, to wit, in
the year 1194. 1194
Geoffrey le Rat, who was Graund-Pryour of France, was chosen Master: And
Saladine then dying, his Son Noradine (Lord of Alepo) succeeding him. About
this time, Simon, Earl of Montfort, was sent by King Phillip Augustus, with an
Army into Syria; where finding much disorder, he took truce for ten years
with the Infidels, in the year 1198. 1198
In the time of this tranquile estate, there chanced a great difference,
between the Knights Hospitallers and Templers, grounded on this occasion. The
Hospitallers complained, that the Templers had enterprised too far upon
their jurisdiction, with much contempt and violation thereof. Which quarrel
(after many rough encounters and skirmishes) was appeased and accorded, by the
interposition of king Amaury, the Patriarchs of Antioch and Jerusalem, and
other Princes and Christian Prelates, who comprimitted this difference, in the
name of Innocentius the third, which fell out very successively. For, after
that God (the only Staff and stay of all affairs in the holy Land) had
permitted this friendly unity, between these two millitary Orders of
Knighthood, King Amaury of Lusignan so prevailed, that the Great Master and
Knights of Saint John, might live with him in the Isle of Cyprus, where he
granted the government of the Kingdom to them. In the year 1205. 1205
King Amaury dyed, so did Queen Isabell, who appointed her Daughter Mary
(which she had by Conrade of Monferrat) to be her heir, and he left her to be
tutoured and guided by the Knights Hospitallers and Templers. In the year
1260. Geoffrey le Rat, the Great Master dyed, and then succeeded him

1260
14 Guerin de Montagu, of the language of Auuergne, who (with the Knights of
his order) aided Lyuon, King of Armenia, against the Turks and Barbarians,
that had intruded into his Kingdom. In recompense whereof, he gave them the
city of Salef, with the castles of Camard and new castle, and their
dependances. He likewise recommended his heir and Kingdom, to the Knights
of the Hospital of Saint John; which gift was confirmed by the Pope, the fifth
of August 1209. Then were John de Brienna, and Mary his Wife (Heir to the
Kingdom) crowned King and Queen of Jerusalem. At length, in the year 1230.
1230
Guerin the great Master died in the city of Ptolomais, and during his time,
all the Christians affairs in the holy Land, depended (very much) upon the
Knights Hospitalers and Templers: who albeit they had many contentions between
them, yet did they still agree together (in all matters) against the Infidels.
After him succeeded

15 One F. Gerin, 1240
of whom no other name is found remembered. Richard Duke of Cornewal, This is
mistaken, for this was K. Richard the first himself.
and Brother to Henry (then King of England) arrived soon after in Palestine,
with an Army of forty thousand men, and did many worthy actions there. The
great Master also, and his knights with him (bearing him company) fought
valiauntly against the Corasmine Infidelles. There the said Master was taken,
and sent as a Prisoner to the Soldane of Egypt, where he died, and in his
place, the Knights of S. John elected (in the city of Ptolomais) for their
great Master

1345
19 Bertrand de Comps, in the time of Pope Innocent the fourth, and when the
General Counsel was called at Lions, 1245. This great Master was present in
a furious battle, fought against the Turcomans, that wasted all the country
about Antioch, in the month of August, 1248 where, having receiud sundry deadly
wounds, he ended his days: And in the City of Ptolomais, on the 24. of Aug.
was elected as Great master

1248
17. Peter de Villebride. In his time, Jews K. of France, called S. Jews,
took on him the cross against the Infidels, with many Princes and Prelates of
France, who went and besieged Damieta where they were aided by the knights
hospitallers and Templers, and the City was soon after surrendered to K. Jews
in the year 1250. Then did the Sultan of Egypt give battle to the christians,
wherein King Jews with his brethren, Charles and Alphonsus, the King of
Cyprus, as also the Great master, and many knights of the hospitalers and
Templers, were all taken prisoners. Which surprizall, caused an atonement
between King Jews and the Soldane, and the hospital Knights lent money to
King Jews, to pay his ransom. In the year 1251. Villebride the great master
dyed in the City of Ptolomais, and succeeded by election

1251
18 Guillaum de Chasteau-neuf, or de Castelno, of the speech of Auuergne. He
was a great obseruer of Justice, and pope Alexander 4. gave to the knights
hospitallers, ye castle and lands of Bethania, in the year, 1256. In his time,
the Christians lost their utmost hope, of any succor from the Princes of
Europe: and in the year 1280. the Great Master of Castelno died, when as the
Hospital Knights of S. John, elected in his sted

19 Hugues Reuelle, or Revel, 1260
in the time of Pope Urban the fourth, who gave to the knights of S. John,
Mont-Tabor, 1261. and in Anno, 1262. they bought the Castle of Assure, but in
the following two years, they took from the Sarazins a Castle named Lilion,
whereupon, the Sultan of Egypt concluded, to work the ruin of the Knights
Hospitallers, and (as an instance) he forcibly took from the said Knights (in
the year 1265. 1265
) the Castle of Assure, at the surprizal whereof, there were slain to the number
of 90. knights of S. John, which greatly abated their power and repute. And in
the year 1267. the Knights hospitallers and Temples were assailed, and much
confused in battle by the Sarazins, near to the City of Ptolomais, for they
wasted and spoiled all the country thereabout. In the year also 1270 the
Knights of S. John lost the Castle of Cracquo, which was assaulted by the
Soldane, and all the knights within it, were put to the sword. It is likewise
said, that this Great Master Revel, assisted King Jews in the voyage to
Tunis, where the said King died of the plague, and that in the end, about the
year, 1278. the Great Master Revel ended his days, having held five
Chapters, or assemblies of the Brother-hoode of S. John, wherein many notable
Statutes were made, for government and reformation of the Order.

1278
20 After his decease, Nicholas Lorgus, was chosen Great Master, who, not to
swerue a jot from his predecessor (well knowing, that nothing sooner procures
the ruin of Commonweals and Comminalties, then discord and dissension) took
such pains, to reconcile the Knights hospitallers with the Templers, that he
drew them to accord, and made them good friends. In the year, 1282 the Knights
of S. John, won a famous victory against the Sarazins, who proudely came to
besiedge the Castle of Margate, their very principal Fortress: which was very
manfully defended by the Hospitallers, and in the end, quitted (at
composition) by the knights, who returned (with their Ensigns displayed) to
the City of Ptolomais. And in the year, 1288. Lorgus the Great Master died,
with very grief, because he saw the Christian affairs in the Holy land,
daily to fall from il, to worse, without any means or hope of remedy.

21 In the same year, John de Villiers, a Frenchman borne, 1288
was created Great Master of the Order. In his time, the City of T^ipoly was
taken from the Christians, by the Infidels, as (in like manner) were the
cities of Sidonia and Ba^uth, in the year, 1289. all which were ransacked,
ruined and burned, and the city of Tire brought under the Soldanes subjection,
whereon the christians of Ptolomais were glad to seek their own peace.
During which time, the Great Master went to Brundusium, with the Great Master
of the Templers, to solicit the christian Princes of the Croisade, and the
Soldane came to assail the city of Ptolomais, which was virtuously defended,
by the Knights of the Hospital and Temple, with many brave sallies forth upon
the besiedgers. Especially the Great Master Villiers, who was sore wounded,
with long sustaining the whole charges of the Barbarian Infidels, the Knights
Barricadoing themselves in a quarter of the City, which yet was afterward
taken on Friday the 18. of May, the same year 1292. With this great loss, the
Christians were driven out of ye holy land, 191. years ten months, and three
days, after it had bin Conquered by Godfrey of Bullen. The Great M. with the
rest of his Knights, fled (for safety) to the Isle of Cyprus, where they were
very kindly entertained by the K. of the Island, who assigned to the^ and the
Templers, the City of Limosson, which was a Port Town or Haven on the Sea.
There did they inhabit, and there did the Great Master assemble two general
Chapters, one in December, 129^. and the other in October 1293. making therein
diverse good Statutes for the Order: and in the year 12^^. he dyed at Limosson,
and then succeeded him

22 F. Odo des Pins, borne in Prouence, 1294
in the time of Pope Boniface the eight. He incurred the hatred and disgrace of
the knights of his Order, by reason of his negligence and covetousness. And
there was a purposed determination, to deprive him of his Great maistershippe;
but it was impeached by the Pope, to avoid scandal, and at length he was
cited to appear at Rome in person to answer to the complaints of the
Hospitallers, and thitherward he travailed. But before he could see Italy, he
dyed by the way, in the year 1296. having (in the precedent years) held two
general Chapters at Limosson. He carried also along with him a manuscript
Chronicle, wherein he had appealed certain letters of the Popes, containing
excommunication, whereby he pursued and relieved his own appeal.

1296
23 The Knights hearing the death of their Great Masters des Pins, elected (at
Limosson) the twenty four day of March 1296. F. Guillaume de Villaret to
succeed him; who was of the same Country of Prouence, and Prior of S. Gilles,
where he was at the time of his election. But having intelligence thereof, he
travailed immediately to the Kingdom of Cyprus, and governed in his charge very
prudently. In his time Vsau Cassanus, King of the Tartares, became a Christian,
and recovered the City of Jerusalem, where he placed the Knights
Hospitallers and Templers in Garrison, in the year 1300. He took the City
of Damas likewise, but it was quickly regained by the Infidels, and the
Hospitallers and Templers returned then to Cyprus again, where the Great
Master departed out of this life, in the year 1308. having held five
general Chapters at Limosson, and seen the utter ruin of the Knights
Templers.

1308
24 The great Master being dead, Folquet de Villaret, of the same Nation of
Prouence, was elected in his room. He was a man of lively spirit and great
courage, and seeing that he had attained to this Sovereign dignity; he
resolved to put in execution a matter, which (in his predecessors days) had
often been intended, but could not any way be effected (viz.) to depart from
the Isle of Cyprus, and to get a dwelling some where else, which he very
happily performed. For in Anne. 1308. the very year of his election, he made
a voyage to Constantinople, and afterward into France, where the Pope gave him
the Isle of Rhodes, (if he could get it) which with his Knights he conquered,
in the year 1309. and seven other Islands near adjoining. So that thither
was the residence of saint John's knights transferred, and then they were
afterward called, The beginning of the Knights of the Rhodes who held their
first name of S. John's Knights still
Knights of the Rhodes, yet keeping the Name of Saint John of Jerusalem still.
Not long after, Otthoman, first Emperor of the Turks, came and besiedged
Rhodes with a Potent Army: but it was relieved by Amadis the fourth, Earl of
Sauoy, and Otthoman was compelled to raise his siedge. After which time the
Earls of Sauoy wore on their Armours, a Cross Argent, in a field Gules, in
memory of the help they had given to the Knights of the Rhodes. The order of
the Templers (having been utterly suppressed, in a general Council holden at
Vienna in Dolphine) the greater part of their goods was given to the Order of
the Rhodes, and confirmed by Pope Clement the fifth, 1312. In the year 1314.
the Knights of the Rhodes conquered the Isle of Lango, with other Isles in the
Archipelagus. And in the year 1317. Folquet the Great Master (pleasing his
own humor overmuch in his victories and conquestes) began to grow haughty,
proud, and insolent, which brought him into contempt of his companions:
whereupon, the Knights reuoulted from him, and if he had not saved himself in
a Castle, they had seized his person. But, in regard they could not get him,
they deposed him from the dignity of Great Master, and in his place, elected

1317
25 Maurice de Pagnac, whereof Pope John the twenty two, being advertised, he
was greatly offended thereat, and sent two Prelates to the Rhodes, to inform
themselves of the fact, with command, to cite the Great Master de Villaret
and de Pagnac, to appear at Auignon in person, Gerard des Pins being appointed
Lieutenant General in the mean while. At this instant time, Orchanes Emperor
of the Turks, came boldly and besiedged the Isle of Rhodes: but the knights
had an admirable victory against him, for there were then ten thousand Turks
hewn in pieces. In this Interim, Maurice de Pagnac, died at Montpellier, Anno.
1322. and Folquet de Villaret was re-established in the dignity of Great
Master. But he perceiving that it was against the liking of his fellow
knights, renounced his Great Maistership, in ye year 1323. and lived as a
private Knight, until the first day of September, 1327. when he dyed, and was
buried at Montpellier.

1327.
26 The same year that he gave over his dignity, the Knights of the Rhodes
chose Elion de Villeneufue, borne also in Prouence, and Priour of Saint Gilles.
In the year 1343. a league was made between the Seigneury of Venice, the K.
of Cyprus, and knights of the Rhodes. And the Great Master having won the name
of an happy governor, died the 27. of May at Rhodes. In his life time, he had
enclosed the great Masters Palace with walls and towers, and divided the
languages, Bayliwicks and other dignities of the Order.

27 After the decease of Villeneufue, Deodon, 1346
or Gods-gift (a Native of Prouence) was elected Great Master. About four
years before he was promoted to this Dignity, he had fought with an horrible
and monstrous Dragon, that greatly afflicted the Isle of Rhodes. And having
killed the Monster, he was therefore so highly honored and esteemed, that his
memory yet remains renowned to posterity. In the year 1347. he aided the
King of Armenia against the Soldane of Egypt. Pope Clement the sixth held the
Knights of Rhodes in such esteem, that almost all the Fortes in Italy
(belonging to the Sea) were governed severally by one of them. In the year
1351. Constance King of Armenia, became a Brother Knight of Rhodes. And in the
year 1353. the Son to John Canta-cuzen, Emperor of Constantinople, came and
required aid of the Great Master of Rhodes: who, after he had governed this
Order of Saint John seven years, six months, and ten days, dyed the
seventh of September, in the said year 1353. and was buried in the Church of
S. John of Rhodes. He builded Milles in the City of Rhodes, and engirt the
Subburbs with walls, making them very strong on the Sea side.

1353
28 Next succeeded him by election (as Great Master) Peter de Cornilian,
Priour of S. Gilles, borne also in Prouence. He was Master, but one year,
eight months and seauenteene days: for, falling into a grievous sickness, he
died in the City of Rhodes, the 24. of August, 1355. He was a man of very
exemplarie life, and so severe, that he was sur-named the Corrector of
Customs. He held a general Chapter at Rhodes, 1354. wherein many good Statutes
were made.

1355
29 After the great Master was deceased, according to acustomed form, Roger
des Pins, born likewise in Prouence, did next succeed him. In his time, the
Pope persuaded the Knights of Rhodes, to buy the Principality of Achaia, of
Iacques de Sauoy, Prince of Piedmont, and the Knights of Rhodes made a general
assembly in the City of Auignon, to effect the treaty of buying the said
principality of Achaia, and to reform some abuses, crept into the Order. For
their statutes were now traduced into the Latin tongue, and to all Princes
were sent authentical Copies or Volumes of them, by appointment of the great
Master: And in the year, 1359. the great Commander, and the Marshall of the
Order, were sent into France (in quality of Ambassadors) to be visiters and
reformers. There was an assembly of the Knights, called at the Cittye of
Carpentras, but it could not hold, in regard of the great Masters death, who
dyed the 28. of May, 1365. and was much lamented, but by the poor especially,
to whom he was a great and charitable Almoner.

30 Raymond Berengarius, of Prouence also, 1365
was next chosen great Master, who had bin before Commander of Castle
Sarrazin. In his time the King of Cyprus, and the Knights of Rhodes made a
league together, and took (perforce) the City of Alexandria in Egypt, which
they ransackt, spoyld* and burnt. The Armenians being expulsed by the Sarazins
out of their dwellinges, were charitably entertained by S. John's knights, in the
Isle of Lango: and at the same time, the City of Tripoli in Syria, was taken
and sacked by the King of Cyprus, and the Knights of the Rhodes. In the year,
1371. the Great Master was (by the Pope) elected Nuntio from the Apostolic
seat, to appease the rumors and divisions, which were then in the Kingdom of
Cyprus: whether he went in person, and both by his Authority and wisdom, he
soon seized all the trobles and mollestations. The Great Master having
governed his Order about eighteen years and an half, departed this life in
the year, 1373

31 In the same year, Robert de Iuliac, 1373.
or of Gulich, great Priour of France, was chosen Great-Maister, who (at the
time of his election) had the charge of his Priory: but understanding the
news, he went forthwith to Auignon, where he was received with great honor, an
assembly general of this Knightly Order being then there held, and the Great
Master had the government of Smyrna imposed upon him, under pain of
excommunication. At his coming to Rhodes, he qualified all the contentions,
which had happened in the time of his absence. At this time went the Pope, to
hold his seat at Rome again, which he and his predecessors had kept at
Auignon, for the space of seauenty one years 1376. In which year, the 29. of
June, dyed the Great Master, and then

1376
32 In his place came John Fernandes d'Heredia, a Native of Arragon, in the
City of Valentia, who was Prior of Cathalognia, and Castillian d'Emposta.
Twice he had bin married, and (chancing to be a Widdower) he was made a Knight
of Rhodes, in the time of Villeneufue, who was then Great Master. Being then
but a simple Knight, he went to visit the holy Sepulcher, and other memorable
places in the holy Land. He was also Ambassador from Pope Clement the sixth, to
the Kings Phillip 6. of France, and Edward the third of England, and did very
good service to King Phillip, in the year 1346. For he being dismounted from
his horse, on a day of battle against the English he gave him his own horse,
whereby the King escaped to a place of safety. In like manner he fortified the
Bastions and new walls of Auignon, whereof he was made Governor by the Pope.
Being great Master, he took his way to Rhodes, in the year, 1377. and being
required by the General of the Venetians Army, to unite their forces together:
they went to Morca, in the year, 1378. where they besiedged the City of
Patras, and took both it and the Castle. The great Master (fighting man to
man with the Governor of Patras) slew him manfully. Afterward, in an
ambuscado of Turks, he was taken prisoner, by reason he was too well known
to them: Whereupon, to work his liberty, Patras and other places (which had
bin won from them) were re-deliuered to the Turks. And yet notwithstanding,
they would needs carry him with them into Albania, where they kept him as a
slave three years. In the year, 1381. the great Masters freedom was bought
with money, and he returning to Rhodes, the Ambassadors of Smirna came to
desire succor of him. In the year, 1391. Baiazeth, Emperor of the Turks
made some preparation to besiege Rhodes, whereupon, Phillebert de Naillac,
Priour of Aquitaine, was sent by his fellow knights to Auignon, with Letters to
the great Master, to require aid against Baiazeth. Naillac returning to
Rhodes, in the year, 1396. Heredia the great Master died, and was buried at
Caspa.

33 News being brought to Rhodes, 1395.
that Heredia the great Master was dead: Phillebert de Naillac, grand Priour
of Aquitaine, and borne in France, succeeded in his room. At the Spring time,
he was invited by Sigismond King of Hungaria, to come and assist him with his
Knights against Baiazeth, which he did in person, in the year, 1397. And then
was a battle fought at Nicopolis, where Baiazeth had the victory, the K. of
Hungary, being glad to save himself (and with the Great Master) retired to
Rhodes. Thither also did the Emperor of Constantinople, send all his precious
Iewelles, to be kept by the Great Master, fearing least Baiazeth should
surprise Constantinople. But he was disappointed by Tamberlain, who overcame
Baiazeth, and kept him captive in a Cage of iron, so long as he lived, and the
siege of Constantinople being raised, the great Master sent home again the
Emperors Jewels. After the foil of Baiazeth, the great Master de Naillac
sailed with an army into Caria, and there builded an inexpugnable fortress,
which he named S. Peter's Castle, in the year 1399. under the reign of Charles
the sixth king of France. In the year, 1403. there happened wars between the
k. of Cyprus and the Genewayes; which was pacified and ordered by the wisdom
and authority of the great Master: to whom the Sultan of Egypt sent an
Ambassador, for request of peace. In the year 1409. the Great Master gave his
personal assistance in the Counsel of Pisa, assembled to quench the Schisms,
which were then crept into the Church, and the guard of the Conclaue was
committed to the great Master, when Alexander the fifth was elected Pope. The
said Master was likewise at the general Counsel of Constance, where three
Popes were deposed, and Martine 5. elected, an. 1414. the guard of the Conclaue
being then again given to the great Master. Traveling into France, he held a
general assembly of his knights at Auignon, afterward at Florence, and last at
Ancona: whence returning to Rhodes, an. 1420. he held there a general chapter,
and in the beginning of June, 1421. he dyed. 1321.


34 And then in the deads place, Anthony de Fluuiano, or de Rivers, This
Anthony de Rivers was sent for to Rhodes, he being then chief Commander of the
Brotherhood, at S. John's of Jerusalem, in Saint John's street.
reported to be a native of Arragon (but more say of England) was created Great
Master. In his time began the general Counsel of Basile, 1430. And not long
after, the Sultan of Egypt (puffed up with the victory which he won at Cyprus)
brake the Truce, and prepared a great Army, with intent to besiedge Rhodes.
But when he heard, that the Great Master was provided of sufficient strength
to withstand him: he left off his determination, and so the Order that way
remained in quiet. This Great Master founded, and endowed a Chapel in the
City of Rhodes, which (afterward) he made a Church for his Knights. And the
29. of October he died, after he had governed (in his place) with much
wisdom, 16. years and an half.

35 The sixth of Nouemb. in the same year 1437 John de Lastic, 1437.
borne in Auuergne was elected Great Master, albeit he was absent at his
election, and remained in Auuergne, whereof he was prior. Before he would go to
Rhodes, he made a general assembly of his knights at Valentia, in the month of
December. 1438. when he came to Rhodes, he began to build the new hospital for sick
people, which the precedent great M. (by his will) had appointed to be done at
his expenses. In his time, Pope Eugenius 4. was deposed by the Counsel of
Basile, and Foelix the fifth, created in his place, who was held at Rome to be
an Antipope. In the year, 1440. the Soldane of Egypt, being come near to the
port of the isle of Cast-Lerouge (which appertained to the Knights) and from
thence turning toward Rhodes, he was put to flight by an army of the Knights,
who had but eight Galleys, and in the Soldanes army there were eighteen, and
there were slain about seven hundred Sarazins, beside a great number that
were wounded. This foil did so highly offend the Sultan, that he leagued
himself with Amurath, Emperor of the Turks, with intention to make himself
Master of the Isle of Rhodes, and to kill, or expel thence that famous Order
of Knighthood. Hereupon, in the year, 1444. he came and besiedged Rhodes,
which was virtuously defended by the Rhodian Knights: and in the month of
September the same year, a general assembly was held at Rhodes, to help the
ensuing necessities of the Order. So the year following, the Great Master (by
advise of the Pope and the King of Cyprus) made peace with Amurath, and held a
general Chapter at Rhodes. At which time, the Duke of Cleues passed by
Rhodes, in his return from Jerusalem, where he had visited the holy places. In
the year 1451. a general assembly was made at Rhodes, wherein, the
administration and government of the Treasure, and whole Fraternity, was given
to the Great Master: who in anno 1452. after the death of Amurath, renewed the
peace with Mahomet the second his son. And yet the year following, Mahomet
became Master of the Cittye of Constantinople, the 29. of May: when (being
not a little proud of this fortunate success) he sent to the great Master
of Rhodes, that he should pay him (yearly) two thousand Ducats, in name of
tribute, otherwise, he purposed not to hold (any longer) the peace sworn
between them. Whereunto the great Master made a courageous answer, to wit:
That neither his Religion, the Isle of Rhodes, nor himself were subjects to
any, but God and his Church, and that he would never pay Turk any tribute,
being rather resolved to dye (both he and all his Knights) then to endure
Christian liberty (which ever had bin free) to come now (by his means) into
thraldom. Whereupon, he sent Ambassadors to the Pope and Christian Princes, to
entreat supplye from them, against the perjured Mahomet. And in the year,
1454. the 19. day of May, he died, having valiantly governed his Order sixteen
years, six months, and thirteen days.

36 Iacques de Milly, borne in Auuergne, 1342
whereof he was Prior, succeeded as Great Master the first day of June 1454.
being in his Priory when he was elected, and his Nephew George de Boisrond,
brought him first tidings thereof. Whereupon he immediately went to Rhodes,
and held a general Chapter the same year, in the month of November. In the
year 1456. the Isle of Rhodes was greatly afflicted with Pestilence and
Famine, whereby it became half desert, and to re-people it again, many
general citations were sent abroad to all the Knights, to meet there at a
certain time. The year 1457. Mahomet besiedged the Isle of Lango, and the
Castle of the Isle des Singes: but he was courageously repulsed, the Knights
having a very happy and signat victory against him; which caused Charles the
seventh King of France, to send the Knights (as a gift) sixteen thousand
Crowns: The Bailiffes, Commanders, and other Officers of the Order, being
then enjoined (by a general Chapter) to come to Rhodes, for more secure and
strong defense thereof. The seventeenth of August 1461. the Great Master dyed,
having (with much providence) governed his charge in hard and troublesome
times, seven years, two months, and sixteen days. He was greatly lamented,
because he was very benign, affable, and human, desirous to preserve peace
and unity among his worthy Brethren.

1461.
37 Peter Raymond Zacosta, born in Arragon, and Castileon d'Emposta, was
created Great M. next; he being then absent in Spain; but at his coming to
Rhodes, by a general Chapter there holden, the eight language of Castile and
Portugal, was then admitted into the Order. For till that instant, there were
but seven languages there before; to wit, three of France, Auuergne, and
Prouence; one of Italy, one of Arragon, one of England, and one of Allemaigne
or Germany. The year 1464. the Venetians Army besiedged the City of Rhodes:
but the siedge was soon raised, and the Venetians returned home to their
Country, the war being appeased by the wisdom of the Great-Maister, who
caused the Tower of Saint Nicholas to be built, at the mouth of Rhodes Port, in
the very same place, where (in elder times) the great Colossus of the Sun
(numbered among the seven wonders of the world) had stood. As a help to this
building, Phillip Duke of Burgundy gave ten thousand Crowns of Gold. The
year 1465. the great Turk sent Ambassadors to Rhodes, to mediate a peace
between him and the Knights Hospitallers: but they worthily refused it, and in
presence of the Ambassadors, denounced War against the Turk. The general
Chapter being then transferred from Rhodes to Rome, and the Great Master
being present in person thereat: he died there the twenty one of February
1467. and was buried in the Church of Saint Peter.

38 Baptista Orsino, Prior of Rome, 1467.
an Italian by Nation and tongue, succeeded the Great-Maister Zacosta. No
sooner was he come to Rhodes, but he received intelligence, that the great
Turk prepared a puissant Army, purposing to besiedge either Rhodes or
Negropont. Wherefore he sent for a great number of the Knights, that were then
absent, to come forthwith for defense of the Island. Moreover, he leagued
himself with the Seigneury of Venice against the Turk. Nevertheless, in the
year 1470. Mahomet forcibly took the City of Negropont, the last day of
July, committing very great and horrible cruelties, killing (in cold blood) all
the Latins there to be found, and (by sound of Trumpet) he proclaimed open war
against the knights of Rhodes, which enforced them to seek all means for
their best defense, providing every way to withstand the Turkish Army. But in
this time of preparation, the eight day of June, the Great Master died of a
long lingering disease, which had afflicted him a whole year together: and
after him succeeded

1476
39 Peter d'Aubusson, borne in Auuergne, Prior there, and Captain of the City
of Rhodes. He being chosen Great Master, solemnly took his oath (according to
custom) to keep the statutes of the Order. He visited ye whole Isle of Rhodes,
and made very great provision, to defend it against the Turks Army: sending
for all knights and Commanders appertaining to the Order, to repair thither
for defense of the Isle, and renewing peace with the Soldane of Egypt. The same
year, King Jews prevailed to have a Jubilee in France, in favor of the
Knights of Rhodes, taking order, that the Moneys thereby arising, should soly
be employed for their defense: And by this Iubily came great store of Money,
wherewith Castles and fortifications were builded in the Isle. Truce also was
taken, between the Knights and the King of Tunis, for thirty years, and the
Knights of the Sepulcher at Jerusalem, were joined with the Rhodians of S.
John. In the year 1479. Mahomet the second Emperor of the Turks, held a
solemn Council, that Rhodes should be besiedged with a powerful Army, as
indeed soon after it was: in which siedge, many sallies forth were made, and
the Turks daily repulsed and chased, albeit they were an hundred thousand
fighting men, and the Army consisted of 160. Sail. The Great master was much
succored by Messire Antoine d'Aubusson his Brother, Vicount of Montelis, who
was a great Warrior, and a most skillful Captain, he was elected Captain
General for the besiedged. In few days, the Turks gave three thousand and
seven hundred shot with the Cannon, against the City Walls, and a maruailous
assault was made of forty thousand Turks: who nevertheless were valiantly
resisted, albeit the Great Master received (in this fight) five great wounds,
one whereof was thought to be deadly. In the end, so worthily were the
assaylants withstood, that they were enforced to raise their siedge, having
lost a great number of their Soldiers, and the Army of Turks returned, (with
mighty shame and disgrace) to Constantinople, after they had besiedged the
City for the space of 89. days. After this siedge, Mahomet the second,
concluded to com in person to Rhodes, whereupon, a general assembly of the
Knights was made: But the death of Mahomet hindered this design, and his
Sons Baiazeth and Zizime performed the War, after the decease of their
Father, which gave some breathing time of rest to the Knights of Rhodes. And
yet Zizime (in person) came to assist the Great Master, withdrawing himself
to Rhodes, in the year 1482. where he was received with great honor, and from
thence conducted into France. In the time of this Great Master d'Aubusson, the
statutes of the Order were reformed, and brought into one volume; peace being
concluded between the Knights and the Great Turk Baiazeth. The Great Master
was made a Cardinal by Pope Innocent the eight, and Legate also into Asia,
with honor of Legate and General of the leagued Army against the Turk.
Finally, he dyed at Rhodes, An. 1503. the third day of July, full of honor and
reputation, and was interred with great Funeral pomp. He had lived 80.
years, three months and four days, and governed the Order twenty seven
years, and sixteen days.

1503.
40 There were 387. Knights assembled at Rhodes, when the Great Master
d'Aubusson dyed, who elected for his successor, Emery d'Amboise, Brother to
George d' Amboise, Cardinal and Legate in France, Archbishop of Rouen. He was
a Frenchman by birth, and great Priour of France at the time of his election,
Guy de Blanchefort coming into France, to accompany him in his voyage to
Rhodes: where he was received with much applause and rejoicing, because the
Kings of France and Spain had written very favorable Letters on his
behalf, to the Knights of the order. He was no sooner there arrived, but he
held a general Chapter, wherein was concluded, that a sumptuous tomb of
Brass should be made, for the deceased Cardinal Great Master. In the year
following, they obtained a very famous and nauall victory, against the Soldane
of Egypt, under the conduct of Phillip de Villiers, of the Isle Adam, a French
Knight of the order, and afterward he was great Master. But this Master
Emerie d'Amboise dyed at Rhodes, An. 1512.

41 And the same year, 1512
410. of the knights were assembled at Rhodes, where they chose Guy de
Blanchefort (borne in Auuergne, and Nephew to the deceased Master d'Aubusson)
to be Great Master. In his time the general Laterane Council was holden at
Rome, where Fabritio Carretto, Admiral and Procurator for the Order of Rhodes,
was Captain of the Guard to the said Council. This great Master de
Blanchefort, embarking himself at Nicea in Prouence, to make for Rhodes; was
surprised, (by the way) with a dangerous sickness, whereof he dyed the 24. of
November, a year and two days after his election.

42 In his stead, Fabritio de Carretto, 1513.
borne in Geneway, and an Italian by language, was treated Great Master, in an
assembly held at Rhodes, the fifteenth of December 1513. where were then
present 550. Knights of the Order, the said Carretto having formerly been
Admiral of Rhodes. In the year 1516. peace was made between the Knights of
Saint John, and Tomombeus Soldane of Egypt, successor to Campson Gaury, who
(but a short while before was slain in a battle, wherein Selim (Emperor of
the Turks) had the victory against him. And Tomombeus was as unfortunate, for
in the year 1517. he was taken, and strangled at one of the Ports of the
great Cayre, by the appointment of Selim. And this was the cause, that the
great Master fortifyed the Isle of Rhodes, to his uttermost power, sending
Ambassadors to the Christian Princes, to let them understand the great
victoryes of Selim, the sooner to take order for sending succor. But Selim
dying, his son Sultan Soliman succeeded him: and in January, 1521. the Great
Master Carretto finished his days at Rhodes, leaving great provision and
Munition for war, which soon after did service to his successor

1521
43 Phillip de Villiers, of the Isle Adam, great Priour of France, and there
borne; where because he also was at the time of his election, Gabriell de
Pomereux great Commander, was chosen Lieutenant to the great Master till he
came. The very same year of his election, the twenty two day of January, 1521.
Sultan Soliman resolved to besiedge the Isle of Rhodes, executing the last will
of his Father Selim: whereof the Great Master being advertised, he made his
preparation (by all possible means) to withstand the Turks enterprise.
Diligently did he strengthen the City of Rhodes, sending for supply into
Christendom; which as then he could not have, by reason of the war
happening between Frances the first, King of France, and the Emperor Charles
the fifth. In the month of June 1522. began the memorable siedge of the City
of Rhodes, which was besiedged with an Army of two hundred thousand Turks, and
afterward the army increased to three hundred thousand men. The besiedged
defended themselves most courageously, and very worthy exploits of war were
there performed: especially by the Great Master, who (during the siedge) did
never put off his Armor. The assaylants were in many attemptes repulsed, and
in one of them, twenty thousand Turks remained dead in the place: Soliman
having then a purpose to raise his siedge, but that there were some close
Traitors, who hindered him from so doing, and yet they did not escape
unpunished. At length, The loss of Rhodes, to the great g^eef^ of al
Christendom.
the Great Master (receiving no succor) was enforced to surrender the City,
upon composition, the twenty four day of December 1522. the Turks having
lost more then an hundred thousand men. Soliman would needs see the Great
Master, and when he beheld him, tears issued from his eyes, in mere
compassion of him. So, the first day of January, 1523. the Great Master (with
50. sail) departed from Rhodes, and took his way toward Candie: after that
the Isle of Rhodes had been in the power of the Knights Hospitallers, for the
space of 213. years, to wit, from the year, 1309. to the end of the year,
1522. After this loss of Rhodes, the great Master and his valiant Religious
Knights, had not any assured place of abiding: until the Isle of Malta was
given the^ by the Emperor Charles the fifth. For they departed first into
Candie: from thence they went into Sicilie and Italy, where the Pope sent them
the City of Vitterbo, and where they held a general Chapter. Afterward they
soiourned for some small time, at Cornetto, then at Villefranche, and at Nicea.
While they remained at Nicea, the great Master made a voyage into England, and
from thence to France, where being at Lions, a great sickness took him: but
after his recovery, The knights of Saint John becam Knights of Malta.
he went to Cambraye, to hold the Baptism Font for Phillebert Emmanuell, son
to Charles Duke of Sauoy. Afterward, coming with his Brethren-Knights to
Malta, on Wednesday morning the sixth of October, 1530. he caused a Palace to be
there erected, for the abiding of him and his successors, calling it Castle
Angelo, building another palace also in the old City of Malta. When he had
governed his Order thirteen years, and seven months (being aged seauenty
years) the 21. of Aug. 1534. he died at Malta, and was buried in a Chapel,
which he had builded near to Castle Angelo, and then succeeded him by election

1534
44 Pierrin du Pont, a Native of Ast, and an Italian by language. Before ye
taking of Rhodes, he was Governor of the Isle of Lango, and after the ^osse
thereof, he departed (with all the knights under his government) and joined his
power in Candie, with the army of the Order. In his time, Charles the fifth
Emperor, attempted to go in person to the kingdom of Tunis in Africa; where
he was assisted by the Galleys belonging to the Order, and the Knights also,
who performed there great exploits of Arms: especially, in the surprising of
Goletta, which was held to be a Fort unconquerable. This war being ended, the
great Master (aged seventy and three years) dyed, having governed only
fourteen months, and 22. days, and was buried by his predecessor Villiers.

45 Desire, or Didier de S. Iaille de Tolon, 1535
borne in Prouence, and Priour of Tholossa, was next made great Master: when
lifting up his eyes to heaven, he used these words! O my God, if thou
think me fit for this great charge, I will not refuse the pain and labor.
In his trauayling toward Malta, being very aged, so soon as he arrived at
Mont-pellier, he fell into an extreme sickness, whereof he died the 26. of
September, 1536. and was buried with much solemnity, in the church of the
Commandery of S. Gilles, without the gates of Mont-pellier: when the knights
were advertised of his decease, the eighteenth of October in the same year,
they proceeded to the election of

46 John d'Homedes, a native of Arragon, 1536.
who being then in Spain, made have to Malta, where he was joyfully received.
Albeit, he was discontented, that they had not sent some of the galleys, nor
the great Carrack of the Order, for his conduct thither: wherefore he disarmed
and destroyed the great Carrack, which caused many complaints against him.
Very often would he discourse of the siedge at Rhodes, because he gave
general notice thereby, that there he had lost one of his eyes. He made a
goodly Park of Dear, and a very beautiful Garden in the Isle of S. Michael,
and there would he spend the greater part of the day: which raised occasion of
murmuring against him, that he was slack in his public government, and no
way careful to provide the Isle of Malta, of needful supplies against the
Turks forces, for he trusted too much in the strength of Castle Angello. In
his time, the City of Tripoli in Barbary, was lost by the Knights of the
Order, and taken by the Turks, which drove him to no little fear and
amazement. In the year, 1552. Leo Strozzi, an especial Commander of the Order,
made an attempt upon the Isle of Zoara, which had very hard success, because
many Knights were then slain there of all Nations, especially many French,
Auuergnacs and Prouenceals. It being declared to the Great Master, he grieved
extraordinarily thereat, and said: That a greater loss had not happened to
the Order, since the surprizall of Rhodes. He builded the Castles of Saint
Elm, and Saint Michaell, and being eighty years old, died the sixth of
September, 1558. having governed sixteen years, ten months, and xv. days,
and was buried in the Great Masters Chapel.

1558
46 Claudius de la Single, borne in France, was next created Great Master,
and at his election, there were then present at Malta, above 400 Knights of the
Order. He governed very discreetly, by Counsel of five worthy Knights his
Officers, and attendaunts, (to wit:) by his Steward, Master of the Household,
Master of the Horse, the Treasurer, and Secretary. So that the Order was in
great happiness, during the time of his Maister-ship, having obtained the
privilege of Neutralitie, of King Henry the second, and Charles the fifte
Emperor, who made War against him. He was very valiant, Religious, and a
most profitable Administrator of the Orders reuennewes, in whose Treasury he
left abundant store: dying of a Catarrhe, which had much suffocated him, after
he had attained to the Climacteriall year 63. of his age.

47 F. John de Valette, borne in Prouence, 1561.
succeeded next as great Master, and his election was very pleasing to all the
Order of S. John, because he was generally beloved of all the Nations, and
universally desired, as most worthy of that charge and dignity. In less
space then two years, he was General of the Gallyes, Bayliffe of Lango,
Great Commander, Priour of S. Gilles, and Lieutenant to the great Master, and
now at length great Master also. He did so affect his Knights and Order, that,
after the day he first entered in it, he would never more return into his
country. So that, by making continual residence therewith them, he passed
through all the degrees and offices of honor in the profession: apearing still
(in all his actions) to be of rare judgment, perfect integrity, and
incomparable valor. So soon as he was advanced to this sovereign dignity, he
resolved to build a new City at Malta, upon the Mountain of S. Elm, A new
City builte at Malta on S. Elemes Mount.
knowing, that all the other Forts were not sufficiently mumted, to endure the
battery of a potent enemy: yet this desseigne was deferred till a further time.
He fortified the Castle of the Isle of Goza, and (forsaking his abiding at the
Castle of S. Angello) came and dwelt within the Town of Malta, which he
defended most valiauntly, against the siedge of the Emperor Sultan Soliman,
when he was grievously wounded in his leg, in the year 1565. But the siedge
being raised, to the shame and confusion of the Turks, he greatly
strengthened the Isle of Malta, and began to build the new City, which was
called Valette, according to his sur-name, and whereof himself solemnly laid
the first stone, on Monday, the eight and twenty of March, 1566. And by the
solicitude of the Great-Maister, the building thereof continued on still,
eight thousand persons being daily employed therein, and five hundred
thousand Crowns monthly paid to the worke-men. At length, the one and twenty
of August, 1568. the Great Master died, on the like day as he was promoted to
his place, having governed eleauen years, fully complete.

1568
48 After the obsequies of Valette, the Great Master, they proceeded to elect
a new successor, which was Pedro de Mente, an Italian borne, and Priour of
Capua. Immediately after his promotion to the Maister-ship, he caused his
predecessors body to be carried into the new City, and to be honorably buried
in the Chapel of our Lady of Victory, for he worthily deserved to be
surnamed the Father of Soldiers, the Shield and defender of the Catholic
faith, and the great persecutor or queller of proud Infidelles. This new
Great Master, before he attained to so high degree, had made good proof of
his Wisdom and valor, in sundry other honorable and worthy offices. For he
was first, Patron of the Gally, which was Captain or Commander of the band:
Next, Lieutenant General of the galleys, Castillion or governor of the Castle
S. Angello at Rome; he was then Admiral next General of the whole Fleet, and
Ambassador for the Order to the Popes Pius the fourth, and Pius the fifth. He
came from Rome to Malta, when he was chosen great Master, and followed his
charge so effectually, that the new City was finished, and thither he purposed
to trans^ferre the dwelling of the Order. For the good Olde-man thought it as
great honor, to dwell in the new City* and make it habitable, as it was for
his predecessor Valette to build it. In his time, the memorable Nauall
battle of Lepanto was sought, and victory obtained against the Turks, wherein
the Knights of the Order did many worthy actions of arms. The great Master
deceasing at Malta

49 John, Bishop of Cassiera, borne in Auuergn, 1572
did next succeed him, in the year, 1572. Before his election to this office,
his virtue had appeared in diverse weighty charges. For, at the enterprise of
Zoara, he was Ensigne-bearer to the Order, and defended the Standard very
woorthily, bringing it back with him to Malta, when both it and himself were
smitten into the sea: yet both of them saved by a Gally belonging to the order,
after he had a long time fought undauntedly against the Infidels. Soon after,
he was chosen Captain general of the horsemen: Commissary of the
fortifications, then, Marshall of the Order, and now last great Master,
wherein he lived very virtuously, not letting any day pass him, without some
especial piece of service, and feeding (with his own hands) thirteen poor
men. With his own money, he builded the great Church dedicated to S. John
Baptist, in the new City of Valette, endowing it with a thousand Crowns of
annual Reuennues: erecting also a goodly Sepulcher, for interring therein the
bodies of the great Masters his predecessors. There happened some
coffeehouse between the Knights and him, which shortning his days, he died.

1582
50 And the twelfth of January, 1582. Hugues de Loubenx Verdale, borne in
Prouence was elected great Master. He was but a young knight, yet both learning
and military knowledge shined clearly in him: For he was in the attempt at
Zoara, where he declared himself to be truly valiant, and had many honorable
Offices imposed upon him. He dying,

51 Martin Garzes, a native of Arragon, 1595.
succeeded him next as great Master. He qualified the discontentmentes
amongst his Brethren-Knights, and took away those Taxes, which had bin
imposed, and interdicted (for a time) the officers of the order, to give a new
form to his own government, and to the good liking of all the the Knights.
He did expressly prohibit, that not any Knight (nor the Great Master
himself) might particularly have any ship on the Sea) to use any Pyracies
for his own profit. He died also at Malta, and lies buried in the Sepulcher
of the great Masters.

52 The Knights assembling for a new election, the tenth of February, 1601. 1601
Aloph de Vignacourt, born in France, was created great master. In the year
1566. he coming to Malta, with great store of other French Gentlemen, upon a
flying rumor, that the Isle was likely to be besiedged again by the Turks
Army, entered into the order, under the Great Master Valette, receiving
(afterward) sundry great charges, wherein his wisdom and man-hoode was
evidently discerned: having bin Captain of the city of Valette, and not long
after, great hospitaller of the Order. He yet continues in the office of great
Master, a great comfort (we hope) to Christendom, and a terror to the
Othomans Empire, whenever they shall attempt the hurt of the Isle of Malta,
where the famous memory, of that ancient Order of Knighthood of S. John of
Jerusalem, is still kept and maintained.

The several Orders of Knighthood, both Ecclesiasticke and Secular; as they
have been, and are yet honored in this Christian World.
Ecclesiastical orders.
Knights of Saint James of Compostella.
1070
IN the year 1070. this Order of Knighthood began in Spain, after that
Ramirus had won the most famous victory, in ye Province of Compostella, against
the Moors.

At first, their number consisted but of thirteen, and it was lawful for them
to take Wives. There was a chief man chosen of this Order, by the Name of
Great Master; who (together with the other thirteen) had power to elect other
Knights.

The badge or note of honor of this knighthood, was a red Cross, carrying the
form of a down pointed Sword. At the Feast of All Saints. was their meeting
appointed, that they might confer about their affairs. Many years have they
continued, with many privileges, and scarcely any but they (called Augustines)
hold any such laws.

Knights of Saint John's of Jerusalem, who were afterward Knights of the
Rhodes, and at this day are called Knights of Malta.
IN the year 1099. 1099
the City of Jerusalem being recovered against the impulsions of the
Infidels, by Godfrey of Bullen, Duke of Lorraine: About that very time, a
certain Hospital was erected by the Christians in Jerusalem, consecrated by
the name of Saint John Baptist, for the entertainment of Pilgrims. Soon
after, was this Order of Knighthood instituted, and the first Rector or Ruler
was called Gerard, and the next after him Raimond. These knights wore a black
Garment, with a Cross Argent, in a field Gules upon their breasts.

In the year 1308. 1308.
being enforced from their former abiding by the Turks, and the Isle Rhodes
granted them by Pope Clement the fifth, they were (in that regard) called
Knights of Rhodes.

In the year 1523. 1523.
Rhodes being won from them, Malta was affoorded them; whereon to this day
they are called Knights of Malta.

The duty of this Knight-hoods-order, was, to fight for the Christian Faith, to
relieve the oppressed, to defend Widows and Orphans, etc. Nor was any one to
be admitted into this Order, that was descended of a Moore, lew, Mahumetist,
or any such ignoble race.

Knights Templers, or Knights of the Temple.
ANno Domi. 1117. Gotfredus Aldemarus Alexandrinus, 1117.
and Hugo de Planco de Paganis (Godfrey Duke of Lorraine, and King of
Jerusalem being dead, and Baldwine then reigning) this order of Knighthood
first began; And a seat was granted them in the Temple of Jerusalem,
whereupon, they were called knights Templers, or Knights of the Temple.

By entreaty of Stephen, Patriarch of Jerusalem, Pope Honorius brought in this
order, and confirmed their Society; giving them a white garment, whereunto
Eugenius the third added a red Cross on the breast.

The charge of these Knights, was, to guide trauailers on the way of
Jerusalem, and to entertain strangers.

1310
Anno Domini 1310. Clement the fifth (who then held his See in France) by
persuasion of Phillip King of France, gave order for the utter subversion of
this Knight-hoods Society, and all their Colleges, thorough-out our Christian
world, wheresoever they were builded: in regard of a most abominable
treachery, by them intended and ratified.

Knights Teutons, or Knights of Allemaigne.
Soon after that Jerusalem was regained from the Christians, one Teuto a
Nobleman, and abounding in riches; instituted this Society of knighthood,
building an house (for their entertainment) at Jerusalem, called Hospitium
virgini Mariae.

Among this Order of Knighthood, neither Knight of Malta, nor any other,
except a Germain (and he likewise to be Noble by birth) could be received into
their degree. Their garment was white, and a black Cross figured upon their
breasts.

In the year 1184. these Knights (the City of Jerusalem being surprised by
the Sarrazins) Ptolomais was granted them: but being likewise driven thence,
they came into their Country of Germany.

In the year 1220. they entreated Frederick the second, Emperor, that he
would suffer them to take Arms against certain fugitive Idolaters in Prussia:
who being by them subdued, they obtained there a new seating, and their
Dition or Lordship of Liuonia was then added to them.

Calatranian Knights, or Knights of Calatrana.
IN the year 1130. 1130
this Order of Knighthood was instituted by Santio King of Toledo, in
imitation of the Order of Saint James.

These Knights took the name of Calatrana, which was a place granted unto
them, where (in former times) had stood a Church, that belonged to the Knights
Templers: And when the Sarazins were ouer-powerful for them, those knights were
constrained to surrender this place unto them.

These Knights did wear a black Garment, with a red cross upon their breast;
and were said to be of the Cisternian Order, holding in Spain very large
possessions.

Knights of Alcantara.
1150
THese Knights held their name of a City in Castile, called Alcantara, and were
of the Cisternian Order.

They had a goodly Temple near to the River Tagus, where they held very ample
possessions.

Their Ensign or Badge was a green Cross.

Knights of the Redemption.
1212
IN Anno Dom. 1212. this Order was instituted by James King of Arragon, who
conquered the Islands called Baleares, or Maiorque and Minorque in the Spanish
Sea.

It was the Office of these Knights, to redeem Captives, whereupon, the Title
of Redemption was given them: they were also called Knights of Marie.

These Knights Order was confirmed by Gregory the ninth, By shop of Rome: And
they wore a white Garment with a black Cross upon it.

Knights of Montesia.
THis order was instituted, 11^0.
much about that very same time, as the Knights of Calatrana were.

They derived their name from Montesia in Valentia, where was their place of
abiding.

The Ensign of these Knights was a red cross.

Knights of the holy Sepulcher.
THese Knights (who derived their name of Christ's Sepulcher) did wear two red
crosses. 1219


This order (at this day) is quite extinct, or (as some do imagine) the Order
of the Knights of Malta is said to be somewhat near it.

Knights of Christ.
IN Anno Dom. 1320. 1320
this order was instituted by John the twentieth, Bishop of Rome. The place of
these Knights abiding, was in Portugal.

A black garment, and a double Cross, were the Ensigns of this Knight-hoods
order.

Knights of Saint Marie, the Mother of Christ.
Certain Noblemen of Bolognia and Modena in Italy, 12^^
being much troubled and molested by perturbations among the Princes, desired
of Vrbane the fourth, Bishop of Rome, that they might be suffered to begin some
kind of Society. Whereupon this order was granted them, to hold in free and
peaceful manner.

A little red Cross, reflected with Gold, they wore upon their breasts.

These Knights did wear costly Garments, and fared delicately: whereupon
they were vulgarly called by the Italians, Frati Gaudenti.

They might not wear any gilt Spurs, or use any Gold on their Horses furniture.

Knights of Saint Lazarus of Jerusalem.
1048
THis Order was confirmed, or (as some will have it) restored by Pius Quartus.
And yet the Knights of this Order, (are said to be) in the times of
Basilius, and Pope Damasus, when Julian the Apostata reigned, and then they
flourished, as some do affirm.

The Ensign or Imprese of this Order, was a green Cross, worn on the left
side of the breast.

A man twice married might not be admitted into this order.

Knights of the round Table.
The Secular Orders.
IN Anno Domini 516. Arthur, a worthy and Warlike King, reigning in the Isle of
Britain, the Country being infested and troubled with Armies of Saxons,
etc. was yet (by him) very valiantly supported, and his fame outstretched to
the remotest Regions. Afterward, when peace was established; that other
Knightly minds might be inflamed with the like glory: this Order he
instituted, which continued (with others) in long and honorable observation.

The Order of these Knights was (especially) in the City of Winchester, as
some have recorded; and their yearly meeting was there, at the Feast of
Pentecost or Whitsontide.

Knights of the Garter.
IN the year 1349. 1349
Edward the third, King of England, having had very great victories against
the French, and other neighboring Nations, did institute this Order, and
consecrated it to S. George.

The King appointed a Garter to be the Ensign of this Order, wrought richly
with Gold and precious stones, which should circle the Leg beneath the knee,
and on it to have these words apparently discerned: HONI. SOIT. QVI. MAL. Y.
PENSE.

The number of these Knights are 26. whereof the King himself is the chief.

The time of this Societies meeting, is the feast of Saint George, and
celebrated at Windsore.

These Knights do wear the Ensign of S. George, (fighting with a Draggon)
fastened to a rich Chain or Collar, which weighs or valueth, neither more or
less then eighty pounds of English Money, as has been said in former
times. Their garments is Purple, with a red Cross.

Knights of the Star.
1350
ANno Dom. 1350 John King of France, being much moved with the glory of
Edward the third, King of England; did institute this order of Knighthood,
entitling it by those 3 Magi, who (going from the East to honor Christ) were
guided by a Star.

The Ensign of this Order was a Star, set eminently in the Hat: and the
words were Monstrant Regibus Astra Viam.

The founder of this order, being much molested with the difficulties
happening in war; could not perfect what he had instituted. And therefore
(within a short while after) this Order ceased.

Knights of the Band.
1367
IN the year 1367. this Order was instituted ^y Alphonsus King of Spain, the
Son of Ferdinand and Constance.

These Knights did wear a certain red scarffe or Band, of three Fingers
breadth, which (like a scole) was fastened on the left Shoulder, and so come
underneath the right Arm, thwart the body.

Into this Order, younger borne Brethren only (of Noble descent and Family)
and none of the elder, might be admitted.

Many Articles (belonging to this order, and to be observed by these Knights)
are at large set down by Sansouino.

Knights of the Annunciation.
ANno Dom. 1409. 1409
Amades or Amadeus, as some write, the sixth, surnamed The green Earl of
Sauoy, devised this Order, who were termed Knights of the virgin Mary, and for
this reason instituted: because Amades the first Earl of Sauoy, (with
wonderful fortitude) defended Rhodes against the Turkish powers, in his memory
it was thus celebrated.

A Chain or Collar (such as Knights use to wear, made of Gold and Silver
plates, and fastened together with little linkes) each man had about his neck,
with these Letters engraven thereon, F. E. R. T. that is, Fortitudo eius Rhodu^
tenuit. Thereat hung also (by another small Chain) the Picture of the Virgin
Mary, with the Angels salutation.

Knights of the golden Fliece.
1429.
IN the year 1429. Phillip, sir-named the good Duke of Burgundy, instituted
this Order, and dedicated it unto Saint James.

The number these Knights were twenty four, whereof the Duke of Burgundy was
the chief.

They used to wear the Picture of a Golden Sheep, affixed to a Chain,
inter-wouen like flames of fire.

Charles the warrelike Duke of Burgundy (who also is said by every one, to be
the first Founder of this Order) added thereunto these words: Aute ferit, quam
flamma micet.

But now at this day, the Knights have these words: PRETIVM NON VILE LABORVM.

Knights of Saint Michaell.
1469
IN the year 1469. Jews, the eleauenth King of France, instituted this Order
at Amiens, and dedicated it to S. Michaell.

The beginning of this Society, consisted of a Band of Men, to the number of
thirty six, the very cheifest and Noblest Peers of the kingdom, being
Knights clear from all detection; and the very chief of them was the King
himself.

At this day, there are a great number of these Knights, and the kingdom of
France is not now so respective in their election, as at the first.

These knights wear a Chain of gold daily, wouen like little shelles,
valewing two hundred Crowns: And thereat hangs the picture of Saint
Michaell, fighting with the Devil, the Words being these, Immensi tremor
Oceani.

These knights did use to meet every year, at the Feast of S. Michaell, in
the Church of S. Michaell on the Mount.

Their garments by Henry the second, king of France, were appointed in very
honorable manner.

Knights of S. Stephen.
In the year, 1561. this Order was instituted by Cosmo de Medices, Duke of
Florence, 1561.
and the same confirmed by Pius Quartus.

The Ensign of these knights, was a red Cross, worn on a black garment.

The Statutes of this Order, do not much differ from them of Malta knights: and
they were allowed to have wives.

The Duke of Florence, is always the chief of this Order, and it is not to be
censured by any of the religious degrees, but properly it does hold a freedom
in liberty.

Knights of the Holy Ghost.
In the year, 1578. Henry the third, 1578
king of France, instituted this Order, and named it of the Holy Ghost: the
memory whereof, was to be celebrated in the time of Pentecost: upon which day,
the King was borne, and succeeded also in the Kingdom. These Knights are an
hundred in number, and the King him-self is the President.

This Feast is celebrated yearly the first day of January, in the Augustines
Church in Paris, by the Parisians.

The Ensign of these Knights, is a Dove (in which form the Holy Ghost
appeared) in midst of a Cross.

The last or lowest degree of Knight-hoode, is theirs, who (as reward of their
Virtues) have golden Spurs put on their heels, and vulgarly are called
Knights.

Concerning Knights Bannerets, who had that Title given them by the Kings of
England in War: And Knights of the Bath, they being also created by the
Kings of that kingdom: because they are of another Nature, I pass them over,
without using any further speech of them.

Of the Emperor of Ethyopia, called Prete-Ian, or Prester-Iohn: Of his
Original, and customs of his people.
Sabellic. lib. 8. de Suplem. Chron.
THe great Emperor of Ethyopia, to whom we (corruptly) give the name Prester,
or Presbiter John, is neither Priest or Sacrificer, though he be (by some)
called Prete-Ian, and (by his own people) named Beldugian, that is to say, Joy
of incomparable excellency, or of most great value, and by others of them, he
is also called Ian, which (in their language) signifies Mighty. The power of
Prester-Ian.
He commands over seventy and two Kings, who are all of different languages,
having their diversity of customs, and the color of their faces or
complexions are much disagreeing. He is able to levy in preparation for war, a
million of fighting men: five hundred Elephantes, with their armor and
munition for encounter, with an infinite number of Horses and Camelles. His
souldi^^s Armor for t^^ir defense.
His Knights or warlike Soldiers, enter armed to the battle each wearing a
long coat of Maile, stretching down closely to their thighs a Sallet or
head-peece on the head, a round Target or Pauois, a crooked Fauchion by his
side, and a Lance with two Steel points or Pikes. Such as have no Sallets or
head-pieces, do wear thick red quilted Cappes on their heads, plated after the
manner of the Mameluke Soldiers. The younger sort carried Darts* Arrows and
Slings, observing the same discipline, and be as obedient or well governed, in
ranging their battails as we are. They use Drums of Brass, and Trumpets
also, to encourage their soldiers to the fight, which is performed with great
hardiment, appointing likewise sundry honors and respective rewards, to such
as declare them^elues to be of highest merit. They do daily pay the families
of their warriors, and mark the children that are borne of them, with a
Cross, which they imprint suddenly in the flesh with an hot iron, so that the
sign remains, as if it were natural unto them.

The exercise of the King Ptete-Ian.
The King himself most commonly called Prete-Ian, after he has bestowed some
hours about State affairs, when he perceives that he is indifferently eased
of them: he imployeth almost all the remainder of his time, in the study of
holy Readings and Histories, which being done, he uses a little exercise of
the body, and then entering into his Bath, afterward he takes his refection,
alone by himself (as most of our Kings use to do) upon a little Table of
Gold, without any Cloth or Napkin, and it is set in such a place as there are
diverse steps or degrees in ascending to it. He is served by sundry Pages, who
are of noble birth, and they bring him his meat (ready cut and prepared) in
little Baskets or Panyers. He drinks wine in a cup of gold, but he has
another kind of drink, His diet and manner of life.
made of sower Apples, and mingled with Sugar, which he receives in a cup of
Crystal. While he feeds, three hundred lusty young men (chosen out of the
several kingdoms under his Dominion, having the place of Archers, and of his
Guarde) do stand round about the Tent-Royall: For, by an ancient custom it
has been kept, that the King continually lives out of any City, wherein he
never abides but two days only, and those Tents are erected in such manner,
that the back part is evermore placed to the East, and the door or opening is
opposite to the West.

The usual Arms or weapons of those guards, are Swords, Daggers, and
Iauelinges, their necks and shoulders, being gorgetted with thick skins of
Beasts. Four Kings, The attendance and service of the Emperor.
who (by commandment) do attend the Court, follow (each after the other) the
Table service, accompanied with many Barons and meaner Officers, even from the
Kitchen, to the Tent of Prete-Ian, all clothed in silk, Seudal and Scarlet:
And there they deliver it to the Pages, who come forth to receive it. The King
and all his Court fare deliciously, with Foul, Fish, and all kinds of Venison.
So soon as he has dined (for he never sups but on Festival days) his
Eunuchs go to fetch diverse Queens (according to their several quarters, being
the Wives of the forenamed Kings, to wait on the Queen and Wife to
Prete-Ian, conducting her unto his Tent, The wives of the Emperor.
to give him pleasure and contentment, and there they sing and Dance in his
presence. He has four wives, who are the daughters of his Neighbour-Kings,
but he lodges but with one of them, to whom he is solemnly married with many
Ceremonies: but if it chance, that he have no children by her, then he calls to
his bed one of the other.

When he purposes to show himself in public, his face is covered with a
Veil of Taffata, which he lifts up and pulls down, that hardly can
his face be wholly discerned: but if it be, it is very quickly covered again.
He uses to show himself unto the people, three times in the year, that is
to say, on the days of Christmasse, Easter, and the holy Cross in September*
and (for this purpose) is a gooly high scaffold duly prepared. The Original of
the Ceremony
The cause of this ceremony, received Original from David Prete-Ian, Surnamed
Alexander, whose death was three whole years concealed by his chief Servants,
that governed the kingdom in his time. Therefore, to avoid all the like
succeeding inconveniences, the father of David Prete-Ian, at the earnest
entreaties of his people, began first to show himself on these ordained days,
which has conrinually ever since been observed, even to Panusius Prete-Ian,
which is now reigning in Ethiopia: only excepted, when he marches in war,
for then he goes daily discovered. He is crowned with a precious Diadem, The
Emperors Crown Scepter, and habit.
the one part whereof is Gold, and the other Silver, and carries (insteade of
a Scepter) a Cross of Silver in his hand: All his Servants are marked with a
Cross, in the very flesh on the right shoulder. He is clothed with rich
garments of frizeled Cloth of Gold, wearing a shirte of silk, with very
large and w^de sleeves, as Dukes in elder times were wont to do: And from the
Girdle downward he wears a wide Kirtle of silk and cloth of gold, with a
Linen couer-ture after a Bishops manner. On either side of him go two
Pages, richly apparre^led, each holding a Cross of Silver in the one hand, and
a naked sword in the other.

His Lords, who are as Kings, and carry that Title, do pay him tribute of Gold
and other metals, of horses and great Cattle of several kinds: The Emperors
tribute by his Kings.
likewise of cloth of Gold, and of wool, according to the quality and best
Nature, of those countries that are under their government: which rightes and
Tributes they have from their Subjects, although they be vassailes (indeed)
to none but Prete-Ian, himself and to whom they yield the greater part of
their substance. Some do pay him large quantities of Corn, and of Salt,
Tributes in general of his people.
for the maintaining of his Armies: Others do bring him Pepper, which is a
rare commodity in that Country, and some do pay him slaves. The Rustickes or
country Bo^^es, who live in the wild and silde-frequented Forests, do bring
unto the Court, great store of Lions, Tygres, and other living savage beasts,
which are afterward shut up into apt appointed places, to yield pleasure and
delight to him and his Princes. As for such as dwell further off from the
Court* it is sufficient for them to bring the skins of such beasts only
wherewith the Abyssines do (in a bravery cloth) themselves, when they go to
war.

This Great Emperor Prete-Ian, governs many Countries, and boundless Seas,
whereof, because this place allows me not to make any large discourse, as
also of the maine matters of State concerning his kingdoms: I refer ye to the
General History of the World, where, whatsoever I am compelled in this
Chronicle to abreuiate (not only of this Emperor, but of all other kingdoms
whatsoever) shall be at large described. Let it suffice then, that I close up
this report, with the only glories of Prete-Ian, and his Ethyopians, The only
glories of Prete-Ian his Ethyopians.
which are, that they do repute themselves to be the very ancientest Nation,
among men, because they have always lived in their innated liberty, and were
never conquered, either by Semyramis, nor Hercules, nor Dyonisius, nor the
Romans: but that they themselves vanquished King Cambyses, and overthrew his
potent army. Heereto they add a more true and eminent glory indeed, which is,
that they were one of the first Nations, in receipt of the Christian faith, well
near from the very beginning thereof. By means of the Eunnuch to the famous
Queen Candace, who was baptized by S. Phillip: And that since their
conversion, they have constantly kept the same Religion, for so many hundreds
of years. Aibeit* that during this time they have been generally (even as yet
they are at this day) mollested, assaulted, and enuyroned with Moors,
Sarrazins, and the Idolatrous Worshippers of Mahomet, yet notwithstanding all
those cruel Tempests (which heretofore destroyed the Roman Empire, and the
very greatest part of Christendom) Ethiopia could never hitherto be spoiled,
either of their Dominion or Religion, albeit some Idolatrous mixture has crept
thereinto. Which is the less to be maruailed at, if we may credit their own
saying, in alleging their constancy and antiquitye, Whence the Ethyopians de
derive their antiquity.
because they derive this their noble Original and continuance, from the
Royal Kings David and Solomon, of whom the most blessed Virgin Marie (Mother
to our Savior) descended, and he himself according to the flesh: Of whom they
keep a very solemn memory, and (above any other of the Apostles) think
reverently of S. Thomas the Apostle.

Of the Kingdom of Persia.
PErsia has carried the same name, from the beginning to this day, containing
in it these Regions, Lar and Requelmall. The chief City of Persia.
The principal City thereof is called Siras, in elder times termed
Persipolis, which is governed by the Sophy, Great Lord of all Persia, and
Azimia, called by our elders Assiria; and the Kingdom of Dearbech, sometime
named Mesopotamia; And Seroan, that was Media; and Parthia, now called Iex;
with Hirca, now termed Coraxan; Sarmania, now Dulcendano; and Asia, now at
this instant called Hetti. All these several Regions, with the greater
Armenia, which is a part also of them, are governed by the great Sophy, The
government of the great Sophy.
and their greatest or chiefest City is named Tauris, being built in the
midst of the Mountain Taurus, four days journey off from the Caspian Sea.
Next unto Tauris, there are other Cittyes, as of Soltauia, Concassan, Spahan,
Corazan, Lera, Mora, Sarmachand, Gesti, Far, Siras, and Ormuz, a City in the
Persick Sea, which at this day is called Mare Misindia. In this City is great
commerce of Merchandise, Fishing for Pearls.
made with the Portugales, and there they fish for great abundance of Pearls.
There are other Cities also, Cureh, Iex, Casmine, Coy, with infinite Castles.
On the West side of Tauris are the Caspian Mountains, which are now called
the Mountains of Arath; And on the Bacchan Sea, aunciently named the Caspian
Sea, are these Cities, Sumacchia, Derbent, Bacchan, and Mamutaga. All these
Provinces and their Regions, are very barren, because they have small store of
Rivers, the greatest whereof is called Bindarin, but in former times they
entitled it Bragada. Concerning the government observed among the Persians, Of
the Persian government, and nature of the people.
it differs far from all the other Mahumetists; because they hate Nobility,
and relying on the servile fidelity of slaves, either murder their Friends
and Kindred, or put out their eyes. But among the Persians, the Sophy is highly
respected, Nobility had in Honor, and many wealthy Lords are living amongst
them, whereof not one is to be found in the Turkish Dominions. The people also
are the very ciuillest in all Asia, men of undaunted courage, and special good
Warriors, both on Horseback and foot: affecting Music, Learning and
Poesy, wherein some attain to no mean excellency, and they are much addicted
to the study of Astrology. So much in brief concerning the Persians, the rest
remains to our General History of the World.

Of the Kingdom of Thunis.
THE City of Thunis or Tunis being very great, was by the Latins called
Tunetum, and of the Arabians Tunus: but they hold that name to be a very
corrupt vocable, because (in their Language) Tunus does not signify any
thing. This City was anciently called Tharsus, as that other in Asia, and was
at first but a very little City, builded by the Affricanes, upon the Lake
which was formed from the Goletta, distant from the Mediterranian Sea, about
twelve miles. The ancient name of Tunis.
But after that Carthage was destroyed, then did those Cities begin to
increase, both in number of habitations and dwellers: in regard that the Armies
which surprised Carthage, being unwilling to tarry there (for fear of fresh
supplies from Europe) came to abide at Tunis, and there they builded many
Houses. Not long after, there came thither a Captain, named Hucha di Vtmen,
who gave them to understand, that an Army ought not to shut up it self, in
any City that should touch or be near unto the Sea: And therefore they made
a City, which they named Cairoan, Cairoan, a new City builded.
about the distaunce of thirty six miles from the Sea, and accounted to be an
hundred miles from Tunis. Then did the Armies forsake Tunis, and inhabited this
new City; other people governing those houses in Tunis, that had bin
abandoned by the Armirs.

After this, about three hundred and fifty years, Cairoan destroyed by the
Arabes.
the City of Cairoan was destroyed by the Arabians, so that the Rector or
Ruler thereof fled thence into the West, and reigned in Buggia, as also over
all the neighboring parts: but there remained still in Tunis, a Family or
kindred of the said Rector or Governor, fled from Cairoan, who still
possessed the same, as Sovereign Lords thereof. About ten years after, they
of Buggia were expulsed by Joseph, the son of Tessino: but beholding the
humility and kindness of the said Lord, they left the State unto him, which
continued in tranquillity, so long as the Family of Joseph reigned. But Abdull
Mumen, King of Marocco, having regained Mabdia, which had been taken by the
Christians; passed homeward in his return by Tunis, where he took the
government upon him: And all the time that Abdull Mumen lived, Tunis governed
by the Kings of Marocco
and Joseph his Son, with their Successors, Jacob and Mansor, Tunis
continued in peace under the rule of the Kings of Marocco. After the death of
Mansor, his Son Muhamet Ennasir, moved War against the King of Spain, but
was overcome and forced to flight, escaping back to Marrocco, where (after
this foil) he lived but few years. Then was his Brother Joseph elected King,
who was slain by certain Soldiers to the King of Tebesm. Now in the Interim,
between the overthrow of Muhament, his death, as also the murdering of his
Brother Joseph, the Arabians returned back on Tunis, and besiedged it: But the
Governor of Tunis, Tunis besiedged by the Arabes.
gave notice thereof to the King of Marocco, that if he sent him not some
immediate succor, he should be constrained to deliver the City to the
Arabes. The King well considering on a case of such importance, did as became a
man of his high spirit and experience, electing (above all other in his Court)
one borne in Civil, a City of Granado, named Habdulnaihidi, whom he
foorth-with sent thither, with the same authority, as if he had gone himself
in person. Being accompanied with twenty goodly great Sippes, Tunis delivered
from the Arabes.
he arrived at Tunis, which was then even half vanquished by the Arabes: But
by his wisdom, providence, and flowing eloquence, he foiled the Enemy,
pacified the State, set all things in good order, and made the Countries
entrance sure against all Intruders. After him his Son succeeded, named Abu
Zaccheria, who in learning and wisdom excelled his Father. He caused to be
builded in Tunis, on the West side of the Cittyes very highest part, a mighty
great Rock, and many goodly Palaces in the City, with a beautiful Temple,
that had an high Tower on the top thereof, round engirt with strong walls.

This Abu Zaccheria went likewise to Tripoli, where his valor won him such
renown, and his wisdom made so good benefit of the Country; that (at his
death) he left an infinite Mass of Treasure behind him. He being dead, his
Son succeeded him, who was an ambitious proud young man, and would no longer
suffer himself under command of Marocco; The declyning of the kingdom of
Marocco, and rising of that of Fez.
because he perceived the declining and downfall of those Lords, and that the
family of Marino began to get fooling, reigning over the Regions of Fez, as
Beni Zeiren did in Telensm, and in Granado. These two great Potentates began
to war upon each other, and to contend for priority of State; But by this
their discord; the power of the Lords of Tunis increased, so that they went
with an Army against Telensi, and compelled them to pay them tribute. Whereupon
the King that new arose from the House of Marino, and had been at surprizall
of Marocco, sent many rich presents to the Governor of Tunis, recommending
both himself and his whole State unto his favor. The Governor accepted him
as a Friend, always provided, that he should be inferior to him: And so he
returned in triumph to Tunis, causing himself to be called King of Africa,
The King of Tunis King of Africa.
which Title was thought very desertfull for him, because (as then) there was
not a more powerful Prince in all Africa, then he. He began then to ordain
his Court Royal, with Secretary, Councellers, and a Captain General, using
all those Ceremonies, that the Kings of Marocco formerly had done. And from
the time of this Prince, even to our days, Tunis held on the same increasing
Dignity, as well in habitations as ciuility, so that it became the only and
singular City of Africa. Where now we leave her to our larger History, as
also the Kingdom of Fez, because the Original of the one came from the other,
and therefore they are the more capable of an entire discourse, which aryseth
to a very spacious and large quantity: There also will we relate the condition
and original of sundry other remote Kingdoms, which (for the reason before
alleged) are in this brief Chronicle purposely omitted.

Of the great Province of Moscouia; As also the Manners, Religion, and power of
the Prince their ruling.
MOscouia is a very great Northerly Region, containing more then five hundred
leagues in length: The principal City thereof being called Mosca, or
Moscuua, greater then the City Paris in France, and seated on the River
Mosqua. There is a large Stone squared, in the midst of the City, A strange
election of the duke of Moscouia.
whereon whosoever can mount himself (without beating down) in the vacancy of
the Crown; he is held as Prince of the Country, and obtayneth the
principality: For very great fightes and combats, the Inhabitants have had one
against another, about the mounting on that stone. He that comes to be Prince
of the Country, does not call himself King, but Duke, being contented with
that popular name, and differs not in Garments from the other Noblemen of
the land, save only, that he wears a higher bonnet. It is a Country rich in
Silver, and so strongly guarded through out, Concerning the Country.
that not only strangers, but their own native people likewise, can pass no
way without the Princes Letters. The country is flat and plain, without any
Mountains: therefore, that which is said of the Ryphean Mountains, and that
they are in this Country is merely fabulous, for there is not any such hill
at all. There are great store of Forests, abounding with wild Beasts, which
are daily chased: and great profit is made (by Traffic) for the skins of
those Beasts, as of Hearts, Wolves, Ermines, Martines, Zubelines, Fouoynes, and
diverse others. This Province confineth Liuonia on the one side, Tartaria, on
the other, and on the third quarter it has the Euxine Sea: containing many
other Provinces to it, Men for the War.
so that the Prince can (in very few days) levy four hundred thousand men
on foot, to begin war withal. They drink nothing but a kind of Beer, and
yet none but the rich may drink thereof, for they have no Wine, but what is
brought from other countries. They be subject to drunkenness, as all other
Northerly people are, and Winter is there so sharp, long and extreme, that if
any Water be hurled up into the Air, it freezeth before it can fall to the
earth. Their Corn ^^uer perfectly ripens, Their drink and Corn.
but when they have reaped it, they dry it in their stoues or hot-houses, and
then grind it. The Spring time is very cold with them and their Summer, which
lasts but two months only, is extremely hot. They have not any use of money,
but instead thereof, Their money.
they have Plates of Gold or silver squared, without any mark or stamp
thereon, which is taken for as much as it weighs in merchandise. As for their
Garments, they go clothed like Turks, in long Gowns or Robes, having narrow
sleeves, and girded about their middle: Their Religion.
Their buildings and manner of life, differs very little from them of Poland
and Bohemia. They are Christians like unto the Greeks, receiving order of
Priesthood from the Patriarche of Constantinople, saying Service in their
Temples in their vulgar tongue, which is the Sclauonian Language, and their
Carracters are Greek.

The abiding of the Prince, The Princes Court.
is in a goodly great Palace, in the City of Moscuna, built after the Italian
manner, being so strong and spacious, as (in our times) the like is not to be
found. There are in the forenamed City, as also in diverse other places, men
very learned and wise, that did make their abode whereas the Schools be. The
Muscouite is Tributary to the King of Tartaria, Learned men among them.
who overcame them in the year of the World, 6745. according as their Annals
do deliver: their Chronologies are not according to our Observation, in
accounting after the years of Jesus Christ. When the Tartarian Ambassadors do
come before the Moscouite Prince, he stands bare headed before them, and
they sit covered. His daily wars.
He has (wel-neere) daily Wars against the Polonois and Scythian, who albeit
they are subjects to other Kings, yet does he much enlarge his dominions over
them. Now, although (as we said at the first) these Princes contented
themselves with the name of Duke, until the time of his Father now reigning:
yet would he needs vsurp the name of King, giving himself these ensuing
Titles, The K. of Muscou^aes Tules.
as his Son also does the same. The great Lord Basilius, by the grace of God,
king and Prince of Russia; Great Duke of Volodimeria, Moscouia, Nouogardia,
Plescouia, Sureluchia, Tuueria Iugaria, Permia, Vraquia, Bulgaria; Great Lord
and Duke of the Lands in Nouagadia the lower: of Cyeruigouia, Rezauia,
Riscouia, Belloya, Iaroslauia, Bierosolia, Vdoria, Obdoria, Condidia, etc. By
which large plurality of Titles, it appears, that he is far more potent
then some have immagined him to be. But concerning his vassailage to the King
of Tartars, he holds it no dishonor to him, He is tributary to the King of the
Tartars.
for he does it to this end: That, while he keeps peace with him, he
brings (much more easily) under his obedience, all the near neighboring
people, and with the power of the great Tartare, he is ten times stronger then
of himself: For the said Tartare bringes (ordinarily) a Million of men with
him to the field, al well appointed for war, with two or three hundred
pieces of Cannon, and three hundred thousand horse, etc.

Of the Kingdom of Poland.
POlonia, in elder times called Sarmatia, is said to receive that name of the
word Pole, which in that Language is as much to say, Of the manner and
situation of Polonia.
as plain, smooth, or eeuen: and so much the rather is it to be credited,
because all the Country is plain, spacious, full of thick woods, and very
few hills or mountains in it. The Earth is cold and freezing, whereby it
produces little store of Wine or Oil: but contrariwise, it yields much
Grain, and diverse other kinds of Pulse, etc.

Zechus and Lechus, or Leschus, The first Rulers of Poland.
were the first that ever governed in Polonia, or there builded any City and
Castle. They both governed for some time, but after the whole race of Lechus
was extirpated, the Barons of the kingdom assembling to give succession to
Leschus, concluded to live at liberty, and without any farther check or
control. Nevertheless, that Justice might be administered to the people,
Vayuodes, called Paladines.
and they governed as necessity required: they ordained twelve Vaiuodes or
Paladines, which order has continued in that kingdom, even to our days, but
not without great hurt to the whole land. For there was no change of these
Officers, but the dignitye lasted their life time, although they carried
themselves badly in their authority, despising their betters, and evil
entreating their Inferiors. Such as among these Vaiuodes, were Castillians,
Commanders of Castelles, Captains, Judges, and such like great Magistrates,
did what themselves pleased, whereby ensued, that this Kingdom could never
have any great progression in arms, being oppressed by such petty, and no
mighty or potent Lords. But in no long while after, the faction of Lechus
(growing in hatred of the Vaiuodes or Paladines government) would needs have
one peculiar Prince: and therefore, they made choice of a worthy and valiant
man, Gracchus the first Prince of Poland.
named Gracchus, who dwelt at the foot of the Sarmatian Mountains, near unto
the River Vistula. He builded a City, calling it Graccouia (which is now
corruptly named Cracouia) a City greatly blessed, both in beauty and
Situation, as also infinite Marchandizes, which is there Trafficked from all
Nations of the world, it being the Metropolis of the whole kingdom.

Paladines chosen again.
The race of Gracchus failing, it returned again to the government of twelve
Paladines, but with much infelicity: because, in contending for Competitors,
diverse factions grew amongst them, and (consequently) insurrections in arms
to withstand one another, whereby great damage happened to the whole land.
Among these turbulent spirits, there was a Polander named P^^arislaus, a man
expert in arms, of quick apprehension, and one that could well fish in such
troubled Waters. The people revolted all to his faction, A King created again.
they made him their King, and he was the fifth Governor of that Province,
after the first Lechus or Leschus. After his death, another gallant young man
succeeded him, termed by the Polacks, Leschus the second, who proved to be a
man of singular prudence: but made old with time, and dying, he left it to his
Son Leschus the third. This man made his Son Pompilius Legittimate, but
divided the Kingdom among twenty other, that were his Bastards, to the great
detriment of the Country. But Pompilius being legittimate, entered into the
government, Gracouia forsaken by the King.
and (leaving Cracouia) appointed his seat in another City, called Gneza: but
finding it too mollestuous, he transferred the State to another City, named
Crusuicza. In this City he died of the Stone, according as himself had
continually foretold: And the chief Lords being assembled in Counsel, they
determined, that no more of Pompilius his successors should reign over them:
but (with one consent) made choice of a Countreyman, named Piastus, one of no
great stature, but strong and well sinnewed. This was the first branch of those
Kings, that continued to the time of Casimirus the second, and of Lodwick: of
which selfsame race, were also descended the modern Princes of Slesia.

This Piastus accepting the Government, took upon him the Title of Duke
only, whose succession coming at length to Boleslaus, Piastus refused the
name of K calling him self Duke of Poland.
in the year, D. CCCC. XC. IX. he was then made King by Otho the third,
Emperor. But the Kingdom coming to another Boleslaus, successor to the
former: he was expulsed thence, and dyed: Whereupon, the Polonians advanced
in his place, his Brother Vladislaus, in the year, MLXXXII. by the Title of
Duke. But in the year, MCCXCV. the Title of King was taken again, by
Primislaus the second, who at first was Duke of the greater Poland, and of
Pomerauia or Pomerland, and so continued the succession even to Ladislaus, the
first begotten son of Cassimirus, who (while his Father lived) was designed
to be King of Hungaria, and of Bohemia. The descent of the kings of Poland.
He took in Marriage Anne, Daughter to the King of France, by whom he had
Lodwick and Anne. Lodwicke succeeded his Father in both his Kingdoms, and
took to Wife Marie, Sister to Charles the Emperor. But in the year of
Christ, 1492. the Barons of Polonia (at a diet) elected, after the Death of
Cassimirus, his Son John Albertus. His continuance was but a while,
therefore by the greater part of the Barons, Alexander Great Duke of Lithuania,
was elected: who going in Arms against the Tartares, dyed in Vilua, aged five
and forty years. Sigismond, his younger Brother, succeeded him, Anno 1500. who
had the Title of King, Anno 1506. and made great War upon the Neighboring
Nations, especially on the Moscouites, of whom he slew thirty thousand, in the
year, 1514. He deceasing, Augustus Sigismond took his place: and after him,
Henry the third, Brother to Charles the ninth, King of France, was chosen and
made King. Henry heir of France, King of Poland.
But his Brother dying, and he affecting his paternall kingdom, (more then the
other) forsook Poland, and went into France to his rightful Inheritance. The
Polanders being thus forsaken they made choice of Maximilian the second, being
Emperor, to be their King: But he not resolving to accept it, and the Kingdom
standing on some doubtful terms, Stephanus Battori, Prince of Transiluania,
being a man of great valor, came into Poland with a slender power, where he was
created King, and so continues.

A brief Suruay of sundry other kingdoms, as they were (by command of the
Emperor Justinian) set down in the Roman Books de Iuris-prudentia.
THe Roman Emperors, in their Imperial Titles of honor and renown, did not
only observe and give to themselves, the names of those Provinces won by
them, or reduced under the yoke of their Empire: but likewise of such Nations
and people, as left their own Countries (in abounding multitudes) and
entered upon the possessions of others, to expel and chase thence the
Natural Inhabitauntes, to plant there their own abiding, by bidding them many
Battles: in some surmounting, and in others speeding according to the Fortune
of War. Of those Nations, I intend to speak in some measure, of their
Original, and how they succeeded, because (at length) they ruined the great
Romayne Empire: Strange nations weakened the Roman Empire.
whereto I am the rather induced, to instruct such as are little skilled in
Histories (not only Cosmographicall, but likewise Geographicall) and to show
them apparently, how much they have injured the greater part of our Hemisphere.

We will first begin with the Goths, because they were the first that
forsook their own native Country, which was called Gothia, or Gothland, The
original of the Goths.
signifying a good Land, it being a Northern Province of Germany. This Land
abounded in Grain, Fruits, Cattle, Woods, Rivers, Metals; but especially,
in Copper, and Skins serving for Furs. At all times, and as yet (at this
day) is to be discerned, the Kingdom of Swessia or Sweuia, has bin comprised
under the Dominion of the Goths. As the Country was fertile in fruits, even
so were the Women thereof likewise in Children, for, as they were strong and of
great stature; so had they usually two Children at a birth, which was the cause
then, More people then the Country can feed.
and so it yet continues, that they had and have more people, then can well
live together, the Country not being sufficient to find sustenance for so many.
In like manner, they are very great feeders, much more then they that live in
the Eastern or Meridionall parts. The Goths perceiving, and advisedly
pondering on this urgent case, they levied the more part, of the youngest and
strongest men of their Country, to the number of three hundred thousand; and
married such as were not, to rid themselves of the charge of Daughters, as
well as of Sons, for the Country ordinarily abounded in the Feminine, more
then in the Masculine Sex. So, being well provided of all necessaries for
war, and leaving a chief commander at home, of the Royal lineage; they
wandered abroad through the fields, to win by power, or compass by love, The
Goths wander to seek a new dwelling.
some new habitation wherein to live.

Many Authors, and among the rest Trebellius says, that the first tidings of
this their straiing, was under the reign of the Emperor Flauius Claudius,
about the year of Jesus Christ 272. And that they passed thorough Allemaign,
Hungary, Thrace, Greece, Gaul, and into Italy. They lost many battles, and
won likewise as many against the Romans, and other people, maintaining
themselves so well; that they reigned in Italy (even in despite of the
Italians and Emperors) the space of seauentie one years, as Procopius
avouches. The Goths reign in Italy and Spain.
At length they went into Spain, whence afterward they would not remove: For
the Catholic Kings of Spain, that then reigned by succession, and reign
yet to this present, were issued from the race and line of their Kings, who
were (indeed) very generous people. Now it is not to be imagined, that in
regard of such a mighty leuy of men, the Country of Gothia or Gothland, or
the neighboring borders remained without Inhabitants, or the rule of Kings:
For there were then left behind, so many as the Land was able to nourish, who
had their Kings in authority over them, and strength sufficient, The reason of
the Goths continuance.
to withstand any invasion of the Country. As for the conquering Armies
abroad, they continued in Honor for a very long time, albeit they lost great
store of men in battles, encounters, surprisals, and passages of Rivers: yet
were these disaduantages still supplied, by the daily birth of Children among
them, because they had their wives in all places with them. Perhaps some
strangers mingled among the^, who wearing their habits, and learning their
language, holp still to supply the fri^ of this people. Of the Ostrogoths.
Such as have bin named Ostrogoths, were people issued of the same country of
Gothia, or Gotteland, from a place which is yet called Ostrogothia: the
principal Cities whereof are Sche^ng and Lincopt. They used to war alone by
themselves, being separate from the Goths, yet ranging the world according as
they did.

Westrogoths.
The Westrogothes in like manner, came out of a Country called Westrogothia, among
whom the cheifest Cities, to this day, are Scaris and Vernen. Wisigoths
Wisigoths, or Bisigoths, came forth of a Country named Visbi, the principal
City whereof i^ yet called Visbi. I was the more willing to make this
description; because I have heard of diverse (who are but slenderly experienced
in Cosmography) that do term those Ostro^goths, The error of some young
Cosmographer
to be Goths Oriental, or of the East; and the Westrogoths, Occidentall
Goths, or dwelling in the West, and so contrariwise of the other. Albeit they
were all descended and came out of the kingdom of Gothia, or Gotteland, as
Munster has very well observed.

Of the Vandales.
The Vandales, in the erroneous judgment of Procopius, a Greek Author, are
said to be of the same Nation, and that all the people of Goths, Vandales,
Alains, Hunnes, and others, (whom I am hereafter to describe) were derived out
of one and the same Land, The error of Procopius.
and were comprehended all under the Name of Sauromates, or Sarmates, and have
no other difference, but by the names of their Captains or Kings. But I must
maintain against him, that the land of the Vandales is distant from Gotheland,
above the space of two hundred leagues, and therefore they cannot be one
people with the Goths. True it is, that this Nation is Septentrionall, or in
the North, as the others are, and is a Maritime Country, named yet to this day
Vandalia: but, as I have already said, very far off the one from the other.
This people did (almost) as much hurt to the Roman Empire, as the Goths did,
for, The travels of the Vandales into diverse countries.
joining diverse other people with them, as the Alaines, Suabes, and
Franconians, they trauerssed the Rheine, Gauderichus being then their King,
and passing among the Gauls, wasted and spoiled them very greatly. Then went
they into Spain, and took possession (in despite of the Goths) of the
Country adjoining to the Kingdom of Granado, which (to this day) is called
Vandalia, or (by corrupting the World) Vandelusia, albeit the Spaniards mince
it more nicely, and nickname it to be Andalusia. But to be brief, they were
thrust forth of Spain (wholly) in the year 431. under another of their
Kings, named Gensericus, and passed thence into Asia, where they reigned 76.
years. From thence they were compelled, in ye seventh year of the Emperor
Justinian, Anno Dom. 528. by the valor of one of his Captains, named
Belisarius.

The Huns of Scythia, and their travails.
The Hunnes departed also out of their Country, for the selfsame cause as the
Goths did, about the year one hundred sixty eight, only to seek some Land,
where they might live after the Scythians Religion, making first choice of
Pannonia: where they always so strongly kept and guarded it, till (after their
own name) it was called Hungaria. This people came from that part of Scythia,
which is termed Hunos, no long distance from the River Tanais: but it is a
miserable estate at this day, and under subjection of the Moscouite. Having
usurped Pannonia, they kept it manfully against the Romans, and two hundred
years after, Attila their King, Attila, King of the Huns
accompanied with some people of Allemaigne, as Bohemians, Gepides, or
Girpides, Schlesites, Werlies, Thuringians, Goths, Ostrogothes, and others,
making (in all) about the number of six hundred thousand men: passed through
Allemaigne, which they much endamaged. Attila, his loss in France.
Then went he into France, where he lost a battle, in which perished a great
number of his men: this battle was given him by the Romans, Gauls, and
certain Goths, allied together, and he lost (as some Authors do affirm)
above two hundred thousand men. At length he iournyed into Italy, which he
(well-neere) vt^erly ruined: and retiring afterward into his own Country of
Hungary, he died within few following months, and on the day of his nuptials,
which was in the year of Jesus Christ 443.

The Lombards were a Northern people, Of the Lombardes, and whence they
descended.
decended out of Denmark, as Eusebius maintains: and no other reason had
they to leave their Country, but only a desire to win some other. There
happened in the time of Seno or Sweno, as some call him, King of Denmark, a
very great dearth or scarsity (in the Land) of victuals, and because the people
endured it very impatiently: it was concluded by the King and his Council, (to
ease the Country of so many men as were ready to famish) that all such persons
as were unable, either for war, or labor of the ground, should be slain,
whether they were old or young. But this severe Edict being revoked, A very
severe Edict.
they then resolved, to make a leuy of all sorts of people, that (by the help
of arms) might travail to find out some other dwelling, so to disburthen the
charge of the Country. This being put in execution, they travailed so far, and
carried themselves so courageously in traversing diverse lands: that they came
at last into Italy, and there conquered the Country which was called Istria,
making themselves absolute Masters thereof. Now, Istria in Italy conquered,
and new named Lombardy.
because these people were long and tall of stature the Italians and Istrians
called them long Barbarians, which by corruption of the word, and succession of
times made them termed Longbards, or Lombardes. Some are of opinion, that
under the reign of Valentinian the Emperor, they began to make themselves first
known, which was about the year of Christ 385. and that they became
commanders in Istria, in the year 570. Likewise, according to Diaconus, the
Emperors made peace with them, in the year 730. and ever since they have held
that Country, which at this day is named Lombardy. Let it here be further
noted, that where (in any History) mention is made of people termed Daces, or
Danians; the Nation of Denmark is thereby understood: out of which country,
many great Armies have travailed at sundry times, and have mightily troubled
diverse kingdoms: among which, they continued long time in England, but were
thence expelled, about the year 860.

The Normans issued from Norduegia.
The Normanes were people of Norduegia, or otherwise called Normania, or Norwey,
a Country in the North, being much addicted to cruelty and inhumanitie,
because they used many great Piracies on the Sea. An hundred and fifty thousand
men of this Nation, bestowed themselves in vessels on the Sea, and took
possession of that part of Gaul or France, which was then termed Neustria,
now Normandy, which was done in the year of Jesus Christ, 600. others say
884. and in the time of Charles le Gros. But be it howsoever, they have (since
then) kept it against all encounters of the Emperors, Kings of France and
England, preserving it still by the Name of Normandy, and themselves reckoned
to be people of undaunted courage. There are diverse others, that do savor of
this their first original, and do yet proule upon the Seas, committing many
cruel Robberies.

The Nation which we call Swesses, Zuitzers, Suesses came out of Sweuia.
or Sweues, who (at this day) are auxiliarie to the French, came out of Sweuia
or Sweueland, a Northerly Region, like unto the other. They likewise (by the
dearth of food among them) departed forth of their Country, about the year of
Grace 800. and went so far as the Rhine, which they would have passed, but
were hindered therein by the Franconians. Thence went they to the Land of the
Heluetians, They go among the Heluetians.
who dispising the Suessians (because they were poorly and wretchedly
apparelled, rude in their feeding, and not looking like soldiers) suffered
them to wander about their Country. At length, perceiving the kind
sufferaunce of the Heluetians, they sought to abide in a certain Canton of
their Land. Which when the Heluetians noted, they demanded of them, to what
end they thus wandered about the World. They answered, that they were poor
people, and sought but to wear out their lives in travail, by deluing or
laboring in the Earth. And seeing that there was wast Ground in those parts,
unlabored, Their poverty among the Heluetians.
or any use made of (it being Hills and Valleys, environed with Lakes) they
desired the Heluetians, to permit them to work in those rough Fields, as yet
not cultiue, and they should receive the benefit thereof, only allowing them
but nourishment for their pains. This was all that they seemed to pretend,
justifying their requests with solemn oaths and protestations. Their desire
was granted, and not long after, the Country wherein they lived, was not
only called Suesia, in regard of the Swesians there dwelling: but likewise
the ancient Inhabitants had the same name given then, and yet the country is
very hilly, and unapt for Ryding. How afterward it came to be called the Land
of Cantons or Leagues, shall at large be shown in our General history.

Of the Allemaignes, and whence they were derived.
Justinian, and other Emperors (both before and after him) entitled themselves
Lords of the Allemaignes, for having received some victories over the
Allemaignes. But this may not be said, (as some do) that those victories were
obtained against the Germans: For even at this day, when we speak or write,
of Allemaigne, therein is comprehended all the Nations, which are contained
throughout Germany, and that do speak the Language of the Tentones. But as for
Allemaigne, The true Alemaigns of Suaba.
or Almaines, the Romans never understood, or meant any other people, then
those of Suaba. And to speak uprightly, they have ever bin the true and
ancient Allemaines, as Cornelius Tacitus plainly confirms. Drusus Nero, was
the first that styled himself Germanicus, for having rather angered the
Germans, then foiled them, as diverse other Emperors afterward did. Moreover,
by Germany is to be understood, nine and forty great Provinces, as well of the
lower part, as the higher part of the said Germany, comprizing the Country of
the Suisses and Heluetians.

Now, concerning the Alaines, or Alans, Alaines, what people they were, and
whence they came.
many have supposed them to be a people of Germany: But therein they were and
are deceived, for Ptolomy knew them, whom he places in a part of Scythia.
Capitolinus bestows them in Dacia: Marcelinus, Pliny, and Dionisius the Poet,
gives them a being in Sarmatia of Europe. Josephus in his last Book, affirms
their aboade to be between the River Tanais, and the Palus Moeotides: And
says moreover, that, in his time, the Alaines or Alanes, accompanied with the
Hyrcanians, both robbed and spoiled all the Region of the Medes. As for my
self, by that which I have gathered, from such as have written on the actions
of the Goths: I am persuaded, that those Alaines were their companions, and
that oftentimes (in their wars) for their own advantage they sundered
themselves from them, as one while they did with the Vandales. But
questionless, their descent was from Scythia, according to Ptolomies
affirmation.

If we shall speak of the Gepides, Girpedes, Of the Gepides or Girpedes.
or Iupedes, what people they were, there are opinions enough concerning them.
Some say, that they were at first of Scythia, and came thence as the Lombards
did into Italy. But having made a more curious and dilligent search, I find,
that they were a people of Germany, and called then Gepudij or Sepusij, and
(according to Ptolomeus Matauastus) now at this day, Siebemburgs, that followed
the Goths, the Vandals, and the Normands also: being erring and Vagabonde
people, till at length they ventured on the Seas, and went to inhabit the
Isles of the Orchades, whereof Thylle is the latest inhabited, as Volateranus
avouches, and they are now subjects to the King of Scotland.

The Original of the Picts, and their coming into the Isle of Orkeney.
In speaking of so many Nations, who are all said to be derived from the
Scithians, we may not forget the Picts, who (by most Writers opinion) are said
to be a people of Germany, that had their Original out of Scythia, descending
of the Agathyrsi in Sarmatia, who used to paint and color their faces, and
thereupon were named Picts. Before they entered into Britain, they inhabited
the Isle of Orkeney for a long time together, ferrying over into Cathnesse
daily, and so multiplying both in power and number, that (getting up further
into the land) they possessed Rosse, Murrey-land, Merne and Angusse, whence
passing into Fife and Louthian, they drove thence the Britain Inhabitants,
who were only poor people, that lived by nourishing and breeding Cattle. This
their entrance into Albion (for so was it then called) was in the year of the
worlds creation, The first k. of the Picts.
3633. Cruthneus Camelonus is said to be the first king of the Picts, and that
he builded a famous City on the bank of the River called Caron, appointing it
to be the chief City of all the Pictish kingdom. He builded also the town of
Agneda, afterward called Edenbrough, of Ethus king of the Picts, and the
Castle, named The Castle of Maidens, because ye Pictish kings kept their
daughters there under strict custody, in all good exercises, til their years
of marriage. Concerning the wars, strifes, and bloody contentions, between
the Albion Scots and Picts, thorough all their Kings raigns, til their utter
overthrow, and quite desolation of Pict-land, Kenneth K. of Scots. desolateth
Pictland.
by Kenneth the victorious King of Scots: I refer it to our larger discourse.
Only letting you know, that this subversion, and utter ruin of the Picts,
happened in the year of our redemption, 839. in the sixth year of King Kenneths
glorious reign, and 1168. years after their first plantation in Albion.

The Getes have bin, Of the Getes.
and yet are a warlick people, mollested greatly by the Turks at this instant:
and yet they found the Romain work sufficient. These are the Transyluanians,
Valachians and Moldauians, and their country is near to the River Ister, where
it falls into the Pontick sea.

The Bourguignons are held by Orosius, to come forth of Germany, and
Volatteranus says, Of the Bourguignons.
that Iouinianus the Emperor vanquished some such people, that lived by the
River of Rhine. But there is nothing more certain (according as I have
gathered by the German Histories) then that they issued from some remaynes of
the Goths, Vandals, and Hunnes, who being altogether chased by the Romans,
threw themselves on that part of Gaul, which is called after their name, and
there (perforce) enthroned themselves. For afterward, they could so well
resist the Romans, that they were constrained to yield them tolleration, and
let them live in the said Country amongst the first Inhabitants. There they
builded Fortes, Villages, and Towns, Of their first name.
which they called then Bourgs of the Goths and Hunnes: but being soon
corrupted into one word, from Bourgs-Goth-Hunnes, they are now called
Bourguignons, as much to say, as a martial people. Aetius, Lieutenant to the
Emperor Theodosius, gave them a battle in the year of Christ, 435. and won the
day: But it cost him so dear, that he would never after meddle any more with
them. About the year, 430. they received and embraced the Christian faith.
This people in these days are become very civil, A fair university in
Bourgougn
and are as much addicted to Learning, as to Arms: For they have a goodly
University, founded by one of the Dukes of Bourgougne, wherein many Lectures
are read of all the Sciences, to Scholars of all Nations, at Dola the Capital
Cittye of that part of Bourgougne, which is under command of the house of
Austria, and there they hold a Parliament also. As for the other part of
Bourgougne, in obedience to the Crown of France, Digeon is the Metropolitan
City thereof, where likewise is held another Parliament: And these two
Bourgougnes are maintained in very good peace, albeit they are in obeisance to
diverse Princes.

We will conclude this discourse with the kingdom of Naples, Of the kingdom of
Naples.
which is a City very ancient and Noble in all respects, and gives the Title
of kingdom to the whole Province, by her own proper name. As concerning the
name of Kingcome, I do not hold it to be of any great antiquity, because the
Normanes took it, from the Grecians, who possessed this Province in diverse
parts thereof, and then it was entitled the Earldome of Apulia or Puglia, as
some do yet term it. Robert Guiscard, a very valiant and worthy man,
expulsed suddenly the Grecians thence, Robert Guiscard the valiant Norman.
and took Sicilie also from the Sarrazins, entitling himself Duke of Apulia,
and of Calabria, and Earl of Sicilie. In no long time after, his nephew
Ruggiero or Roger, having conquered the City of Naples, which till that time
had been in the Grecians Government, received the Title of King of both the
Scicilies, by Anacletus the Antipope, in the year of our Lord, 1130. which
afterward was confirmed unto him in good and lawful manner. And from that
time forward, it was called the kingdom of Scicilie, on this side Pharos, The
Scicilian evening.
until the reign of Charles the first, when it became divided from Sicilie,
by occasion of that famous accident, called Vesro Sciciliano, the Scicilian
Evening, wherein so many of the French were slain. I find moreover in many
good Historians, that Naples has had three several Names to wit; the Kingdom
of Naples; the Kingdom of Apulia, and the Kingdom of Scicilie, on this side
Pharos.

Of the Kingdom of Portugal.
THe Kingdom of Portugal, began in the year of Christ, M.C.X. after this
manner, Henry Earl of Lorrayne coming thither, Hen. count of Lorraine
performed many valiant deeds against the Sarrazins: And his high deseruings
moved Alphonsus the sixte, King of Castile, to give him a Bastard daughter of
his in marriage, named Tiresia, and (in way of Dowrye) assigned him also that
part of Galicia, which then was contained in Lusitania. Of this marriage was
Alphonsus borne, who was the first that ever styled himself K. of Portugal,
The first K. of Portugal
and he was the first also that took the City of Lisbone from the Sarrazins.
For he having conquered five of their kings in several battles, caused his
Arms to be adorned with five several Crowns and Coat-Armors, which ever
after continued the Ensign of the kings of Portugal, in perpetual memory of
his valor. But he quickly stained this fair fame, with cruelty used by him
to his own mother, for, after her second marriage, he caused her to be
imprisoned: and albeit the Pope labored the matter greatly by his Legate, yet
could he never compass her deliverance. Which sin was severely punished on
him by his enemies, who afterward took him in battle. And then his son
Sanctio succeeded him, and after Sanctio diverse other, to John, who was the
tenth King in direct and natural line. This John was at the first expulsed from
his Kingdom, The King of Portugal a Knight of S. John of Jerusalem.
and made a Knight of S. John of Jerusalem: but at length he was re-called to
his kingdom, where he made very honorable proof of his valor, and (among
diverse famous deeds) he took from the Sarrazins the City of Septia. He had
seven Sons, among which Ferdinand (for intergrity of life) was termed a
Saint. Henry another of his Sons, was the first that found Noua Insula in the
Athlantike Sea. He being very skilful in the Mathematics, lived continually
without a Wife, and made his daily abiding in a Promontory, which was called
the Cape of S. Vincent, and there he died in the year, 1460. But Edward, who
was the eldest brother, was made King, and (by wars) he adjoined to the
kingdom of Portugal, Zelia, Tigea, and Alcazar in Africa. He had two
Daughters, or Sisters (as some say) named Ioane and Leonora: The succession of
the Kings of Portugal.
the first was married to the king of Castille, and the other to Frederick the
third, Emperor: of whom was borne Maximilian the first, who was afterward
Emperor, and Grandfather to Charles the fifth. He had also a Son named
Alphonsus, who succeeded him in the Kingdom, and begat John and Emanuel, who
was 14. king of Portugal. Emanuel had John, who took to wife, ye sister of
Charles 5. Emperor, called Katherine. Lodwick died an infant, but Isabel was
wife to the said Charles, and he had another daughter yt was married to Charles
D. of Sauoy. After him succeeded Sebastian, who (in our time, fighting with the
Moors was slain, and the king of Marocco, with diverse other great Lords of the
Moors. Henry, Uncle to the deceased king, followed him in succession, he
being then a Cardinal, and very aged; holding the kingdom but some few months.
But he dying, Phillip king of Spain entered on the kingdom, resisting the claim
of Don Anthonio, being a Brothers-son of the dead King Henry, and so
out-wearied him, that he could never attain thereto in full possession. So it
remains still under the Spanish government.

The Kingdom of Italy.
COncerning the Kingdom of Italy, the antiquity thereof, when at first it was
called Ianicula, of Ianus; Camesena, of Cameses; Saturnia, of Saturnus,
Hesperia, of Hesper, and Italia of Italus, with all the Kings there reigning,
till the Latins, and those likewise that descended of Eneas, to the time of
Romulus, with the History both of old Rome, and Rome as it now is; it
remains to our general History. Only we will say somewhat of the Original
of Venice, moved thereto by just occasion.

A brief discourse of the Original of the Venetians; the foundation of
Venice, and how it has been governed, from the year of our salvation 421. to
thi^ instant.
To the ancient, Right Worshipful, and worthy Society of the Goldsmiths.
HIstoriographers, who have written of the Venetians, do not agree together in
their true Original. For some do write, that they are descended of the
Venetian Gauls, inhabiting along the Ocean Sea in little Britaigne, called
Armorica, whereof one of the principal Cities (being a Bishops See) was
called Vennes. Others, and among them; Titus Liuius borne in Padua, assures us,
that they came forth of Paphlagonia, and that Philemon their Captain, (being
slain at Troy the great) they went with Antenor into Italy. Others write, that
this Nation, having been Neighbors to the Cappadocians, and venturing fight
with the Cimmerians; they hazzarded further upon the Adriatic Sea in their
Fortune. The most common opinion, is of them, who say, that the Hinitians or
Henetes came with Antenor, and, People of Paphlagonia
in sometime after (by changing of a letter) were called Venitians, or Venetes.
First of all, they expelled the Euganeans, who inhabited this Country, People
by the inner gulf of the Adriatic Sea, toward the Alps.
between the Adriatic Sea and the Alps, and builded the City of Padua.
Afterward, by success of time, they increased in such sort, as they would not
be satisfied to be Masters (only) of that which had appertained to the
Euganeans, (consisting of thirty four fair Cities and Towns;) but intruded
farther, to seize on Bressano and Forli. Some report this Country to be
bounded with the Rivers of Pau, and that of Add, as also the Lake of Guard,
aunciently called the Benack the Alps, and the Adriatic Sea.

And so the ancient Venetians, in this manner extended their Dominion, both in
longitude and latitude, in the most pleasant Country of Italy: but the seating
of the places, did daily beget the elder estate of the Venitians hatred. For on
the one side, Liburnia, the Country of Croaua, between Istria and Dalmatia
the ordinary robberies of the Liburnians, and on the other side, ye frequent
and frightful courses of the Barbarians, did hinder them from any long time of
continuing in quiet. For, without these impeachments, this Nation had been
most fortunate, in conquering (by the right of War) one of the most goodly
and beautiful Regions in all Italy. The situation of Venice, and capacity
thereof.
Now, over and beside, that on the South Side, it is environed with a most
calm circuit of the Sea, and in regard thereof, is the more capable of
receiving all strange Merchandises: So is it likewise wattered with very
delectable Rivers, whereby, whatsoever comes from the Sea, is easily
transported to the very Navel of the Province. It abounds in Pooles, Pondes,
Forests and vnder-woodes, and the whole Land is choicelie fertile in Corn,
Wine, Oil, and all kinds of Fruits. It is also plentifully stored with
Country Houses, Towns, Cities, and Villages, Castles, Fortes, and such like,
very commendable for the situation, and enclosure of their Walls.

These n^w Inhabitants, when their weak estate began to grow in fairer
form: they were seldom exempted from the Wars and incursions of Strangers.
For, after many bold insolences of the Barbarians, with continued Wars
against each other, even from their very beginning, until the time of Attila:
they were yet much more dreadfully encombered, with the furious assault of the
Goths, a te^mpest far exceeding in turbulencie, all other former disasters
happening to them whatsoever: For first, the Hunnes (a people of Scythia,
Mountains in the north part of Scythia, where snow lies continually
dwelling near to the Riphean Mountains) conducted by Attila, the Son of
Mandluck, dispersed themselves over Italy, and making horrible spoil
wheresoever they went; fell into the Province belonging to the Vinitians. After
a long siedge, they took the City of Aquileia, and spoiled and burnt it
wholly. An ancient city in that part of Italy, called Forum I^lij.
In like manner did they ruinate the Cities of Concordia and Altina, and
almost all the Venitian Region.

At the fearful news of this War, the Venitians were more amazed then any
other, and so much the rather, because they had been formerly invred, to
sustain their cheifest mishappes amongst the Barbarians. Whereupon, it is
said, that (even then) a great number of persons with-drewe themselves from
the firm Land, to the Isles where Venice at this instant is builded: hasting
thither from all other parts, especial upon the arrival of this cruel
Enemy Attila. Some (of the better sort of Padua) first began the retreat, and
being come to the entrance or issue of the River, which was then very deep,
(whence the name of Rialto has remained to the same place, The first
foundation of Venice.
as derived of the word Riuealto) they there laid the first foundation of the
City of Venice.

The meaner people of Paduaj, enforced by the self same fear; fled thence,
and began to people themselves in Chioggia, Little Isla^ds in the Sea, and near
adioining.
Malamocco and Albiola. Some of them of Aquileia (at the same time) betook
themselves to the Marshes or Fennes of Grada, and, upon the fresh return of
Attila, the people ran (in mighty affluence) along the sea Coasts to the
neighboring Isles. They of Aquileia bestowed themselves in Grada, a place
nearest to firm Land, yet engirt with Waters. They that fled from Concordia,
made use of Coarli and the Attinois, six little Islands near to one another;
which they gave names unto, according to the Names of the Gates of their former
lost and ruined Cities: To wit; Torcello, Maiorbo, Buriano, Muriano, Amiana,
and Gonstantiaco.

The prime estate of the place where Venice now stands.
These several places, where at this present the city of Venice is seated,
were (in elder times) very strait or narrow Islandes, and near unto each
other: saving only that they were separated by the pleasing course of Rivers,
which ran into, and returned again from the Sea, according to the changes of
his flux and reflux. Nor in these straites were then any dwellinges to be
discerned, but only of Sea-Fowles, that flew thither from the Seas, to sport
themselves upon the Sunnie banckes; The first builders of Venice, and at what
time.
and Fishermen also would sometimes there put in for harbor.

The Paduans, that took up the Rialto, were the first that began to build,
and it was in the very same place, where the first Foundation of the City was
laid: namely, the 25. day of March, in the year of our Lord, 421. and second
year of the reign of Pharamond, first King of the Gauls or Frenchmen; in
the time also of Pope Boniface the first, and of the Emperor Honorius. Whereby
it plainly appears, that at one and the selfsame time, began both the
kingdom of France, and the Commonwealth of Venice. And that both the one and
the other have continued to this present, for twelve hundred years, very
little, either more or less.

This City so newly begun, increased daily both in people and buildings.
But see what happened upon a sudden, a Greek Carpenters House (or rather he
was one of the Shipwrights, Their first buildings destroyed by fire.
named Entinopus) falling a fire, consumed in a moment (with a violent and
continual embracing) 24. fair new built Houses. Which when these new-come
Inhabitants perceived, and fearing that Heaven was offended with this their
manner of beginning, forgetting God, and serving their own appetites. They
fell all to prayer, and made a solemn vow, to build a Church in the honor of
God, and in memory of the Apostle S. James; at which very instant time, a
mighty tempest of rain (as suddenly fell) whereby the rest of the new-begun
City was happily preserved.

That Church is yet at this day plainly to be discerned, with the marks and
appearances of great antiquity, even in the very midst of the Rialto: And it
was then consecrated by four Bishops, The first Church built in Venice.
to wit; Seuerianus Bishop of Padua; Ambrose, Bishop of Altina; Iocundus,
Bishop of Treuisa, and Epodius, bishop of Vderzo, and a Priest was there
appointed, to perform divine service.

Noble and rich men the first fou^ders of Venice.
The first foundations of this famous City, were men of honest repute, Noble
and rich. For the ancient Venitians, at the change of their abiding, brought
with them thither their Wives and Children, with the very wealthiest mooueables
which they had, and so (at leisure) withdrew themselves, to places of a more
secure dwelling. But being impeached (by incurssions of the Hunnes) to Till
the Grounds upon the Sea Coasts; such as had any means or apt commodity:
gave themselves to fighting, and to make Salt, or to transport the goods of
their neighbors; esteeming the benefit thereby gotten, to be no more
dishonest or unbefitting, then to Plough and husband the grounds of others.

As for the wealthier sort, they addicted themselus to Traffic Merchandises
with strangers, and by their frequent aduenturing into diverse Countries, some
of them, being very skillful Miners, and well experienced in the trial of
several Dors or Metals hidden in the ground, which by industry and endeavor
they found in the earth; became Finers or Triers of those Metals, and
extracted (from the grosser substances) the purer perfections of Gold and
Silver, whereby (in their own language they were termed Orifici, derived of
the Latin word Aurifex, Goldsmiths, or Hammer-Men, that (of those refined
Metals) could frame Cups, Pots, Ringes, Basins, Ewres, or any other needful
matter whatsoever, both for the service of God in Churches and Temples, and for
the royalty of Emperors, Kings, and Princes. So that, by the consent of
diverse good Authors, as Liuie, Florus, Cassidorus, Trogus Pompeius, and
others, The first Goldsmiths known in Europe, were in Venice.
the first Goldsmiths, Workers in Gold and Silver, and framers of those
excellent Metals into such orderly means for use (within the parts of
Europe) lived in Venice, whereas yet (to this day) do remain the very best,
ingenious and perfect workmen for such matters (according to the judgment of
many) that are to be found in any part of the World. Concerning such, as
remained more ordinarily at home, for rare and safety of the City, they
applied their Spirits, to devise good laws and customs for general
benefit. During which time, such was their due respect of Justice, and so
precise care of equity and right to all men, as, Care of Justice and common
good.
among so great a number of people, there could not be any disorderly
differences noted.

Catholic Religion they so singularly commended, Love of religion, in
especial respect.
and the daily presence of some reverend Prelates, who had saved themselves
with their Compatriots: that it augmented (among them) a common affection to
piety. And their assistance appeared very requisite, not only for the ministry
of holy offices; but also for retention of the Inhabitants of this new City,
in ancient piety and Religion.

Fearing, least they might be infected with the poison of Arrian Heresy:
because nothing else made more spoil and havoc thorough all the Province,
except the Weapons of the Goths and Hunnes.

Such was the beginning of the City of Venice, and in such manner of living,
and in such exercises, she spent her first infancy: till (by her Virtues) she
attained to greater grows, and grounded her self in her instant state and
condition. It has constantly bin held, that this commonwealth (euer-more)
retained that form of government which is termed Aristocratia, that is,
Aristocratia optimatum principatus.
that the most noble and woorthiest Citizens, should guide and govern. For
although it be said, that it has bin governed, first by Consuls, then by
Tribunes, and lastly by Dukes, and Masters of warlicke power: yet
notwithstanding, al these Dignities, being but elective, and not hereditary,
the election should (in right) appertain to the most Noble Islanders, and
Gentlemen of name, by whose advise the Commonweal ought to be managed, even as
it has bin, and still continues to this day.

Consuls, to the number of three, were chosen for two years, The Government of
Consuls, and who were the first in Venice.
and albeit that this kind of Government lasted* for about the space of
threescore years, yet we find only but three consecutiue or succeeding
elections of them. The first Consuls, were Albertus Phalarius, Thomas
Candianus, and Zeno Daulo. These men first governed the City in her Nonage,
and some are of the mind, that they were the first Authors of the Padnaus
slight, and their retyrement to the Lakish or marshie Isles, as also of their
first building there. The second Consuls, were Lucianus Graulus, Maximus, or
Marinus Lucius, and Hugo Fuscus. The third, were Marcus Aurelius, Andreas
Claudius and Albinus Maurus. The names of such as were elected after these, are
not to be found in any Histories.

After, that the Isles (about the Rialto) were filled with Inhabitants: in sted
of Consuls, The creation of Tribunes, and what they were.
Tribunes were created, and for their creation, the matter was first debated
privately by few people, afterward, it was ordained and resolved in open
assembly of the Islanders: that in each Isle there should be a Tribune, and he
should be a yearly Magistrate, to render Justice to the Citizens, and with
severity, to punnish their offenses. But the remainder, which concerned the
generality of the Commonweal: was referred to the general assembly of the
Islanders, to be by them determined. Afterward, there was but one Tribune
created, for government of the Isles, which continued for some years.
Finally, they concluded to create ten, whereunto were added two more, who
should dwell in Heraclea: And this Tribunary dignity held place for more then
two hundred years. Here is to be noted, that the Tribunes of the Isles,
abusing their authorities, did so trouble the State with civil dissentions, as
it plainly appeared, that the maine body of the City would be dissolved,
without some good and immediate remedy. Which gave occasion, that (to hear the
complaints of every one) a general assembly of the Isles was published, and
their meeting to be in Heraclea.

In this assembly, Christophero, Bish. of Grada was President, accompanied with
a great number of the Clergy, and after divine service was performed, the first
proposition which he made, was, yt (for good of the commonwealth) each man
might complain of ye future Tribune, which being done, and the offenses no
longer to be endured, for public benefit of the state in general, resolution
was set down, Election of a Duke among the Venetians.
to make election of a Duke, who should represent all honor and Majesty in the
State or Siegneurie, and he should have power to assemble the general
counsel, when questions were to be made, of any important matter concerning
the Commonwealth. He should have power also, to elect yearly Tribunes, or
Magistrates in every Isle, and their appellations to be brought before him.
Moreover, if any should obtain any dignity, Prelacy or benefice, by Suffrages
of the Clergy or people: that he should not enjoy it, or be possessed
thereof, without the good liking and consent of the Duke, whose power also
ended with his life.

Who was the first D. of Venice.
This being thus concluded, in the year, 697. Paullucio was created the first
duke, and so has yt Ducal dignity continued ever since. Save only that in the
year, 737. after the death of the third Duke Orso: it was determined, that no
Duke should be elected, for six years, but that a Master of the armed troops
or soldiors should be established, and his authority to be annual, which
lasted no longer then five years. For in the year, 742 they proceeded again
to a Dukes election, and since that time, the Commonwealth of Venice has
evermore had Dukes and Princes of the Seigneury: by whose wisdom (and his
Counsel assisting) it has bin preserved in an ever flourishing estate, even
to this instant year, 1611.

A short Summary, of the lives of the Dukes and Princes of Venice: and a
breuiate also of the most remarkable actions, in the times of their government.
PAuluccio Annapesto, was first Duke of the people, chosen in Heraclea. He
took his Oath before Christophero patriarch of Grada to govern according to
ye Laws, and to regard nothing more then the weal public. He pacified the
difference which Luitprand k. of the Lombards had with king Aribert, and made
friendship with them both: As well by his authority, as by arms. He brought
the rebellious Aequilius under obedience, increased the Cities customs and
reuennewes, and dyed, having bin Duke xx. years, vi. months, and viij. days.

2 Marcello Tegaliano, of the same place of Heraclea, was elected his
successor, by common voice of the people. He was devout, modest and affable,
but much less diligent in governing, then his predecessor. The Patriarchat of
Grada was trans-ferred into Aquileia in his time, by Luitprand, and there he
had great wars about the dissentions of the Bishops, whereinto he would not
interpose himself, but died, having bin Duke nine years, and xxi. days.

3 Orso Hipato, a Nobleman of Heraclea, won himself great Reputation by his
famous deeds. Paulo the Exarcho had recourse to him, the Grecian Army being
broken, and siedge laid to Rauenna by Luitprand. He regained Rauenna, made the
Kings Nephew his prisoner, slew the Duke of Vicenza, and reseated the Exarcho
in his due rights. He brideled the Aquileians, who troubled the public
peace, and put courage into the souls of the younger sort. He was slain by
reason of the dissentions of Iesolo, the xi. year and fifth month, of his
Principality.

4 Theodato Hipato, son of Orso, was proclaimed Duke five years after the
death of his Father: during which time, the people were governed by a Marshall
or Master of the soldiors: and forsaking Heraclea, he brought the State to
Malamocco. There he was the first created, and limited his confines with
Astolpho king of the Lombards. He was also slain, by Galla a citizen of
Malamocco, in the 13. year of his principality.

5 Galla de Malamocco, a wicked and seditious man, yet showing himself as
Protector of public peace, he was established in the place of Theodato. But
his wickedness being known, and that (being but a subject) he would needs
make himself absolute Lord, having before slain his chief Master Theodato:
the people plucked out his eyes, and took from him the dignity, which he had a
year usurped.

6 Dominico Monegario, of Malamocco, was seated in the sted of Galla. Somewhat
to bridle his Dukes authority, the people joined two yearly Tribunes with him.
But he, being a man audacious and arrogant, sought to tiranize over the people:
whereat they growing into fury, plucked out his eyes, the 8. year of his
Principality.

7 Mauritio Galbaio, a Noble Heraclean, for his Justice, wisdom, and wealth,
was chosen to this dignity. He made his son Duke with him, and they governed
together. In his time, the church of Grada being mollested, he sent an
Ambassador to pope Stephen, to accord the difference. The Bishopprick of S.
Peter de Castello Oliuolo was then erected. And he died, having governed 23.
years.

8 Giouanni Galbaio, having bin Duke 9. years with his father, governed the
commonwealth yet 9. years more, and after the said time, he made Mauritio his
Son companion with him in the Principality. But they being both of wicked and
insufferable life, having murdered John Patriarchat of Grada, throwing him
down headlong from an high tower: Fortunatus, successor in the Patriarchate,
made a conspiracy against them, and another was elected Duke. Whereat, being not
a little confounded, the Father fled into France, and the son to Mantua, the
xvi. year of their rule.

9 Obelerio, being elected Prince by them that had intelligence with
Fortunatus, took his Brother Beato as his associate, and Valentine beside
(being their third brother) was admitted with them in the same dignity. And it
is worth note, that of these three brethren, Beato is only placed in the rank
of Dukes in the Counsel chamber of Venice, where as Obelerio incited Pepin
king of Italy, to make war on the Venetians: and Beato maintained the
commonwealth reigning 5. years.

10 Angelo Participatio, after he had well born himself in the war against
Pepin, was elected Duke, the people being summoned to the Rialto. He founded
the Dukes Palace, in the same place where that now built, stands. The
division of the Empire was made in his time, and the Venetians left in their
own liberty. The City was divided into wards, streets and precinctes. The
Pregadi, and the Ouaranta, who (for criminal offenses) was then instituted
among them. He governed eighteen years.

11 Giustiniano Participatio, having bin an associate in the dignity with his
father, was (after his death) confirmed by the people. He repealed home his
brother John, who was then at Constantinople, and accepted him as his fellow
ruler: he made the peoples authority greater than before, and gave aid to
Michael the Emp. against the Sarazins. The body of S. Mark was in his time
brought from Alexandria, accepting into his protection, and the church remaining
at this day, was consecrated in his memory. He died the 2. year of his dignity.

13 Giouanni Participatio remained in the royalty, and enlarged the Church of
S. Mark, placing therein a great number of priests and Canons, and appointing
a Primicerio to govern them. He caused the head of Obelerio to be cut off, whom
he had besiedged in the Isle of Curtia. He made war upon the Nauratines, and
overcame them. In the end, a conspiracy was devised against him, and being
confined to Grada, in the eight year of his Principality, he shaued his head
and bearde, and made himself a Monk, in which estate he died.

13 Pietro Tradonico of Pola, having carried himself to the peoples
contentment in the wars against Pepin, was elected duke. He joined John his son
in rule with him, and gave succor to ye Emp. of Constantinople, who made
request thereof by Theodosius Patricius. He was made Protospatary of the
empire, in help whereof he sent 60. galleys. Jews 2. granted him many
privileges, and in the end he was slain by a sedition, in his 27. year.

14 Orso Participatio, having appeased the sedition, was made Duke. The Turks
having spoiled Dalmatia, even so far as Grada, were vanquished by him, and
Giouanni Participatio his son, whom he had made associate with him in his
government. Basilius the Emperor highly honored him for that good Service, and
made him Protospatarie of the Empire. He governed 17. years.

15 Giouanni Participatio, being confirmed in his dignity, took and burned
Comachio, wasted the County of Rauenna, to revenge himself on the Count of
Comachio, who had imprisoned and wounded to death his Brother Badoario. He
growing much overcome with sickness, caused the Church of Saint Cornelius and
S. Cyprian to be built at Malamocco; and having governed five years and six
months, renounced the Dignity.

16 Pietro Candiano, was elected after the voluntary dismission of his
Predecessor. He was a valiant Man, and expert in Arms, and yet
notwithstanding, greatly addicted to devotion. He went (in person) with ten
Galleys against the Narantines, who (as Theeus) robbed and purloined from the
Venitians. Fighting valiantly against them, he died at the second time, with
the weapons in his hands. He governed no longer then five months.

Dominico Tribuno, is set by some in rank with the Dukes: but others, less
curious in search of the History, have omitted him, because he was Duke but
three months and thirteen days, and nothing is remarkable in his time, but a
certain privilege granted by him to Chioggia.

17 Pietro Tribuno, Son of Dominico, was elected Duke. He obtained of Guydo,
Emperor and King of Italy, a confirmation of all ancient Privileges. The
Barbarian Hunnes came again into Italy, and burned Heraclea, Capo de Arger,
and Chioggia. This Prince overcame them, with very much honor, and this was
the third time, that those Strangers sought to usurp on that State. He
governed twenty four years.

18 Orso Badoaro, called himself Participatio, and was the first that changed
his name. He sent for his Son Pietro to Constantinople, and he was made
Protospatarie. In the year 920. he obtained of Rodolphus, Emperor and King of
Italy, the confirmation of the Venitians ancient authority, to stamp Moneys.
He addicted himself wholly to piety, and in his 20. year, he renounced the
Dignity, to make himself a Monk, and live privately.

19 Pietro Candiano the second, was a worthy man, and made war on Lauterio
Marquess of Istria, who hindered the Traffic of the Venitians: he ouer-came
him, and reconquered the people of Capo d'Istria. He vanquished Albertus, Son
to the Emperor Berengarius, who impatronizing himself of Rauenna, impeached
the passage of the Venitians Ships. In his time, Maidens were stolen by the
Testaines, to join in marriage with them; but they were soon recovered. He
governed seven years.

20 Pietro Badoaro, the Son of Orso, was redeemed by him from the
Sclauonians. He governed but two years and seven months, always in peace,
which he much affected. Berengarius the Emperor did him many favors, for his
great deserts.

21 Pietro Candiano the third, Son to the second Candiano, associated
himself in his dignity with his son Pietro; and at two several times armed
33. Ships against the Narentines; but at the second time, he made peace with
them. His son being reproved by him for his bad behauior; revolted from him,
and against the Commonwealth. The people would have slain him, but he was
sent into exile: where joining with Guydo, Son of Berengarius; he endangered
the Commonwealth. Whereat his father grieuing, died in his fifteenth year of
his government.

22 Pietro Candiano the fourth, being repealed from exile (albeit the people
had sworn never to receive him) was made prince with very great applause. He
dealt in such sort with Pope John the 12. that the Churches of Grada was made
Patriarchall, and Metropolitan of all the Venitians State, and of Istria. Otho
the Emperor, granted him many honorable privileges. He ruined Vderzo, and
was slain with his Son, in a sedition of the people: having governed 20.
years.

23 Pietro Orseolo, was a man altogether devout, and was elected by the people
against his will. He would very often walk in an unknown habit, to visit the
Houses of poor people and Hospitalles. He appeased the dissentions between
the Venitians, and them of Capo d'Istria, who yielding themselves tributarie.
He went with Beato Romualdo of Rauenna, to live religiously. He governed two
years and two months, doing many worthy and charitable deeds.

24 Vitale Candiano, Son of Peitro the third, made the confederacy with the
Emperor Otho. He fell sick so soon as he entered upon his charge: wherefore
he became a Monk, having governed about a year.

25 Tribuno Memo, was very rich, but no man of State. In his time happened
great dissentions, between the Families of Moresina and Caloprina, by reason
whereof, many notorious murders were committed. He took part with the Moresini,
which caused the other faction to withdraw themselves to Verona to the Emperor
Otho. He gave the Isle of Saint Giorgio Maggiore to the Abbat of Moresini: And
renounced the Principality in his twelfth year, entering into Religion.

26 Pietro Orseolo the second, being a very discreet man, ordered the matter
so well with the Emperors Basilius and Alexius, that the Venitians were
exempted from Toules and taxations. Otho the Emperor lying at Verona, did
highly favor him; and, among other graces, to hold one of his Sons at
Baptism. He was the first that extended their Confines on the sea, winning
many places in Istria and Dalmatia. Having caused the Church and Palace to be
finished in his time, he died the ^8. year of his Principality.

27 Ottone Orseolo, having governed some space with his Father Pietro, was
confirmed in the dignity, at the age of eighteen years. He won such reputation,
that Geta King of Hungaria, gave him one of his Sisters in marriage. In person
he conquered them of Istria, who were become Rebels; And went into Dalmatia, in
the enterprise against Cresmura. At length, the malicious enuiers of his
glories, devised a conspiracy against him, and he was confined into Greece, in
the 17. year of his rule.

28 Pietro Centranico, or Barbolano, succeeded next to Otho. But having not
well qualified all dissentions, as well concerning the Citizens removing, as
the other neighbors: he was compelled to forsake the dignity, and make
himself a Monk. Orso, Brother of Otho, returned from Constantinople, being
Patriarch of Grada, and he was constituted in expectation of Othos coming. He
continued about a year in the palace, and forsook the Principality, news
being brought of Othos death. Dominico Orseolo would then perforce usurp the
Dignity, but he was expelled by the people the next morning, and dyed at
Rauenna.

29 Dominico Flabanico, was elected during his exile, by the faction of them
that had excluded Dominico Orsolo. In his time, and in the year 1040. the
national Council was held, for government of the Ecclesiastics. He made the
Family of Orseolo suspicious to the State, by his own means, and labored
for their utter supplantation. He governed ten years, four months, and twelve
days.

30 Dominico Contarini was very pleasing to the people. He brought Dalmatia to
peace, being heavily burdened with the rebellion of Zara. He favored the
Normans against Robert K. of Apulia. And the discord which happened between
the Commonwealth, and Pepo Patriarch of Aquileia, was by him qualified. He
builded the Monastery on the Lido, and died in his 28. year.

31 Dominico Silino, won himself such reputation, that Nicephorus Emperor of
Constantinople, gave him his sister in marriage; by whose persuasion he made
war upon the forenamed K. Robert of Apulia, and (at the first attempt) returned
with a very honorable victory, possesing himself of Duras. But at his second
adventure, he fought with small advantage; whereby ensued the diminution of his
credit. He pergetted the Church of S. Mark with Marble, first and before any
other, causing it also to be beautified with an artificial Checquer-worke.
He died in the 13. year of his government.

32 Vitale Faliero being made Duke, he immediately obtained of Alexius, then
Emperor, to have the Soueraignety of Dalmatia and Croatia. Henry, successor in
the Empire, did him many great favors: and coming in devotion to Venice, he
held on of his Daughters at Baptism. The Office of Proprieties was constituted
in his time, and the workmanship of Saint Marks Church continued. He died in
his sixteen year.

33 Vitale Michele, by his worthy aduenturing on the Sea, did very far
extend the Commonwealths limits. He made the Eastern war, by persuasion of
Pope Urban the second, for conquest of the holy Land, with the Princes of
Christendom. The Isle of Smyrna, Suria and Jerusalem were then recovered from
ye Infidels. He died in his sixth year.

34 Ordelafo Faliero, Son of Vitale, assisted King Baldwine against the
Infidels, in conquest of the Holy Land; and made such progression, as they
divided the Empire between them, thoroughout all the Kingdom of Judea. In the
eight year of his Principality, Malamocco was almost all burned and submerged*
by reason whereof, the Episcopal See was transferred to Chioggia; He went in
person to the war against Zara, which was become rebellious, and winning the
victory: he would needs return thither again a second time, and on the like
occasion; where he died in Arms, in the 15. year of his principality.

35 Dominico Michele, being made Duke for his high repute and merit; went to
give aid to the Christians in the holy Land. With 200. well appointed ships and
Galleys, he made the Infidels to raise their siedge from before Ioppa. He
took Tire, which he gave to Vaumond Patriarch of Jerusalem. Emanuell the
Emperor made war against him, from whom he won Chio, Rhodes, Samos, Mitylline,
and Ister. He renounced his Principality, in the 13. year of his rule.

36 Pietro Polani, Kinsman to Michele, was a very wise Man, insomuch as he was
made Arbitratour of the difference between Conrade and Emanuell the Emperor.
He made War against them of Pisa and Padua, whom he conquered. He armed
himself against the Duke of Apulia, in behalf of the said Emanuell, to whose
Empire he added many worthy possessions. Some say, it was his Son that won
all the battles, and that himself, being fallen sick, returned thence, and
died in his eighteen year of rule.

37 Dominico Moresini, he swept the Gulf of certain Pirates of Ancona, the
chief whereof, being called Guiscardo, was taken and hanged. He laid siedge
to Pola, which he took, with Parenzo; which Cities were become rebellious in
Istria. He held confederacy with William King of Sicilie, of whom he obtained
many exemptions for the Traffic of his Merchants. Zara made the Metropolitan
City, at his instaunce, and he so prevailed, that Dominico his Son was
made an Earl. He beautifyed the buildinges of the City of Venice, and began
the Tower of Saint Mark. He died seven months after the eight year of his
Election.

38 Vitale Michele the second, subdued the Tarentines, which now had rebelled
the third time. He imprisoned Vlrick Patriarch of Aquileia, and twelve
Channons. In an hundred days, he put forth an hundred Galleys, and twenty
Ships on the Sea, against the Emperor Emanuell. The great Family of the
Iustiniani, were, in his time brought to one only man, and he was become
Religious; whom he took forth of his Monastery (by the Popes consent) and
gave him his own daughter in marriage, because he would not have so worthy a
house to be extinct. There happened a great pestilence in his time, the
occasion whereof, the people in their weak judgment laid upon him. He was
wounded, and dyed, having governed xvij. years, and xxvij. days.

39 Sebastiano Ziani was the first that ever was elected by the eleauen
electors. In his time there was a great Schism in the Church, by means of
the Emperor Frederick Barbarossa, who caused Alexander the third to forsake
the Sea, Octauian having bin made Antipope. Alexander made his retirement to
Venice, where having a long time served in the Monastery of la Charita; he was
in the end known, and taken thence by the Prince and Seigneury. Hereupon,
Barbarossa made war against the Venetians: but his son Octauian being
taken, he mediated reconciliation between them. He died in the fifth year of
his government.

40 Orio Malipiero, or Mastropetro, was the first Duke elected by the 40. and
for that purpose was created by the death of Ziani. He had six Counselors
allowed him* to authorize his deliberations. He reconquered Zara, that had now
the fourth time rebelled. He sent supply unto the Christians against the
Moors, who began to usurp in the Holy-Lande, 88. years after that Baldwine
had delivered it. Ptolomais was recovered* and Andronicus, successor to
Emanuell the Emperor, delivered many Venitian Merchants. He renounced the
Principality in his 14 year, and entered into Religion.

41 Henrico Dandolo was likewise elected by the forty. They of Zaro were once
again vanquished, and Pola conquered. In his time was the surprizall of
Constantinople, and the acquisition of the East Empire, wherein he assisted
the Princes and French Barons. He dyed in his thirteenth year, being General
of all the Christian Army.

42 Pietro Ziani, son of Sebastian, was made Duke within a while after the
death of Dandalo, the Correctors being then first instituted. In his time came
Ambassadors from Athens and Achaia, to submit themselves in obedience to the
Commonwealth. Candie was then peopled with a Colony of Noble Vinitians. He
married Constance, Daughter to Tancrede King of Sicilie. In the end, he
renounced the Principality, having governed 24. years.

43 Giacomo ^epolo, was made Duke by chance, in concurrency of Renieri Candolo,
who had as many voices as he. Candie rebelled, and the seditious were severely
chastised. Zara, that had long borne the yoke, was now reduced under
obedience. He had War against them of Ferrara, and against Ezzelino, who
would have invested himself with Padua. In conclusion, he gave over the
Principality in his twentieth year, and dyed soon after.

44 Marino Moresini, was made Duke by the one and fortith, by reason of the
precedent concurrence. In his time was another Colony of Noblemen sent into
Candie, who builded there Canea. He made War against Ezzelino, who besiedged
Mantua, and who (in a furious rage) caused twelve thousand Paduans to be
hewne in pieces, which he had with him then in his Army. He died in the fourth
year of his Principality.

45 Reuieri Zeno Podesta, at Fermo was elected Duke, and sent to be fetched
thence with four Galleys. Under him, the Commonwealth won a famous victory,
against them of Genes: but the contentment therewith was very brief, because
Michaell Paleologus expelled both the Frenchmen and Venitians out of
Constantinople, being aided by the Genewaie forces, which was eight and fiftye
years after the surprising of the said City: yet once more (after that) the
same people were again reconquered: And having governed this Dignity sixteen
years, he dyed.

46 Lorenzo Tiepolo was made Duke, in memory of the victory he had against
them of Genes at Tire: he allied two of his Sons, (very Nobly) with two
strange Ladies: by reason whereof, a Law was then made, that the like might not
afterward be done. He brought Seruia in obedience to the Commonwealth, and the
Bolognians were vanquished by him: he governed seven years, and xxv. days.

47 Giouanni Contarini, being aged eighty years, and Attorney of S. Mark,
was made Duke. The Law against illegitimates was then enacted, and they
excluded from all public offices. There were some rebellions moved in Istria,
and by them of Genes, but they were quickly appeased. At length, through
vnwieldinesse of age, and by advise of the Senate, he gave over the dignity,
having governed four years, and six months.

48 Giouanni Dandolo was elected, being then absent. The City was (in his
time) much afflicted by water, and an Earthquake. He made war in Istria, aginst
the Patriarch of Aquileia, and the Count of Goritia. At the instance of pope
Nicholas, he assisted the Archbishop of Tripoli with 25. galleys. He died
seven months after his viij. year of rule.

49 Pietro Gradanigo, a man of great courage, delivered the commonwealth from
two important dangers. One, was a high disgrace, which happened in a battle
against them of Genes: The other, was the conspiracy of Baiamonte, which was
boldly checked with weapon in hand, upon the place of S. Mark. It was then
ordained, that Noblemen only should govern, and the counsel of ten was then
instituted. Having ruled 22. years and nine months, he died.

50 Marino Giorgio, was a man of such life, that they termed him a Saint.
Venice was continually excommunicated in his time, by reason of the taking of
Ferrara. Zara rebelled again the sixte time, and much labor it cost to reduce
it under obedience again. After, he builded the Monastery of S. Dominick, and
died (aged 81. years) in his first year, having governed ten months, and ten
days.

52 Giouanni Soranzo, had the honor of recovering Zara, and many other places,
which had revolted in his Predecessors time. Negropont, was re-obtained, and
War afresh commenced against them of Genes. The excommunication was quitted
from Venice, by the interposition of Francisco Dandolo, kneeling before the
Pope, with a Chain of iron about his neck. The number of Atturneyes of S.
Mark, was increased to six. He governed sixteen years, and six months.

52 Francisco Dandolo, who had so lowely humbled himself for his Countries
good, was therefore exalted to her highest Dignity. They of Pola, and of
Valesia, submitted themselves to the Commonwealth, which gave way unto the
war against the Patriarch of Aquilea. Padua was taken on Albert Scaliger, and
Treuisa and the County remained to the Commonwealth. This man was of the
league with the Christian Princes, against the Turk, and in his time were
sixty several Ambassadors at Venice. He governed ten years, and ten months.

55 Bartolomeo Gradenigo, Attorney of Saint Mark, was made Duke at 76. years
of age* by the intercession of Andrea Dandolo, and his cessation. In his time
was Venice myraculously delivered from a mighty imminent inundation. Candie
rebelled, and the Rebels were severely punnished. There happened a great
Dearth in the City, which drove the people to coffeehouse. He died in his
fourth year.

54 Andrea Dandolo, who had before resigned his place to Gradenigo, caused the
dearth for to cease, by sending for great store of Corn out of Sicilie. He
obtained of the king of Babylon, free Navigations into Egypt. Zara rebelled the
seventh time, and was reprized. The War between them of Genes and the
City, was trobled by two great accidents: One, was an earthquake very
dreadful, and the other, was a grievous Pestilence. He governed twelve
years, wanting some few months.

55 Marino Faliero, was elected Duke, being then Ambassador at Rome. Having
received an injury by some perticulers, which was not revenged according unto
his own desire: he determined in the eighty year of his age, to make himself
absolutely Lord, without any control. The Conspiracy being discovered by
Nicholo Lion; he had his head smitten off within the Palace. And it was
ordained, that his Picture should not be placed among the other Dukes, but
the place being left void, had only this Writing. This is the place of Marino
Faliero, who, for his grievous offense, had his head cut off: he was Duke but
ten months.

56 Giouanni Gradenigo had an excellent spirit, but a much mishappen
countenance. The War was renewed against the Genes, which tearmined with a
mutual peace. He had war against the King of Hungary for Dalmatia. Treuisa
was besiedged in his time, and thither he went in person. He governed one
year, three months and fourteen days.

57 Giouanni Delfino, was elected Duke when he was in Treuisa, defending it
against the King of Hungary. The Senate sent to demand free passage for him,
which being denied, he came forth with 200. horse to beard the enemy, and so
attained to Margliera, where the Senate in person received him. In short time he
gave end to this war, and recovered Conciliano, Serualla, and Asola. He made
peace for the sovereignty of Dalmatia, and died aged 45. years, having
governed four years, two months, and eleven days.

58 Lorenzo Celso, upon a false bruit of a victory against them of revolted
Genes, was made duke in concurrence of Pietro Gradenigo, Leonardo Dandolo, and
Marro Cornaro. Candie rebelled again, and it was regained with very great
difficulty. On this occasion, a Iusts and feast was publicly made in the place
of S. Mark: he died 2. days after the fourth year of his Principality.

59 Marco Cornaro, a man very wise and learned, was sent into Candie, which was
rebellious, and there he made a cruel bloody war: the Pope granting plenary
Indulgence to al such as went thither. The Rebels being severely punished, ye
commonwealth sent to Pope Vrbane 5. a certain number of their Galleys. He
governed 2. years, 5. months and 24. days.

60 Andrea Contarini, ^led to the Paduans, fearing to be elected Duke, and as
presaging the ruin which (in his time) would betide the commonwealth. First of
all, he made war with them of Triesta, then soon after, with Carrara for the
confines of Padua: and such was the fortune, that Chioggia being taken, the
City of Venice found it self to be in extreme danger. But in the end,
he went and opposed himself (in person) against the Enemies, vanquished
them, and regained Chioggia. He dyed, having governed fifteen years, four
months, and fifteen days.

61 Michele Morisini, was a man well furnished with Learning and Wisdom. Some
say, that in his time the Isle of Thenedes was taken, and not in the time of
his Predecessor Contarini. There were diverse Laws then made, and (amongst
others) it was ordained, that Homicides, who formerly had been hanged, should
afterward have their heads smitten off. He lived but four months, and five
days in his Dignity, and died in the 74. year of his age.

62 Antonio Veniero, was a rigorous obseruer of Justice. He confined one of his
own Sons in exile, because he had (ouer-lightly) offended the Family of a
Noble Venitian. He made league with Galeazzo the Vicounte, against Carrara,
whereupon he took Padua. He assisted the Emperor Emmanuell against the
Turk, and gave aid also unto Sigismond, King of Hungaria, who afterward came
to the Empire. The place of Saint Mark, and that of the Rialto, were greatly
beautified in his time. He died two months and three days, after the 18 year
of his rule.

63 Michele Steno, had the dignity of Attorney of Saint Mark, with that of
Duke. He won an important battle against the Genewaies. Carrera was now
the last time vanquished, and Padua and Verona surprised. They of Vicenza, to
free themselves from his tyranny, yielded themselves to the Commonwealth.
Ladislaus King of Hungaria, did likewise for-goe Zara. He died, having governed
13. years and three days.

64 Thomaso Mocenigo, was first General of the Goulfe. He embraced peace, to
the end, that the Citizens might Traffic. Vdina became obedient to the
Commonwealth, with the Country of Friuoli; by means of the Lords of
Sauorguani, who were made Noblemen of Venice. The Florentines were also
succored against the Duke of Milaine. In his tenth year he died.

65 Francesco Foscari did stoutly repress the Duke of Milaine, who proceeded
too far on the liberties of Italy. Brescia, Bergamo, and other Cities of
Lombardie were then won: among which were Loda and Parma, and Rauenna in
Romania. He made also a large progress on the Seas, even into Morea. The
Senate assisted Paleodogus the Emperor, against the Turks, who usurped
Constantinople in the year 1453. He was made Arbitratour by the Duke of
Milaine, in certain differences of neighborhood. The King of Dacia was made
a Noble Venitian: And afterward, the Duke (in regard of his age and
infirmities) was dismissed, having governed 34. years, and six months.

66 Paschale Malapiero, was appointed in the place of Foscari, being Atturny of
S. Mark, who died two days after his dismission. He made a Law, that in
following times, the Duke should not be deposed. In his days, the famous Art
of Printing was brought into Venice. The Arsenall was greatly increased: And
he maintained the people in peace, during four years, 6. months, and five
days that he governed.

67 Christophoro Moro, of Procuratour of S. Mark, was made Duke. He lived for
some time in peace, till the second year of his government; and then the Turk
(proud of his surprizall of Constantinople) declared War against the
Venitians. He made heace with Pope Pius the fifth, and the Duke of Burgundy: But
the Pope dying, they remained alone, and maintained war which lasted twenty
years. And yet he dyed, having reigned 9 years and six months.

68 Nicholo T^ono had such good hap, that (in his time) the commonwealths
affairs went well against the Turk. Pietro Mocenigo, General in the
Archipelagus, united his power with the Popes. The King of Naples, and they of
Rhods sent 85. Galleys together, and took Satalia, a city of Pamphilia. He
made league likewise with the King of Persia, against the Turk. James King of
Cyprus coming to Venice, espoused Catharina Cornara, adoptiue Daughter of S.
Mark. He governed one year, eight months, and five days.

69 Nicholo Marcello, Attorney of S. Matk, after some laws made by the
Correctours; was elected Duke. In his time there was a conspiracy in Cyprus,
to have the Kingdom fall into the power of Ferdinand King of Naples. Pietro
Morcenigo went thither with a great Army, where he appeased all troubles, and
severely chastised the Rebels. Scutari, a City in Liburnia, was besiedged
by the Turk, and valiantly defended by Antonio Loredano. This Duke governed
one year, four months, and 17. days.

70 Pietro Mocenigo was elected Duke, in desert of all his worthy deeds.
Lepanto was besiedged in his time by the Turk, and virtuously maintained by
Antonio Loredano. They brought their power likewise before the Isle of
Stalimena, but the same Loredano (by his valor) defended it. The Daughter to
King Ferdinand came to Venice, with the Cardinal her Brother, where they were
roially entertained. This Prince caused a Money to be stamped, which he surnamed
by his own name: And governed but two years and nine months.

71 Andrea Vendramino had such ill hap in his government, that the Venitian
Army was two several times put to flight by the Turks: Once, near to Croya
in Albania, and the other, in the Country of Friuli. He was a goodly man of
person, and had a most beautiful Lady to his Wife, by whom he had as goodly
Children, whom he allied in marriage with the cheifest Families. He governed
one year and eight months.

72 Giouanni Mocenigo, Brother to Pietro Mocenigo, having continued the War
against the Turk; in the end made peace with him: Ordering the matter so,
that he left Scutari and Stipula in liberty of commerce, and power to keep a
Deputy at Constantinople. He made War against Ferdinand King of Naples, at
the instance of Pope Sixtus the fourth, which occasioned the long War called
Sociale. In the end, peace was made, the Commonwealth having gotten Rouigo
and Polesano. The City became much disgraced by fire, and a pestilent
sickness: The Prince dyed, having reigned seven years and six months.

73 Marco Barbarigo, the Plague being ceased, caused all to be new builded,
which the Fire had defaced in the Palace. He was greatly differing from from
all other Princes, to wit, in pardoning, and forgetting particular injuries
done unto him: but such as were committed against the State, he would have
revenged with stricttest severity. The Grand Signeur or Turk, sent a
particular Ambassador unto him, to congratulate his election. He governed but
nine months.

74 Agostino Barbarigo, withstood the progress of Charles 8. King of France,
when he made war against them of Arragon, for the kingdom of Naples, which he
conquered. The Turk usurped on the Commonweals of Lepanto, Modona, and
Corona. The Kingdom of Cyprus was brought under the tutelage of the Senate,
and Queen Catharina brought thence to Venice. The Office de la Sante was
created, by occasion of the Pestilence. The Duke governed 15. years, and 21.
days.

75 Leonardo Lauredano sustained a very rigorous war against the chiefest
Princes of the world: there being a league made at Cambray, between the
Emperor Maximilian; the King of France; them of Naples; and the Dukes of Sauoy,
Ferrara and Mantua, incited thereto by Pope Julius the second. All the whole
estate of firm land was surprised, except Treuisa; but in the end it was
recovered. He lived in the Principality nineteen years, eight months, and 20.
days.

76 Antonio Grimani, being General, had a most infamous disrout or foil, by
which occasion, he was dismissed of the charge of Procurator of S. Mark, and
confined to Cherso. He brake his limitation, and with-drewe himself to Rome
to the Cardinal his Son: where he had so many worthy Offices imposed upon
him, as, not only he was re-established in his Atturnies place again; but he
was likewise made Duke, at the age of eighty two years, and governed but one
year, ten months, and two days.

77 Andrea Gritti, gaining best part of the glory, for the reprisall of Padua,
was in very great esteem. He dealt so with the King of France, (to whom he
was Prisoner) that his Majesty allied himself with the Commonwealth, and
Brescia and Verona were reconquered. He knew very well, how to make his
carriage pleasing to the Senate, during the wars between Charles the fifth,
Emperor, and King Fraunces the first, as also against Solomon. He governed
fifteen years, seven months, and eight days.

78 Peitro Lando continued the defense of the Commonwealth against the Turk:
with whom (at last) he made a peace, knowing how to make use thereof, and
maintain his own charge, while the war continued between Charles the fifth,
and King Frances the first. He governed six years and eight months.

79 Francesco Donato, making benefit also of this peace, beautified the City
with many goodly buildings, besides that of the Palace. He sent succor to the
Emperor, against certain Rebels in Germany. The Princes of Guise, coming to
Venice in his time, were entertained as fitted their dignity. He governed
seven years and six months.

80 Marco Antonio Treuisano, a Man altogether devout, labored that the
Commonwealth might abound in goodness and civil manners; preventing (by his
own worthy example) that vices should not be winekt at, as, in too many
Countries, they are. He governed a year, wanting three days.

81 Francesco Veniero, could so well skill of governing the Commonwealth, that
albeit the Turk (in his time) made War in Apulia, and the King of France in
Tuscanie: yet all was well at Venice, and the Queen of Poland Royally
welcomed thither. He governed two years, one month, and twenty days.

82 Lorenzo Priuli, was solicited (by the Pope) to make War against the
Emperor. But he being a Friend to the Commonwealth; by no means would offend
him, but mediated a pacification of those affairs. In his time peace was made
between France and Spain, and Charles the fifth dyed. This Prince governed
three years, eleauen months, and eight days.

83 Girolamo Priuli, Brother to the precedent Prince, enjoyed those great
Honors which Pope Pius the fourth gave to the Commonwealth: And all his
delight was to hear Ambassadors in the Hall of Kings. In his time the
Council of Trent was concluded, whither he sent (as Ambassadors) Nicholo de
Ponte, and Matheo Dandolo.

The Commonwealth held (at Baptism) the Son to the Duke of Sauoy b^ a
Deputy, borne of Marguerite of France. He dyed, having governed eight years,
two months, and four days.

84 Pietro Loredano, by the concurrence of two others, was elected Duke,
contrary to the hope of all, or his own expectation. The Arsenall was burned
in his time, and there then also happened a very great dearth of all things.
Selim, Successor to Solomon, took occasion to break peace with the
Commonwealth, demanding of them the Kingdom of Cyprus, and moved War
upon this Subject. He governed four years, five months, and eight days.

85 Luigi Mocenigo, War being kindled against the Turk; lost the Kingdom
of Cyprus, Nicosia being taken, and Famagosta surrendered. The Commonwealth
made league with Pope Pius the fifth, and Phillip King of Spain* so that their
Armies (being joined together in the year 1571. they obtained a worthy
victory against the Turks. Soon after, Henry the third, King of France,
came to Venice, where he was magnyficently entertained. This Prince dyed in
his seventh year.

86 Sebastiano Veniero was elected by common voice, and with such applause,
that diverse Turks ran to him, and kissed his feet. He created five
Correctours of the Laws, for ruling the affairs of the Palace. The City was
delivered of a dangerous plague, and the Palace was again very greatly
defaced by fire. This Prince governed not above one whole year.

87 Nicholo de Ponte, was created Duke, a man very learned in all the Sciences,
and whereof he had made public profession in Venice. He passed through all the
honors of the Commonwealth, wherewith the Citizens could possibly gratify
him. The Seminary of S. Mark was instituted by him. Certain Princes of
Iapponia arriving then at Venice, were by him most honorably entertained. He
builded the Bridge of Canareggio: and governed seven years, nine months, and
thirteen days.

88 Paschale Cicogna, Procurator of S. Mark, was elected when he was at divine
service in the Church. In his time there was great wars between France and
Spain about Piedmont, and between the Emperor and the Turk, for some parts
in Hungaria* He caused the Town of Palma to be builded, in the confines of the
country of Friuli, and a new Castle or Fortress, in the Isle of Cephalonia.
He had the honor of the wonderful Bridge of the Rialto, which he builded:
And governed ten years, or thereabout.

89 Marino G^imini, Procurator of S. Mark, was so highly in grace and favor of
the people, that on the day of his election, they declared extraordinary signs
of joy, and continued them for many following days. The second year of his
Principality, he caused the Duchess his Wife to be crowned in great Triumph.
At which time Pope Clement the eight sent her the Rose of gold. In his time
much joy and triumph was made, for the peace concluded between the Kings of
France and Spain. Upon occasion of the Popes coming to Ferrara, obtained by
the Ecclesiastical Estate, the Cardinal Aldobrandino passed thence to Venice,
where he was most honorably welcomed with diverse other Cardinals. There was
such an extraordinary ouer-flow of waters, in the fifth year of his
Principality, yt the Barks, Boats, and Gundeloes floated on the place of S.
Mark, even as if they had been in a full maine river. He dyed, and was much
bemoaned of the people, having governed ten years, and eight months.

90 Leonardo Dandolo, having by his worthy deseruings, singular wisdom and
dexterity, managed passed affairs, and gone through al honors of the
Commonwealth, giving evident testimony of his care and faithfulness, was
advanced in the place of Grimani, the tenth day of January, 1606. He had bin
sent Ambassador to Constantinople to Mahomet (he being newly come to the
Empire of the East) in the common-wealthes-name, to salute him with accustomed
complements. He has such a practiue brain, and so happy a memory, seated in a
soul so religiously zealous for common benefit, that the Senate has referred
more to him then to any other of his Predecessors. The City has (in his time)
been excommunicated, by Paulus Quintus now pope, about some pretentions
appertaining to his See: But it may well be said of this Prince, that, against
such Thunder-clappes and lightning flashes, he has shown himself like an
immooueable Rock, in defense of that estate in general. In like manner, two
principal Pillars of Christendom, threatened great disaster and ruin: bu^
that most Christian Henry the fourth, King of France, embracing those two
Collombes, vpheld both the one and other, and redressed all coffeehouse, by
the entermise of his Ambassadors, and has erected a Triumphall Arche, to the
immortality of his glory. This Prince now living happily in peace, does daily
acknowledge to France, his particular affection for such favor, and may (in
time) much better declare it. God long preserve him, and all other good Princes.

Of the Kingdom of Spain.
Spain was (in her younger days) held by sundry petty Kings and Tetrarches;
Spain divided (at first) into six Provinces. viz. 1. Terracon. 2. Carthage. 3.
Lus^tania. 4. Gallacia. 5. Boetia. 6. Tingintaua.

and afterward became divided into many Commonweals. The Carthiginians (a
people of Africa) hazzarding their fortune thither, held one part thereof,
and possessed themselves of many Cities, Towns, and places, until they were
expelled thence by the Romans, in the time of the Punick wars. Since when,
it was continually subject unto the Commonwealth of the Roman, and reduced
into form of a Province only, in the reign of the Emperor Augustus. So it
remained till the Emperor Honorius; in whose days the Vandales (a people of
the North parts) brought it under their command. 433.
But they were (soon after) chased thence by the Goths, who established there
the seat of their kingdom, which in that kind they maintained, for the space
of about two hundred years: nor were they then called kings of Spain, but
kings of the Goths. In the reign of Roderick, king of the Goths, the Moors of
Africa entered Spain, The Moors in possession of all Spain.
in the year 715. they being brought thither by one named Julian, in very
despightfull indignation, and to shape out a way to his bloody revenge, because
King Roderick had dishonored his Sister, or (as some others say) his daughter.
And so did the Moors possess themselves (wel-neer) of al Spain, seizing the
city of Tolledo, which was the^ the capital city. Thus ended the kingdom and
name of the Goths in Spain. Nor rested they so, but pursued on their conquest
still, and there remained none but Galitia, the Asturies and Leon, which
countries king Pelagius, Uncle and successor of Roderick, had fled to for
refuge, and there shut up himself, in regard that those places were environed
with Mountains and might well defend and shelter him for some time. But his
successors, being hardly pressed by the Sarrazins, could no longer resist:
wherefore, under the reign of Alphonsus the second, they were forced to crave
the help of Charlemaigne, King of France, by whose valor and Virtue, the
Moors were beaten thence a great way, and had bin quite cast out of the
Country, if the Spaniards malice had bin no hinderance thereto. Afterward, the
kings of Leon and Galicia (for such were then their only titles) being so
formerly preserved, began somewhat to increase in power. And in regard of this
expedition, performed by the French, the strength of the Moors was so weakened
and diminished, that many other Kingdoms were established in Spain, The
Kingdoms of Navarre and Arragon.
as that of Navarre by Enocho Count of Bigorre, in the year, 960. which he
took away from the Moors and Sarrazins, by a very valiant conquest of them.
The Son of this Enocho, being named Garzias, second king of Navarre, won and
conquered Arragon from the same enemies. And afterward, in the year 116. was
Arragon reduced to be a kingdom, by the Will and Testament of Sanchio the
Great, fourth King of Navarre, for love to Ramyrus his Natural Son, who was
the first King thereof. This was the same Sanchio, who being Earl of Castille
in the kingdom of Leon, took on him first the name of King Castille, which he
left unto his Son Ferdinand. Portugal conquered from the Moors.
The Kingdom of Portugal was also conquered from the same Moors, by Earl
Henry, Son unto the Duke of Lorraine; who held it first of all, under Title
of Earl, in the year, 1110. but quickly after brought he it to be a Kingdom.
Spain did continue so (in this kind of State) for a long time, divided into
many Kingdoms: And the Moors had also their abiding there, possessing still a
great part thereof, till such time as

Ferdinand the fifte, King of Arragon, 1492
who was married to Isabell, the only heir of Castille: And he (wholly)
expulsed the Moors out of Spain, in the year, 1492. In no great distance of
time after, he possessed himself of Sicilie and Naples, inuading also the East
Indiaes. But fraudulently he usurped the Kingdom of Nauar, The beginning of
the kingdom of Spain, and de^cent of their kings.
against John d'Albret, who was (indeed) the lawful King. And it is this
Ferdinand, and Isabell his Wife, that (we may say truly) the Kingdom of
Spain only had beginning in. They left one only Daughter, named Ioane, who
was married to

Phillip the first, of Austria, Son unto the Emperor Maximillian, and Mary of
Bourgundie: he succeeded in this Kingdom of Spain, and other Countries
beside. He was likewise Earl of Bourgondie, of Flaunders, and Lord of the
Lowe-Countreyes, in the right of his Mother. In this his Marriage, was borne

Charles the fifth, who was afterward Emperor. 1516.
He reigned nine and thirty years, preserving his Provinces very happily:
And he left for successor, both in Spain, and the more part of his other
Countries, his son

Phillip the second, 1555
who reigned three and forty years, having adjoined (to his other Estates)
the Kingdom of Portugal, in the year of our Lord, 1580. and so
(consequently) all that which the Portugalles held in the East Indiaes, and
elsewhere, as in Africa and Brasile, which came unto him by the death of King
Henry the Cardinal. He died aged seauentie years, the thirteenth day of
September, 1598. No long time before his death, he had made peace with the
mighty and most Christian King of France and Navarre, Henry the fourth.

1598
Phillip the third, his Son, succeeded him, and reigns as yet to this day.
He married Margaret, Daughter to the Archduke of Austria, by whom he had a
Son, in the month of April, 1606.

Of Germany and the Princes Electors.
Of Germany, and the Princes Electors.
LIttle can we here speak of Germany, in regard it requires a large and ample
discourse: Only concerning the Princes Electors, I find it recorded, that
Pope Gregory, the fifte of that name, being a Native of Saxony in Germany,
and Kinsman to the Emperor Otho; to the end that the Empire might long
remain, in the hands of them of his Nation, procured a Law to be made, with
the consent of Otho, about the election of the Emperor, in the year of our
Lord, 1002. which Law was afterward duly kept, and has been to our time,
that it should be always lawful and permitted to the Allemaignes or Germans
only, to elect and choose the Prince, that was to be called Caesar, and King of
the Romans, with the Title likewise of Sovereign Emperor and Augustus, so
soon as his election was approved. It was therefore ordered, that that three
Ecclesiastical persons, and four of the Laytie, should have the full
authority herein, with the voice of all the State in general. Three
Ecclesiastiks, and three Layickes, with addition of a fourth, the K. of Bohemia.
The Ecclesiastical men, were the Arch-Byshoppes of Magonoe, Treues, and
Colongne; The Layickes were the Marquess of Bradenbourg, the Count Palatine of
Rhine, the Duke of Saxony, and the King of Bohemia, to all whose Successors
this Dignity appertained. And the King of Bohemia was added for the seventh
Electour, to the end, of avoiding all differences which might happen in the
election, and to judge especially over the other.

A short Chronologicall Discourse of France, the Original of that Nation, and
a brief History of their kings, from Pharamond their first Governor, to Jews
13. now reigning.
To the Worshipful Master Richard Langley, Esquire, Towne-Clarke of the
Honorable City of London.
THe greater part of such as have Written, concerning the Original and
Etymology of the Name Francs or Francions, who afterward came to be called
Frenchmen, have scarce faithfully or respectiuelie handled that Subject. Many
ancient moderate Writers, The error of Writers, about the names original.
as Sigisbert, Gregory of Tours, Aimonius the Monk, Hunibant, and the more part
of our Chroniclers and Annalistes, made their whole recourse to Dreams and
Fables, because they lived in those barbarous times, when learning was trodden
underfoot, and good Books were burned by the Goths, Vandales and Hunnes,
with other uncivil Nations, who quenched and smothered the light of good
Letters, which being hidden underground (to avoid such barbarous and abortiue
fury) our forenamed Writers were robbed of knowing those sound Authors, without
whom they could not iudiciouslie censure, or write the History of the French
Nation. Others that long time after, and much nearer to our instant Age, have
likewise written on the same Argument; by following the track of those former
blinde-guides, have fallen into their error and folly: reading no other
Authors but those misse-leaders, neither taking any pains to peruse those
grave ancients, which more polished seasons have discovered unto us. So that
those best embraced Authors of the French, are even the loudest liars, leaving
a rooted opinion in their idle fancies; that they are issued of the Troyans,
and that they were named French of Francus, Francus or Frencion, the son of
Hector.
or Francion, the Son of Hector, who, after sack and spoil of the said
City, saved himself (with so many as could escape the Graecians Sword and
fire) in the Palus Maeotides, and that (of his name, whom they thus followed)
they were first called Francks, or Francions. Next, that near to this Palus
Maeotides, they builded a City, which they named Sicambria, after the name of
an Aunt to Francus, Sicambra the Daughter of King Priam.
the Daughter of King Priam; and that there they dwelt, until the Emperor
Valentinians time, being then constrained to pass into Allemaigne, and thence
into Gaul. See here the conceit of some fond Frenchmen, concerning the
Etimologie of their name; which if any one should offer to take from them, he
should (in their judgment) commit no mean crime. And albeit there are many, and
contrary opinions in this case, yet I will plainly tell ye no more, then what
I have read, and seen written.

Some say, that (in times past) there was a nation in Europe, scattered and
dispierced here and there, who were called Cimmerians; Cimmerians. Cimbrians.
Sicambrians. Francs or Francions.
one part of them had the Name of Cimbrians, another Sicambrians, and a third
Francs, or Francions. These people passing thorough the Country of Pannonia
(now divided into two parts, the one called Hungaria, and the other Austria)
were driven from their precedent dwelling, which was at the Cimmerian Bosphorus
by the Goths, in the year of the Worlds Creation, 3520. Others say, that
these Cimmerians termed themselves to be derived of those Fraci, that
appeared on the Earth after Noah's Flood (viz:) that of those divisions made in
the whole universe, by partage of the Mediterranean Sea, those which were in
Europe (distinctly on the right hand) gave to the Haebrews these Fraci, The
Hebrew Fraci, and the Affricanes.
even as them on the left hand did the Affricanes. There are some others, who
do fetch the Original of those Cimmerians, from Gomer the Son of Iaphet,
and youngest Son of Noah, of whom they should take their Name, by change of
some Letters, calling them Cimmerians, instead of Gomorians. But howsoever it
was, that Nation of Cimmerians, abandoning the utmost Confines of Thrace, and
the forenamed Bosphorus; divided themselves into diverse bands: o^e whereof
made their way to the Pannonians; another to that side of Germany, where the
Cimbrian Chersonnesus is described by our Geographers; And the rest, leaving
Europe, The Cimbrian Chersonnesus.
passed into Phrygia, and making up higher into Asia, set down their rest on
the Banckes of Danubie, and the maine Ocean. There (once more) they separated
themselves into two Troops: One whereof entered into Europe, under conduct of
their King named Francion. And, being no other then mere Vacabond persons,
enquiring still for novelty of Countries, after they had run through a great
part of Europe; at length, they rested on the banckes of Rhine, where they
would needs build a City, in semblaunce and Name of Troy, the Capital
Commander of Phrigia. They began the foundation, Torches or Torques of Torquor
their King.
but the work remained imperfect. The other sort, that made their abode on the
banckes of Danubie, elected for their K. one named Torchor, by whose name they
were called Torches or Torques: even as on the contrary side, the other, after
the name of Francion their King, were termed Francs, Francions, or Francons.
They waxing weary of their kings Empire (which grew to an insupportable
tyranny) expulsed them, and lived a long time without any King, under
authority of their Captains. But in the end, corruption ouer-swaying those
Captains, and threatening a tyranicall usurpation: they did likewise cast them
off, and grew to their former election of Kings again, even from the
selfsame stirp and race, whereof their first Kings had bin elected. They made
choice then of a Man named Theudomer, Theudomer, a kinsman (by descent) to king
Priam
son to Richomer, a man of strong, great and goodly stature, wearing his Hair
long, and he was descended of the race of Priam King of Phrygia, and of
Francion. So that, if this opinion be true, it should enstruct us, that the
Original of the Francons or Francions, proceeded of the Cimmerians, and that
those Cimmerians came from Phrygia, and the Troyans.

The Cimbrians, who were descended of the Cimmerians, went to the banckes of
Rhine, and dwelt there in those straits, where (in these days) are the
Countries of Holland and Gueldres: But they were forced thence, by frequent
ouerflowings, and strange inundations of the waters of Rhine.

The Sicambrians, being issued of these Cimbrians, and who never boudged from
the shoares of Rhine, as these others did, of whom we have formerly spoken:
they passed into Italy, and from thence into other Regions heretofore
mentioned. And it is to be noted, that when the Cimbrians went first to Rhine
(be it that they came from the Pannonians by Land, or from Phrygia and Thrace
by the German Sea, being in number about 489360.) they were by the Teutones
and Thuringians, Neighbors to Rhine, named Neumagi, Neumagi, is new kinsmen.
as much to say, as new Kins-men or Cousins.

Afterward, when their King Antenor (a man of great power) had espoused Cambra,
a beautiful, Antenor married Cambra Daughter to the King of Britain.
wise, and chaste Lady, borne in the Country of Britain, now called England:
in favor of her, he termed his people Sicambrians. This happened in the year
of the Worlds Creation, 1550. At which time Artaxerxes reigned over the
Persians, and Hanniball passed first into Italy.

Priam, Son to Antenor succeeded him, and then Marcomedes.
Antenor, King of the Sicambrians, lest to those his people inhabiting on the
Rhine, his Son Priam for their King. After whom succeeded Marcomedes, who
extended his Dominion from the banckes of Rhine, so far as Thuringe. The
other Sicambrian Kings, succeeding after these forenamed; did (almost all of
them) term themselves Troyans: which holds (with good judgment) to show,
that the Sicambrians were issued of the Cimmerians and Phrygians.

There were also many Kings of these Nations, and after that the Sicambrians
grew to increase near the Rhine, both in multitude of men and riches: diverse
other Kings reigned over them, who extended the limits of their possessions,
on either side the Rhine. In the reigns of Clodion, Clodomire the second,
Clodion, Clodomire, Meradac and Bolo^ kings, leagued with the Teutones.
Meradac and Bolon, (under conduct of whom, the Cimbrians forsook the shoares
of Rhine, by reason of the inundations of the said River, and likewise of the
Sea) they leagued themselves with the Teutones or Allemaignes, and departed in
great troops from their habitations; leaving very few there behind them, who
being afterward vanquished by the Romans, with other people of the Gauls
neighboring near the Rhine; continued peaceably in their dwellings, until
the declining of the Roman Empire: but yet they were wadged as Soldiers in
the Roman Legions, and served the Romans faithfully in all their wars.

Some certain years after, they rebelled against the Emperor Honorius, who
conqu^red them in a battle: But, recovering their loss, they grew in to good
favor with the Emperor Valentinian. Hereupon some have written, that in
regard they gave him good aid against the Ala^nes, and expelled them from the
Palus Maeotides: they were by him called Francks, Why the Emperor Valentinian
called the^ France.
and dispensed withal for ten years tribute, which formerly (as a Due) they
paid to the Romans. But at the ten years end, the Emperor sent his
Collectours to them, to leuy again the said tribute: whereto they would in no
wise listen, but despising his commandment, they murdered his Officers.

The Emperor being offended at their rebellion, K. Priam slain, and his people
fled into Germany.
assembled a potent Army, that vanquished them in battle, wherein also Priam
their King was slain, and they driven to flight from their City Sicambria.
Being thus expulsed thence, they came into Germany, which then was enemy to
the Romans, and possessing themselves of Thuringe; they lived there (for some
time) under the reign of Marcomedes, son to Priam, and of Sueno, son to
Antenor, one of their Kings: thus you may see what some have said. But, as
concerning the City of Sicambria, builded near to the Palus Maeotides, not by
the Francones or Francions, but only so avouched, by the writings of Hunibant,
and afterward by those of Gregory of Tours, of Rheginon, and of Sigisbert: good
Authors do make a mere mockery of it, for they never knew any other City
named Sicambria, but that famous City which is in Allemaigne. So that by this
our instant deduction, it evidently appears, that ye Sicambrians dwelt with the
Pannonians, The Sicambrians lived with the Panonians.
and that (from thence) they came into Germany, to the sh^ars of Rhine: and
having in such manner obtained their liberty, they were then first of all
called Francs. But now to come again to our Francs, Francions, or Francones,
admit them to be issued of the S^cambrians, or of the Cimbrians, or of the
Germans, or of any other: It is notorious enough, Franconia in Saxony, and
France in Gaul.
that two great Provinces were by them inhabited, and named; to wit, Oriental
France or Franconia, in the Country of Saxony, and the kingdom of France in
Gaul: and that the very first time, that any speech was heard of the^, it was
in the declining of the Roman Empire, under the Emperors Aurelianus, Probus,
Florianus, and Proculus. Which has made some to conceit the very same matter
of the Sicambrians, and that the name of Francs was given them. either after
one of their Kings; or of their bold courage, or of the Hebrew Fraci. The
Emperor Aurelianus had to deal with them, when they would needs pass the
Rhine, to come into Gaul, and (as some report) slew a great number of them.
And yet they were not so much weakened, but they could rebel again, and
withstand the succeeding Emperors.

Now let us come to the Etimologie of this name of Franc, or Francs, there are
some, Of the word Franc or Francs.
who make no other proof thereof, but that it was only in regard of the
immunity, given unto them by the Emperor Valentinian, after they had helped him
against the Alaines: Inferring also, that he called them so by a Greek name,
Francois, which is as much to say; as bold, hardy, and valiant, and by those
means were enfranchised from all touls, subsidies, and tributes for ten years
space. But there is not any Etimology received by our Frenchmen, but such as
certain Authors, by idle forged Histories of their own brain, would make
them to believe: and that they are derived of Francus or Francion, son to
Hector, according as we have already declared.

Now, to answer all these recited opinions, and to begin with the word
Ferocitie, as derived of the adjective Ferox, The French would have their name
derived of Ferocitie.
and whereof some great estimulation is made: There is no appearance at al, that
they should derive their name from thence, this Etymology being but pulled in
by the ears, and so far off from the name of Francs, as there needs no other
reason to object against it, but the very spacious distance between these two
words Ferocitie and Francois, considering withal, that all Authors have
described the French, to be men mild, courteous and affable, and not fierce,
stern or cruel. As for the other reason, the best received of them, that
strives to make us believe, that they are issued of Francus or Francion, the
son of Hector: It is most certain, that there never was any such Francus or
Francion son to Hector, because Hector had but one son, Hector had no son but
Astianax.
named Astianax, who at the surprizail of Troy, was thrown by the Greeks from a
very high Tower, to the end, that no one of the Troyans race might remain, to
revenge (upon the Greeks) the sack of Troy. And to say, Franchise and
Immunitie.
that the Etymology of the name of Francs came from the franchise and immunity,
which was given unto them by the Emperor Valentinian: It has no likelihood of
reason, because they were called so before Valentinian was borne. Now, albeit
that the name of franchise, comes nearest to that of Francs: yet cannot that
deriuation be received for authentical, because the name of this Nation is more
ancient (by more then a thousand years) then the word of franchise, which
is but a new coynde word in respect of the other, and which, by Frenchmen
(lovers of their own language) has bin allowed to signify the said liberty.

The Election of Pharamond, who was the first King of France, how he was
elected for his Virtues and Heroyick actions only. The Francs gave aid to the
Emperor Valentinian, and (by that occasion) were exempted from paying Tribute
for ten years. In like manner, what Ceremonies were aunciently observed, in
election of their Kings; and of the Salique Law.
THe Francs, Francions, or Francons (of whose adventures and Etymology we
have amply discoursed) having after many peregrinations, Voyages, The Francs
builded a City near to the Palus Maeotides.
and Trauerses, made choice of their abiding at Paulus Maeotides: very near
thereunto, and (according to the opinion of the most common and received) they
builded a City, where they inhabited until the time of the Emperor
Valentinian, whom they valiantly assisted against the Alaines, that had
rebelled against the Emperor and the Roman Empire. In recompense of which
good succor and service, the Emperor discharged them (for ten years space)
from paying the ordinary Tribute, which they owed to the Romans: yet ordering,
that (at expyrarion of such time) they should return to their former
servitude. The ten years being expyred, constraint came for repayment of the
Tribute: But they (feeling ye sweetness of such an immunity* and desirous to
reduce to a perpetual privilege, that which the Emperor had but in grace
granted) in pride and presumption replied, that they purposed no longer
payment of any thing: but, since with price of their blood, and no mean
danger of their lines, they had freely bought and purchased their freedom:
they were not so weakly advised, to forgo (at so cheap a Market) that which
had cost them so dear.

The Emperor displeased with this their refusal, brought a great Army
against them, and foyling them in the fight, expelled them from their dwelling:
The Francs foiled by the Emperor, choose a Captain named Marcomir.
So that they were enforced to assemble themselves, under the conduct of a
chief Captain amongst them, named Marcomir or Marcmeier, which (in the old
Franc Language) signifies a Governor of they Country. Thus they withdrewe
themselves into a Province of Germany (at this present called Allemaigne)
where they inhabited, and after their own name, called the Province of their
abiding, Franconia. There are some Authors, who will not avouch, that the
Emperor Valentinian did vanquishe them, because (in very truth) there is no
such matter found in any very ancient Writer. Contrary-wi^e, Amianus
Marcellinus, an old and true Historiographer, says, That when as Valentinian
was in Italy, The words of Amianus Marcellinus
he received tidings, that great Britain (now named England) was then
overrun and spoiled) by the Pictes and Scotts; And likewise, that a great
number of the Francs, as also of the Saxons, did ouerspreade Gaul. But common
Opinion houldeth, that the Francs would not pay the Tribute, after ten
years were expyred, and that being, thereuppon, overcome by the Emperor
Valentinian; they were (as already has been said) expulsed from their
abiding, and compelled to save themselves in the said Province.

Being there seated, they grew desirous, They choose an order of government
among the^.
to choose and establishe a manner of Governing their Estate, whereby ensued
many contentions among them. For, some would have it brought into a
Monarchy, which is the Government of one Prince only: And others, into an
Aristocratie, which is to be governed by a certain number of Wise and
discreet persons.

Heereuppon, in a publlque assembly made, The advice of Charamond, concerning
the election of Pharamond
on this occasion, one among them, named Charamond, made a very eloquent
Oration in the behalf of Monarchy, and his maine scope aimed; that they
should elect for their King and Prince, Pharamond, a man just, very devout,
of good sort, and valiant* qualities necessarily required to be in a
Prince. Moreover, he added, that if he should do any thing, unfitting for
a King and Prince: it was a very easy matter for them, to take away from him
the administration of his Kingdom and Government, because people were before
Kings and made them their Rulers. Nor can I be persuaded, quoth he, that the
man now to be elected, will any way fall into Tyranny, or raise us in any
disobedience toward him, in regard of the virtuous qualities wherewith he is
endued: And from him may we well expect, all such Justice, kindness, care, and
assistaunce, as Subjects can hope for in their Prince, his actions and
behavior of life being so well known unto us. He is Son to this worthy
Captain Marcomir, who so wisely and happily has brought us hither, who so
securely has here established us, and who so valiantly sheelded us from the
Romans threatenings; when (by inequality of our power to theyrs) we were
compelled to forsake the Palus Maeotides. We are then much obliged to
Pharamond, in memory of his Fathers weighty merits: And these two especial
reasons should move us to receive him as our King, and prefer him (before
all other) to that dignity; even as we ought to advance Monarchy before
Aristocratie, whereunto I know some among us will incline, without foreseeing
the harms that will befall us, if we embrace it. For, if we consider our
ancient manner of life, it has been to obey one, and not many, in which
regard, me-thinkes, that the first thing, which ought to be respected in the
establishing of an Estate, is the humor of the Inhabitants, and to consider,
of what command or government they are most capeable, to wit; of Monarchy
alone, or many-headed Aristocratie.

Thus spoke Charamond, and then many contrarieties were moved among them,
about diversity of Opinions. Whereupon, Prince Charamond began again
another most excellent Oration, maintaining his former speeches against
Quadrek, a great Prince likewise, who defended the contrary, saying: Quadrek
his opposition against Charamond
That Kingdoms governed by many Princes, were more peaceable, and better
pollicied, then to be subjects to one king only.

After all these disputes (long debated on either side) the Francs (who were
more capeable to live under a Monarchy, then a public command, because
they were men free, The election of King Pharamond
most hardy, and courageous) by common consent, elected King Pharamond, and
according to their custom, placing him upon a Pauois, lifted him upon the
Shoulders of men, and so walked with him three times about the place of their
meeting, proclaiming him their King. This was in the year of the Worlds
creation, 438^. And of Jesus Christ* 420. Or after others, four hundred twenty
six, or four hundred twenty and seven.

Some say, that he was the Son of Marcomir, yet others say no. His name was
Pharamo^d or Waramond, which in the ancient Franc Language, signifies a man of
truth. And we may well conceive, that his name and Nature were correspondent,
and that he was a virtuous personage: considering they chose him for their
king, after such a great contention, and withal, that such as desire to live
under a Monarchy, and to have one King: will have him to be a good man, which
is the only felicity that can come to any Estate, when a Prince is furnished
with integrity and truth, and all other Virtues commendable in a Prince: Even
as contrariwise, it can sustain no greater mischief, then to be subjected to
barbarousnesse, and Injustice of a cruel Tyrant.

All the truest Histories do agree, that Pharamond was the first King of the
Francs or Francons, Pharamond first King of the Francs or Franconians.
in Franconia a Province of Germany: but they speak not of his passage into
Gaul, for he was never there. And the first of them that ever went thither,
was Clodion the Hayrie, Clodion was the first that entered into Gaul.
Son (according to some) of the forenamed Pharamond. Nor came he also
thither (but as we use to say) to bid the Country Good morrow: For he was
repulsed, chased, and compelled to return thence. And he, that (of the two
Nations of the Francones and Gauls) made them but one, reducing them into one
body: was Meroneus, the Son of Clodion, as shall be after declared in his
due place. Pharamond lived only on the Banks of Rhine, without passing any
further thence: it contented him to bring his people only thither, to sound,
not the foord, but the fortune of passage into Gaul.

Being chosen King, he conceived, that the very strongest bond, which
binds and shuttes up any State for longest continuance, is the Constitution
of Laws: which are nothing else, but a reason planted in Nature, commending
honest occasions, and prohibiting their contraries. Beside that, they had never
been made by Lawe-Makers, but for the conservation of States, Empyres,
Kingdoms, Seigneuries, Cities, and their Inhabitants. And because long
Wars, as also their so recent and late foil, had brought his people unto
some good form of obedience: he concluded to make new Laws, which might
cause them to live under certain Rules of policy, considering, Pharamond
deuiseth Laws for his people, with consent of his Lords.
that as hardly can a people live without Laws, as the body without members.

For the better establishing of these new Laws, he used the advice of four
his cheifest Barons, even those of woorthiest merrite amongst all his Lords,
to whom some do give these Names Vridogast, Sagobast, Vrisogast, and
Bosogast. He likewise devised certain Laws, Laws Saliques or Ripuaries.
which he termed Saliques and Ripuaries, the Chapters whereof are yet to be
seen, which do not speak any thing of the general right of his Kingdoms,
but concerning the particular right of every one, especially in the Article of
Succession. From whence our French Nation has derived the Law Salique,
speaking of the succession of the Realm of France, the institution whereof,
they attribute to Pharamond.

Against which Judgment, we will not oppose our selves any way, only we say,
by the testimony of truest Histories, there is not found any but this Salique
Law, which the French do boldly affirm to be made by Pharamond. Yet such as
labor to have us believe this opinion, do scarcely know how the Kingdoms of
Barbarians, and their Kings governed: Albeit it was a custom observed among
Barbarous Nations, A custom among barbarous Nations.
that their Daughters should never succeed in the Crowns of their Kingdoms.
Also, in the reign of Pharamond, the third general Council of Ephesus was
holden, against Nestorius Bishop of Constantinople; and the fourth Schism came
into the Church. Especial matters happening in the time of Pharamond
Saint Hierome and Saint Augustine died, the one aged ninety one years, and
the other seventy six, after they had long time governed their Churches: And
then began Christian Religion to flourish, by the holy and painful writings
of many Doctors. This is all that can be said of Pharamond, first King of the
Francs, or Franconians, who afterward were called Frenchmen: And he, after he
had reigned ten, or (according to some others) eleauen years, died in Anno
Dom. 431. Our Historyes have not given him any Wi^e, albeit some say, that
Clodion his Successor was his Son.

431
2 Clodion, second King of the Francs, Franconians, Clodion sir^named Hayrie,
for wearing long hair, and a beard in sign of liberty.
or French, succeeded his Father Pharamond, in the year of grace 431. He was
sir-named Clodion the Hairy, because he wore his Beard and Hair long,
ordaining the French to wear the like, in sign of liberty: because the
Romans used to poule and shave all such as they subdued, in sign of
servitude, and this fashion of wearing long hair continued in France, until
the time of Peter Lombard, in the reign of Jews the younger, fourth King of
that name. Clodion perceiving the Romans to war weak, by Wars which they
maintained against the Vrisigotes, and loath to loose occasion for enlarging
his Kingdom: levied a mighty Army, The deeds of Clodion for enlarging his
Kingdom.
subdued the Thuringians or Lorraignes, took Cambray by assault, putting all
the Romans to the Sword that were therein, and vanquished their Army near to
the River of Rhine. Then passing the Forest Charbonniere, he took Tournay;
and pursuing his purpose, for dilation of his Confines, he went into France,
conquering Burgundy, Toulouse, Angolesme and all Aquitain. Clodion having
reigned twenty years, died in An. 449.

3 Meroneus, third King of the French, 450
succeeded Clodion as his Son, or nearest Kinsman, Anno 450. Tritemius
writes, that he was Son to Clodion, but it is not found to be so in the
Histories of France. In him the generation of the Kings of France took
beginning, which endured until King Pepin, The beginning of the Kings of
France in generation.
the Son of Charles Martell. Meroneus (like unto his Predecessors) was a
Pagan; yet very bold and courageous in war, as he declared by many foughten
battles, wherein he was continually present. In his time, Attila King of the
Hunnes or Hungares (who termed himself Flagellum Dei) leuyed an Army of five
hundred thousand Men, and came into the Country of Gaul; where he spoiled
Coulongue and Treues, with many Castles situated on the Rhine. Attila with his
Hunnes invaded Gaul.
He trauersed France also, where he wasted Amiens, Beauuais, Chaalons, Troys
and Rheimes, bringing his siedge before Orleaunce. Meroneus seeing France so
much oppressed (with the help of Aetius, Lieutenant General in Gaul for the
Army of Theodosius the younger, Emperor of Rome, and of Theodorick King of
the Vuisegothes) gave him a strong battle in the Catalaunique Fields (which
is said to be near to Chaalons in Champaigne) in which fight, were slain
about two hundred thousand Men of War, The ^ight of Attila out of Oval.
as well on the one side as the other* Attila beholding his Men in disorder,
and that he could not call them back again as he would: was enforced to
retire home to Hungary, where he could never after re-assemble them of that
company.

This battle was fought in the year 452. Others say, it was in the twenty
seventh year of the Empire of Valentinian the third. Meroneus having his hopes
much more highly advanced. by such a great and glorious victory: took the
Cities of Sens, Paris, and a great part of Gaul, not finding any to offer him
resistance. So that thence forward, the Country which before has been termed
Gaul, began even then to be called France.

He caused one of his Sons to be thrown into a Fire, When Gaul began to be
called France
because he had slain the King of Cornwall, who came in courtesy to be
merry with him; Cornwall being then tributarie to France, as some have
reported, who also do entitle Meroneus to be the first king of the French, and
all his Race the Merouingians. He dyed in the tenth year of his reign (after
he had very much enlarged his Kingdom) in Anno Domini. 472. Or, according
to others, 459.

4 Childerick, or, as some term him, 460
Chilperick, Son to Moroneus, succeeded him in the year 460. The great
luxury, The incontinent life of Childerick.
and bad life which he led, in the beginning of his reign, abusing the Wives
and Daughters of many worthy Lords, begot him such indignation and hatred among
the^; that they purposing to surprise him, he was faigne to save himself by
flight to Basinus, king of Thuringe, now called Lorraigne. This did he by the
council of a friend of his, named Vidomarck, who (as a secret token between
them) breaking a Ring of Gold, gave him the one half: coniuring him, to give
no faith (for his return) but to him that should bring him that other half.
The French elected (in his place) a Lieutenant of the Romans, named Gillon,
who held Soissons, and laid such heavy exactions on every man, exercising also
such cruelties on the Princes of France: that (in the 8. year) he was
expelled, and Childerick again restored, wholly by the means of Vidomarch.

Childerick pursued Gillon his Enemy, and had great victories and conquestes
against him. He fought a battle also near to Orleaunce, against Andoacre,
who was Duke of the Saxons. He enlarged his Kingdom along the River of Loyre,
so far as Angeirs. One great and irreparable error he committed, for breaking
the right of Hospitality, Childebert wronged his dearest friend
with Basinus King of Thuringe, (who had received, and relieved him in the
chiefest of his adversity) he carried away with him his wife Basina, by whom he
had a Son called Clouis. He died in An. 485. the 26. of his reign.

The first Christian K. of France.
5 Clouis, first King Christian, and fifth King of France, succeeded his Father
in the year of our salvation 485. He married Clotilda, Sister to the Duke of
Burgundy. He made war upon Siagrius, the Son of Gillon, Lieutenant to the
Romans, who held Soissons, and some other parts of Belgic Gaul: from whence
he expulsed him, and made him fly to Tholouze, to Ala^ic King of the
Vuisegoths; who betrayed him, and sending back to Clouis, The Romans Dominion
ended in France.
he had his head smitten off. So the Romans, being partly fled, and partly
slain; held no longer dominion in France. Having likewise vanquished King
Basinus, he ^^bdued Thuringe, now called Lorraigne: and amplified the kingdom,
even from ye Rhine, so far as Seine, extending her limits to the river Loyre.
The Queen his Wife did often times solicit him to become a Christian,
whereto he would by no means listen: til being in a hot conflict against the
Allemaignes (who descended in great companies, to drive the French out of
Gaul) and desparing of the battle; How Clouis converted and becam a
Christian, by means of his Queen.
he thought upon the God of Clotilda his Queen, promising, that he would be
a Christian, if that day he obtained the victory. It pleased God to grant it
him, and he was Baptized at his return in the City of Rheimes by Remy
Arch-Byshoppe of the said place, with his two Sisters, and more then three
thousand of the Nobility. The sacred Oil was poured on his head, even in his
Baptism, and all his successors (at their Coronations) have in like manner
been sacred. Clouis changed his former Coat of Arms, taking three Golden
Floure-de-luces, in a field Azure: wherewith he first warred upon Gondebant
King of Burgundy, who was Uncle to his Wife, and discomfited the Vuisegothes
before Poictiers, having slain (with his own hand) Alaric their King, and
won from them the Country of Aquitaine, so far as the Pyrenean Mountains,
and almost all Gaul and Allemaigne. The Emperor sent Clouis a Crown of Gold.
Heereuppon, the Emperor Anastasius sent him a Crown of Gold, with the Title
and vesture of Patritius and Consul. He made a choice of Paris for his
ordinary abiding, and commanded it to be the chief City of his Kingdom:
where he dyed in Anno 514. being aged eyghty years. And was buried in the
Church of S. Geneuiefue du mont de Paris, which himself had founded, in memory
of Saint Peter and Saint Paul, leaving four Sons and two daughters.

515.
6 Childebert succeeded his Father Clouis, in the year five hundred fifteen,
but not in the whole kingdom; Four kings reigning together in France.
For he leaving four Sons living, it was divided into four parts among
them, and each one was King of his several portion. Childebert had for his
part Paris, where he held his Seat royal, with other dependaunces, as
Poictu, Maine, Touraine, Champaigne, Aniou, Guienne, and Auuergne. Clothaire
was King of Soissons; Clodomire King of Orleaunce; and Theodorick the Bastard,
being the eldest, was King of Metz. They made War by the procurement of
Clotilda their Mother, on Sigismond King of Burgundy; who was slain (with his
Wife and Child) by Clodomire king of Orleaunce: who likewise (in another
battle) was killed himself by Gondemar, under a feigned pretense of
friendship: but for this (in the end) Burgundy was taken and destroyed.
Clothaire and Childebert war in Spain.
Clothaire assisted by Childebert, possessed himself of the Kingdom of
Orleaunce, and slew his Nephews. Clothaire and Childebert had great wars
together, which in the end was accorded; and they passed with their armies
into Spain against Almarick, who used their Sister very hardly, because she
would not be an Arrian: And killing him in the battle, they brought her
back with them into France. He reigned 45. years, and dyed without any
Children: he lies buried at S. German des Prez, which he founded by the
name of S. Vincent.

559
7 Clothaire, the Son of Clouis, succeeded his Brother Childebert, in the
year 559. or as some say, 560. he had before been King of Soyssons forty
five years, and suruiued all his Brethren and their Children; so that (at
length) he remained sole-king of France. He was luxurious, and cruel in the
death of his two Nephews, Children to Clodomire King of Orleaunce. He likewise
(with much disgrace) upon a Good Friday, slew Gauliter d'Yuetot in a Church:
For reparation of which wrong, he advanced or erected the Land of Yuetot (which
is in Normandy) into a kingdom, to the heirs of the said Gaultier. Clothaire
Sole-Monarch of the Gauls.
Clothaire seeing himself Sole-Monarch of the Gauls; would needs leuy the
third part of the Churches reuennewes: Against which the Archbishop of Tours
made resistance, telling the King boldly, that the reuennewes of the Church,
were the goods of the poor. He lost a battle against the Saxons and
Thuringians, because he would not take them to mercy, and suffer them to
depart with their lives saved. He overcame (in war) Cran his Bastard Son,
who rose in arms against him, causing him, his wife and Children to be burned:
having also formerly slain the Duke of Bretaigne, whom he had caused to
reuoult. He reigned 51. years; dyed at Compeigne, and lies buried at S.
Medard de Soyssons. Anno 567.

8 Cherebert or Aribert, 567
succeeded his Father Clothaire, in the year 567. Paris fell to him by
partage. He was very unchaste of life, Cherebert an unchaste King.
and repudiated his Wife, to entertain two of her waighting women: for which
German Bishop of Paris excommunicated him. He reigned nine years, died
without any heirs: And lies buried at Saint Roman near Blaye in Gascoigne.

157
9 Chilperick, succeeded his Brother Cherebert, in the year 577. having before
reigned nine years King of Soissons. He had three wives, the first whereof he
divorced from him, compelling her to enter into Religion. The second, being
named Audouera, Fredegond Concubine to Chilperick.
he banished. And the third, called Athanagilde, he caused to be strangled in
her bed. All which was done by the procurement of Fredegonde, his Concubine,
whom he then married, and had a Son by her, named Clothaire. His Brethren
warred against him for his inhumanities, and would have deposed him: but in
the end, they were pacifyed. Chilperick perceiving his Brother Sigibert, king
of Metz, to be much molested by the Allemaigns, took many Cities from him:
whereat Sigibert being justly offended, never ceased, till (by the help of
Gontran) he recovered all that was taken from him, pursuing him still in such
sort, that Theodebert his Son was slain, and he glad to save himselse in
Iournay, where Sigibert besieged him. Sigibert was slain in his Tent, by two
Traitors hired thereto by Fredegonde. In short while after, Fredegonde knowing
that the king had noted overmuch familiarity, F^edegonde caused the King to be
murdered.
between her and Landry (Maire of the Palace) her adulterer: she caused the
king to be murdered by the said Landry, at Chelles near Paris, as he returned
somewhat late one night from hunting, having reigned in all 23. years, and
lies buried at S. German des Prez.

10 In the year, 587. 587
Clothaire, second of that name, the son of Chilperick and Fredegonde, (being
but four months old) was acknowledged for Legitimate, and made king, under the
government of Gontran King of Orleans his Uncle, who made Landry (Maire of
the Palace) Tutor to the young King, and because he should be norished with
his Mother Fredegonde. Childebert seeks to revenge his fathers death.
Childebert King of Metz, endeavored by Arms to get the government of the
kingdom, and (as much as in him lay) to have Fredegonde punished, for the
death of his Father Sigibert, and of his Uncle Chilperik, whom she had caused
to be both murdered. Gontran appeased him by making him his heir: yet
notwithstanding, in short while after he began war again, against which Landry
with Fredegonde (who was a woman of admired courage) opposed themselves.
Fredegonde a woman of great spirit.
And she (to imbolden the French) carried the young king her son in her arms,
walking so with him thorough the thickest of the battle, and showing him unto
the soldiors, she would say: Fight for your young King, and defend his
kingdom: by which means Sigibert was foiled, and driven to flight. Brunehault,
Brunehault executed.
having put to death many children of the blood Royal, was delivered to
Clothaire, who caused her to be torn with four horses. He revenged himself on
the Saxons, leaving no male child alive that was taller then his sword. He
reigned 44. years, and lies buried at S. German des Pres.

631.
11 Dagobert, first of that name, succeeded his Father Clothaire, in the year,
631. he gave to his brother Aribert, the kingdom of Aquitaine in partage, which
returned to him again, by suruiuing his said Brother. Dagobert was in great
peril of death, in the life time of his father, because he had cut off his
schoolmaisters beard, and caused him to be grievously beaten: The building of
the Church of S. Denis.
but miraculously he avoided the anger of his father, whereupon he builded the
Church of S. Denis in France, which he enriched with treasures taken from other
churches, especially that of Poictiers, and granted them also the Fair of
Lendit. He was the first that gave any patrimony of the Crown to Churches. He
conquered the Sclauonians, who were then Idolaters, and quieted the Gascoignes
that had rebeld against him, compelling also the King of Bretaigne to do him
homage. It is said, that being much addicted to pleasure, he would train after
him a troop of gallant maidens, apparrelled like to Queens. Jews banished
out of France.
By a perpetual Edict, he banished all Jews out of France, that would not
be baptized. During his reign, Mahomet the false Prophet, a native of Arabia,
began to show himself. He reigned sixteen years, died of a Flux in his belly
at Espinay, and lies buried at Saint Denis, which he instituted as a
Sepulcher for Kings.

645
12 Clouis, second of that name, succeeded his Father Dagobert, in the year of
man's salvation, 645. He had but one bastard Brother, named Sigibert, who in the
life time of his father Dagobert was provided of the Kingdom of Austrasia, and
reigned there but eleauen years, leaving a Son, whom he dearly
re-commended unto Grimoald, Maire of his Palace. But he, The treachery of
Grimoald Maire of the Palace.
insted of advancing him in his right, caused him to be shaven, and sent unto
a Monastery in Scotland, making his own son Hildebert King of Austrasia.
Clouis hearing this wicked act, within two years after, caused Grimoald to be
put to death, Clouis sole Monarch of the Gauls.
and expulsed Hildebert out of the Kingdom: by which means, Clouis remained
sole Monarch of the Gauls. He had by his wife Baudone (a Lady of Saxony)
three Sons, who were all Kings each aft^r other. In his time there happened in
France such scarsity of victuals, and consequently such an extreme famine,
that Clouis, to redress it, took from the Church of S. Denis, the silver
couertures about the Relics and roof, The care of Clouis for feeding the
poor.
and other treasures (wherewith his father Dagobert had enriched it, to feed
the poor in so great a misery, exempting thereto (in recompense) the
jurisdiction of the Bishop of Paris. He went to Jerusalem, and there warred
against the Infidels. He reigned sixteen years, and dying, was buried at S.
Denis.

13 In the year, 663. 663
Clothaire, third of that name, succeeded after his father Clouis. Kings (in
those times) were so careless of maintaining their Majesty Royal, that they
suffered themselves to be governed by the Maires of their Palace, who had
charge of all their public affairs, while they (in mean space) gave
themselves wholly to voluptuousness. The Maires of the Pals lace ouerrule the
Kings.
These Maires hereby took such authority upon them, that the king was but as
their vassaile, and him would they keep in some Castle, or other place of
pleasure, never showing him to the people, but only once in a year, the first
day of May, and then it was done with great pomp, and Royal magnificence,
mounted in a triumphall Chariot, and the people that took pleasure in such
sights, would salute him only with loud acclamations. This course continued
till Pepin le Bref, which was almost an hundred years. During the raygne of
such Kings, Paris and Normandy was all their largest demaines: the rest of
O^ule being divorced as it were from the Kings Sovereign prerogative, was in
the possession of many Princes, making themselves Dukes and Earls in their
several jurisdiction. He lies buried at Chelles near Paris, dying in the
year, 666. and fourth of his reign. He did not any thing deserving to be
written, but only kept his subjects in peace: For Ebroin was so terrible (he
being then Maire and Governor) as neither the princes of France, or any other
Strangers, durst attempt to raise War against him. The honor both of kings
and Kingdom, died with Clothaire, for the Maires of the Palace, pretending to
guard the rightes of the Crown; began (each one through his own avarice) to
debate the Government of public affairs, as formerly has been declared.

14 Childerick, second of that name, 666
and son of Dagobert, succeeded his Brother Clothaire, in the year, 666.
being received by the French, in hatred of Theodorick: who (by the persuasion
of Ebroine) was crowned King, but afterward shaven, and put into S. Denis
Monastery, as Ebroine himself was at Lucon in Burgundy. His insolences and
cruelties, Childerick was slain in hunting, and his Q. also.
hastened his tragical ending, being slain as he was hunting with his wife
Blitilda great with child, by one named Bodille, a Gentleman of Franconia,
who^ he had caused to be cruelly beaten. He reigned 12 years, and is buried at
S. Germain des Pres.

15 Theodorick, first of that name, 680
Son also to Dagobert, and Brother to Childerick, was again made king in the
year, 680. He, after the death of Cothaire the third, reigned a year and more,
before Childerick, albeit he was the younger Brother, only by the means of
Ebroine, Maire of the Palace. But in regard of his badde government, he was
shut up in a Monastery, and so was Ebroin Maire of the Palace, whose cruelties
the French could not endure. But Childerick and his Queen being murdered in
hunting, he was fetched forth of the Monastery, and advanced again to the
dignity Royal, in the year before expressed: And then was Landresill, the son
of Archambauld, made Maire of his Palace. Landresill murdered by Ebroin.
But Ebroin (forsaking his Cloister, got a great Army together, and won the
victory against them; killing Landresill by Treason, and taking the King and
kingdom into his own government, revenging himself, without sparing any. He
overcame Pepin and Martine, Brothers to the Duke of Austrasia, and (contrary to
his faithful promise) killed the said Martine: himself also being after
slain (in the night time) by Hermanfroy, Pepin Heristel Maire of the Palace.
Count of the same country. Pepin Heristell was then made Maire of the Palace,
who carried himself valiantly in his Office, and greatly augmented the
kingdom.

This King Theodorick, whom some do call Thierry, having reigned xix. years,
died in Anno 693. leaving two sons by his wife Clotilda, Clouis who was king
after him, and Childebert. During the raigns of these two precedent kings, the
greatness of Royal Majesty (which ought to be in Kings) did overmuch obscure
it self: and the Church of Rauenna (dissenting from the Romain Church) was yet
by means of Pope Donus, drawn to voluntary conformity, which greatly
increased the Cleargies honor, and their dignities, so that the Romain Church
much augmented it self.

694.
16 Clouis, third of that name, and eldest son to Theodorick, entered into
possession of the Royalty, The worthy deeds of Pepin Heristell.
being very young in years, An. 694. In his time, Pepin Heristell, Maire of the
Palace, passed the Rhine with a puissant Army, subduing ye Saxons and
Sueuians, who had revolted from obedience, by reason of some troubles happening
in France. He also conquered the Frisons with their Duke, and made them to
receive the Christian faith. He reigned four years, and his burial is not
recorded.

17 Childebert, second of that name, succeeded his Brother Clouis, in the
year, 698. 698
Of his deeds there is little set down in writing, for Pepin Heristell (Maire
of the Palace) ruled then the whole kingdom, and managed all the affairs of
France at his pleasure. The power and authority of Pepin Heristel
He heard Ambassadors, and gave them answer, according peace or truce, as to
himself seemed best. In these reigns, the Maires of the Palace held such
authority, as it was not lawful for any to contradict them. And yet Lambert,
Bish. of Vtrecht (whom Pepin had revoked from bannishment) notwithstanding al
his power, did not forbear to reprove his adultry: but it cost him his life,
for he was slain by Dodon, brother to his concubine. Pepin made his own son
Grimoald, Mair of the palace, in which office he was soon after slain.
Charles Martell Bastard son to Pepin Heristell.
Then he made his bastard son, called Charles Martel, duke of Austrasia, and
Maire of the palace. Pepin died in the 17. year of his government, as Maire of
ye Palace: And Plectrude his wife, being desirous to rule, with her young
son Thibaulte, caused Charles Martel to be imprisoned at Colougne. Childebert
die^, having reigned 18. years, and lies buried at S. Stephens of Naucy, as
some have supposed that his brother Clouis does also.

18 Dagobert, second of that name, succeeded his father Childebert, in the
year 716. 716.
He was governed by Plectrude, widow to Pepin Heristel, and by Thibaulte,
Son to his son Drogon. Some French men Crowned (as their King) one named
Daniell, or Chilperick, having the Count Hermanfroy, Hermanfroy Maire of the
Palace.
Maire of the Palace, that had slain the cruel Ebroine. Charles Martell was
still kept Prisoner at Coulongue, by Plectrude, who hindered him (by that
means) from enjoying his Dukedom of Austrasia. Thibault the youngest Son of
Plectrude, aspyring to be Sole-Maire of the Palace, as also to expel
Hermanfroy, and his King Chilperick; raised an Army against them: But
Hermanfroy withstood him so courageously, near to the Forest Charboniere,
Hermanfroy prevailed against Thibaulte.
that Thibaulte was glad to fly, with loss of his people. By this means,
Hermanfroy (like a Conqueror) supported the reign of Chilperick, until that
Charles Martell was escaped out of Prison. Dagobert reigned four years,
leaving two Sons; who, by the factions of diverse Princes (affecting the
government) were made Monks.

720
19 Clothaire, fourth of that name, was king in Anno. 720. After that Charles
Martell had escaped out of Prison, wherein he had been detained by Plectrude
his Stepmother: he came presently into France with a strong Army, to reseaze
his Lordship of Maire of the Palace, and to exclude Chilperick (called
Daniell) with duke Hermanfroy, Maire of the Palace, who had made him King of
France after the death of Dagobert the second. They encountered together, and by
the aid of the Duke of Frise; he was discomfited and fled. But yet his
courage was not quailed, for afterward he foiled Chilperick near to Cambray:
who having reunited his forces, with the help of Eudo Duke of Aquitaine, was
once more vanquished in Champaign. The Duke of Aquitaine retyring, took
Chilpericke home with him into his Country. Hermanfroy, (called by some
Rainfroy) was pursued and taken in the Cittye of Angiers, where Martell (in
kindness) left him to finish his days. Charles Martell maire and great
Governor of France.
Charles Martell having prevailed against all disaduantages, was received in
France for Maire and great Governor. After the first victory, which he had
against Chilperick; he made Clothaire the fourth King of France, whom some do
term to be Brother, and others Uncle to Dagobert the second. He reigned two
years, and lies buried at Nancy.

20 Chilperick, second of that name, 722
otherwise called Daniel, having bin nourished young in a Monastery, had
formerly reigned two years, before Clothayre the fourth. Charles Martell,
after the death of the said Clothaire, sent for him out of Gascoigne, and
acknowledging his lawful right, caused him to be constituted King, The subtle
policy of Charles Martell.
in the year, 722. This did he the rather (now in the fresh Sunshine of his
reconfirmed power) to hold him as King in apearance only, that he dying
without issue, might leave the Crown to his Brother. He reigned almost five
years, and lies buried ot Noyon.

21 Theodorick, second of that name, 727
or Thierry, as some call him, eldest son of Dagobert the second, was made
King in the year, 727. Charles Martell sent to fetch him forth of a Monastery,
whereinto he had bin put when he was young, and created him King, in bare Title
only: For Charles Martell (being Maire of the Palace) did manage the whole
business of the Kingdom, Charles Martel ruled the whole kingdom.
and carried himself therein with very good credit.

Thus did the Maires take such advantage of the Kings carelessness, as (in the
end) they expelled them from the Royal dignity and used it only for
themselves. Charles Martell subdued the Saxons, and those of Bauaria, that
entered into rebellion. Eudo Duke of Aquitain raised the Sarrazins (who then
bare great sway in Spain) to come with him, and War in France, making open
passage for them. They came thither, to the number of four hundred thousand
persons, with Women, Children, and Servant, with purpose to inhabit the
Country, wasting it al along as they went. Charles Martell made a great
slaughter of the Sarrazins.
But Charles Martell met them near Tours, where he vanquished and slew
350000. with very small loss of his own followers. Afterward he prevailed
against the Frisons, and once more he foiled the Sarrazins before Auignon,
expelling them (in the end) quite out of France. This king having reigned
fifteen years, dyed, and lies buried at S. Denis.

741
22 Childerick, third of that name, Surnamed the Insensible, in regard of his
blockish neglect and carelessness, being likewise brought from the Monastery,
succeeded his brother Theodorick, in the year, 741. In which year, Charles
Martell (Maire of the Palace, The death of Charles Martel who left three
Sons.
and Governor of France) after many famous and worthy victories by him
obtained, dyed: and was in Royal habit interred at Saint Denis, in the rank
of Kings, albeit he never had the Name nor Title. He left three Sons,
Pepin, Carloman, and Griffon. Pepin, being Maire of the Palace, lost not a
iotte of that authority, which his Father had formerly exercised over the
Kings: but governed the Realm with his Brother Carloman. Griffon, thinking
himself not sufficiently remembered by his Father, seized Laon to himself,
and held it strongly: but in the end, he was constrained to agree with his
Brethren. Carloman, contemning the goods and honors of this World, went to
Rome to Pope Zachary, and received the habit of Religion at his hands. Pepin,
succeeding as heir, to that which Carloman had forsaken, and having the favor
of the chiefest in the Kingdom: saw occasion smile upon him, Pepin makes
means to enjoy the Kingdom.
to make himself a King, and therefore would not let slip so fair an
opportunity. Hereupon by his Ambassadors, he gained the consent of Pope
Zachary, whom he thoroughly acquainted with the pusilanimity and dissolute life
of k. Childerick, with other his predecessors. In like manner he laid open to
him, the pains and Trauayles of his Father and himself, only in defense of
the Kingdom, and how it was more conuenable, that he who attended the charge
of public affairs, should likewise bear the name of king, rather then he
that waited not thereon at all, but followed his own delights and voluptuous
pleasures, which being considered by the Pope, by the intermise of Bruchard
Bishop of Bourges, and Folrad, The death of Childerick and his wife.
Chaplain unto the said Pepin; it was ordained, that Childerick should be
shaven, and sent unto his Monastery again, where he dyed, with Gisala his
wife, having reigned nine years. And then was Pepin with full consent of the
Nobility, and general sufferages of all the people, proclaimed King of France.

Here ended the first generation of the Kings of France, in the ligne
Masculine, being termed the race of the Merouingians: which lasted from
Pharamond to this Pepin, 331. years. And here begins the second
generation; called the race of the Carlouingians.
751
PEpin, surnamed Le Bref, or Short, Son of Charles Martel, was made king of
France, in the year of grace 751. having bin nine years Maire of the Palace,
from the reign of Chilperick the third. This man, as well by consent of Pope
Zachary, as favor of the French Nobility (his former good government also
(especially considered) was sacred King, the first of that race. Pope Stephen,
who succeeded Zachary, withdrew himself into France, to have succor against
Astulphus King of the Lombards. Pepin being acquainted therewith, Pepin aideth
Rome against the Lombards.
took part with the holy see of Rome, promising to restore that which was
usurped from it: In requital whereof, the Pope sacred him again, with his two
Sons: And Pepin marching with his Army into Italy, sent the Pope home to
Rome again, for Astulphus was besiedged in Pauia, and constrained to make
agreement with the Pope. Pepin gave to the Sea of Rome, the Exarchate of
Rauenna, and many other Cities and Towns by him conquered. He had many
victories against Gaiser, or Waifer, Duke of Aquitaine, who (in the end) was
slain, and his Country conquered, in a battle which he won near to
Perigord. He subdued the Saxons, Pepin instituted the Court of parliament.
who were revolted from their allegiance: And he instituted the Court of
Parliament in France. He died at Paris, in the eyghteenth year of his reign,
leaving two Sons and seven Daughters, which he had by Bertha his Wife. In
his time was Robert, Robert the Devil
Surnamed the Devil, Son unto Aubert Duke of Normandy.

24 Charles the Great, called Charlemaigne, 768
son of Pepin le Bref, succeeded in the kingdom, the year of Grace, 768. and
was Crowned at Worms, after he had made partage with Caroloman his Brother,
when he had reigned 32. years King of France, by consent of the Clergy and
Roman people (in regard of the great good done by him to Christendom, and
the Church of Rome) he was proclaimed, Charlemain made Emp: of the west, And
the first that was called most Christian King,
and crowned Emperor of Rome, in the year, 800. upon Christmas day, the people
crying aloud three several times: To Charles Augustus, crowned of God, the
great and peaceable Emperor; life and victory. He was the first, called Most
Christian King, being a man of great stature, admirable strength, eloquent in
many languages, studious, affecting to hear the reading of histories, a great
lover of learning and the learned, as Parls and Pisa can well witness.
Nicephorus and he divided the Empire, agreeing, that the one should be called
Emperor of the East, and the other of the West. He quailed the commotion raised
in Gui^nne, by the procurement of his Brother Caroloman, who therefore went in
a rage to Rome, and returning thence, died soon after. To please his Mother he
married Theodora, Sister or daughter to Didier k. of the Lombardes: whom he
quickly divorced, and remarried Hildegrande, Daughter unto the Duke of Swethen,
by whom he had Charles, Pepin, Jews, Rotrude, Bertha, and Gilette. Having
pacified the broils in Aqui^aine, at the request of Pope Adrian, he went in^o
Italy against Didier; whom he subdued, and so gave ending to the Lombards
kingdom, The ending of the Lombards kingdom.
sending the king, his wife and children into exile. He conquered the Saxons,
against whom he warred thirty years, having twelve several Battles against
them. He repulsed the Sarrazins, that wasted Spain, and lost one battle in
dealing with them, wherein perrished thirty thousand of his men: but returning
on them the second time, he won a famous victory. But too true it is, that
bringing his army home into France, and passing by Ronceuaux; his
arrieregarde was rudely assailed by the Gascoignes, The unfortunate battle of
Ronceuaux
and there he lost a great number of his Knights, among whom were Rowland and
Oliver. He conquered the H^nnes, Sclauonians, Bauarians, and Danes; loosing his
two best Sons, Charles and Pepin, accomplishing many deeds worthy of
memory, as well in war as peace. He founded the Universities of Paris. Pauia,
and Bolongne: apointing also Orders for Ecclesiastical persons, called
Capitula Caroli Magni, and caused the Counselles of Maience, Rheimes, Tours,
Chaalons, Arles and Francfort to be holden, ordaining withal, The twelve
Peers of France.
the twelve Peers of France. Such was the raygne of this great Charles, till
being crazed with a Fever: he dyed, in the six and fortyeth year of his
Kingly Government, the foureteenth year of his Empire, the seauenty one of
his age, and lies buried at Aix la Chapelle.

25 Jews, 816
Surnamed the Debonnaire or meek, succeeded his Father Charlemaigne, Great
difference between the Son and Father.
both in the Roman Empire, and Kingdom of France, but not in his Virtue and
greatness of courage, for he was so Nicknamed, in regard of his overmuch
readiness and facility, which made his authority despised, both of his own
people and strangers, in the year, 816. Many debanches happened under his
reign, as well on behalf of Bernard his Nephew, king of Italy, his wife and
children (whom he caused to be put to death) as also in his war against the
Bretons, who would not be brought under his obedience. He had three sons by
his first wife, to wit; Lothaire, whom he made King of Italy, Pepin King of
Aquitaine, and Jews King of Bauiere. In second marriage, he had Judith,
daughter to the Count of Altorfe; by whom he had Charles the Balde, who (after
him) was K. of France. He endeavored to reform the ouer-great pomp and
dissolutions in them of the Church, by a Counsel holden at Aix la Chapelle.
The sons in Arms against their father, and their usage to him.
His three first Sons made diverse wars upon him, being thereto provoked, as
well by the Ecclesiastickes, as by the partage which he had made to Charles
the Balde, his youngest son. In their first attempt, they besiedged him at
Compeigne, where they took their second mother Judith, whom when they had
shorn and vayled, they sent her in Religion to Poictiers; leaving their Father
(then) without any administration or royal charge. But afterward, being
recovered from such seruility, and causing his wife to be brought him again:
he was so mild and meek, that he pardoned the Rebels all their offenses. A
second time his Sons arose against him, and (accompanied with many other
Traitors) levied a great Army, wherein Pope Gregory took part with them: and
then they compelled their Father, to come and submit himself to their mercy,
bereauing him of his imperial Ornaments, and giving him the habit of a Monk,
they caused him to be strictly guarded in the Abbey of Saint Medard de
Soissons. His Wife they sent as an exile into Italy, and his Son Charles (as
a Prisoner) to Prouence. The Lords of France and Allemaigne, being unwilling
to suffer that such shame and indignity should be done to an Emperor; The
Lords of France release their Emperor.
in the following year they gave him his liberty, bringing his Wife and Son
again unto him, and Lothaire (chief causer of his Fathers captivity) was glad
to fly thence into Italy. The Emperor constrained his Sons to seek his
mercy, and then he freely forgave them. At Mayence he dyed, having reigned
twenty six years, and was interred at Metz.

26 In the year 843. 843
Charles the Baulde, Son of Jews the Meek, was made King, by a division or
partage made with his Brethren. Charles remained King of France, Jews king of
Germany; and Lothaire had Italy, with the Empire, Prouence and Austrasia,
whereof he made a Duchy, calling it Lorraine, after his own name. Before the
said partage, they had a great battle near to Auxerre; wherein almost all
the Nobility of France lost their lives. The Normans became Masters (almost)
of all France.
Which was the cause that the Normans (who were risen under conduct of two
valiant leaders) were become Masters well-neere of all France; but in the
end, they were expelled by the King, who was ^rowned Emperor by Pope John,
after the decease of his Nephew Jews, the Son of Lothaire. In this time he
became very high minded, contemning the French manner of habit, an^ wearing
the Grecian fashion, with a Dalmatian garment hanging down to his heels,
beside other strange and pompous attires. Having reigned two years in the
Empire, he was poisoned by his Physician; K. Charles poisoned by his physician.
dying at Mantua; and buried at Verceillis, but seven years after, his body
was transported to S. Denis. He reigned in all 38. years.

879
27 Jews the second, surnamed the Stutter or Stammerer, Son of Charles the
Bauld, succeeded his Father both in the Empire and Kingdom, in the year 879.
Charles the Bauld had three sons, the first was named Charlon; whose eyes he
caused to be pulled out, in regard of his wicked government. The second was
called Charles, who dyed before him. And the third, was this Jews, sir-named
the Stammerer, because his tongue was somewhat short, and made him to falter in
his speech. The Pope escaped out of prison.
Pope John came into France, being escaped out of prison, because he^ stood
against the crowning of Charles le Gros, (Son to Jews of Bauaria) Emperor.
He Crowned King Jews the Stutter Emperor, which he enjoyed not long, in
regard of his sicklynesse, for he dyed in the second year of his reign:
leaving his Wife Richeult (Sister to the King of England, and who was returned
home to her Brother) great with Child of a Son, that was afterward called
Charles the Simple. He appointed as his Guardian, Odo, Son to the Earl of
Aniou, hoping great comfort of the fruit in her Womb. He left also two Bastard
Sons, Jews and Carlon. During his reign, the Normans were valiantly repulsed:
he lies buried at Compeigne.

28 Carlon and Jews, 881
the illegitimate sons of Jews le Begue, were Kings after his decease, The
base sons of Jews made Kings.
in the year 881. not having any other heir to succeed him. Some sought to
give the kingdom to Boson, King of Prouence: and others to Charles the Emperor,
king of Germany. Carlon and Jews (nevertheless) were crowned Kings, and
carried themselves valiantly against the Normans, who (for five years space)
made very great enterprises on France. In the battle which they had near to
Chinon, they fought manfully upon the river of Vienna; there nine thousand were
slain, beside them that were drowned in flight. They expelled also the
forenamed Boson and Charles the Emperor, seeking to make themselves Kings of
France. These two brethren died strangely. The strange death of both the Kings.
Jews, pursuing a wild Bear with his Iaueling, was shot through with an
arrow, which one of his train did let fly at the beast, and so he died, in the
4. year of his reign. Carlon died a year after, as unluckily, for he being
one day very pleasant on horseback, galloping after a fair Damsel, who ran
(for her safety) into a small Country cottage: he (not staying his horse, nor
minding the impossibility of his passage) brake his neck at the doors entrance.

Now, because he was the eldest, and suruiued his Brother, the name of King is
atttibuted to him, as if that he had reigned alone. They were both buried at S.
Denis.

186
29 Jews the third, surnamed Fai-neant, Do nothing, after the death of Carlon
his Father, was made King in the year 886. This man, being altogether
careless, albeit he had a great number of men, which his Father had
assembled to resist the Normans (who wasted the kingdom very much) would not
use any resistance: but like one fearful and negligent, A dishonorable
composition with the Normans.
made agreement with them, and promised to give them 12. thousand pounds of
Money yearly, till twelve years should be expired. Whereupon, the French
(disdaining to be tributary to the Normans) deposed the said Do nothing, and
made him a shaven Monk at Saint Denis. And the rather they did it, because he
had taken a Nun from Challes S. Baudour, near Paris, and married her whether
she would or no. To resist the Normans, the French sent for Charles le Gros,
Emperor of Rome, Nephew also to Charles the bald, and him they made King. The
Normans kept Paris besiedged, with forty thousand men, who were in such sort
foiled, as not a man of them escaped alive. A great sl^ughter of the Normans.
Nevertheless, to contain them in some more moderation; he made alliance and
agreement with their Dukes. Which raised such strange garboiles in the Realm,
so displeased the people, and incensed them with such hatred against him: that
they expulsed him both out of the Empire and Kingdom, Charles le Gros expulsed
from the Empire and kingdom
and he dyed in a poor Village of Suauba, very poor and miserably. Yet the
five years of this reign are attributed to him and not to Jews Do nothing.

30 Odo, or Eudes, 891
Son to Robert Earl of Angiers, was made King in the year 891. after
Charles le Gros, by advise of the Princes: albeit he was not of the race of
Charlemaigne, but only Tutour to Charles the Simple, and he was preferred by
Arnould the Emperor (successor to Charles le Gros) who would have had the
Kingdom himself. During his reign, the Normans (breaking their agreement
made with Charles le Gros) began to war again, much more cruelly then
before, and now the second time besiedged Paris: But Odo carried himself so
undauntedly, that he ouer-came them many times. In this while, certain Barons
of the Realm, Charles the Simple sent for out of England, and crowned K.
had sent for Charles the Simple into England, and Crowned him King of France,
at the age of fourteen years. Odo, who was then in Aquitaine (hardly
brooking this disgrace) moved great war against Charles the Simple, which
continued for long time. Nevertheless, at the hour of his death, he
entreated the Princes of France, that they should restore the said Charles to
the Kingdom, because (in true right) it appertained to him. This Odo brought
up (as a novelty) to have a great many Flourede-Luces (without any direct
number) in the Arms of France, which continued so till the time of Charles
the sixth. He reigned nine years, and lies buried at S. Denis.

900
31 Charles the third, surnamed the Simple, son of Jews le Begue, or the
Stammerer, began to reign soly in the year 900. After his Tutours death, who
had held the kingdom in the minority of his years. The war of the Normans
continued still: yet the king fell into acquaintance with Raoull, or Rollo their
Duke, and gave him his daughter in marriage, endowed with all the Land,
Neustria, now named Normandy.
which then was called Neustria, and afterward made a duchy, and named
Normandy, with especial condition, that he should be baptized. Robert Earl of
Paris, Brother to Odo, (lately deceased) pretended to vsurp the kingdom, and
drawing many Lords into his faction, crowned himself King. But Charles, with
the aid of the Emperor Henry, gave him battle near to Soissons, wherein
the said Robert was vanquished and slain. Heereat Hebert, Earl of Vermandois
(his Brother in Law) was highly displeased, yet he dissembled it for an apt
time, and one day, pretending to feast the King, he entreated him to lodge in
his castle of Peronne. No sooner was he entered, Charles compelled to resign
his Kingdom.
but he did shut him up in a Tower (where he dyed) compelling him to resign
the Kingdom to Raoull, Brother to the Duke of Burgundy. He left by Theargina
his Wife, a Son named Jews, who fled for his safety into England. This
King reigned alone 14. years, and lies enterred at Peronne.

927
32 Raoull of Burgundy, Son to Richard Duke of Burgundy, was made King in the
year 917. This man not being of the lineage of kings, would needs be crowned
at Soissons: Hugh the great Count of Paris.
as well by favor of Hugh the great Earl of Paris, as also of Hebert Earl of
Vermandois, who then kept King Charles the Simple Prisoner, seazing his person,
under color of feasting him, and constrayning him (before his death) to
resign his Kingdom, in presence of many Lords, and to give it (as a free
gift) to the said Raoull, which yielded the greater authority to his reign.

The Queen Theargina, wife to King Charles the Simple, seeing such troubles in
France; made her retirement into England, to the King her Brother, with her Son
Jews, Jews d' Outremer, or of Beyond Sea.
called Jews of beyond the Sea. Raoull made a voyage into Italy, pretending to
get the Empire, which was then in strife, and there he vanquished Berengarius
an Italian Prince, who laid some claim thereto. But finding himself not well
affected of the Italians; he withdrew thence into France: where he dyed of a
very strange disease, Raoull died very strange lie.
being eaten with worms, notwithstanding all remedies applied by his
Physicians. He reigned about ten years, died at Auxerre, and was buried at
S. Colombe near Sens.

33 Jews, fourth of that name, 929.
sir-named Jews d'Outre-mer, or of beyond the Sea. Son of Charles the Simple,
was made K. in the year 929. being then in England with the K. his uncle, the
Princes, Prelates, and Barons of France sent for him into England: whither his
Mother Theargina had carried him for refuge, when Hebert had betrayed King
Charles her Husband; and he was crowned at Laon. The King had debate with Raoul
of Burgundy, about the Kingdom, and made war upon the Emperor Otho for the
Duchy of Lorraine: but peace being made between them, he took to Wife
Herberge, Sister to the said Emperor. At his return home into France, Hebert
Earl of Vermandois executed.
he caused Hebert Earl of Vermandois to be hanged, who had procured his
Father to dye in Prison. Hugh, the great Earl of Paris, who then held the full
sail of the kingdom; raised the Normans to rebel against the King: But the
King drawing him to his side, he rebelled from him again, because he had made
an agreement with the Normans without him, and caused them also to alter their
purpose, with a fresh begun war: wherein the King was taken Prisoner, and
carried to Rouen. Afterward he was delivered to the great Earl Hugh, who
detained him at Laon: but the Emperor Otho came to his succor, and delivered
him. Jews reigned twenty seven years, and lies buried at S. Remy of Rheimes.

956
34 Lothaire, Son of Jews d' Outremer, or of beyond the Sea, was made King in
the year 956. At the beginning of his reign, Hugh the great Earl of Paris
governed all the affairs of France: The death of Hugh the great Earl of Paris.
but he dyed soon after (leaving three Sons, to wit, Hugh Capet, who
afterward usurped the kingdom; Otho and Henry, who were successively Dukes of
Burgundy;) and was sumptuously enterred at Saint Denis. Lothaire reigned 31.
years, and lies buried at S. Remy of Rheimes.

35 After King Lothaire, Jews his Son, 986
fifth of that name, succeeded in the government, in the year 986. He reigned
but one year, died without any heir, and was the last King of the race or
lineage of Charles the great, his burial was at Compeigne. Charles, Duke of
Lorraine, Charles duke of Lorraine seeks to be King.
(who was his Uncle and nearest Heir) hearing of his death, would needs
pass into France, to make himself King: But the French hated him extremely,
as well because he had continually pertaken with the Allemaignes, sworn
enemies then to the French; as also, in regard he was a bad Prince to his own
Subjects. So that they would not receive him for their King, but wholly ran
to Hugh Capet, then Maire of the palace, a very wise and worthy man. He
perceiving that the French favored and affected him, knew well enough how to
sow (both in their ears and hearts) an vnliking opinion of Charles Duke of
Lorrain, to make him the more hateful to them. He first laid before them, how
he had permitted the Allemaignes free passage, D. Charles disabled by Hugh
Capet.
when they came and warred on France. Next, that he had maintained the chief
enemies to the crown of France, wherein he stood guilty of high treason; And
so, (by consequent) was disabled of any succession to the said Crown.

Here ends the second generation of the Kings of France, in the ligne
Masculine, being the race of the Carlouingians, and which continued (after
Pepin) for the space of 233. years.
987
HVgh Capet, Son to Hugh the great Earl of Paris, possessed himself of the
Crown of France, in the year 987. He was (by some of the French) proclaimed
King at Noyon first of al; soon after, in the City of Rheimes (partly by
favor, and partly perforce) Crowned King of France, and made his entrance
into Paris: whereupon, Charles Duke of Lorraine took Rheimes, Laon, and
Soissons. Hugh Capet with a potent Army besiedged Laon, D. Charles and his
wife and Children surprised by treason.
where he took Charles with his Wife and Children, by Treason in the Bishop
of the said place, and sent them Prisoners to Orleaunce, where they were very
strictly kept, and died. Capet being the Conqueror, maintained, that the
kingdom should wholly appertain to him: because Raoull of Burgundy (his
uncle) had formerly possessed himself thereof, by the voluntary resignation
of Charles the Simple. He caused his son Robert (who had followed his studies)
to be crowned at Orleaunce, and to associate him in the kingdoms regiment:
taking away the authority of the Maire of the Palace, when thus he advanced
his son, whom he had by Adela, daughter to Edward King of England. He
appointed also the twelve Peers again; began the dignity and office of
Constable; and established the Marshals of France. He reigned alone, and with
his Son 9. years. He founded the Abbay of S. Magloire at Paris, and lies
buried at S. Denis.

37 Robert, the son of Hugh Capet, being Crowned King in the life time of
his Father, 997
began to rule alone in the year 997. as true inheritour, both of the Crown,
and likewise of his Fathers virtues. He reigned worthily, being a Man very
devout and meek, the Kingdom continuing peaceable, and without war. The
virtues of Robert, son to Hugh Capet.
This King was very wise, and could compose in Latin very learnedlie: for he
made many Proses, Himnes, and answers, which yet (to this day) are sung in the
Church. He was also well skild in Music, and would oft-times sing among the
Channons, and wear a Coape (for company) with them, living as religiously, as
royally. Henry Duke of Burgundy (his Uncle by the Mothers side) made him
Heir of his Duchy, leaving it unto him by his Testament: and incited him
against Landry Duke of Neuers, (being beloved and supported by the
Burgundians) who insulted upon his right, in which attempt they foiled him,
and drove him to flight. He joined the City of Sens to the Crown, by
confiscation, for a certain delict done by the Count Reynard. He sent his
Army against the Valentians, with Richard Duke of Normandy, to assist the
Earl of Flanders his Kins-man, against Henry the Emperor. His Wives and
children.
He had three wives* Luthard, Bertha (whom he forsook upon some occasion)
and Constance, by whom he had three sons, one whereof died during his reign.
In his time was an universal famine and mortality. He dyed, having reigned 34.
years, and lies buried at S. Denis.

1030.
38 Henry the first succeeded in the kingdom, after his Father Robert, in the
year 1030. In his beginning to govern, his younger Brother Robert warred
against him, being allied to the Earls of Champaigne and Flaunders; who
strove to make him King, by the procurement of his Stepmother: but he
(assisted by the Duke of Normandy, and the Earl of Corbeile) mayntained his
own quietness. He joined Meulanc to his Crown, by rebellion of the Earl of
that place. Raoull king of high Burgundy being dead, the Emperor Conrade seized
on that part thereof, which we call La Franche Conte; And the Duchy being
Roberts, Brother to the King, the kingdom of Burgundy (which had so contied an
hundred and thirty years) was then abolished. The ending of the kingdom of
Burgundy.
The King seated young William the Bastard, Duke of Normandy, (to whom he had
been Guardian) peaceably in his Duchy, because some of his Subjects would
have deprived him thereof, as being unwilling to entertain him. The King of
the Russians.
He founded Saint Martine des Champs, in the same place where his Palace was,
without Paris. By Anne his wife, daughter to George or Gaultier king of the
Russians, he had Phillip and Hugh, and a Daughter married to the Duke of
Normandy. Feeling himself to wax week, he caused his Son Phillip to be
crowned King of France: And before his death, he left Baldwine Earl of
Flanders as Guardian of his Children. He reigned 31. years, and lies buried
at Saint Denis.

39 Phillip the first, succeeded after his Father, 1061.
in the year 1061. During his time, William the Bastard, Duke of Normandy, The
conquest of England by William the Bastard.
conquered the Realm of England: and Godfrey of Bullen was made King of
Jerusalem; also the Country of Gastinois came then to the Crown. This king
reigned 48. years, and lies buried at S. Bennets on Loire.

40 Jews the sixth, sir named le Gros, 1110
immediately after the death of King Phillip his Father, in the year 1110. was
sacred at Orleaunce by the Bishop of Sens, the way of Rheimes not being then
secure. Some Princes and Lords (assisted by the King of England) in the
beginning of his reign, did give him many molestations; but still it was his
hap to be Conqueror, and the War of the English (very many times
appointed) was at last ended. The Pope flies for refuge into France.
Pope Gelasius fled for refuge into France, where he was succored against the
Emperor. In the year 1129. the King caused his Son Phillip to be Crowned;
who (two years after) dyed at Paris, by reason of a Hogs running between
the Legs of his Horse, that threw him violently on the Pauement, and dying
of that hurt, he was buried at Saint Denis. Afterward, he had his other Son
Jews crowned, and it was done by Pope Innocent, he being then in France.

At this time were a great company of Lazers and Leapers in France, who would
have infected all the rest of the people; but they were all taken and burned.
Knights Templers, and Chartreux Monks*
The order of the Knights Templers, and Chartreux Monks began in this kings
reign: and the winds were so rough and impetuous, in the year 1135. that they
ouer-turned many Towers, Castles, Trees in Forests, and Mils. This King
appeased the troubles in Flanders, Bou^bonnois, and Auuergne: he builded the
Abbay of Saint Victor near Paris; reigned 28. years, died at the age of
sixty, leaving six Sons and a daughter, and lies buried at S. Denis.

1138
41 Jews the seventh, sir-named the Young man, began to reign after his
Father, in the year 1138. He made war on Thibault Earl of Champaigne, too^o^
him the City of Vitry: And (in a great ^age) burned the Church, with 13
hundred persons in it, 1300. persons ^u^ned in a church.
that had fled thither for safety. By the solicitation of S. Bernald, he went
to Jerusalem with his Queen, and with the Army of the Emperor Conrade:
where, besiedging Damas, thorough discord in the Army, he could boast of no
advantage; but retyring thence, had not the Ships of Sicily befriended him
and his; they had remained Prisoners there. Being returned into France, he
made a separation between him and Queen Aelianor his wife, Duchess of
Aquitaine and Aniou, upon two suspicions conceived against her. Henry, Duke of
Normandy (who afterward was King of England) married her, with her Patrimony
of the said two Dutchies: and there-about followed great Wars between
France and England. The King married Constance, Daughter to the K. of Spayn,
who dyed soon after: And then he remarried Alice, daughter to the Earl of
Blois, by whom he had Phillip Dieu-donne, Gods gift. Then happened great
disturbance in England, between the King and his son, who making his recourse
to Jews, caused thereby a very troublesome war, without any advantage to
either side. But in ye end they were accorded, and a marriage concluded, A
marriage between England and France.
of Alice the daughter of Jews to the son of England. The King died at Paris,
having reigned 43. years, and lies buried in the Abbay of Barbeau, which was
founded by him.

42 Phillip Augustus, sir-named Dieu-donne, 1181.
Gods gift, succeeded after his Father, in the year 1181. He banished all the
Jews out of France, and yet afterward permitted them entrance again:
ordaining many Edicts against Blasphemers, as also the usury of the Jews. He
did put to death the Albigeois Heretics, and them of Besiers: augmenting
greatly the City of Paris, instituting Sheriffs and Alder-men, Virtuous
deeds in a King.
commanding the streets to be paued, building also the Halles for Students,
and the Churchyard of S. Innocent, and enclosing with walls the University side.
He went to recover the City of Jerusalem, with Richard Cueur de Lion, King
of England; and falling off from him, returned home into France. He had
afterward great wars against the said K. Richard, and John without Land his
brother, who succeeded him; about the titles of Normandy, Aquitain, Poictu,
Maine, Aniou, and Auuergne. He won the battle at Bouines against the Emperor
Otho, and other French Lords who were entered into rebellion against him: Fifty
thousand men slain in one battle.
In which battle perished fifty thousand men, and Otho himself was enforced
to flight, the Earl of Flanders and the Earl of Bolongne being taken
Prisoners, by which reason the king was called the Conqueror. He reigned 43.
years, died at Mante, aged 59. and lies buried at S. Denis, leaving two sons
and a daughter.

1224
43 Jews the eight, succeeded after his Father, in the year 1224. In the life
time of his Father, he crossed the Seas, and made War in England, attayning
to no such success as he expected. He renewed kindness and Brotherhood
between the French and Germans, took Auignon, and warred upon the
Albigeois. He reigned three years, and lies buried at Saint Denis.

1227
44 Jews the ninth, succeeded his Father Jews the eight, in the year 1227.
Blaunche his Mother (in regard of his young years) was appointed to be
Regent: whereat some Lords were discontented, but she took order sufficiently
with them. She maintained the war against the English, and agreement was made
with them upon solemn Oath, Peace between England and France.
to hold Aquitaine, doing homage, and to yield up Normandy, Ponthieu, Maine,
and Poictiers. The king being in peace, exercised himself to live Religiously,
building Churches, Hospitals, and Monasteries, enriching them with rents and
reuennues. In the 24. year of his reign, he went to recover the Holy Land,
descended into Egypt, and took Damieta. He was afterward so rudely assailed,
that he was taken by the Soldane: but delivered again, upon his restoring
Damieta, and paying a great ransom. He bought of the Venetians, the Crown of
Thorns (as was supposed) with other Relickes of the passion, and caused them
to be safely kept in the holy Chapel at Paris. Many Shepherds, Peazants
ari^e, and do great hurt in France.
understanding that the King was prisoner, arose up in arms, and made great
spoil in France: but they were foiled by them of Orleance and Bourges. The
king at his return, did very severely chastise blasphemers: And passing
afterward into Africa, took Carthage, and assailed Thunis, where the
Pestilence happening in his Camp, he died of a flux of blood. He reigned 34.
years, and lies buried at S. Denis.

Behold briefly the life and death of King Jews, ninth of that name, who
afterward by Pope Boniface the eight, in the time of Phillip le Bell, K. of
France called a Saint
was cannonized among the number of Saints in Romes Calendar, and called S.
Jews. His reign was truly in piety, religion, sanctity and justice. His
youth was much tormented with rebellions, subleuations, and seditions of some
Lords: but his manly years did disperse them, as the Sun does dim clouds.
He was devout, upright, valiant, liberal, severe, and yet clement, using all
these Virtues, according as he knew them to be needful.

1271
45 Phillip the third, Son of S. Jews, was proclaimed King in the Camp before
Thunis, in the year, 1271. but was afterward Sacred at Rheimes. He was
Sur-named Phillip the hardy, and at his coming back into France, he had many
difficulties, about the death of Phillip his impoysoned Son, in the Wars of
Foix and Terracon. Upon an Easter day, in the evening hour, all the French
(being then in Sicily) were every one slain, The Sicili-Vespres.
whereon grew the Byword of the Sicilian Vespres or Evening. The king died at
Parpignan, in the fortith year of his age, and lies buried at Saint Denis,
he married Isabel, Daughter to Peter of Arragon, by whom he had Phillip,
Charles, and Marie: And then, remarrying Marie, Daughter unto Henry Duke of
Brabant, he had by her Jews and Margaret.

1286.
46 Phillip the fourth, Sur-named le Bell, or the Fair, Son to the forenamed
Phillip, succeeded his Father, in the year, 1286. both in the Kingdom of
France and Navarre, in right of his wife. In his younger days he had a
Schoolemaister, a Roman borne, and a great Divine, named Gilles, who caused the
King to write an excellent work (yet to be seen) called The Institution of
Princes. As the King was at Paris, A Book written by the King.
being returned from his Corronation at Rheimes; this Divine (according to the
Universities ancient custom, which was, to make a learned speech after the
kings sacring) made a singular Oration to him to increase his desire in
following Virtue and piety, preserving his subjects in peace and tranquillity.
He built the sumptuous Palace of Paris, and subdued the Flemings, who had
forsaken his part, and given aid to the English against him; the Earl of
Flanders, and his two sons being then taken prisoners. The King left a
Garrison in the country, but they were slain in a commotion of the people:
Whereupon, the Earl of Flanders (having given his faith to the King) was sent
thither with one of his sons: but being able to do no good, he returned back
again to the King, and died soon after at Compeign. The k. went thither
himself in person, and at the first had no better success: but at length, he
charged them so furiously, that he foiled 36000. whereon they were constrained
to make atonement, and pay him 200000. Crowns. The day of Coutray, was
afterward favorable to the Flemmings, but deplorable to the French, the
English preuayling mightily against them. Then came the Bulls of Pope Boniface
against Phillippe, The Popes Bulls against the King, burned.
but they were burned in the Court of the Palace: which made Boniface to
excommunicate the King, but Bennet his Successor absolved him again. In his
time was the Papal See, trans-ferred to Auignon, The Popes See was brought to
Auignon.
where it continued threescore and ten years, Rome being then governed by
Legates. The king died at Fountainebleu, which was the place of his birth:
having reigned 28. years, and lies buried at S. Denis.

47 Jews the tenth, Sur-named Hutin (after the conformity of his manners)
succeeded his Father, in the year, 1314. 1314
and had his right also, (after his Mother) in the kingdom of Navarre.
Enguerrand de Marigni, General of the Finances, being accused to have robbed
the kings treasury, was hanged at Mont-faucon, which he himself first caused
to be made. Jews took first to wife Margaret, Enguerrand executed at
Mont-faucon.
Daughter to Robert Duke of Burgundy, by whom he had a Daughter. Next, he
married Constance, whom he left with child of a Son, named John, that lived
but eight days. This King reigned but xviij. months, died at Boys de
Vinciennes, and is buried at S. Denis.

1316.
48 Phillip the fifth, Surnamed the Long, succeeded after his Brother Jews Hutin
in ye kingdom, being called Long* in regard of his tal stature and
slenderness. The Duke of Burgundy, would have troubled his possession of the
crown, in regard of his Daughters Daughter* but the Salique Law did not favor
him therein. This King Phillip married Jane, Daughter to Otholine Earl of
Burgundy, by whom he had three daughters: The first married with the Son to
the Duke of Burgundy; the second, the Son to the Earl of Flaunders; and the
third to the Daulphine of Viennois, by which marriages all Wars were
assuaged in France. Marriages make peace in France.
During his reign, diverse Leapers and Lazers (procured thereunto by the Jews)
poisoned all the wells which caused a great Pestilence thorough the Kingdom:
but both the one and other were grievously punnished therefore. Never could
this King obtain of his people, any impost or Taxation by him levied. He made
a Law, that there should be in his kingdom, but one kind of weight, one measure,
and one money, commanding that it should be duly kept. But while this was in
execution, he died, without any heirs male, having reigned five years in
peace, and lies buried at S. Denis.

In these times, certain Troops of Country people, that were called Pastors
and Shepherds, arose again in France, as formerly some had done in the time
of King Jews the ninth. These men made their vaunt, Another rising of Peazants
in France.
that they would cross the Seas, and go war against the Infidels. They had
two chief men of mark among them, and well beseeming such an assembly, to wit,
a Priest, that (for his mis-behauiour) was expulsed his Church: and an Apostata
Monk, of the Order of S. Bennet. These two fellows, so abused the hearts and
belief of the poor popularity, that silly Shepherds left their Flocks, and
Laborers their Manual trades, to follow these two impostures: who made them
verily believe, that the Holy Land could be recovered by none but them. In
conclusion, this heap of Rascality was quailed in Languedoc, because, in stead
of preparing their fury against the Infidels, and passing the Seas: they fell
upon the Jews, whom the king had repealed into France.

1321
49 Charles le Bell, Son to Phillip the fourth, succeeded after his Brother, in
the year 1321. and likewise was King of Navarre, as his three predecessors had
bin. He had three wives* Blaunch, (whom he divorced for her adultery) Marie,
and Margaret. Iourdain de l'Isle (albeit he was Nephew to Pope John the two
and twentieth) was hanged and strangled at Paris, Iourdain de l'Isle hanged at
Paris
for his strange offenses. This King fell to concord with the English, appeased
the Earl of Flaunders, and drew his people to a mutual Reconciliation. He
was a great Iusticer, reigned seven years, dyed at Boys de Vinciennes, and is
buried at Saint Denis.

By his death, the second branch of the Capets (called De Valois) came to the
Royalty, and began in
1328.
50 PHillip de Valois, Coozin German to the three precedent Kings, dying
without heir male: his succession was in the year, 1328. His right to the
Crown was dearly disputed, between him and King Edward the third of England,
Son to the Sister of the three forenamed Kings, who (preferring his Mothers
Title) would needs be King of France, contrary to the Decree of the Law
Salique, and consent of all the States. He did king Phillip homage for Guyenne
and Ponthieu; but (being not well pleased therewith) cut him off quite from
Flanders, Bretaigne, Germany, Crecy, The Battle of Crecy, and great loss of
the French.
where Phillip lost the day, with the very flower of all the French Nobility,
taking Calais also by their flight. Truce being taken between both the Kings:
Edward of England had both the Title of king, and Arms of France or conquest,
which ever after was attributed to him and his. Phillip, reigned 22. years,
died at Nogent, and lies buried at S. Denis.

51 John, Son to Phillip de Valois, 1350.
succee-his Father, in the year 1350. proouing as unfortunate in those
tempestuous times, as his father had done before him. He married Ioane,
Countess of Bolongne, by whom he had four sons and one Daughter. Raoull the
Constable of France was beheaded in prison. King John, as a prisoner brought
into England.
In the day at Poictiers, King John was taken by the English, and carried into
England, which imprisonment of his, caused many pitiful Tragedies, the most
furious whereof were acted in the chief Cities of France. Four years after,
King John passed into England, for the freedom of his Ostages: but there he
died at London, having reigned 13. years. His son caused his body to be
brought to S. Denis.

52 Charles the fifth, Son to King John, 1364.
succeeded his Father, in the year 1364. He sustained very great troubles
during the captivity of his father, by a commotion which the k. of Nauar
raised at Paris, who was aided by the merchants of the said City, and would
have had the Regency, but that Charles (being then Daulphine) made opposition
against him. He dealte for the ransom and deliverance of his Father: after
whose decease, he was crowned King. He took to Wife Ioane, Daughter to
Charles Duke of Burbon, by whom he had three Sons, and one daughter. He
maintained great wars against the English, Five armies at one time against
the English.
having (at one instant) five several Armies in field against them, because
they were such potent enemies: And to supply so mighty a charge, he was feign
to lay a heavy taxation upon wine and Salt. Bertrand de Guesclin, a most
worthy Knight, was then his high Constable: And the Bastille at Paris was then
builded. A sedition happened at Montpellier, and six hundred of the seditious
were executed. This King was surnamed the Wise, for his deep discretion,
goodness, and government. The Bibles first verssion into the French tongue.
He so loved Learning, that he caused the Holy Bible to be translated into the
French Language (which remains yet) in the Royal Cabinet of the Louure) with
many other good Books beside. He had still an eye to Justice, sitting daily to
hear causes, and ordering all his affairs by Counsel. With much adoo, he
regained some Towns from the English, in Poictu and Xaintonge. He reigned
sixteen years, yielded his soul to God at Chasteau de Beauty, and lies
buried at S. Denis. The Sect of the Turlupins was then abolished. See Emil.
Lib. 9.

1380
52 Charles the sixth, son of Charles the fifth, was crowned King at the age of
foureteen years, being under the government of his Uncles, the Dukes of Berry,
Burgundy, (...)
and the Duke of Aniou, who got into their custody many millions of Gold, left
by the King deceast. And then, (no Money being to be found) the people were
charged with heavy impositions, whereby great seditions happened at Paris,
Rouen, and Orleaunce. The King took into the Arms of France again, the three
Floure-de-Luces only, Factions in the Court of France.
and fell sick of a Phrenzy: by reason of two factions in his Court, the Dukes
of Berry and Burgundy, against the Dukes of Orleaunce and Bourbon, whereby many
lamentable mishaps ensued. The Princes took the government into their hands,
and division happening (concerning the treasure) the Duke of Burgundy caused
the Duke of Orleaunce to be slain at Paris, and the Duke of Burgundy was
slain at Montereau. Phillip his Son craved aid of the English, who
presently took (well near) all Normandy; beside the unhappy day (to the
French) of Agincourt or Azincourt, where many wo^ull Tragedies were acted on
the Theater of France by the English, Burgundians, and the Kings Mother, who
was imprisoned at Paris. The King of England married Madame Katherine of France.
The Duke of Burgundy delivered him the King, the Queen, and the City of
Paris, The King of England crowned in France.
where he caused him to be crowned King, and many other Cities and Towns were
delivered him beside. King Charles having reigned forty two years, died at
Paris, and lies buried at Saint Denis. His reign was long, but full of
calamity.

1423
54 Charles the seventh, Son to Charles the sixth, was made King in the year
142. He found his Kingdom possessed (in all parts) by the English; Paris and
the greater part of the Realm, being then commanded by the Duke of Bedford,
Regent for young Henry King of England; who called himself King of France;
held his Parliament at Paris; was there crowned king; and made the Seal and
Moneys also in his own name: King Charles having nothing else, but the
Countries of Poictu, Berry, and Orleaunce, whereon the English (in a mockery)
called him the king of Bourges. They went to besiedge the City of Orleaunce;
but they were thence repulsed by the French Captains: For they had a Maid in
their Company, who was called Joan the Pucelle, Ioane the Pucelle of France.
and they verily believed, that she was sent of God, for the succor of King
Charles, and to chase the English out of France. The King, after the
discomfiture of the English near to Partenay; was conducted to Rheimes, and
there crowned: But the English got the Pucelle, and burned her at Rouen The
King made peace with the Duke of Burgundy, who forthwith left the English; and
afterward recovered Paris and Normandy from them. King Charles reigned 38.
years, and lies buried at S. Denis.

1461
55 Jews the eleventh, succeeded his Father, in the year 1461. being then in
Burgundy, whence the Duke conuayed him to Rheimes, where he was crowned. He
found a number of notable Enemies, both Domestical and Foreign: For his
Lords made war against him, which they termed The Weale-publike war, and
he lost the day to them at Montle-hery, The order of S. Michael instituted
Gransson, Nancy, and Guinegaste. The order of S. Michaell was then instituted,
and Iacques d'Armaguac beheaded. His reign was full of fear, suspicion, and
treachery, which so pierced his heart; that, in a long time of dismay (after 33.
years government) he died, and lies buried at Nostre Dame de Clery.

56 Charles the eight, 1484.
succeeded his Father Jews, in the year 1484. being crowned at the age of 14.
years: yet the States meeting at Tours, appointed that he should not have any
Regent. He sustained a long war in Bretayne, which termined by his marriage
with Anne, eldest Daughter to Fraunces Duke of Bretayne; by whom he had three
Sons, but could not long enjoy any one of them. At the request of his
Confessor, he rendered to the King of Spain the Earledomes of Roussillon and
Parpignan, which his Father had won. Being in peace, he adventured to recover
the kingdom of Naples, The Kingdom of Naples won by the French.
which he did (without striking one stroke) in full conquest: K. Alphonsus and
his son Ferdinand being thence retired, and left Glibert de Montpensier
Viceroy there. Returning home into France, he was assailed on the way by the
Romans, Venitians, and them of Milleyne at Fornoue, where his person was in
great danger, the enemies being ten to one: Nevertheless, he charged them
with such courage, that he bare thence the victory. He delivered the Duke of
Orleaunce, being besiedged in Nouarre, and made peace with the Duke of
Millaine. He returned home into France, where he dyed (within a year after)
at Amboise, as he stood and beheld the Princes playing at Tennis. He reigned
fourteen years, and lies buried at S. Denis.

Thus ended (in him) the direct ligne of Valois, he dying without any heirs
Masle; and then followed the collateral Issue, which began in
1499
57 Jews the twelft, nearest of Kin to Charles the eight, in the year 1499.
He being Duke of Orleaunce, and also of Valois. He repudiated Ioane, Daughter
to King Jews the eleauenth, whom he had married perforce; and espoused Anne
of Bretaigne, Widow to the King his Predecessor. He established a Parliament
at Rouen, gave orders to the University of Paris; sent his Army into Italy,
took Genes and Millayne, and Jews Sforza, Duke of Milleyne, The kingdom of
Naples reconquered
who dyed a Prisoner in France. The Kingdom of Naples was re-taken, under the
conduct of Monsieur d' Aubigny: And the King vanquished the Venetians Army at
Agnadell, where he took Bartholmew their Leader, albeit the Pope banded with
the Venetians against him. Gaston de Foix.
Gaston de Foix took Boulongne, and won the battle near to Rauenna: where
he was slain, by chasing the enemies ouer-far; and yet notwithstanding, the
victory remained to the French, with surprizall of the City, and many
Captains and great persons taken Prisoners. Hereupon, the Pope raised many
heavy enemies against him, whom (in the end) he woorthily vanquished. He
reigned 17. years, and lies buried at S. Denis.

58 Frances de Valois (as nearest of Kin) succeeded King Jews, in the year
1515. 1515
This King bare such affection to learning, that he was sir-named The Father
and Restorer of the Sciences. At his beginning, he overcame the Switzers, took
Millaine and Fontarabie. Afterward, being desirous to win the Towns
belonging to the Duchy of Millaine, and to bring his siedge before Pauia: he
was taken Prisoner, in the year 1524. and carried Captive into Spain. The
King carried prisoner into Spain.
France was then very greatly afflicted, not only by this disaster; but by a
great Famine, because the Corn was frozen up in the Earth. The King was
delivered by a treaty holden at Madrill, and married Elianor, Sister to Charles
the fifth, Emperor; peace being then concluded, in the year 1535. The King
possessed himself of Sauoy and Piedmont, repulsing the Emperor out of
Prouence: But peace being made for ten years, the Emperor passed thorough
France, with very great entertainment. War began in the Low Countries, The
English won Bullen.
which (after many alarmes) was accorded in the year 1544. even then when the
English won Bullen. The King deceased at Rambouillet, having reigned 32.
years, an lies buried at S. Denis.

1547.
59 Henry the second succeeded his father Frances de Valois, in the year 1547.
No way degenerating from the laudable virtues of his father. He renewed and
confirmed the alliance (made by his Father) with the Switzers, and took the
Fortes about Bullen on the Sea, by such furious assaults, and overmuch
neglect in the English, that they forsook them, and made a peace. In the year
1552. he made his voyage for Germany, to maintain the liberty of certain
Princes, who had (in ye case) required his help. He brought Metz in Lorraine
under his obedience; and (at his return) took Danuilliers, Yuoy, Monmedy, and
other places, with-drawne by his Enemies. He made agreement with Pope Julius
the third, delivering Mirandola and Parma; reducing also Siennato her ancient
liberty, whereof the Spaniards had bereaved her. During this time, the Emperor
came and besiedged Metz, where (without doing any thing) he lost a great number
of his men. The K. marching into the Low-Countryes, took Mariembourg, Bouoines,
and Diuant, driving his Enemy undauntedly before him. In the year 1555. truce
being taken with the Empeperour, Phillip King of Spain, and the King of
England (which lasted but a while) and the French forces being in Italy, under
conduct of Seigneur de Guyse: S. Laurance day at Saint Quintines.
the King assailed S. Quintines, and won the day, which was called S. Laurance
day. In the year 1557. the K. having assembled the same power, and under the
same Leader; took Callice, Guines, Hames, and the County of Oy, with the
City of Thionuille the year following. Peace being finally concluded
between them, by means of marriage of Phillip King of Spain, with Elizabeth
the eldest Daughter of France, and the Prince of Piedmont, with Margaret only
Sister to King Henry: In toy of the said marriages and peace, a Turney was
celebrated in Paris, in the street of Saint Anthony, King Henry hurt in
^^lting. and died soon after.
where King Henry (running in the Lists) was smitten with the Counter-cuffe of
a Lance into the head, whereof he died the tenth day of July, 1559. and in the
13. year of his reign, being interred at Saint Denis.

60 Frances, second of that name, 155^
aged about 15. or 16. years old, succeeded his Father, in Anno. 1559. In the
life time of his Father, he married Madame Mary Stuart* Daughter to the King
of Scots: And the 15. day of September, he was sacred at Rheimes, by the
Cardinal of Lorraine, Archbishop of the said place. Thence he accompanied
Madame the Duchess of Lorrain his Sister, so far as Barleduc, and
withdrawing thence to Amboise, thither came diverse men in arms (whereon it
was called the tumult of Amboise) who said; The tumult of Amboise
that they would present requests to the King, concerning the government, and
matter of Religion: But because they came in Arms, some of them were executed,
and the rest appeased by the Kings Edict. The King, after a Council holden at
Fontainebleau; appointing an assembly of the States, to hear the greeuances of
his people, and distrusting some intended mutiny: he went to the City of
Orleance in Arms, where being desirous to proceed in his purpose, he fell
sick of a Catarrhe which happened in one of his ears, whereof he dyed the
fifth day of December, 1560. and lies buried at S. Denis.

1560
61 Charles, ninth of that name, succeeded his Brother Fraunces, in the year,
1560. And because he was but eleauen years old, the Kingdoms affairs were
governed by the Queen his Mother: Anthony of Bourbon Lieutenant General.
Anthony of Bourbon, and king of Navarre, being made Lieutenant general,
which was to the great contentment of all the States then assembled at
Orleaunce. The reign of this King was trauerssed with many civil dissentions,
about the matter of Religion: whereon ensued the assembly of Poissi, the Edict
of January, the death of the Duke de Guyse, slain at ye siege of Orleaunce by
Poltrot. Then followed the Voyage of Bayonne, the battles of Dreux, S. Denis,
Ia^nac, and Montcontour, with other Edicts of pacification: And the marriage of
Henry of Bourbon, with Margaret de Valois, whereat happened that most bloody
and lamentable massacre. The bloody massacre at Paris.
Then the siedge of Sancerre, and that of Rochelle, with the retraite of the
Prince of Conde in Germany: And lastly, the death of the King, (without any
children) being even ouer-wearied with such numberless disturbances. The King
died the 30. day of May, 1574. at Chasteau de Vinciennes lez Paris. But before
his death, he left the Queen his Mother Regent, until his Brother (who was
then King of Poland) were returned to France; and he lies buried at Saint
Denis.

62 Henry, third of that name, 1574
being returned from Poland (to the no little grief of that Nation, so to part
with their King) upon the third day of February, 1575. it being the very
same day in Lent, whereon he had bin formerly crowned King of Poland in the
City of Cracouia, was likewise Sacred and Crowned at Rheimes by the reverent
Cardinal of Guyse. The 15. day following of the same month, was he married to
Madame Loyse, Daughter to my Lord the Earl of Vaudemont, of the ancient and
noble house of Lorraine. His reign was diversely agitated with partialities in
Religion, which passed under pretext (in faction formed against the State) and
covered with the name of an holy league or Union, The holy League or Union.
against which, he combatted with difficulties enough* and diversity of exploits
on either side. Under his government was the overthrow of the Rutters Army:
the battle of Coutras, the Estates of Blois, and almost the whole revolt of
France. The Reconciliation of two Kings, which so pressed the factious and
rebellious: The King murdered by a Iacobine Friar.
that they had no other recourse, but to a most execrable parracide, which was
committed on the Kings person at S. Clou, by Iacques Clement a Iacobine Monk,
the first day of August. 1589.

And so ended (in him) the race of that Royal branch of Valois.
1589.
63 HEnry the fourth, being formerly King of Nauar, by right of succession came
to be K. of France also, being issued in direct ligne from Robert Earl of
Clermont in Beaunoisis, and the last Son of S. Jews. The beginning of his
reign was very Thorny, marked with very signale actions in his progress, the
most memorable whereof, (for breuities sake) by a person of great honor and
repute, were noted in these four lives.

Arques, Yuri, Dijon still shall bear the marks,
Of honor right and courage in that king,
To whom the strangers pride stands trembling,
To hear the fights of Dijon, Yuri, Arques.
Here, the life, fame, and due merit of that great King, would give me way
into a large field of ample discourse, did not my purposed brevity make
imbarment. Wherefore, with the very words of a worthy and learned Gentleman,
I will conclude, and sum up this Man of men, this Prince-like Soldier, and
Souldiour-like Prince: whose Royal face was white with Time, watchinges, and
experience, and the Lawrelles which did beguirt his venerable head, and took
their root in his Caske, were gathered in the grounds of three pitched
fields, thirty five encounters of Armies, one hundred and forty Combats, and
three hundred several siedges of places, in all which, his person strove (if
it were possible) to have got the start of his courage. That the sacred person
of so great a King, should be undone by the hand of an unholy villain, and his
own* vassaile: that a Prince of the Sword, should be butchered with a Knife.
That he, who had returned victoriously alive, from the head of so many Armies
(where death kept his open Shambles) should be robbed of his life, by the hand
of only one, and in the peaceful streets of Paris, which were as yet even
warm with the glory of his Queens Coronation, performed but the day before:
Is such a villainy, as exceeds (if it were possible) the just merit of
damnation, and that two Kings of one Kingdom, should one after the other be
so shamefully murdered, Iacques Clement.
the one by a Iacobine Friar, the other sometimes of the Feliants Order,
Francis Rauilliart.
is such an indelible blot on the brow of France, as the utmost date of time
can never wipe off, nor any Pen sufficiently express, the sorrow fitting a
Theme so unpleasing.

64 Jews, the thirteenth of that Name, 1610.
elbest Son to King Henry the fourth, and Maria de Medices his Queen, being
then scarcely ten years old, succeeded his Father, in the Kingdoms
Dignity, but the Queen his Mother was proclaimed Regent. May he long live,
heir unto his Fathers Fame and Heroycall virtues, but, defended (by the hand
of heaven) from his fate and hard Fortune, as all Christian Princes else (I
pray to God) may be likewise preserved.

A Brief Chronologicall Suruay, concerning the Netherlands, divided into 17.
provinces: with a Breuiate of the Earls and Princes there reigning, from
Thierrie (who was the first Earl of Holland and Zeland) to this instant time.
COncerning the Original of the people inhabiting these countries, we find,
that two Brethren, sons to the King of A people near to the Se^thians.
Cathes, the one being named Battus, or Batton, and the other Zelandus, were
the first Fathers of them, and that (from them) they derived their names. For
these two Princes, being too extremely pursued by the hatred of a Stepmother,
and no way pitied or supported by the King their father (escaping many trains
and machinations, of poisoning, murdering, and diverse other dangers by her
daily devised, and put in practice against them) were forced to forsake their
native abiding and fly to an Island within the Rhine: where Battus determining
to make his stay, Battauia is Holland.
called it Battauia after his own name, and that is, in plainer understanding,
Holland. Zelandus, not liking to live so near, or with his Brother (least
pursuit should surprise them both, and revenge there fasten, which in more
desperate place they had avoided) he travailed on to the uttermost cou^nes of
the Rhine, and liking there to set down his rest, imitated his Brothers example
(in styling the Country) and called it Zeland. Zeland named by Zelandus.
Concerning their building of Cities, Towns, Castles, and Fortes, which
afterward came to be ruined and defaced again, by wars with the Romans,
Saxons, Gauls, Danes, etc. or to what order of life the people disposed
themselves, and thorough how many and infinite encumbrances (from their
original) they passed for no mean store of years together: these are matters
merely exempt from our intended brevity, and may more amply be seen in ye
history at large, whereunto I refer any such desirous Reader, and borrowing
favor for so large a leap, I instantly proceed to the year, 863. when
Holland first became to be an Earldom.

In the year before mentioned, 863
Charles the Bald, King of France, at Bladell, in the Province of Campeigne,
having there (in his company) a general assembly of his Princes and Barons, for
consultation of many important matters: pleased to advance the two Sons of
Count Haghen (who was Uncle to the King) for their great deseruinges, The two
Sons of Count Haghen.
and for the farther encouragement of the like virtuous minded Gentlemen.
Walger, who was the eldest Son, he made Earl of Teysterbaudt; and Thierrie,
the youngest Son, or Theodor, as some term him, being formerly called
Thierrie of Aquitaine, he made Earl of Holland.

This gift of the Kings, especially that to Thierry, was much withstood by the
Frizelanders, as scorning to be commanded by any new Lord or Ruler: wherefore
they consulted with the Hollanders, and a plot was laid to expel this new
Earl. But it proved to no effect, for the King coming thither (in person)
with a powerful army, made such an example on the Ringleaders in this
Rebellion, that the rest (in great humility) submitted themselves, casting
their weapons not only at the Kings feet, but likewise at the Earls, and
(upon pardon) they vowed their continual bounden duty to Thierrie. His
authority was then further strengthened, in the year 868. by the Letters
Patents of King Charles, as also by them of Jews, Thierry Earl of Holland,
Zeland and Lord of Frizeland.
King of Germany, confirming him to be Earl of Holland, Zeland, and Lord of
Frizeland. This Thierrie married Genna, or Ienna, Daughter to Pepin the Bald,
king of Italy, Son to the Emperor Charlemaigne. He woorthily foiled the
Danes, that then possessed the Town of Vtrecht, the Wiltes and the Slaves,
disabling them from any further footing in Holland, which made them presume to
meddle in Zeland, but thence they were repulsed likewise. By which means he
remained afterward in peace, beautifying his Countries, both with fair
buildings and good Laws. He dyed very old, having reigned forty years, and
after him succeeded

2 Thierrie his Son, second of that name, Earl of Holland, Zeland, and Lord
of Frizeland, who married with Hildegarde, Daughter to King Jews of France,
the Stammerer, and Sister to King Charles the Simple. The Frizelanders did
twice revolt from their obedience, The Frizelanders rebel again.
and would not allow Earl Thierrie to be their Lord, but slew very many of
them that obeyed ye Earl, wasting, spoiling, and burning all the way as they
went. But at length, they were justly repayed for their insolency, and such a
slaughter was made of the Frysons (without any merry) that few or none of them
returned home to their dwellings. Afterward, he forced them to make the doors
of entrance into their houses, so low and narrow, that they must stoop very
low before they could get in, and this he did, to make them ye more humble and
servile, receiving a new Oath of allegiance of them. And having reigned about
fifty years, being then aged 88. years old, he dyed, leaving two Sons
behind him, the eldest whereof (being named Egbert) became Archbishop of
Treues, and Arnold his youngest Son succeeded him.

3 Arnolde, or (as others will have it) Arnulph, youngest Son to Earl
Thierrie, followed in rule as his Fathers Successor: But he held the
Earledomes of Holland, Zeland, and Lordshippe of Frizeland, no longer of the
Crown of France, but of Otho the third, Emperor, and so became in fee to the
Empire. A very fearful Comet appeared in his time, with strange Ecclipses both
of the Sun and Moon, being as red as blood, A dreadful Comet, Ecclipses and
earthquakes
and terrible Earthquakes: a fire also fell from Heaven, in similitude like an
huge Tower, burning for a long time: after which ensued so violent a
Pestilence, that the living dyed burying the dead. The Frizons reuolting again
from obedience, made all his reign a continual warfare, and the Armies (on
either side) meeting near unto Winckell, so dreadful a battle was fought
between them; that the Hollanders sustained the worst, Count Arnolde being
there slain, and a great number of his cheifest Nobility. This battle was
fought the eighteenth of October, the morrow after Saint Lamberts day, in the
year 993. So this Earl Arnolde, having reigned five years, and being thus
unfortunately slain, was buried by his Father and Grandfather, in the Abbie
of Egmont.

4 Thierrie, third of that name, and Son to Count Arnolde, succeeded as
fourth Earl of Holland, Zeland, and Lord of Frizeland. Being desirous to
revenge his Fathers death upon the Frizons: he was much impeached therein by
Adelbold, Adelbold Bishop of Vtrecht.
Bishop of Vtrecht, against whom (nevertheless) hepreuailed in two foughten
battles, in the year 10^8. and (with great slaughter of the Fryzons) brought
them under obedyence to his youngest Son Floris, whom he made Lord of them.
This Earl Thierrie, living afterward in very peaceful days, undertook a
Pilgrimage to Jerusalem, with the Lord of Arckell* his loyal Subject; who died
at Jerusalem, and was there very honorably buried by Thierrie. After whose
return home, and some years passed in peace with his Wife and Children,
having reigned 46. years, he died in Anno 1039. and was buried by his Fathers
in the Abbay of Egmont.

5 Thierrie, fourth of that name, 1039.
was the fifth Earl of Holland, Zeland, and Lord of Frizeland, after the
decease of Thierrie his Father. In a Journey of Princes and Lords, performed
(for pleasure) in the City of Liege, it was this Earls hard hap, to kill a
Brother of the Bishops of Cullen and Liege: The Bishops of Cullen and Liege.
whereby ensued such discord and mollestation, that, after many adventures of
revenge, undertaken by the German Gentlemen, albeit, therein they sustained
much loss of men, the Earl was shot into the Thigh with a poisoned Dart, of
which wound he dyed the fifteenth of May 1048. 1048.
after he had governed nine years, and was buried by his Fathers, in the Abbay
of Egmont. He was never married, and therefore left not any Child to succeed
him.

6 Floris, who (as you have heard before) was Earl of Frizeland, now after his
Brothers death, became the sixth Earl of Holland and Zeland. The former mishap
at Liege, could not as yet be forgotten by the Bishops of Cullen and Liege; but
they would needs prosecute fresh revenge upon Count Floris, who being a man
of undaunted spirit, defeated his Enemies in two several attempts. Once by a
cunning Stratagem, Two millitary Stratagems.
causing Ditches and Pit-fals to be made in South Holland, and covering them
with Straw and grass, so that they could not be easily discerned. At this
time, a bloody battle being fought between them, there was forty thousand
of the Earls enemies slain, beside twenty six thousand more, who were
drowned and smothered in those Ditches. An. Dom. 1058. The second foil of his
adversaries, happened four years after this, when the Hollanders (putting the
Germans to flight) returned with rich spoils and great store of Prisoners,
this was in the year 1062. yet was it this Earls ill fortune, to be afterward
slain unarmed, as he sat under an Elm, taking the air, his enemies
prevailing by this advantage. He had ruled in Holland 14. years, and in
Frizeland 21. and lies buried at Egmont.

7, 8. Gertrude, widow to Earl Floris, in regard that Thierrie her son was in
his nonage, governed those Countries in his right. And in the year 1063. 1063.
she remarried with Robert the Frizon (son to Baldwin of Lisle de Buck, Robert
the Frizon.
Earl of Flanders) with the good lyking of all the States and Nobility. He
also was made Guardian of young Earl Thierrie, and (had this Gertrude) three
Sons, Robert, Sur-named the young (who went with Godfrey of Bullen to the
holy Land, and was (after his Father decease) Earl of Flanders;) Phillip,
father to William of Ixt, and Baldwin Bishop of Teroanne; beside three
daughters also, which he had by the said Gertrude. This Robert was called the
Frizon, not in regard of his birth, but of his big stature, strength and
courage, for having prevailed against the Frizons, and hearing of his Brothers
death, Baldwine de Mons, Earl of Flanders; he laid claim to the said
Earldom, and (notwithstanding the opposition of Richild Widow to Earl
Baldwin: by means of the Flemings, he ouer-threwe the King of France in a
battle, and she with her Son Baldwine, remaining satisfied with the
Country of Henault, Robert Earl of Flanders
Robert became quietly Earl of Flanders. For eight years space, he carried
himself with great wisdom and valor, and dying in the year 1077. 1077*
was buried in the Cannons Church, founded by himself at Cassel. Gertrudes
time of rule by her self, and Roberts after, are reckoned as two several
governments.

9 Godfrey, The Crook backed duke of Lorraine
sir-named the Crooke-backt Duke of Lorraine, in this time of young Earl
Thierries minority, was made an instrument (in regard of the former quarrel of
Count Floris, and the Bishops of Cullen and Liege, as yet not revenged to their
minds) to suggest a false information to Henry the fourth, Emperor, whereby
the said Godfrey became an Usurper of the young Earls right, for the space of
four years. But, as he was sitting on the draught to ease his body, a Servant
of young Count Thierries, did thrust a Iaueling up into his fundament, whereof
he died (not long after) at Maestrecht.

10 Thierry, fifth of that name, who (by Crookebackt Godfrey, and other strange
oppositions) had long time bin debarred from quiet possession of his right; at
length, by an absolute conquest of the Frizons, The Fryzons conquered in two
battles.
in two several great battles, recovered all, and returned home as a
Conqueror. Afterward, he married Whithilde, daughter to Frederick, Duke of
Saxony, by whom he had a Son and a Daughter: Floris, that succeeded him, and
Mathild, married to the Duke of Orleans. Earl Thierrie having governed fifteen
years, dyed, and was buried in the Abbey of Egmont.

1119
11 Floris, second of that name, and sir-named the Fat or Gross, succeeded
next after his father Thierrie: he greatly favored men of the Church, whereby
the Abbey of Egmonts revenues were largely increased. He being a man of very
peaceful inclination, little or no disturbaunces happened in his time: but
only by the Frizons, who, for their rebelling, were severely punnished, and
forced to submit themselves to his mercy. This Floris married Petronilla, or
Parnell, Daughter to Didier, Dider duke of Sauoy*
Duke of Saxony, and Sister to Lotharius the Emperor: By her he had three
Sons; Thierrie, Floris, called the Black Prince of Kenemerlandt; and Simon,
also one Daughter, named Hadewick, who was Countess of Gueldres. Having
governed his Countries very honorably, for the space of thirty one years; He
died in Anno. 1133. and lies buried in the Abbey of Egmont.

1133
12 Thierrie, sixth of that name, succeeded his Father Floris, and was much
mollested by the Frizons, in regard, that his Brother Floris the Black Prince,
envying the happiness and quiet of Thierrie, went and took part with them
against him; until such time as the Emperor Lotharius (being their Uncle)
had reconciled them, and made them friends. Conrade being joined as competitor
in the Empire, with Lotharius, Lotharius and Conrade Emperors.
caused a fresh quarrel between Thierrie and the Bishop of Vtrecht, he
ratifying the former grant of Henry, which caused very long contention, and
much blood to be shed on either side. Thierrie having governed his countries of
Holland, Zeland, and Frizeland 40. years, died in An. 1163. and lies buried
in the Abbey of Egmont.

13 Floris the third, eldest Son of Earl Thierrie, as Heir to his Father, 11^3
inherited his right in Holland, Zeland, and Frizeland. The Frizons (pretending
their former freedoms and imperial liberties) made still their reuoltes from
time to time, imboldned thereto by the often suggestions of Godfrey of Rhemen,
Bishop of Vtrecht, who as his predecessors had done before him, Earledomes of
Ostergo and Westergoe.
still questioned the Earledomes of Ostergo and Westergoe in Frizeland: but the
Emperor Frederick went himself in person, and made an agreement in writing
between them. Al which notwithstanding, much hurt was done on either side, as
time and treachery fitted them with apt opportunity. A great controversy
happened between the Earls of Holland and Flanders, for the Isle of Walchren,
1166*
and Count Floris (in trial of fight) became Prisoner to the Earl of
Flanders: who nevertheless used him princely, and they being accorded by ye
Archbishop of Cullen, and the Bishop of Liege; the great hole near to the
Dam or Sluice, The Dam or Sluice, called dogs Sluice.
was recovered with much ado, by casting a Dogge-Fish thereinto, and speedy
filling it up with earth, whereon they named it Hond^dam, that is, Dogs-sluce.
This Earl Floris, assisting the Emperor Frederick, Phillip King of France,
Richard K. of England, with many other Dukes, Christian Princes and Earls, at
the siedge of Damieta in So^ia; fell there sick in the Army, 1208.
and died in the year 1208 having governed his Provinces 27. years.

14 Thierrie the seventh, hearing of his Fathers death in Palestine; succeeded
as his heir in all his Earledomes. The whole time of his regiment, was in
war and continual combustions. First by his Brother Lord William of Holland,
L. William of Holland.
(who was with his Father Floris in Palestine, and performed there many
honorable services) through diverse disagreements yt happened between them,
notwithstanding as many labored reconcilings, 1198.
and pacifications. Next, Baldwin Earl of Flanders, he was as molestuous to
him likewise, for the Isle of Walchien: besides the Frizons rebellions, and his
trouble with the Bishops of Cologne and Liege, as also his imprisonment to the
Duke of Brabant, and then the intrusion of the Bishop of Vtrecht, after which,
ensued a peace and united amity on all sides. This Count Thierrie had no heirs
male, but two beautiful daughters; Adella, married to Henry of Gueldres, who
died without any Children, and Ada, meanly married by her Mother, (after her
Fathers death) to Count Jews of Loos, that so the government might be disposed
at her pleasure. 1203.
In ye year 1203 Earl Thierry died, having governed his Countries 1.3 years,
and lies buried in the Abbay of Egmont.

15 Ada, daughter to Earl Thierry, was Countess of Holland and Zeland, after
her fathers death; The government of a Woman despised.
which moved a great hart-burning in the Lords and Gentlemen, that they should
live under a Woman, and a poor Earls command. Therefore they sent into
Frizeland for Count. William, protesting to assist him in attaining the
government of Holland. The young Countess Ada was surprised in their first
attempt, and her husband the Earl of Loos driven to flight; who yet won the
Bishop of Vtrecht (by Money and other promises) to aid him, and by this means
he had some small success for a while. But the Countess Ada dying without any
Children, Earl William was then the true and only Heir to Holland and
Zeland, in which right of his, he went with his power against the Earl of
Loos, and such was his success, that the Women did beat his Enemies with
Distaues and Stones, Women beat Men with Distaues and stones.
they being glad to cast away their Armor for lightness, to save themselves
by flight: yet many were drowned in the Ditches, and a great number taken
Prisoners, with all the Earl of Loos Tents, Pauillions, Plate, Jewels, and
Munition, which Count William royally divided among his Hollanders, remaining
absolute Prince of Holland, Zeland, and Frizeland.

16 William, first of that Name, 121^.
succeeded rightfully in all his Earledomes, by the death of his Niece the
young Countess Ada. He had some strife with Didier Bishop of Vtretcht, and
Gerard Vander Are his Brother: but (upon certain Articles) al displeasures
were qualified. By his first wife Alix, daughter to the Earl of Gueldres, he
had Floris, that next succeeded him, Otho bishop of Vtretcht, William,
Lieutenant of Holland, and two Daughters, the one was Abbess at Rhynsbourg,
Edmund of Lancaster, son to the K. of England.
and the other at Delfte. His second wife was named Mary, Daughter to Edmund of
Lancaster, son to Henry the third, K. of England, by whom he had no issue. He
governed 19. years, and dying, lies buried at Rhynsbourg. 17 Floris the
fourth, succeeded his Father Count William in his Earledomes. He took great
delight in Iusts and Tournaments, and the Earl of Clermont proclaiming a
public Triumph for all comers (at the Countess his Wives request who
greatly desired to see this Floris, of whom she had heard much fame and
commendation) this honorable Earl of Holland, Zeland, etc. was there
treacherously slain, only thorough the jealous suspicion of the old Earl of
Clermont, who was there likewise presently slain himself, and the Countes
(grieuing for this great mishap) dyed soon after. The wonderful birth of 365.
Children.
This Count Floris had a Daughter named Mathilde, or Margaret, as some call
her, who was married to Count Herman of Henneberg; She despising a poor
Widow, that desired her alms upon urgent necessity, holding in either arm a
sweet young child, both which, God has sent her at one birth, gave her uery
reproachful words beside, as, that she could not be honest of her body, and
(by her husband) have two children lawfully begotten. This History is avouched
for a truth by diverse good Authors.
The poor Woman, grieuing to be rejected in such extreme want and need, but
much more, to hear her reputation so nearly touched, knowing her soul clear
from all dishonest detection, made no further suite to the Lady, but (falling
upon her knees) appealed to God for defense of her Innocence, and earnestly
desired, that as she had conceived, and borne those two infants lawfully by
her husband, even so, if ever that Lady should be subject to the custom of
women, that it would please him, to send her as many children at one birth, as
there were days in the years. Not long after, the Lady conceived with child by
her husband, and (for her deliverance) went into Holland, to visit ye earl her
brother, taking up lodging in the Abbey of religious women at Losdunen, and
grew so exceeding great, as the like had never before bin seen. When her time
came, on ye Friday before Palm Sunday, in the year 1276. she was delivered of
365. children, the one half being sons, and the other daughters: but the odd
child was an Hermaphrodite, and they were all well shaped and proportioned in
their little members. These children were laid in two Basins, and were all
baptized by Guydon, Suffragan to the Bish. of Vtrecht, who named all the sons
John, and the Daughters Elizabeth, but what name he gave the Hermaphrodite, is
not recorded. They were no sooner baptized, but they all died, and the Mother
also. The two Basins are yet to be seen in the said Church of Losdunen, and a
memory of them, both in Latin and Dutch. The Latin beginning thus. Margareta,
Comitis Hennebergiae vxor, and Florentij Hollandiae and Zelandiae filia, etc.
Underneath are these verses: En tibi monstrosum and memorabile factum,
Quale nec a mundi condition datum.
This Count Floris, being so treacherously slain, as you have heard before,
had his body brought back into Holland, by the Earl of Cleues, and other
Noble Lords, who buried it in the Abbey of Rhynsbourg; he having honorably and
virtuously governed his Countries 12. years. He left but one Son named
William, six years old, who was in the tutelage of his Uncle Otho, bishop of
Vtrecht, during his minority.

18 William, second of that name, succeeded his father Floris in all his
dominions, being al ye time of his under years, in the government of Otho
Bishop of Vtrecht his Uncle, who was a very worthy and careful Guardian to
him. The pope having deposed Frederick the second, and Conrade his son from
the Empire: the princes Electors (in despite of the Pope) made this Earl
William King of the Romans, and crowned him at Aix la Chapelle, Earl William
king of the Romans
he having then attained to the age of 20. years. A long and tedious trouble
happened, between him, and Margaret Countess of Flanders, a very high minded
and proud woman, for the Country of Walchren, wherein, after a great foil and
slaug^ ^he Flemings, (taking part with her) and impr^ent of her two sons, Guy
and John, she implored the aid of Charles Duke of Aniou, against king William,
and sped thereby no better then she had done before, but was glad in the end
to seek reconcilement. This K. William did build the Palace of the Earls of
Holland, in the village of La Hage, or the Hague where it is at this day, and a
goodly Cloister at Harlem. At his wars in West Frizeland, where he prevailed
very successefully, he would needs, without any other assistance then himself,
follow ye rebels over the Ice, where his horse slipping in, him self almost
drowned, and none near to help him, but enemies of the Frizons, yt lay secretly
in ambush: K. William cruelly slain
they beat him down with clubs and staves, not knoing that it was the king, and
so they slew him. But when afterward they took better notice of him, by his
Target and Arms thereon emblazoned, in very hearty sorrow for their foul deed,
they buried him secretly, in a poor house in the village of Hooktwonde,
thinking so to wipe out all remembrance of him. But his body was after found,
and buried in the Abbey of Middlebourg, in the Isle of walchre^. 19 Floris the
fifth, son to king William, who was slain so inhumanely, albeit he was but
six months old, yet he succeeded his father, his Uncle Floris being his
Governor and Tutor. At 17. years of age, he went with an army against the
euer-reuolting Frizons, and overcame them at a village called Schellinckhout,
very severely revenging his fathers death on them, and (by building four
Castles i^ ^land) brought them wholly under his obed^ Afterward, Count Floris
made a voyage into England, 1290
where a marriage was contracted, between John, eldest Son to Earl Floris,
and Elizabeth, Daughter to King Edward the first, John being (not long after)
sent into England, to accomplish the said marriage, where he remained in the
Court of England, till his Fathers unfortunate death, which briefly was thus.

A Knight lived in the Earls Court, named Gerard Van Velson, The History of
the death of Earl Floris
who had bin a whole years space detained in prison, and his Brother beheaded,
through certain false suggestions whispered to the Earl, which (afterward)
appearing to be a mere injury, the Earl sought to repair this wrong, with
very especial favors done to the Knight, great aduancements, and would
have bestowed also his Concubine in marriage on him. Which Gerard disdaining,
and replying, that he would not wear his cast shoes: the Earl rashly
answered, that he should take his leauings, in despite of his heart. To
prevent marriage with the Earls Minion, the Knight bestowed his affections
else where, and wedded a Lady of great honor and beauty. Which when the Earl
understood, he pursued his former rash folly, to the price of his own life.
Sending Gerard on an employment of much credit and respect, and wherewith he
was not a little pleased, not doubting any such wicked intention. The Earl came
unto Gerardes house, under color of hospitaliiy, and there (winning her to
private conferen^e in her bed chamber) forcibly defloured her, to perform his
rash promise to her husband. At Gerards return, and this foul wrong
discovered, it was pursued with very bloody revenge, by a resolved conspiracy
sworn against his life: which albeit he had some warning of (by a paper
delivered him by a poor woman) yet his disaster being inevitable, a train was
laid for him as he rode a hauking, and xxi. wounds he received on his body, by
the hand of the said Gerard. But he and the rest of the conspirators escaped
not unpunished, Aseuere r^uenge for the Earls death.
for they had their heads smitten off, and were then laid upon wheels: but
Gerard was put (stard naked) into a Pipe stuck full of sharp nails, and was
so rolled up and down through all the streets of Leyden. Then was he beheaded,
and laid on a wheel, and all his Kindred to the ninth degree, put to death,
and laid upon wheels.

20 After the wicked murder of Earl Floris the fifth, committed by the
Fryzons, 1297
as has been declared, John his only son (being then in England with King
Edward his Father in law) was next to succeed him as his rightful heir. But
before he could leave England, some partialities and factions happened in
Holland for the government, which soon were qualified at Earl John's being
there present, notwithstanding the subtle policy of Wolfart of Borssele,
seizing the person of Earl John, and Lady Elizabeth his Wife, Wolfart of
Borssele his secret intention.
thinking to have the government of the said Earl, because as yet he was
but young. Earl John prevailed against the Frizons, and the Bishop of Vtrecht,
and having governed his countries about four years, 1300
he fell sick at Harlem, and there died. He was the first of all the Earls of
Holland, The end of the race of the Dukes of Aquitain and succession of the
Earls of Henault.
that died without children: wherefore in him failed the line masculine of the
Earls from the Dukes of Aquitain, which from Thierrie, or Theodor, the first
Earl of Holland, had continued 437. years. He was buried in the Abbey of
Rhynsbourg, his widow Lady Elizabeth being carried back into England, where
she was afterward married to the Earl of Oxford: So that by the death of Earl
John in this manner, those countries were deuolued to the earls of Henault,
issuing by the mothers side from the Earls of Holland.

1301.
21 John, second of that name, called John of Henault (claiming his right from
Alix, sister to William king of the Romans) succeeded after John, as Earl of
Holland, Zeland, and Frizeland, etc. He had a long and tedious trouble with
John de Reuesse, who persuaded the Emperor, that John Earl of Holland dying
without issue, his Earledomes ought (in right) to return to the Empire:
according as Charles the Bald, Emperor of the Romans, had at first given them
in see and homage to Thierrie of Aquitaine. This suggestion raised the Emperor
Albert in Arms, against John of Henault, John de Reuesse drowned.
but the Bishop of Cullen compounded the matter between them, and John de
Reuesse was afteeward drowned, by which means, John of Henault was rid of a
turbulent enemy. John of Henault, having governed Henault thirty years, and his
Countries of Holland, Zeland, 1305
and Frizeland 5. years, died and was buried at Valenciennes

22 William the third, son and heir to Count John of Henault, succeeded his
fathers earldoms: The good Earl william.
he was commonly called The good Earl william, for his Virtues, Justice, good
life, and honorable actions. In his time happened so great a dearth and famine
tn Holland, 1316
that poor people died with hunger, A wonderful dearth.
even in the streets as they went: seeking also for herbs and roots in the
fields and woods, there they were likewise found dead, and in the common high
ways: little children died sucking at their Mothers breasts, and some were
enforced to feed on their dead Children. In this time of Famine, a poor
waman in the Town of Leyden, being extremely ouercharged with hunger,
entreated her own sister, A strange example of an unmerciful Sister.
(being a woman of better ability) to lend her some Bread, which she would
thankfully repay again, when God should enable her. She very unkindly, and
without any pity of her extremity, denied her oftentimes, notwithstanding the
others often vrgings, that she was assured, she could not be without bread.
Hereupon, the unmerciful Sister (lying both to God, and to her own poor
sister) said: If I have any bread, I wish that it may instantly be turned into
a stone: wherewith the heavy displeasure of God laid hold upon her words, and
going afterward to her Cupboord (to relieve her self) she found al her loaves
of bread converted into apparent stones, and died her self with extremity of
hunger. It is credibly said, that one or two of those stones, are yet to be
seen in S. Peter's Church at Leyden, as a memory of this just judgment of God.

A worthy action of Justice, don by this good Earl William.
There is also recorded another memorable History, of upright Justice done by
this good Earl William, to a poor Countryman, against a Bayliffe of South
Holland, who had taken a goodly fair Cow from him, that was the relief of
himself, his poor Wife and Children, as there are some Kine in that Country,
which do give twenty pottles of Milk and more, in a day. The Bayliffe, at the
poor man's complaint to this good Earl William, who lay then sick in his Bed
at Valenciennes (yet never debarred any suitors from audience, were he sick or
well) was adjudged to give the poor man an hundred Crowns of good Gold, for
the wrong he had done to him, which was accordingly performed. But for his
injury to public Justice, (being himself an Officer) and abusing the
authority committed in trust to him, the Earl sent for an Executioner, and
caused his head to be smitten off by his Beds side. This good Count William,
being a virtuous Prince, victorious in war, a Man learned, wise, well
spoken, and judicious, a great friend to peace, gracious to all men, and
beloved in all Princes courts, having governed his Prouences 32. years, died
the 9. of June 1337. and was buried with great pomp at Valenciennes.

1337
23 William the fourth, Son to the good Earl William, came to his Fathers
Earledoms by lawful succession. Earl William a worthy soldier
He was a man of high merit, and a most famous Soldier, whereof he made good
proof; first against the Sarrazins and Moors, in the Kingdom of Granada;
Next, 1338
with the Emperor Jews, and many Noble Earls, ayding his brother in law
Edward the 3. King of England, against the King of France; 1342
Th^^ly, in ouer-running all Lithuania, Liuonia, and warring against the
Russian Infidels, lading home his men with victory and wealthy spoils; And
lastly, in prevailing against the Frizons, Robert of Arckel, governor of
Vtrecht.
and Robert of Arckell Governor of Vtrecht. Yet it was his hard hap to be
slain unknown (among the Frizons) before any could have power to help him:
so that he left no lawful Child to succeed him, and therefore his Sister, 1346
(being Empress) remained his only Heir.

24 Margaret, Wise to Jews of Bauaria, Margaret the Empress Princess of
Holland.
(then Emperor) and eldest Sister to Earl William, slain (as you have heard)
by the Frizons, by the Emperors interposition of his authority, and her own
Native right, went down by the Rhine into Holland, accompanied with a most
princely and well beseeming train, and was acknowledged to be Lady and
Princess of Holland, Zeland, and Frizeland. But before her return back to
the Emperor again, she constituted both his and her eldest son (named
William of Bauaria) to be her Regent there in those Countries, for a sum of
Money yearly paid to her; but remaining unpaid, she might resume all her
rights to her self again. The Emperor deceasing, the Empress Margaret came
thither again, and had resignation (from her son William) of all the foresaid
Countries, retyring himself into Henault, as being well contented there to
live: The factions of Cabillaux and Hoecks.
till by intestine discord, and dangerous practices of two intruded factions,
called Cabillaux and Hoecks (wherein both Nobles and Gentlemen did too far
enter) the Mothers government did grow insufferable, and Duke William was
recovered from Henault, to undergo the Sole-authority. Two very bloody
battles were fought between the Empress and her Son; 1351.
and in the first, Earl William escaped with great difficulty, and fled into
Holland, for this battle was fought at La Vere in Zeland. But in the second,
there was so much blood spilt, that (for three days after) the old River of
Mense (at full Sea) was (all over) red in that place. A grear effufion of blood.
The Empress (by help of a small Bark) escaped into England, and, upon an
agreement afterward made between them; Duke William had the quiet possession
of Holland, Zeland, and Frizeland assigned him, and the Empress Margaret had
the County of Henault, where (five years after) she ended her days, and lies
buried at Valenciennes.

25 Duke William being peaceably possessed of his Seigneuries, according to the
former composition, Mathilda, daughter to Henry duke of Lancaster
being also Duke of Bauaria, Palatine of Rhine, and Earl of Henault by his
Mothers death, took to Wife the Lady Mathilda, daughter to Henry Duke of
Lancaster in England, by who^ he had not any children. Much strife, war, and
bloody bickering, happened between him and the Bishop of Vtrecht, with
shrewd disaduantages on either side; till, by the means of some Noblemen, they
were reduced to amity. 1358
This Duke William (by what occasion it could never be known) fell
distracted of his senses, and slew a Knight with a blow of his Fist: so that
he was shut up (under good Guarde) for nineteen years space, even till he
dyed. Having governed his Provinces of Holland, Zeland, and Frizeland (before
his madness) seven years, and Henault two.

26 Albert of Bauaria, Brother to Duke William, in the time of his distraction,
was sent for from Bauaria, and made Governor of his Brothers Countries, in
hope of his recovery, which by no means could he compassed. He vanquished
the Frizons in many rebellions, The Barons of Eughien beheaded.
took the Town of Delft, and beheaded the Baron of Eughien, upon sinister
informations, which caused great trouble between him, and fire brethren of
the said Baron: but, upon their reconcilement, Count Albert builded the
Channorny of the Chapel, at the Court of the Hage.

In his time, 1368.
a Sea-Woman (by reason of great Tempests at Sea, and extraordinary high
tides) was seen swimming in the Zuyderzee, between the Towns of Campen and
Edam; which being brought to Edam, A Sea Woman seen in the Zuyderzee.
and cleansed from the Sea-Mosse grown about her, by her long abiding there:
she was like to another woman, endured to be apparrelled, and would feed on
meats as others did, 1401
yet sought she all means to escape, and get into the water again, had she
not very carefully bin tended. She did learn to spin, and exercise other
womanly qualities, being daily seen of infinite persons, who have made perfect
testimonial of this race accident, and signified if for an undoubted truth,
auouching, that she lived fifteen years, and lies there buried in the
Churchyard. 1404
In the year 1404. this famous Prince Albert dyed, after he had governed his
Countries forty six years: nineteen as he was Tutor to his distracted
Brother, and twenty seven as Prince, Heir and Lord of those Countries,
being buried at the Hage in Holland.

27 William, sixth of that name, after the death of Duke Albert of Bauaria his
Father, succeeded as his immediate Heir. His first Wife was Daughter to
Charles the fifth, King of France, and she dyed young, without any Issue. He
secondly married the Daughter of John, Son to Phillip the bold Duke of
Burgundy, by whom he had one only Daughtex, Phillip the bold Duke of Burgundy.
named Iaqueline, or Iacoba, as the Dutch use to call her. This Count William
wasted Frizeland, spoiled Liege, and prevailed against the Gueldres, as also
the Lords (Father and Son) of Arckell at Gorrichom, and reconciled the Duke
of Burgundy to the French King. The Dolphine of France, Son to King Charles
the sixth, married Iaqueline, Count Williams Daughter; but he being poisoned, by
putting on a shirt of maile, 1417
died without Issue: As Earl William himself did not long after, being bitten
in the Leg by a mad Dog, which hurt could never be cured. So that Lady
Iaqueline (his Daughter, and widow to the Dolphine of France) was his true
Heir in all his Seigneuries: He governed thirteen years, and lies buried at
Valenciennes in Henault.

28 Iaqueline, or Iacoba* Daughter and Sole-heire to William of Bauaria,
succeeded her Father in all his Earledomes and Seigneuries, being then Widow
to the Dolphine of France, and yet but 19. years of age. In regard of her
youth and widdow-hood, she endured much mollestation in her government,
chiefly in Holland: for the two factions took head again, and bandied their
boldness on both sides, the Hoeckins, favoring the Countesses faction* and
the Cabillantines her Enemies, by which means her rule was greatly disturbed.
John of Bauaria Bishop of Liege.
For John of Bauaria (forsaking his Bishoppricke of Liege) sought to make
himself an Earl, and marry his Nice Iaqueline (utterly against her will) and
yet to dispossess her of her rightful inheritance, for which purpose he
leagued himself with the Cabillantines, and other powerful Friends, who
nevertheless were slain in their bold adventure at Gorrichome. And, to
frustrate the Bishops vain hope, the Pope dispensed her marriage, with John
Duke of Brabant, albeit he was her near Kinsman, whereby their Patrimoniall
inheritances were the more strengthened, and he acknowledged as their Prince,
in Henault, Holland, Zeland, Frizeland, etc. It were needless here to relate,
John of Bauaria the Bishop reckoned the 29. Earl of Holland.
the following molestations of John of Bauaria the bishop, to his Niece
Iaqueline, taking on himself the title of Earl, and therefore, (by some)
rancked among the Earls of Holland, or the after marriages of Lady Iaqueline;
to the Duke of Gloucester, Uncle to Henry the sixth, King of England; the fourth
and last time (in great priuacy) to Frank of Borsselle, Lieutenant of Zeland,
or her (no mean troubles) by the Duke of Burgundy, to whom she resigned up all
her Countries: 1463
Let it suffice, that she lived in continual vexations 19. years, and dying
at the Hage, was buried in the Chapel of the Court of Holland.

30 Phillip Duke of Burgundy, being (both by Father and Mother) rightful yeire
and successor to the forenamed Countess Iaqueline; was thus entitled: The
Titles of Phillip Duke of Bourgogne.
Phillip Duke of Bourgogne, Brabant, and Lembourg; Earl of Flanders, Artois,
Burgogne, Henault, Holland, Zeland, and Namur; Marquess of the holy Empire;
and Lord of Frizeland, Salins and Macklyn. He had three Wives; by the two first
he had no Children, but by the last, named Isabel (daughter to John K. of
Portugal) he had three sons; Anthony and loss, who died young, and Charles
Martin, Earl of Charolois, The order of the golden Fliece instituted.
and successor to his father. This Phillip of Bourgogn instituted the order of
Knighthood of ye golden Fliece, and had much discontent with his Son Charles,
whom (at length he married to the Lady Margaret, Sister to Edward the fourth,
K. of England. The Rebels of Gaunt and Bruges dearly felt the valor of this
Phillip; he besieged Callis, surprised Luxemboug. subdued Liege; and ouer-came
the Hamecons; He exceeded all his predecessors (Duks of Bourgogne) in riches,
Seigneuries, height of Pomp and State. He died the fifth of June 1467. 1467.
having governed about forty years. In his time was the famous Art of Printing
first invented, The Art of printing first invented.
the men of Harlem in Holland do challenge the first honor thereof, but it was
reduced to perfection at Mentz, by one John Faustus, who had been Servant to
Laurence Ianson of Harlem, as they constantly affirm it.

31 Charles, The warlike Duke of Bourgogne
Sur-named the Warlique Duke of Bourgogne, succeeded in all his Fathers Titles
and Dignities. The Inhabitants of Gant resisting him, he brought them under
obeisance, and defeated the Liegeois in battle, which enforced Liege to
yield to him. He made peace with the French King, who doubted to be detayned
at Peronne by Duke Charles. Upon a fresh rebellion of the Liegeois. The Duke
forced king Jews to go with him to the siedge of their town; which he ruined,
and practiced the like of the House of Brederode. He warred against the
Frizons; and carried many Prin^es in hope of his daughters marriage. The French
K. and the duke sought to deceive each other, and the Constable of S. Paul
(waxing hateful to them both) they resolved his ruin, and (on a truce taken
for 9. years, between the King and Duke) the Constable was beheaded at Paris.
The Duke warred against the Swisses, and was defeated by them, both at Granson
and Morat, wherewith ye Swisses were enriched. The Duke besiedged Nancie, and
was there slain in battle, by the Treason of the Earl of Campobachio, The
Earl of Campobachio.
an Italian: where being engirt with a great troop of Lanciers, he received
three wounds, 1477
one in the head, the second in the thigh, and the third in the fundament. He
left one only Daughter and heir.

32 Mary, Daughter and Heir to Duke Charles, the warlike Duke of Bourgogne,
succeeded her Father in all his Countries: being but 18. years old when he was
slain before Nancy, wherefore she remained under the charge of the Duke of
Cleues, and his Brother the Lord of Rauestein. The French King seized Piccardie
and Arthois: she happening into the Ganthois power, endured much trouble, by
putting her chiefest servants and Councellers to death: the Flemings were
defeated, and the young Duke of Gueldres slain. The Duke of Gueldres slain.
Afterward, a marriage was concluded between Maximilian Archduke of Austria,
Son to the Emperor Frederick, and the Lady Marie of Bourgogne* albeit she
would more gladly have matched with the house of France.

33 Maximilian, Archduke of Austria, and Son to the Emperor Frederick,
marrying the Princess Mary of Bourgogne, was thereby wedded to much war and
trouble. For first the Gueldres revolted from the house of Bourgogne; Next,
happened the battle of Guinegate, wherein the Archduke was the Conqueror:
Then, 1479
Turnay yielded to him, truce was taken between him and the French King, New
tumults of the Cabillaux and Hoecks
and the new tumults of the Cabillaux and Hoecks, were likewise by him
pacified. Dordrecht was surprised by the young Lord of Egmont; also, many
Towns in Guelders yielded to the Archduke: and (not long after) followed the
death of the Arch-Dutchesse Mary; 1482
who had (the first year of her marriage, a Son, named Phillip (Father to
Charles the fifth) the second year a Daughter, called Margaret, betroathed in
her infancye, to Charles the Dolphin of France, Son to King Jews 11. and the
third year, a Son named Frances, according to the name of Fraunces Duke of
Britain his Godfather. Engelbert, earl of Nassawe. 1491
Maximilian being chosen King of the Romans, he made Engelbert, Earl of
Nassau, Governor of the Netherlands in his absence: And afterward, upon the
bold insolency of the Ganthois and B^ugois (keeping the King of Romans
prisoner) Albert Duke of Saxony, was made second Governor of the Netherlands,
and General for the Emperor Frederick against the Flemings. But Frederick
dying, 1494
his Son Maximilian succeeded him in the Empire, by which means, Phillip of
Austria, son to the said Maximilian, inherited his right in Holland, Zeland,
Frizeland, etc.

34 Phillip, second of that name, being but 16. years old, and succeeding his
father Maximilian, Emperor in the Netherlands, had these Titles. The Titles of
Phillip. Archduke o^ Austria.
Phillippe Archduke of Austria, Duke of Bourgogne, Lothier, Brabant, Styria,
Carinthia, Lembourg, Luxembourg, and Guelders; Earl of Haspourg, Flaunders,
Arthois, Bourgogne, Ferrette and Kiburch; Palatine of Henault, Holland, Zeland,
Namur and Zutphen: Marquess of the Holy Empire, and of Bourgan; 1497
Landtgraue of Elsaten, Lord of Windismarke, Portenau, Salynes, and Macklyn.
Upon his full possession of the Netherlandes, peace was made between him, and
Charles the 8. King of France, war happening betwixt the Archduke and the
Duke of Guelders, great inconveniences followed thereon: 1503
but Duke Albert being slain before Groningen, the Archduke inherited the
realm of Spain by his wife, being made King of Castile, and George Duke of
Saxony (being then made governor of the Netherlands, for the Archduke
Phillip) continued the wars in Frizeland. For, upon the death of Isabell Q.
of Castile, Jane, daughter to Isabel married to the Archduke Phillip
Jane her daughter, being only heir, and married to the Archduke Phillip;
she heerby invested him in the Realms of Spain, Leon, Granado, etc. as
absolute King. But he enjoyed that dignity not long, 1505
for in the year, 1506. the 27. of September, 1506
he died (suddenly) in the City of Bourgos, suspected to be poisoned. After
the death of Phillip King of Castile, the Emperor Maximilian took upon him
the government of the Netherlandes, as Guardian unto Charles and Ferdinand his
Grandchildren, being the Sons of Phillip and Jane, King and Queen of Castille.

35 Charles of Austria, second of that name, succeeded rightfully in all his
Fathers Lands and Seigneuries, 1508
and by the Emperors appointment his daughter the Lady Margaret (Dowager of
Sauoy, and Aunt to the Princes Charles and Ferdinand) was Regent of the low
countries. 1515
Afterward, Prince Charles took possession of the Netherlands, and being
crowned K. of Spain and Arragon, soon after followed the death of the Emperor
Maximilian, 1519
and in an assemblye at Francfort, for choice of a new Emperor, Charles King of
Spain had free election, by the name of Charles the fifth. Then was Lady
Margaret, 1520
(Widow both of Castile and Sauoy, and Aunt to the Emperor Charles) accepted
as sole Gouernesse of the Netherlandes, Lady Margaret sole Gouernesse.
in her Nephews absence. Troubles happened in Spain, by reason of the Kings
departure thence, and not only war in Frizeland, but likewise between the
French and Bourguignons, as also the war of Boores or Peazants in Germany:
and the Groningeois rejecting the Du. of Guelders, 1526
did yield themselves to the Emperor: then, happened the 2. bloody edict from the
Emp. against the Netherland protestants, and then was the imperial diet at
Ausbourg, where the protestant princes presented the confession of their faith.
After followed the devouring inundation in the Netherlands, and the death of
the Lady dowager Margaret, whereby Mary of Austria, 2. daughter to K. Phillip,
and Q. Jane of Castile, 1531.
succeeded in the government of the Netherlands. Mary of Austria.
War happened between the Emperor and the French King, but upon the coming
of Queen Elenor of France to the Emperor her Brother, 1554.
peace was concluded betwixt them.

36 While Mary of Austria governed the Netherlands, for the Emperor Charles her
brother, great troubles happened to the Protestants, by opposition of the Pope
and Emperor against them. 1549.
The Emperor affected the Empire for Prince Phillip his Son, which bred a
quarrel betwixt the Emperor, and his brother Ferdinand King of Hungary, to
whom the Princes of the Empire were more inclined, then to Phillip; and then
the Protestants denied their coming to the Counsel of Trent. 1555
Phillip King of Spain married Mary Queen of England: And not long after, ye
Emperor resigned the Netherlands to his Son King Phillip (whereby he was
reckoned the 36. Earl of Holland, Zeland, etc.) and the Empire to his Brother
Ferdinand, K. of the Romans and Hungary, departing out of the Netherlands, to
end his days quietly in a Monastery, not far from Placentia. He reserved
100000 Crowns yearly to himself, employing 4000. for his diet and
maintenance, appointing the rest to young maids marriages, 1556.
and the relief of Widows and Orphans, he not living above two years
after. When not only happened his death, but likewise the deaths of the Queens
Dowagers of France and Hungary, as also of Mary Queen of England, after whom
succeeded her Sister Elizabeth, in which time, Elizabeth Q of England.
Emanuell Philebert, Duke of Sauoy, and Prince of Piemont, was Governor and
Lieutenant General of the Netherlands, for King Phillip: till the King of
Spaines marriage (being turned into tears, by the untimely death of the French
king) caused Margaret of Austria, Bastard to the Emperor Charles the fifth, and
Duchess of Parma, to succeed the Duke of Sauoy in the Netherlandes regiment.
1559
King Phillip returned then home into Spain, it being his last departure out
of those Countries: The Spanish Inquition.
whereon (not long after) ensued the subtle bringing of the Spanish Inquisition
into ye Netherlands, by the creation of new Bishops, 1565
and such was the power and privilege of the Inquisitors, as none were able to
withstand them, in confiscation both of body and goods at their own pleasure.

Now, albeit the Tyranny of the Duchess government in the Low Countries,
was more then the people could well endure, 1568
yet (to put a sharper Snaffle in their mouths) King Phillip removed his
Bastard Sister Margaret, and sent Don Ferdinando Aluares, Duke of Alua, who
quickly brought the Netherlands into a most pitiful estate: making himself
sure of Gaunt, and Count Horn and Count Egmont (abusiuelie) made Prisoners: he
builded the Castle of Antuerpe, where he erected his own proud Statue, and
proceeded to apprehend the prince of Orange by Commission, setting down
Articles by the Spanish Inquisition (which were confirmed by the King) to
ruinate the Netherlandes, upon which, soon followed the execution of the sons
of Batembourg at Brussels, as also the Earls of Egmont and Horn. 1574
William of Nassau, Prince of Orange, Will. Prince of Orange The Commander of
Castile.
was made Governor of Holland, Zeland and Vtrecht for the States, and proved
very fortunate in many attempts against the Duke of Alua, which made him labor
his repeal home into Spain, with Don Frederick his son. Don Jews de
Requesens, the great commander of Castile, was sent to spoil the Dukes place in
the Netherlands, for the king of Spain, to whom Aluaes former behavior served
for an example, in his proceeding, and notwithstanding his besieging of
Middlebourg (near hand to famishment) yet was his fleet defeated before his
face, 1575
and the Town yielded up by Collonell Mondragon, to the Prince of Orange.
After many dangerous turmoiles, on both sides, the States sent to require
succor of Elizabeth Queen of England, and soon after dyed Don Jews de
Requesens at Brussels; Don John of Austria.
in whose room succeeded Don John of Austria (Bastard son to the Emperor
Charles the fifth) as Governor for King Phillip in the Netherlands, all the
Provinces whereof were united at the pacification of Gand, whereupon, the
Castle was yielded unto the States, and all the Spaniards departed out of
Antuerp castle, which was also delivered into the States hands. Don John being
received as Governor, he sought ocasions how to renew war against the Prince
of Orange, and diverse discontentmentes, 1577.
as also treacherous practices, being noted in Don John, the States grew
jealous of him, and he was proclaimed the Countries enemy. Then was the
Archduke Mathias called to be Governor, The Archduke Mathias.
and while the heart-burnings held between Don John and the States, the Duke
of Aniou, and Duke Casimire also were required to succor them, but to little
effect, for Arthois and Henault fell from the Netherlands general union, and
then followed the death of Don John, 1578.
of the plague, in the Camp near unto Mamure.

Then Alexander Farnase, The Prince of Parma.
Duke of Parma and Placentia, bastard Nephew to the king of Spain, succeeded
Don John in the Netherlands government: Whereupon, a stricter Union (then
before) was made betwixt the Provinces at Vtrecht. 1580.
The Duke of Aniou was called to be Protector, The Duke of Aniou.
and partly Lord of the Countries in the Union, which made the King of Spain
proscribe the Prince of Oraunge, and set his life at sale, to which
proscription the Prince (in every point) made his just answer. 1581.
Then were valiant and woorthye services performed by Sir John Norris, and
Captain (afterward) Sir Roger Williams. In the year following, the General
Estates of the united Provinces, having declared Phillip K. of Spain, second of
that name, to be fallen from the Seigneury of the said provinces, in regard of
his extraordinary and too violent government, against their privileges and
freedoms (solemnly sworn by himself.) In way of right and Arms, took upon
them all the Government of the politic Estate, and of the Religion in those
Provinces, The States for themselves.
breaking the Kings Seals, absoluing the Subjects of their Oath to him, and
causing them to take a new Oath, for preservation of their Country, and
obedience to the said States. Upon a bargain made by the King of Spain, to
kill the Prince of Orange, the said Prince was shot by one John Iauvregui, a
banquerout-Merchants Servant, 1582
who was presently slain, but the Prince escaped that attempt with life. The
prince of Orange shot.
Afterward, he was traitorously murdered by one Balthazar Gerard a high
Bourguignon, 1584
The Prince of Orange murdered.
at Delft in Holland: whereon, Prince Maurice (being his Son) succeeded his
Father in the government. Then followed the sied^e of Antuerpe, in which time,
the States once more, re-commended their cause to the Q. of England, either to
give her the full Sovereignty of the Netherlands, or else to succor and relieve
them with her forces, upon good conditions offered. Her Majesty granted to
send them assistance, but no sovereignty or protection of them, would she take
upon her: whereupon, certain cautionary towns and Skonces were delivered up to
her, for repaiment of such sums of Money, as should be disbursed by her, 1585
and Articles of covenant set down between them. Also, Robert Lord Dudley,
Baron of Denbigh, and Earl of Leicester, was appointed by the Queen of
England, The Earl of Leicester.
to be her Governor general, over the English powers in the Netherlands.

In the time of the Earl of Leicesters government for the Queen, were sundry
worthy services performed by the Earl of Essex, Sir John Norris, the Lord
Willoughby, Sir Phillip Sidney, Sir William Russell, etc. beside the subtle
pretenses of Sir William Stanley, Rowland York, Patton, and others, who held
fair weather with the Earl of Leicester, and had the government of Zutphen
Sconce, and the strong Town of Deuenter (to the great dislike of the States)
yet performed no such matter, as the Earls hope was persuaded of them. For,
after the death of that matchless Noble Gentleman Sir Phillip Sidney, he being
shot before Zutphen, Sir Phillip Sidney slain
and thereof dying; 1587
the Earl of Leicester (being gone for England) both Deuenter and Zutphen
Sconce were delivered up to the Spaniards, by base ^oruption of Money. And (not
long after) the Prince of Parma beleagering S^luice; Sluice.
by composition it was also yielded up, after it had endured 17000. Cannon
shot and more. Beside, upon some coffeehouse, between the Earl of
Leicester and the States; the Queen called home the said Earl into England,
The Lord willoughby
and the Lord Willoughby remained there General of the English forces. The
sundry worthy services, both by him, and the English performed, with the
Spanish undoubted hopes of Englands conquest, 158^*
in the dreadful year of 1588. Prince Maurice his entrance into the
Netherlands regiment, Prince Maurice.
and the Duke of Parmaes wars in France* all these I pass over, referring such
as desire farther satisfaction therein, to the large History of the Netherlands.

The Prince of Parma dying at Artas (after his retreat from Rouen) the second
of September 1592. 1592
Maurice of Nassan, borne Prince of Orange, Marquess of La Vere, and of ^ing,
etc. was made great Captain and Admiral General of the united Provinces of
the Low^countries, Ernestus D. of Austria.
by the Estates: And Ernestus, Archduke of Austria, was also made Lieutenant
Governor, and Captain General for Phillip King of Spain.

Prince Maurice proouing very successful in his warlike artemptes, a Renegate
or Apostat Priest (in the habit of a Soldier) was corrupted (by the Archduke
Ernestus) to murder the Prince Maurice at Breda; and upon his own confession
thereof, 1594.
he was executed at the Hage. Prince Maurice should be murdered twice.
Afterward, upon Prince Maurice his valiant surprisall of Gronning, Ernestus
had dealt in like manner with a Soldier, named Peter du Four (who had
sometime served in the company of the Guarde to Prince Maurice) ^o undertake
the murdering of him at Lillo: the which treason being confessed by the man
himself, he was executed in the Town of Berghen vp-zoom. Here might much be
said of the honorable services of Sir Frances Vere, Sir Frances Vere.
and others, but our purposed breuity is the only imbarment; and the
Netherlandes History (at large) may thereof discharge me. The Archduke
Ernestus dyed the twenty one day of February, 1595. 1595.
Mo^dragons forces defeated by Prince Maurice, and La Motte slain before
Dourlaus; the Estates (under the King of Spain) gladly sought peace with the
united Provinces* and sent Articles in writing to Prince Maurice, for
consideration of their motion. This was not done but, upon good advise in the
King of Spain, perceiving the Netherlandes, and Prince Maurice his great
fortunes against him, adding every day, (more and more) to his utter abolition
thence. Hereupon, Albertus the Cardinal, Brother to deceased Ernestus, and
Archduke of Austria, Albertus Arch duke of Austria.
was sent (by the King) to govern there for him* many Easterlings and
Netherland ships, which had bin stayed in Spain to meet the Indian fleet, were
suddenly released; and Phillip of Nassau (who is now Prince of Orange and Earl
of Buron, (...)
that had long time been restrained of his liberty in Spain) for better
countenancing ye intended business, 1596
he likewise was sent along with the Cardinal Albertus.

The Cardinal being made Governor* for the King de Spain, took Callice from
the French King, as his first piece of service, but for loss thereof, he
recovered La-fere from the Spaniards. Hulst besiedged.
Whereupon, the Cardinal besiedged Hulst in Flanders, which yielded in the
end: but it was a dear purchase to the Cardinal, for this siedge, (continuing
some two months) cost him the lives of above threescore valiant Captains,
besides other Commanders, Colonels, and men of mark, and ^bou^ five thousand
well approved soldiers.

Then did the king of Spain dispense with himself for payment of his debtes,
which made many Merchants in Spain, Italy, Antwerp, Amsterdam, and
Middlebourg, to become Banquerouts. 1597
A league was made between the French King, the Queen of England, and the
States, against the Spaniardes, and then did Prince Maurice go to Tournhoult,
Tournhoult
where the Earl of Varax was slain. Amiens also was surprised by the
Spaniardes; but soon besiedged and recovered by the French King, albeit the
Cardinal offered succor, which proved in vain. Prince Maurice besiedged and
took the Towns of Alpen, Meurs* Rhinberg, Groll, Brefort, Enscheyde,
Oldenzeel, Otmarsom, Goor, and Lingen, all which services he performed in three
months. Then happened another treacherous plot, 1598
against the life of Prince Maurice, by persuasion of the Jesuits at Doway,
The Jesuits conspire the death of Prince Maurice.
and undertaken by Peter Pan, a Cooper by Trade, but being then a Broaker
or Banquerout Merchant; who having received the Sacrament, to perform the
deed either with Knife, Poniard, or Pistol, the Provincial of the Jesuits
made a long Sermon, to encourage him in the action, and assuring him of
Paradise, if he performed it, used these words to him besides: Go in peace,
for thou shall go like an Angel, in the guard of God. But the man (being
terrifyed in conscience) discovered the whole Treason, without any compulsion,
and was therefore executed at Leyden in Holland. The King of Spain growing
weak and sickly, gave his Daughter the Infanta, named Isabella Clara Eugenia,
in marriage to the Archduke and Cardinal Albertus, with transaction of the
Netherlands and Bourgogne: whereupon he left his Cardinals habit, and went to
fetch the Infanta. Soon after died the King of Spain, The death of K. Phillip
on the 13. day of September, Anno 1598. being seventy one years old, add
four months.

The Archduke and the Infanta being come into the Neatherlandes, 1599
had their instalment at Brussels, Louaine, Antwerp, etc. The Emperor sent to
the States, concerning a peace, but their resolution held to make war in
Flanders. 1600
Then happened the siedge and memorable battle of Nieuport, The battle of
Nicuport
where Prince Maurice took diverse Fortes from the Spaniards, and ouer-threw
the Archdukes Army, he being there in person: but gladly fled away, leaving
his Arms, Horse of Combat, all his Household, Artillery, and baggage behind
him, and lost 6000. men, beside 800. taken Prisoners, among whom was Don
Francesco de Mendoza, Admiral of Arragon, Marquess of Guadaleste, and
Lieutenant General of the Archdukes Army, who was led to Oostend; Don
Baptista de Villa noua, led to Horn in Holland; Don Alonzo Ricquell, to Delft,
Don Gonzalo Hernandes de Spinola, to Vtrecht; Don Pedro de Montenegro, to ye
Hague; Don Pedro de Valasco, to Berghen, with Don Francisco de Torres, and Don
Antonio de Mendoza, and Don Pedro de Leusina, to Enchuise^: besides the
Archdukes three Pages, Count Carlo Rezi, Don Diego de Guzman, and Mortier; Don
Pedro de Monte-maior, his chief taster; likewise his Physician, Barber,
Harbinger, Rider, Cook, Porter, the Grooms of his Chamber; most of the Archers
and Halberdiers of his Guard, and (in a manner) all his household; with three
Priests or Monks; 40. Ancients, and 37. Pentioners, termed (by them)
Ancient and Sergeants reformed. He lost also six pieces of Ordynance, 136.
Ensigns of foot taken, and five Cornets of horse, comprehending the Mutiners
Standerd, and the recovered lost Colors. Moreover, on the Archdukes side were
slain, the Earl of Saume, the Earl of La Fere, the Seneshall of Montelimar,
the Baron of Pimereull, Chassy Ortigny, Son to the President Richadot; Don
Gaspar de Sapena, Colonel, who dyed at Oost-end, Don Diego de Torres, Don
Gaspar de Loyazo, Don Gonzalo d'Espinola, Don Joan de Pardo, Don Garcia de
Toledo, Don Lopode Capeta, Don Alouzo Carcamo, Don Louis Faccardo Sebastian
Velasco, Sebastian Doteloa, Christionall Verdugues, Mattheo d'Otteuille,
Ioannettin de casa nueua, the Pay-Maister Alines, and many other never known.

Prince Maurice and the states loss.
Prince Maurice and the States, at the first encounter in the morning, and
lastly in the battle, lost about 2000. men* among whom were Bernard, Couteler,
and Hamelton, Captains of Horse and some twenty Captains of foot, but no Man
of Mark or special note. In this brave exploit at Neiuport, the virtue and
valor of Sir Frances Vere General, and Sir Horatio Vere, his Brother
Colonel, will for ever be remembered.

The occurrences in the following years, 1601
as the besiedging of Oast-ende; The enterprise on Flessigne; The practice to
sack Antwarpe again; Grave yielded up to Prince Maurice; 1602.
Also his honorable offers to the Town of Sluice, 1604
and it being yielded to him upon composition, even in the view of the
Archdukes Army: They require a larger field of discourse, then by this breuity
can be admitted. Proceed we then to speak of the long continued siedge at
Oast-end, which lasting three whole years, The long siedge at Oastend.
and eleauen weeks, was at last compounded withal, and on the twenty two day
of September 1604. yielded to the Archduke.

What numbers were slain in this long continued siedge of Oastende, can hardly
be gathered, albeit, a note was found in a Commissaries Pocket (who had been
slain the seventh of August 1604. before Oastend) wherein were diverse good
observations; especially concerning the Archdukes Camp, and what number (of
each degree) dyed and were slain therein, during this siedge, until the
yielding up thereof, (viz:) Masters of the Camp, seven; Colonelles,
fifteen; Sergeant Majors, The Archdukes loss at Oastend.
twenty nine Captains, 565. Lieutenants 11^6. Ensigns, 322. Sergeants 1911.
Corporals, 116^. Lanspizadees, 600. Soldiers, 54663. Mariners, 611 Women and
Children, 119. all amounting to 72124. persons.

To continue the memory of this long siedge, as also the winning of Sluice,
Counters (of Silver and Copper) were made in the united Provinces, bearing (on
the one side) the figure of Oostend, and on the ^ther, the Towns of Rhinberke,
Grave, Sluice, Ardenbourg, with the Forts of Isendyke and Cadsant, with this
inscription round about; Plus triennio obsessa, hosti rudera, Patriae quatuor
ex me vrbes dedi. Oost-end being more then 3. years besiedged, gave the Enemy
an heap of stones, and to her native Country four Towns. Another Counter,
concerning Sluice, had these words on the one side, Traxit, duxit, dedit. Anno
1604. And with the Arms of Zeland on ye other side, were these words: Beatus
populus cuius adiutor Deus. For the following years, from 1604 to 1608. 1605.
I find no especial or memorable accydents; 1606
but an enterprise by prince Maurice, on the River of ^^held and Antwerp, 1607
with the taking of the Castle of Wouwe, 1608
near to Berghen Vpzoome; 1069
Spiholas taking of Linghen, with an attempt on Berghen, and Groll, taken by
composition, 1610.
etc. For a treaty of peace happening between England and Spain, the like also
chanced to be talked on, concerning the Netherlands, and many meetings were
made to bring it to effect. At length it was brought to pass by the labor and
endeavor of a Friar (as was reported) who made many errands between Spain and
the Netherlands, until it was accomplished. Since when, nothing has happened of
any consequence, but the taking in of the Town of Guliche in Germany, where
the prince Maurice behaved himself very honorably.

Of the Kingdom of Ireland.
Avoiding all nice and secupulous curiosity, about the first name and Original
of Ireland, I purpose to follow these best received authors, as Giraldus
Cambrensis, Flatsbury, Henry of Marleborow, and others, that therein do give
the best direction. The Original of the Irish.
They say and affirm, that the Hispaniards the Original offspring of the
Irish, because Hispaine, in those ancient days was called Iberia, after the
name of Iberius, the Son of Iuball, and in regard also, that the famous River
Iberus was then their habitation, did entitle this land Iberia, as Leyland, and
some other Chroniclers Write, or Ibernia, Leyland in Cyg. Ca^t.
with addition of the letter (n) to express a kind of variation. From which
Ibernia, it may easily be presumed, that Iberland, or Iuerland received first
sound, and so Ireland, by contraction or corruption in common phrase. It is
said like wise to be called Scotia, at the very same time, in reverend respect
of Scotach, or Scota, Scotach or Scota the wife of Gathelus.
wife to Gathelus, an ancient Noble Captain of those Iberians, she being
Mother, others say Grandmother, to Hiberus and Hermon, the Sons of Metellus,
reigning then in Hispaine. Five brethren men of no mean merit and valor
(being sons to one Dela) all worthy Seamen, and skillful Pilots, rigging a
fleet, arrived in Ireland, and perceiving it to be but slenderly peopled,
concluded (by casting lots, for several shares) to divide the Country among
themselves. The four elder brethren, who were named Gandius, Genandius, An.
mund. 2^33 Camb^e^. Lib. 1. dict 3. rub. 5, 6.
Sagandus or Gangandus, Rutheragus or Rutheranus, having cast the whole Island
into four partitions, and finding their younger brother Slanius to stand quite
exempted from any abiding, sucuaying more advisedly their several portions:
(which were thus squared, Lagenia, Leinster, lying East: Connatia, Connaght,
west: Vltonia, Vlster, North: and Momonia Mouuster south, each made an
abatement of his proportion, and amongst them laid out a fifth part, named
Media, Meeth, which afterward, from being the lesser share (by his manly
carriage) proved to be the largest, and he obtained the whole monarchy of
Ireland, appointing Meeth to serve for ye monarchs diet or table.

The first K. of Ireland.
It appears then, that Ireland was thus divided into five several territories
or kingdoms, and that the Spaniards, or Hispaniardes first peopled the same.
There are also accounted 130. pettye Kings of that Nation, from Hermon, that
slew his Brother Hiberus (of whose name the Irish received theirs) to
Laogirius, the Son of Nealus Magnus, in whose days Ireland was converted to
the Christian faith, by that holy man S. Pat^ik. About which time came Roderick
a Scithian Prince, Roderick K. of the Picts.
with no great number of men, who were the Picts, and he their king, and there
they sought to make their abiding: but the Irish persuaded the^ thence, and
then they betook themselves to the North part of Britain, where both
Rodericke and the more number of his followers, were slain by Marius King of
Britain. In no long while after, one Turgesius, a notable Pyrat of the
Norweig^ans, came thither likewise, Turgesius the Tyrant.
with a strong power, and made himself King or Conqueror of Ireland, using
much tirrany, and deflouring all the other Kings daughters: till by the policy
of Omalaghlilen, King of Meth, whose daughter also the tyrant would needs
ravish, a company of young youths were disguised like fair Nimphs, with short
sharp Skeines hidden under their Garments, and the fair young Lady her
self, Daughter to Omalaghlilen, was their chief conducter to the lascivious
Tyrants bed Chamber. Turgesius, his only companions at that instant, were a
few dissolute young men, affected like himself, whom the King had made
acquainted with this amorous purchase, promising, that (his lust being
satisfied) where he liked to make election, the rest should remain at their
free disposition. No sooner were these disguised young Gallantes entered the
Chamber, and the king preparing himself to embrace the King of Meths
Daughter, but, The just punishment of a lascivious Tyrant.
drawing forth their Skeynes, they first cooled the Tyrants heat in his own
blood, and afterward his Minions were in like sort served. The fame of this
valiant act being quickly flowne thorough Ireland, and the Princes rising in
Arms on so apt an advantage, they resolved to free themselves from such
seruility: as indeed they did, and made Omalaghlilen their chief King or
commander, in honor of this their great deliverance.

Concerning diverse other invasions of Ireland afterward, by the Danes,
Norwegians, Swedens, Saxo Grammat. Albert. Crantz.
Normans, etc. reported by Saxo Grammaticus, Albert Crantzius, and others: they
are matters no way incident to our present purpose, but referred to our
general determination, more capeable of such plenty of discourse. Therefore,
passing over those former years of trouble and disturbance, Syluest. Girald.
Cambrensis.
let us come to Syluester Giraldus Cambrensis, his history of the conquest of
Ireland, when Dermon Mac Morogh, K. of Leynster. fled out of Ireland, to crave
succor of Henry the second, King of England, who was then in Aquitaine, busied
with very serious affairs, wherein I will be so brief as I may.

This Dermon Mac Morough, King of Leinster, O Dermon Mac Morogh.
having bin (from his youth and entrance into the Kingdom) tirranous over his
Nobility, and full of oppression to all the Gentry, became highly hated and
despised, and so much the rather for rauishing the wife to Ororike prince of
Meth, in the absence of her husband. Ororike not brooking such an indignity,
procured Rotherick (K. of Connagh, and Monarch of all Ireland over the other
Kings) to give him aid, with all the forces that either of them could make.
Dermon understanding this main opposition, fled into Aquitaine, where he found
Henry the second, King of England, and such was his distressefull tale to him,
with Oath of allegiance sworn unto him. to be his true vassaile and subject:
Dermon swears allegiance to K Henry.
that king Henry made kind acceptance of him, and took him into his protection,
granting him his Letters pattents into England, to use the aid and means of
his Subjects, for recovery of his right in Ireland. Being returned from King
Henry into England, he came to Bristow, where his letters Patents were many
times publickely read, and liberal wadges and offers made, to such as in this
extremity would give him assistance. Gilbert Earl of Chepstone.
All proved in vain, till Richard, son to Gilbert, Earl of Chepstone (being
promised Dermons Daughter and heir in marriage, Robert Fitz Stephens, and
Maurice Fitz-gerard*
with inheritance and succession in his Kingdom) was bound to visit him with
aid in Ireland, at the following Spring: Robert Fitz-Stephens, and Maurice
Fitzgerald, had promise also of the Town of Wexford, being the chiefest Town
in Leinster, and six Cantreds of land to them and theirs for ever, to come
likewise (with their best help) at the Spring ensuing. Upon hope of this
assistaunce, Dermon ventured home among his enemies, Fitzstephens and his men
pass into Ireland.
but in very private manner for his own safety. At time appointed, Robert
Fitz-Stephens accompanied with Maurice Fitzgerald and with thirty serviceable
Gentlemen, all of his Kindred, beside three hundred bold Archers, the best
chosen, and only men of Wales, sailed in three sundry barks, and landed in
the^ Calends of May, at the Banne in Ireland. Whereby, A prophes^ of Merlin^
an old Prophesy of Merlins was said to be fulfilled, (viz.) A Knight
by-parted, should enter first with force in Arms, and break the bounds of
Ireland. Their landing there, proved so succesful to Derman, that he kept his
word with Fitz-stephens and Fitzgerald, for the town of Wexford, and
territories thereto appertaining with the cantreds of land: he sent also for
Richard Strongbow, Earl of Pembroke, son to Earl Gilbert of Chepstone,
Richard Strongbow Earl of Chepstone and Pembroke.
who, upon Dermons letters, and intelligence of Fitz-Stephens great fortunes
(with his followers) there desiring ernestly to make one in so worthy an
imploiment made suit to k. Henry for his passage thither. But whither he
obtained leave or no, he being of very noble parentage, greater in spirit, then
possessions, and aiming at the fairest fortunes: dreadles of the kings
displeasure, with such power as he could provide, he landed at Waterford in
September. Here it shall not differ much from our purpose, to report those
Noble men's names, who before any other of the English assisted this worthy
Earl Richard Strongbow for Dermon, in subduing Ireland to the Crown of
England, according as they are recorded in the chancery of Ireland, and as the
learned M. Camden has also observed them. Robert Fitz-Stephens. Haruey de
Mont-ma^ish. Maurice Prendergest. Robert Bar. Meiler Meilerine. Maurice
Fitz-Gi^ald. Redmund, Nephew of Fitz-Stephens. William Ferrand. Miles de Cogan.
Gualter de Ridensford. Gualter, and Alexander, sons of Maurice Fitz-Girald.
William Notte. Robert Fitz-Bernard. Hugh de Lacie. William Fitz-Adelm. William
Marcarell. Humfrey Bohun. Hugh de Gundeuill. Phillip de Hasting. Hugh Titell.
David VValsh. Robert Poe^. Osbert de Hetloter. william de Bendenges. Adam de
Geruez. Griffin Fitz-Stephens Nephew. Raulfe Fitz-Stephens. Walter de Barry.
Phillip VValsh. Adam de Hereford. John Curcy. Hugh Contilon. Redmund Cau^^more.
Redmund Fitzhugh. Miles of S. David's. With diverse other beside.
Then also was it generally noised, that Celidons prophecy was fulfilled,
Celidons prophesye.
(viz) A little Firebrand shall go before a great fire, and as the sparks
kindle the lesser wood, so shall the same set the g^et wood on fire. There was
another prophesy also, Merlins Prophecy,
of Merlins, viz. A great forerunner of a greater follower, shall come, and he
shall tread down the heads of Desmond and Leinster, and the ways (before
opened and made ready) he shall in large. Dublin, Leinster, and diverse other
places were immediately won, and Earl Richard married to Eua, Dermons daughter.

By which marriage, he enjoyed but one daughter only, who enriched William
Mare^chall with the Earldom of Pembrokes Title, fair Lands in Ireland, five
Sons, all dying childlesse, and as many daughters, who honored their husbands
( viz. Hugh Bigod, Earl of No folk, Guarin Montchensey, Gilbert Earl of
Gloucester, William Ferrars Earl of Derbie, and william Breose, with children,
goodly honors, and rich possessions.

Upon the news in England, of Earl Strongbow and his followers daily
prevailing in Ireland, King Henry offended with Earl Strongbow
King Henry grew offended with him, and made a Proclamation against him, that
none of his Subjects should further assist Dermon or him. But, upon the
Earls private passage into England, and conference with the King at Newham,
near to Gloucester, all displeasure was forgotten, and the King (having then an
Army in readiness) should pass forthwith into Ireland, where all should be
delivered up into the Kings possession. King Henry landed at Waterford, on
Saint Lukes day, in the seventh year of his reign, the 41. of his age, and
of our Lord, 1172. Dermon Mac Morogh being dead some short while before. The
princes of Ireland swear fealty to King Henry.
The King being Royally welcomed into Ireland, Dermon or Mac Carti, Prince of
Cork, Donald O Bren, Prince of Limerick, Donold O Carel, Prince of Ossorie,
and Macleighlin O Felin, Prince of the Decies or Ophalie, O Ro^ke, K. of Meth,
and Oneale, King of Vlster* with Rotherick O Conor Dun, the Brown Monarch of
Ireland, came al and submitted themselves to k. Henry, swearing fealty and to
be tributaries to him. Al matters being ordered in Ireland to the Kings good
lyking, he departed thence to England, having made Earl Strong-bow Earl of
Pembroke, the first Lord Governor of Ireland, joining Reimond le Grace in
Commission with him* in the year, 1174.

The names of the Governors, Lieutenants, Lord Justices, and Deputies of
Ireland, since the conquest thereof, by King Henry the second. The years of
our Lord

RIchard Strongbow, Earl of Pembroke, 1174
Governor, Reimond le Grace being joined (for his more ease) in commission with
him. Reimond le Grace, Lieutenant by himself. 1177
William Fitz Adelme, Lieutenant, having John de Curcy, Robert Fitzstephans,
and Miles Cogan joined in Commission with him. Hugh Lacie, Lieutenant. John
Lacy, Constable of Chester. and Richard de Peche. Governors. 1182
Hugh Lacy, again Lieutenant. Hugh Lacy the younger, Lord Justice. Henry
Loandoris, Archbishop of Dublin, 1227
Lord Justice. Maurice Fitzgirald, Lord Justice. 1228.
John Fitzgeffery, Knight, Lord Justice. 1253
Alain de la Zouch, Lord Justice. Stephen de Long Espe, Lord Justice. 1258
William Deane, Lord Justice. Sir Richard Rochell, or Capell, Lord Justice.
1261.
David Barry, Lord Justice. 1267
Robert Vfford, Lord Justice. Richard de Excester, Lord Justice. 1268
James Lord Audley, Lord Justice. 1269
Maurice Fitzmaurice, Lord Justice. 1270
Walter, Lord Genuille, Lord Justice. 1272
Robert Vfford, again lord Justice. 1281
Fulborne, Bishop of Waterford, Lord Justice. John Stamford, Archbishop of
Dublin, Lord Justice. William Vescie, Lord Justice. 1295
William Dodingsels, lord Justice. Thomas Fitz-Maurice, Lord Justice. 1293
John Wogan, lord Justice. 1314
Theobald Verdo^, lord Justice. 1315
Edmund Butler, lord Justice. 1317.
Roger, Lord Mortimer, Lord Justice. Alexander Bignor, Arch-Bishoppe of Dubline,
Lord Justice. 1319
Roger, lord Mortimer, the second time lord Justice. 1320
Thomas Fitz-Iohn, Earl of Kildare, lord Justice. 1321
John Birmingham, Earl of Louth, lord Justice. 1323
John, Lord Darcy, Lord Justice. 1327
Roger Outlaw, Prior of Kilmainan, lord Justice. Anthony, lord Lucy, lord
Justice. 1332
John, lord Darcy, second time lord Justice. John, lord Charleton, lord Justice.
1338
Thomas, Bishop of Hereford, lord Justice. 1339
John, Lord Darcy, ordained lord Justice by Patent, during his life, by King
Edward the third. Raphe Vfford, lord Iustire. 1346.
Robert Darcy, lord Justice. John Fitz-Maurice, lord Justice. Walter, lord
Birmingham, Lord Justice, his Deputies were John Archer, Priour of Kilmainan,
and Baron Carew, with Sir ThoRokesby. Maurice Fitz-Thomas, Earl of Desmond,
had the Office of Lord Justice, for term of his life, by the grant of King
Edward the third. Thomas Rokesby, Knight, lord Justice. 1355
Almericke de S. Amand. 1357
appointed Lord Justices by turns. John Butler, Earl of Ormund. appointed
Lord Justices by turns. Maurice Fitz-Henry, Earl of Kildare. appointed Lord
Justices by turns. Lionell, Duke of Clarence, Lord Justice. 1361
Gerald Fitz-Maurice, Earl of Desmond, 1367
lord Justice. William, lord Windsor, 1369
the first Lieutenant in Ireland. Roger Ashton, lord Justice. 1372
Roger Mortimer. 1381
Justices and Lieutenaunts especially recorded, in the days of King Richard
the second. Phillip Courtney. Justices and Lieutenaunts especially recorded, in
the days of King Richard the second. James Earl of Ormund. Justices and
Lieutenaunts especially recorded, in the days of King Richard the second.
Robert Vere, Earl of Oxford, Marquess of Dublin, created Duke of Ireland.
Roger Mortimer, Earl of March, Lieutenant. 1394
Roger Mortimer, Earl of March and Vlster, lieutenant. Roger Gray, lord
Justice. John Stanley, Knight, lord lieutenant. Thomas of Lancaster, 1401.
brother to king Henry the fourth, lord Lieutenant; whose Deputies at sundry
times, were Alexander, Bishop of Meth, Stephen Scrope, knight, and the Prior of
Kilmainan. 1403
James Butler, Earl of Ormond, Lord Justice. Gerald, Earl of Kildare, Lord
Justice. 1407
James Butler, Earl of Ormond, Son to the foresaid James, Lord Justice. 1413
John Stanley, again Lord Lieutenant. Thomas Cranley, Archbishop of Dublin,
Lord Justice. 1414
John, Lord Talbot of Shefield, Lieutenant. 1420.
James Butler, Earl of Ormond, the second time Lieutenant. Edmund, Earl of
March, James, Earl of Ormond, his Deputy. Lieutenants to K. Henry the sixth.
John Sutton, Lord Dudly, Sir Thomas Strange, his Deputy. Lieutenants to K.
Henry the sixth. Sir Thomas Stanley, Sir Christopher Plunket his Deputy.
Lieutenants to K. Henry the sixth. Lion, Lord Wells, Deputy to the Earl of
Ormond. Lieutenants to K. Henry the sixth. James, Earl of Ormond, by himself.
Lieutenants to K. Henry the sixth. John, Earl of Shrewsbury, the Archbishop of
Dublin ( in his absence) Lord Justice. Lieutenants to K. Henry the sixth.
Richard Plantagenet, Duke of York, Father to King Edw: the fourth, had the
Office of Lieutenant, by letters patents from king Henry the sixth, for ten
years. His Deputies (at sundry times) were the Baron of Deluin; Richard
Fits-Eustace, Knight; James Earl of Ormond; and Thomas Fitzmoris, Earl of
Kildare. Thomas Fitzmoris, Earl of Kildare, Lord Justice in the days of King
Edward the fourth, until the third year of his reign. After whom, George
Duke of Clarence, brother to the King, had the office of Lieutenant during his
life, and made his Deputies (at sundry times) these Men following; Thomas,
Earl of Desmond. Deputies to the duke of Clarence. John Tiptoft, Earl of
Worcester. Deputies to the duke of Clarence. Thomas, Earl of Kildare. Deputies
to the duke of Clarence. 1470
Henry, Lord Gray of Ruthine. Deputies to the duke of Clarence. Sir Rowland
Eustace, Lord Deputy. Richard, Duke of York, younger son to King Edward the
fourth, Lieutenant. Edward, Son to K. Richard the 3. Lieutenant, his Deputy was
Gerald, Earl of Kildare. Jasper, Duke of Bedford, and Earl of Pembroke,
Lieutenant: his Deputy was Walter, Archbishop of Dublin. Edward Poynings,
Knight, Lord Deputy. 1494
Henry, Duke of York, afterward King, 1501
by the name of Henry the eight, Lieutenant; his Deputy was Gerald, Earl of
Kildare. Gerald Fitzgerald, Earl of Kildare, L. Deputy. Thomas Howard, Earl
of Surry, afterward, 1520
Duke of Norffolke, Lieutenant. Piers Butler, Earl of Ossorie, Lord Deputy.
Geralde Fitzgeralde, Earl of Kildare, 1523
again Lord Deputy. The Baron of Dublin, Lord Deputy. Piers Butler, Earl of
Ossorie, again L. Deputy. 1529
William Skeffington, Knight, Lord Deputy. Gerald Fitzgerald, Earl of Kildare,
ye third time Lord Deputy. William Skeffington, again Lord Deputy. 1534.
Leonard, Lord Gray, Lord Deputy. 1540
Sir William Brereton, Knight, Lord Justice. 1541
Sir Anthony Sentleger, Knight, Lord Deputy.
The names of all the Lords, Deputies, and Justices in Ireland, since the
death of King Henry the eight, who died in January 1546.
1546.
SIr Anthony Sentleger, knight, by Patent, 1546
dated 24. Martij. Anno primo Edw. 6. Sir Edward Bellingham, Lord Deputy, 1547
22. Aprills An. eodem. 1548.
Sir Francis Brian. Lord Justice. 1549
Sir William Brabeston, Lord Justice. 1550
Sir Anthony Seutleger, the third time Lord deputy, 4. August. 1551
Sir James Croftes, Lord Deputy, twenty nine Aprilis. 1553
Sir Anthony Sentleger, the fourth time Lord Deputy, September 1. Anno primo
Reg. Marie. 1555
Thomas, Lord Fitzwalter, Lord Deputy 27. Aprilis. 1556
Sir Henry Sidney. Lords Justices. Doctor Coren, or Corwen. Lords Justices.
Sir Henry Sidney, Lord Justice alone, 1556.
eighteen January. Thomas Earl of Sussex, Lord Lieutenant, 1557
19. Martij. Sir William Fitz-Williams, Lord Justice. 1558
Thomas, Earl of Sussex, Lord Deputy, 1559
6. Maij Anno primo R. Elizab. Sir Nicholas Arnold, Lord Justice. 1564
Sir Henry Sidney, Lord Deputy the third time. 1565
Doctor Weston, Lord Chancellor. Sir William Fitzwilliams. 1567
Sir Henry Sidney, 1568.
Lord Deputy the fourth time. Sir William Fitz-williams, Lord Justice. 1570
Sir William Fitz williams, Lord Deputy, 1571
11. December. Anno. 14. Elizab. Sir Henry Sidney, Lord Deputy the fifth time,
1572
August 3. Sir William Drury, Lord Justice, 1579.
14. Septem. by patent, 18. May. Sir William Pelham, lord Justice. 1580.
The Lord Arthur Gray. 1580.
Adam Arch-Byshoppe of Dublin. Lords Justices. 1582
Sir Henry Wallop. Lords Justices. Sir John Perot, Lord Deputy. 1584.
Sir William Fitz-Williams, Lord Deputy. 1588
Sir William Russell, Lord Deputy. 1595
Thomas, Lord Borough, lord Deputy. 1597
Robert, Earl of Essex, Lord Lieutenant. 1599
Charles Blunt, Barou Montioy, Lord Deputy. 1600
Sir George Carew, Lord Deputy. 1602.
1604.
Sir Arthur Chichester, Lord Deputy, who yet to this day continues in that
honorable office.
Of the Kingdom of Scotland.
ACcording to the ancient Historiographers of Scotland in description of their
Nations first offspring and original (after Brutes first division of
Britain to his Sons) they make relation of a Noble man among the Grecians,
Gathelus a noble Grecian.
that was named Gathelus, the son of Cecrops (in the judgment of some) who
builded Athens: but, according to the conceit of others, the Son of Argus
Nealus, fourth King of the Argines. This Gathelus, being banished by his
Father, for some matter of disobedience, departed thence into Egypt, in the
thirty three year of Pharao Orus, An. Mund. 2416,
then King of that Country, and there carried himself with such valiant and
extraordinary success, against the Countries Enemies, Joseph. Lib. 2 Cap. 7.
(in the company of Moses, General under the King himself) that Pharao
bestowed his fair Daughter (named Scota) on him in marriage, having also then
given him and his foll^wers, the City Thebes (Aegyptiaca) reported to be taken
from the Israelites. Upon just occasion, Gathelus (after his Fathers in Laws
decease) leaving Egypt, being provided of Ships and other apt necessaries,
took his Wife, Children, and a great multitude both of Greeks and Ethyopians,
and setting forth of Nilus, determined to seek his fortune in other Countries.
Gathelus his departure out of Egypt.
This was in the year of the worlds creation, 2453. and after his abiding in
Egypt, above 39. years: what accidents befell him in this voyage, is needelesse
to report, his first arrival was on the Coasts of Numidia in Afric, now
named Barbary: but being not able to settle there, he came into a part of
Spain, long after termed Lusitania. It is said that the place of his landing
there, was called Port-Gathele, after the name of Gathelus, He landed in
Portingale.
which afterward became (corruptly) to be called Portgale, or Portingale, the
certainty whereof I refer to better judgments. The people there inhabiting,
gave both him and his, at the first, a bold repulse, but in the end he
prevailed victoriously, and after further friendly conference with the
Spaniards, he began to build a City named Brachara, on the banks of the
River Mundus, The City Brachara builded.
and so at the first did he name the City it self. Gathelus by the Spaniards
further persuasions and promise of assistance to their uttermost, whatsoever
disasters should betide him and his: removed to the Northside of Spain, on
the Cantabrian Sea coasts, now called Galitia, where he builded likewise
another City, named Brigantia, afterward called Nouium, and now Compostella.

Here did Gathelus bear the Title of king, Campostella builded.
and gave laws to his people, commanding that they should all be called
Scottish-men, to honor the name of his dear beloved wife Scota, as he had
always so termed them, in the time of his travails. In time, they grew to be
so great a Nation, The Scots foyleth the spaniards.
that the Spaniards warring with them for their own safety, sustained the
worst: and though victory remained to the Scots, yet such good Orders were
agreed on, that both Scots and Spaniards should observe their own laws,
without invasion offered on either side. Then did Gathelus live in peace with
his neighbors, sitting daily on his Marble stone in Brigantia, administering
Laws and Justice to his people: Gathelus his Marble stone.
which stone was fashioned like a seat or chair, having such a fate thereto
belonging (as is said) that wheresoever that stone should be found, there
should the Scottishmen reign and hold dominion. Hereof it ensued, that there
first in Spain, afterward in Ireland, and next in Scotland, the Kings ruling
over the Scottishmen, received the Crown sitting upon that stone, until the
time of Robert the first, King of Scotland. On the stone was this inscription
engraven. The inscription on the stone of Gathelus.
Ni fallat fatum, Scoti quocunque locatum*

Englished thus: Except old Sawes do fail,
and Wizards wits be blind:
The Scots in place must reign,
Gathelus his people do greatly aabound.
where they this Stone shall find.
This quiet life of Gathelus, did so daily increase the abundance of his
people, that the bounds of his dominion was not able to contain them, and he
being religious in covenant with the Spaniards, avoiding all means of breach
of the peace: having intelligence of an Island lying North over against Spain,
and wherein was but few inhabitants: made ready his shipping, leuyed an
Army of his subjects, and under conduct of his two sons, named Hiberus and
Himecus, or Hermion (which he had by his Queen Scota) conveyed them over into
that Island, Gathelus his two sons come into Ireland.
which after-warde was named Hibernia, after the name of Hiberus. The History
records, that the Scottishmen offered no violence to the inhabitants, but
fought all means to win them by gentleness, which in the end was easily
compassed, and all things appointed in decent order: which made Hiber leave
his Brother to govern there in Hilberland or Ireland, The death of Gathelus
and valor of his son Hiberus.
and return back to Spain. There he found his Father Gathelus to be dead, and
he (with the peoples joyful consent) was admitted to succeed him as his son:
but in regard of his admirable courage, and not satisfied with those bounds
that pleased his father; he made conquest of other Cities and Towns near
about him, so that they were enforced to sue unto him for peace, and agreed to
such conditions, Scotts and Spaniardes one nation.
that a league concluded amity, and marriage contracts between both Scots and
Spaniards, causing them to become as one people, continuing their succession of
Kings (after Hibers death) in his posterity, amongst which were Metellus,
Hermoneus, Ptolomeus, Hiberius, and Simon Brechus.

Passing over the contentions in Ireland, under the rule of the forenamed
Himecus, the three sons of Metellus (viz) Hermoneus, Ptolomeus and Hiberius,
being sent thither in defense of the iniuried Scots; let us speak of this
Simon Brechus, Simon Brechus in Ireland, first K. over the Scots.
lineally descended of the Scottish blood, who was the first King that reigned
over the Scots in Ireland, he brought with him thither ye fatal Marble stone,
and was thereon crowned, in sign of his full possession of that kingdom, and
in the year from the worlds creation, 3270. after the flood, 1616.55. from the
building of Rome, after Brutes entrance into Britain, 870. and before our
Saviors incarnation, 697. He governed his subjects with great Justice forty
years, after whom succeeded Fandufus, from whom issued Ethion, Fandufus and
his issue.
that begat Glaucus, whose son (named Nottasilus) was the father of Rothsay,
all which reigned successively over the Scots in Ireland.

Rothsay, to avoid the super-abounding increase of the Scottish Nation in
Ireland, Rothsay transporteth his Scots into the western Isles.
transported them (by diverse numbers) into the Isles anciently called Ebonides,
afterward Hebrides, but now (by the Scots) the Western Isles, lying on the
West half of Scotland, and named the Isle he first possessed them of, the isle
of Rothsay, after his own name: this was 133. years after Simon Brechus was
crowned King. Nor may we forget, yt they also named those Islandes (and an
especial part thereof) by the name of Argathelia, in memory of their first
guide and Prince Gathelus, Argathelia in remembrance of Gathelus.
and as yet to this day it is called Arguile, wherein also, as all over the
main and firm land, called then Albion, and they Albion-Scots, they planted
themselves, albeit it was a wast and very desert dwelling.

Here could I enter into a necessary declaration, concerning the coming of
the Pictes, into those parts of Albion, what people they were, The Pictes come
into Albion.
their combustions with the Britains and Scots, and rule of their Kings, till
their absolute destruction, according to an ancient Prophecy: That the Scots
should in the end destroy all the Pictish progeny: But because I have briefly
spoken of them, and having referred their further relation to our general
History, we will now go on with our matter of the Albion Scots. In the
troubles of Ireland, Ferguhardus in Ireland.
among the Scots there inhabiting, one Ferguhardus, a very worthy and noble
Prince, reigned there, who sent an army to assist the British and Albion
Scots, upon their request of aid, under the conduct of his son Fergusius, who
was a young gallant Prince, yet an expert Warrior, and took with him the
Marble stone, because he went to a dangerous war, and hoped withal, that the
issue of his pains should be the attaining of a kingdom: As indeed, upon an
assembly and parliament held at Arguile, and his high merit to exceed all others
whatsoever, he was elected and sacred in that supreme office, Fergusius the
first king of Scotland
in the year after the worlds creation, 3640. before our blessed Saviors
incarnation, 327. after the building of Rome 420. and after Brutes entrance
into Britain, 790. This Fergusius, after he had reigned royally the space of
25. years, sailing into Ireland, to quiet a coffeehouse amongst the
Nobility, was driven upon a Rock, where he perished by drowning, and that
Rock has ever since, even to this day, bin called Rock-Ferguse, otherwise
Knock-Ferguse.

After the much lamented death of Fergusius, because his sons were over
young, to undergo the weighty charge of government, Feritharis the second k. of
Scotland.
his Brother Feritharis was crowned King, being enthroned in his Kingly
Ornaments, with all solemnity: his two edged sword, his scepter Royal, and
his Crown of Gold, made in form of a Rampire, for preservation of his
Countries liberty: which manner of inuesting continued (without any
alteration) till the days of Achaius King of Scotland, who confirming a
perpetual league with Charlemaigne, Emperor and K. of France, to last for ever
between Scots and French, added to the Crown four Flower de Lices, with four
Croslets, divided in sunder with equal spaces, rising somewhat higher then the
Flower de Lices, that thereby, the observing of Christian Religion, and sincere
faith (maintained by the Scottish Nation) might appear the more apparent to all that beheld it. After Feritharis (who reigned worthy 15. years) not Ferlegus,
How the first kings of s^ottes succeeded each other.
the eldest son of Fergusius succeeded, but Mainus the younger son, being
then aged 24. years: and after him his son Do^uadille, the following
succession we will thus briefly relate.

Doruadil reigned 28. years. Nothatus, Brother to Doruadil, raygned two
years. Reuther, son to Doruadill, 26. years. Reutha, the Uncles son to
Reuther, seventeen years, and then entering into a private life, he resigned
the Crown to Thereus. Thereus, the son of Reuther, who reigned 12. years.
Conanus, Lord of Galloway, who after the decease of Thereus in Britain,
yielded the government to Iosina, Brother to Thereus, and reigned 24. years.
Finnanus, son to Iosina, thirty years. Durstus, son to Finnanus, nine
years. Ewin, Uncles son to Durstus, xix. years. Gillus, base son to
Ewin, who being expulsed, Ewin, second of that name, was crowned K. and
reigning xix. years, resigned his state to Ederus. Ederus, the son of
Dothan, 38. years. Ewin the third, son to Ederus, 7. years. Metellanus, son
to Carren, the Brother of Ederus, in the 12. year of whose reign, The birth
of our Savior Jesus Christ.
our Savior Jesus Christ was borne of the blessed Virgin Mary in Bethlem,
which was 324 years, after the establishing of the Scottish kingdom by
Fergusius. This Metellanus died in the 28. year of his reign. Caratake, son
to Cadallan, 54
and Nephew to Metellanus, reigned xxi. years. Corbreid, yongst brother to
Caratake, 34. years. 58
71
Dardan, sur-named the Great, for his huge stature four years. 75
Corbreid Gald, eldest son of King Corbreid, 35. years. This was a very
worthy and famous King, and the Country where he last fought with the
Romans, in memory of his own name, was called Galdia, which (as some think)
is that now named Galloway. 131
Lingthake, son to Corbreid Gald, two years. 133
Mogall, nephew to Corbreid Gald, six and thirty years. 162
Conarus, son to Mogall, 14. years. 176
Ethodius, Nephewe to King Mogall. In this Kingsraigne, Lucius, King of the
Britains, with a great part of his people, received the Christian faith, being
according to the Scottish Chronicles, in the year after our Saviors birth,
187. This Ethodius reigned 33. years. 207
Satrahell, or Serrahell, Brother to Ethodius, reigned four years. 211
Donald, Brother to Satrahell, 21. years. In this kings time, the Scots
received with him the Christian faith, 330. years after the erection of the
Scottish Kingdom. And this Donald was the first that caused Gold and Silver
to be coined in his Realm, stamping a Cross on the one side* and his face on
the other. 216
Euthodius the second, being Son to the former King Euthodius, reigned 16.
years. 242
Athirco, son to Ethodius, 12. years. 252
Natholocus, a Noble man of Argile, xi. years. Findocke, son to Athirco, ten
years. Donald, Brother to Findock, being named Donald of the Isles, twelve
years. 273
Crathlint, Son to King Findock, 287
twenty four years. Fincomarke, the Uncles son to Crathlint, 322
47. years. Romacus, Nephewe to King Crathlint, 358
four years. Angusianus, Nephewe to King Crathlint, 360
two years. Fethelmachus, Cousin to Angusianus, three years. 363
Eugenius, the Son of King Fincomarke, 369
three years. Ferguse, Son to Erthus, who was Son to Ethodius, Brother to
Eugenius, 424.
and borne in Denmark, 16. years.
Eugenius, the Son of Ferguse, 440
in whose time the Wall, called Adrians Wall, was undermined and overthrown;
Also the Britains were made tributary to the Scots and Pictes: The Britains
tributary to the Scots and Picts.
which was about five hundred years, after that Julius Caesar had brought them
in subjection to the Romans; after our Saviors birth 446. and the seventh
of Eugenius his reign. Then was the Isle of Albion sore infected with the
Pelagians Heresy, and Paladius (termed by some the Apostle of Scotland) was
sent by Pope Celestine to the Scots and Picts. This Eugenius reigned 30.
years, and advanced the State of his Country to more wealth and felicity,
then any of his Predecessors had done before him.

470
Dongard, brother to Eugenius, raignd 5. years.

481
Constantine, Brother also to Eugenius, 17. years.

501
Dongall, or Congall, Nephew to Constantine, and son to his Brother Dongard,
20. years.

521
Conranus, Brother to Congall, in whose time the great K. Arthur was borne, and
S. Germane preached among the Soldiers in the Camp, and bare the Kings
Standard in the field, wben with the cry of Alleluia three tunes together, the
Saxons were miraculously discomfited. This Conranus died in the 20. year of
his reign, the 16. of Arthurs over the Britains, and fifth of the Emperor
Justinian, An. Christi. 531.

531
Eugenius, his Nephew, and son to his brother Congall, in whose time was the
bloody battle between the Britains, Scots, and Picts, wherein above 20000.
men were slain, with Mordred, K. Arthur, The death of King Arthur, Mordred, etc.
and Gawan or Gauan, brother to Mordred, and most part of ye British Nobility.
This Eugenius reigned 38. years.

578
Conuall, Brother to Eugenius, in whose time S. Colme, or Colombe, came from
Ireland into Scotland. This Conuall reigned ten years, and then Kinnatill his
Brother, being enthroned at Argile by free election, lived but twenty days
after his Coronation.

588
Aldan, Son to King Conran, was crowned by the holy Father Saint Colme, and
reigned thirty seven years. In this Aidans time, the Saxons having driven the
Britains into Wales, and insulting over their lands and Countries; divided
the kingdom into seven parts or deuisions, England made seven kingdoms.
ordaining seven several Kings to rule over them. In this King Aidans rule,
died Saint Colme, at Dune in Ireland, whereon his toomb these verses were found
engraued.

Hi tres in Duno, tumulo tumulantur in vno,
Brigida, Patricius at que Columba pius.
Saint Colme, Saint Patrick, and Brigetta pure,
These three in Dune lies in one Sepulture.
Kenethus Keir, Son of Conuall, or Conwall, 606
raigued four months.

Eugenius, fourth of that name, 620.
Son to King Aidan, and (by some) called Brudus, according to S. Colmes
prophecy of him, was crowned King of Scotland. He reigned 15. years.

Ferquhard, Son to Eugenius, 13. years. 632


Donald, or Donwald, 645
the third son of Eugenius, 15. years.

Ferquhard the second, Nephew to Donwald, 664
18. years.

Maldwin, Son of king Donwald, 684
in whose time was a grievous Pestilence through most part of the World, A
general Pestilence.
consuming a greater number of Men before it ceased, then were left alive, for
it continued the space of three years together. He reigned twenty years.

Eugenius the fifth, Nephew to Maldwin, 688
four years.

Eugenius the sixth, the Son of Ferquhard, 697
ten years.

Strange visions in Albion.
In this Kings reign were many wonderful visions seen in Albion. In the River
of Humber (to the apparent view of a multitude of men) a number of Ships
appeared under sail, as ready furnished for the war. In the Church at Camelon,
a noise was heard like the clattering of Armor. Milk was turned into blood in
diverse places of Pict-land, and Cheese converted into a bloody Mass or Cake.
Corn, as it was gathered in Harvest time, was all bloody, and it rained blood
in the further parts of Scotland, as the Scottish Chronicles do make mention.

6^9
Ambirkeleth, Nephew, or Son (as some say) to Eugenius the fifth, reigned not
fully two years.

716
Eugenius the seventh, Brother to Ambirkeleth, who caused the Histories of his
Ancestors lives to be written in Books and volumes, The Histories of the Kings
lives written.
for example to posterity, appointing those Monuments to be carefully kept in
the Abbay of Iona, now called Colmekill; he reigned 17. years, and dyed much
lamented.

734
Mordacke, Nephew to Eugenius. In whose time (according to venerable Bede)
four several people lived in peace and quietness within the bounds of
Albion, though differing in manners, language, laws, and ordenaunces: Saxons,
whom he called Englishmen, Brittaynes, Scots, and Picts. In which time also,
Bid concluded his history, with the ending of King Mordacks life.

762
Ethfine, Son to Eugenius the seventh, who had four Governors under him in
his Realm: Donald, Treasurer of Argile, Collane of Athol, and Mordake of
Galloway his Lieutenants, and Conrath the Thane of Murreyland. He reigned 30.
years.

Eugenius, the eight Son of King Mordacke, 767
three years.

Ferguse the third, Son of King Ethfine, 769
three years.

Soluathius, Son of Eugenius the eight, 788
twenty years.

Achaius, Son of King Ethfine, 819
in whose time was a perpetual league confirmed between him and the Emperor
Charlemaigne of France. And then had Hungus, the Pictish King, the vision of
Saint Andrew and his Cross, as is reported, whereby S. Andrew, became Patron
both of the Scots and Picts. This Achaius reigned 32 years.

Conuall, the Brother of King Ethfine, 824
five years.

Dongall, Son of King Soluathius, 830.
five years.

Alpine, the Son of King Achaius, 833
four years.

Kenneth, the Son of Alpine. 839
This is that famous and renowned King, in whose time the Pictish Nation were
utterly destroyed, The utter s^buersion of the Picts.
the City of Camelon cast down, the Castle of Maidens forsaken by the Picts,
and none, or very few of them left living in Albion. Which happened after
their first beginning to reign there, 1173. years; 1166. from the entrance
of Fergusius; eight hundred thirty nine after our Saviors birth, and from the
Worlds Creation, 4806. Translation of the Marble stone.
In memory of this his famous victory, King Kenneth brought the Marble Stone
out of Argile (where till then it had been kept) into Gourie, and placed it
at Scone, near to the place where he prevailed against the Picts. This royal
K. died in the year 856. having reigned 20. years in great renown and glory.

860.
Donald, Brother to King Kenneth, died in the sixth year of his reign, which
was much mollested by the Danes, under Cadane King of Denmark, pretending a
Title to the Picts lands.

874
Constantine, the Son of King Kenneth, a very worthy and famous king, who
redressed al disorders in his Land, appointing Priests to apply their vocation,
and not to meddle with any seculer business, going to war, or keeping any
Horses, A virtuous King.
Hawks, or Hounds. The youth of his land (to avoid wantonness and idleness)
were appointed but one meal a day; and drunkenness, either in man or Woman, was
punnished with death. He reigned 13. years.

876.
Ethus, brother of Constantine, who was a man of such swiftness of ^oot, that
he could match and make way in running, with Hearts and Hounds, whereupon he was
sir-named Light-foot. He governed scarce two years.

893.
Gregory, the son of Dongall, that reigned before Alpine; in whose time lived
John Scot the famous Clerk. This Gregory raignd 18. years.

Donald the fifth, 903
Son of Constantine the second, in whose time Gormond and his Danes were
baptized, and Gormonds name was changed to Athelstane. He reigned almost 11.
years. 943.


Constantine the third, Son of Ethus ye swift, 40. years. He gave over his
kingly dignity, and entered into Religion, as Hector Boethius affirms.

Malcolme, the Son of Donald, 15. years. 959


Iudulph, Son of Constantine the third, 968
and prince of Cumberland, he reigned about 9. years

Duffe, the Son of King Malcolme, 972
four years.

Culene, Prince of Cumberland, 976
and Son of King Iudulph, reigned not fully five years.

Kenneth, Son to King Malcolme the first, 1000
25. years.

Constantine, the Son of King Culene, 1002
not three years.

Grime, Nephew to King Duffe, 1010.
not fully nine years.

Malcolme the Son of Kenneth, 1034
and Prince of Cumberland, 25. years.

Duncane, Nephew to Malcolme, 6. years. 1046.
In his time was Banquho Thaine of Lochquaber; of who^ the house of the Stuarts
is descended, even to his Majesty now reigning. And then was England. divided,
between Canutus King of Denmark, and Edmund Ironside, after a valiant Combat
fought between them.

Mackbeth, son to Sinell, Thaine of Glammis, 1057
reigned 17. years.

1092
Malcolme Cammore, Son of King Duncane, he changed the name of Thaines were
as Barons.
Thaines into Earls, being t^en the first that ever were among the Scots,
according to their own Histories. At this time did William the Bastard, duke
of Normandy, make his Conquest of England. This King Malcolme reigned 36.
years. And after some difference for the Crown between Donald Bane, Brother
to King Malcolme, and Duncane a Bastard Son to King Malcolme (which usurpation
continued for the space of three years) Edgar the rightful Prince attained to
his due claim.

1101
Edgar, Son to King Malcolme, was the first that ever was anointed King in
Scotland: now was the general passage to the Holy land, under Godfrey of
Bullen, and many other Christian Princes. This King Edgar reigned nine years.

1109
Alexander, Brother to Edgar, being sir-named Alexander the fierce, for his
stearne valiancy in pursuing Thieves and Robbers. David, Brother to King
Alexander, being in England, married Maude, Daughter to Waltheof, Earl of
Huntingdon and Northumberland, and (in right of his wife) was made Earl of
Huntingdon and Northumberland, with inheritance of the lands to them belonging.
In this King Alexanders time (who reigned 17. years complete) the order of
the Knights of Rhodes, The beginning of the Knights of Rhodes.
being formerlie Knights of Saint John of Jerusalem, took beginning, and
the order of the white Monks. Then lived also the Holy Man Richard de sancte
Victore, being a Scot borne, but living (the more part of his time at Paris in
France) where he died, and lies buried in the Abbey of S. Victore, he being
a Brother of the same house.

David, Brother to Alexander, 1153
succeeded as lawful heir, and ruled 29. years, and two months. It is
recorded of this King, that he excelled in Noble Virtues, and sober
conversation of life, being very pitiful to the poor, and somewhat
ouer-bountifull to the Church. The virtuous life and reign of K. David.
For when King James the first, came to his Tomb at Dunfirmling, he said, That
he was a sore Saint for the Crown, leaving the Church ouer-rich, and the
Crown too poor. He purged his Court so clean of al vicious behavior, and
disordered customs, that it appeared to be a school of virtue. No riotous
banqueting, surfeiting cheer, or lascivious word could be herd there, or any
wanton signs, whereby to kindle lust or idle concupiscence. All the words,
works, and whole demeanor of his servants, tended ever to some good
conclusion, free from moving strife, or a thought of sedition: the Kings own
life and example, serving for their guide and direction. He builded 15 Abbeyes
(viz) Holy-Rood house, Kelso, Iedburgh, Melrosse, Newbottell, Holmecultrane,
Dundranane, Cambuskenneth, Kinlois, Dunfirmling, Holme in Cumberland. Also two
Nunneries, one at Carleill, and the other at North Berwike; with two Abbeyes
beside New Castle, one of S. Benedictes order, and the other of white Monks. He
erected likewise four Bishoppricks in his Realm Rosse, Brechin, Dunkeld, and
Dublane: endowing them with rich rents, fair lands, and very commodious
possessions.

1165
Malcolme, Sur-named Malcolme the Maid, because his conversation and delight
(both in mind and body) was so chaste from his very infancy, that he lived
single al his days, and without marriage. He was Son to Prince Henry, that was
son and heir to King David, and reigned not fully twelve years.

1214
William, Brother to King Malcolme, and for his singular Justice Sur-named the
Lion. In this Kings time, Richard King of England, sur-named Cueur de Lion,
went his voyage to the Holy-Lande: King William reigned nine and forty years.

1249
Alexander the second, Son to King William the Lion, who caused his Fathers
death to be mourned for through his whole kingdom: he reigned 35. years.

1290
Alexander the third, son to the former King Alexander, in whose time was a
general Counsel at Lions in France. He reigned 42. years, and by reason of
his dying without any issue, the controversy between John Ballioll, and
Robert Bruise then happened: which was heard and censured by Edward the first,
The several claims of John Baliol, and Robert Bruise*
king of England, albeit they maintained both their claims, upon their Titles
severally, Balioll descending of Margaret, eldest Daughter to David, Earl of
Huntington, Brother unto William the Lion; and Bruise coming of Isabell, second
daughter of the said Earl David, and the next heir male to William the Lion,
for want of succession in the right line. By which Title (how ever Balioll is
said to be crowned King) Robert Bruise inioyed the royal dignity, in the year,
1305. He had issue, David, that left no posterity, and Margery, married to
Walter, Great Steward of Scotland, (descended lineallie from the Princes of
Wales, by Neste, Daughter to Griffith^ap Lhewlyn, Mother to Walter, the son
of Fleance, made Great Steward of Scotland by Malcolme the fourth.) Of whom
came Robert the second, first of the sur-name of Stuart, that bare dominion in
Scotland.

Robert Stuart, being called Robert the second, 1250
was crowned King with Royal solemnity at Scone, in the 47. year of his age,
The first coming of the Stuarts to the Crown,
on the Annuntiation day of our Lady in Lent, 1370. he reigned ten years. It is
recorded of this K. Robert the 2. that h^s Captains and commanders were
always fortunat in war, never returning but with spoils and victories. He was
a Prince of such constancy in promise, that he sildome spoke the word which he
not performed. Such an obseruer of Justice was he also, that he would not
remove from any place, but Proclamation was first made, that if any of his men
or officers did take any thing unpaid for: the party to whom the debt was
due, should come in, and imediatelie satisfied, he willingly heard the
complaints of the poor, and was as diligent in seeing their wrongs redressed.

1390
John Stuart, Earl of Carrike, and son to King Robert before named, was
crowned king: but because John was judged to be an unfortunate name for Kings,
they changed it, and called him Robert, The Kings name changed.
after his Fathers name, and so he was King Robert the third. Then was the
first creation of Dukes in Scotland, for the king made his eldest Son David,
Duke of Rothsay, and his Brother Robert, Duke of Albanie; yet neither of these
sons succeeded their father, but another son, who was named James. This King
Robert reigned 16. years.

1424
James, Son to King Robert, succeeded his Father in the kingdom of Scotland:
his Queen was delivered of two Sons at a birth, named Alexander and James;
Alexander dyed in his infancy, but James lived, and succeeded his Father. This
King James the first, reigned thirteen years. Of whom it is written, that he
was a very severe and upright Iusticer, yet so mild and sweet of Nature, that
not any of their Princes did more reverently embrace peace at home among his
subjects or more willingly conclude it abroad with strangers, then he. His
Wisdom appeared so manifestly, in many very great and especial affairs,
that Kings of other Nations did lovingly join in league and friendship with
him. He had bin so well educated in all Sciences and Gentlemanly actiuity, by
the careful diligence of the best Schoole-maisters, that it could not be
easily judged, in which he was most perfect: For he was an excellent
Musician, a rare Poet, a most elequent Orator, and so exactly (both in mind
and memory he comprehended ye depth of Divinity and Law) that for all these
(in his time) he gave not place to any one. Lastly, he was not only a beauty
to his Country, in providing his peoples quiet at home, but fought also for
their defense against their enemies abroad. The invention of guns in this kings
time.
The invention of Gunnes happened in his time, and he caused diverse pieces of
Artillery to be made in Flanders, one of which being a great and goodly Piece,
he called the Lion, whereon these verses he caused to be engranen.

Illustri Iacobo Scotorum Principi digno,
Regs magnifico, dum fulmin^ castra a reduce,
Factus sum subito, nuncuper ergo Leo.
James the second, son to King James the first, 1436.
being but six years old, succeeded his Father in the Crown, and was the
103. King of Scotland from Fergusius the first. The Art of Printing found out.
In this Kings time was the famous Art of Printing invented, in the City of
Mentz in Germany. This King raygned 24. years, and among his Subjects in the
Camp, he carried himself so gently toward all men, that they seemed not to
fear him as their King, but reverenced and loved him like a father. He would
ride up and down amongst them, and eat and drink with them, even as if he
had bin fellow-like with the meanest.

James the third, 1461
Son to King James the second, being but seven years of age, succeeded his
father in the kingdom, and reigned 29. years.

1488.
James the fourth, son to King James the third, was crowned King of Scotland,
the 24. day of June, 1488. he being then aged xvi. years. This King James the
fourth, married the Princess Margaret, King James married the eldest daughter
to Henry 7. King of England.
eldest Daughter unto Henry the seventh, King of England, and reigned five and
twenty years, deserving to be ranked and numbered amongst the best princes that
ever there governed, for his polliticke rule, and administration of Justice.

1513
James the fifth, being a Child, aged one year, five months, and ten days,
and son to king James the fourth, was Crowned King of Scotland, the one and
twentieth day of September, 1513. his Mother the Queen being appointed Regent
of the Realm. This King reigned 32. years, being an obseruice of Justice, a
defender of the Law, and a sound shield for the poor and innocent, in which
regard (of his Nobility) he was called King of the Commoners. He would set at
liberty the poor oppressed with the tyranny of the rich, and repress the
rich from spoiling the poor. All which he did with a kind of severity, but
yet in such sort, as therein appeared a wonderful gentleness in his natural
disposition: because he seldom did put any of them to death, but did either by
inprisonment, or mulct, punish the offense. For it was his usual saying, That
he would never take life from any, but only to keep the Law sound, for
example to others, and to keep down their boldness, that dwelt about the
borders. His death was great lamented of his subjects, to whom he was a perfect
Patron, and a loving Father.

Mary, Daughter and heir to King James the fifth, began her reign over
Scotland, 1542
the 18. of December, 1542. She was but seven days old when the King her
Father died, and left her his kingdom, her mother then lying in childbed, in
the Castle of Lithquo, of which place the Lord Leuingston being then Captain,
had the charge both of mother and daughter committed to him, with the mothers
good liking, and free consent. This Q. Mary married Frances the Dolphin of
France, who after his fathers death was king of France: but King Frances dying,
Mary Qu. of Scotland, Mary Dowager of France returns back into Scotland.
and Dowager of France, returned home again into Scotland, where her Mother
had bin Regent all the time of her absence, I mean until the x. of June, 1560.
on which day the Queen Mother of Scotland died. Afterward, Mary Q. of Scots
married Henry Stuart, Lord Darnley, Earl of Rosse, Duke of Albanie, and son to
the Earl of Lennox, who was proclaimed king at the Market Cross in Edinburgh,
the 28. of July, 1564. and on the tenth of February, 1566. he was made Knight
of the Order of S. Michael, in the Chapel of Holirood house, with great
reverence and solemnity. In the month of June next following, the 19. day, and
between the hours of x. and xi. before noone, Queen Mary was delivered of a
goodly young Prince, who afterward was crowned King of Scotland, by the name
of James the sixth.

1567
James the sixth, Son to King Henry and Q. Mary, being about a year old,
began his reign over Scotland, and was crowned King thereof, the 19. of July,
1567. He succeeded also in his rightful inheritance of the Crown of England,
(after the decease of Queen Elizabeth, of famous memory) the 24. day of March,
1602. gloriously uniting those kingdoms in one, which formerly (by Brute) had
bin long time divided.

Of the Island of Albion, before Brutes arrival there, and tearming it
Britain, after his own name; Also, what Kings reigned there before he came
thither.
To the Worshipful, Master William Dios, Esquire, Remembrauncer of the
Honorable City of London.
WHether this Land were peopled before the flood or no, it is no part of my
purpose to argue here thereon, Geog. Com. lib. Beros. ant Lib. 1.
albeit Dominicus Marius Niger, and Berosus do affirm, that well as this
Islande was inhabited with people, long before the days of Noah, as any other
Country or part of ye world beside. But after the flood, Annius de Viter. in
Comment. sup. 4. Lib. Beros. de aut. Lib. 1
according to Annius de Viterbo, Berosus and others, when Noah divided the
earth among his three Sons, that part which is now known by the name of
Asia, fell to the lot of his eldest Son Sem; Africa to his second Son
Cham; and Europe (withal the Isles thereto appertaining) to his third Son
Iaphet, among which, this Island (now called Britain, with other Isles
thereto belonging) was certainly numbered. Iaphet, Noah's third Son (by some
called Iapetus; by others, Atlas Maurus, because he died in Mauritania) in the
judgment of Bodinus, Johannes Bodin ad fact. hist. cogn.
auouching the consent and authority of the Hebrew, Greek, and Latin Writers,
was the first that peopled the Countries of Europe, dividing it also (by the
Grandfathers example) among his Sons, Franciscus Tarapha.
of whom Tuball (according to Tarapha) had the rule of Spain, Gomer the
Italians, and Samothes was the founder of Celtica, which contained in it (as
Bale testifies) a great part of Europe, but especially those Countries now
called Gallia and Britannia, which peopling of this Island (by Iaphets
Children) is affirmed to be 200 years after the flood.

Samothes, being the sixth Son of Iaphet, Samothes, first King of Celtica.
Wolfang. Lazius demigr. genesis
and called (by Moses) Mesech, by others, Dis, had for his portion (as
Wolfangus Lazius avouches) the Country between the River of Rhine, and the
Pyrenean Mountains, where he founded the kingdom of Celtica, tearming his
people Celtae: which name was as indifferent to them of Gallia, as to the
Inhabitants of the Isle of Britain. This King Samothes, is reported to be a
Man excelling all other (in that age) in learning and knowled^e, and that (of
him) the^ arose a sect of Philosophers, Lib. de Magic. success. Lib. 22.
both in Britain and Gallia, which were called Samothei, and as Aristotle and
Secion do say, were surpassing, both in the Law of God and man, and therefore
greatly addicted to religion: especially them of Britain, which not only made
the whole nation to take name of them, but, as Bale and Doctor Caius affirm,
the Island it self was named Samothea, De ant. Ca^t. ce^t. Lib. 1. Script.
Brit. ce^t. 1. Magus second King.
which was the first peculiar name it had, before the arrival of Albion.

Magus, the Son of Samothes, was second King of Celtica after his Father.
This Magus was likewise so famous for his learning, that the Persians Magi, or
Divines, are said to come of him.

Sarron third King.
Sarron, succeeded his Father Magus, in the Country of Gallia, and the Isle
Samothea, of whom Diodorus Siculus reports, that a sect of Philosophers
descended among the Celtes, who were called Sarronides.

Druis 4. K.
Druis, or (after Seneca) Dryus, reigned after his Father Sarron, indifferently
over the Celtes and Samotheans. Of him came the Philosphers, called Druides, De
bello Gal gic^. Lib. 9. and Lib. 6.
whom Caesar anoucheth, to have the charge of common and private sacrifices,
the discussing of points of Religion, the education of youth, the determining
of matters in variance, and full power to interdict so many from the Sacrifices
to their Gods, and society of men, as disobeyed their award. If any doubt
arose in the Countries, about matters of Discipline; they always resorted to
these Druides, who, Anti. Lib. 5
(as Humphtey Llhoyd witnesses) made their cheifest aboade in the Isle now
called Anglesey, and there (at all times) received their resolution.

Bardus, the Son of Druis, Bardus fifth King.
was the fifth King over the Celtes and Samotheans: a man much renowned for
invention of Music and Ditties, and he made an order of Philosophical Poets,
or Herauldes, calling them Bardi, after his own Name. Of these Bardi, Nonnius;
Strabo, Diodorus, Stephanus. Bale, and Sir John Price do thus record. That
they used to Register the Noble exploits of ancient Captains, and to draw the
pedegrees and Genealogies of such as were living. They did so excel, in
singing sweet Songs and Ditties to their Harpes, that, if two Armies had
been ready to join battle, and any one of these Bards (by fortune) entered
among them; they had not the power to strike, until he left singing, and went
from the Armies.

When Bardus was deceased, the Celts began to affect liberty, The Celtes
subjected by Albion the Giant.
and (addicting themselves to pleasure and idleness) would live no longer
under the strict orders of their ancient Kings: which brought them the sooner
under subjection to the Giant Albion, who straited Celtica and the Celtes,
within the bounds of Gallia, tearming this Island (formerly called Samothea)
Albion, according to his own name, and subdued the people; albeit the Title of
Samotheans (according to the judgment of diverse Writers) had continued from
Samothes to Albion, the space of 310. years. This Albion was the fourth Son
of Neptune, whom Moses calls Nepthuim, and who did put his said Son in
possession of this Island, by conquering the Samotheans, Bergion ruled in
Ireland.
as he did the like to his other Son, named Bergion, in Ireland and the
Orkenies, which were brought under his obeisance. Concerning the History of
Hercules Lybicus, (whom Moses names Laabin) his Conquests in Spain, his
passage into Italy against Lestrigo, and lastly his killing Albion and his
Brother Bergion; it being nothing incident to my present purpose, I leave it.
Also the Story of Danaus Daughters, being fifty in number, that they should
arrive in this Island (after the slaughter of their Husbands, the fifty Sons
of King Aegyptus) and that one of those Ladies should be named Albina, of whom
this Land should be called Albion: I pass it over likewise, and will now
proceed to the known History of Brute. Yet not daring to enter into so rich a
Mine of hidden treasure, till being guided by the Light of Britain (the
learned labor of a worthy Gentleman and Antiquarie, Master Henry Lyte of
Lytescarie, Esquire, and which (with his own hand) he presented to our late
Sovereign Queen and matchless Mistress, on the day when she came in royal
manner to Paul's Church) I be guided therein for my better direction, using his
own words.

The Light of Britain.
BRitannia Mayor (the Country of the bright Britona, Britania of Britona, and
Britomartis
called Britomartis, the president of Britain) that is to say, the chaste Diana
of Calydonia sylua: Astrorum decus; Syluarum dea; casta et innupta; custos, et
cultrix nemorum; metuenda Virago; terror syluestribus apris. This Britannia
mayor, was first found by Brute of Albania; the Conqueror of the Greeks; the
mighty deliverer of the Troyans, and first founder of the Noble Britains. Who
by the Oracle of the bright Britona, Diana Britonas Oracle. Albania. Calydonia.
Aetolia.
called Diana of Calydonia sylua (Astrorum decus) brought the remains of the
Albanian Troyans of Asia, from Albania Calydonia sylua, and Aetolia in Greece;
to Albania Calydonia sylua, and Aetolia in Briraine. Before whose most happy
and fortunate arrival, there was neither Town, City, Country, River,
Region, or place of name in Britannia: for Britannia (at Brutes arrival) was
no Britannia, but a rude and solitary Desert or wilderness, without name,
Ferarum altrix, Britannia a Wilderness. Ferarum altrix.
a very nursery or place of store for wild Beasts. The Countries and Regions
of Britayne, were then all ouer-growne with Woods, replenished with all
kindness of savage and cruel beasts; as Lions, Bears, Wolves, Foxes, wild
Boares, and all other game belonging to the Chase. Beside diverse other kind of
wild Beasts and Cattle; especially a certain kind of white monsterous
wild Bulls and Kine, Wild Bulls and Kine.
with long shagd curled hair and maines, which kind of Cattle were as fierce
and cruel, as Lions, and could never be tamed by man's art; as you may find it
registered and recorded in our ancient Chronicles, and noted in the very common
Dictionaries, upon these words Caledonia, and Caledonia sylua Britanniae,
always mistaken, and corruptly Written Caledonia, for Calydonia: because the
reason why our Country was first called Caledonia sylua, was no better known
to the ancient Romans in Julius Caesar's time, then it is (at this day)
known to diverse of our Antiquaries and Chronicles of Britayne. For one
deriueth Caledonia sylua, from Calden, and another fetches Calydonia sylua,
from Kaled: But the ones fair Daughter Kaled, is too young to be the Mother
of Calydon, or Calydonia sylua Britanniae; And the others Calden, or
Hazellsticke, is as weak to be the Mother of Calydon. For Calydon, Calydon was
the son of Aetolus. Mars the father of Etolus.

Parthaon and Britona.


of whom Calydonia sylua, by Aetolia in Greece took name, was the Son of
Aetolus, who was the Son of Mars, the God or Patron of battle. Mars was the
father of Aetolus, of Parthaon, and of the bright Britona called Britomaris,
the president of Britayne.

Aetolus, the Son of Mars, and Brother to bright Britona, was Father of
Calydon, of whom Calydonia sylua, by Aetolia in Greece, (Mother of our
Calydonia sylua, the general name of all Britayne) took name: but especially
of Calydonia sylua secunda, which is Scotland, called Britannia secunda. In
which part of Brytaine, at this day, is the most ancient Town of Parthaon, now
called Perth; Parthaon, now Perth in Aetolia. Aetolia, now Athol.
and Saint John's Town, the principal Town of Aetolia, now called Atholl, a
Region or Country of Britannia, Albania, or Calydonia sylua secunda, where the
great Calydon Wood, Calydon wood.
which begins at Striueling (called the Dolorus Mount) runs forth
thorough Mentieth and Stratherne, to Aetolia (that fruitful Region of
Grampius Mount) which reaches to Lochquhaber, Calydoniu^ Cathnesse.
and to Calydonium Promontorium, which is Cathnesse or Orcha, the angle, point,
cape, foreland or lands end of Scotland.

This Calydonia sylua Brytannia, was the daughter of Calidonia sylua, Calydon.
by Aetolia in Greece who took his original from Calydon the Son of
Aetolus. Aetolia, Aetolia.
now called Atholl in Britayne, is the Daughter of Aetolia, a City of Albania,
and Calydonia sylua in Greece, so called of Aetolus the Son of Mars.
Parthaon, Parthaon.
now called Perth, or Saint John's Town, the principal Town of Aetolia in
Scotland, took his glorious name of Parthaon, the Brother to bright Britona,
called Britomaris, the president Brytaine: Of whom, all Britannia (containing
all the Countries and Regions of England, Scotland, Wales, and Cornwall,
called by Alexander Necham, in his book De diuina sapientia, Bruti tellus) took
the most glorious name of Britain.

Britannia of Britona.
For Brute of Albania, the Founder of Britain, came to this Isle by the Oracle
of Britona, called Diana of Calydonia sylua: therefore he called this Isle of
Britannia, of the bright Britana, etc. The same Brute also, who was borne in
Albania, Albania of Albania.
bannished to Albania, and the first founder of Britayne called Albania; called
all our Country of Britayne, Albion, seu Albania: not of the White Rocks and
Cliftes, as some men suppose, but of Albania in Asia, and Albania Epiri in
Greece, the Country of Helenus and Andromache, Queen of Albania Epiri, from
whence, Brute of Albania brought the Albanian Troyans, the founders of Britayne.

Chronicles and written Records of Brute.
To approve what formerly has been said, without any need of repetition, we
have a multitude of most glorious Records and Chronicles, Written and Printed,
confirmed by the Testimony of Julius Caesar, by Pope Eleutherius; by a
Parliament holden at Norham upon Twede; and another at Lincoln, in the time
of King Edward the first, who, by his Letters sent from Lyncolne ^o Pope
Boniface, does approve Brutes* History to be no F^ble: as some Critics of
our time have done, who will not believe our ancient written Records, although
confirmed by Emperors, Kings, Popes, and Parliamentes, neither the Testimony of
Strangers. Wherefore, by the Oracle of Diana, called Britomartis, the President
of Britayne* and by the Oracle of Diana Lucifera, that is to say, Venus, called
Bosphorus, the bright Queen of Phrygia, and Caria, Mother of Eneas, and the
Graces, of whom came Brute of Albania, founder of Britain, who brought in
Carius, a Noble Prince of Lydia and Caria, with the people of Caria, and
Swannes of Carry in Britain: By the Oracles aforesaid, the Swans of Carry in
Britain, are now stirred up to maintain the verity of the British History.
The Gods of the Gentiles, whose Temples our forefathers (of the Troyan race)
erected in diverse Countries and regions of Britain: especially at Troia-noua,
Dianas Temple at Troia noua
now called London in Britain, where the Troynouants did sometimes Sacrifice
Bulls, Bullocks, Diana Tauropolia, Theonte^ Dea.
and Stags, to Diana Tauropolia, whom the Gentiles called the Queen of
Heaven: which was the same Diana called Bellona, whom the Brigantes honored
at York, Brigantium Ciuitas. And what were these Brigantes, I pray ye? Diana
Bellona of York.
Herodian says, that the Briges, Phryges, and Brigantes were all one.
Whereupon I conclude, that the Brigantes, that is to say, our Northern
Britains, were Phrygian Troyans. Briges. Phryges. Brigantes.
The Brigantes of Britain, are the people of Yorkshire, Richmondshire,
Lancashire, Dutham, westmerland and Cumberland, hard to the Pictes Wall, where
the Abij and Picti Agathyrsi dwell, about Abus Aestuariu^, now called Humber.
Abus Aestuarium.
And what were those Abij, but Albanian Troyans, that came also from Abus, a
River of Albania Epiri? And the ancient Britains, called Picti Agathyrsi,
what were they? Even Scythian Troyans of Albania, Abij Alba^i Agathyrsi
who sprang of Scythes and Agathyrsus, the Sons of Hercules, that sometime
reigned in Troy: for the famous City of Troy in Phrygia, the head of all
Asia, was in Scythia.

Troyans, called Taurini, and Tauroscythi.
The noble Troyans were called Taurini, and Tauroscythi, of a famous mountain
of Asia, called Tau^us Mount, which runs thorough all Asia; a great part of
the Mountain Taurus ends in Caria which is a country of Asia belonging to
Troy. Taurus the mansion of Venus.
Venus, called Bosphorus, the mother of Eneas and the Graces (of whom came
Brute of Albania, the founder of Britain) was Queen of Phrygia and Caria. The
famous River of Maeander is in Caria, which river has Golden sands and singing
Swannes, that sometime served Venus, Queen of Phrygia and Caria: wherefore the
Swans of Caria, and Signets of Troy in Britain, must always sing of Troy and
Troyans. Rivers of Britain, are Records of Brute.
The daughters of heaven and earth, Isis, Themis, Rhea, Thetis, Abus, Arius,
Alanus, Ax, Tameres, and all our famous Rivers of Britain, with the Deucalion
Sea, and Islandes of Britain, especially Archadia, Aemonia, and Arachne are
glorious records of Brute and the Troyans, the founders of Britain. Diverse our
most ancient Cities and Towns of Britain, as Oxford upon Isis and Themis,
Troia-noua upon Isis, Themis, Towns and Cities, Records of Brute.
and Rhea Albanorum; York, Brigantium ciuitas; Antandros, turned to S. Andros;
Parthaon, Perthe, turned to Saint John's Town, Albanum ciuitas, turned to S.
Albanes, Chester, and Doriscestria, with the ancient Towns of Derby and
Leicester; and Tyanton upon Tamares River of Britain, with diverse other Towns
and Cities of Britain, are Records of Brute and the Troyans, Founders of
Britain.

The diverse Nations and people of Britain, Diverse Nations and people of
Britain, Records of Brute.
as the Troy-nouants, Brigantes, Scotobrigantes, the people of Albania,
Calydonia, and Aetolia; the Iberi, the Albani, and Georgij, the people of
Derbie and Leycester, the people of Chester, that came from Cestria Epiri, with
the Doors, loves, and Cares, and the Tamarites of Tyanton, commonly called
Tanton: All these are Records of the Noble people of Greece and Asia, the
remains of the Troyans that came into to Britain with Brute.

To these, add a Catalogue or Register, Princes, Noblemen, and Gentlemen
Records of Brute.
of the ancient Princes, Noblemen, and Gentlemen of Britain, whereof there are
some remaining to this very day, begin we then thus. Brute, Corineus,
Locrine, Camber, Albanacte, Madan, Mempricius, Ebranke, and his twenty Sons,
Brute Greensheild, Assaracus, and Cecilius, etc. Belinus and Brennus, Cambra,
or Cambria, Antenors Wife, Cambra, Belinus Daughter, Conidagus King of Albania,
slew Morgan at Glammorgan. Conidagus builded ye Temple of Minerua at Bangor in
Wales, and the temple of Mars at Parthaon, now S. John's town of Aetolia in
Scotland. Aruiragus, in whose days, a Joseph of Aramithia, preached in
Britain. Leile, Androgeus, Brother to Cassibelanus; this Androgeus let Julius
Caesar into Britain. Pirrhus, Alexander Arcadius, Alexander Audax, Achaius,
Etolus, Helena, Coile, Constantine; Graye, Persie, Dercie, Carry, Busir, or
Bousir, Cicell, Cydne, Dennis, Bridgis, Andros, Carowe, Caros, Tracie, Rhese ap
Rhesus; Oen, or Owen, King of Calydon, Brent the son of Hercules. Thinn,
Euance, Bryce, Hill, Drake, Calais, Nele, Gryne, Dorill, Hodie, Crane, etc.
These and infinite more beside, which Brute brought with him from the
Countries of Isis and Themis, and from Albania, Calydonia Sylua, and Etolia in
Greece, to Albania, Calydonia Sylua, and Etolia in Britain, are undoubted
records of him and the Troyans, Founders of Britain.

Thus much out of Master Lytes Light of Britain, which worthy Gentleman
being deceased, his Son Master Thomas Lyte, of Lytescarie, Esquire, a true
immitator and heir to his Fathers Virtues, has (not long since) presented the
Majesty of King James, with an excellent Map or Genealogicall Table
(containing the breadth and circumference of twenty large sheets of Paper) which
he entitleth Britains Monarchy, approouing Brutes History, and the whole
succession of this our Nation, from the very Original, with the just
observation of al times, changes and occasions therein happening. This worthy
work, having cost above seven years labor, beside great charges and
expense, his highness has made very gracious acceptance of, and to witness
the same, in Court it hangs in an especial place of eminence. Pity it is,
that this Phoenix (as yet) affoordeth not a fellow, or that from priuacie, it
might not be made more general: but, as his Majesty has granted him
privilege, so, that the world might be worthy to enjoy it, whereto, if
friendship may prevail, as he has bin already, so shall he be still as
earnestly solicited.

Brute, the son of Siluius, having unfortunately slain his father in
hunting, Brute slew his Father Siluius.
as he shot his Arrow at a Dear, was therefore bannished his Country,
whereupon he went into Greece, where a great number of the Troyans (living
before in servitude) resorted to him, and by his valor he gave them liberty,
by conquerring Pandrasus, King of that Country, who was descended of the Noble
Achilles. He compelled him also, to let him have his fair Daughter Innogen in
marriage, with furniture, money, victuals, and Shipping, wherewith (after many
hard adventures) passing along the straits of Gibralterra, Brute met with
Corineus.
and coasting along the shore on the right hand: he met with Corineus, and
another company, that came with him from Troy likewise with Antenor. Joining
then their powers together, they sailed on, til arriving within the rivers
mouth of Loire, which deuideth Aquitaine from Celtike Gallia, (supposed to be
Gascoigne) they landed in the Dominions of a King, called Goffarius, and
Surnamed Pictus, by reason he was descended of the people of Agathyisi, who
were other-wise termed Picts. King Goffarius with his men did sharply resist
those new comers, but sustained the worst twice, Brutes resistance in Gallia.
and in the last conflict, Brutes Nephew (named Turnus) was slain; in whose
memory Brute builded there a City, which (to this day) is called Tours in
Touraigne. Departing thence, he and his train came to the Isle of Britain,
and landed at the haven, now called Totnesse, Anno. 2855. and after the
destruction of Troy 66. before the building of Rome, Brutes landing in Albion.
368. years which was before our Saviors nativity, 1116. almost ended. He
found this land desolate, saving a few Giants, who in short time were
vanquished: for Corineus wrastled with the strongest of them, named Goemagot or
Gogmagog, at a place beside Doner, where he cast him headlong down from one
of the rocks in regard whereof, the place is called Gogmagogs Leap or fall.
Brute builded London, The building of London.
calling it Troy-newydh, or Troia-noua. He begat on his wife Innogen, 3. sons,
among whom he divided his kingdom before his death. To Locrine, who was the
eldest, he gave the middle part, calling it Loegria, or Loegiers. The division
of Britain by Brute, to his sons.
To Camber his second son, he gave the west part of the Island, calling it
Cambria or Cymbry, divided from Loegria, by the river Seuerne. To his third son
Albanact, he gave all the North part, entitling it Alban or Albania, according
also to his name. To Corineus his dear esteemed friend and companion, he
gave that part of the Land, which (after him) to this day is called Corinwall.
Lastly, when he had governed this land 24. years. He died and was buried at
that new City which he had builded. Anno ante incarnat. Christi, 1132.

Locrine, after his Father Brutes death, was king of Loegria, and Lord
Paramount of the whole Island of Britain. In his time, Humber or Humyr, King of
the Hunnes entered into Albania, and slew Albanact. The death of Albanact
But Locrine and Camber, to revenge their brothers death, met in Arms with
Humber, near to an arm of the Sea, that parted Loegria and Albania: where
killing him in the fight, they threw his body into the water, which in memory
of his name, is yet called Humber. Locrine married Guendolen, Daughter to
Corineus, but falling in love with Estrilde, a strange Lady in King Humbers
Camp: he rejected his wife, which caused her to raise an army against him.
In trial of that fight. Locrine was slain, and Guendolen drowned Estrilde,
The death of k. Locrine
with her Daughter Sabrine, or Hauren, in the River of Seuerne, so called after
her name. Locrine reigned twenty years, and left a Son, named Madan.

Madan, son of Locrine and Guendolen, began his reign over the Britons, an.
mundi, 2909 He used great tyranny among his people, and builded Madancaistre,
now called Dancaster. Madan devoured by Wolves.
Having ruled this land 40. years, he was devoured of Wolves and other wild
beasts, as he was abroad in hunting. He left 2. sons, Mempricius and Manlius.

2949
Mempricius, eldest son of Madan, succeeded his Father, and slew his Brother
Manlius, for better confirmation of his government. He fell into unlawful
lusting after women, so that he forced his peoples wives and daughters: and
albeit he had a wife and many Concubines, yet he used the abominable sin of
Sodom. Memprecius devoured by wild beasts.
So that becoming hateful both to God and man, being one day lost of his
people, as he was hunting, he (as his father) was eaten of wild beasts,
after he had reigned 20. years.

2969
Ebranke, son of Mempricius by his lawful wife, succeeded in rule over the
Britons. He had one and twenty wives, on whom he begat twenty Sons, and
thirty Daughters. He was the first Prince of this Land, that ever invaded
Gallia, now called France, from whence he returned with great riches and
triumph. The building of York
He builded the City of Caerbranke now called York, about the 14. year of
his reign: and in Albania or Scotland, he builded also the Castle of Maidens,
and the City of Alclud. He governed Britain very nobly forty years, and
lies buried at Caerbranke or York.

3009
Brute Tarianlas, or Greeneshield, Son of Ebranke, succeeded his Father in
the regiment of Britain. He sought to bring all Gallia under his subjection,
and (some do avouch) that he performed it, albeit Brinchild gave him a great
foil in Henault. He reigned twelve years, and was buried by his father at
York.

3021
Leill, the son of Brute Greenshield, reigned after his Father. He builded
the City called Caerleil, that is to say, Leill his City, The building of
Carleill.
or the City of Leill, and repaired also Carleon, now called Chester, which is
said to be built before Brutes entrance into this land, by a Giant named Leon
Gauer. Leill reigned 25. years, and was buried at Carleill.

Lud, or Ludhurdibras, the Son of Leill, 3046.
ruled Britain after his Father. He builded the City of Kaerkin, now called
Canterbury; The building of Canterbury, Winchester and Shaftsbury.
the City of Caerguent, now called Winchester, and Mount Paladour, now called
Shaftsbury: Aquila, a Prophet or Bardh of the British nation, wrote diverse
Prophesies concerning the building of Shaftsbury* Lud reigned 29. years, and
was buried at Canterbury.

Baldus, or Bladus, son of Lud-hurdibras, 3085
succeeded his Father in the rule of Britain. He was skillful in the
Sciences of Astronomy and Nigromancy: he builded the City of Caerbran, now
called Bathe, and made there hot Bathes; The building of Bath
though William of Malmsbury is of ye mind that Julius Caesar made those baths:
which cannot be so, because Julius Caesar never went so far that way into
the Land. This Bladud was so proud of his art, that he would needs presume to
fly in the air: but he fell on the Temple of Apollo in Troy-nouant, and was
there torn in pieces, having reigned twenty years.

Leir, the Son of Bladud, 3105.
followed his Father in Britains government, being a Prince of most Noble
Nature, and governed his Subjects very royally. The building of Leircester, on
the River of Sore.
He builded the Town of Caerleir, now called Leircester. And because the
History of his three Daughters, Gonorill, Regan, and Cordeilla, with their
several marriages to Henuinus, duke of Cornwall, Maglanus, Duke of Albania,
and Agauippus prince of Gallia, is very well known, and all the fortunes thereto
belonging; I am the easier induced to pass it over, with all the troubles
happening to King Leir, through his own weakness. Leir reigned forty years,
and was buried at Leircester.

3155
Cordeilla, youngest daughter to K. Leir, succeeded as Queen and Gouernesse of
Britain; but her two Nephews, Cunedagius and Morgan, sons to her, as unkind
Sisters, made short her time of government, after the decease of her Husband
Aganippus. For they imprisoning her, and she being a Lady of unconquerable
courage: grief, and despair of liberty, made her there to slay her self,
after she had ruled five years.

^150.
Cunedagius and Morgan, divided the whole land between them, Britain divided
the second time
after Cordeillas death. But envy and covetous desire in either, to rule alone,
raised them in arms against each other, and Morgan was slain in Cambria by
Cunedagius, and the place of his death is yet called Glan-Morgan, Morgans land,
he not having reigned above two years with his Brother: who afterward builded
three temples, Cunedagius builded 3. Temples.
one to Mars, at Perth in Scotland, another to Mercury, at Bangor in Cambria,
and the third to Apollo in Cornwall. He reigned 33. years, and was buried at
Troy-nouant.

Riuallus, Son of Cunedagius, 3203.
next ruled Britain, in whose time it rained blood 3. days together, which
blood engendered such multitudes of Horseflies, The building of Rome.
that many people were stung to death by them. In his time was the City of Rome
builded: he reigned 46. years, and was buried at York.

Gurgustius, son of Riuallus, reigned 37. years. 3249


Sysillius, or Cecilius, Brother of Gurgustius, 3287
49. years.

Iago, or Lago, Cousin to Gurgustius, 3336
twenty eight years.

Kinimacus, or Kinmarus, Son of Sisillius, 3364
54. years.

Corbodug, Son of Kinimacus, 43. years, 3418
or (by some) 62. years.

Ferrex and Porrex, Sons or Gorbodug, 3476.
reigned jointly, till ambition divided them, and Ferrex being slain in
battle, the Mother of them both wrought (afterward) the death of Porrex.
After which, great troubles endured for the space of fifty years, for the
Sole-Monarchie of this land became then a Pentarchie, The Pentarchy of five
Kings:
as divided betwixt five Kings or Rulers: And here ended the line of Brute.

The Pentarchy.
1. Rudacus. King of Cambria or Wales. 2. Cloton. King of Cornwall. 3. Pinnor.
King of Loegria. 4. Staterus. King of Aibania. 5. Yewan, or Owen. King of
Northumberland.
3529
Mulmutius Dunwallo, the Son of Cloton, who was allowed for most rightful
Heir, he succeeded as Sole-Monarch of Britain, after his Father. This
Mulmutius builded a Temple in Troy-nouant, called ye Temple of Peace, which some
do hold to be that ancient monument, called Blackwell-Hall. The building of
Blackwell hall.

Malmsbury and the vies builded. Mulmutius Laws.


He builded also two Towns, Malmsbury and the Vies, and was the first king
that was crowned with a Crown of Gold. He made diverse good Laws, which long
time after were called Mulmutius laws, being turned out of British into
Latin, by Gildas Priscus, and (long time after) translated out of Latin into
English, by Alfred K. of England, and mingled among his statutes. The 4 high
ways of England. The beginning of sanctuary.
He began to make the four great high ways of Britain, and gave priueledges
to Temples, Ploughes, Cities, and high ways leading to them, so that
whosoever fled to them, should be in safety from bodily harm, and thence he
might depart without prejudice to his person. In regard that he was the first
king crowned with a golden Crown, most writers give him the name of the first
King of Britain, And among his other ordinances, Waights and measures to buy
and sell by.
he first appointed weights and measures whereby men should buy and sell, and
devised very severe punishments for Theft. He reigned 40 years, and was buried
at Troy-nouant.

3574
Brennus and Belinus, the Sons of Mulmutius, had (in their Fathers life time)
the Land once more divided between them: Belinus enjoying Loegria, Britain
again divided.
Wales, and Cornwall: and Brennus all the Countries over and beyond Humber.
But when Brennus grew covetous to exceed his portion, and sought to compass it
by foreign assistance, he was enforced to flight, and Belinus quietly seated
in the whole possession. Then finished he the four highways of Britain,
which his Father had begun, which were called, The names of the four high
ways of England. Belines-gate.

The building of the Tovver of London.


the Fosse, Watling-streete, Erming-streete, and Hiknel-streete, confirming to
them the privileges which his Father had formerly granted. He builded the Haven
called Belines-gate, and a Castle also Eastward from that Gate, called (long
time after) Belines Castle, but is the same, which we now call the Tower of
London: He reigned twenty six years, and was buried in Troy-nouant.

Gurguintus, the Son of Belinus, 3596
succeeded in Britain after his Father. He subdued Denmark, and made them pay
tribute to Britain: In his days was the Town of Cambridge, The foundation
of Cambridge.
with the University, first founded by Cantaber a Spanyard, according to Caius.
He reigned 19. years, and was buried at Troy-nouant.

Guintholinus, Son to Gurguintus, 3614
reigned after his Father, being married to a virtuous Lady, named Mertia, who
devised certain Laws, which afterward were termed Mercian Laws. He ruled
27. years, and was buried at Troy-nouant.

Sicilus, Son to Guintholinus, 3657
reigned after his Father, albeit he was then but seven years old, but his
Mother Mertia had both the government of his person, and of the Realm, in
which time she devised those Laws before mentioned. It is said, that then
the Picts arrived in Britain, and possessed those parts, which now are the
Marches of England and Scotland: The arriual of the Picts.
he reigned seven years, and was buried at Troy-nouant.

3663.
Kimarus, Son of Sicilius, reigned three years.

3669
Elanius, Son of Kimarus, reigned seven years.

3670
Morindus, Bastard Son of Elanius; In his time a came a wonderful Monster out
of the Irish Seas, that destroyed many people, and the King in fighting with
the said monster, was devoured by him: having reigned six years.

3676
Gorbouianus, first Son of Morindus, who builded the town of Grantham, raignd
10. years.

3686
Archigallus, Elidurus, Vigenius, and Peridurus, being all likewise the Sons
of Morindus, reigned severally in Britain, by great contentions, all their
times scarcely reaching to 27. years, yet Elidurus was crowned King three
times, each after other. But no sooner died Elidurus (a King of most mild and
princely nature) but there passed above 185. years, between the said
Elidurus, and the beginning of King Luds reign, in which time there reigned
33. Kings: 33. Kings betwixt Elidurus and Lud.
of whose names and rule, Authors do so disagree, that I pass them over, and
come to King Helie, who was the last of those 33. Kings, who gave name to the
Isle of Elie, The Isle of Ely.
builded a goodly palace there, with reparatiens of the Sluices, Ditches, and
Causies about the Isle, for conuayance away of the water, yet he reigned not
fully a year.

Lud, eldest son to King Hely, 3895
succeeded in Britains government. He enclosed Troy-nouant with a Wall made of
lime and stone, and fortified with diverse fair towns; building also a gate in
the west part of the wall, Luds-gate.
which he called Luds-gate. He erected likewise a goodly Palace, somewhat near
to Luds-gate, which is now the Bishop of Londons Palace, and (in mere
affection to the City) he altered the name thereof from Troy-nouant, and
called it Caer-Lud, Troy-nouant altered to Luds Town.
that is Luds Town* since when, corruption has termed it London. K. Lud
reigned 11. years, and was buried near Lud-gate. He left two sons, named
Androgeus and Tenancius, whose minority in years made them incapable of
government.

Cassibaline, Brother to K. Lud, 3508
was admitted King of Britain, or rather Ruler and Protector of the Land,
during his Nephews nonage. In the 8. year of his reign, Julius Caesar (with
his Romans) came into Britain, The Roman coming into Britain with Caesar.
where being wearied (at first) with a sharp battle, and (after that) his navy
well-neere destroyed by a sudden tempest; he returned back into Gallia or
France. But ye next spring (being the year before Christ 51.) he crossed the
seas again with a greater army, and compelled Cassibelane to consent, that
Britain should become tributary to the Romans. Then reigned four Kings in
Kent, Cingetorix, Taximagulus, Four Kings in Kent.
Caruilius, and Segonax, all whose power could not withstand Caesar: whose
prevailing thus in Britain, was Anno mundi, 3913. and after Brute, 1060.
Cassibelane reigned 17. years.

3921
Tenantius, Luds youngest Son, succeeded as lawful King of Britain,
because his Brother Androgeus had assisted Caesar, against Cassibelane: He
reigned 23. years, and was buried at London.

3944
Kymbeline, or Cimbeline, Son to Tenantius, succeeded after his Fathers
decease. In his time was the Savior of the World, The birth of Jesus Christ
our Lord Jesus Christ, borne of the euer-blessed virgin Marie: Kymbeline
reigned 35. years.

Guiderius, eldest Son to Kymbaline, was King of Britain, The year of Christ
in the year of our Lord after his incarnation 17. He, judging the Romans
tribute to be unjust, 17
denied to pay it. This Guiderius was slain at Portchester, Guideruis slain
at Portchester.
valiantly resisting against Claudius and his Romans, where one Hamo, who was
on the Romans side, attired him self like a Britain, changed his shield and
armor, and so entering the thickest of the British host, came at last where the
K. was, and so slew him. But Aruiragus, Brother to Guiderius, perceiving this
villainy, caused himself presently to be clad in the kings coat, armor, and
other furniture, whereby the Kings death was scarcely discerned. He renewed the
fight with such undaunted courage, ye Claudius was beat back to his ships, and
Homo to the next adjoining Woods, whether Aruiragus pursued him, and slew him
ere he could get off the haven, casting him peece-meal into the sea, which
Haven (in memory of his name) was ever after called Hamans Haven, How South
hampton became so named.
afterward by corruption) Hampton Haven, and now (at this day) commonly called
Southampton. Guiderius reigned 23. or (after others) 29. years.

Aruiragus, youngest Son to Kymbeline, 46
succeeded his Brother, as King of Britain. In his time, Vespasian came into
Britain, landing at Sandwich or Richborough. Also, about the year of Christ,
Joseph of Arimathia came into Britain.
53. and while this Aruiragus reigned, Joseph of Arimathia was sent by Phillip
the Apostle into Britain: and one Simon Zelotes came then thither also. Then
began Britain to be governed by Roman Lieutenantes and Treasurers.
Aruiragus reigned 28. years, Britain governed by Romayne. Deputies.
dyed in the year of Grace, 73. and was buried at Gloucester.

Marius, son of Aruiragus, succeeded his father in the State, and then came
the Picts, 73
with Roderick their King, into this land: The Pictes coming into Britain
but Roderick was slain by Marius, and his people vanquished. In memory of
which victory against the Picts, Marius erected a Stone, where the battle was
fought, whereon was engragen Marij victoria. The Stone was set upon
Stanesmoore, and the whole Country thereabout, taking name of this Marius, was
called Westmaria, now Westmerland. Marius reigned 53. years, Westmaria,
Westmerland.
and was buried at Carleill.

Coilus, Sone of Marius, was (after his Fathers death) King of Britain, 125
having bin educated among the Romans, which made him pay them the tribute
all the time of his reign. He builded the Town of Colichester in Essex,
Colchester builded.
now called Colchester: he reigned 55. years, departed this life at York, and
lies there buried, as some say, but others, at Co^lchester.

16^
Lucius, son of Coilus, succeeded King after his Father, being a very godly
and Virtuous Prince. And because since the coming of Joseph of Arimathia into
the land, there was much talk about Christ, and Holy Religion, which many had
begun to embrace, he sent to Pope Eleutherius, that he would send some more
learned men to him, whereby both he and his might fully be enstructed in the
faith of Christ. Eleutherius sent unto him D^ianus and Faganus (by some called
Fugatius and Damianus) two worthy learned Clearkes, Britain converted to the
Christian faith.
who at their coming, converted the King and his people from Paganism. There
were in those days (within the bounds of Britain) 28. Flamines, and 3.
Ach-flamines, Arch-byshops and Bishops appointed in Britain.
that were as Bishops and Arch-byshoppes of the Pagan Religion: in whose
place King Lucius appointed the 28. Bishops, and three Arch-Byshops of
Christian Religion. O^^ of which Arch-byshops held his See at London, another
at York, and the third at Caerleon Arswike in Glaumorganshire. To the
Arch-byshop of London was subject Cornwall, and all the middle part of
England, even unto Humber. To the Arch-Byshoppe of York, all the North parts
of Britain, from the River of Humber, to the furthest parts of Scotland. And
to the Arch-Byshop of Caerleon, was subject all wales, within which country
were then seven Bishops, where now there are but four. This King Lucius is
said to build the Church of Saint Peter at Westminster, and Saint Peter's
Church of Cornehill in London. S. Peter's Churches at Westminster and London in
Corne-hill
This Lucius reigned 12. years, and dying without issue, the Britains fell
at variance, by which means, the Roman Lieutenants go on again with their
Government, the Emperor Adrian coming in person into Britain, and then the
wall of Adrian was built, The Wall of Adrian.
from the mouth of Tine, to the Water of Eske, containing thirty miles in
length. Adrian having quieted all disturbances in Britain, Lollius, Vrbicus,
Calphurnius Agricola, Vlpius Marcellus, Pertinax, Clodius Albinus and
Heraclitus, succeeded each other as Lieutenantes (over the Britains) for the
Romans, which manner of Government so continued, to the year of our Lord,
207.

Seuerns, Emperor of Rome, 207
did now begin his rule in Britain, causing a Trench to be cast from Sea to
Sea. He reigned not fullye five years, and was buried at York. A Trench cast
in Britain from sea to sea.
His Sons Geta and Bassianus contended for the Government, Geta was slain in
battle, and Bassianus ruled six years: but he was likewise slain by one
Caransius, a Britain of unknown Birth, whom the Britains accepted as their
King* till Alectus was sent from Rome with his Legions of Soldiers, who
conquered Caransius in field, and slew him.

Aesclepiodotus, Duke of Cornwall, preuayling in fight against Alectus, and
Liuius Gallus, or Wallus, whom (when he had slain, he threw into a Brook,
Wallus Brook, Walbrook.
which took name of him, and was called Wallus Brook, now Walbrooke) was
admitted to reign over the Britains. And discord being afterward raised,
between the King, and one Coell, Earl of Colchester, they met in a field of
battle, where Asclepiodotus was slain, after he had reigned thirty years.
At this time was Britain in cruel persecution, The martyrdom of S. Alban.
under the bloody tyrants Dioclesian and Maximus; Alban, a Citizen of
Werlamchester, being the first that suffered martyrdom in Britain, he being
converted to Christian faith by zealous Amphibilaus, and because he would not
sacrifice to their false Gods, he was beheaded on the top of the hill
ouer-against VVerlamchester, where a Church and Monastery was builded in memory
of his martyrdom, Werlamchester, S. Albanes.
and VVerlamchester being destroyed, the place took name of him, and is to
this day called S. Albanes. A number of Christians were likewise assembled at
another place, John Rossus Warwicons. in l^^. de wigor^. Epis.
to hear the word of life preached by that virtuous man Amphibilaus, but they
were all there slain by the Pagans, and the place (in their memory) named
Lichfield, The field of dead bodies. It is also recorded, Lichfielde* why it
was so called.
that in the days of these Tyrants, Dioclesian and Maximus, of godly men and
Women, professing the faith of Jesus Christ, there were martired in sundry
place, above 17000.

26^
Coell, Earl of Colchester, began his rule over the Britains, in An. Dom.
262. But Constantius being sent from Rome to suppress him, Constantius married
Helena, daughter to King Coell.
he couenanted to pay the tribute, and gave his daughter Helena (a Noble and
learned Lady) in marriage to Constantius. King Coell reigned 27. years, and is
said to be buried at Colchester, or rather at Gloucester.

Constantius succeeded in the rule of Britain, 189
after Coell, and had by his wife Helena a Son, named Constantine, that was
afterward Emperor, and sir-named Constantine the Great. The martyrdom of
Amphibilaus.
In this Constantius days, Amphibliaus was apprehended, and suffered
martyrdom at Redburne, near to VVerlamchester, fifteen years after the
death of S. Alban: Constantius reigned eleven years.

Constantine, 306
son of Constantius and Helena, and sir named the Great, was King after his
Father, and created Emperor in Britain. Q Helena found the Cross and the
Nails.
His Mother Queen Helena went to Jerusalem, where she found the Cross that
our Savior was crucified on, and the Nails, which she gave to her Son
Constantine; who did set one of them in the Crest of his Helmet, another in the
bridle of his horse, and the third he threw into the Sea, to assuage a rough
Tempest.

Octauius or Octauian, began his reign over the Britains in Anno 329. 329
being called Duke of Windsor. Octauius put to flight by Trahernes
He assembled a great company of people, and fought with the Governors of the
Land which Constantine had here appointed: yet was he expelled by Traherne
into Norway, and Traherne being slain by treason afterward, Octauius sent
Maximianus, Cousin to the Emperor Constantine, to whom he gave his daughter in
marriage. Octauius reigned 54. years. About this time, Helena walleth London
and Colchester.
the Empress Helena, Mother to Constantine, for love she bare to Colchester
and London, did newly engirt them both with Walls round about, causing great
Brick and huge Tyles to be purposely therefore made, which are yet to be seen
in the Town and Castle of Colchester.

383
Maximianus, or Maximus, usurped in Britain the Title of the Empire, and
assembling all the men of War, and youth of the Realm, he went into France,
expelled the Frenchmen out of Armorica, and placed Britains there under
Conon Meridoc, Duke of Cornwall, whereon it was ever after called Britayne the
Less. Little Britain
This Maximus or Maximianus, having slain the Emperor Gratian, at Lions in
France, was slain himself at Aquileia, by the Emperor Theodosius, after he
had governed the Britains eight years.

390
Gratian, a Britain, taking on himself the Rule of Britain, for his stearne
and rough Government was quickly slain. About this time, The Saxons first
entrance into Britain.
did the Saxons first enter into this Land, and the Romain Empire greatly
declining, their rule in this kingdom, and payment of Tribute (which had
continued for the space of four hundred eighty three years) now quite
ceased.

Constantinus, Brother of Aldroemus, King of little Britain, at the suit of
the Arche-Byshoppe of London, in Name of all the Britains, accepted the
Government of this Land, Constantinus crowned at Cicester.
and was Crowned at Cicester. He had three Sons, Constantius (who was made a
Monk) Aurelius Ambrosius, and Vter, Sur-named Pendragon. This Constantinus was
Traitorously slain in his Chamber, by a Pict, and then one Vortiger, a
Britain, a man of great power amongst the Britains, took Constantius out of
the Abbey of Winchester, and Crowned him King. But causing him soon after to
be murdered, and the murderers strangled, least he should be discovered, he
got himself to be chosen King, Aurelius Ambrosius, and Vter Pendragon,
(Brethren to the murdered king) being glad to fly into Britain Armorica.
Hengist the Saxon, and his Brother Horssus, bringing great store of Saxons into
the Realm, by marrying his Daughter Rowen to Vortiger, Hengist the Saxon and
his Brother Horsus.
grew into no mean savor, filling still the Land with three sorts of
German people, (to wit:) Saxons, Iutes, and Angles, who at length, made
such spoil and hauucke of the Britains, that from Sea to Sea, the whole
Realm, was most pitifully wasted and ruined: the Britains being enforced
for to fly out of their own Country, Vortiger deposed, and Vortimer Crowned.
and the Saxons enjoyed their possessions. Vortiger was deposed, and Vortimer
his Son crowned King, who had four principal Battles with the Saxons, and
prevailed very worthily against them, til (by the means of Rowen, Daughter to
Hengist) Vortimer was poisoned after he had governed the Britains seven
years and odd months. Then was Vortiger restored to his kingdom again, and
Hengist performed his bloody treachery on Salisbury Plain, The Britain Nobles
murdered on Salisbury plain.
on a May day, murdering 460. Noble Britains with Knives, which he and his
Saxons had closely hid in their Pockets. There was Vortiger taken prisoner, and
could not gain his liberty, till he had granted Hengist three Provinces or
Countries of his Kingdom, to wit, Kent and Essex, or (as some write) Sussex,
where the South Saxons afterward inhabited, and Norffolke and Suffolk, where
the East- Angles planted themselves. At this time was the Heptarchie or seven
Kingdoms of this Land, Aurelius and his Brother Vter, returned out of
Britain Armorica, with a powerful Army, and marching into Wales against
Vortiger, The death of Vortiger.
assailed him in his Castle, which they consumed with fire, where perrished
Vortiger, and all else there with him.

Aurelius Ambrose was made King of Britain, anno 481. 481.
He gave Hengist battle, who flying for safety, The death of Hengist.
was taken by Edoll Earl of Chester, and beheaded at Conningsborow. In memory
of the Britains slaughter on Salisbury plain, stones were fetched out of
Ireland, and set up in the same place, Stone-heng
and called to this day Stone-heng. Aurelius reigned nineteen years, was
poisoned by a counterfeit Monk, and buried at Stone-heng.

Vter, sur-named Pendragon, 500
because Merlin likened him to a Dragons head, which (at his birth)
maruailously appeared in the firmament, The birth of Arthur.
at the corner of a blazing Star. He loved fair Igrine, wife to Gorlois Duke
of Cornwall, on whom he begot the valiant Prince Arthur. Vter reigned 18.
years, and was buried by his Brother at Stone-heng.

Arthur, Son of Vter Pendragon, 5^6
succeeded his Father in the kingdom. He fought twelve battles against the
Saxons, Arthur had 12. battles against the Saxons.
returning Conqueror in every one of them: yet could he not drive them out of
the land, but still they possessed Kent, Sutherie and Norfolk. He instituted
the order of the round Table, was deadly wounded in a battle which he fought
with his cozen Mordred; and having reigned 26. years, was buried at
Glastenbury between two Pillars, where his body was afterward found, in the
days of King Henry the second, about the year, 1191.

Constantine, Cozen to Arthur, 542
and Son of Cador, Duke of Cornwall, succeeded next in ye government: But
Aurelius Conan warred against him, and slew him in the field, when he had
reigned four years, and was buried at Stone-heng.

Aurelius Conan, was next King of Britain, 546
albeit his Uncle had most right thereto, whom he imprisoned, and cruelly
murdered his two sons: Conan murdered his Nephews.
after which himself lived not long, but died before he had reigned two
years. 548


Vortiporus reigned after his Father Aurelius Conan four years, and left no
issue to succeed him in the kingdom.

580
Malgo, Nephew of Aurelius Conan, reigned five years.

Careticus ruled Britain three years, and the English and Saxon Kings
(remoouing the Britains) enlarged the bounds of their own Dominions: so that
beside the Kings of Britayne, there reigned eight Kings of the English and
Saxons, Eight kings of the English and Saxons.
as Ethelbert in Kent, Cissa in Sussex, Ceauline in Westsex, Creda or Crida in
Mercia, Erkenwine in Essex, Titila in East Angles, Ella in Deira, and Alfred in
Bernitia. The Britains lost possession of the more part of their ancient
seats, The Britains loose their ancient seats
and the faith of Christ was thereby greatly decayed, for the Churches were
destroyed, and the Arch-Byshoppes of Caerleon Arswike, London and York,
withdrew (together with their Clergy) into the Mountains and Woods in
Wales. Now was Augustine the Monk, and others sent to preach the Christian
faith in Britain, Augustine the Monk sent into Britain.
and was made Arch-byshop of Britain, or the English Nation, and King
Ethelbert (with his people of Kent) were converted to the Christian faith.

613
Cadwan was elected King of the Britains in Anno 613. The Britain^ 24. years
without a King.
For (after Careticus) they had remained (for about the space of 24. years)
without any especial Governor, being led by sundry Rulers: this Cadwan had
before bin Duke or Ruler of North Wales. He governed two and twenty years.

Cadwallo or Cadwalline, Son of Cadwan, 635
succeeded as King of the Britains, after his Father. He reigned 48. years,
and being dead, his body was balmed with sweet confections, and put into a
Brazen Image, by marvelous Art melted and cast, which Image was also mounted
on a goodly brazen horse, and so set up aloft on the West gate of London,
called Ludgate, in token of his Conquests, and for a terror to the Saxons. S.
Martins at Ludgate built.
The Church of Saint Martine under the same Gate, was then also builded by the
Britains.

Cadwallader, Son of Cadwallo, 678
succeeded him in the Britains government, whose raygne lasted but three
years, for he was constrained (with his people) to forsake their Native
Country, and by Sea to fly over into Britain Armorica, there to seek
relief for their languishing bodies. In this Cadwallader ended the line and
government of the Britains, The ending of the Brytaines Government.
now called Welchmen, which name they took of their Leader Wallo or Gallo, or
else of a Queen of Wales, called Gales or Wales. The Britains had the greater
part of this Land in rule (reckoning from Brute to this time) 1822. years,
and now the whole Dominion of the Land, came to the Saxons.

Egbert, the Son of Alcmund, a petty Prince, 800
the son of Offa, of the blood of Ina, King of the West Saxons, having bin
banished by k. Brightrick into France; after Brightricks death, was repealed
home, and succeeded as the seventeenth King of the West Saxons. He subdued the
Cornishmen, and seuearely punished the unquiet Welch-men. The victories of King
Egbert.
Bernulfe King of Mercia, was overthrown by him, and Kent, Essex, Southrie,
and Sussex, with their several Kings, al brought under his obeisance, and the
kingdom of Northumberland yielded unto him. Then subdued he North Wales, and
took the City of Chester. Afterward, assembling a Counsel at Winchester, he
was there crowned King and Soueraign Lord of the whole land: which he changed
from the name of Britain, and from the several appellations of the
Heptarchie, and called it Englelond, The first no^ination of England, by K.
Egbert.
or Angles-land, that is to say, The Englishmens Land, whereof in Latin it was
termed Anglia, a name taken from the Angles, which, of the three people then
possessing it, to wit, the Iutes, Saxons, and Angles (being indeed all but one
Nation) were the most valiant and populous. In his time was the first invasion
of the Danes, and he had an overthrow by them at Carrum: The first in^asion
of the Danes.
which success causing them to adventure the like attempt the year following,
landing their Fleet in Wales, and joining with the Welch-men, they were
overthrown by K. Egbert, at a place called Hengistenton, and a great number of
them slain. This glorious Prince, having greatly enlarged the bounds of his
kingdom, and reigned seven and thirty years, died, and was very Royally
buried at Winchester.

837.
Ethelwolph, eldest son to the most victorious King Egbert, succeeded next in
the kingdom of England. All the time of his reign, he was grievously troubled
with the Danes invasions; A worthy victory over the Danes
but he had a worthy victory over them at Ockley in Southrey, such as the like
has hardly been heard of in the English Dominions. He divided the kingdom
between himself, and his son Ethelbald, and having reigned twenty years* was
honorably buried in the Cathedral Church at Winchester. 857


Ethelbald succeeded his Father Ethelwolphe by inheritance, but to his second
son Ethelbert (in his life time) he had given the kingdoms of Kent and
Essex, which he had conquered. Ethelbald defiled his fathers bed.
This Ethelbald presumed to defile his Fathers bed, and married his
Stepmother Judith: he raygned five years, and dying, was buried at Shirbourn.

Ethelbert, second son of King Ethelwolph, 862.
succeeded after his Brother Ethelbald in the regiment. This Ethelbert drove
the Danes out of Kent, many times overthrew them, and put them to flight. He
reigned five years, and was buried by his Brother Ethelbald at Shirbourne.

Ethelred, third Son to King Ethelwolph, 867
reigned next after his Brother Ethelbert. He fought nine battails with the
Danes in one year, Nine Ba^t^^ fought with the Dan^s in one ye^
bearing still the victory away with him; but dissension among the Saxon
Kings, furthered the Danes in conquest of their kingdoms. Ethelred was slain
in fight with the Danes, having reigned five years, and was buried at
Winbourne Abbey.

Alfred, or Alured, sur-named the Great, 87^
youngest Son to Ethelwolph, succeeded his Brother in the Kingdom. He was
very greatly troubled with the Danes, who inuading diverse parts of the Land,
did most cruelly wast it: yet had he (in one year) seven battles with them,
and ouer-throwing them at length, recovered his kingdom. He builded 3.
Monasteries, one at Edlingsey, afterward called Athelny, near Taunton in
Sommerset-shire; K. Alfred builded 3. Monasteries
the second at Winchester, called the New Minster; and the third at Shaftsbury,
where his Daughter Ethelgeda was Abbess. Oxford built by Ki. Alfred.
But, by persuasion of Neote, a famous Learned Monk, he built the University
of Oxford, being himself a good Grammarian, Rhetorician, Philosopher, Musician
and Poet, as also a most perfect Architect. He reigned 29. years, and six
months, and was buried in his New-Minster, at Winchester.

900
Edward, son to King Alfred, and Surnamed the Elder, succeeded in the
kingdom after his Father. He subdued the Kingdom of the East Angles, and so
enlarged the bounds of his Kingdom, The East Angles conquered by K* Edward.
that he had most part of Great Britain under his obedience; he built a new
Town at Nottingham, on the South Side of Trent, and made a Bridge over between
the old Town and new. He repaired Manchester in Lancashyre, (accounted then the
Southend of Northumberland) and built a Town, called (by ancient writers)
Thilwall, K. Edward a great builder.
near to the River of Mercia, placing therein a Garrison of Soldiors. Diuer
other Towns and Castles also he builded, as two at Buckingham, on either side
the River Ouse, against the Danes incursions, and another at the mouth of Auon:
he repaired the Towns of Toceter and Wigmore, and having raygned 24. years,
was buried in the New Minster or Monastery at Winchester.

Athelstane, or Adelstane, eldest Son of King Edward, succeeded his Father, 924
and (as his Ancestors) was crowned at Kingston on Thames. A great army of the
Danes, Scots, and Irish, was overthrown by King Athelstane; Northumberland,
Westmerland, and Cumberland yielded unto him. King Athelstane the first monark
of England.
He was the first of the English Kings, that obtained the government of the
whole Kingdom, which continued so 140. years after, though not without some
interruption, the Danes (in the mean time) usurping the Crown by the space of
thirty years. The Welsh and Cornishmen ware subdued by him. He builded two
Monasteries, one at Wilton, in the Diocese of Salisbury, and another at
Michelme in Somersetshire, founding also a College of Priests, at S.
Edmunds-bury. There were few famous Monasteries in this land, but he
beautified them either with some new piece of building, Jewels, Books, or
Lands, and caused the sacred Scriptures to be translated out of the most pure
Fountain of the Haebrewes, into the English Saxon tongue. He reigned 16.
years, and was buried at Malmesbury.

Edmund, Brother to King Athelstane, succeeded next after him, and vanquishing
the Danes, 940
was afterward unfortunately slain, having reigned five years, and was buried
at Glastenbury.

946
Eldred or Eadred, Brother to King Edmund, succeeded next in the royal
Dignity, being crowned also at Kingstone upon Thames. Edwin and Edgar, Sons
to King Edmund, were put by from ruling, in regard of their tender age. Eldred
subdued the Northumbers, repaired the Abbey of Abington, built by King Ina, but
ruined by the Danes. And having reigned nine years, was buried in the old
Monastery at Winchester.

955
Edwine, eldest Son to King Edmund, succeeded his Uncle Eldred, and was
crowned at Kingston. This Edwin was wholly addicted to sensuality and pleasure,
banished Dunstane, Abbot of Glastenbury, for reproouing his Rape of Algiua, his
near Kinswoman, even when his Lords were sitting in Counsel. He having
reigned four years, was deprived, and dying with grief, was buried in the
new Abbey at Winchester.

959
Edgar, Brother to King Edwine, was anointed and crowned King at Bathe, and
afterward at Kingstone. He was a great favorer of Religious men, and had a
Fleet of three thousand and six hundred ships always in readiness, K.
Edgar his fleet of ships
and sailed therewith (once a year) about all great Britain. He had the
whole Isle, and all the Kings thereof in subjection to him, and was rowed up
and down the River of Dee, by seven Kings his vassailes: Luduall, one of
those Kings, did pay him a yearly tribute of Wolves. A tribute of Wolves.
He reigned 16. years, and was buried at Glastenburie.

Edward, eldest Son to King Edgar, 975
succeeded his Father, being crowned at Kingston, but by Counsel of Elfrith,
his Stepmother, he was treacherously murdered, when he had raygned three
years, and was buried at Shaftesbury.

Ethelred, or Egelred, 979
second Son to King Edgar, was crowned at Kingstone; but because his coming
to the Crown was by his brothers murder, he could never obtain his peoples
affection. The Danes murdered in one night.
All the Danes in England (by the command of King Ethelred) were murdered in one
night. He reigned 38. years, and was buried in Saint Paul's Church in London.

Edmund, Son to King Ethelred, 1016
and Surnamed Ironside, was immediately proclaimed K. after his Fathers death;
as the Clergy and Nobility did the like to Canutus, because they had sworn
fealty to his Father Swain, or Sweno: Edmund Ironside and Canutus both
proclaimed Kings.
whereon three great battles were fought betwixt King Edmund and Canutus, and
the Danes overthrown at Otford in Kent, beside the great battle at Ashdone in
Essex, near Saffron walden, where the Englishmen were foiled by the Danes, and
the Land once again divided, between Canutus and King Edmund, who was
treacherously slain at Oxford, having reigned but one year, and some few
months, and was buried at Glastenbury.

Canutus the Dane, 1017.
challenging all England to himself, was crowned King in Saint Paul's Church
in London, and married Queen Emma, the widow of king Etheldred: he reigned xx.
years, and was buried at Winchester.

1035.
Harold, surnamed Harefoot, using the power of the Danes in England, invaded
the Realm, while his brother Hardi-kenutus Governed in Denmark. He reigned
four years, dyed at Oxford, and was buried at Westminster.

Hardikenutus, or Hardy-Canutus, Son of King Canutus, 1041
and his Queen Emma, obtaining his Fathers Kingdom; sent for his mother from
exile. He died with the cup in his hand, as he sat merrily disposed at his
Table, in the third year of his reign, The ending of the Danes government in
England.
and was buried at Winchester. With this Hardy-Canutus, ended the dominion of
the Danes in England, who had grievously oppressed this nation, for the space
of 250. years.

1042
Edward, the son of Ethelred and Emma, was next crowned King at Winchester,
all the Danes being then quite expulsed the land. This Edward was Surnamed the
Confessor, for his virtuous life and worthy Laws: also he is said to be the
first that cured the Disease, called, The Kings Evil. The Kings Evil.
He reigned three and twenty years, and was buried at Westminster, which (in
his life time) he had most sumptuouslye repaired.

1067
Harold, son of Earl Goodwin, took upon him the government of the kingdom:
but William, Duke of Normandy, came into England with a powerful Army, and (in
battle) Harold was shot through the brains with an Arrowe, England conquered
by D. William.
having reigned but nine months, and was buried in the Monastery of Waltham in
Essex, by whose death, Duke William obtained his Conquest of England.

William, Duke of Normandy, 1067
base Son of Robert, Duke of Normandy, and Nephew to King Edward the
Confessor, whom he perceived more addicted to virtue, then policy, Duke
Williams policy to get the Crown.
and through debility of body not like to live long: contryued his own
attaining to the crown of this land, after the decease of the aged King. For
he placed diverse Normans, in the cheifest rooms about him while he lived, and
when he was dead, levied an Army of diverse Nations, and therewith pretending
the Patronage of England, against Harold, Earl Godwins Son, who usurped the
Kingdom; first fought with him, and flewe him at a place now called Battle,
in Sussex, and then took the Crown on him, by election of the Estates.
Seeking next to bar Titles, Edgar Etheling, true heir of the Saxons blood
he imprisoned Edgar Etheling, the only true heir of the Saxons blood, and by
means of Ethelbert, Archbishop of Hamborow, procured Sweno, King of Denmark
(for money) to cease the Danes claim. He builded four strong Castles: one,
at Nottingham, another at Lincoln, the third at York, and the fourth near to
Haftings, where he landed at his first arrival in England. He devised the
Cover le feu Bell, to be Rung nightly at eight of the clock, in all Cities,
Towns, Rake up the fire.
and Villages, for prevention of mighty tumults. He ordained the Terms, The
four Terms.
and that they should be kept four times in the year, and Judges to sit in
several Courts, for desciding controuersiall matters betwixt party and party,
as is used unto this day. He appointed Sheriffs in every shyre, and Justices
of the peace, to see offenders punnished, and the Countries kept in quiet. He
ordained the Court of Exchequer, with the Barons, Clerks and Officers, thereto
belonging, as also the high Court of Chancery, with the Book then called, The
Exchequer and Court of Chancery.
The Roll of Winchester, now, The Doomesday Book, whereby the whole Land was
taxed, and every man's estate, and wealth thoroughly known. He reigned twenty
years, ten months, and 26. days, and was buried in the Abbey of Saint
Stephen, at Ca^n in Normandy, which he had founded. And this is well worthy
memory, that he being so great a Conqueror, K. William destitute of a Grave.
yet after his death, could not have so much ground to bury his dead body,
without wronging some other, until that (by his Executors) it was bought for
him.

William Rufus, second son to the Conqueror, 1087
by his Fathers appointment succeeded him in the Kingdom, and was crowned at
Westminster. Robert, elder Brother to King William, and Duke of Normandy, went
with Godfrey Duke of Bullen, and other Christian Princes to the Holy Land, to
recover it from the Sarazi^s. This King William Rufus, caused new Walls to be
builded about the Tower of London, and laid the foundation of Westminster
Hall. The foundation of Westminster Hall.
He reigned thirteen years, and was slain with an Arrow, by one Sir Walter
Tyrel, a French knight, in the New Forest in Hampshire, his body being buried
at Winchester. In which Forest, not many years before, 511
had stood 36. Parish Churches, diverse fair Towns, Villages, and Hamlets,
containing thirty miles in circuit: New forest in Hampshire, and strange
accidents the^ happening.
all which was laid wast by the Conqueror, the poor inhabitants expelled
thence, and it was made a place for wild beasts to live in. It was somewhat
strange, that in that very place, the King should be so unfortunately slain;
Richard his Brother blasted to death, and Henry the Conquerors Nephew, by his
eldest Son Robert, as he ouer-earnestly pursued the game, in the the bushes
(like to another Absolon) straungely strangled to death; vengeance from God
(as was thought) punnishing the fathers offense in his posterity.

Henry, 1100
sur-named Beauclerke for his Learning, and youngest son to the Conqueror,
succeeded his Brother King William, and was crowned at Westminster. Robert,
Robert D. of Normandy.
Duke of Normandy, being returned from the Holie-Lande, warred with his Brother
Henry, for his right in the crown of England, and after much contention, being
taken and committed Prisoner unto Cardiffe Castle in Wales, after 26. years
imprisonment, he there dyed, and was buried at Gloucester. Maud, King Henry's
Daughter, was married to the Emperor Henry: but his other children, William,
Duke of Normandy, his Sister Marie, Countess of Perch; Richard, Earl of
Chester, with his Brother Otwell, Governor to Duke William, and the said Earl
of Chester his wife, King Henry's Children drowned.
the Kings Niece, with diverse others, to the number of 140. persons, beside
50. Mariners, following the king out of Normandy, were all drowned. King
Henry reigned 35. years, died in the Forest of Lions in Normandy, and was
buried in the Abbey of Reading, which he had founded. In this king Henry first
of that name, ended the line of ye Norman kings, concerning their heirs male,
who had reigned about 69. years: and then began the French, by Title of the
heirs general.

1135
Stephen, Earl of Bullen and Mortaigne, son to Stephen Earl of Bloys, by
Adela, Daughter to king William the Conqueror, usurped the crown from Maud
the Empress, and her young son Henry, K. Stephen usurped the Crown.
which caused great Wars between him and her, and very miserable times to
the people; till by an assembly of the Lords at Winchester, Articles of peace
and agreement were concluded. King Stephen reigned eyghteene years, ten
months, and three and twenty days, and was buried in the Abbey of Feuersham in
Kent.

1154
Henry, sur-named Fitz-Empresse, and Shortmantle, succeeded next in the crown
of England. He expelled strangers out of the Land, and had a long and
troublesome contention, Tho. Becket Archbishop of Canterb.
with Thomas Becket, Archbishop of Canterbury. He crowned his son Henry,
as fellow-King with him, which procured him much mollestation, by means of his
Queen, and his other sons. In his time, was the conquest of Ireland, Dublin,
and Waterford, being won by Earl Strongbow. He had diverse Concubines, but
especially fair Rosamond, whom he kept in a Labyrinth at Woodstock, where she
was poisoned by Q. Elianor. King Henry the second reigned 34. years, nine
months and two days, and dying, was buried at Font-Euerard in the Duchy of
Alanson. In him ended the reign both of the Normans and Frenchmen, over the
Realm of England.

Richard, Earl of Poictiers, 1189
and second Son to King Henry, was crowned King at Westminster. He went to the
Holy Land, Ki. Richard went to the Holy Land, he was called Cuee^de-Lion.
and performed many worthy services there: his brother John (in his absence)
aspired to rule the whole land, being provoked thereto by the French king. As
King Richard besiedged the Castle of Chalus Cheuerel; he was wounded with an
impoysoned quarrel, shot at him by one Barturam de Gurden, or Peter Bazile,
whereof he dyed, having reigned nine years, nine months, and odd days, and
was buried at Font-Euerard.

John, Lord of Ireland, Earl of Mortaign and Gloucester, and brother to king
Richard, 1199
was crowned at westminster. He had long and tedious contentions with his Barons, as
also with the pope, by whose means, Jews the French kings son, was drawn
into the business, and had the crown offered him by the Lords, whereon he
wrought great spoil in the Land. King John reigned 17. years, six months, and
27. days, and dying by poison, was buried at Worcester.

1216
Henry, third of that name, and eldest Son to King John, succeeded immediately
after his Father, albeit he was but nine years old: the Barons and French
Jews, being still very mollestuous, William Marshall, Earl of Pembroke.
against whom William Marshal, Earl of Pembroke, was chief General of the
Kings forces, and prevailed worthily. This King Henry, reigned 56. years, and
27. days, and was buried at Westminster.

1272
Edward, eldest Son to King Henry, and Surnamed Long-shankes, was crowned at
Westminster, after his return home from the Holy Land. Wales conquered
This King conquered Wales, and divided it into Shyres; and banished the Jews
for ever out of England. Having reigned 34. years, seven months, and twenty
days, he dyed, and was buried at Westminster.

Edward of Carnaruon, son to King Edward the first, 2307
succeeded in the kingdom after his Father. This king did overmuch affect an
Esquire of Gascoigne, Piece Gau^ston.
called Pierce Gauaston, and disshonoured many of his Lords, to advance him: as
he did the like, by the two Spensers, the Father and Son. At length, he was
imprisoned by his Barons, with help of the Queen and Prince, and then
deposed, when he had reigned nineteen years, six months, and seauenteene
days.

Edward the third, 1327
son to king Edward the second, was crowned at Westminster in his Fathers life
time. Flanders, yielded themselves and all their Towns to King Edward, and,
laying claim to the Crown of France (in right of his Mother Queen Isabell) he
entered that land with a puissant army, and quartered the Arms of France, with
his own of England. The Order of the Garter.
He devised the worthy Order of the Garter: and Prince Edward, Surnamed the
Black Prince (beside his famous victories in France) reseated Don Peter king
of Castile in his kingdom, which his bastard Brother Henry usurped against
him. K. Edward the third reigned fifty years, and five months, and dying at
Sheene, was buried at Westminster.

Richard, second of that name, 1277.
son to Edward the Black Prince, being about eleauen years old, succeeded
after his Grandfather King Edward; the Duke of Lancaster, and the Earl of
Cambridge, being Protectors of the young kings person. The rebellion of Jack
Straw, Jack Straw, and his rebels
and Wat Tyler, with the Essex and Kentishmen then happened, and the worthy act
of William Walworth, Lord Mayor of London, in arresting the traitor. Great
storms arose between the king and his Nobles, because he had let to Farm the
realm of England, to Lords that abused the king, and much misgouerned him,
sending abroad blanke Charters, etc. Whereupon, in the end, Articles against
the King.
Articles were framed against the king, and he committed to the Tower of
London: Henry, Surnamed Bullingbrooke, son to John of Gaunt, being
proclaimed king, and Richard quite depryued, when he had reigned 22. years,
three months, and nine days. Dying, he was buried at Langley.

1399.
Henry Plantagenet, borne at Bullingbroke, in the County of Lincoln, being
Cosin-Germaine to king Richard the second, succeeded next by Richards
deprivation, The Crown entailed.
and entailed the crown to him and his heirs. Owen Glendoure, with his
VVelchmen, entered into Rebellion against the king, and did put him in great
danger of his life by Treason, by conueying a Caltrop into his bed. This king
Henry reigned 13. years, and odd months, and was buried at Canterbury, with
great solemnity.

1413
Henry of Monmouth, son and heir to king Henry the fourth, succeeded after
his father. He urged his title to France, The battle of Agin-court.
and fought the famous battle at Agin-court. He reigned nine years, six
months, and four days, and dying at Boys de Vinciennes in France, was buried
at Westminster.

Henry of windsore, being but nine months old, 1423
did yet succeed in his lawful right. He was also crowned king of France at
Paris, and had his time troubled with many grievous combustions both abroad and
at home, as also diverse foughten battles, The houses of York and Lancaster.
to the effusion of much blood. He reigned 38. years, six months, and four
days, and was buried first at Chertsey, and afterward removed to windsore.

1461
Edward, Earl of March, took on him the government of the Realm, being son to
Richard Duke of York, that was slain at Wakefield. His reign also was filled
with many troubles, broils, and Rebellions: yet he governed 22. years, one
month, and eight days, and was buried at Windsore.

Edward the fifth, son to king Edward the fourth, 1483
succeeded after his father, being never crowned, but deposed by his Uncle
Richard, Duke of Gloucester, when he had reigned two months, Edw. 5. never crowned
and eleven days, and with his brother, was murdered in the Tower of London,
where both their bodies were obscurely buried.

Richard, Duke of Gloucester, usurped the kingdom two years, two months, and
one day: 1483.
and was slain in battle at Bosworth field, Bosworth field.
by Henry Earl of Richmond, and buried at Leicester. In him ended the line of
the Plantagenets.

Henry, Earl of Richmond, 1485
surnamed Tudor, son to Edmund of Hadham, Earl of Richmond, who was son of
Owen ap Meredyth, and Queen Katherine the French kings daughter, wife to king
Henry the fifth. This king Henry, builded and repaired in his life time, many
goodly houses, beside his Manor of Richmond, The memorable buildings of king
Henry the seventh.
and his Chapel at Westminster; as Baynards Castle in London; the goodly
Hospital of the Sauoy, near. Charing-Crosse, to which he gave lands, for
relief of an hundred poor people. Sir Religious houses for Franciscan Friars,
of the Obseruant and Couentall orders, ( viz.) at Richmond, at Greenwich, and
at Newarke, for Obseruants: at Canterbury, New Castle, and Southhampton, for
Couentals. He gave also many sums of money, to good and godly uses. And for
that one of the goodliest Chappelles in Europe, was (by his means) finished,
formerly begun by king Henry the sixth, called the Kings college Chapel,
Kings College chapel in Cambridge.
in the University of Cambridge: I cannot omit the sum he gave to accomplish
the same, which was 10000. lt. (viz.) 5000. pounds in his life time, and the
rest by will at his death, under his great Seal of England, which was truly
paid, as is yet to be seen in the same College. He married his eldest
daughter Margaret, to James the fourth, King af Scots: of which happy marriage,
we enjoy our dread Soueraign now reigning, King James the sixth. King Hentie
reigned 23. years, and somewhat more then 8. months, and was buried in his new
Chapel at Westminster.

1509
Henry the eight, son of king Henry the seventh, succeeded next in the
kingdom after his father. He banished the Popes authority out of England, and
was proclaimed King of Ireland, because the former Kings were only called
Lords of Ireland. Lords of Ireland.
He wun Terwin, Tourney, and Bullen in France, and gave the Church of the Gray
Friars in London to the City, to be a place of relief for poor people;
King Henry's gifts, to charitable uses.
S. Bartholomewes Spittle, the Gray Friars, and two parish Churches, the one
called S. Nicholas in the Shambles, the other S. Ewin in Newgate Market, were
then made all one parish Church, and he gave in Lands for maintenance thereof,
five hundred Marks by the year for ever. He reigned 37. years, 9. months, and
5. days, and was buried at Windsore.

Edward the sixth, 1549
only son to king Henry the eight, was crowned king at Westminster. He caused
the Mass to be utterly abolished, The Mass abolished.
Images to be defaced in Churches, and the Lords supper to be ministered in both
kinds. There was then good orders devised for the poores relief, and poor
people were distinguished by three several degrees, in manner following: Three
degrees of poor.
1. The poor by impotency. 2. Poor by casualty. 3. Thristlesse poor.
1. The poor by impotency, were also divided into 3 kinds 1. The fatherles
pore man's ch^^d. 2. The aged, blind, and lame. 3. The diseased person, by
leprosy dropsy, etc.
2. The poor by casualty, were also of three kinds. 1. The wounded Souldior.
2. The decayed Householder. 3. The visited with grievous disease.
3. The thriftlesse poor were likewise of 3. kinds. 1. The Riotor, that
cons^meth all. 2. The Vagabond, that will abide in no place. 3. The idle
^erson, as Strumpets and others.



1 Christ's Hospital was appointed for the innocent and fatherless child,
Christ's hospital.
to be trained up in knowledge of God, and virtuous exercises.

2 Saint Thomas Hospital in Southwark, was appointed for relief of the aged,
S. Thomas Hospital.
blind, and lame.

Bridewell.
3 Bridewel was also appointed for the Vagabond, idle strumpet, and unthrift.

Of all which several Hospitals, this Virtuous young k. Edward was the founder,
and gave the lands of the Sauoy (which then served as a harbor to Loyterers,
Vagabonds, and strumpets, that lay all day in the fields, and at Night were
harbored there) to the maintenance of these houses: which Lands were of the
yearly value of six hundred pounds, and he gave 4000 Marks beside, of Lands
taken in M^^tmaine, so yearly valewed. This worthy young King reigned six
years, five months, and eight days, and was buried at Westminster.

1553
Mary, eldest daughter to King Henry the eight, and Sister to King Edward,
succeeded after her Brother. She married with the Prince of Spain, who was
afterward king, and reigning 5. years, five months, and ten days, was
buried at Westminster.

1558
Elizabeth, second Daughter to king Henry the eight, and Sister also to king
Edward, came next to her right in the Crown of England. To write of the
Princely life and reign of that Virgin Empress, and matchless Queen, would
require large Volumes, yet all too little for her high deserving merit. Having
lived (well near) threescore and ten years, and happily reigned 44. years, 4.
months, and od days: she died the 24 of March, 1602. and was buried at Westminster.
The lines engraven on her Tomb, may serve for her further memory.

A Sacrifice to Posterity.
Having restored Religion to the Primitive sincerity, established Peace,
reduced coin to the just value, revenged Domestical rebellion, succored
France, grieved by civil war, supported Belgia, overcome the Spanish
invincible Navy, pacified Ireland, by driving out the Spaniards, and compelling
the Rebels to yield to her pardon, increased very much the Reuennewes of both
Universities, by a Law for their provision of Victual, enriched all England,
and administering most prudently the Imperial state thereof 45. years in true
piety, in the seauenty year of her age (in most happy and peaceable manner
departed this life) leaving here her mortal parts, enterred in this famous and
renowned Church (by her conserved) til by the command of Christ, they rise
again immortal.

James, king of England, Scotland, France, 1602
and Ireland, first Monarch of the whole Islands or Country, was proclaimed
king the 24. of March, 1602. being the only inheritour to k. Henry the
seventh, and Elizabeth his Queen, issuing from Lady Margaret, eldest Daughter
to them both. In whose happy marriage, ended the long civil dissentions, of
the two divided families of York and Lancaster: And by his most rightful
succession, in the divided kingdoms of England and Scotland, has united them
in one sole Monarchy of Great Britain. Long may he reign, to Gods glory, and
comfort of his Kingdoms.

A brief Catalogue of the Princes of Wales, from the time that King Edward the
first had conquered Wales, to this instant.
1. EDward, borne at Caernaruon, and therefore called Edward of Caernaruon,
being Son to king Edward of England, first of that name, was the first Prince
of Wales of the English blood, after the death of Prince Lhewelyn, and came to
Chester, in the 29. year of his fathers reign, where he received the homage of
the freeholders of Wales.

2 Edward of Windsore, being eldest son to king Edward the second, in the 15.
year of his fathers reign, was created Prince of Wales, and Duke of
Aquitaine, in a Parliament holden at York.

3 Edward borne at Woodstock, and son and heir to king Edward the third, in
the 17. year of his Fathers reign, was created Prince of Wales at London.
This Prince was surnamed the Black Prince, he took John the French King
prisoner, and dyed in the 46. year of his age, his father yet living.

4 Richard, son to Edward the Black Prince, was created Prince of Wales at
Hauering in the Bower, in the fifty year, of king Edward the 3. his
Grandfather, and was afterward king of England, by the name of king Richard the
second.

5 Henry of Monmouth, son and heir to king Henry the fourth, was in the
first year of his fathers reign, created Prince of Wales at Westminster.

6 Edward of Westminster, son and heir to king Henry the sixth, in the 31.
year of his Fathers reign, was created Prince of wales, and Earl of Chester,
at westminster.

7 Edward, eldest son of king Edward the 4. borne in the Sanctuary at
Westminster, in the 11. year of his Fathers reign, was created Prince of
Wales, and Earl of Chester at London. He was afterward king of England, by the
name of Edward the fifth, but never crowned, because both he and his Brother
were made away, by the treachery of their Uncle Richard, Duke of Gloucester,
that usurped the Crown.

8 Edward, the only Son of king Richard the third, being a child of ten
years old, in the first year of the said kings reign, was created prince of
wales at London.

9 Arthur, son and heir to king Henry the seventh, in the fifth year of his
Fathers reign, was created Prince of wales at London: and dying at Ludlow
Castle, in the 17. year of his fathers reign, was buried with great Funeral
solemnity at Worcester.

10 Henry, Duke of York, son to King Henry the seventh, and Brother unto
Prince Arthur, was after the said Princes death, in the nineteenth year of
his Fathers reign, created Prince of Wales: and was afterward King of England,
by the name of King Henry the 8. In the 26. year of his reign, the
Principality and Country of Wales, was (by Parliament) incorporated and united
unto the Kingdom of England, and all the Inhabitants thereof made equal in
freedoms, liberties, rightes, privileges, laws, and in all other respects,
to the natural subjects of England.

11 Edward, son to King Henry the eight, and borne at Hampton Court, the
Principality of Wales, being incorporated (as has bin said) to the Crown and
kingdom of England, was no otherwise Prince of Wales, then under the general
Title of England, as the King his Father was king of England, Prince of Wales
by general title
and (under ye name) king of Wales, as it being a member of England. Nor do I
read of any other creation or inuesture, that he had in that Principality. He
was King after his Father, by the name of K. Edward 6.

1. Princess of Wales.
1 Marie, Daughter to King Henry the eight by the Princess Katherine Dowager,
Widow of Prince Arthur, was Princess of Wales.

2. Princess of Wales.
2 Elizabeth, Daughter also to King Henry the eight, was in a Parliament, in
the 25. year of her Fathers reign, declared Princess and Inheretrix of the
crown of England, with all dominions to the same belonging; and therefore was
(as her Sister) Princess of Wales.

All these forenamed Princes of Wales, were created (solemnly) by and in
Court of Parliament, except three, which were Richard the second, Edward the
fifte, and Edward, Son to Richard the third. Those that were created out of
Parliament, were Princes, whose fortunes proved hard and disastrous: For
Richard the second was deposed, and after murdered; Edward the fifth was also
murdered in the Tower of London; and Edward, son to Richard the third, dyed
within three months after, as a just judgment of God, for his Fathers
wickedness.

12. Henry, son and heir to our dread Sovereign King. James, in the eight
year of his Fathers reign over England, Prince of Wales by creation.
etc. was created in the Court of Parliament at Westminster, Prince of Wales,
Duke of Cornwall and Rothsay, Earl of Chester, and Knight of the most Noble
Order of the Garter: The strong arm of Heaven be his continual keeper and
defender.

Brief Observations, not unfitly annexed to this our short Summary of England.
Of Bishopprickes, and their circuites.
Jurisdiction of Canterb.
CAnterbury erected first by Augustine the Monk, in the time of Ethelbert,
king of Kent, by prouincial regiment, reaches over all the South and west
parts of this Land, and Ireland also, and there are few shyres, wherein the
Arch-byshop has not some peculiets. But in it self, as (from the beginning)
was, and is proper to the Sea. It extends but over one parcel of Kent, which
Rudburne calls Cantwarland, the Jurisdiction of Rochester including the rest:
so that in this one County, both the greatest Archbishopricke, and least
Bishoppricke are united together. Canterbury has under it one Arch-deaconry,
that has jurisdiction over 11. Deanries, or 161. Parish Churches. In time of
popery, vndername of first fruits, it paid to Rome (at every alienation)
10000. Ducats or Florens, beside 5000. which the new elect did usually pay for
his pall, each ducat being then worth an English Crown.

Jurisdiction of Rochester.
Rochester, included within the limits of Kent, was erected also by Augustine,
in the raygne of Ceolrijc, over the West Saxons. It has one Archdeacon, whose
government in spiritual causes, rules 3. Deanries, or 132. parish Churches,
whereby appears, that in Kent are 393. parish churches, whereof the said two
Archdeacons have cure and charge. It paid to Rome at the bishops admission,
1300. Ducats or Florens.

London was erected at first by king Lucius, Jurisdiction of London
who made it an Archbishops See (as in due place has already bin remembered)
and so it continued till Augustine translated that title to Canterbury. It
includes Essex, Middlesex, and part of Hertfordshire, containing (in
quantity) the ancient Kingdom of the East- Angles, before it was united to the
West Saxons. It has four Arch-deaconries, (viz.) London, Essex, Middlesex and
Colchester, that have under them 363. parish Churches, beside peculiers. The
Archdeaconry of S. Albanes, was added thereto by king Henry the eight, which
has also 25. parishes, whereof four are in Buckingham, the rest in
Hertfordshire. It paid to Rome, three thousand Florens.

Chichester began in the Isle of Seals or Seolsie, Jurisdiction of
Chichester.
and was translated to Chichester in the time of William the Conqueror, when
general remove of Sees was made, from small Villages to greater Towns. It
has Sussex only under jurisdiction, wherein are 16. Deanries, and 551 parish
Churches: and paid to Rome (at every alienation) 333. Ducates.

Winchester, was given to Biri^us, Jurisdiction of winchest.
and his successors, by Kinigils and Oswald, of the Northumbers, in whose time
it was erected. It Governs Hampshire, Surrie, Iardseie, Gardeseie, and the
Isle of Wight; containing eight deanries, 276. Parish-Churches, beside
perpetual Prelary of the Honorable Order of the Garter. It paid to Rome
12000. Ducates or Florens.

Jurisdiction of Salisbury
Salisbury was made chief See of Shirbourne, by Bishop Harman (Predecessor to
Osmond) who brought it from Shirbourne to that City. It governs Barkshire,
Wiltshire, and Dorsetshire. It paid to Rome 4000. Florens.

Jurisdiction of Excester.
Excester has Devonshire and Cornwall, sometimes two several Bishoppricks,
but (in the end) brought into one of Cornwall, and from thence to Excester, in
the time of King William the Conqueror. It paid to Rome at every alienation,
six thousand Ducates or Florens.

Jurisdiction of Bath.
Bath, the Sea whereof was sometime at Wels, before John (the bishop there)
annexed the church of Bath unto it, which was in An. 1094. it has
Somersetshire only, and it paid to the Court of Rome, 430. Florens.

Jurisdiction of Worcester.
Worcester, has Worcestershire, and part of Warwickshire; Before the
Bishopric of Gloucester was taken from it, it paid to the Pope two thousand
Ducates of Gold, at change of every Prelate. It began in the time of Offa,
King of the East- Angles.

Jurisdiction of Gloucester.
Gloucester has Glocestershire only, wherein are nine Deanries, and 294.
Parish-Churches. It never paid any thing to Rome, because it was erected by
King Henry the eight, when he had abolished the Popes usurped authority.

Jurisdiction of Hereford
Hereford, has Herefordshire, and part of Shropshire. It paid to Rome at every
alienation 1800. Ducates.

Lichfielde, had Couentry added to it, Jurisdiction of Lichfield
in the reign of King Henry the first, at the earnest suit of Robert, Bishop
of that See: It has Staffordshire, Darbishire, part of Shropshire, and the
rest of Warwickshire, void of subjection to the Sea of Worcester. It was
erected in the time of Penda, King of the South- Mercians: And paid to the
Pope three thousand Florens, at every alienation.

Oxford, has Oxfordshire only, Jurisdiction of Oxford.
and never paid any taxation to Rome, being erected by K. Henry the eight.

Elie, has Cambridgeshire, and the Isle of Elie, being at first a wealthy
Abbey; Jurisdiction of Elie.
it was erected by King Henry the first, in Anno 1109. It paid to the Pope at
every alienation, 7000. Ducates.

Norwich, Jurisdiction of Norwich
called in elder times Episcopatus Donnicensis, Dononiae, or Aestanglorum, was
first erected at Felstow, or Felixstow; afterward removed to Donwich; thence to
Helmham; next to Theodford, or Thetford; and lastly (in the Conquerours time)
to Norwich. It contains Norffolke and Suffolk only, but (at first) included
Cambridgeshire also, and so much as lay within the Kingdom of the East-
Angles. It began under Cerpenwald, King of the East Saxons; and paid to Rome
5000. Ducates. It contained sometime 1563. Parish-Churches, beside 88.
religious Houses; but now we hear of no more then 1200.

Jurisdiction of Peterborow.
Peterborow, sometimes a notable Monastery, has Northampton and Rutlandshires,
being a Diocese erected likewise by King Henry the eight, and never paid
first Fruits to the Pope.

Jurisdiction of Bristow.
Bristow, has Dorsetshire, sometime belonging to Salisbury: a See also erected
by king Henry the eight.

Jurisdiction of Lincoln.
Lincoln, of all other (of late times) was the greatest, and albeit that (out
of it) were taken the Sees of Oxford and Peterborow; yet it still retains
Lincoln, Leicester, Huntingdon, Bedford, Buckingham shires, and the rest of
Hertfordshire, extending it self from Thames to Humber. It paid to the Pope at
every alienation, 5000. Ducates: and began in the time of King William Rufus.
Thus much of the Bishoprics in Lhoegres or England, as it was left to
Locrine; now go we to Wales.

Jurisdiction of Landaffe.
Landaffe, or the Church of Taw, has Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction in
Glamorgan, Monmouth, Brechnoch, and Radnor shires, and paid 700. Ducates to
Rome, at every exchange of Prelat. But it was a poor answer (upon call) of
the incumbent, in Court before the Lord President, when he said: The Daffe is
here, but the Land is gone.

Jurisdiction of S. David's
S. David's, has Pembroke and Caermardineshires, whose livery and first fruits
to the Sea of Rome, was 1500. Ducates.

Jurisdiction of Bangor.
Bangor is in North Wales, and has Caernaruon, Angleseie, and Merioneth
shires: and paid to Rome, 126. Ducates.

S. Asaphes, has Prestholme, Jurisdiction of Saint Asaphes.
and part of Denbigh, and Flint Shires, in ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, and is
the least in circuit in Wales, amounting (in all) not to one good County;
yet it paid to Rome at every alienation, 470. Ducates. Hitherto of the
Province of Canterbury, for so much thereof as now lies within compass of
this Island.

The Archbishops See of York was restored about the year of Grace 625. in the
time of Eadwin, king of Northumberland, York and her Jurisdiction.
Paulinus sitting as first Bishop there, by ordination of Iustus Archbishop
of Canterbury. It has Jurisdiction over Yorkshire, Nottinghamshire, and the
rest of Lancashire (not subject to the Sea of Chester.) It paid to Rome 1000.
Ducates, beside 5000. for the pall of the new elect.

Chester upon Dee, Jurisdiction of Chester.
otherwise called Westchester, has Chestershire, Darbishire, the most part of
Lancashire, even to the Ribell, Richmond, and a part of Flint and Denbighshires
in Wales. It was made a Byshoppricke by Henry the eight, An. regni 33. July 16.

Durham, has the County of Durham, Jurisdiction of Durham.
and Northumberland, with the Dales; the Bishops have bin (sometimes) Earls
Palantines, ruling under name and succession of Saint Cuthbert. It paid to Rome
9000. Ducates, at every alienation.

Caerleill, Jurisdiction of Caerleill.
was erected Anno 1132. by king Henry the first, and has Cumberland and
Westmerland in rule. It paid to the Pope a thousand Florens.

Bish. of Man
There is another Bishopric, called the Sea of Mona, or Man, sometime named
Episcopatus Sodorensis, whereof one VVimundus was ordained the first Bishop,
and John the second, in the troublesome time of king Stephen. But the gift of
this Prelacy is said to rest in the Earls of Darby, to nominate thereto (from
time to time) such as they deem convenient.

Of the Colleges in Cambridge and Oxford and their Founders.
In Cambridge.
Years of the foundations
Colleges. by Founders. 1546
1. Trinity College. by King Henry the 8. King Henry the sixth, 1441
2. The Kings Col. by Edward the fourth, Henry the 7. Hen. 8. 1511
3. Saint John's. by L. Margaret, grandmother to Henry 8. 1505
4. Christ's College. by K Hen. 6. and Lady Marg. before named. 1446
5. The Queens col. by Lady Margaret, wife to Henry the sixth. 1496
6. Jesus College. by John Alcock, bishop of Elie. 1342
7. Bennet College. by The Brethren of a Guild, called Cor. Chr. 1343
8 Pembroke Hall. by Maria de Valencia, Countess of Pembr. 9. Peter College.
by Hugh Balsham, 1256
bishop of Elie. 10. Gundeuill, and Caius College. by Edmund Gundeuil, 1348
Parson of Tertington, and John Caius, Doctor of Physic. 11. Trinity Hall.
by William Bateman, 1354
bishop of Norwich. 12. Clare Hall. by Rich. Badow, 1326
Chanceller of Cambridg. 13. Katherine Hall. by Robert Woodlark, 1459
Doctor of divinity. 14. Magdalen Colle. by Edward D. of Buck, 1519
and Tho. L. Audley. 15. Emanuell Colle. by Sir Walter Mildmay, etc. 1585

In Oxford.
1. Christ's Church. 1539
by King Henry the eight. 2. Magdalen college by Will. Wainfleet, 1459
first fellow of Merton College, then scholar of Winchester, and afterward
Bishop there. 3. New College. by Will. Wickham. 1375.
Bishop of Winchester. 4. Merton college. by Walter Merton, 1276
Bishop of Rochester. 5. All Souls College. by Hen. Chichelie, 1437
Arch bishop of Canterbury 6. Corpus Christi College. by Richard Fox, 1516
Bishop of Winchester. 7. Lincoln college. by Richard Fleming, 1430
bishop of Lincoln. 1323
8. Auriell College. by Abraham Brown, Almoner to K. Ed. 2. 1340
9. Queens college. by R. Eglesfield, Chaplain to Phillip, Queen and Wife to
King Edward the third. 1263
10. Balioll College by John Baliol, king of Scotland. 1557
11. Saint John's college. by Sir Thomas White, Lord Mayor of London. 1556
12. Trinity College by Sir Thomas Pope Knight. 1316
13. Excester college by Walter Stapleton, bishop of Excester. 1517
14. Brazen-nose. by William Smith, Bishop of Lincoln. 873
15. University Col. by William Archdeacon of Du^esme. 16. Gloucester College.
by John Gifford, who made it a Cell for 13 Monks. 17. Jesus College. by Hugh
ap Rice, Doctor of the Ciuill-law.
Hostels or Hals in Oxford.
Broade-gates. Heart Hall. Magdalen Hall. Alburne Hall. Postminster Hall. Saint
Mary Hall. White Hall. New Inn. Edmund Hall.
The Names of the Shires in England and Wales.
THE first ten Shires do lie between the British Sea, and the Thames,
according to Polydore.

Kent. Sussex. Surrey. Hampshire. Barkshire. Wiltshire. Dorsetshire.
Sommersetshire. Devonshire. Cornwall.
On the North-side of the Thames, between it and Trent, which passes thorough
the midst of England, are 16. other Shires, six toward the East, and the other
toward the west. Essex, sometime all Forest, save one hundred. Middlesex.
Hertfordshire. Suffolk. Norffolke. Cambridgeshire, wherein are twelu hundreds.
Bedfordshire. Huntingdon, wherein are four hundreds. Buckingham. Oxford.
Northampton. Rutland. Leicestershire. Nottinghamshire. Warwickshire.
Lincolnshire.
There are six also westward, toward Wales. Gloucester. Hereford. Worcester.
Shropshire. Stafford. Chestershire.


These are the 32. Shires, which lie by South of the River Trent; beyond which
River, there are other eight. Darby. York. Lancaster. Cumberland. Westmerland.
Richmond, wherein are five Wapentakes; And when it is accounted as a parcel of
Yorkshire ( out of which it is taken) then is it reputed for the whole Riding.
Durham. Northumberland.
So that in the portion sometime called Lhoegria, there are now forty Shires. In
Wales also there be thirteen, whereof seven are in South Wales. Cardigan, or
Cereticon. Penmoroke, or Penbroke. Caermardin, wherein are nine hundreds or
Commots. Glamorgan. Monmouth. Brecknocke. Radnor.
In North Wales likewise are six. Anglescie. Caernaruon. Merioneth. Denbigh.
Flint. Montgomerie.


Which being added to those of England, do make up 53. Shieres or Counties.

A Brief Collection, of the Original, Antiquity, Increase and Modern estate
of the honorable City of London.
To the Worshipful, M. Cornelius Fish, Esquire, and Chamberlain of the said
most famous City.
COncerning the name of this ancient and worthy City, The names by diverse
given to London.
by diverse Authors it has bin (as diversely) descanted on: Tacitus, Ptolomeus,
and Antoninus called it Londinium and Longidinium: Amianus Marcellinus termed
it Lundinum and Augusta: Stephen (in his Cities) calls it (...): our
Britains, Lundayn: the old Saxons, Londonceaster, or Londonbeig; Strangers,
Londra and Londres; and the Inhabitants, London. By other writers (whom some
judge fabulous) it has bin called Troia-noua, or Troynouant, New Troy,
according to the Name that Brute (first founder thereof) gave it: Dinas Belin,
Belins City; and Caer-Lud, or Luds-Towne, of King Lud: who not only
re-edified, but also gave it that name. Erasmus derived it from Lindum, a
Cittye in the Isle of Rhodes: and so (by variety of judgments) it has run
into the like variety of names. In which strange stream of opinion, how a
man may best carry himself, without impeach to any, is, freely to leave each
man master of his own conjecture: whether Londons true name took original
from any of these forementioned, or whether Woods and Groves (being named in
ye British tongue L'lhwn) London should receive her title, by way of excellency,
Caesar and Strabo, alleged by M. Camden
and be called, The City, or A City thick of Trees, because the Britains
called those woods and Groves by the names of Cities and Towns, which they
had fenced with trees cast down and plashed, to stop up all passage.

London burnt by the Danes.
But leaving the name, we find that London was burnt and destroyed (how fair
soever it was built before) by the Danes, and other Pagan enemies, about the
year of Christ, 839. but afterward, in the year, 886. Alfred, King of the
West Saxons, both restored, repaired, and made it honorably habitable: giving
the charge and keeping thereof, to his Son in Law Ethelred, Earl of the
Mercians, with whom he had formerly married his Daughter Ethelfleda. That it
was strongly defenced with walls, I read, that the Londoners did shut up their
gates, and manfully withstood the Danes, Will. Malinsbury.
preserving their king Ethelred within their walls; this was in Anno Christi,
994. Also in Anno 1016. when Edmund Ironside governed the West Saxons, Canutus
the Dane brought his Fleet to the West part of the bridge, and threw a trench
about the City, as hoping by assault to win it: but the Citizens repulsed him,
and drove him from their walls. Those walls were (from time to time) well
maintained and repaired: Maintenance of the walls.
with stones from the Jews broken houses, in King John's iime, 1215. when the
Barons (entering by Ealdgate, or Aldgate) brake their houses down. And in K.
Henry's time the third, when the walls and gates were repaired (in more
seemly wise then before) at the common charge of the City. The circuit of
London wall on the lands side, is measured thus. From the Tower of London in
the East, London wall in circuit.
to Ealdgate, commonly called Aldgate, 82. perches. From Algate to Byshopsgate,
86. perches: From Byshopsgate in the North, to the Postern of Criplesgate, 162.
perches. From Criplesgate to Ealdersgate, or Eldrich gate, 75. perches. From
Ealdersgate to Newgate, 66. perches. From Newgate in the West, to Ludgate, 42.
perches, amounting in all to 513. perches of Assize. From Ludgate to the Fleet
Dike, 60. perches. From Fleet-bridge South, to the River of Thames, about 70.
perches. Which perches (in complete number) rise to 643. each perch containing
five yards and an half: which in yards do amount to 3536. and an half,
containing 10608. foot, that make up two English miles, and more by 608. foot.

There were but four Gates (at first) made in the wall of this City, viz:
Aldgate, Eastward; Four Gates and no more in elder time.
Aldersgate, Northward; Ludgate, Westward; and the Bridge-gate (over Thames)
Southward. But other Gates and Posterns (for ease and conueniency of passage)
were afterward made, as men's affairs required to other quarters of the City.
The Posterne gate by the Tower.
A Posterne gate was sometime near to the Tower of London, which decaying by
length of time, and a deep Ditch made without the wall, it fell down in the
year, 1440. the eighteenth of King Henry the sixth, and was never after builte
again: but a plain Cottage of Timber, Lath, and Loame, with a narrow passage,
being erected instead thereof, it so continues. Aldgate.
Aldgate was next in the East, so named by the antiquity thereof: for it was so
called in king Edgars time: and the Soke or Franchise (with the Port of
Aldgate, and all customs thereto appertaining) were likewise given by Matilda
(Q. to Henry the first) to the Priour of the B. Trinity, within Aldgate (and
by her founded) in as ample and free manner as she enjoyed them. Bishopsgate
The third was Bishopsgate toward the North, built by some Bishop of London, as
is imagined, for other certainty is not as yet found, which Gate did much ease
to such as travailed East, and by North, as to Norffolke, Suffolk,
Cambridgeshire, etc. because before the erection thereof, such as iournied out
at Aldgate, of necessity held on to the miles end, and turning them on the
left hand to Blethon-hall, now Bednal-Greene, r^de directly to Cambridge
Heath, and so took their iournies North, or East, and by North, or occasion
required. Otherwise, refusing Aldgate way, they had no other help then out at
Aldersgate, through Aldersgate street, and Goswell street, now termed
Pickt-hatch, toward Iseldon, and by a Cross of stone on their right hand, set
up for a mark by the North end of Goldinglane; passed through a long street
(yet called Ald-streete, or Old-street) to another Cross by Sewers ditch
Church, where now stands a smiths Fordge, and there they turned again
North-wards, to Totenham, Enfield, waltham, ware, etc. This Bishopsgate, The
Easterlings.
the Dutch Merchants of the Haunce, Stiliard, or Guildhalla Tentonicorum, were
bound by covenant, both to repair and defend, at all times of danger and
extremity. The fourth, was a Posterne, now called Mooregate, which one Thomas
Faulconer, Mooregate.
Mayor of London, An. 1413. and third of Henry the fifth, caused to be made
there on the Moors side, where never Gate was before: that people might pass
upon cause-wayes into the field for recreation, because the field was then a
marish. The fifth Gate was the Posterne of Criplesgate, Criplesgate.
so called long before the Conquest, in regard of Criples begging there: and
the body of S. Edmond the Martyr was brought into London thereat, when it was
conuayed from Bedrisworth (now called Bury S. Edmunds) thorough the East Saxons
Kingdom, to the parish church of S. Gregory, near to the Cathedral church of
S. Paul, where it rested 3. days. This posterne of Cripplesgate, was a prison
of commitment for Citizens and others, being arrested for debte or common
trespasses, as now the Compters are: Fabians manuscript.
and it was new builded by the Brewers of London, An. 1244. But in An. 1483.
Edmund Shaa, or Shaw, Goldsmith and Mayor of London, gave 400. Marks by his
will, and stuff of the Old gate, to build it again new, as now it is, which
his executors performed in the year, 1491. The sixth was Aldresgate, or
Aldersgate, not Aldrich, Aldersgate.
Elders or Elderngate, as derived from ancient men that builded it, or trees
there sometime growing: but from antiquity of the gate it self, being one of
the four that were first builded, and to serve the North-parts, as Aldgate did
for the East, both bearing the name of Aldgate, and Alder or Aldersgate, to
differ their seniority in building. The 7. was a Posterne gate made in the 6.
year of Edw. the 6. in the Wall of the dissolved cloister of Gray F^iers, now
called Christ's Church and Hospital, Christ's hospital postem
serving for passage to S. Bartholmewes in Smithfield. The 8. west and by
North, was called Newgate, because it was later builded then the rest, Newgate.
by reason that S. Paul's Church being burned in the Conquerors time, about the
year 1086. Mauritius, then bish. of London, not repayring ye old church, but
seeking to begin another, extended ye work in such largenes of ground, that al
passage from Aldgate in the East to Ludgate in the west, was almost stopped up.
Whereupon this gate was first devised and made, and so named: serving aptly for
passage and cariages, from Aldgate, along Cornhil, through West-cheap, and S.
Nicholas Shambles, and the Market taking name of Newgate, to any Westward part
over Oldborne bridge; or turning (without the gate) into Smithfield, to
Iseldon. or any part North and by west. It has bin a Jail or prison for
sellons and other offenders long time, as the records in K. John's time
testifies. And in an. 1422. the first of Henry 6. the executors to Richard
Whittington had license to reedify the said gate, Ludgate.
which they did with his goods. The 8. gate was Ludgate in the west, builded by
k. Lud, before Christ's nativity, 66. years, serving for the west, as Aldgate
for the East, and was repaired with the stones of ye Jews defaced houses, when
the Barons were in arms in k. John's time, as Aldgate and the other gates the^
were. A notable testimony to confirm this assertion, apeared in the year 158^.
when the gate was taken down to be new builded, for a stone was then found in
the wall, which had bin taken from one of those Jews houses, with this
Inscription thereon (but in Hebrew Caracters) Haec est statio Rabbi Moses,
filij insignis Rabbi Isaac: This is the station or ward of Rabbi Moses, son of
the honorable Rabbi Isaac. And it seemed to have bin fixed in the front of some
one of the Jews houses, as a note or sign, yt such a one dwelled there. It
was made a free prison in the 1. year of K. Richard 2. Nicholas Brembar being
then mayor, and after confirmed (in the time of John Northampton Mayor 1382) by
a common Counsel in the Guild-hal, ye freemen of the City, for debt, trepasses,
Ludgate made a free prison.
accounts and contempts, should be imprisoned in Ludgate, and for treasons,
fellonies, murders, and other criminal offenses, Newgate should be the prison.
Lastly, there is also a breach in the City Wall, and a Bridge made of Timber
over the Fleet Dike, betwixt Fleete-bridge and Thames, directly over against
the House of Bride-Well, but it is not as (as I think) called any Gate.

The South side of London.
Now concerning the South Side of the City, and that it was sometime walled
too, the City being then round engirt with a Wall: the Testimony of William
Fitz-Stephen (who wrote in the reign of King Henry the second) may serve to
approve it, William Fitz Stephen his words.
for these are his very words. The Wall is high and great, well towred on the
North-side, with due distances between the Towers. On the South Side also, the
City was walled and towred: but the Fishfull River of Thames, with his ebbing
and flowing, has long since subverted them. If then we shall speak of
Water-Gates, Water gates
as already we have done of Land-gates, and, being now in the west, return
toward the East; the first then was called Ripa Reginae, the Queens-banck, or
Queens Hith, Queenes-Hith.
deserving well to be esteemed a Watergate, and the very chief of the City,
being a common Strand or landing place, equal with, and (in old time) far
excelling Belines-Gate. For, beside the antiquity thereof, and to whom, (in
those days) it severally appertained; I find that King Henry the third, in
the ninth of his reign, commanded the Constables of the Tower of London, to
arrest the Ships of the Cinque-Portes on the River of Thames, The Stilyard,
or Guilda-Halla Teutonicorum.
and compel them to bring their Corn and Fish to no other place, but to the
Queenes-Hith only. And when corn arrived between the Gate of Guilde-Hall, of
the Merchantes of Colleyne, and the Soke of the Archbishop of Canterbury (for
he had then a House near to the Blacke-Fryers) it was not to be measured by
any other quarter, then that of the Queens Soke or Hith, on pain of forty
shillinges amercement. Afterward, Queenes-Hith, and the Farm thereof (granted
by Richard Earl of Cornwall) was by the said King Henry the third, confirmed
to John Gisors then Mayor, the Comminaltie of London, and their Successors for
ever (as appears by his royal Charter) for the sum of fifty pounds. It was
also ordained by King Edward the fourth, that all Ships, Vessels, or Boats,
bringing provision of Victual to the City (of what quality soever) if but
one Vessel only: it came to the Queenes-Hith; if two, the one to
Queenes-Hithe, the other to Belins-gate; if three, The order for the Cities
provision, at Belins gate, and Queenes-hithe.
two to Queenes-Hithe, the third to Belins-gate, etc. so that (always) the
more part came to Queenes-Hithe. But if the Vessel were so great, coming with
Salt or otherwise, from the Bay, and could not conveniently come to these Gates
or Keys; it was then to be conuaied to them, (as aforesaid) by Lighters.

Downe-gate is the next, Downe-gate.
and was so named (as is supposed) by reason of the ways sudden descent or
stooping, from Saint John's Church in Walbroke, to the River of Thames. It was
some-time a large Watergate, frequented with Ships and vessels, like to the
Queenes-Hithe; and appeared (by an Inquisition, in the twenty eight year of
Henry the third) to be a part thereof, being ordered by the customs thereto
belonging.

Wolfesgate
Wolfes-gate, now out of use; one part being builded on by the Earl of
Shrewsbury, the other by the Chamberlain of London, and now called Cold-Harbor.

Ebgate.
Ebgate, so called of old time: but now it is a narrow passage to the Thames,
called Ebgatelane, or old Swan.

Oyster-gate
Oyster-gate, so called of Oysters usually there sold, as chiefest market for
them, and other shellfish. There now stands the water-engine, that serves the
City with water, made in the year 1582. by Peter Moris, Dutchman.

Bridge-gate.
Bridge-gate, so called of London Bridge, whereon it stands, being one of
the Cities first four and principal Gates, and long before the Conquest,
when there (then) stood a bridge of Timber.

Buttolphs-gate.
Buttolphs-gate, so called of the Parish Church of S. Buttolph near adjoining:
which Gate was some-time given, and confirmed by William the Conqueror, to the
Monks of Westminster, by virtue of a former gift, which Almundus (of the Port
of S. Buttolph) gave them, when he was there made Monk.

Belins-gate.
Belins-gate, or Belingsgate, the largest watergate now on the Thames, and
most frequented. Belin, a King of the Brittons (according to Geffrey of
Monmouth) first built it, and gave it his own name, about 400. years before
Christ's Nativity.

There are two Water-gates more, Two water gates.
one on the west side of Wooll-wharffe, or Customers Key, beautifully enlarged
and built of late: This gate is commonly called the Watergate, at South end of
Water-lane. The other, by the Tower Bulwark, and is the last and turthest
Watergate Eastward. Beside these common Water-gates, there were then diverse
private wharffes and Keys, all along from East to West of the City, on the
banck of the River of Thames.

Before we part further from this famous river, London Bridge.
let us here remember Londonbridge over it, which, before there was any bridge
at al, or it a bridge of timber, there was a Ferry kept in the same place, and
no other passage was there then to Southwark, but by the Ferry only. The
Ferry-man and his Wife dying, left this Ferry to their only daughter, named
Mary; who (with her Parents goods left her, and the profits arising from the
Ferry) built a house of Sisters, S. Marie Oueries.
where the East part of S. Mary Oueries Church (above the Quier) now stands,
and where she her self was buried; giving them also the over sight and
benefits of the ferry. Afterward this house of Sisters (being converted to a
College of Priests) the Priests builded the Bridge of timber, and kept it in
good reparations, Londonbridge of Timber.
till the continual charges growing ouer-burthenous, about the year 1176. the
course of the River being then turned another way, for a time, by a trench
purposely devised (beginning about Rodriffe, or Redriffe in the East, and
ending above Patrickseie, or Batersey in the west) the Bridge of stone began to
be founded, and continued 33. years in building. London bridge of Timber burnt.
The Bridge of timber, in the year 1136. was burnt down by fire, but in An.
1163. it was not only repaired, but new made of Timber again, by one Peter of
Cole-Church, Priest and Chaplain: who also began the foundation of the
Stone Bridge, som-what near to the Timber-bridge, and lived till within four
years of the works ending, being buried in a Chapel erected on the Bridge:
But the whole bridge of stone, was finished by the worthy Merchants of London,
Setle Mercer, Will. Almaine, and Benedict Botewrite, principal Masters of that
work.

Other bridges of stone, also belonging to the City, Fleetbridge
as Fleetbridge without Ludgate, made at the charges of John Wels, Mayor, Anno.
1431. Oldborne-bridge, Oldbourne bridge.
so called of a Bourne, which sometime ran down Old-borne. Cowbridge, by
Cow-bridge-street, Cowbridge
or Cow-lane; which being decayed, another of timber was made by Chicklane.
Beside, there were other Bridges over the Town-ditch, as without Aldgate,
Bishopsgate, Mooregate, Cripples-gate, Aldersgate, the Posterne of Christ's
Hospital, Newgate, and Ludgate, al paued over with stone, and leuelled with
the streets: beside diverse bridges (in elder times) over the course of
Walbrooke.

While we are thus speaking of Water and Bridges, belonging to the City,
here I think it most convenient also, to say somewhat concerning the
Conduits, Of the Co^duites.
and sweete-waters conuaied to them by Pipes of Lead. The first Cesterne
whereof (castellated with Stone in the City of London) was called the great
Conduit in Westcheap, (...)
which was begun to be builded in the year 1285. Henry Wales, then being Mayor.
(...)
The Tonne upon Cornehill, was cesterned in Anno. 1401. John Chadworth then
being Mayor. Bosses of water, at Belins-gate; by Paules-wharffe, and by S.
Gyles Church without Cripples-gate, were made about the year 1423.

Water was brought to the Standard in west Cheap, about the year 1431. The
S^^^dard (...) cheap*
And King Henry the sixth, in An. 1442. granted to John Hatharley, Mayor,
license to take up 200. Fodar of Lead, for the building of Conduites; a
common Granery, and of a new Cross in West-Cheape, for Honor of the City.

The Conduit in Aldermanbury, Conduits Alderman bury and Fleestreets.
and the Standard in Fleet Street, were made and finished by the executors of
Sir Will. Eastfield, in An. 147^. A Cesterne was also added to the Standard in
Fleet Street; a second made at Fleet-bridge; and another without Cripples-gate,
in An. 1478.

The Conduit in Grasse-street, in An. 1491.

The Conduit at Old-bourne Cross, about 1498. and made new again by Master
William Lamb, 1577. with an help also at Old-bournebridge.

The little Conduite, commonly termed the Pissing-Conduit, by the
Stocks-Market, about 1500.

The Conduit at Bishops-gate, 1513.

The Conduit at London-wall, 1528.

The Conduit without Aldgate, 1535.

The Conduite in Lothbury and Colman-street, 1546.

The Conduit of Thames-water, at Downe-gate, 1568.

Nor may I hear forget the standard of Thames water by Leaden Hall, which being
derived from the forcier of water, made by Peter Moris forenamed, ascending up
over the steeple of S. Magnus Church, at the north end of London bridge,
conuaieth water into many men's houses in Thames street, New-Fish-streete,
Grasse-streete; And so mounteth up still in Pipes, to the North-west corner of
Leaden Hall (the highest ground in all the City) where the wast of the maine
Pipe rising into this standard (provided at the cities charge) at every tide
was provided to run forth 4. ways, at four several spouts, for plentiful
service of the near adjoining Inhabitants, and cleansing the Channels passing
those four several ways.

The Conduits of Thames-water, by the Parish-Churches of S. Mary Magdalen, and
Saint Nicholas Cold-Abbey, near to old Fish-streete, were made in An. 1583.
Beside the water* Forcier by London Bridge, before remembered, and another (made
since) near to Broken-wharffe, for conueiance of Thames-water into men's
Houses, by an English gentleman, named M. Beuis Bulmar, in An. 1594. Nor will
we forget the new Conduit, lately built by Aldersgate, and Thames-water also
thither conuaied, by an English Gentleman, named Thomas Hayes, in An. 1610.

Come we now to the ancient division of this worthy City, which (as
Fitz-Stephen, says, The Cities division into Wards.
four hundred years ago.) This City, even as Rome, is divided into Wards.
It has yearly Sheriffs, instead of Consuls; and has the dignity of
Senators, in Aldermen. Those wards, both before, and in the reign of Henry the
third, were ^4. in number, 13, lying on the East Side of Walbrooke, and 11. on
the West: but those Wards in the west, growing in greatness to ex^e the other in
the East: in Anno 1393. and 2. of Richard the second. Faringdon Ward, (being
then one entire ward) was by Parliament divided into two, also termed
Faringdon within, Faringdon without, and allowed to have two Aldermen. So ye
twelve wards were then on the west side of Wa^brooke, and the whole number made
25. wards. The Liberties of the Borough of South-warke, were afterward
purchased by the Mayor. C^mminalty, and Citizens, and added to London* as the
26. ward, 26. wards, 26. Alderme^
in An. 1150. whereby the number of Alder-men grew to be 26. But because my
purposed breuity, keeps within the Cities bounds only, and not (at this time,
till publication of my general Chronicle of London and Middlesex, even so
far as the Lord Mayor and Sheriffs power extends) permits me to exceed
that compass; I shall now say nothing, either of South-warke, or Londons
Subburbs.

Portsoken ward (so named of the Franchise of Aldgate) was sometime a Guild,
Portsoken Ward.
and began in King Edgars time, above 600. years since, being called
Knighten Guilde, K^hten Guilde.
of 13. poor knights or Soldiers, that (being favored by the King and Land,
for (service done them) had a parcel of Land granted them on the Cities East
side, and liberty of a Guild for ever. Provided, that each of them should
victoriously accomplish 3. combats; one above ground, one under ground; and
the third in the water: Also, at a certain day appointed, they should run
with Spears in East Smithfield, against all comers: all which, they worthily
performed, and therefore the King called it Knighten Guilde. I read but of one
parish church in this ward, which is called S. Buttolph without Algate, and a
small parish Church, for the Inhabitants of the Close, sometime called S.
Trinity, afterward the Minories. This Portsoken Ward has an Alderman, and his
Deputy, sire common Counselors, four Constables, four Scauengers eighteen
wardmote Enquestmen, and a Beadle. It is sessed at four pound, ten shillings,
for the fifteen.

To^^^street W^^d.
Tower-street ward, is the first ward within London-wall Eastward. In which
ward are three parish churches, viz. Alhallowes Barking, S. Olaue in
Hart-street, and S. Dunstane in the East, beside S. Peter in the Tower, for the
inhabitants there. Also two Halles of Companies, viz. Cloth-workers Hall, in
Mincheon Lane, and Bakers Hall, (...)
in Ha^t or Harp Lane. This ward has an Alderman, and his Deputy; common
Counsel, eight: Constables thirteen. Scauengers, twelve. Wardemote Enquest,
thirteen, and a Beadle: It is also seized at 26. pounds to the fifteen.

Aldgate Ward, takes name of the Gate. Algate ward
In which ward are three parish churches, viz. S. Katherine Christ-Church:
Saint Of a shaft or Maypole higher then the Church Steeple.
Andrew Undershaft, and S. Katherine Of Colma^ Haw, a Haw yard or garden.
Coleman. Likewise three Hals of Societies or companies: Iremongers Hall, in
Fen-Church-streete, Bricklayers Hall, in Sprinckle Alley, now called Sugerloafe
Alley, of the like sign: and Fletchers Hal in S. Marystreet. It has an
Alderman and his Deputy, six common Counselors, nine Scauengers, eighteen
Wardemote Enquestmen, and a Beadle. It is also taxed at five pound to the
fifteen.

Limestreet ward, so named, Limestreete Ward. Leaden hall
of usual making and selling of Lime there in formertimes, as is supposed. In
this ward stands Leaden Hall, which, before it was built of stone,
appertained to Sir Hugh Neuill Knight, in Anno 1309. Afterward, the famous and
mighty man, Sir Simon Air, sometime and Vpholster, and next a Draper, builded
it square of stone, as now it stands, with a fair and large chapel in the
Eastside of the Quadrant, on the Porch whereof, was engraven, Dextra Domini
exaltauit me; The right hand of the Lord has exalted me: And on the
North-wall in the Church, these words, Honorandus famosus Mercator Simon Air,
huius operis, etc. The honorable and famous Merchant Simon Air, founder of
this work, once Mayor of this City, and Citizen and Draper of the same. He
builded there also a goodly Granary for corn, and made there an open and free
market. It was once intended for a Bursse, for assembly of Merchants: but took
not effect, the Merchants meeting still in Lombard-streete, ^s before they had
done. In this ward, is not any Parish church, but small portions of two
parishes, and no hall of any company. It has an Alderman and his Deputy, four
common Counselors, four Constables, two Scauengers, sixteen wardemote
Enquest, and a Beadle. It is sessed at one pound, nineteen shillings, two
pence half penny farthing in the fifteen.

Bishopsgate Ward.
Byshopsgate ward, so named of the gate, supposed to be built by a bishop of
London. Within this ward and Liberties of London, stands the Hospital of S.
Marie of Bethlem, founded by Simon Fitz-Mary, Hospital of Bethelem. New church
yard.
Sheriff of London, Anno. 1246. being an Hospital for distracted people.
Also, a goodly churchyard for burial of the dead, enclosed with a wall of
brick, performed at the charge of Sir Thomas Roe, Merchant Tailor, and Lord
Mayor of London. There is likewise a goodly house, Fishers folly
named Fishers-folly by Queen Elizabeth; Cro^by place.
and Crosbies place, so called by the builder thereof, Sir John Crosbie, Grocer
and Wool-man. Gresham College.
Also Gresham College, builded by Sir Thomas Gresham, Knight, and appointed
(by his will) to be a college of Readers (with large stipends allowed them) in
Divinity, Law, Physic, Astronomy, Geometry, and Music. In this ward is
three parish churches, viz. Saint Buttolphes without Byshops-gate, S.
Ethelburge within the Gate, S. Helens adjoining to the Nuns Prior. There was
also (sometime) the parish Clearkes Hall, Leather sellers Hall.
and now there is the Leather Sellers Hall, which they have (very lately) to
their great cost, new builded. It has an Alderman, and his two Deputies, one
without, and the other within the gate, 6. common Counselors, 7. Constables,
7. Scauengers, 13. wardmote Enquest, and a Beadle. It is taxed at 13. li. to
the Fifteen.

Broadstreet ward, took name of a street, Brodestreet ward.
called Brodestreet, wherein are diverse goodly houses, one that belonged to Sir
William Powlet, Lord Treasurer, another to the Earl of Shrewsbury, and a
third, wherein (sometime dwelt the Earl of O^enford, near to Sir Thomas
Greshams Alms houses. In this ward are six parish churches, viz. Alhallowes
by the wall, at the North-end of Brodestreet, S. Peter's the poor, at the
South-end, S. Martines Oteswitch, in Three-needle street, S. Bennet Of three
men so named, founders thereof
Fynk, Saint Bartholomew by the Exchange, and S. Christopher by the Stocks
Market. Beside the Friars Augustines, Of Fynke the founder.
which serves for the Dutch nation, and another church serving in like manner
for the French. There is also a free School called S. Anthonies school, and
two hals of societies: S Anthonies school. Drapers hal
one in Throgmorton street, called Drapers hall, which sometime belonged to the
Lord Cromwell; the other in Three-needle-streete, Merchant Taylers hal.
called Merchant Tailors Hall. This ward has an Aldermon and his deputy, 10.
common counselors, 10 Constables, 8. Scauengers, 12. wardmote Enquest, and a
Beadle. It is taxed to the fifteen in London at 27, li. and accounted in the
Exchequer after 25. li.

Corne-hill Ward

The Weyhouse.


Cornhil ward, derived the name thereof from a corn Market, which had bin
there kept time out of mind. In this ward is the Weyhouse or Kings beam, for
all Merchandises brought from beyond the seas; which house was builded by Sir
Thomas Louell, Knight, and a fair front of Tenements toward the street, which
he gave to the worshipful company of Grocers, he being a free Brother of that
society. There is also the Bursse for Merchants, The Royal Exchange.
afterward by Queen Elizabeth named the Royal Exchange, builded by S. Thomas
Gresham, knight, Agent to her Majesty, begun in an. 1566. and finished 1567. In
this ward likewise is a Grammar School, adjoining to S. Peter's church, S.
Peter's school.
which in times past, had bin a Library, and repaired by the executors of sir
John Crosby, Alderman. In Corne-hill ward are two parish churches, viz. S.
Peter's upon Cornhill, builded in the time of king Lucius, by Thean, the first
Arch-byshop of London; And S. Michaell Tharchangell, the foundation thereof
being uncertain, but William Rus, Alderman, gave a fair bell to this church,
Rus Bell in Cornehill.
naming it Rus (corruptly called Rouse) to ring out nightly at eight of the
clock. No hall of any Society is in this ward, but it has an Alderman and his
Deputy, four commrn counselors, four constables, four Scauengers, sixteen
wardmote Enquest, and a Beadle: It is charged at sixteen pound in the Fifteen.

Langborne Ward, Langborne Ward, all fenny about with a Morish ground.
bearing name of a long Bourne of sweet water, which (in elder times) breaking
forth into Fen-church street, ran along the same street, and Lombards street
also, called of the Longobards, or Lombards (Merchaunts there meeting twice a
day) to the west end of S. Mary woolnothes church, where turning southward, and
breaking into small shares, Rilles, or streams: it gave a name to Shareborn
Lane, South-borne Lane, or Shirborne Lane, running thence South into the
Thames. In this ward are seven Parish churches, viz. S. Gabriell Fenchurch,
corruptly called Fanchurch; Saint Dionis Backchurch, at Lime-street end;
Alhallowes Staning, or Stane church, or Stone church (by differing from others,
then builded of timber) at Martlane end. S. Edmond the king and martyr. in
Lombardsstreet, near Of Birchouer the first builder and owner.
Birchouers lane, now called Birchen lane. Alhallowes in Lombardes street; S.
Nicholas Acon or Hacon, in S. Nicholas lane; and S. Mary Woolnoth in
Lombardstreet. One Hal there is in this ward, Pewterers Hall.
called Pewterers Hall, in Limestreet, which society was admitted a
brotherhood, in the 13. year of Edward the 4. It has also an Alderman and his
deputy, 8. common counselors, 15. constables. 9. Scauengers, 17. wardmote
Enquest, and a Beadle: In the Exchequer, it is taxed at 20 li. 9. s. d. to the
fifteen.

Belins-gate Ward.
Belins gate, or Billingsgate ward (so named of Belin the king, first founder
of the gate or haven) wherein are many Keys and Wharfes, whereof is not now my
purpose to speak, because they are referred to my Chronicle of London at
large. In this ward are five parish churches, viz. Saint Buttolph by
Belings-gate, in Thames street, S. Marie on the Hill, the street or lane being
so called; S. Margaret Pattens (because pattens were usually there made and
sold) in Rode lane; S. Andrew Hubbert, in East cheap; and Saint George in
Buttolph-lane. It has also an Alderman and his Deputy, common councellers
uncertain, Constables eleven, Scauengers six, Wardmote Enquest fourteen, and
a Beadle. It is taxed in London to the Fifteen, at two and thirty pound, and
in the Exchequer, at one and thirty pounnd, ten shillings.

Bridgeward
Bridge-ward within, received name of the famous Bridge of London. In it are
four parish churches, viz. S. Magnus, at the Bridge-foote, Saint Margaret in
Bridge-street, S. Leonard Milk Church (so named of William Melker, an
especially builder thereof) on Fish-streete hill, and S. Benet Grasse-church,
so termed of the Hearbe-Market there kept. In this ward also, is the
Fishmongers Hall, Fishmongers Hall. Stock fishmongers. Salt fishmongers.
which Society were (sometime) two several companies, called
Stock-fishmongers, and Saltfishmongers: and they had six several Halles,
because their company was so great. It has an Alderman and his deputy,
sixteen common counselors, fifteen constables, Scauengers six, sixteen
wardmote Enquest, and a Beadle. It is taxed at 47. pound to the Fifteen.

Candlewick-street Ward, Candlewick street ward.
or Candle-wright street Ward, so called (as is likeliest) of Chandlers or
makers of candles, both of wax and Tallow, Weauers of Drapery, Tapery, and
Napery.
who seemed (for the more part) there to inhabit. Albeit it is very evident,
that Weauers of Drapery, Taperie, and Naperie, did altogether dwell there, time
out of mind; till they were out-worne, and their place possessed by the
Drapers.

In this Ward are five Parish churches, (viz.) Saint Clements in East-cheape,
Saint Mary Abchurch, or Vpchurch, Saint Michaell in Crookedlane, which was
sometime called the college in Crooked-lane, Saint Martine Orgar, and Saint
Lawrence Poultney, so called by John Poultney, Mayor of London, who made it a
college of Jesus, and of Corpus Christi, for a Master and seven Chaplaynes.
This Ward has an Alderman and his Deputy, eight common counselors, eight
constables, six Scauengers, twelve Wardemote Enquest, and a Beadle. It is taxed
at sixteen pound to the fifteen.

Walbrooke Ward, Walbrooke Ward.
takes Name of the street, where under was (sometime) a brook, named Wallus
Brook, as has already been elsewhere declared. In which Ward are five
Parish churches, viz. S. Swithen by Londonstone, S. Mary Woolchurch, so called
of a beam to weigh wool, Wooll-Church Haw or Beam.
and was called Wooll-Church Haw; Saint Stephen by Walbrooke; Saint John upon
Walbrooke; and Saint Mary Buthaw, or Boathaw, so called, of near adjoining to
a Yard or Haw, where Boats (in elder times) were made, and landed (from
Downegate) there to be mended. It has an Alderman and his Deputy; 11. common
Councellers; 9. Constables; 6. Scauengers; 13. Wardmote Enquest, and a Beadle.
It is taxed in London at 33. pounds to the fifteen.

Downegate Ward.
Downgate ward, so called, upon the down descending to the Thames. In this ward
is the Guilda Aula, Guilda Aula Teutonicorum.
or Halla Teutonicoru^, for the Merchants of the Haunce, or of Allemaigne,
commonly called the Stilyard, where they had their Garners to lay up their
Corn, and other commodities; as Cables, Ropes, Masts, Pitch, Tar, Flax,
Hemp, Linen Cloth, Wainscots, Wax, Steel, etc. There is also a House,
anciently called Cold-Harbrough, Cold Harbrough.
which (after diverse passages from Man to Man) in the eight year of King
Edward the third, came to Sir John Poultney, who having been Mayor four times
in that house, it then took the name of Poultneys Inn. More, there is a
famous Grammar-Schoole, founded in the year 1561. by the M. Wardens and
assistants of the Merchant-Taylors, in the Parish of Saint Laurance Poultney.
Merchaunt Tailors school, the Manor of the Rose.
Richard Hills, sometime Master of that worthy Society, had given formerly
five hundred pounds toward the purchase of an house, called The Manor of
the Rose, belonging some-time to the Duke of Buckingham, wherein the said
School is kept. In this Ward are two Parish-Churches (Viz:) Alhallowes ad
foenum, in the Ropery, (because Hay was there sold at Hay-wharffe, and Ropes in
the High-streete) or Alhallowes the more; and Alhallowes on the Cellers
(because it stands on Vaults) or Alhallowes the less. There are likewise
four several Hals of Companies, as, Skinners hall.

Tallow-Chandlers Hall.

Ioyners hall Dyers Hall.


upon Walbrooke, the Skinners Hall, belonging to that Worshipful Company; and
Tallow-Chandlers Hall; Ioyners Hall in Greenewich-lane, now called Fryer-lane;
and Dyers Hall in Thames-streete. This Ward has an Alderman and his Deputy;
9. common Councellers; 8. Constables; 5. Scauengers; 14. Wardemote Enquest, and
a Beadle. It is taxed at 28. pounds to the fifteen. Here we end the thirteen
Wards, that are all on the East side of the water course of Walbrooke, not any
one house lying on the West Side.

Wards on the West Side of Walbrooke.
VIntry Ward, Vintry ward.
of Vintoners (cled in old time Merchants Vintoners) and the Vintry, for the
Merchantes of Bordeaux there craned up their Wines, out of Lighters and other
Vessels, and being there landed, made Sale of them within forty days after,
etc. There are in this Ward, four Parish Churches (viz.) Saint Michaell Pater
Noster in the Royal, which Church was new builded and made a College of Saint
Spirit, Whittingtons College.
and Saint Marie, founded by Richard Whittington, Mercer, four times Mayor;
for a Master, four fellows Masters of Art; Clearkes, Conducts, Chorists,
etc. And an Almes-house called Gods-house, or Hospital, for thirteen poor
Men, etc. Saint Thomas Apostle, by Wringwren-lane; Saint Martine in the
Vinttie, sometime called Saint Martine de Beremand Church; and Saint James at
Garlicke-Hithe, because Garlic was sold usually there, on the bancke of the
River of Thames. Richard Plat, Brewer, founded a Free-schoole there, Parish
Clerks hall.
1601. In Broad lane is ye Parish Clearks Hall purchased by them, after loss
of their Hall in Byshopsgatestreet. Vintoners Hall, near the Lane called
Stodies Lane, Vintners hall. Plummers Hall. Fruiterers Hall. Cutlers hall
Glasiers hal
given them by Sir John Stodie, Vintoner, Mayor, in Anno 1357. Plummers Hall in
Palmers Lane, now called Anchor-lane. Fruiterers Hall, in Worcester house,
sometimes belonging to the Earls of Worcester. Cutlers Hall, in
Horsebridgestreet. Glasiers Hall in Kerion Lane: All which Halls are in the
said Ward. It has also an Alderman and his Deputy; nine Common Councellers;
nine Constables; four Scauengers; fourteen Wardmote Enquest, and a Beadle:
It is taxed at six pounds, thirteen Shillings, four pence, to the fifteen.

Cordwainer street ward.
Cordwainer-streete-ward, taking name of Cordwainers, or Shoe-makers, Curriers,
and Workers of Leather, there dwelling. In this Ward are three Parish-churches,
viz. Saint Anthonies in Budge-Rowe, corruptly called Saint Antlings; Alde Mary
Church; and new Marie Church, or Mary le Bow of Saint Marie de Arcubus, in
West-Cheaping, being builded (in the Conquerours time) upon Arches: Nine a
clock Bell is nightly rung.
In which Church is kept the Court of the Arches, which here takes name of the
place, and not of the Court. This Ward has an Alderman and his Deputy; common
Councellers eight, Constables, 8. Scauengers eight, Wardmote Enquest
fourteen, and a Beadle. It is taxed in London to the fifteen, at 52. li. 16.
s. And in the Exchequer at 52. li. 6. s.

Cheape-Ward, Cheap ward
taking name of the Market there kept, called West-cheaping, has in it seven
Parish Churches, viz. Saint Benet Shrog, or Shorehog, but the most ancient name
is Benet Shorn, of Benedict Shorn, some-time a Citizen and
Stocke-Fish-Monger, a new builder, repayrer, and Benefactor thereof. S.
Pancrace by Sopars-lane; Saint Mildred in the Poultry; Saint Marie Cole-church,
of one Cole that builded it; Saint Martin Pomerie, in Ironmong-lane, so called
of Apples some-time there growing; Alhallowes in Honny-Lane; Saint Laurance in
the Jury, and the Chapel of Guild Hall, sometime a College. Guilde Hall
built, Anno 1411.
Guild Hall it self also is in this Ward, begun to be new builded in Anno
1411. the twelfth of Henry the fourth, by Thomas Knoles then Mayor, and the
Aldermen his brethren to the charge whereof the companies gave large
beneuolences: it was made (of a little cottage:) so large and goodly as now it
stands, to have the Courts for the City kept therein, being nine in number.

The Courts kept in Guild.
Courts for the City.
1. Court of Common Council. 2. Court of the Lord Mayor, and the Aldermen his
Brethren. 3. The Court of Hustings. 4. The Court of Orphans. 5. The Sheriffs
two Courts. 6. The Court of the Wardmote. 7. The Court of Hall-mote. 8. The
Court of Requests, commonly called the Court of Conscience. 9. The
Chamberlaines Court for Prentises, and making them free.
Moreover, in this Ward, are the Hals of two very worshipful Companies;
Grocers hal
the Grocers Hall in Conyhope lane, which Company being first called
Pepperers, were incorporated by the name of Grocers, Mercers Chapel and Hall.
in Anno 1345. The Mercers Hall, sometime an Hospital, entitled of Saint
Thomas of Acon, or Acars, wherein is said a Free-Schoole to have been long
kept. This Ward has an Alderman and his Deputy, 11. common Councellers; 9.
Scauengers; 12. Wardmote Enquest, and a Beadle. In London it is sessed at 72,
li. 16, s. to the fifteen, and in the Exchequer, at 72. li. 11. s.

Colemanstreete-ward, Coleman street ward.
taking name of a street so called, by one Coleman, the first builder and owner
thereof, wherein are three Parish Churches, viz. Saint Olaue Vpwell in the old
Iewry, called Colechurch-streete sometimes; Saint Margaret in Lothbury: and
Saint Stephen in Colemanstreere. It was named the Old Iewry, because the Jews
had a Sinagogue, where now stands the Tavern, known by the name of the
Windmill, Founders hall.
and their dwelling was all there-about. The Founders Hall in Lothbury;
Lathbery, or Loadberie, so named of a Bery or Court in elder time there kept;
whereof some use has bin, and is also made by the Merchants Adventures: and in
Coleman street is the Armorers Hall, Armorers Hall.
who were made a Fraternity or Guild of S. George, in the first year of King
Henry the sixth. This Ward has an Alder-man and his Deputy; common Counselors
four, Constables four, Scauengers four, wardmote Enquest thirteen, and a
Beadle. It is taxed at fifteen pounds, sixeteen shillings nine pence to the
fifteen.

Bassings Hall Ward, Bassings Hal ward.
and said to be so named of Bassinges Hall, the very principal House of the
Ward, which appertained to the Family of the Bassings (a name of great renown
and antiquity in this Realm) who builded the goodly building (afterward
called Bakewell Hall, of one Thomas Bakewel dwelling there, corruptly termed
Blackwell Hall) and gave it the Name of Bassings Haugh, Bassinges Haugh.
or Hall, as by their Arms, (before the old work was taken down) in very
many places appeared. In this Ward is but one Parish Church, called Saint
Michaell at Bassings Haugh: and diverse Halles of Companies, Masons hall Weauers
hall.
as Masons Hall, of what antiquity, appears not. Weauers Hall, being then
Weauers of Woollen-cloath, whose Fraternity or Guilde is of great antiquity and
power, confirmed by Charter from King Henry the second, as they held it in
time of his Grandfather, Weauers of Woollen Clothes.
King Henry the first, or rather (as the very words are) freeer, better,
worshipfullier, and wholier, then in his said Grandfathers time.

Other ordinances were there then beside, that Woollen-cloathes should be in
breadth two yardes within the Listes, and as good in the midst, as in the
sides, etc. But if any Man made Cloth of Spanish Wool, mixed with English
Wool; the Port-graue, or principal Magistrate of London ought to burn it,
etc. There is also Girdlers Hall, Girdlers hal Coopers Hall.
and Coopers have their Hall near to the Parish Church of Saint Michaell. This
Ward has an Alderman and his Deputy, four Common Councellers; two Constables;
two Scauengers; 17. Wardmote Enquest, and a a Beadle. In London it is taxed at
7. li. and so in the Exchequer likewise, to the fifteen.

Cripples gate Ward.
Cripples-gate ward, so named of the gate, called Cripples-gate, wherein are 6.
parish churthes, viz. S. Mary Aldermanbury, of a Bery or courthal there kept,
now called the Guildhal, s. Alphage (sometime Elfing Hospital or spittle) by
London w^l, s. Mary Magdalen in Milkstreet, s. Albons in woodstreet, s. Michael
in Huggenlane, Haberdashers hall. Waxchandlers hall. Plaisterers hall. Brewers
hal. Pinners hal. Bowyers hal
and s. Giles without Cripplesgate. Halles of companies, are Habberdashers
Hall, in Maiden lane, and Waxchandlers Hall there also. Pinners hal sometime,
but now Plaisterers Hall, in Adle street: and Pinners Hal is now in
Siluerstreet. Brewers Hall likewise in Adlestreete, and Bowyers Hall not far
from Monkswel-street. This ward has an Alderman and his Deputy within the
Gate, eight common counselors, nine constables, twelve scauengers, fifteen
wardmote Enquest, and a beadle. Without the Gate also, it has a Deputy, two
common counselors, four constables, four Scauengers, seauenteen wardmote
Enquest, and a Beadle: It is taxed in London at forty pound to the Fif-teene.

Aldersgate ward, Aldersgate Ward
taking name likewise of Aldersgate, has six Parish churches in it ( viz.)
saint Marie Staining, in Stayning lane, s. John Zachary, in Engaine or
Maidenlane, s. Leonard in Fauster-lane, saint Olaue in Siluerstreet, saint Anne
by Aldersgate, and saint Buttolph without Aldersgate. Hals of companies, first,
Goldsmiths Hall.
Goldsmiths Hall at Maydenlane end, they being an ancient and very worshipful
society; for the first Mayor that ever was in London, was a brother of that
society, named Henry Fitz-Alwin, Fitz-Liesstane, who continued Mayor more then
24. years together. Cooks hall.
The Cooks or Pastelers have a Hall also in Aldersgatestreet, and they were
admitted to be a company, and to have a Master and wardens, in the 22. year
of Edward the fourth. This ward has an Alderman and his two Deputies; one
within, the other without, common counselors five, Constables, 8. Scauengers,
9. wardmote Enquest, fourteen, and a Beadle. In London it is taxed at seven
pound to the fifteen, and in Exchequer at six pound, nineteen shillings.

Faringdon ward within
Faringdon ward within, or Infra, distinguished (by that word of difference)
from the other ward of the same name, which is without the city walls, and
thereon fearmed Faringdon extra, or without. Yet (in elder times) these two
wards were but one, and under the care of one alderman, until the 17. year
of king Richard the second; when, the greatness thereof caused it to be
divided into two wards, being then ordered (by parliament) to have two
aldermen also as to this day it continues. This whole great ward of Faringdon
both within and without, How Faringdon ward took name.
derived her name of W. Faringdon, or Farendon, Goldsmith, alderman of that
ward, and one of the sheriffs of London, in anno 1281. the ninth year of
King Edward the first, when he purchased the aldermanry of this ward, as is
evident to be seen, by an abstract of deeds, from Thomas de Ardene, or
Arderna, to Ankerinus de Auern, Ralphe le Feure, and so to William Farringdon,
or Farendon, citizen and Goldsmith, and to his heirs, so coming to Nicholas
Faringdon, son to the said William, which Nicholas was a goldsmith also, and 4.
times Mayor: living 53. years after his first being Mayor, and he builded the
Arch or gate by S. Augustines Church, which gives passage into the South
Churchyard of S. Paul's.

In this ward of Faringdon within, 1361.
is the goodly Cathedral Church of S. Paul, and 9. other parish Churches
beside, viz. s. Peter at the cross in West cheap, Saint Fauster in
Fauster-lane; The free school in Paul's Churchyard, founded by John Collet,
Doctor in Divinity and Deane of Paul's.
Christ Church, made a Parish church of the Gray-Friers Church, and of two
Parish churches, S. Nicholas, and saint Ewin, and also an Hospital for poor
children, saint Matthew in Friday street, S. Augustine by Paul's gate, Saint
Faith under Paul's Church, S. Martins at Ludgate, Saint Anne at the
Blackfriars, S. Michael ad Bladum, or at Corn (corruptly called the Querne)
by Paul's gate, where sometime was a Corn market kept, and the chapel of s.
James by Cripplesgate. Hals of Societies, Imbroyderers hall. Barbar chirurgions
hall. Sadlers hall. Butchers and Felt makers hall.
Imbroiderers Hall in Guthurus. Barbar Chirurgions hal in Monkes-well-street,
Sadlers hall in Cheap, Butchers Hall in Chick-lane in the Shambles, which
serves also for ye Feltmakers. This ward has an Alderman and his Deputy,
twelve Common Counselors, seauenteene Constables, eighteen Scauengers,
eyghteen wardmote Enquest, and a Beadle, It is taxed at 50. pound to the
Fifteen.

Bread-streete Ward, Bread-street Ward.
so called of bread there sold (in elder time) in that street, which gives
name to the whole Ward, and has four Parish Churches in it. viz. Alhallowes
in Bread-streete, saint Mildreds in Bread-streete, saint John Evangelist in
Friday-streete, and s. Margaret Moses in Friday-streete. Hals of companies,
Salters hall. Cordwa^ners hall.
are the Salters Hall in Bread-streete, and Corwainers or Shoo-makers Hall, in
Maidenlane, or Distar lane. This ward has an Alderman, and his Deputy; ten
common Counselors, ten Constables, eight Scauengers thirteen Wardemote
Enquest, and a Beadle. In London it is taxed at thirty seven pound to the
fifteen, and in the Exchequer at 36. pound, 18. shillings, two pence.

Queens Hith ward.
Queene-Hith Ward, so called of the Queens Hith or water Gate, whereof we have
already spoken. In which ward are seven Parish churches, Viz. saint Trinity
in Trinity lane, saint Nicholas Cold-abbey, at Knight-riders street, saint
Nicholas Olaue on Bredstreet hill, saint Mary de Monte Alto, or Mounthaunt, by
Old Fishstreet hill, or Five foot lane, saint Machael at the Queens Hith, saint
Mary Summerset near Broken wharfe, and saint Peter, called Parua, Painters hal.
by Paul's wharfe. Hals of companies are these, Painter Stayners Hall in
Trinity Lane, Blacksmiths Hall on Lambert hill. Blacksmiths hall.
This ward has an Alderman and his Deputy, six common Counselors, nine
constables, eight Scauengers, thirteen Warde-mote Enquest, and a beadle. In
London it is taxed at twenty pound to the fifteen, and in the Exchequer at 19.
pound 16. shillings, two pence.

Castle Baynard ward, Castle Baynard ward.
so named of an ancient castle there standing, belonging sometime to one
Baynard, a Nobleman, that came into this Land with the conqueror, and first
builded it. In this ward are four parish churches, viz. saint Benet Hude, or
Hithe, by Paul's Wharfe, saint Andrew by the Wardrobe, saint Mary Magdalen in
Old-fishstreete, and saint Gregory by Paul's church. Halles of companies, are
these, Wood-mongers Hall, Woodmongees hall. Stationers Hall.
on the East Side of Paul's wharfe Hill, and the Stationers Hall, near the
west end of Paul's: but converted to a Tavern since then, and the Hall was
also in Milkestreet, for a while, but afterward translated again into Amen
lane, at the end of Pater noster row, to a goodly ancient house in oldetime,
belonging to John Duke of Britain, and Earl of Richmond. Afterward called
Pembrokes Inn, as appertaining to the Earls of Pembroke, in the time of
Richard the second, the eighteenth year, and Henry the sixth the fourteenth
year. But it lately belonged to Henry Lord of Aburgaueny, and was called
Aburgauenie house. This ward has an Alderman and his Deputy, common
counselors, 9. constables, 10. Scauengers, 7. wardmote Enquest, 14. and a
Beadle: In London it is taxed at twelve pound to the fifteen, and in the
Exchequer at 11. li. 13. s.

There remain, yet two more, Faringdon ward without, Faringdon ward and
Bride-ward both without.
and Bridgeward without, or the Borough of the South-warke, and the round
inuironing Suburbs without the walls, the Duchy of Lancaster, and City of
Westminster; All which being not comprised within this instant determination,
crave favor for reference to our Chronicle of London, wherein, whatsoever is
wanting here, and this slender pile would not permit (stretching already
beyond expectation) shall (by Gods assistance) be more fully, effectually, and
largely performed, then (as yet) Master John Stow his Survey, or any other
work (that I have seen) has so amply delivered, especially concerning this
honorable City, and the County of Middlesex, so far as the cities bounds and
privileges do grant admittance. Let me not be rashly censured in these
gayseeming words, to cast any disgrace or il aspersion, on the painful labors
of that worthy and industrious man Master John Stow (whom living, I loved as a
dear and intimate friend, and dead, I honor with all kind remembrance) for
such as have had knowledge of our inward respect of each other, and what has
past between us (concerning this business for the City) I know will no way
mis-conceite of me: they are too wise and virtuous, to swerue in a known
truth, and more sound and solid, then malice can have any power to seduce:
whatsoever then is referred to our further intention, as it has bin a labor
willingly undertaken by me (albeit both beseeming and requiring a much better
Judgment) So, by his help, who is both the hope and help of all Virtuous
endeauours, it shall be effected with all possible diligence.

Of the Temporal Government of this Honorable City, since the Conquest.
To the worshipful M. Rowland Smart, Esquire, Sword Bearer of London.
PAssing over those Tempestuous times of the old Britons, Romans, Saxons, and
Danes, Ethelred Earl of Mercia
till Ethelred or Alfred, Earl of Mercia, who had the custody of this city in
his power: he no sooner dyed, but both it, and all other possessions belonging
to the said Earl, returned to King Edward (surnamed the Elder and) c.
Remaining thus in obedience to him, he then ordaining Portgraues, to have the
government thereof under him: which name, Portgraue, or Portreue, is
compounded of two Saxon words, Port and Gerefe, or Reave: Portgraue or Portreue
Port signifyeng a Town or City, and Gerefe or Reave, a Guardian or Ruler of
the said town or city. Before the conquest, in the days of k. Edw. the
Confessor, one Wolfegare was Portgraue, as appears by the kings charter to
him, thus: Edward K. greeteth Alfward bishop, Wolfegare my Portgraue, Wolfegar
Portgraue.
and all the Burgesses in London, etc. These Portgraues continued in William the
conquerors time, William Rufus, and Henry the first, when Hugh Buche was
Portgraue, and Leofstanus, Goldsmiths, Provost, Provost.
which name of Provost then began: for Aubery de Vere was (afterward)
Portgraue, and Robert Bar-Querel, Robert Bar-Querel provost.
Provost. Then (by the same King) was the sheriuewick of London and Middlesex
granted to the Citizens of London. In the reign of King Stephen, Gilbert
Becket was Portgraue, and Andrew Bucheuet Provost: and Godfrey Magnauilla, or
Mandeuil (by gift of Maude the Empress) was Portgraue or sheriff of London
and Middlesex, Portgraue and Sheriff of London and Middlesex.
for the yearly farm of three hundred pound, as appears by the Charter. In
the time of k. Henry the second, those Portgraues were likewise (in diverse
records) called Vicecomites, Vicounties or sheriffs, as being under an Earl,
and then (as since) used that Office, as the sheriffs of London now do.
Albeit some Authors term them Domesmen, Elder-men, or Judges of the Kings
court. Here then, it shall not seem impertinent, once more to remember the
words of William Fitz-stephen, saying. Even as Rome is divided into Wards,
William Fitz Stephen his words.
so is this City. It has yearly Sheriffs, insted of Consuls. It has the
dignity of Senators, in Aldermen; It has under Officers, and (according to the
quality of Laws) so has it several Courts, and general assemblies, upon
appointed days.

At parting with the name of Portgraues and Prouosts, Bayliffes of London.
in the first year of K. Richard 1. the citizens obtained to be governed by
2. Baliffes, who (in ancient deeds) were called Sheriffs, as the Law
terms the Shire Balliua, using the same office of Shriuewick, as the
Portgraues before did. The names of the first Bayliffes or Officers, entering
into their dignity at the Feast of Saint Michaell the Arch-angell, Anno 1189
were Henry Cornehill, and Richard Reynere. The first Bayliffes of London.
King Richard also (at that very time) appointed a supreme Officer above the
rest, by the name of Mayor, which word was borrowed from the Haebrew word Mar,
and signifies Dominus, Lord; a word used by the Franconians and old Saxons,
their Neighbors (of whom Englishmen have their Original) but called Maire,
as the French did their Maires of the Palace. Thus was the chief Governor
called Lord Maire, Beginning of the Mayralty.
or Mayor, because they understood not, that the epethite Maire, or Mayor,
employed no less then lord, without any other additions, yet thus was it the^
given, for a larger augmentation of Honor.

Now, as the Goldsmiths yielded London a Provost before (named Leofstanus) even
so the same Company (albeit not as yet rancked into a List of Brotherhood)
gave London likewise, the first Lord Maire or Mayor in Dignity, The first L.
Maire of London.
whose name was Henry Fitz-Alwin, Fitz-Liefstane, and being so appointed by the
King; he continued in that supreme Office, from the first year of King
Richard the first, until the fifteenth of K. John, which was more then twenty
four years. Henry Cornehill and Richard Reynere (being first chosen
Bayliffes) served then as Sheriffs, (by all likelihood) to the said Henry
Fitz-Alwin, The time of the L. Mairs election.
Fitz-Leifstane, Maire* whereby very well may be observed, the progress and
continuance of those several elections and choyces (even to this day) the
Sheriffs being first appointed, and then the Lord Maire after chosen, and at
the Feast of Saint Michaell the Arch-aungell, at the first, (by King Richard)
it was ordained. King John in like manner, after this high Dignity (begun by
his Brother) granted them free liberty by Charter, Choice of Lord Maire by
voices and hands. Choice of Sheriffs.
to choose by (voices and hands) yearly, out of the twelve chiefest and
principal Companies, their Praetor or Maire: Also two Sheriffs, whereof the
one should be called the Kings Sheriff, and the other the Cities Sheriff,
which (in that form) has continued even to this instant. Nay more, he
granted them full power and authority, not only to choose their Sheriffs at
their own pleasure, but also (upon just occasion, either of contempt, mutiny,
disobedience, or other offenses) to degrade and deprive them. Forest of
Middlesex and warren of Stanes.
The Forest of Middlesex, and the Warren of Stanes, being laid open in An.
1218. the King afterward, in the year 1226. confirmed to the Citizens of
London, free warrant and liberty, to hunt a limited circuit about the City,
and in the Warren of Stanes. Also, that the Citizens of London should pass
Toule-free, thorough al England: Toule free thorough al England granted to
London.
and the Kedeles or weres in the River of Thames or Midway, to be plucked up and
destroyed for ever. When the Franchises and liberties were thus confirmed by
King John, he granted moreover, that either Sheriff should have two Clarks,
and two Sergeants; also, Common seal of the City.
that the City should have a common Seal, and that the Mayor should be
presented to the Barons of the Exchequer, and they then to admit him, as lawful
Lieutenant and Deputy (under the king) to govern the City.

Having thus briefly discoursed, how the dignity of honor began in this famous
City, both in the style of Lord Mayor and Sheriffs; as briefly will we also
part their progress and succession, from that first worthy man Henry
Fitz-Alwin, Fitz-Liefstane, Goldsmiths, to the as worthy Man, Sir William
Crauon, now governing, this present year, 1611.

Henry Fitz-Alwin, Fitz-Liefstane, 1189
Goldesmith, beginning to take that high office on him, in the first year of
King Richard the first (who was also for his valor and courage Surnamed Cueur
de Lion) continued still in the same Dignity, for more then twenty four years,
and then deceassing, in the 15. year of King John, he was buried in the Priory
of the holy Trinity, near unto Aldgate.

In the said 15. year of King John (either to serve out the remainder of that
year, 1213.
or to go on in a new election,) Roger Fitz-Alwain was chosen Lord Maire: but I
neither find his freedom, or his death, albeit he continued (as it seems) in
Office but one year; the like did Serle Mercer, and William Hardell, in the
years 1214. and 1215. And then began the reign of King Henry the third, Son
to King John, the 19. of October, 1216.

1216
James Alderman, and Solomon Blasing, Lord Majors, served out this year (by
several parts) each after other.

1217.
Serle Mercer, was again chosen Lord Mayor, and continued in the Dignity six
years together.

1223
Richard Renger, being chosen Lord Mayor, continued so the space of four
years.

1227
Roger Duke, or Duck, was Lord Mayor of London four years.

1231
Andrew Bokerell, Pepperer, was Lord Mayor of London seven years together.

1238
Richard Renger, Lord Mayor again one year.

1239
William Ioyner, Lord Mayor one year, who builded the Quier of the Gray-Fryers
Church in London, and afterward became a lay brother of that house.

1240
Gerard Bat, Lord Mayor one year: and being elected again for the ensuing
year, the King would not suffer it, because he had been charged (in the
former year) with taking Money of the Victuallers, and could show no reason
for it.

1241
Reginald Bongey, was Lord Mayor two years.

1243.
Raphe Ashwy, Lord Mayor one year.

1244
Michaell Tony, Lord Mayor one year.

1245
John Gisors, Pepperer, Lord Mayor two years.

1247
Peter Fitz-Alwin, Lord Mayor one year.

Michaell Tonny, Lord Mayor again one year. 1248


Roger Fitz-Roger, Lord Mayor one year. 1249


John Norman, Lord Mayor one year* 1250


Adam Basing, Lord Mayor one year. 1251


John Tolason, Draper, Lord Mayor one year. 1252


Richard Hardell, Draper, 1253
was Lord Mayor six years together.

John Gisors, Pepperer, 1259
again Lord Mayor one year.

William Fitz-Richard, 1260
was Lord Mayor two years.

Thomas Fitz-Richard, 1262
was Lord Mayor four years together.

Will Richards, again Lord Mayor one year. 1266


Allen le Zouch, Lord Mayor one year: 1267
and being a Baron of the Land, and chief Justice also, he was slain in
Westminster Hall, by John Warren, Earl of Surry, in An. 1270.

Sir Stephen Edwards, Lord Mayor one year. 1268


Sir Hugh Fitz-Othon, 1269
was made Custos of London, and Constable of the Tower, by reason of a great
quarrel happening between the Goldsmiths and the Tailors: so that the King
gave the keeping of the City to his Son Prince Edward* who made the said Sir
Hugh Fitz-Othon Custos of the City, A Custos appointed over the City of
London.
and Constable of the Tower, as his Deputy. But Prince Edward quickly obtained
of the King his Father, to have the Cities ancient liberties confirmed by
Charter again, and so they proceeded on to their wonted election of a lord
Mayor and Sheriffs, as before, and Sir Hugh Fitz Othon was discharged of his
office.

1270
John Adrian, Vintoner, was Lord Mayor of London two years.

1272.
Sir Walter Haruey, Lord Mayor, and H. Frowike, Pepperer, likewise for part of
that year: wherein began the reign of King Edward the first, the 16. of
November, 1272.

1273.
Sir Walter Haruey, Lord Mayor again for one year.

1274
Henry Walleis, Lord Mayor for one year.

1275
Gregory Roksley, Golde-Smith, chief Say Master of all the Kings Mints
thorough England, and keeper of the Kings Exchange at London; was Lord Mayor
se^uen years together.

1282
Henry Walleis, who builded the Tonne upon Cornhill, to be a Prison, and the
Stocks to be a Market-house, was Lord Mayor again three years together.

1285
Gregory Roksley being chosen Lord Mayor again, King Edward was informed, that
the said Gregory Roksley took bribes of the Bakers, and suffered them to sell
bread, that wanted six or seven ounces of weight in a Pennie-loafe, yet Wheat
was then sold at London for 12. and 16 pence the quarter. Upon which
information, the K. seized the Franchises and liberties into his own hands,
appointing first one John Sandwich, to be Custos thereof for one part of the
year, and Sir John Breton, London again in the charge or rule of a Custos.
Knight, for the other part. Thus did the City of London continue under the
government of several Men, bearing the names of Custos, till King Edward the
second began his reign, which was the seventh day of July, 1307.

Sir John Blunt, Knight, 1307
having been Custos of the City, for the space of six years before, was
now in the first year of King Edward the second, Lord Mayor for one year.

Nicholas Faringdon, or Farendon, 1308
Golde-smith, of whom the Ward of Faringdon (both within, and without) took
name, was L. Mayor for one year.

Thomas Roman, Lord Mayor one year. 1309


Richard Reffam, Mercer, Mayor one year. 1310


Sir John Gisors, Pepperer, 1311
Lord Mayor two years.

Nicholas Faringdon, Goldsmiths, 1313
again Lord Mayor one year.

Sir John Gisors, Pepperer, 1314
again L. Mayor one year.

Stephen Abendon, Lord Mayor one year. 1315


John Wingraue, Lord Mayor three years. 1316
In his time happened such cheapnesse of Corn, that a Bushel of Wheat (which
had been sold formerly for ten shillings) was then sold for ten pence.

Hamond Chickwell, Pepperer, 1319
Lord Mayor one year.

Nicholas Faringdon, 1320
again Lord Mayor one years.

Hamond Chickwell, Pepperer, 1321
again Lord Mayor two year.

Nicholas Faringdon, Goldsmiths, 1323
again L. Mayor one year.

1324
Hamond Chickwell, Pepperer, again Lord Mayor two years.

1326
Richard Britain, Goldsmiths, Lord Mayor one year. In whose time King Edward
the third began his reign, the 25 day of January, 1326. who granted the Lord
Mayor to be Justice for the Jail delivery at Newgate; The Lord Mayor Justice
for Jail delivery at New gate.
and the Citizens of London not to go (by any constraint) to any War out of
the City of London. Beside, that the Franchises and liberties of the City,
should not thence-forward (for any cause) be seized into the Kings hands:
Nor any Eschetor to be in the City, but the Lord Mayor for the time being.

1327
Hamond Chickwell, Pepperer, again Lord Mayor one year.

1328
John Grantham, Lord Mayor one year.

1329
Richard Swandland, Lord Mayor one year: In whose time the King kept a great
Iusting in Cheap, between Sopa^s-lane and the great Cross.

1330
Sir John Poultney, Draper, Lord Mayor two years.

1332
John Preston, Draper, Lord Mayor one year.

1333
Sir John Poultney, Draper, again L. Mayor one year.

1334
Reginald at the Conduit, Vintoner, L. Mayor one year.

1335
Nicholas Wotten, Lord Mayor one year.

1336
Sir John Poultney, Draper, again Lord Mayor one year. He founded a College in
the parish Church of Saint Laurance Poultney, by Candlewick-streete.

Henry Darcy, Lord Mayor two years: 1337
In whose time the Sergeants to the Lord Mayor, The first Maces to Sergeants
granted.
and Sheriffs of London, were granted by the King, to beat Maces of Silver
and Guilt, with the Kings arms on them.

Andrew Aubery* Grocer, L. Mayor two years. 1339


John of Oxenford, Vintoner, 1341
Lord Mayor one year.

Simon Francis, Mercer, L. Mayor one year. 1342


John Hamond, Lord Mayor two years. 1343


Richard Leget, Lord Mayor one year. 1345


Geffrey Witchingham, L. Mayor one year. 1346


Tho. Leggy, Skinner, Lord Mayor one year. 1347


John Louekin, Fish-Monger, 1348
Lord Mayor one year.

Walter Turk, Fish-Monger, 1349
Lord Mayor one year.

Richard Killingbury, Lord Mayor one year. 1350


Andrew Aubery, Grocer, 1351
again Lord Mayor one year.

Simon Francis, Mercer, 1352
who (with Henry Frowike) founded the College in Guild Hall Chapel, and was
again Lord Mayor two years.

Thomas Leggy, Skinner, 1354
again Lord Mayor one year.

Simon Francis, Mercer, 1355
again Lord Mayor one year.

Henry Prichard, or Piccard, Vintoner, 1356
who (in one day) feasted the kings of England, France, Four kings feasted at
the L. Majors house in one day.
Scots, and Cypres, at his own house, and was L. Mayor one year.

1357
John Stody, Vintoner, Lord Mayor one year.

1358
John Louekin, Fish-Monger, again Lord Mayor one year.

1359
Simon Dolesby, Grocer, Lord Mayor one year.

1360
John Wroth, Fish-Monger, Lord Mayor one year.

1361
John Peche, Fish-Monger, Lord Mayor one year.

1362
Stephen Gondish, Draper, Lord Mayor one year.

1362
John Not, Grocer, Lord Mayor one year.

1364
Adam of Bury, Skinner, Lord Mayor one year.

1365
John Louekin, Fish-Monger, again Lord Mayor, and Adam of Bury one year.

1366
John Louekin, Fish-Monger, again Lord Mayor one year. This John Louekin
builded Saint Michaels Church in crooked-lane.

1367
James Andrew, Draper, Lord Mayor one year.

1368
Simon Mordon, Fish-monger, Lord Mayor one year.

1369
John Chichester, Goldsmiths, Lord Mayor one year.

1370
John Barnes, Mercer, Lord Mayor two years.

1372
John Piell, Mercer, Lord Mayor one year.

1373
Adam of Bury, Skinner, again Lord Mayor one year.

William Walworth, Fish-Monger, 1374
Lord Mayor one year.

John Ward, Grocer, 1375
Lord Mayor one year.

Adam Staple, Mercer, Lord Mayor one year. 1376
His time no sooner expired, but therewith ended the life of King Edward the
third, and on the 21. of June 1377. began the reign of King Richard the second.

Sir Nicholas Brember, Grocer, 1377
Lord Mayor one year.

John Philpot, Grocer, Lord Mayor one year. 1378


John Hadley, Grocer, Lord Mayor one year. 1379


Will. Walworth, Fish-Monger, 1380
again Lord Mayor. In this year of his Mairalty happened the tumultuous
rebellion of Jack Straw, Wat Tiler, Jack Carter, Jack Truman, etc. with the
commons of Kent, Essex, and other places: But William Walworth, being then Lord
Mayor, The Lord Mayor killed Jack Straw the Rebel.
arrested the Traitor Jack Straw so stoutly with his Weapon on the head (even
as he saucily took the Kings Horse by the bridle in Smithfielde) that,
thrusting him afterward through the throat; the whole crewe were dishartened,
and seeing their Captain slain, betook themselves to flight. For which
worthy act, the King immediately knighted the Lord Mayor William Walworth, and
with him Ralphe Standish, John Philpot, Nicholas Brember, John Launde, and
Nicholas Twifield, Burgesses of the City, The dagger added to the Cities
Arms.
adding the Dagger into the Cities Arms, which till that day was a red Cross
in a Silver field only.

1381
John Northampton, Draper, Lord Mayor two years.

1383
Sir Nicholas Brember, Grocer, knighted with Sir William Walworth, Lord Mayor
three years together.

1387
Nicholas Exton, fishmon. lord mayor 1. year

1388
Nicholas T^^ifield, or T^ylorde, knighted with Sir William Walworth, Lord
Mayor one year.

1389
William V^na^r, Grocer, Lord Mayor, one year.

1^90
Adam B^mme, Goldsmith (who provided the City of such plenty of corn from
beyond the seas, that the City was able to furnish the country) Lord Mayor
one year.

13^1
John Hend, Draper, in whose time happened a great tumult in London, because
one of the bishop of Salisburies men, had taken a Horse-loafe from a Bakers man
in Fleete-streete, and on the Bishops complaint to the King, the Lord Mayor
being sent for to Windsore, and other of his Brethren; the Mayor, Sheriffs,
and other substantial Citizens, were there arrested, the Mayor committed to
the castle of Windsore, and the rest to other Castles and Holds. The King
seized the city into his hands, appointing a Warden to govern it, A Warden
appointed to govern London.
named Sir Edward Darling^^g, knight, etc. But in short while the Kings
displeasure was pacified, and the liberties of London restored and ratifyed.

1392
William S^ondon, Grocer, lord mayor 1. year.

1393
John Hadley, Grocer, again lord mayor one year.

John Froshe, Mercer, Lord mayor one year. 1394


William More, Vintner, 1395
L. Mayor one year

Adam Bamme, Goldsmiths, 1396
again Lord Mayor one year.

Richard Whittington, mercer, 1397
Lord Mayor one year.

Drew Barentine, Goldsmiths, 1398
Lord Mayor 1. year. At his expiration of Office, began the reign of King
Henry the fourth, the 29. of September, 1399.

Thomas Knolles, Grocer, lord mayor 1. year. 1399


John Francis, Goldsmith, lord mayor one year. 1400


John Shadworth, mercer, lord mayor one year. 1401


John Walcote, Draper, lord mayor one year. 1402


William Ascham, Fishmonger, 1403
lord mayor one year.

John Hend, draper, again lord mayor one year, 1304
he builded new again the parish Church of saint Swithen at London stone.

John woodcock, mercer, lord mayor one year. 1405


Richard VVhittington, mercer, 1406
again lord mayor one year. In which year died of ye plague more then 30000.
people.

William Stondon, Grocer, 1407
again lord mayor one year.

Drew Barentine, Goldsmiths, 1408
again lord mayor one year. He builded part of the Goldesmiths Hall, and
gave them lands.

Richard Marlow, Ironmonger, 1409
Lord Mayor one year.

Thomas Knoles, Grocer, 1410
again L. Mayor one year: he began anew to build the Guild Hall in London,
etc.

1411
Robert Chichley, Grocer, Lord Mayor one year.

1412
William Waldren, mercer, Lord Mayor one year. In his time died king Henry the
fourth, and his son King Henry the fifth began his reign, the 20. day of
march, 1412.

1413
William Cromar, Draper, lord Mayor one year.

1414
Thomas Faulconer, mercer, who builded the Postern at Moorgate, and lent the
king 10000. marks upon Jewels, Lord Mayor one year.

1415
Nicholas Wotton, Draper, Lord Mayor one year.

1416
Henry Barton, Skinner, who first ordained Lanthorn and Candlelight in the
winter Euenings, First Lantherne and candlelight
from Hallontide to Candlemasse: Lord Mayor one year.

1417
Richard Marlow, Iremonger, again Lord Mayor one year.

1418
William Seuenoke, Grocer, (who founded a free School, and Alms houses at
Seuenoke in Kent) Lord Mayor one year.

1419
Richard Whittington, mercer, of whose worthy deeds we have else where spoken,
Lord Mayor again one year.

1420
William Cambridge, Grocer, Lord Mayor one year.

1421
Robert Chicheley, Grocer, again L. Mayor one year. He gave the plot of
ground, to build the parish church of S. Stephens in Walbrooke thereon: In his
time died king Henry the fifte, and King Henry the sixth began his reign the 31
of August, 1422.

William walderne, mercer, 1422
again Lord Mayor one year. Newgate was then builded by Richard Whittingtons
executors.

William Cromar, Draper, 1423
again Lord Mayor one year.

John Michell, Fishmonger, 1424
Lord Mayor one year.

John Couentrie, mercer, Lord Mayor one year. 1425


John Reinwell, Fishm. lord mayor one year. 1426


John Gidney, Draper Lord Mayor one year. 1427


Henry Barton, Skinner, 1428
again Lord Mayor one year.

William East-field, mercer, 1429
Lord Mayor one year.

Nicholas wotton, Draper, 1430
again Lord Mayor one year.

John Wells, Grocer, a liberal benefactor, 1431
for new building the chapel by Guild-Hald; beside, of his goods was builte
the Standarde in west-Cheape, Lord Mayor one year.

John Parneis, Fishmonger, 1432
Lord Mayor one year.

John Brokle, Draper, Lord Mayor one year. 1433


Roger Oteley, Grocer, Lord Mayor one year. 1434


Henry Frowicke, Mercer, 1435
L^de Mayor one year.

John Michell, Fishmonger, 1436
again L. Mayor one year.

Sir William East-field, mercer (who was made a Knight of the Bathe, 1437
and gave great bounty to the Water conduits, L. Mayor, Knight of the Bath.
Lord Mayor again one year.

1438
Stephen Brown, Grocer, Lord Mayor one year.

1439
Robert Large, mercer, Lord Mayor one year.

1440
John Paddesley, Goldsmiths, mint-maister, Lord Mayor one year.

1441
Robert Clopto^, Draper, Lord Mayor one year.

1442
John Hatherley, Ironmonger, Lord Mayor one year.

1443
Thomas Catworth, Grocer, Lord Mayor one year.

1444
Henry Frowicke, mercer, in whose time Paul's Steeple was fiered with lightning,
and hardlye quenched, Paul's ste^ple fired.
Lord Mayor again one year.

1445
Sir Simon Air, Draper (who builded Leaden Hal, for a common Granary to the
city, etc.) Lord Mayor one year.

1446
John Olney, mercer, Lord Mayor one year.

1447
John Sidney, Draper, Lord Mayor one year.

1448
Stephen Brown, Grocer, again Lord Mayor one year.

1449
Thomas Chalton, mercer (in whose time happened the Rebellion of Jack Cade of
Kent) Lord Mayor one year^.

1450
Nicholas VVilford, Grocer, lord Mayor one year.

1451
William Gregory, Skinner, lord Mayor one year.

1452
Godfrey Filding, mercer, who was made one of the counsel to King Henry the
sixth, and King Edward the fourth, lord Mayor one year.

John Norman, Draper, 1453
who was the first mayor that was rowed by water to westminster, The first
Mayor rowed to Westminster.
for (till that time) they rode thither on horseback, lord Mayor, one year.

Stephen Foster, 1454
Fishmonger (who enlarged Ludgate) Lord Mayor one year.

William Marrow, Grocer, 1455
lord Mayor one year.

T^omas Canning, Grocer, 1456
Lord Mayor one year.

Godfrey Boloine, 1457
mercer (who gave a 1000. li. to poor householders in London, etc.) lord Mayor
one year.

Thomas Scot, 1458
Draper lord Mayor one year

William Hulin, Fishmonger, 1459
lord Mayor one year.

Richard Lee, Grocer, lord Mayor one year. 1460
In his time began King Henry the sixth his troubles, and King Edward the fourth
entered his reign the fourth of March, 1460.

Hugh witch, mercer, lord Mayor one year. 1461


Thomas Cook, Draper, 1462
Lord Mayor Knight of the Bath.
made knight of the Bath, in the fifte year of King Edward the 4. Lord mayor
one year.

Matthew Phillip, Goldsmiths (made Knight of the Bath the fifth year of Edward
the fourth, 1463
Lord Mayor Knighted in the field.
and afterward knighted in field, the tenth of Edward the fourth, Lord mayor
one year.

Raphe Ioceline, Draper, 1464
Knight of the Bath and knighted also in field, Lord mayor one year.

1465
A sheriff knight of the Bath.
Raph Verney, mercer Lord Mayor one year. Henry weauer, one of the Sheriffs
of London, was then made knight of the Bath.

1466
John Young, Grocer (knighted in the field) L. Mayor one year. 1467


1468
Tho. O^dgraue, Skinner, L. Mayor 1. year.

1469
William Tailor, Grocer, L. Mayor one year.

Lord Mayor delivered the king out of the Tower.
Richard Lee, Grocer, again lord Mayor one year. In whose time the Tower of
London being delivered to him and his brethren, they released King Henry the
sixth thence.

1470
John Stockton, mercer, who worthily withstanding the Bastard Fauconbridge,
he, with eleven Aldermen, L. Mayor 11 Aldermen, and the Recorder, knighted in
field.
and Thomas Vrswick, then Recorder, were all knighted in the field by K.
Edward the fourth; Lord Mayor one year.

William Edwards, Grocer, L. Mayor 1. year.

1471
Sir william Hampton, Fishmonger, Lord Mayor one year. 1472


1473
John Tate, mercer, lord mayor one year. In his time ye Sheriffs of London
were appointed to have severally 16. Sergeants, Sergeants, yeomen, and Clearks
appointed.
and each Sergeant his Yeoman. Then also was ordained six Clearkes, viz. a
Secondary, a Clarke of the Papers, and four other Clerks, beside the
vnder-Sheriffes Clerks.

1474
Robert Drope, Draper, L. Mayor one year.

1475
Robert Basset, Salter, L. Mayor* one year.

1407
Sir Raphe Ioceline, Draper, knight of the Bath, lord mayor one year.

1477
Humfrey Hayford, Goldsmiths, lord mayor, one year.

Richard Gardener, mercer, lord mayor one year. 1478


Sir Bartholmew James, Draper, 1479
Knighted in field and (who newly builded the great Conduit in West-Cheape)
lord mayor one year.

John Brown, mercer, lord mayor one year. 1480


William Hariot, Draper, 1481
lord mayor one year

Edmund Shaa, Goldsmith, 1482
who builded Cripplesgate, lord mayor one year. Then began the reign of
King Edward the fifth, son to King Edward the fourth; but prevented by the
cruel usurpation of his Uncle Richard, Duke of Gloucester, who began his reign
the 22. day of June, 1483.

And because many have often desired, to know the country and parentage of our
Lord Majors of London, in regard that diverse worthy houses have descended of
them: my purpose was, to have examined our ancient Records, from the very
beginning of that honorable dignity, and so to have pursued the tract thereof
(by reporting each man's Fathers name and Country) even to this instant. Wherein
I have had the most laborious and painful help, of my especial kind friend,
master W. Williams: And shaping our course from the present government of sir
William Crauon, hoping to have reached the maine height of our purpose, even to
Henry Fitz-Alwin, etc. We could proceed no further backward, then the reign of
king Richard the third, where I will now begin with their country, and parents,
and so hereafter, go on with the rest, if this great labor may be but
favorably accepted.

The reign of King Richard the third.
1483
RObert Billisdon, Haberdasher, Son to Alexander Billisdo^, of
Queeningborough, in the County of Leicester, Lord Mayor one year.

1484
Thomas Hill, Grocer, Son to William Hill of Hilston, in the County of Kent.
Sir William Stocker, Draper, son to Thomas Stocker, of Eton, Three Lord
Majors in one year.
in the County of Bedford. And John Ward, Grocer, son to Richard Ward, of
Howdon, in the County of York. These three Majors were all in this one year,
by reason a sweating sickness. And King Richard, being slain at
Bosworth-field; Henry the seventh began his reign the 22. of August 1485.

1485
Hugh Brice, Goldsmiths, Son to Richard Brice of Dubline in Ireland: Lord
Mayor one year.

1486
Henry Collet, Mercer, son to Robert Collet of Windouer, in the County of
Buckingham, Lord Mayor one year.

1487
Sir William Horn, Salter (made Knight in the field by King Henry the
seventh) was son to Thomas Horn of Snaylewell, in Cambridgeshire; Lord Mayor
one year.

1488
Robert Tate, Mercer, Son to Thomas Tate, of the City of Couentry; Lord
Mayor one year.

1489
William White, Draper, son to Will. White of Tickhill in the County of York;
Lord Mayor one year.

John Matthew, Linnen-Draper, 1490
and translated to the Mercers, Son to Thomas Matthew of Sherington, in the
County of Buckingham; Lord Mayor one year.

Hugh Clopton, Mercer, son to John Clopton of Stratford upon Auon, 1491
in the County of Warwick ( where the said Hugh builded the goodly
Stone Bridge) Lord Mayor one year.

William Martine, Skinner, 1492
son to Walter Martin, of the County of Hertford; Lord Mayor one year.

Sir Raphe Ostrich, 1493
Fish-Monger ( knighted by Henry the seventh) son to Henry Ostrich of
Hitchin, in the County of Hertford, lord Mayor one year.

Richard Chawry, Salter, 1494
Son to William Chawry, of Westram in Kent; Lord Mayor one year.

Henry Collet, Mercer, 1495.
again Lord Mayor one year.

John Tate, Mercer, 1496
son to Thomas Tate of Couentry, and Brother to Robert Tate Mayor, forenamed,
Lord Mayor one year.

This John Tate, Robert Sheffielde, Recorder, and both the Sheriffs, were
knighted in the field by King Henry the seventh, Black heath field.
for their good service against the Rebels at Black Heath Field.

William Purchase, Mercer, 1497.
son to John Purchase of Gamelinghey, in the County of Cambridge, Lord Mayor one
year.

1498
Sir John Perciuall, Merchant-Taylor, knighted in field by King Henry the
seventh) son to Roger Perciuall of London; L. Mayor one year.

1499
Nicholas Aldwine, Mercer, Son to Richard Aldwine of Spalding in Lincolnshire,
lord Mayor one year. He gave twelve pence a piece to 3000. poor people in
London, and the like to as many in Spalding.

1500
William Remington, Fish-Monger, son to Robert Remington, of Boston in
Lincolneshire, Lord Mayor one year.

1501
John Shaa, Goldsmiths, son to John Shaa of Rochford in Essex, Lord Mairs first
riding from the Guild Hall, to take Bardge to Westminster.
Lord Mayor one year. He was made Knight in the field by King Henry the
seventh, and he caused the Aldermen his Brethren, to ride from the
Guilde-Hall to the Thames side, when he took Bardge to Westminster, where he
was sworn by the Kings Council. He first kept Court alone in the afternoon,
for redress of matters called before him.

1502
Bartholmew Read, Goldsmiths, son of Roger Read of Crowmer in Norffolke; L.
Mayor one year.

1503
William Capell, Draper, son of John Capell of Stokeneyland in Suffolk; Lord
Mayor one year. First setting up of Cadges.
He was knighted by King Henry the seventh. And he first caused Cadges to be
set up in every Ward, for punishment of Rogues and vagabonds.

1504
John Winger, Grocer, son to William Winger of Leicester; Lord Mayor one year.

Thomas Knesworth, Fish-Monger, 1505
son to John Knesworth, of Knesworth in Cambridgeshire, Lord Mayor one year.

Sir Richard Haddon, Mercer, 1506
son of William Haddon, Citizen and Mercer of London, Lord Mayor one year.

William Brown, Mercer, 1507
Son of John Brown, Citizen and Mercer of London, Lord Mayor for one part
of the year, and Laurance Ailmer, Draper, Son of Thomas Ailmer, of Ellesnam
in Essex, Lord Mayor for the other part.

Stephen Iennings, Merchant-Taylor, 1508
son to William Iennings, of VVolnerhampton in Staffordshire ( where he
builded a free School, worthily yet maintained by the Merchant-Taylors, and
the greater part of S. Andrews Vnder-shaft Parish Church in London) Lord Mayor
one year.

Thomas Bradbury, Mercer, 1509
son to William Bradbury of Branghing in Hertfordshire: Lord Mayor part of
the year, and Sir William Capell the rest, wherein dyed King Henry the
seventh, and Henry the eight his son, began his reign the 22. of April,
1509.

Henry Keble, Grocer, 1510
son to George Keble of London, Citizen and Grocer; Lord Mayor one year.

Roger Acheley, Draper, 1511
son to Thomas Acheley of Stanwardine in Shropshire; Lord Mayor one year.

Sir William Coppinger, Fish-Monger, 1512
son to Walter Coppinger, of Buckseill in Suffolk; And Sir Richard Haddon,
Mercer, were Lord Majors this year by several parts, each after other.

1513.
William Brown, Mercer, son to John Brown, Citizen and Mercer of London,
Lord Mayor one year.

1514
George Monox, Draper, borne in London, Lord Mayor one year.

1515
Sir William Butler, Grocer, son to Richard Butler, of Bindenham in
Bedfordshire, Lord Mayor one year.

1516
John Reest, Grocer, son to William Reest of Peterborow, in Northamptonshire,
Lord Mayor one year.

1517
Sir Thomas Exmew, Golde-smith, son to Richard Exmew of Ruthin in Cheshire;
Lord Mayor one year: he made the Water-Conduite in London wall by Moore-gate,
etc.

1518
Thomas Mirfin, Skinner, son to George Mirfin, of Elie in Cambridgeshire, L.
Mayor one year.

1519
Sir James Yardford, Mercer, son to William Yardford of Kidwelley in Wales;
L. Mayor one year.

1520
Sir John Brugge, Draper, son to Thomas Brugge of Dymmocke in Glocestershire;
Lord Mayor one year.

1511
Sir John Milborne, Draper, son to John Milborne of Long-Melford in Suffolk;
L. Mayor one year.

1522
Sir John Mundy, Goldsmiths, son to William Mundy of Wycomb in Buckinghamshire;
Lord Mayor one year.

Sir Thomas Baldry, Mercer, 1523
son to Richard Baldry, of Stow-market in Suffolk; Lord Mayor one year.

Sir William Baylie, Draper, 1524
son to John Baylie of Thackstead in Essex; Lord Mayor one year.

Sir John Allen, Mercer, 1525
son to Richard Allen of Thackstead, in Essex; Lord Mayor two years.

Sir Thomas Seymor, Mercer, 1526
son to John Seymor of London, Fish-Monger, who was Son to Robert Seymor of
Walden in Essex; Lord Mayor one year.

Sir James Spencer, Vintoner, 1527
son to Robert Spencer of Congleton in Cheshire, Lord Mayor one year.

Sir John Rudstone, Draper, 1528
son to Robert Rudstone of Hatton in Yorkshire; Lord Mayor one year.

Sir Raphe Dodmer, Mercer, 1529
son to Henry Dodmer, of Pickering-Leigh in Yorkshire; being free of the
Brewers, he was from them translated to the Mercers, and Lord Mayor one year.

Sir Thomas Pargitor, Salter, 1530
son to John Pargitor, of Chipping-norton in Oxfordshire, Lord Mayor one
year.

Sir Nicholas Lambert, Grocer, son to Edmond Lambert of Wilton in Wiltshire;
1531
L. Mayor one year.

1532.
Sir Stephen Peacock, Haberdasher, son to Stephen Peacock of the City of
Dublin; Lord Mayor one year.

1533
Sir Christopher Askew, Draper, son to John Askew of Edmonton in Middlesex;
Lord Mayor one year.

1534
Sir John Champneis, Skinner, son to R. Campneis, of Chew in Somersetshire;
Lord Mayor one year.

1535
Sir John Allen, Mercer, again Lord Mayor one year, and made a privy
Counceller to the King, for his great wisdom.

1136
Sir Raphe Warren Mercer, son to Thomas Warren of London, Fuller, who was son
to William Warren, of Fering in Essex: L. Mayor one year.

1537
Sir Richard Gresham, Mercer, son to John Gresham, of Holte in Norffolke; Lord
Mayor one year.

1538
Sir William Forman, Haberdasher, son to Willi^ Forman of Gainsburgh in
Lincolnshire, Lord Mayor one year.

1539
Sir William Hollis of London, Mercer, L. Mayor one year.

1540
Sir William Roche, Draper, son to John Roche of Wixley in Yorkshire; Lord
Mayor one year.

1541
Sir Michaell Dormer, Mercer, son to Geffrey Dormer of Tame in Orfordshire; L.
Mayor one year.

1542
John Cootes, Salter, son to Thomas Coots of Bearton, in Buckinghamshire; Lord
Maire one year.

Sir William Bowyer, Draper, son to William Bowyer, of Harston in
Cambridgshire, 1543
Lord Mayor one year.

Sir William Laxton, Grocer, 1544
son to John Laxton, of Yongdel in Northamptonshire; Lord Mayor one year.

Sir Martin Bows, Golde-Smith, 1545.
son to Thomas Bows of York City, Lord Mayor one year.

Sir Henry Hubberthorne, 1546
Merchant-Taylor, son to Christopher Hubberthorne, of VVadingworth in
Lincolnshire, L. Mayor one year. In whose time died King Henry the 8. and King
Edward the sixth, began his reign the 28. of January, 1546.

Sir John Gresham, Mercer, 1547
son to John Gresham of Holte in Norffolke, Lord Mayor one year.

Sir Henry Amcotes, Fish-Monger, 1548
son to William Amcotes of Astrap in Lincolnshire, L. Mayor one year.

Sir Rowland Hill, Mercer, 1549
son to Thomas Hill of Hodnet in Shropshire: Lord Mayor one year.

Sir Andrew Iudde, Skinner, 1550
son to John Iud of Tonebridge in Kent, Lord Mayor one year.

Sir Richard Dobbes, Skinner, 1551
son to Robert Dobbes of Baitby in Yorkshire: L. Mayor one year.

Sir George Barn, Haberdasher, 1552
son to George Barn, Citizen and Haberdasher of London, Lord Mayor one
year.

1553
Sir Thomas White, Merchant-Taylor, son to Thomas White of Rickmansworth, in
Hertfordshire, Lord mayor one year. Then died king Edward, and Queen Mary
began her reign the 6. day of July, 1553. This sir Thomas White founded S. John
Baptists College in Oxenford: and gave 2000. li. to the City of Bristoll, to
purchase 100. and 20. li. land yearly, etc.

1554
Sir Thomas Lion, Grocer, son to John Lion of Peryfare in Middlesex, Lord
Mayor one year.

1555
Sir William Gerard, Haberdasher, son to John Gerard, Citizen and Grocer of
London, who was son to William Gerard, of Seddingbourne in Kent; Lord Mayor one
year.

1556
Sir Thomas Offley, Merchant-Taylor, son to William Offley, of the City of
Chester, lord mayor one year.

1557
Sir Thomas Curteis, Fish-Monger, son to John Curteis of Enfield in
Middlesex, he was free of the Pewterers, and from them translated to the
Fish-Mongers, Lord Mayor one year.

1558
Sir Thomas Leigh, Mercer, son to Roger Leigh, of VVillington, in Shropshire,
Lord Mayor one year. In which year died Queen Mary, and Queen Elizabeth
began her princely reign the seventeenth day of November, 1558.

1559
Sir William Huet, Cloth-worker, son to Edmond Huet of Wales in Yorkshire: Lord
Mayor one year.

Sir William Chester, Draper, 1560
son to John Chester, Citizen and Draper of London; Lord Mayor one year.

Sir William Harper, Merchant-Taylor, 1561
son to William Harper, of the Town of Bedford, lord mayor one year.

Sir Thomas Lodge, Grocer, 1562
son to William Lodge, of Cresset in Shropshire, Lord Mayor one year.

Sir John White, Grocer, 1563
Son to Robert White of Farnam in Surry, Lord Mayor one year.

Sir Richard Malory, Mercer, 1564
son to Anthony Malory of Papworthamus, in Cambridgeshire; Lord Mayor one year.

Sir Richard Champion, Draper, 1565
son to Richard Champion of Godilming in Surrey, Lord mayor one year.

Sir Chtistopher Draper, Iron-monger, 1566
son to John Draper of Melton Mowbrey; Lord Mayor one year.

Sir Roger Martin, Mercer, 1567
son to Laurance Martine of Melford in Suffolk, Lord mayor one year.

Sir Thomas Roe Merchant-Taylor, 1568
son to Robert Roe, Citizen and Merchant-Taylor of London, who was son to
Reiginald Roe, of Lee in Kent, lord mayor one year.

Sir Alexander Auenand, Iron-monger, 1569
son to Robert Auenand, of Kings-Norton in Worcestershire, Lord mayor one
year.

Sir Rowland Heyward, Cloth-worker, 1570
son to George Heiward of Bridge-north in Shropshire, Lord Mayor one year.

1571
Sir William Allen, Mercer, son to William Allen, Citizen and Pasteller of
London, who was son to Richard Allen, of Stondon in Hertfordshire; Lord Mayor
one year.

1572
Sir Lionell Ducket, Mercer, son to William Ducket of Flynton in
Nottinghamshire, Lord mayor one year.

1573
Sir John Rivers, Grocer, son to Richard Rivers of Penseherst in Kent L. Mayor
one year.

1574
Sir James Hawes, Cloth-worker, son to Thomas Hawes, Citizen and Merchant of
London, who was son to John Hawes of Stokenwenton, in Middlesex, Lord Mayor one
year.

1575
Sir Ambrose Nicholas, Salter, son to John Nicholas of Nedingworth in
Huntingdonshire, Lord Mayor one year.

1576
Sir John Langley, Goldsmiths, son to Robert Langley, of Althrop in
Lincolnshire, Lord Mayor one year.

1577
Sir Thomas Ramsey, Grocer, son to John Ramsey, of Elenbridge in Kent; lord
Mayor one year.

1578
Sir Richard Pipe, Draper, son to Richard Pipe of Wolnerhampton, in
Staffordshire, he was free of the Leather-sellers, and from them translated to
the Drapers, Lord Mayor one year.

1579
Sir Nicholas Woodroue, Haberdasher, son to David Woodroue, Citizen and
Haberdasher of London, who was son to John Woodroue, of the Parish of Vscombe
in Devonshire; Lord Mayor one year.

Sir John Branche, Draper, 1580
son to John Branche, Citizen and Draper of London, who was son to John
Branch of Laynham in Suffolk; Lord Mayor one year.

Sir James Haruey, Iron-monger, 1581
son to William Haruey, of Cotwalton in Staffordshire, L. Mayor one year.

Sir Thomas Blanke, Haberdasher, 1582
son to Thomas Blanke, Citizen and Haberdasher of London, who was son to
Thomas Blancke of Guildford in Surry, Lord Mayor one year.

Sir Edward Osborne, Cloth-worker, 1583
son to Richard Osborne of Ashford in Kent, Lord Mayor one year.

Sir Thomas Pulloccill, Draper, 1584
son to William Pulloccill, of Fotescray in Kent, lord Mayor one year.

Sir Wolstane Dixie, Skinner, 1585
son to Thomas Dixie of Catworth in Huntingdonshire, Lord Mayor one year.

Sir George Barn, Haberdasher, 1586
son to Sir George Barn, Knight, Citizen and Haberdasher of London, Lord
Mayor one year.

Sir George Bond, Haberdasher, 1587
son of R. Bond of Trull in Somersetshire, Lord Mayor one year.

Sir Martine Calthrop, 1588
Citizen and Draper of London, Lord Mayor for part of the year, and Richard
Martine, Goldsmiths, for the rest.

Sir John Heart, Grocer, 1589
son of Raphe Heart of Sproston Court in Yorkshire, L. Mayor one year

Sir John Allot, Fish-Monger, 1590
son to Richard Allot of Lymbergh in Lincolnshire, Lord Mayor one part of the
year, and Sir Rowland Heywerd the rest.

159^
Sir William Web, Salter, Son to John Web of Reading in Barkshire, lord
Mayor one year.

1592
Sir William Roe, Iron-monger, Son to Thomas Roe of Penseherst in Kent, Lord
Mayor one year.

1593
Sir Cutbbert Buckle, Vintoner, son to Christopher Buckle, of Bourgh in
Westmerland, L. Mayor for part of the year, and sir Richard Martine Goldsmith,
the rest: This sir Richard Martine was son to Thomas Martine, of Saffron
Walden in Essex.

1594
Sir John Spenser, Cloth-worker, son to Rich. Spenser of Waldinfield in
Suffolk, Lord Mayor one year.

1595
Sir Stephen Slaney, Skinner, son to John Slaney of Mitton in Staffordshire,
Lord Mayor one year.

1596
Thomas Skinner, Cloth-worker, son to John Skinner of Walden in Essex: Lord
Mayor for part of the year, and sir Henry Billingsley Haberdasher the rest.
This sir Henry Billingsley was son to William Billingsley, Citizen and
Haberdasher of London, who was son to Roger Billingsley, of the City of
Canterbury in Kent.

1597
Sir Richard Saltonstall, Skinner, son to Gilbert Saltonstal, of Hallyfax in
Yorkshire, Lord Mayor one year.

Sir Stephen Soame, Grocer, 1598
son to Thomas Soame of Bradley in Suffolk, Lord Mayor one year. He was free
of the Girdlers, and from them translated to the Grocers.

Sir Nicholas Mosley, Cloth-worker, 1599
son to Edward Mosley of Hough in Lancashire, Lord Mayor one year.

Sir William Ryder, Haberdasher, 1600
son to Thomas Ryder of Muckleston in Staffordshire, Lord Mayor one year.

Sir John Gerard, Haberdasher, 1601
son to sir William Gerard, Knight, Citizen and Haberdasher of London, Lord
mayor one year.

Sir Robert Lee, Merchant-Taylor, 1602
son to Humphrey Lee of Bridge-north, in Shropshire, Lord mayor one year.

Sir Thomas Benet, Mercer, 1603
son to Thomas Benet of Wallingford in Barkshire, Lord Mayor one year.

Sir Thomas Low, Haberdasher, 1604
son to Simon Low, Citizen and Merchant-Tailor of London, who was son to
Raphe Low of London, Gentleman; Lord Mayor one year.

Sir Leonard Holyday, Merchant-Taylor, 1605
son to William Holyday, of Redborow in Glocestershire, Lord mayor one year.

Sir John Wats, Cloth-worker, 1606
son to Thomas Wats of Buntingford in Hertfordshire, Lord mayor one year.

Sir Henry Roe, Mercer, 1607
son to sir Thomas Roe, Knight, Citizen and Merchant-Taylor of London; Lord
Mayor one year.

1608
Sir Humphrey Welde, Grocer, son to John Welde of Eaton in Cheshire; Lord Mayor
one year.

1609
Sir Thomas Cambell, Iron-Monger, son to Robert Cambell, of Fulsam in Norffolk,
Lord Mayor one year.

1610
Sir William Crauon, Merchant-Taylor, son to William Crauon, of Appletreewick
in Yorkshire; Lord Mayor now governing, to whom (with the rest of his worthy
Brethren) I wish all health and happiness.

Since the time also of King Richard the third, these Gentlemen have born
office in this City, according to their names and places.
Recorders of this City.
M. HVmphrey Statkey, Esquire. M. Thomas Fitz-Williams, Esquire. Sir Robert
Sheffield, Knight. M. John Chaloner, Esquire. M. Robert Brook, Esquire. M.
Shelley, Esquire. M. Baker, Esquire. M. Roger Cholmeley, Esquire. M. Richard
Onslow, Esquire. M. Thomas Bromeley, Esquire. M. William Fleetwood, Esquire.
M. Edward Coke, Esquire. M. Edward Drew, Esquire. M. Thomas Fleming, Esquire.
M. John Crook, Esquire. Sir Henry Montague, Knight.
Common Sergeants of this City.
M. Robert Moloneux, Esquire. M. John Haugh, Esquier. Thomas Higham. M. Thomas
Frowick, Esquire. M. Thomas Marow, Esquire. M. John Green, Esquire. M. White,
Esquire. M. Walsingham, Esquire. M. VVonley, Esquire. M. Robert Sothwell,
Esquire. M. Robert Brook, Esquire. M. Atkins, Esquire. M. Marsh, Esquire. M.
Randall, Esquire. M. Thomas Kirton, Esquire. M. Thomas Wilbraham, Esquire. M.
Richard Wheeler, Esquire.
Chamberlaines of this City.
M. WIlliam Phillip, Esquire. M. Miles Adys. M. William Purhas. M. William
Milborne. M. Nicholas Mattock. M. George Medley. M. Thomas Haies. M. John
Sturgeon. M. George Heaton. M. John Mabbe. M. Robert Brandon. M. Thomas
Wilford. M. Cornelius Fish.
Common-Clearkes, or Towne-Clearkes.
M. WIlliam Dunthorne. M. Nicholas Pakenham. M. Walter Stub. M. William Pauior.
M. Thomas Rushton. M. Blackwell. M. Anthony Stapleton. M. William Sebright. M.
Richard Langley.
Esquires attending on the Lord Mayor in his house, and elsewhere.
Sword-bearers.
John Metford. Walter Thomas. John Pynchbecke. Valentine Mason. Richard
Berwick. Walter Smith. Robert Smart. Matthew Sturdeuant. Rowland Smart.
Common Hunt.
John Stokker. Arnold Babington. John Burton. Thomas Abbot. Thomas Underhill.
John Lune. John Dewell. William Richbell.
Common Proclaimer, or Crier.
John Ash. Thomas Camery. Thomas Say. Richard White. William Nicholson. John
Hallyday. John Green. Christopher Fowkes. John Northage. Edward Ap-Iohn.
Water Bayliffe.
John Good. Henry Snow. Geffrey Morton. Thomas Briggs. Sebastian Hillarie.
Henry King. Nicholas VVillie. Robert Sharborowe. Cuthbert Thursbie. Thomas
Benson.
These Officers also do attend the Lord Mayor in their several places.
Under Chamberlain.

Four Clearkes of the Lord Majors court, who wrote weekly in the Lord Majors
house severally.

Coroner of London. Sergeant Caruers, three. Sergeants of the Chamber, three.
Sergeant of the Channel. Yeoman of the Channel. Yeomen of the Waterside,
four. Under water Balyffe Yeomen of the Chamber* two. Meal weighers* three.
Yeomen of the wood wharfes, two. The Sword-Bearers man. Esquires men. Common
Hunts-men two Esquires men. Common Cryers man* Esquires men. Water ^ayliffes
men two Esquires men. The Caruers man Esquires men. Nine of these have ^iueries
of the ^* ^aior. v^^* The Sword bearer, and his man. Three Caruers. Four
Yeomen of the water side.
FINIS.

