NEW ENGLISH CANAAN OR NEW CANAAN. Containing an Abstract of New England,
Composed in three Books.

The first Book setting forth the original of the Natives, their Manners and
Customs, together with their tractable Name and Love toward the English. The
second Book setting forth the natural Indowments of the Country, and what
staple Commodities it yealdeth. The third Book setting forth, what people are
planted there, their prosperity, what remarkable accidents have happened since
the first planting of it, together with their Tenants and practice of their
Church.
Written by Thomas Morton of Cliffords Innegent, upon ten years knowledge
and experiment of the Country.

Printed at AMSTERDAM, By JACOB FREDERICK STAM. In the Year 1637.

To the right honorable, the Lords and others of his Majesty's most honorable
privy Council, Commissioners, for the Government of all his Majesty's
foreign Provinces.
Right honorable
THe zeal which I bear to the advauncement of the glory of God, the honor of
his Majesty, and the good of the weal public, has encouraged me to compose
this abstract, being the model of a Rich hopeful and very beautiful Country,
worthy the Title of Natures Masterpeece, and may be lost by too much
sufferance. It is but a widows mite, yet all that wrong and rapine has left
me to bring from thence, where I have indevoured my best, bound by my
allegiance, to do his Majesty service. This in all humility I present as an
offering, wherewith I prostrate my self at your honorable footstool. If you
please to vouchsafe, it may receave a blessing, from the Luster of your
gracious Beams, you shall make your vassaile happy, in that he yet does live,
to show how ready he is and always has bin, to sacrifice his dearest blood,
as becomes a loyal subject, for the honor of his native Country. Being

your honors humble vassaile THOMAS MORTON.

The Epistle to the Reader.
GENTLE READER,
I Present to the public view an abstract of new England; which I have
undertaken to compose by the incouragment of such genious spirits as have been
studious of the inlargment of his Majesty's Territories, being not formerly
satisfied, by the relations of such as through haste, have taken but a
superficial survey thereof, which thing time has enabled me to perform more
punctually to the life, and to give a more exact account of what has been
required; I have therefore been willing to do my indevoure to communicate the
knowledge, which I have gained and collected together, by mine own
observation, in the time of my many years residence in those parts, to my
loving Country men: For the better information of all such as are desirous to
be made partakers of the blessings of God in that fertile Soil, as well as
those that, out of Curiosity only have bin inquisitive after novelties. And
the rather for that I have observed, how diverse persons (not so well affected
to the weal public in mine opinion) out of respect to their own private
ends; have labored to keep both the practice of the people there, and the
Real worth of that eminent Country concealed from public knowledge, both
which I have abundantly in this discourse laid open, yet if it be well
accepted, I shall esteem my self sufficiently rewardded for my undertaking
and rest.

Your Wellwisher. THOMAS MORTON.

In laudem Authoris.
TO Excuse the Author ere the work be shown
Is accusation in it self alone,
And to commend him might seem oversight,
So diverse are the opinions of this age,
So quick and apt, to tax the modern stage,
That hard his task, is that must please in all
Example have we from great Caesar's fall,
But is the son to be disliked and blamed,
Because the mole is of his face ashamed,
The fault is in the beast not in the son
Give sick mouths sweet meats fie they relish none,
But to the sound in censure he commends,
His love unto his Country his true ends,
To model out a Land of so much worth,
As until now noe traveller seth forth,
Fair Canaans second self, second to none,
Natures rich Magazine till now unknown,
Then here survay, what nature has in store,
And grant him love for this, he craves no more.
R. O. Genesis

Sir Christoffer Gardener, Knight.
In laudem Authoris
THis work a matchles mirror is that shows,
The Humors of the seperatiste, and those
So truly personated by thy pen,
I was amazed to see it, herein all men,
May plainly see as in an inter-lude,
Each actor, figure and the scaene well viewed,
In Connick Tragic and in a pastoral stife,
For tyth of muit and Cummin shows their life,
Nothing but opposition, against the right,
Of sacred Majesty men, full of spite,
Goodness abuseing, turning virtue out
Of Doors, to whipping stocking and full bent,
To plotting mischeife, against the innocent,
Burning their houses, as if ordained by fate,
In spite of Law, to be made ruinate,
This task is well performed and patience be,
Thy present comfort and thy constancy,
Thine honor, and this glass where it shall come,
Shall sing thy praises till the day of doom.
Sir. C. G.

In laudem Authoris.
But that I rather pity I confess,
The practice of their Church, I could express
My self a Satyrist; whose smarting fanges,
Should strike it with a palsy, and the panges,
Beget a fear, to tempt the Majesty,
Of those, or mortal Gods, will they defy
The Thundering Jove, like children they desire,
Such is their Zeal, to sport themselves with fire,
So have I seen an angry Fly, presume,
To strike a burning taper, and consume
His feeble wings, why in an air so mild,
Are they so monstrous grown up, and so vilde,
That Salvages can of themselves espy
Their errors, brand their names with infamy,
What is their zeal for blood, like Cyrus thirst,
Will they be over head and ears, a cursed
A cruel way to found a Church on, noe,
TO is not their zeal, but fury blinds them so,
And pricks their malice on like fire to join,
And offer up the sacrifice of Kain;
Jonas, thou have done well, to call these men
Home to repentance, with thy painful pen.
F. C. Armiger.

NEW ENGLISH CANAAN, OR NEW CANAAN.
The Authors Prologue.
IF art and industry should do as much
As Nature has for Canaan, not such
Another place, for benefit and rest,
In all the universe can be possessed,
The more we prove it by discovery,
The more delight each object to the eye
Procures, as if the elements had here
Bin reconciled, and pleased it should appear,
Like a fair virgin, longing to be sped,
And meet her lover in a Nuptial bed,
Decked in rich ornaments to advaunce her state
And excellence, being most fortunate,
When most enjoyed, so would our Canaan be
If well employed by art and industry
Whose offpring, now shows that her fruitful womb
Not being enjoyed, is like a glorious tomb,
Admired things producing which there dye,
And ly fast bound in darck obscurity,
The worth of which in each particular,
Who list to know, this abstract will declare.
NEW ENGLISH CANAAN, OR NEW CANAAN.
The first Book. Containing the original of the Natives, their manners, and
Customs, with their tractable nature and love toward the English.
CHAP I. Prooving New England the principal part of all America, and most
commodious and fit for habitation.
THe wise Creator of the universal Globe, has placed a golden mean betwixt
two extremes: I mean the temperate Zones, betwixt the hot and cold; and
every Creature, that participates of Heavens blessings, with in the Compass of
that golden mean, is made most apt and fit, for man to use, who likewise by
that wisdom is ordained to be the Lord of all. This globe may be his glass,
to teach him how to use moderation, and discretion, both in his actions and
intentions. The wise man says, give me neither riches nor poverty; why?
Riches might make him proud like Nebuchadnezar, and poverty despair, like Jobs
wife; but a mean between both. Use of vegetatives.
So it is likewise in the use of Vegetatives, that which has too much Heat or
too much Cold, is said to be venenum, so in the use of sensitives, all those
Animals, of what genus or species soever they be, if they participate of heat
or cold, in the superlative, are said to be Inimica naturae, Fish poisonous
about the Isle of Sall.
as in some Fishes about the Isle of Sall, and those Islands adjoyninge,
between the Tropickes, their participatinge of heat and cold, in the
superlative is made most manifest, one of which, poisoned a whole Ships company
that eat of it. And so it is in Vipers, Toades, and Snakes, that have heat or
cold in the superlative degree.

Therefore the Creatures that participate of heat and cold in a mean, are
best and holsomest: And so it is in the choice of love, the middell Zone
between the two extremes is best, and it is therefore called Zona temperata,
Zona temperata, the Golden mean.
and is in the golden mean; and all those Lands lying under that Zone, most
requisite and fit for habitation. In Cosmography, the two extremes are
called, the one Torrida Zona, lying between the Tropickes, the other Frigida
Zona, lying near the Poles: all the lands lying under, either of these Zones,
by reason, they do participate too much of heat or cold, are very
inconvenient, and are accompanied with many evils. And allthough I am not of
opinion with Aristotle, that the lands under Torrida Zona, are altogether
uninhabited, I my self having been so near the equinoctial line, that I
have had the Sunn for my Zenith, and seen proof to the contrary, yet cannot I
deny, but that it is accompanied with many inconveniences, as that Fish and
Flesh both will taint in those parts, notwithstanding the use of Salt which
cannot be wanting there, ordained by natures hande-worke. Salt abounds under
the Tropicks.
And that is a great hinderance to the settinge forth and supply of navigation,
the very Sinews of a flourishing Commonwealth. Then barrenness, caused through
want of raines, for in most of those parts of the world it is seldom
accustomed to rain, until the time of the Tornathees (as the Portingals
phrase is, who lived there) and then it will rain about 40. days together,
Rain 40. days about August between Cancer and the Line.
which moisture serves to fructify the earth for all the year after, duringe
which time is seen no rain at all: the heat and cold, and length of day and
night, being much alike, with little difference. And these raines are caused by
the turning of the winds, which else between the Tropickes, do blow Trade,
that is always one way. For next the Tropicke of Cancer it is constantly
North-East, and next the Tropicke of Capricorn it is Southwest; so that the
winds coming from the Poles, do keep the air in those parts cool, and
make it temperate and the parts habitable, were it not for those and other
inconveniences.

This Torrida Zona is good for Grasshoppers: and Zona Temperata for the Ant and
Be. But Frigida Zona good for neither, as by lamentable experience of Captain
Davis Fate, is manifest, who in his inquest of the Nortwest passage for the
East India trade was frozen to death. Capt. Davis froze to death.
And thefore for Frigida Zona, I agree with Aristotle, that it is unfit for
habitation: and I know by the Course of the caelestiall globe, that in
Groeneland many Degrees short of the Pole Articke, Groene Land too cold for
habitation.
the place is too cold, by reason of the Sunns absence almost six months, and
the land under the continual power of the frost; which thing many more
Navigators have prooved with pitiful experience of their wintringe there, as
appears by the history, I think, they will not venture to winter there
again for an India mine.

And as it is found by our Nation under the Pole Articke, so it is likewise to
be found under the Antarticke Pole, yet what hazard will not an industrious
mind, and courageous spirit undergo, according to that of the Poe^t. Impiger
extremos currit Mercator ad Indos per mare pauperiem fugiens, per saxa, per
ignes. And all to get and hord up like the Ant and the Be, and yet as Solomon
says, he cannot tell whether a fool or a wise man shall enjoy it. Therefore
let us leave these two extremes, with their inconveniences, and endeavor to
find out this golden mean, so free from any one of them. Behold the secret
wisdom of allmighty God, and love unto, our Solomon to raise a man of a
lardge heart, full of worthy abilities to be the Index or Loadstarre, that does
point out unto the English Nation, with ease and comfort how to find it out.
And this the noble minded Gentleman, Sir Ferdinando Gorges Knight, Sir
Ferdinando Gorges the original cause of plantinge New England.
zealous for the glory of God, the honor of his Majesty, and the benefit of the
weal public, has done a great work for the good of his Country.

And herein this, the wondrous wisdom and love of God, is shown, by sending
to the place his Minister, to sweep away by heaps the Salvages, The Salvages
dyed of the Plague.
and also giving him length of days, to see the same performed after his
enterprise was begun, for the propagation of the Church of Christ.

This judicious Gentleman, has found this goulden mean, to be situated about
the middle of those two extremes, and for directions you may prove it thus:
Counting the space between the Line and either of the Poles, in true
proportion, you shall find it to be 90. Degrees: then must we find the mean,
to be near unto the Center of 90. and that is about 45. Degrees, and then
incline unto the Sotherne side of that Center, properly for the benefit of
heat, remembringe that Sol and Homo generat hominem; and then keep us on that
fame side, and see what Land is to be found there, and we shall easily discern
that new England is on the South side of that Center.

For that Country does begin her bounds at 40. Degrees of Northern
latitude, New Engl. is placed in the golden mean.
and ends at 45. Degrees of the same latitude, and does participate of heat
and cold indifferently, but is oppressed with neither: and therefore may be
truly said to be within the compass of that golden mean, most apt and fit for
habitation and generation, being placed by Allmighty God the great Creator,
under that Zone, called Zona temperata, and is therefore most fit for the
generation and habitation of our English nation, of all other, who are more
near neighbors to the Northern Pole, whose Land lies between 50. and 54.
Degrees of the selfsame latitude: now this new England though it be nearer to
the line, then that old England by 10. Degrees of latitude, New England 10.
Degrees nearer the line then old England.
yet does not this exceed that other in heat or cold, by reason of the
cituation of it; for as the Coast lies, being circularly Northeast and
Southwest, opposite toward the Suns risinge, which makes his course over the
Ocean, it can have little or no reflecting, heat of the Sunbeames, by reason of
the continual motion of the waters, making the air there the cooler and the
constanter: so that for the temperature of the Climent, sweetness of the air,
fertility of the Soil, and small number of the Salvages (which might seem a
rubb in the way off an effeminate mind,) this Country of new England is by all
judicious men, accounted the principal part of all America, for habitation and
the commodiousnesse of the Sea, Ships there not being subject to worms, as in
Virginea and other places, and not to be paraleld in all Christendom. The
Massachussets being the middell part thereof, The Massachussets in the middel
of New Engl.
is a very beautiful Land not mountany, nor inclininge to mountany, lies in
42. Degrees, and 30. minutes, and has as yet the greatest number of
inhabitants, and has a very large bay to it, divided by Islands into 4. great
bays, where shippinge may safely ride all winds and weathers, The Winds not
so violent in New England.
the winds in those parts being not so violent as in England by many Degrees,
foe there are no shrubbs seen, to lean from the winds as by the Sea Coast of
England, I have seen them lean, and the groundage is a sandy sleech free from
rocks to gaul Cables, but is good for anchorage, the rest of the Planters are
dispersed among the Coasts between 41. and 44. Degrees of Latitude, and as yet,
have very little way into the island, the riches of which Country I have set
forth in this abstract as in a Landskipp, for the better information of the
Travelers, which he may peruse and plainly perceave by the demonstration of
it, that it is nothing inferior to Canaan of Israel, but a kind of parallel to
it, in all points.

CHAP. II. Of the original of the Natives.
IN the year since the incarnation of Christ, 1622. it was my chance to be
landed in the parts of New England, where I found two sorts of people, the one
Christians, the other Infidels, these I found most full of humanity, and more
friendly then the other: as shall hereafter be made apparent in Dew-Course, by
their several actions from time to time, whilst lived among them After my
arrival in those parts, I endeavored by all the ways and means that I
could to find out from what people or nation, the Natives of New England might
be conjectured originlly to proceed, and by continuance and conversation
amongst them, I attaned to so much of their language, as by all probable
conjecture may make the same manifest, for it has been found by diverse, and
those of good judgment that the Natives of this Country, do use very many
words both of Greek and Latin, to the same signification that the Latins and
Greeks have done, The Natives have a mixed language.
as en animia, when an Indian expresses, that he does any thing with a good
will; and Pascopan signifies gredygut, Pasco Pan greedy gutt.
this being the name of an Indian that was so called of a Child, through the
greediness of his mind, and much eating, for Pasco in Latin signifies to
feed, and Pan in Greek signifies all, and Pasco nantum, quasi pasco nondum,
half starved, or not eating, as yet; Mona an Island.
Equa coge, set it upright, Mona is an Island in their language, quasi Monon,
that is alone, for an Island is a piece or plott of ground standing alone, and
divided, from the mane Land by force of water.

Cos a Whetstone.
Cos is a Whetstone with them. Hame an instrument to take Fish, many places do
retain the name of Pan, as Pantneket and Matta pan, so that it may be thought
that these people heretofore, have had the name of Pan in great reverence and
estimation, Pan the Shepherds God.
and it may be have worshipped Pan the great God of the Heathens: Howsoever
they do use no manner of worship at all now: and it is most likely that the
Natives of this Country, are descended from people bred upon that part of the
world, which is toward the Tropicke of Cancer, for they do still retain the
memory of some of the Stars one that part of thea Caelestiall Globe, as the
North-starre, which with them is called Mask, for Mask in their Language
signifies a Bear, and they do divide the winds into eight parts, and it
seems originally, have had some litterature amongst them, which time has
Cancelled and worn cut of use, and where as it has been the opinion of some
men, which shall be nameles, that the Natives of New England may proceed from
the race of the Tartars, and come from Tartaria into those parts, over the
frozen Sea.

Not to proceed from the Tartars.
I see no probality for any such Conjecture, for as much, as a people once
settled, must be remooved by compulsion, or else tempted thereunto in hope of
better fortunes, upon commendations of the place, unto which they should be
drawn to remoove, and if it may be thought, that these people came over the
frozen Sea, then would it be by compulsion, if so, then by whom, or when? or
what part of this mane continent may be thought to border upon the Country of
the Tartars, it is yet unknown, No part of America known to be near Tartary.
and it is not like, that a people well enough at ease, will of their one
accord undertake to travayle over a Sea of Ice, considering how many
difficulties they shall encounter with, as first whether there be any Land at
the end of their unknown way, no Land being in view, then want of Food to
sustane life in the mean time upon that Sea of Ice, or how should they do for
Fuel, to keep them at night from freezing to death, which will not be had in
such a place, but it may perhaps be granted that the Natives of this Country
might originally come of the scattred Trojans: For after that Brutus, who was
the forth from Aneas, left Latium upon the conflict had with the Latins,
(where although he gave them a great overthrow, Why Brutus left Latium.
to the Slaughter of their grand Captain and many other of the Heroes of
Latium, yet he held it more safety to depart unto some other place, and
people, then by staying to run the hazard of an unquiet life or doubtful
Conquest, which as history makes mention he performed;) this people were
dispersed there is no question, but the people that lived with him, by reason
of their conversation with the Graecians and Latins, had a mixed language that
participated of both, whatsoever was that which was proper to their own nation
at first; I know not for this is commonly seen where 2. nations traffic
together, the one indevouring to understand the others meaning makes the^ both
many times speak a mixed language, Two Nations meetinge make a mixed language.
as is approoved by the Natives, of New England, through the coveteous desire
they have, to commerce with our nation, and we with them.

And when Brutus did depart from Latium, we do not find that his whole number
went with him at once, or arrived at one place; and being put to Sea might
encounter with a storm, that would carry them out of sight of Land, and then
they might sail God knows whether, and so might be put upon this Coast, as
well as any other; Daedalus the first that use Sails.
Compass I bele had none in those days; Sails they might have, (which
Daedalus the first inventor thereof) left to after ages, having taught his
Son Icarus the use of it, who to his Cost found how dangerous it is, Icarus
the second that used Sails.
for a Son not to observe the precepts of a wise Father, so that the Icarian
Sea, now retains the memory of it to this day, and Victuals they might have
good store, and many other things fittinge, oars without all question, they
would store themselves with, in such a case, but for the use of Compass there
is no mention made of it at that time (which was much about Saul's time the
first that was made King of Israel. Troy destroyed about Saul's time.
) Yet it is thought (and that not without good reason for it) that the use of
the Loadstone, The Loadstone in Salomons time.
and Compass was known in Salomons time, for as much as he sent Ships to
fetch of the gould of Ophir, to adorn and beautify that magnificent Temple of
Jerusalem, by him built for the glory of Almighty God, and by his special
appointment: and it is held by Cosmographers to be 3. years voyage from
Jerusalem to Ophir, and it is conceaved that such a voyage could not have
been performed, without the help of the Loadstone and Compass.

And why should any man think, the Natives of New England, to be the gleanings
of all Nations, only because by the pronunciation and termination their words
seem to trench upon several languages, when time has not furnished him with
the interpretation thereof, the thing that must induce a man of reasonabe
capacity to any manner of conjecture, of their original, must by the sense and
signification of the words, principally to frame this argument by, when he
shall draw to any conclusion thereupon, otherwise he shall but run round
about a maze (as some of the fantastical tribe use to do about the tithe of
muit and comin.) Therefore since I have had the approbation of Sir Christopher
gardener Knight an able gentl. that lived amongst them and of David Tompson a
Scottish gentl. that likewise was conversant with those people both Scollers
and Travelers that were diligent in taking notice of these things as men of
good judgment. And that have bin in those parts any time; besides others of
less, now I am bold to conclude that the original of the Natives of New
England may be well conjectured to be from the scattered Trojans, after such
time as Brutus departed from Latium.

CHAP. III. Of a great mortality that happened amongst the Natives of New
England near about the time, that the English came there to plant.
IT fortuned some few years, before the English came to inhabit at new
Plimmouth in New England; that upon some distaste given in the Massachussets
bay, by Frenchmen, then trading there with the Natives for beaver, they set
upon the men, at such advantage, that they killed many of them burned their
shipp then riding at Anchor by an Island there, now called Peddocks Island in
memory of Leonard Peddock that landed there (where many wild Anckies haunted
that time which he thought had bin tame,) distributing them unto 5. Sachems
which were Lords of the several territories adjoyninge, they did keep them so
long as they lived, only to sport themselves at them, Five Frenchmen kept by
the Salvages.
and made these five Frenchmen fetch them wood and water, which is the general
work that they require of a servant, one of these five men out livinge the
rest had learned so much of their language, as to rebuke them for their bloody
deed, saying that God would be angry with them for it; and that he would in
his displeasure destroy them; but the Salvages (it seems boasting of their
strenght,) replied and said, that they were so many, that God could not kill
them.

The Plague fell on the Indians.
But contrary wise in short time after, the hand of God fell heavily upon them,
with such a mortal stroke, that they died on heaps, as they lay in their
houses and the living; that were able to shift for themselves would run away,
and let them die, and let there Carkasesly above the ground without burial. For
in a place where many inhabited, there had been but one left a live, to tell
what became of the rest, the livinge being (as it seems) not able to bury the
dead, The livinge not able to bury the dead.
they were left for Crows, Kites, and vermin to pray upon. And the bones and
skulls upon the several places of their habitations, made such a spectacle
after my coming into those parts, that as I travailed in that Forest, nere
the Massachussets, it seemed to me a new found Golgatha.

But otherwise it is the custom of those Indian people, to bury their dead
ceremoniously, and carefully, and then to abandon that place, because they have
no desire the place should put them in mind of mortality: and this mortality
was not ended, when the Brownists of new Plimmouth were settled at Patuxet in
New England, and by all likelihood the sickness that these Indians died of,
was the Plague, as by conference with them since my arrival, and habitation in
those parts, I have learned. And by this means there is as yet but a small
number of Salvages in New England to that, which had been in former time, and
the place is made so much the more fit, 2. Sam. 24.
for the English Nation to inhabit in, and erect in it Temples to the glory of
God.

CHAP. IV. Of their Houses and Habitations.
THe Natives of New England are accustomed to build them houses, much like the
wild Irish, they gather Poles in the woods and put the great end of them in
the ground, placinge them in form of a circle or circumference, and bendinge
the topps of them in form of an Arch, they bind them together with the Bark
of Walnut trees, which is wondrous tuffe, so that they make the same round on
the Topp.

For the smooke of their fire, to assend and pass through? these they cover
with matts, some made of reeds, and some of long flagges, or sedge finely
sowed together with needles made of the splinter bones of a Cranes leg, with
threeds, made of their Indian hemp, which their groueth naturally, leaving
several places for doors, which are covered with mats, which may be rolled up,
and let down again at their pleasures, making use, of the several doors,
according as the wind sitts, the fire is always made in the midst of the
house, with wind falls commonly: yet some times they fell a tree, that grows
near the the house and by drawning in the end thereof maintain the fire on
both sids, burning the tree by Degrees shorter and shorter, until it be all
consumed; for it burns night and day, their lodging is made in three places
of the house about the fire, they lie upon plankes commonly about a foot or
18. inches above the ground raised upon railes that are borne up upon forks
they lay mats under them, and Coats of Deares skins otters beavers Racownes
and of Bears hides, all which they have dressed and converted into good lether
with the hair on for their coverings and in this manner they lie as warm as
they desire in the night they take their rest, in the day time, either the
kettle is on with fish or flesh, by no allowance: or else, the fire is employed
in roasting of fishes, which they delight in, the air does beget good
stomachs, and they feed continually, and are no niggards of their vittels, for
they are willing, that any one shall eat with them, Nay if any one, that shall
come into their houses, and there fall a sleep, when they see him disposed to
lie down, they will spread a matt for him, of their own accord, and lay a
roll of skins for a boulster, and let him lie? if he sleep until their
meat be dished up, they will set a wooden boule of meat by him that sleeps,
and wake him saying Cattup keen Meckin: That is, if you be hungry, there is
meat for you, where if you will eat you may, such is their Humanity.

Likewise when they are minded to remoove, they carry away the mats with them,
other materiales the place adjoining will yeald, they use not to winter and
summer in one place, for that would be a reason to make fuel scarce, but after
the manner of the gentry of Civilized natives, remoove for their pleasures,
some times to their hunting places where they remain keeping good hospitality,
for that season; and sometimes to their fishing places, where they abide for
that season likewise: and at the spring, when fish comes in plentifully, they
have meetinges from several places, where they exercise themselves in gaminge,
and playing of juglinge tricks, and all manner of Revelles, which they are
deligted in, that it is admirable to behold, what pastime they use, of
several kinds, every one striving to surpass each other, after this manner
they spend their time.

CHAP. V. Of their Religion.
IT has bin a common received opinion from Cicero, that there is no people so
barbarous, but have some worshipp, or other in this particular, I am not of
opinion rherein with Tully; and surely, If he had bin amongst those people so
long as I have bin, and conversed so much with them, touching this matter of
Religion, he would have changed his opinion, neither should we have found this
error, amongst the rest, by the help of that wodden prospect, if it had not
been so unadvisedly built upon such high land as that Coast. (all men's
judgments in general,) does not yield, had he but taken the judicial
council of Sir William Alexander, that setts this thing forth in an exact and
conclusive sentence; if he be not too obstinate? he would grant that worthy
writer, that these people are sine fide, sine lege, and sine rege, and he has
exemplified this thing by a familiar demonstration, which I have by long
experience observed to be true.

And me thinks, it is absurd to say they have a kind of worship, and not be
able to demonstrate whom or what it is they are accustomed to worship. For my
part I am more willing to believe that the Elephants (which are reported to be
the most in telligible of all beasts) do worship the moon, for the reasons
given by the author of this report as Mr. Thomas May, the minion of the Muses
dos recite it in his contimation, of Lucans historical poem, rather then this
man, to that I must be constrained, to conclude against him, and Cicero; that
the Natives of New England have no worship nor religion at all, and I am sure
it has been so observed by those that need not the help of a wodden prospect
for the matter.

CHAP. VI. Of the Indians apparel.
THe Indians in these parts do make their apparel, of the skins of several
sorts of beasts, and commonly of those, that do frequent those parts where
they do live, yet some of them for variety, will have the skins of such
beasts that frequent the parts of their neighbors, which they purchase of
them, by Commerce and Trade.

The Indians make good lether.
These skins they couvert into very good lether, making the same plume and
soft. Some of these skins they dress with the hair on, and some with the
hair off; the hairy side in winter time they wear next their bodies, and in
warm weather, they wear the hair outwardes: they make likewise some Coats
of the Feathers of Turkies, which they weave together with twine of their own
making, very prittily: these garments they wear like mantels knit over their
shoulders, and put under their arm: they have likewise another sort of
mantels, made of Mose skinnnes, which beast is a great large Dear, so big as
a horse, these skins they commonly dress bare, and make them wondrous white,
and stripe them with size, round about the borders, in form like lace set on
by a Tailor, and some they stripe with size, Indians ingenious workmen for
their garments.
in works of several fashions very curious, according to the several
fantasies of the workmen, wherein they strive to excel one another: And
Mantels made of Bears skins is an usual wearinge, among the Natives, that
live where the Bears do haunt: they make shoes of Mose skins, which is the
principal leather used to that purpose; and for want of such lether (which is
the strongest) they make shoes of Deeres skins, very handsomely and
commodious, and of such deeres skins as they dress bare, they make
stockinges, that comes within their shoes, like a stirrup stockinge, and is
fastened above at their belt which is about their middell; Every male after he
attaines unto the age, which they call Pubes, wereth a belt about his middell,
and a broad piece of lether that goes between his legs, and is tuckt up both
before and behind under that belt, The modesty of the Indian men.
and this they wear to hide their secreats of nature; which by no means they
will suffer to be seen, so much modesty they use in that particular, those
garments they always put on, when they go a huntinge to keep their skins
from t^^ brush of the Shrubbs, and when they have rheir Apparel one, they
look like Irish in their trouses, the Stockinges join so to their breeches. A
good well grown dear skin is of great account with them, and it must have the
tale on, or else they account it defaced, the tale being three times as long as
the tales of our English Dear, yea four times so long, this when they
travel is raped round about their body, and with a girdle of their making,
bound round about their middles, to which girdle is fastened a bagg, in which
his instruments be, with which he can strike fire upon any occasion.

Indians travail with materials to strike fire at all times.
Thus with their bow in their left hand, and their quiver of Arrows at their
back, hanging one their left shoulder with the lower end of it, in their right
hand, they will run away a dog trot, until they come to their journey end,
and in this kind of ornament, (they do seem to me) to be hansomer, then when
they are in English apparel, their gesture being answerable to their one
habit and not unto ours.

Their women have shoes and stockinges to wear likewise when they please,
such as the men have, but the mantle they use to cover their nakedness with,
is much longer then that, which the men use; for as the men have one Deeres
skinn, the women have two soed together at the full lenght, and it is so lardge
that it trailes after them, like a great Ladies trane, and in time I think
they may have their Pages to bear them up and where the men use but one Bears
skinn for a Mantle, the women have two soed together; and if any of their women
would at any time shift one, they take that which they intend to make use of,
and cast it over them round, before they shifte away the other, for modesty,
The Indians ashamed of their nakedness.
being unwilling to be seen to discover their nakedness, and the one being so
cast over, they slip the other from under them in a decent manner, which is to
be noted in people uncivilized, tberein they seem to have as much modesty as
civilized people, and deserve to be applauded for it.

CHAP. VII. Of their Childbearing, and delivery, and what manner of persons
they are.
THe women of this Country, are not suffered to be used for procreation, until
the ripeness of their age; at which time they wear a redd cap made of lether
in form like to our flat caps, and this they wear for the space of 12.
months: for all men to take notice of them that have any mind to a wife; and
then it is the custom of some of their Sachems or Lords of the territories, to
have the first say or maidenhead of the females? (very apt they are) to be with
child, and very laborious when they bear children, yea when they are as great
as they can be, The women big with child, very laborious.
yet in that case they neither forbear labor, nor travail, I have seen
them in that plight with burdens at their backs enough to load a horse, yet
do they not miscarry, but have a fair delivery, and a quick, their women are
very good midwifes, and the women very lusty after delivery and in a day or two
will travel or trudge about. Their infants are borne with hair on their
heads; and are of complexion white as our nation, but their mothers in their
infancy make a bath of Wallnut leaves, Children bathed to stain the skin.
husks of Walnuts, and such thing as will stain their skin for ever,
wherein they dip and wash them to make them tawny, the color of their hair
is black, and their eyes black, these infants are carried at their mothers
backs, by the help of a cradle made of a board forket at both ends, whereon the
child is fast bound, and wrapped in furs: his knees thrust up toward his
belly, because they may be the more useful for them when he sits, which is
as a dog does on his bumme, and this cradle surely preserues them better then
the cradles of our nation; for as much, as we find them well propertioned not
any of them, crooked backed or wry legged, and to give their charracter in a
word, they are as proper men and women for feature and limbs as can be found,
for flesh and blood as active: long handed they are, (I never saw a
clunchfisted Salvadg amonst them all in my time.) The color of their eyes
being so generally black, made a Salvage (that had a young infant whose eyes
were gray,) showed him to us and said they were English men eyes, I told the
Father, that his son was nan weeteo, which is a bastard, he replied titta
Cheshetue squaa, which is he could not tell; his wife might play the whore and
this child the father desired might have an English name, because of the
likeness of his eyes which his father had in admiration, because of novelty
amongst their Nation.

CHAP. VIII. Of their Reverence, and respect to age.
IT is a thing to be admired, and indeed made a president, that a Nation yet
uncivilizied, should more respect age then some nations civilized; Age honored
among the Indians
since there are so many precepts both of divine and humane writers extant:
toinstruct more Civil Nations in that particular wherein they excel, the
younger are always obedient unto the elder people, and at their commands in
every respect without grummbling, in all councels (as therein they are
circumspect to do their acciones by advise and counsel and not rashly or
inconsiderately, the younger men's opinion shall be heard, but the old men's
opinion and council embraced and followed, besides as the elder feed and
provide for the younger in infancy: so do the younger after being grown to
years of manhood, provide for those that be aged, and in distribution of
Accres the elder men are first served, by their dispensator and their counsels
(especially if they be powahs) are esteemed as oracles amongst the younger
Natives.

The consideration of these things, me thinks should reduce some of our
irregular young people of civilized Nations: when this story shall come to
their knowledge, to better manners, and make them ashamed of their former error
in this kind, and to become hereafter more duetyfull, which I as a friend (by
observation having found) have herein recorded for that purpose.

CHAP. IX. Of their pretty comuring tricks.
IF we do not judge amiss of these Salvage in accounting them witches, yet
out of all question, we may be bold to conclude them to be but weak witches,
such of them as we call by the names of Powahs some correspondency they have
with the Devil, out of al doubt as by some of their accions, in which they
glory, is manifested Papasiquineo; that Sachem or Sagamore is a Powah of great
estimation amongst all kind of Salvages, there he is at their Revels (which
is the time when a great company of Salvages meet, from several parts of the
Country, in amity with their neighbors) has advaunced his honor in his feats
or juggling tricks (as I may right term them) to the admiration of the
spectators whom he endeavored to persuade, that he would go under water to
the further side of a river to broad for any man to undertake with a breath,
which thing he performed by swimming over and deluding the company with
casting a mist before their eyes that see him enter in and come out, but no
part of the way he has bin seen, likewise by our English in the heat of all
summer to make Ice appear in a bowl of fair water, first having the water
set before him he has begun his incantation according to their usual
accustom and before the same has bin ended a thick Cloud has darkened the air
and on a sodane a thunder clap has bin heard that has amazed the natives, in
an instant he has showed a firm piece of Ice to flote in the midst of the
bowl in the presence of the vulgar people, which doubtless was done by the
agility of Satan his consort.

And by means of these sleights and such like trivial things, as these they
gain such estimation amongst the rest of the Salvages; that it is thought a
very impious matter for any man to derogate from the words of these Powahs. In
so much as he that should slight them, is thought to commit a crime no less
heinous amongst them, as sacrilege is with us, as may appear by this one
passage, which I will set forth for an instance.

A neighbor of mine that had entertained a Salvage into his service, A Salvage
entertained a factor.
to be his factor for the beaver trade amongst his countrymen, delivered unto
him diverse parcells of commodities, fit for them to trade with; amongst the
rest there was one coat of more esteem then any of the other, and with this
his new entertained merchant man travels amonst his countrymen to truck them
away for beaver: as our custom has bin, the Salvage went up into the Country
amongst his neighbors for beaver and returned with some, but not enough
answerable to his Masteers expectation, but being called to an account and
especially for that one Coat of special note; made answer that he had given
that coat to Tantoquineo, a Powah: to which his master in a rage cried what
have I to do with Tantoquineo? The Salvage very angry at the matter cried,
what you speak; you are not a very good man, will you not give Tantoq. a coat?
what is this? as if he had offered Tantoquineo, the greatest indignity that could
be devised: so great is the estimation and reverence that these people have of
these Ingling Powahs, who are usually sent for (when any person is sick and
ill at ease) to recover them, for which they receive rewards as do our
Chirgeons and Physicians, and they do make a trade of it, An English man cured
of a swelling
and boast of their skill where they come: One amongst the rest did undertake
to cure an Englishman of a swelling of his hand for a parcel of biskett, which
being delivered him, he took the party greived into the woods aside from
company, and with the help of the devil (as may be conjectured) quickly
recovered him of that swelling, and sent him about his work again.

CHAP. X. Of their duels and the honorable estimation of victory obtained
thereby.
THese Salvages are not apt to quarrel one with anothet: yet such has bin the
occasion that a difference has happened, which has grown to that height, How
the Salvages perform their duells.
that it has not bin reconciled otherwise then by combat, which has bin
performed in this manner, the two champions prepared for the fight, with their
bows in hand, and a quiver full of arrows at their backs, they have entered
into the field, the Challenger and challenged have chosen two trees, standing
with in a little distance of each other; they have cast lotts for the chief of
the trees, then either champion setting himself behind his tree watches an
advantage, to let fly his shafts, and to gall his enemy, there they continue
shooting at each other, if by chance they epsy any part open, they endeavor
to gall the combatant in that part; and use much agility in the performance of
the task they have in hand. Resolute they are in the execution of their
vengeance, when once they have begun, and will in no wise be daunted, or
seem to shrinck though they do catch a clap with an arrow, but fight it out
in this manner until one or both be slain.

I have bin showed the places, where such duels have bin performed, Trees
marked where they perform a duel.
and have fuond the trees marked for a memorial of the Combat, where that
champion has stood, that had the hap to be slain in the duel? and they count
it the greatest honor that can be, to the serviving Cumbatant to show the
scares of the wounds, received in this kind of Conflict, and if it happen to
be on the arm as those parts are most in danger in these cases, they will
always wear a bracelet upon that place of the arm, as a trophy of honor to
their dying day.

CHAP. XI. Of the maintaining of their Reputation.
REputation is such a thing, that it keeps many men in awe, even amongst
Civilized nations, and is very much stood upon: it is (as one has very well
noted) the awe of great men and of Kings, and since I have observed it, to be
maintained amongst Salvage people, I cannot choose but give an instance thereof
in this treatise, to confirm the common received opinion thereof.

The Sachem or Sagamore of Sagus made choice, (when he came to man's estate) of
a Lady of noble descent, Daughter to Papasiquineo: the Sachem or Sagamore of
the territories near Merrimack River a man of the best note and estimation in
all those parts (and as my Countryman Mr. Wood declares in his prospect) a
great Nigromancer, A marriage.
this Lady the young Sachem with the consent and good liking of her father
marries, and takes for his wife. Great entertainment, he and his received in
those parts at her fathers hands, where they wear fested in the best manner
that might be expected, according to the Custom of their nation, with
reveling, and such other solemnities as is usual amongst them. The solemnity
being ended, Papasiquineo causes a selected number of his men to wait upon his
Daughter home: into those parts that did properly belong to ber Lord, and
husband, where the attendants had entertainment by the Sachem of Sagus and his
Countrymen: the solemnity being ended, the attendants were gratified.

Not long after the new married Lady had a great desire to see her father, and
her native country, from whence she came, her Lord willing to pleasure her,
and not deny her request (amongst them) thought to be reasonable commanded a
selected number of his own men to conduct his Lady to her Father; wherewith
great respect they brought her: and having feasted there a while, returned to
their own country again, leaving the Lady to continue there at her own
pleasure, amongst her friends, and old acquaintance: where she passed away the
time for a while: and in the end desired to return to her Lord again. Her
father the old Papasiquineo having notice of her intent, An embassage sent from
Papasiquineo to his soon in law, a Sachem.
sent some of his men on embassage to the young Sachem, his son in law, to
let him understand that his daughter was not willing, to absent her self from
his company any longer; and therefore (as the messengers had in charge) desired
the young Lord to send a convoy for her: but he standing upon terms of
honor, and the maintaining of his reputation, returned to his father in law this
answer that when she departed from him, he caused his men to wait upon her
to her fathers territories, as it did become him: but now she had an intend to
return, it did become her father, to send her back with a convoy of his own
people: and that it stood not with his reputation to make himself or his men so
servile, to fetch her again. The old Sachem Papasiquineo having this message
returned, was enraged? to think that his young son in law did not esteem him
at a higher rate, then to capitulate with him about the matter, and return him
this sharp reply; that his daughters blood, and birth deserved no more
respect; then to be so slighted, and therefore if he would have her company,
he were best to send or come for her.

The young Sachem not willing to under value himself, and being a man of a
stout spirit, did not stick to say, that he should either send her, by his
own Convey, or keep her; for he was not determined to stoop so low.

So much these two Sachems stood upon terms of reputation with each other,
the one would not send her, and the other would not send for her, least it
should be any diminishing of honor on his part, that should seem to comply,
that the Lady (when I came out of the Country) remained still with her father;
which is a thing worth the noting, that Salvage people should seek to
maintain their reputation so much as they do.

CHAP. XII. Of their traffic and trade one with another.
ALthough these people have not the use of navigation, whereby they may
traffic as other nations, that are civilized, use to do, yet do they barter
for such commodities as they have, and have a kind of beads; Beads in stead of
Money.
in steed of money, to buy withal such things as they want, which they call
Wampampeak: and it is of two sorts, the one is white, the other is of a violet
color. These are made of the shells of fish; the white with them is as
silver with us; the other as our gould, and for these beads they buy, and sell,
not only amongst themselves, but even with us.

The name of their beads Wampampeak.
We have used to sell them any of our commodities for this Wampampeak, because
we know, we can have beaver again of them for it: and these beads are current
in all the parts of New England, from one end of the Coast to the other.

And although some have indevoured by example to have the like made, of the
same kind of shells, yet none has ever, as yet, attained to any perfection in
the composure of them, but that the Salvages have found a great difference to
be in the one and the other; and have known the counterfett beads from those
of their own making; and have, and do slight them.

The skins of beasts are sold and bartered to such people, as have none of
the same kind in the parts where they live.

Likewise they have earthen potts of diverse sizes, from a quarte to a gallon,
2. or 3. to boil their vittels in; very strong, though they be thin like our
Iron potts.

They have dainty wooden bowls of maple, of high price amongst them, and
these are dispersed by bartering one with the other, and are but in certain
parts of the Country made, where the several trades are appropriated to the
inhabitants of those parts only.

So likewise (at the season of the year) the Salvages that live by the Sea
side for trade with the inlanders for fresh water, reles curious silver reles,
which are bought up of such as have them not frequent in other places,
chestnuts, and such like useful things as one place affords, are sold to
the inhabitants of another: where they are a novelty accounted amongst the
natives of the land; and there is no such thing to barter withal, as is their
Whampampeake.

CHAP. XIII. Of their Magazines or Storehovvses.
THese people are not without providence, though they be uncivilized, but are
careful to preserve foede in store against winter, which is the corn that
they labor and dress in the summer, What care they take, to lay up corn for
winter.
And although they eat freely of it, whiles it is growinge, yet have they a
care to keep a convenient portion thereof; to releeve them in the dead of
winter, (like to the Ant and the Be) which they put under ground.

Their barnes are holes made in the earth, that will hold a Hogshead of corn a
piece in them. In these (when their corn is out of the husk and well dried)
they lay their store in great baskets (which they make of Spark) with matts
under, about the sides and on the top: and putting it into the place made for
it, they cover it with earth: and in this manner it is preserved from
destruction or putrefaction; to be used in case of necessity, and not else.

And I am persuaded, that if they knew the benefit of Salt (as they may in
time,) and the means to make salt meat fresh again, they would endeaver to
preserve fish for winter, as well as corn; and that if any thing bring them
to civility, it will be the use of Salt, to have food in store, which is a
chief benefit in a civilized Commonwealth.

These people have begun already to incline to the use of Salt. They beg
Salt of the English.
Many of them would beg Salt of me for to carry home with them, that had
frequented our howses and had been acquainted with our Salt meats: and Salt
I willingly gave them; although I sold them all things else: only because
they should be delighted with the use there of; and think it a commodity of no
value in it self, allthough the benefit was great, that might be had by the
use of it.

CHAP. XIV. Of their Subtilety.
THese people are not (as some have thought a dull, of slender witted people;
but very ingenious and very subtle. I could give maine instances to maintain
mine opinion of them in this: But I will only relate one, which is a passage
worthy to be observed.

In the Massachussets bay lived Cheecatawback the Sachem or Sagamore of those
territories, who had large dominions, which he did appropriate to himself.

Into those parts came a great company of Salvages, from the territories of
Narohiganset, to the number of 100. persons; and in this Sachems Dominions they
intended to winter.

When they went a hunting for turkies: they spread over such a great scope of
ground, that a Turkey could hardily escape them. Dear they killed up in great
abundance, and feasted their bodies very plentifully: They trade away beavers
skins for corn.
Beavers they killed by no allowance: the skins of those they traded away at
wassaguscus with my neighbors for corn, and such other commodities as they
had need of; and my neighbors had a wonderful great benefit by their being
in those parts. Yea sometimes (like genious fellows) they would present their
Merchant with a fatt beaver skin, A beaver skin with his tail on of great
estimaeion.
always the tail was not diminished, but presented full and whole: although
the tail is a present for a Sachem, and is of such masculaine virtue, that if
some of our Ladies knew the benefit thereof, they would desire to have ships
sent of purpose, to trade for the tail alone, it is such a rarity, as is not
more esteemed of, then reason does require.

But the Sachem Cheecatawback (on whose possessions they usurped, and converted
the commodities thereof to their own use, contrary to his likeing) not being
of power to resist them, practiced to do it by a subtle stratagem. And to
that end gave it out amongst us, A subtle plot of a Sachem.
that the cause why these other Salvages of the Narohigansets, came into these
parts, was to see what strength we were of, and to watch an opportunity to cut
us off, and take that which they found in our custody useful for them; And
added further, they would burn our howses, and that they had caught one of his
men, named Meshebro, and compelled him to discover to them where their barnes,
Magazines, or storehowses were, and had take away his corn, and seemed to be
in a pitiful perplexity about the matter.

And the more to add reputation to this tale, desires that his wifes and
children might be harbered in one of our howses. This was granted, and my
neighbors put on corslets, headpeeces, and weapons defensive and offensive.

This thing being known to Cheecatawback, he caused some of this men to bring
the Narohigansets to trade, that they might see the preparation.

The Salvage that was a stranger to the plott, simply coming to trade, and
finding his merchants, looks like lobsters, all cladd in harness, was in a
maze to think what would be the end of it. Haste he made to trade away his
furs, and took any thing for them, wishing himself well rid of them, and of
the company in the house.

A Salvage scared.
But (as the manner has bin) he must eat some furmety before he go: down
he sits, and eats, and withal had an eye on every side; and now and then saw
a sword, or a dagger laid a thwart a headpeece, which he wondered at, and
asked his guide whether the company were not angry. The guide, (that was privy
to his Lords plot) answered in his language. that he could not tell. But the
harmless Salvage before he had half filled his belly, started upon a
sudden, and ran out of the house in such have, that he left his furmety
there, and stayed not to look behind him who came after: Glad he was that he
had escaped so.

The subtle Sachem he played the tragedian; and fained a fear of being
surprised; and sent to see whether the enemies (as the Messenger termed them)
were not in the house; and comes in a by way with his wifes and children; and
stopps the chinkes of the out house, for fear the fire might be seen in the
night, and be a means to direct his enemies where to find them.

And in the mean time, he prepared for his Ambassador to his enemies a
Salvage, that had lived 12. months in England, to the end it might add
reputation to his embassage. A Salvage that had lived 12. Months in England,
sent for an Ambassador.
This man he sends to those intruding Narohigansets, to tell them that they
did very great injury, to his Lord, to trench upon his prerogatives: and
advised them to put up their pipes, and begone in time: if they would not, that
his Lord would come upon them, and in his aid his friends the English, who were
up in arms already to take his part, and compel them by force to be gone, if
they refused to depart by fair means.

This message coming on the neck of that which doubtless the fearful
Salvage had before related of his escape, A good opportunity of of traffic
lost by the subtility of a Sachem.
and what he had observed; caused all those hundred Narohigansets (that meant
us no hurt) to be gone with bagg, and baggage, And my neighbors were gulled
by the subtilety of this Sachem, and lost the best trade of beaver that ever
they had for the time, and in the end found their error in this kind of
credulity when it was too late.

CHAP. XV. Of their admirable perfection, in the use of the senses.
THis is a thing not only observed by me, and diverse of the Salvages of New
England, but also, by the French men in Nova Francia, and therefore I am the
more encouraged to publish in this Treatice my observation of them, in the use
of their senses: which is a thing that I should not easily have bin induced,
to believe, if I my self, had not bin an eye witness, of what I shall relate.

The Salvages have the sense of seeinge better then the English.
I have observed, that the Salvages have the sense of seeing so far beyond any
of our Nation, that one would almost believe they had intelligence of the
Devil, sometimes: when they have told us of a shipp at Sea, which they have
seen, soener by one hour, yea two hours sail, then any English man that
stood by; of purpose to look out, their sight is so excellent.

Their eyes indeed are black as iett; and that coler is accounted the
strongest for sight. And as they excel us in this particular so much noted, so
I think they excel us in all the rest.

This I am sure, I have well observed, that in the sense of smelling, they have
very great perfection: which is confirmed by the opinion of the French, that
are planted about Canada, who have made relation, That they are so perfect in
the use of that sense, that they will distinguish between a Spaniard and a
Frenchman by the sent of the hand only. Salvages that will distinguish a
Spaniard from a french man by the smell of the hand.
And I am persuaded, that the Author of this Relation has seen very probable
reasons, that have iuduced him, to be of that opinion; and I am the more
willing to give credit thereunto, because I have observed in them so much, as
that comes to.

I have seen a Dear pass by me upon a neck of Land, and a Salvage that has
pursued him by the view.

I have accompanied him in this pursuit; and the Salvage, princking the Dear,
comes where he finds the view of two deares together, leading several ways.
One he was sure, was fresh, but which (by the sense of seeing) he could not
judge, A Dear pursued by the view of the, foot, he was found and killed.
therefore, with his knife, he diggs up the earth of one; and by smelling,
says, that was not of the fresh Dear: the diggs he up the other; and viewing
and smelling to that, concludes it to be the view of the fresh Dear, which he
had pursued, and thereby follows the chase and killes that Dear, and I did
eat part of it with him: such is their perfection in these two senses.

CHAP. XVI. Of their acknowledgement of the Creation, and immortality of the
Soul.
ALthough these Salvages are found to be without Religion, Law, and King (as
Sir William Alexander has well observed,) yet are they not altogether without
the knowledge of God (historically) for they have it amongst them by tradition,
that God made one man and one woman, and bad them live together, and get
children, kill dear, beasts, birds, fish, and foul, and what they would at
their pleasure; and that their posterity was full of evil, and made God so
angry: that he let in the Sea upon them, and drowned the greatest part of
them, that were naughty men, (the Lord destroyed so.)

The belief of the Salvages.
And they went to Sanaconquam who feeds upon them, pointing to the Center of the
Earth: where they imagine is the habitation of the Devil:) the other, (which
were not destroyed,) increased the world; and when they died (because they were
good) went to the house of Kytan, pointing to the setting of the son; where
they eat all manner of dainties, and never take pains (as now) to provide it.

The Son called Kytan.
Kytan makes provision (they say) and saves them that labor and there they
shall live with him forever void of care. And they are persuaded that Kytan is
he that makes corn grow, trees grow, and all manner of fruits.

And that we that use the book of Common prayer, do it to declare to them,
that cannot read, what Kytan has commanded us, and that we do pray to him
with the help of that book; and do make so much account of it, that a
Salvage (who had lived in my house before he had taken a wife, by whom he
had children) made this request to me (knowing that I always used him with
much more respect then others. A Salvage desired to have his son brought up to
learn the book of common prayer.
) That I would let his son be brought up in my house, that he might be
taught to read in that book: which request of his I granted; and he was a
very joyful man to think, that his son should thereby (as he said) become
an Englishman; and then he would be a good man.

I asked him who was a good man; his answer was, he that would not lie, nor
steal.

These, with them, are all the capital crimes, that can be imagined; all other
are nothing in respect of those: and he that is free from these, must live
with Kytan for ever, in all manner of pleasure.

CHAP. XVII. Of their Annals and funerals.
THese people, that have by tradition some touch of the immortality of the
soul, have likewise a custom to make some monuments, over the place where the
corpse is interred: Their custom in burryinge.
But they put a great difference between persons of noble, and of ignoble, or
obscure, or inferior descent. For indeed in the grave of the more noble, they
put a planck in the bottom for the corpse to be laid upon; and on each side a
plancke, and a plancke upon the top in form of a chest, before they cover the
place with earth. This done, Their manner of Monuments.
they erect some thing over the grave in form of a hearse cloth, as was that
of Cheekatawbacks mother, which the Plimmouth planters defaced, because they
accounted it an act of superstition. Which did breed a brawle as has bin
before related: for they hold impious, and inhumane: to deface the monuments of
the dead. They themselves esteem of it as piaculum, and have a custom amongst
them, to keep their annals: and come at certain times to lament, At burrials,
they black their faces.
and bewail the loss of their friend; and use to black their faces, which
they so wear in stead of a mourning ornament for a longer or a shorter time,
according to the dignity of the person: so is their annals kept and observed
with their accustomed solemnity. Afterward they absolutely abandon the place,
because they suppose the sight thereof, will but renew their sorrow.

It was a thing very offensive to them, at our first coming into those parts,
to ask of them for any one that had bin dead; but of later times it is not so
offensively taken, to renew the memory of any deseased person, because by our
example (which they are apt to follow) it is made more familiare unto them;
and they marvel to see no monuments over our dead, and therefore think no
great Sachem is yet come into those parts: or not as yet dead, because they
see the graves all alike.

CHAP. XVIII. Of their Custom in burning the Country, and the reason thereof.
THe Salvages are accustomed, to set fire of the Country in all places where
they come; and to burn it, twize a year, vixe at the Spring, and the fall of
the leaf. The reason that mooves them to do so, The Salvages fire the Country
twice a year.
is because it would other wise be so overgrowne with underweedes, that it
would be all a coppice wood, and the people would not be able in any wise to
pass through the Country out of a beaten path.

The means that they do it with, is with certain mineral stones, rhat they
carry about them: in baggs made for that purpose of the skins of little
beasts which they convert into good lether; carrying in the same a piece of
touch wood (very excellent for that purpose of their own making. These
mineral stones they have from the Piquenteenes (which is to the Southward of
all the plantations in New England) by trade and traffic with those people.

The burning of the grass destroys the underwoods, and so scorcheth the elder
trees, that it shrinkes them, and hinders their grouth very much: So that he
that will look to find large trees, and good timber, must not depend upon the
help, of a wooden prospect to find them on the upland ground; but must seek
for them, (as I and others have done) in the lower grounds where the grounds
are wett when the Country is fired: by reason of the snow water that remains
there for a time, until the Sun by continuance of that has exhaled the
vapoures of the earth, and dried up those places, where the fire (by reason of
the moisture) can have no power to do them any hurt: and if he would endevoure
to find out any goodly Cedars, he must not seek for them on the higher
grounds, but make his inquest for them in the valleys, for the Salvages by this
Custom of theirs, have spoiled all the rest: for this custom has bin
continued from the beginning.

And least their firing of the Country in this manner; should be an occasion of
damnifying us, and indaingering our habitations; we our selves have used
carefully about the same times; to observe the winds and fire the grounds about
our own habitations, to prevent the Damage that might happen by any neglect
thereof, if the fire should come near those howses in our absence.

For when the fire is once kindled, it dilates and spreads it self as well
against, as with the wind; burning continually night and day, until a shewer
of rain falls to quench it.

And this custom of firing the Country is the means to make it passable, and
by that means the trees grow here, and there as in our parks: and makes the
Country very beautiful, and commodious.

CHAP. XIX. Of their inclination to Drunkenness.
ALthough Drunkenness be justly termed a vice, which the Salvages are ignorant
of, yet the benefit is very great, that comes to the planters by the sale of
strong liquor to the Salvages, who are much taken with the delight of it, for
they will pawn their wits, to purchase the acquaintance of it, yet in all the
co^merce that I had with them, I never proffered them any such thing; nay I
would hardly let any of them have a drame unles he were a Sachem, or a
Winnaytue, that is a rich man, or a man of estimation, next in degree to a
Sachem, or Sagamore: I always told them it was amongst us the Sachems drink.
But they say if I come to the Northern parts of the Country. I shall have no
trade, if I will not supply the^ lusty with liquors, it is the life of the
trade, in all those for parts, it so happened, that thus a Salvage desperately
killed himself, when he was drunk, a gunne being charged and the cock up,
he sets the mouth to his breast, and putting back the tricker with his foot,
shot himself dead.

CHAP. XX. That the Salvages live a contended life.
A Gentleman and a traveller, that had bin in the parts of New England for a
time, when he returned again in his discourse of the Country, wondered (as
he said,) that the natives of the land lived so poorly, in so rich a Country,
like to our Beggars in England: Surely that Gentleman had not time or leisure
whiles he was there, truly to inform himself of the state of that Country,
and the happy life the Salvages would lead wear they once brought to
Christianity. The Salvages want the art of navigation


I must confess they want the use and benefit of Navigation (which is the very
sinnus of a flourishing Commonwealth,) yet are they supplied with all manner of
needful things, for the maintenance of life and lifelyhood, Food and raiment
are the chief of all that we make true use of; and of their they find no
want, but have, and may have, them in a most plentiful manner.

If our beggars of England should with so much ease (as they,) furnish
themselves with food, at all seasons, there would not be so many starved in
the streets, neither would so many gaoles be stuffed, or gallouses furnished
with poor wretches, as I have seen them,

But they of this sort of our own nation, that are fit to go to this Canaan
are not able to transport themselves, and most of them unwilling to go from
the good ale tap; which is the very loadstone of the land by which our English
beggars steer their Course: it is the Northpole to which the flowre-deluce of
the compass points; the more is the pity that the Commonalty of our Land are
of such leaden capacities, as to neglect so brave a Country, that does so
plentifully feed Maine lusty and a brave, able men, women, and children that
have not the means that a Civilized Nation has to purchase food and raiment:
which that Country with a little industry: will yield a man in a very
comfortable measure; without overmuch carking.

I cannot deny but a civilized Nation, has the pre-eminence of an uncivilized,
by means of those instruments that are found to be common amongst civil
people, and the uncivile want the use of, to make themselves masters of those
ornaments, that make such a glorious show, that will give a man occasion to
cry, sie transit gloria Mundi.

Now since it is but food and raiment that men that live needs (though not
all alike,) why should not the Natives of New England be said to live richly
having no want of either: Clothes are the badge of sin, and the more variety
of fashions is but the greater abuse of the Creature, the beasts of the forest
there do serve to furnish them at any time, when they please: fish and flesh
they have in great abundance which they both roast and boil.

They are indeed not served in dishes of plate with variety of Sauces of
procure appetite, that needs not there. The rarity of the air begot by the
medicinable quality of the sweet herbs of the Country, always procures good
stomakes to the inhabitants.

I must needs commend them in this particular, that though they buy many
commodities of our Nation, yet they keep but few, and those of special use.

They love not to be cumbered with many utensilles, and although every
proprietor knows his ownes, yet all things (so long as they will last,) are
used in common amongst them: A biscuit cake given to one; that one breaks it
equally into so many parts, as there be persons in his company, and distributes
it. Platoes Commonwealth is so much practiced by these people.

According to humane reason guided only by the light of nature, They lead a
happy life, being void of care.
these people leads the more happy and freer life, being void of care, which
torments the minds of so many Christians: They are not delighted in baubles,
but in useful things.

Their natural drink is of the Cristall fountain; and this they take up in
their hands, by joining them close together. They take up a great quantity at a
time, and drink at the wrists, It was the sight of such a feate, which made
Diogenes hurl away his dishe, and like one that would have this principal
confirmed. Natura paucis contentat, use a dish no more.

I have observed that they will not be troubled with superfluous commodities.
Such things as they find, they are taught by necessity to make use of. they
will make choice of; and seek to purchase with industry so that in respect,
that their life is so void of care, They make use of ordinary things, one of
another as common.
and they are so loving also that they make use of those things they enjoy (the
wife only excepted) as common goods, and are therein, so compassionate that
rather than one should starve through want they would starve all, thus do they
pass away they time merrily, not regarding our pomp (which they see daily
before their faces) but are better content with their own, which some men
esteem so meanly of.

They may be rather accounted to live richly, wanting nothing that is
needful; and to be commended for leading a contented life, the younger being
ruled by the Elder, and the Elder ruled by the Powahs, and the Powahs are ruled
by the Devil, and then you may imagine what good rule is like to be amongst
them.

FINIS.
NEW ENGLISH CANAAN, OR NEW CANAAN.
The second Book. Containing a description of the bewty of the Country with
her natural indowements, both in the Land and Sea, with the great Lake of
Erocoise.
CHAP. I. The general Survey of the Country:
IN the Month of June, Anno Salutis: 1622. It was my chance to arrive in the
parts of New England with 30. Servants, and provision of all sorts fit for a
plantation: And whiles our howses were building, I did endeavor to take a
survey of the Country: The more I looked, the more I liked it.

A famous Country.
And when I had more seriously considered, of the bewty of the place, with all
her fair indowments, I did not think that in all the known world it could be
paralel'd. For so many goodly groves of trees; dainty fine round rising
hillucks: Their fountains are as clear as Cristall.
delicate fair large plains; sweet cristall fountains; and clear running
streams, that twine in fine meanders through the meads, making so sweet a
murmering noise to hear, as would even lull the senses with delight a sleep,
so pleasantly do, they glide upon the pebble stones, jetting most jocundly
where they do meet; and hand in hand run down to Neptunes Court, to pay
the yearly tribute, which they owe to him as sovereign Lord of all the
springs. Contained within the volume of the Land, Great store of fowls, fish
and turtledoves.
Fowls in abundance, Fish in multitude, and discovered besides; Millions of
Turtledoves one the green boughs: which sat pecking, of the full ripe
pleasant grapes, that were supported by the lusty trees, whose fruitful load
did cause the arms to bend, which here and there dispersed (you might see)
Lillies and of the Daphnean-tree, which made the Land to me seem paradise,
for in mine eye, it was Natures Masterpiece: Her chiefest Magazine of all,
where lives her store: if this Land be not rich, then is the whole world poor.

What I had resolved on, I have really performed, and I have endeavored, to
use this abstract as an instrument, to be the means, to communicate the
knowledge which I have gathered, by my many years residence in those parts,
unto my Countrymen, to the end, that they may the better perceive their error,
who cannot imagine, that there is any Country in the universal world, which
may be compared unto our native soil, I will now discover unto them a Country
whose indowments are by learned men allowed to stand in a parallel with the
Israelites Canaan, which none will deny, to be a land far more excellent then
Old England in her proper nature.

This I consider I am bound in duty (as becomes a Christian man) to
perform, for the glory of God, in the first place; next (according to Cicero,)
to acknowledge that, Non nobis solum nati sumus, sed partim patria, partim
parents, partim amiei vindicant.

For which cause I must approove of the indeavoures of my Country men, that
have bin studious to enlarge the territories of his Majesty's empire by
planting Coloines in America.

And of all other I must applaude the judgment of those that have made choice
of this part (whereof I now treat) being of all other most absolute, as I will
make it appear, heareafter by way of parallel, among those that have settled
themselves in new England, some have gone for their conscience sake, (as they
profess) and I wish that they may plant the Gospel of Jesus Christ: as
becomes them, sincerely and without satisme or faction, whatsoever their
former or present practices are (which I intend not to justify, howsoever they
have deserved (in mine opinion) some commendationes, in that they have
furnished the Country, so commodiously in so short a time, although it has bin
but for their own profit, yet posterity will taste the sweetness of it, and
that very suddenly.

And since my task in this part of mine abstract, is to entreat of the
natural indowments, of the Country, I will make a breise demostration of them
in order, severally, according to their several qualities: and show you what
they are, and what profitable use may be made of them by industry.

CHAP. II. what trees are there and how commodious.
Oaks are there of two sorts, 1. Oak.
white and redd, excellent timber for the building, both of howses, and
shipping: and they are found to be a timber, that is more tough then the oak of
England. They are excellent for pipe-staves and such like vessels; and
pipe-staves at the Canary Islands are a prime commodity, I have known them
there at 35. p. the 1000. and will purchase a freight of wines there before any
commodity in England, their only wood being pine, of which they are enforced,
also to build shippinge: of oackes there is great abundance in the parts of New
England, and they may have a prime place in the Catalogue of commodities.

Ash there is store and very good for staves, 2. Ash.
oars or pikes, and may have a place in the same Catalogue.

Elem: 3. Elm.
of this sort of trees, there are some; but there has not as yet bin found any
quantity to speak of.

Beech there is of two sorts, 4. Beech.
redd and white very excellent for trenchers, or chaires and also for oars and
may be accounted for a commodity.

Wallnut, 5. Wallnut.
of this sort of wood there is infinite store and there are 4. sorts, it is an
excellent wood, for many uses approoved, the younger trees are employed for
hoopes, and are the best for that imployement of all other stuff whatsoever,
the Nutts serve when they fall to feed our swine, which make them the
delicatest bacon of all other food, and is therein a chief commodity.

Chestnutt, 6. Chestnuts.
of this sort there is very great plenty; the timber whereof is excellent for
building and is a very good commodity, especially in respect of the fruit, both
for man and beast.

Pine, 7. Pine.
of this sort there is infinite store in some parts of the Country. I have
traveled 10. miles together, where is little, or no other wood growing. And of
these may be made rosin, pitch, and tar, which are such useful commodities,
that if we had them not from other Countries in Amity with England, our
Navigation would decline. Then how great the commodity of it will be to our
Nation, to have it of our own, let any man judge.

Cedar, of this sort there is abundaunce; 8. Cedar.
and this wood was such as Solomon used for the building of that glorious
Temple at Jerusalem, and there are of these Cedars, fur trees, and other
materials necessary for the building of many fair Temples, if there were any
Salomons to be at the Cost of them, and if any man be desirous to find out in
what part of the Country the best Cedars are, he must get into the bottom
grounds, and in valleys that are wet at the spring of the year, where the
moisture preserves them from the fire in spring time and not in a wooden
prospect, This wood cutts red, and is good for bedsteads tables and chests, and
may be placed in the Catalogue of Commodities.

Cypres, of this there is great plenty, and vulgarly this tree has bin taken,
9. Cypres.
for another sort of Cedar; but workmen put a difference between this Cypres,
and the Cedar, especially in the color; for this is white and that redd white
and likewise in the finenes of the leaf and the smoothnes of the barque. This
wood is also sweeter then Cedar and (as it is in Garrets herball) a more
bewtifull tree; it is of all other to my mind, most bewtifull, and cannot be
denied to pass for a commodity.

Spruce, 10. Spruce.
of these there are infinite store, especially in the Northern parts of the
Country: and they have bin approoved by workmen in England, to be more tough,
then those that they have out of the east country: from whence we have them
for masts and yards of shipppes.

The Spruce of this Country are found to be 3. and 4. fadum about.
The Spruce of this country are found to be 3. and 4. fadum about: and are
reputed able single, to make masts for the biggest ship, that sails on the
maine Ocean, without peesing, which is more than the East country can afford.
And seeing that Navigation is the very sinneus of a flourishing Commonwealth,
it is fitting, to allow the Spruce tree a principal place, in the Catalogue of
commodities.

Alder, 11. Alder.
of ths sort there is plenty by rivers sides good for turners.

Birch, 12. Birch.
of this there is plenty in diverse parts of the Country. Of the barck of these
the Salvages of the Northern parts make them delicate Canowes, so light, that
two men will transport one of them over Land whether they list, and yet one of
them will transporte ten or twelffe Salvages by water at a time.

Mayple, 13. Maple.
of those trees there is great abundance, and these are very excellent, for
bowls. The Indians use of it to that purpose, and is to be accounted a good
commodity.

Elderne, there is plenty in that Country, of this The Salvages make their
Arrows, 14. Elderne.
and it has no strong unsavery sentlike our Eldern in England.

Hawthorne, of this there is two sorts, 15. Hawthrone.
one of this which bears a well tasting berry, as bigg as ones thumb, and
looks like little Queen apples,

Vines, of this kind of trees, 16. Vines.
there are that bear grapes of three colors, that is to say: white, black,
and red.

The Country is so apt for vines, that (but for the fire at the spring of the
year) the vines would so over spread the land, that one should not be able to
pass for them, the fruit is as bigg of some; as a musket bullet, and is
excellent in taste.

Plumtrees, of this kind there are many; 1. Plummes.
some that bear fruit as bigg as our ordinary bullis: others there be, that
do bear fruit much bigger than pear plummes, their color redd, and their
stones flat, very delitious in taste.

Cheritrees, 17. Cherries
there are abundance, but the fruit is as small as our sloes, but if any of
them were replanted, and grafted, in an orchard they would soon be raised by
means of such and the like fruits.

There is great abundance of Musk Roses in diverse places: 19. Roses.
the water distilled excels our Rosewater of England.

There is abundance af Sassafras and Sarsaperilla, 20. Sassafras and 21.
Sarsaperilla.
growing in diverse places of the land; whose budds at the spring do perfume
the air.

Other trees there are not greatly material to be recited in this abstract, as
goose berries, rasberies, and other beries.

There is Hemp that naturally grows, finer then our Hemp of England.

CHAP. III. Potthearbes and other herbs for Sallets.
THe Country there naturally affords very good potherbes and sallet herbs
and those of a more maskuline virtue then any of the same species in England;
Potmarioram Time, Alexander, Angellica, Pursland, Violets, and Anniseeds,
as Potmarioram, Time, Alexander, Angellica, Pursland, Violets, and Anniseeds,
in very great abundance: and forth pott I gathered in summer, dried and
crumbled into a bagg to preserve for winter store.

Hunnisuckles and Balm.
Hunnisuckles, balm, and diverse other good herbs are there, that grow without
the industry of man, that are used when occasion serves very commodiously.

CHAP. IV. Of Birds, and fethered fowls.
NOw that I have briefly showed the Commodity of the trees, herbs, and fruits.
I will show you a description of the fowls of the air, as most proper in
ordinary course.

And first of the Swanne, Swannes*
because she is the biggest of all the fowls of that Country. There are of
them in Merrimack River, and in other parts of the country, great store at the
seaons of the year.

The flesh is not much desired of the inhabitants, but the skins may be
accounted a commodity, fit for diverse uses, both for feathers, and quiles.

Geese, pide. white, and gray.
There are Geese of three sorts vize brant Geese, which are pide, and white
Geese which are bigger, and gray Geese which are as bigg and bigger then the
tame Geese of England, with black legs, black bills, heads, and necks black;
the flesh far more excellent, then the Geese of England, wild or tame, yet
the purity of the air is such, that the biggest is accounted but an
indifferent meal for a couple of men. There is of them great abundance. I have
had often 1000. before the mouth of my gunne, I never saw any in England for my
part so fatt, as I have killed there in those parts, the feathers of them makes
a bed, softer then any down bed that I have lain on: and is there a very good
commodity, Feathers pay for powether and shot.
the feathers of the Geese that I have killed in a short time, have paid for all
the powther and shot, I have spent in a year, and I have fed my dogs with as
fatt Geese there, as I have ever fed upon my self in England.

Ducks pide, gray, and black
Ducks, there are of three kinds, pide Ducks, gray Ducks, and black Ducks in
great abundance: the most about my habitation were black Ducks: and it was a
noted Custom at my house, to have every man's Duck upon a trencher, and then
you will think a man was not hardly used, they are bigger boddied, then the
tame Ducks of England: Very fatt and dainty flesh.

The common dogs fees were the gibletts, unless they were boiled now and than
for to make broth.

Teales green and blew.
Teales, there are of two sorts green winged, and blew winged: but a dainty
bird, I have bin much delighted with a roast of these for a second course, I had
plenty in the rivers and ponds about my house.

Widggens there are, Widggens.
and abundance of other water foul, some such as I have seen, and such as I
have not seen else where, before I came into those parts, which are little
regarded.

Simpes, Simpes.
there are like our Simpes in all respects, with very little difference. I have
shot at them only, to see what difference I could find between them and and
those of my native Country, and more I did not regard them.

Sanderlings are a dainty bird, Sanderlings.
more full boddied than a Snipe, and I was much delighted to feed on them,
because they were fatt, and easy to come by, because I went but a stepp or to
for them: and I have killed between four and five dozen at a shoot which
would load me home.

Their food is at ebbing water on the sands, of small seeds, that grows on
weeds there, and are very good pastime in August.

Cranes, there are great tore, Cranes.
that ever more came there at S. David's day, and not before: that day they
never would miss.

These sometimes eat our corn, and do pay for their presumption well enough;
and serves there in powther, with turnips to supply the place of powthered
beef, and is a goodly bird in a dishe, and no discommodity.

Turkies there are, Turkies.
which diverse times in great flocks have sallied by our doors; and then a
gunne; (being commonly in a readiness,) salutes them with such a courtesy, as
makes them take a turn in the Cook room. They dance by the door so well.

Of these there has bin killed, that have weighed forty eight pound a piece.

They are by mainy degrees sweeter then the tame Turkies of England, feed them
how you can.

I had a Salvage who has taken out his boy in a morning, and they have brought
home their loades about noone.

I have asked them what number they found in the woods, who have answered Neent
Metawna, which is a thosand that day; the plenty of them is such in those
parts. They are easily killed at rooste, because the one being killed, the
other sit fast nevertheless, and this is no bad commodity.

There are a kind of fowls which are commonly called Pheisants, Pheisants.
but whether they be pheysants or no, I will not take upon me, to determine.
They are in form like our pheisant hen of England. Both the male and the
female are alike; but they are rough footed; and have stareing feathers about
the head and neck, the body is as bigg as the pheysant hen of England; and
are excellent white flesh, and delicate white meat, yet we seldom bestow a
shoot at them.

Partridges bigger in body as those of England.
Partridges, there are much, like our Partridges of England, they are of the
same plumes, but bigger in body. They have not the sign of the horseshoe on
the breast as the Partridges of England; nor are they colored about the heads
as those are; they sit on the trees. For I have seen 40. in one tree at a
time: yet at night they fall on the ground, and sit until morning so together;
and are dainty flesh.

Quails bigger body as those in England.
There are quails also, but bigger then the quails in England. They take trees
also: for I have numbered 60. upon a tree at a time. The cocks do call at the
time of the year, but with a different note from the cock quails of England.

The Larkes sing not.
The Larkes there, are like our Larkes of England in all respects: saving that
they do not it use to sing at all.

There are Owls of diverse kinds: Owls.
but I did never hear any of them whop as ours do.

The Crows smell and taste of Musk in summer, but not in winter
There are Crows, kights and rooks that do differ in some respects from those
of England. The Crows (which I have much admired, what should be the cause)
both smell and taste of Musk in summer, but not in winter.

Hawks of five sorts.
There are Hawks in New England of 5. sorts, and these of all other fether
fowls I must not omit, to speak of, nor need I to make any Apology for my
self, concerning any trespass, that I am like to make upon my judgment,
concerning the nature of them, having bin bred in so genious a way, that I had
the common use of them in England: and at my first arrival in those parts
practiced to take a Lannaret, A Lanneret.
which I reclaimed, trained, and made flying in a fortnight, the same being a
passinger at Michuelmas. I found that these are most excellent Mettell, rank
winged, well conditioned, and not tickleish footed, and having whoods, bells,
luers, and all things fitting, was desirous to make experiment of that kind of
Hawke, before any other.

And I am persuaded: that Nature has ordained them to be of a far better
kind, then any that have bin used in England. They have neither dorre, nor
worm to feed upon (as in other parts of the world) the Country affording none,
the use whereof in other parts, makes the Lannars there more bussardly, then
they be in New England.

There are likewise Fawcons, Fawcons*
and tassell gentles, admirable well shaped birds, and they will tower up when
they purpose to pray, and on a sudden, when they esspie their game, they will
make such a cancellere, that one would admire to behold them, Some there are
more black, then any that have bin used in England.

The Tassell gent, (but of the least size) is an ornament for a person of
esimation among the Indians to wear in the knot of his lock, with the train
upright, the body dried and stretched out. They take a great pride in the
wearing of such an ornament, and give to one of us (that shall kill them one
for that purpose) so much beaver as is worth three pounds sterling very
willingly.

These do us but little trespass, because they pray on such birds as are by the
Sea side, and not on our Chickens. Goshawkes there are, and Tassels.

Goshawkes well shaped
The Tassels are short trussed bussards; but the Goshawkes are well shaped, but
they are small; some of white male, and some redd male, I have seen one with
8. bars in the train. These fall on our bigger poultry: the lesser chicken.
I think they scorn to make their pray of; for commonly the Cock goes to
wrack. Of these I have seen many, and if they come to trespass me, I lay the
law to them with the gunne, and take them damage fesant.

Marlins small and great.
There are very many Marlins; some very small, and some so large as is the
Barbary Tassell.

I have often beheld these pretty birds, how they have scoured after the black
bird, which is a small sized Choffe that eats the Indian maisze.

Sparhawkes there are also, Sparhawkes.
the fairest, and best shaped birds that I have ever beheld of that kind,
those that are little, no use is made of any of them, neither are they regarded,
I only tried conclusions with a Lannaret at first coming; and when I found,
what was in that bird, I turned him going: but for so much as I have observed
of those birds, they may be a fit present for a prince; and for goodness too
be preferred before the Barbary, or any other used in Christendom, and
especially the Lannars and Lannarets.

A Hunning bird, is as small as a Beetle. His bill as sharp as a needle point,
and his feathers like silk.
There is a curious bird to see to, called a hunning bird, no bigger then a
great Beetle; that out of question lives upon the Be, which he eats and
catches amongst Flowers: For it is his Custom to frequent those places,
Flowers he cannot feed upon by reason of his sharp bill, which is like the
point of a Spannish needle, but short. His feathers have a glass like silk,
and as he stirs, they show to be of a chaingable color: and has bin, and
is admired for shape color, and size.

CHAP. V. Of the Beasts, of the forest.
NOw that I have made a rehearsal of the birds, and fethered Fowls, which
participate most of air, I will give you a description of the beasts, and show
you, what beasts are bred in those parts, and what my experience has gathered,
by observation of their kind, and nature, I begin with the most useful and
most beneficial beast, which is bredd in those parts, which is the Dear.

Dear of 3. kinds.
There are in this Country, three kinds of Dear, of which there are great
plenty, and those are very useful.

Mose or Red dear.
First, therefore I will speak of the Elke, which Salvages call a Mose: it is a
very large Dear, with a very fair head, and a broad palm, like the palm of
a fallow Deares horn, but much bigger, and is 6. footewide between the tipps,
which grow curbing downwards: He is of the bigness of a great horse.

Mose or dear greater then a horse, the height of them 18. hand fulles.
There have bin of them, seen that has bin 18. handfuls high: he has a bunch
of hair under his jaws: he is not swifte, but strong and large in body, and
long legged; insomuch that he does use to kneel, when he feeds on grass.

They bring forth three faunes at one time.
He brings forth three faunes, or young ones, at a time; and being made
tame, would be good for draught, and more useful (by reason of their strength)
then the Elke of Raushea. These are found very frequent, in the northern parts
of New England, their flesh is very good food, and much better then our redd
Dear of England.

They make good lether of the hides of Dear.
Their hids are by the Salyages converted into very good lether, and dressed as
white as milk.

Of this lether, the Salvages make the best shoes, and use to barter away the
skins to other Salvages, that have none of that kind of bests in the parts
where they live. Very good buffe may be made of the hids, I have seen a hide
as large as any horse hide that can be found. There is such abundance of them
that the Salvages, at hunting time, have killed of them so many, that they have
bestowed six or seven at a time, upon one English man whom they have borne
affection to.

The midling Dear or fallow Dear.
There is a second sort of Dear (less then the redd Dear of England, but much
bigger then the English fallow Dear) swift of foot, but of a more dark
color; with some griseld hears. When his coat is full grown in the summer
season, his horns grow curving, with a crooked beam, resembling our redd
Dear, not with a palm like the fallow Dear.

These bring 3. fawnes at a time, spotted like our fallow Deares fawnes; the
Salvages say, four, I speak of what I know to be true; for I have killed, in
February a do with three fawnes in her belly, all heared, and ready to fall;
for these Dear fall their fawnes, 2. months sooner; then the fallow Dear of
England. There is such abundance of them, that an hundred have bin found at the
spring of the year, within the compass of a mile.

Trappes to catch the Dear.
The Salvages take these in trappes made of their natural Hemp, which they
place in the earth; where they fell a tree for browse, and when he rounds the
tree for the browse, if he tread on the trapp, he is horsed up by the leg,
by means of a pole that starts up, and catches him.

Their hides the Saluages use for clothing, and will give for one hide killed
in season 2. 3. or 4. beaver skins, which will yield pounds a piece in that
Country: so much is the Deares hide prised with them above the beaver. I have
made good merchandise of these, the flesh is far sweeter then the venison of
England: and he feeds fatt and lean together as a swine, or mutton, where
as our Dear of England feed fatt on the out side, they do not croake at
rutting time, nor spendle shafte, nor is their flesh discolored at rutting. He
that will impale ground fitting, may be brought once in the year, wherewith
bats and men he may take so many to put into that park, as the hides will pay
the chardge of impaleinge, If all these things be well considered, the Dear,
as well as the Mose, may have a principal place in the catalogue of
commodities.

The Humbles was the dogs fee.
I for my Part may be bold to tell you, that my house, was not without the
flesh of this sort of Dear, winter nor summer, the humbles was ever my dogs
fee, which by the wesell, was hanged on the bar in in the Chimny, for his
diet only: for he has brought to my stand a brace in a morning, one after the
other, before sun rising, which I have killed.

There is likewise, a third sort of dear, less then the other, Roe bucks or
Rain Dear.
(which are a kind of rain dear) to the southward of all the English
plantations, they are excellent good flesh. And these also bring three fawnes
at a time, and in this particular the Dear of those parts, excel all the
known Dear of the whole world.

Wolfes pray upon Dear.
On all these the Wolfes do pray continually, the best means they have (to
escape the wolfes is by swimming to Islands, or necks of land, whereby they
escape: for the wolf will not presume to follow them, until they see them
over a river; then being landed, (they waiting on the shore) undertake the
water, and so follow with fresh suite.

The next in mine opinion fit to be spoaken of, Beaver.
is the Beaver; which is a Beast ordained, for land and water both, and has
fore feet like a cunny, her hinder feet like a goese, mouthed like a cunny,
but short eared like a Serat, fish in summer, and wood in winter, which he
conveyes to his house built on the water, wherein he sitts with his tail
hanging in the water, which else would over heat and rot off.

The Beavers cut down trees, with his foreteeth.
He cuts the bodies of trees down with his foreteeth, which are so long as a
boares tuskes, and with the help of other beavers (which held by each others
tails like a teeme of horses) the hind most with the leg on his shoulder
stayed by one of his fore feet against his head) they draw the logg to the
habitation appointed, placing the loggs in a square, and so by pyling one upon
another, they build up a house, which with boghes is covered very strongly, and
placed in some pond to which they make a damme of brush wood like a hedge: so
strong, that I have gone on the top of it cross the current of that pond. The
flesh of this beast is excellent food. The fleece is a very choice furre,
which (before the Salvages had commerce with Christians) they burned of the
tail, this beast is of a masculine virtue for the advancement of Priapus: and
is preserved for a dish for the Sachems, or Sagamores: who are the princes of
the people but not Kings (as is fondly supposed.)

Beaver at 10. shill. a pound.
The skins are the best marchantable commodity, that can be found, to cause
ready money to be brought into the land, now that they are raised to 10.
shillings a pound. In 5 years one man got together 1000. p. in good gold.


A servant of mine in 5. years, was thought to have a 1000. p. in ready gold
gotten by beaver when he dyed; whasoever became of it. And this beast may
challenge pre-eminence in the Catalogue.

The Otter in winter has a furre as black as Iett.
The Otter of those parts, in winter season has a furre so black as jett; and
is a furre of very high price: a good black skin is worth 3. of 4. Angels of
gold. The Flesh is eaten by the Salvages: but how good it is I cannot show,
because it is not eaten by our Nation. Yet is this a beast, that ought to be
placed in the number amongst the Commodities of the Country.

The Luseran, or Luseret, is a beast like a Catt: but so bigg as a great hound:
The Luseran as bigg as a hound.
with a tail shorter then a Catt. His claws are like a Catts, He will make a
pray of the Dear. His Flesh is dainty meat, like a lamb: his hide is achoise
furre, and accounted a good commodity.

The Martin is a beast about the bigness, of a Fox. His furre is chestnutt
color, The Martin is about the bigness of a Fox.
and of those there are great store in the Northern parts of the Country, and
is a good commodity.

The Racowne is a beast as bigg, full out, as a Fox, Racowne.
with a Bushtayle. His Flesh excellent food: his oil precious for the
Syattica, his furre course, but the skins serve the Salvages for coats: and
is with those people of more esteem, then a coat of beaver, because of the
tails that (hanging round in their order) do adorn the garment, and is
therefore so much esteemed of them. His fore feet are like the feet of an
ape; and by the print thereof, in the time of snow, he is followed to his hole,
which is commonly in a hollow tree, from whence he is fiered out; and saot ken.

The Foxes red and gray.
The Foxes are of two colors: the one redd, the other gray, these feed on
fish; and are good furre, they do not stink, as the Foxes of England, but
their condition for their pray, is as the Foxes of England.

The Wolfes of diverse colors.
The Wolfes are of diverse colors: some sandy colored: some griselled, and
some black, their food is fish which they catch, when they pass up the
rivers, into the ponds to spawne, at the spring time. The Dear are also their
pray, and at summer, when they have whelps, the bitch will fetch a puppy dog
from our doors, to feed their whelps with. They are fearful Curres, and
will run away from a man (that meets them by chance at bank end) as fast
as any fearful dog. These pray upon the Dear very much. The skins are
used by the Salvages, especially the skin of the black wolf, which is
esteemed a present for a prince there.

The skin of a black wolf, a present for a prince.
When there arises any difference between prince, and prince, the prince that
desires to be reconciled to his neighboring prince does endeavor to purchase
it, by sending him a black wolfes skin for a present, and the acceptance of
such a present is an assurance of reconciliation between them; and the
Salvages will willingly give 40. beaver skins for the purchase of one of
these black Wolfes skins: and allthough the beast himself be a discommodity,
which other Countries of Christendom are subject unto, yet is the skin of
the black wolf worthy, the title of a commodity, in that respect that has bin
declared.

The Bears afraid of a man.
If I should not speak something of the bear, I might happily leave a scruple,
in the minds of some effeminate person who conceaved of more dainger in them,
then there is cause. Therefore to encourage them against all Fear, and
Fortify their minds against needles danger, I will relate what experience
has taught me; concerning them, they are beasts that do no harm in those
parts: they feed upon Hurtleburies, Nuts, and Fish, especially shellfish.

The Bear is a tyrant at a Lobster, and at low water will down to the Rocks,
and groape after them with great diligence.

The Salvages seeing a bear chase him like a dog and kill him.
He will run away from a man as fast as a little dog, If a couple of
Salvages chance to epsy him at his banquet, his running a way, will not serve
his turn, for they will coat him, and chase him between them home to their
howses, where they kill him, to save a labor in carrying him far. His Flesh
is esteemed venision, and of a better taste then beef.

His hide is used by the Salvages, for garments, and is more commodious than
discommodious, and may pass (with some allowance) with the rest.

The Musk wash, Muske-washe.
is a beast that frequenteth the ponds. What he eats I cannot find. He is
but a small beast, less then a Cunny, and is indeed in those parts no other
then a water Ratte, for I have seen the suckers of them dug out of a bank;
and at that age, they neither differed in shape color, nor size, from one of
our great Ratts. When he is old, he is of the Beavers color; and has
passed in wait with our Chapmen for Beaver.

The Male of them have stones, which the Salvages, in un caseing of them, leave
to the skin, which is a most delicate perfume, and may compare with any
perfume that I know for goodness; Then may not this be excluded the Catalogue.

This Country, in the North parts thereof, has many Porcupines, but I do not
find, Porcupines.
the beast any way useful or hurtful.

There are in those Northern parts many Hedgehoggs, Hedghoggs.
of the like nature, to our English Hedghoggs.

Conyes of several sorts.
Here are great store of Conyes in those parts, of diverse colors; some white,
some black, and some gray. Those toward the Southern parts are very small,
but those to the North are as bigg as the English Cony: their ears are very
short. For meat the small rabbit is as good as any that I have eaten of else
where.

Squirils of three sorts.
There are Squirils of three sorts, very different in shape and condition; and
is gray, and he is as bigg as the lesser Cony, and keeps the woods feeding,
upon nutts.

Another is red, and he haunts our howses, and will rob us of our Corn, but
the Catt many times, pays him the price of his presumption.

A flying Squirill.
The third is a little flying Squirill, with bat like wings, which he spreads
when he jumpes from tree to tree, and does no harm.

Now because I am upon a treaty of the beasts, Snakes.
I will place this creature the snake amongst the beasts having my warrant from
the holy Bible; who (though his posture in his passage be so different from all
other, being of a more subtle and aidry nature, that he can make his way
without feet, and lift himself above the superficies of the earth, as he
glids along.)

Yet may he not be ranked with any, but the beasts, notwithstanding he
frequents the water, as well as the land.

There are of Snakes diverse, and of several kinds, as be with us in England,
but that Country has not so many, as in England have bin known.

The general Salvage name of them is Ascowke.

The rattle Snakes.
There is one creeping beast or long creeple (as the name is in Devonshire,)
that has a rattle at his tail, that does discover his age; for so many years
as he has lived, so many joints are in that rattle, which sounds (when it
is in motion,) like pease in a bladder, and this beast is called a rattle
Snake, but the Salvages give him the name of Sesick; which some take to be the
Adder; and it may well be so; for the Salvages are significiant in their
denomination of any thing) and is no less hurtful than the Adder of England,
nor no more. I have had my dog venomed with troubling one of these; and so
swelled, that I had thought it would have bin his death: but with one Saucer of
Salet oil powered down his throat, he has recovered, and the swelling
assuaged by the next day. The like experiment has bin made upon a boy, that
has by chance troad upon one of these, and the boy never the worse. Therefore
it is simplicity in any one that shall tell a bugbeare tale of horrible, or
terrible Serpents that are in that land.

Mise there are good store, Mise.
and my Lady Wood-bees black gray malkin may have pastime enough there: but for
Rats, the Country by Nature is troubbled with none.

Lions always in hoe Clymats, not in cold.
Lions there are none in New England: it is contrary to the Nature of the beast,
to frequent places accustomed to snow; being like the Catt, that will hazard
the burning of her tail rather than abide from the fire.

CHAP. VI. Of Stones and Minerals.
NOw (for as much as I have in a breife abstract showed you the Creatures:
whose specificall Natures do simpathise with the elements of fire and air) I
will come to speak of the Creatures that participate of earth more then the
other two, which is stones.

And first of the Marble for building; Marble.
whereof there is much in those parts, in so much as there is one bay in the
land, that bears the name of Marble harber, because of the plenty of Marble
there: and these are useful for building of Sumpteous Palaces.

And because, Limestone.
no good building can be made permanent, or durable, without Lime: I will let
you understand that there is good Limestone near to the river of Monatoquinte
at uttaquatockto my knowledge and we hope other places too, (that I have not
taken so much notice of) may have the like, or better: and those stones are
very convenient for building.

Chalk stones there are near Squantos Chapel showed me by a Salvage. Chalk.


There is abundance of excellent Slate in diverse places of the Country: Slate.
and the best that ever I beheld for covering of howses: and the inhabitanrs
have made good use of these materials for building.

There is a very useful Stone in the Land, and as yet there is found out but
one place where they may be had, Whetstones.
in the whole Country, Old Woodman, (that was choked at Plimmouth after he
had played the unhappy Marks man when he was pursued by a careless fellow
that was new come into the Land) they say labored to get a patent of it to
himself. He was beloved of many, and had many sons, that had a mind to
engrosse that commodity. And I cannot spy any mention made of it in the
wooden prospect.

Therefore I begin to suspect his aim: that it was for himself, and therefore
will I not discover it, it is the Stone so much commended by Ovid, because love
delights to make his habitation in a building of those materials, where he
advises. Those that seek for love to do it, Duris in Cotibus illum.

This Stone the Salvages do call Cos, and of these (on the North end of
Richmond Hand) are store, and those are very excellent good for edged tools: I
envy not his happiness. I have bin there: viewed the place, liked the
commodity: but will not plant so Northerly for that, nor any other commodity
that is there to be had.

There are Loadestones also in the Northern parts of the land: Loadstones.
and those which were found are very good, and are a commodity worth the
noteing.

Iron stones there are abundance: Ironstones.
and several sorts of them known.

Lead ore is there likewise, Lead.
and has bin found by the breaking of earth, which the Frost has made mellow.

Black Lead I have likewise found very good, Black lead.
which the Salvages use to paint their faces with.

Red Lead is there likewise in great abundance. Read lead.


There is very excellent Boll Armoniack. Boll.


There is most excellent Vermilion. All these things the Salvages make some
little use of, and do find them on the circumference of the Earth.

Brimstone mines there are likewise. Brimstone.


Mines of Tin, Tin.
are likewise known to be in those parts: which will in short time be made use
of: and this cannot be accounted a mean commodity.

Copper mines are there found likewise: that will enrich the Inhabitants.
Copper.
But until their young Cattle, be grown hardy laborers in the yoke, that
the Plough and the Wheat may be seen more plentifully, it is a work must be
forborne.

They say there is a Silver, and a gold mine found by Captain Littleworth:
Silver.
if he get a patent of it to himself, he will surely change his name.

CHAP. VII. Of the Fishes, and what Commodity they prove.
AMong Fishes. First I will begin with the Codd, because it is the most
commodious of all fish, as may appear, by the use which is made of them in
foreign parts.

The Codd fishing is much used in America, Codd.
(whereof New England is apart) in so much as 300. Sail of ships, from diverse
parts, have used to be employed yearly in that trade.

15. Ships at one time for Codd.
I have seen in one Harbor, next Richmond I land 15. Sail of ships at one
time, that have taken in them, driyed Codds for Spain, and the Straights (and
it has bin found that the Sailors have made 15.18.20.22. p. share for a common
man.

The Coast abounds with such multitudes of Codd, that the inhabitants of New
England do dunge their grounds with Codd; and it is a commodity better than
the golden mines of the Spanish Indies; for without dried Codd the Spaniard,
Portingal, and Italian, would not be able to vittel of a shipp for the Sea; and
I am sure at the Canaries it is the principal commodity: which place lies
near New England yery convenient, for the vending of this commodity, one
hundred of these being at the price of 300. of New found land Codds, great
store of train oil, is maid of the livers of the Codd, Oil maid of the
livers of the Codd.
and is a commodity that without question will enrich the inhabitants of New
England quicly; and is therefore a principal commodity.

The Basse is an excellent Fish, both fresh and Salt one hundred whereof
salted (at a market) have yielded 5. p. A 100. Basse sold for 5. p.
They are so large, the head of one will give a good eater a dinner, and for
daintiness of diet, they excel the Marybones of Beef. There are such
multitudes, that I have seen stopped into the river close adjoining to my
house with a sand at one tide, so many as will load a ship of a 100. Tonnes.

Other places have greater quantities in so much, as wagers have bin laid,
that one should not throw a stone in the water, but that he should hit a fish.

I my self, at the turning of the tide, have seen such multitudes pass out
of a pound, that it seemed to me, that one might go over their backs drishod.

These follow the bayte up the rivers, and sometimes are follwed for bayte and
chased into the bays, and shallow waters, by the grand pise: and these may
have also a prime place in the Catalogue of Commodities.

The Mackarels are the bait for the Basse, and these have bin chased into the
shallow waters, Mackarell are bait for Basse.
where so many thousands have shot themselves a shore with the surfe of the
Sea* that whole hogges-heads have bin taken upon the Sands; and for length they
excel any of other parts: they have bin measured 18. and 19. inches in length,
and seven in breadth: and are taken with a drayle, (as boats use to pass to
and froe at Sea on business) in yery great quantities all alonge the Coaste.

The Fish is good, salted; for store against the winter, as well as fresh, and
to be accounted a good Commodity.

This Sturgeon in England is regalis piscis. every man in New England may catch
what he will, there are multitudes of them, Sturgeon.
and they are much fatter then those that are brought into England from other
parts, in so much as by reason of their fatness, they do not look white, but
yellow, which made a Cook presume they were not so good as them of Roushea:
silly fellow that could not understand that it is the nature of fish salted, or
pickelled, the fatter the yellower being best to preserve.

For the taste I have warrant of Ladies of worth, with choice pallats for the
commendations, who liked the taste so well, that they esteemed it beyond the
Sturgeon of other parts, and said they were deceaved in the looks: therefore
let the Sturgeon pass for a Commodity.

Of Salmons there is great abundance: and these may be allowed for a
Commodity, Saimon.
and placed in the Catallogue.

Of Herrings, Herrings.
there is great store, fat, and fair: and (to my mind) as good as any I have
seen, and these may be preserved, and made a good commodity at the Canaries.

Of Eeles there is abundance, both in the Saltwaters, and in the fresh: and the
fresh water Eele there (if I may take the judgment of a London Fishmonger) is
the best that he has found in his life time. I have with jieele potts found
my house hold, Great plenty of Eeles.
(being nine persons, besides dogs) with them, taking them every tide, (for 4.
months space,) and preserving of them for winter store: and these may prove a
good commodity.

Of Smelts there is such abundance, Smelts.
that the Salvages do take them up in the rivers with baskets, like sives.

Shadds or Allizes taken to dunge ground.
There is a Fish, (by some called shadds, by some allizes) that at the spring of
the year, pass up the rivers to spaune in the ponds; and are taken in such
multitudes in every river, that has a pond at the end, that the Inhabitants
doung their ground with them. You may see in one towneship a hundred acres
together, set with these Fish, every acre taking 1000. of them: and an acre
thus dressed will produce and yeald so much corn, as 3. acres without fish:
and (least any Virginea man would infer hereupon, that the ground of New
England is barren, because they use no fish in setting their corn, I desire
them to be remembered, the cause is plain in Virginea) they have it not to
set. But this practice is only for the Indian Maize (which must be set by
hands) not for English grain: and this is therefore a commodity there.

There is a large sized fish called Hallibut, Turbut or Hallibut.
or Turbut: some are taken so bigg that two men have much a do to hale them
into the boat; but there is such plenty, that the fi^her men only eat the
heads, and finnes, and throw away the bodies: such in Paris would yield 5. or
6. crowns a piece: and this is no discommodity.

There are excellent Plaice and easily taken. They (at flowing water) do almost
come ashore, Plaice.
so that one may stepp but half a foot deep, and prick them up on the sands:
and this may pass with some allowance.

Hake is a dainty white fish, Hake.
and excellent vittell fresh; and may pass with other commodities, because
there are multitudes.

There are great store of Pilchers: Pilchers.
at Michelmas, in many places, I have seen the Cormorants in length 3. miles
feedinge upon the Sent.

Lobsters are there infinite in store in all the parts of the land, Lobsters.
and very excellent. The most use that I made of them, in 5. years after I
came there was but to bait my Hook for to catch Basse, I had bin so cloyed
with them the first day I went a shore.

This being known, they shall pass for a commodity to the inhabitants, for
the Salvages will meet 500, or 1000. at a place where Lobsters come in with
the tide, to eat, and save dried for store, abiding in that place, feasting
and sporting a month or 6. weeks together.

There are great store of Oysters in the entrance of all Rivers: Oysters.
they are not round as those of England, but excellent fat, and all good. I
have seen an Oyster bank a mile at length.

Mustles there are infinite store, Mustles.
I have often gone to Wassaguscus; where were excellent Mustles to eat (for
variety) the fish is so fat and large.

Clames is a shellfish, Clames.
which I have seen sold in Westminster for 12. pe. the skore. These our swine
feed upon; and of them there is no want, every shore is full, it makes the
swine prove exceedingly, they will not fail at low water to be with them. The
Salvages are much taken with the delight of this fish; and are not cloyed
(notwithstanding the plenty) for our swine we find it a good commodity.

Raser fishes there are. Raser fish.


Freeles there are, Cockles, and Scallopes, Freele.
and diverse other sorts of Shellfishe, very good food.

Now that I have showed you what commodities are there to be had in the Sea,
for a Market; I will show what is in the Land also, for the comfort of the
inhabitants, wherein it does abound. And because my task is an abstract, I
will discover to them the commodity thereof.

Fresh fish, Trouts, Carpes, Breames, Pikes, Roches Perches, Tenches, and Eeles,
There are in the rivers, and ponds, very excellent Trouts, Carpes, Breames,
Pikes, Roches, Perches, Tenches, Eeles, and other fishes, such as England does
afford, and as good, for variety; yea many of them much better; and the Natives
of the inland parts, do buy hooks of us, to catch them with, and I have
known the time, that a Trouts hook has yielded a beaver skin, which has
bin a good commodity to those that have bartered them away.

These things I offer to your consideration (courteous Reader) and require you
to show me the like in any part of the known world if you can.

CHAP. VIII. Of the goodness of the Country and the Waters.
NOw since it is a Country so infinitely blessed with food, Food and Fire.
and fire, to roast or boil our Flesh and Fish, why should any man fear for
cold there, in a Country warmer in the winter; than some parts of France and
nearer the Sun: unles he be one of those that Solomon bids go to the Ant
and the Be.

There is no boggy ground, known in all the Country, Noe Boggs.
from whence the Sun may exhale unwholsom vapors: But there are diverse
arematicall herbs, and plants, Perfumed air with sweet herbs.
as Sassafras, Musk Roses, Violets, Balm, Laurel, Hunnisuckles, and the
like, that with their vapors perfume the air; and it has bin a thing much
observed that, ships have come from Virginea where there have bin scarce five
men able to hale a rope, until they have come within 40. Degrees of latitude,
and smell the sweet air of the shore, where they have suddenly recovered.

And for the water, therein it excels Canaan by much; Of Waters.
for the Land is so apt for Fountains, a man cannot digg amiss, therefore if
the Abraham's and Lots of our times come thither, there needs be no contention
for wells.

Besides there are waters of most excellent virtues, worthy admiration.

The eure of mellancolly at Ma remount
At Ma-re Mount, there was a water (by me discovered) that is most excellent
for the cure of Melancolly probatum.

The cure of Barrenness.
At weenasemute is a water, the virtue whereof is, to cure barrenness. The
place takes his name of that Fountain which signifies quick spring, or
quickening spring probatum.

Water procuring a dead sleep.
Near Squantos Chapel (a place so by us called) is a Fountain, that causes
a dead sleep for 48. hours, to those that drink 24. ounces at a draught, and
so proportionably. The Salvages that are Powahs at set times use it, New Engl.
excels Canaan in fountains.
and reveal strange things to the vulgar people by means of it, So that in the
delicacy of waters, and the convenience or them, Canaan came not near this
Country.

Milk and Honey supplied.
As for the Milk and Honey which that Canaan flowed with, it is supplied by the
plenty of birds; beasts and Fish, whereof Canaan could not boast her felfe.

Yet never thelesse (since the Milk came by the industry of the first
Inhabitants,) A plain parallel to Canaan.
let the cattle be chereshed that are at this time in New England, and
forborne but a little, I will ask no long time, no more, but until the
Brethren have converted one Salvage, and made him a good Christian, and I may
be bold to say. Butter and cheese will be cheaper there, then ever it was in
Canaan. It is cheaper there then in old England at this present, for there are
store of Cowes; considering the people: which (as my intelligence gives) is
12000. persons, and in gods name let the people have their desire, who write to
their friends, to come out of Sodom, to the land of Canaan, a land that flows
with Milk and Honey.

The Request for the Nomination of New Canaan.
And I appeal to any man of judgment whether it be not a Land, that for her
excellent indowments of Nature may pass for a plain parallel to Canaan of
Israel, being in a more temporat Climat, this being in 40. Degrees and that in
30.

Chap. IX. A Perspective to view the Country by.
AS for the Soil, I may be bold to commend the fertility thereof, and
prefer it before the Soil of England, The Soil.
(our Native Country) and Ineede not to produce more then one argument for
proffe thereof, because it is so infallible.

The grouth of Hemp.
Hemp is a thing by Husband men in general agreed upon, to prosper best, in
the most fertile Soil: and experience has taught this rule, that Hempeseede
prospers so well in New England, that it shewteth up to be ten foot high and
ten foot and a half, which is twice so high as the ground in old England
produces it, which argues New England the more fertile of the two.

As for the air, The air.
I will produce but one proffe for the maintenance of the excellency thereof;
which is so general, as I assure my felfe it will suffice.

No cold cough or murre.
No man living there; was ever known to be troubled with a cold, a cough, or a
murre but many men coming sick out of Virginea to New Canaan, have instantly
recovered with the help of the purity of that air; no man ever surfeited
himself either by eating or drinking.

As for the plenty of that Land, it is well known, that no part of Asia,
Africa, or Europe; The plenty of the Land.
affords dear that do bring forth any more then one single faune; and in
New Canaan the Dear are accustomed to bring forth 2. and 3, faunes at a time.

Besides there are such infinite flocks of Foul, and Multitudes of fish both
in the fresh waters, and also on the Coast, that the like has not else where
bin discovered by any traveller.

The winds there are not so violent as in England; Winds.
which is prooved by the trees that grow in the face of the wind by the Sea
Coast, for there they do not lean from the wind as they do in England, as
we have heard before.

The Rain is there more moderate then in England, Rain.
which thing I have noted in all the time of my residence to be so.

The Coast is low Land, and not high Land: The Coast
and he is of a weak capacity rhat conceaveth otherwise of it, because it
cannot be denied, but that boats may come a ground in all places along the
Coast, and especially within the Compass of the Massachusetts patent, where the
prospect: is fixed.

The Harboures are not to be bettered, Harboures.
for safety, and goodness of ground, for ancorage, and (which is worthy
observation;) shipping will not there be furred, neither are they subject to
worms, as in Virginea, and other places.

Let the Situation also of the Country be considered (together with the rest,
Situation.
which is discovered in the front of this abstract,) and then I hope no man
will hold this land unworthy to be entitled by the name of the second Canaan.

And since the Seperatists, The Nomination.
are desirous to have the denomination thereof, I am become an humble Suter on
their behalf for your consents (courteous Readers) to it, before I do show
you what Revels they have kept in New Canaan.

CHAP. X. Of the Great Lake of Erocoise in New England, and the commodities
thereof.
WEstwards from the Massachussets bay (which lies in 42. Degrees and 30.
Minutes of Northern latitude) is situated a very spacious Lake (called of the
Natives the Lake of Erocoise) which is far more excellent, then the Lake of
Genezereth in the Country of Palestina, both in respect of the greatness and
properties thereof; and likewise of the manifould commodities it yealdeth: the
circumference of which Lake is reputed to be 240. miles at the least: and it is
distant from the Massachussets bay 300. miles, or there abouts: wherein are
very many fair Islands, where innumerable flocks of several sorts of Foul
do breed, Foul innumerable.
Swannes, Geese, Ducks, Widgines, Teales, and other water Foul.

There are also more abundance of Beavers, Dear, and Turkies breed about the
parts of that lake, then in any place in all the Country of New England; and
also such multitudes of fish, (which is a great part of the food, that the
Beavers live upon,) Multitudes of Fish.
that it is a thing to be admired at: So that about this Lake, is the
principallst place for a plantation in all New Canaan, The prime place of New
Canaan.
both for pleasure and proffit.

Here may very many brave Towns and Cities be erected which may have
intercourse one with another by water, very commodiously: and it is of many men
of good judgment, accounted the prime seat for the Metropolis of New Canaan,
From this Lake Northwards is derived the famous River of Canada, (so named of
Monsier de Cane a French Lord, Canada, so named of Monsier de Cane.
that first planted a Colony of French in America, there called Nova Francia,
from whence Captain Kerke of late, by taking that plantation, brought home in
one shipp (as a Seaman of his Company, reported in my hearing) 25000. Beaver
skins.

And from this Lake Southwards, trends that goodly River called of the Natives
Patomack, Patomack.
which dischardgeth herself in the parts of Virginea, from whence it is
navigable by shipping of great Burden up to the Falls (which lies in 41.
Degrees, and a half of North latitude:) and from the Lake down to the Falls
by a fair current. This River is navigable for vessels of good Burden; and
thus much has often bin related by the Natives, and is of late found to be
certain.

Great herds of Beasts as bigg as Cowes
They have also made description of great herds of well grown beasts, that
live about the parts of this Lake, such as the Christian world (until this
discovery) has not bin made acquainted with. These beasts are of the bigness
of a Cow, their Flesh being very good food, their hides good lether, their
fleeces very useful, being a kind of wolle, as fine almost as the wolle of
the Beaver, and the Salvages do make garments thereof.

It is ten years since first the relation of these things came to the ears
of the English: at which time we were but slender proficients in the language
of the Natives, and they, (which now have attained to more perfection of
English, could not then make us rightly apprehend their meaning.

We supposed, when they spoke of Beasts thereabouts as high as men, they have
made report of men all over hairy like Beavers, in so much as we questioned
them, whether they eat of the Beavers, to which they replied Matta, (noe)
saying they were almost Beavers Brothers. This relation at that time we
concluded to be fruitles, which since, time has made more apparent.

About the parts of this Lake may be made a very great Commodity by the trade
of furs, to enrich those that shall plant there; a more complete discovery of
those parts: is (to my knowleadge) undertaken by Henry Ioseline Esquier son
of Sir Thomas Ioseline of Kent Knight, by the approbation and appointement of
that Heroic and very good Common wealths man Captain John Mason Esquier, a
true foster Father and lover of virtue, Henry Ioseline employed for discovery.
(who at his own chardge) has fitted Master Ioseline and employed him to that
purpose, who no doubt will perform as much as is expected, if the Dutch (by
gettinge into those parts before him, do not frustrate his so hopeful and
laudable designs.

It is well known, they aim at that place, and have a possibility to attain
unto the end of their desires therein, by means, if the River of Mohegan,
which of the English is named Hudsons River (where the Dutch have settled: to
well fortified plantations already. If that River be derived from the Lake as
our Country man in his prospect affirms it to be, and if they get and fortify
this place also, they will gleane away the best of the Beaver both from the
French and English, who have hitherto lived wholely by it, and very many old
planters have gained good estates out of small beginnings by means thereof.

And it is well known to some of our Nation that have lived in the Dutch
plantation: The Dutch have a great trade of Beaver in Hudsons River.
that the Dutch have gained by Beaver 20000. pound a year.

The Salvages make report of 3. great Rivers that issue out or this Lake 2. of
which are to us known, the one to be Patomack, the other Canada, and why may
not the third be found there likewise, which they describe to trend westward,
which is conceaved to discharge herself into the South Sea. The Salvages
affirm that they have seen ships in this Lake with 4. Masts which have taken
from thence for their ladinge earth? that is conjectured to be some mineral
stuff.

There is probability enough for this, and it may well be thought, that so
great a confluxe of waters as are there gathered together, must be vented by
some great Rivers: The passage to the East Indies.
and that if the third River (which th^^ have made mention of) prove to be
true as the other two have done: there is no doubt but that the passage to the
East India, may be obtained, without any such daingerous and fruitless inquest
by the Norwest, as hitherto has bin endeavored: And there is no Traveller of
any reasonable capacity, but will grant, that about this Lake, must be
innumerable springes, and by that means many fruitful, and pleasant pastures
all about it, It has bin observed that the inland part (witness Neepnet) are
more pleasant and fertile then the borders of the Sea coaste. And the Country
about Erocoise is (not without good cause) compared to Delta the most fertile
part in all Egypt, The Country of Erocois as fertile as Delta in Egypt.
that abounds with Rivers and Rivalets derived from Nilus fruitful channel,
like veins from the liver, so in each respect is this famous Lake of Erocoise.

Ad therefore it would be adjudged an irreparable oversight to protract time,
and suffer the Dutch (who are but intruders upon his Majesty's most hopeful
Country of New England) to possess themselves of that so pleasant and
commodious Country of Erocoise before us: being (as appears) the principal
part of all New Canaan for plantation, and not elsewhere to be paralelld in all
the known world.

NEW CANAANS GENIUS. EPILOGVS.
THou that art by Fates degree,
Or Providence ordained to see,
Natures wonder, her rich store,
Ne'-r discovered before,
The admired Lake of Erocoise,
And fertile Borders now rejoice.
See what multitudes of Fish,
She presents to fit thy dish,
If rich furs thou do adore,
And of Beaver Fleeces store,
See the Lake where they abound,
And what pleasures else are found.
There chaste Leda free from fire,
Does enjoy her hearts desire,
Among the flowery bancks at ease,
Live the sporting Najades,
Bigg lim'd Druides whose brows,
Bewtified with greenebowes,
See the Nymphs how they do make,
Fine Meanders from the Lake,
Twining in and out as they,
Through the pleasant groves make way,
Weaving by the shady trees,
Curious Anastomases,
Where the harmeles Turtles breed,
And such useful Beasts do feed,
As no Traveller can tell,
Else where how to parallel,
Colcos golden Fleece reject,
This deserves best respect,
In sweet Peans let thy voice,
Sing the praise of Erocoise,
Peans to advaunce her name,
New Canaans everlasting fame.
NEW ENGLISH CANAAN, OR NEW CANAAN.
The Third Book. Containing a description of the People that are planted
there, what remarkable Accidents have happened there, since they were settled,
what Tenants they hold, together with the practice of their Church.
CHAP. I. Of a great League made with the Plimmouth Planters after their
arrival, by the Sachem of those Territories.
THe Sachem of the Territories, where the Planters of new England are settled,
that are the first of the now Inhabitants of New Canaan, not knowing what they
were, or whether they would be freindesor foes, and being desirous to purchase
their freindship, that he might have the better Assurance of quiet tradinge
with them (which he conceived would be very advantageous to him) was desirous
to prepare an Ambassador, A Salvage sent an Ambassador to the English at their
first coming.
with commission to treat on his behalf, to that purpose; and having one that
had been in England taken (by a worthless man) out of other parts, and after
left there by accident, this Salvage he instructed, how to be have himself,
in the treaty of peace, and the more, to give him encouragement to adventure
his person, amongst these new come inhabitants, which was a thing, he durst
not himself attempt, without security or hostage, promised that Salvage
freedom, who had been detained there as their Captive: which offer he
accepted, and accordingly came to the Planters, salutinge them with welcome,
in the English phrase, which was of them admired, to hear a Salvage there
speak in their own language, and used him with great courtesy: to whom he
declared the cause of his coming, and contrived the business so, that he
brought the Sachem and the English together, between whom was a firm league
concluded, which yet continues. After which league the Sachem being in company
with the other whom he had freed, and suffered to live with the English,
espijnge a place where a hole had been made in the ground, where was their
store of powder laid to be preserved from danger of fire (under ground)
demanded of the Salvage what the English had hid there under ground, The
Sachem feared the Plague.
who answered the plague, at which he starteled, because of the great
mortality lately happened, by means of the plague, (as it is conceaved) and the
Salvage the more to increase his fear told the Sachem if he should give
offense to the English party, they would let out the plague to destroy the all,
which kept him in great awe. Not long after being at varience with another
Sachem borderinge upon his Territories, he came in solemn manner and entreated
the governor, that he would let out the plague to destroy the Sachem, and his
men who were his enemies, promising that he himself, and all his posterity
would be their everlasting freindes, so great an opinion he had of the English.

CHAP. II. Of the entertainment of Mr. Westons people sent to settle a
plantation there.
MAster Thomas weston a Merchant of London that had been at some cost, to
further the Brethren of new Plimmouth, in their designs for these parts,
shipped a company of Servants, fitted with provition of all sorts; for the
undertaking of a Plantation to be settled there, with an intent to follow after
them in parson. These servants at first arived at new Plimmouth where they were
entertained with court holy bread, Court holy bread at Pimmouth.
by the Brethren, they were made very welcome, in show at least: there these
servants goods were landed, with promises to be assisted in the choice of a
convenient place, and still the good cheer went forward, and the strong
liquors walked. In the mean time the Brethren were in consultation, what was
best for their advantage singing the song, Frustra sapit, qui sibi non sapit.

This plantation would hinder the present practice, and future profit, and
Master Weston an able man would want for no supplies, upon the return of
Beaver, and so might be a plantation that might keep them under, who had a
Hope to be the greatest, besides his people were no chosen Seperatists, but men
made choice of at all adventures, fit to have served for the furtherance of
Master Westons undertakinges: and that was as much as he need to care for:
ayminge at Beaver principally, for the better effecting of his purpose. Now
when the Plimmouth men began to find, that Master Westons men's store of
provition grew short with feasting, then they hasted them to a place called
Wessaguscus, in a weak case, and there left them fasting.

CHAP. III. Of a Battle fought at the Massachussets, bevveene the English and
the Indians.
THe Planters of Plimmouth, at their last being in those parts, having defaced
the monument of the ded at Pasonayessit (by taking away the hearse Cloth which
was two great Bears skins sowed together at full lenth, and propped up over
the grave of Chuatawbacks mother,) the Sachem of those territories, being
enraged at the same, stirred up his men in his be half, to take revenge: and
having gathered his men together, he begins to make an oration in this manner.
The Sachems Oration,
When last the glorious light of all the skey was underneath this globe, and
Birds grew silent, I began to settle as my (custom is) to take repose; before
mine eyes were fast closed, me thought I saw a vision, (at which my) spirit
was much troubled, A spirit mooving the Sachem to War.
and trembling at that doleful sight, a spirit cried aloude (behold my son)
whom I have cherisht, see the papps that gave thee suck, the hands that lappd
thee warm and fed thee often, can thou forget to take revenge of those uild
people, that has my monument defaced in despitefull manner, disdaining our
ancient antiquities, and honorable Customs: See now the Sachems grave lies
like unto the common people, of ignoble race defaced: thy mother does
complain, implores thy aid against this theevish people, new come hither if
this be suffered, I shall not rest in quiet within my everlasting habitation.
This said, the spirit vanished, and I all in a sweat, not able scarce to
speak, began to get some strength, and recollect my spirits that were fled,
all which I thought to let you understand, to have your Council, and your aid
likewise; this being spoken, straight way arose the grand Captain, and cried
aloud come, let us to Arms, it does concern us all, The grand Captain makes
a speech.
let us bid them Battle; so to Arms they went, and laid weight for the
Plimmouth boat, and forceinge them to forsake their landinge place, they seek
another best for their convenience, thither the Salvages repair in hope to
have the like success, but all in vain, for the English Captain warily
foresaw, The maine Battle.
(and perceavinge their plot) knew the better how to order his men fit for
Battle in that place, he bouldly leading his men on, rainged about the field
to and fro, and taking his best advantage, lets fly, and makes the Salvages
give ground, the English followed them fiercely on and made them take trees for
their shelter, (as their custom is) from whence their Captain let fly a
maine, yet no man was hurt, at last lifting up his right arm, to draw a fatal
shaft (as he then thought) to end this difference, The field won by the
English.
received a shot upon his elbow, and straight way fled, by whose example, all
the army followed the same way; and yealded up the honor of the day, to the
English party; who were such a terror to them after, that the Salvages durst
never make to a head against them any more.

CHAP. IV. Of a Parliament held at Wessaguscus, and the Acts.
MAster Westons Plantation being settled at Wessaguscus, his Servants, Some
lazy people.
many of them, lazy persons, that would use no endeavor to take the benefit of
the Country, some of them fell sick and died.

One amongst the rest an able bodied man, that ranged the woods, A lusty
fellow.
to see what it would afford, lighted by accident on an Indian barn, and from
thence did take a capp full of corn; the Salvage owner of it, finding by the
foot some English had bin there, came to the Plantation, and made complaint
after this manner.

The chief Commander of the Company one this occation called a Parliament of
all his people but those that were sick, and ill at ease. And wisely now they
must consult, upon this huge complaint, that a privy knife, A poor complaint.
Edward Johnson a chief Judge. Maid a heinous fact.
or stringe of beads would well enough have qualified, and Edward Johnson was
a spetiall judge of this business: the fact was there in repetition,
construction made, that it was felony, and by the Laws of England punished
with death, and this in execution must be put, for an example, and likewise to
appease the Salvage, when straight ways one arose, moved as it were with some
compassion, and said he could not well gain say the former sentence, yet he
had conceaved within the compass of his brain an Embrion, that was of
spetiall consequence to be delivered, and cherished he said, that it would
most aptly serve to pacify the Salvages complaint, and save the life of one
that might (if need should be) stand them in some good steed, being young
and strong, fit for resistance against an enemy, which might come un exspected
for any thing they knew, The Oration made was liked of every one, and he
entreated to proceed to show the means how this may be performed: says he,
you all agree that one must die, and one shall die, A fine device
this young man's clothes we will take of, and put upon one, that is old and
impotent, A wise Sentence. To hang a sickman in the others steed,
a sickly person that cannot escape death, such is the disease one him
confirmed, that die he must, put the young man's clothes on this man, and let
the sick person be hanged in the others steed: Amen says one, and so says
many more.

And this had like to have prooved their final sentence, and being there
confirmed by Act of Parliament, to after ages for a President: But that one
with a ravenus voice, begun to croake and bellow for revenge, and put by that
conclusive motion, alleging such deceipts might be a means hereafter to
exasperate the minds of the complaininge Salvages, Very fit Justice.
and that by his death, the Salvages should see their zeal to Justice, and
therefore he should die: this was concluded; yet nevertheless a scruple was
made; now to countermaund this act, did represent itself unto their minds,
which was how they should do to get the man's good will: this was indeed a
spetiall obstacle: A dangerous Attempt.
for without (that they all agreed) it would be dangerous, for any man to
attempt the execution of it, lest mischeife should befall them every man; he
was a person, that in his wrath, did seem to be a second Sampson, able to
beat out their branes with the jawbone of an Ass: therefore they called the
man and by perswation got him fast bound in jest, Iestinge turned to earnest.
and then hanged him up hard by in good earnest, who with a weapon, and at
liberty, would have put all those wise judges of this Parliament to a pitiful
non plus, (as it has been credibly reported) and made the chief Judge of
them all buckell to him.

CHAP. V. Of a Massacre made upon the Salvages at Wessaguscus.
AFter the end of that Parliament, some of the plantation there, about three
persons went to live with Checatawback and his company, and had very good
quarter, for all the former quarrel, Good quarter with the Salvages.
with the Plimmouth planters: they are not like will summers, to take one for
another. There they purposed to stay until Master Westons arrival: but the
Plimmouth men intendinge no good to him (as appeared by the consequence) came in
the mean time to Wessaguscus, and there pretended to feast the Salvages of
those parts, A plott from Plimmouth.
bringing with them Porke, and things for the purpose, which they set before
the Salvages. They eat thereof without suspicion of any mischeife, who were
taken upon a watchword given, and with their own knives (hanging about their
necks) were by the Plimmouth planters stabd and slain: Salvages killed with
their one weapons.
one of which were hanged up there, after the slaughter.

It the mean time the Sachem had knowledge of this accident, by one that ran
to his Countrymen, News carried.
at the Massachussets, and gave them intelligence of the news; after which
time the Salvages there consultinge of the matter, in the night (when the other
English feareles of danger were a sleep,) knocked them all in the head, A
revenge.
in revenge of the death of their Countrymen: but if the Plimmouth Planters had
really intended good to Master Weston, or those men, why had they not kept the
Salvages alive in Custody, until they had secured the other English? Who by
means of this evil mannaginge of the business lost their lives, and the
whole plantation was dissolved thereupon, as was likely for fear of a revenge
to follow, as a relatione to this cruel antecedent; and when Master Weston
came over; he found things at an evil exigent, by means thereof: But could
not tell, how it was brought about:

The Salvages of the Massachussets that could not imagine, from whence these
men should come, or to what end, seeing them perform such unexpected actions,
neither could tell by what name, properly to distinguish them, did from that
time afterward, call the English Planters Wotawquenange, which in their
language signifies stabbers or Cutthroates, The Salvages call the English
outthroats.
and this name was received by those that came there after for good, being then
unacquainted with the signification of it, for many years following, until
from a Southerly Indian, that understood English well, I was by demonstration,
made to conceave the interpretation of it, and rebucked these other, that it
was not forborne: The other calling us by the name of Wotoquansawge, what that
does signify, he said he was not able by any demonstrarion to express; and
my neighbors durst no more in my hearing, call us by the name formerly used,
for fear of my displeasure.

CHAP. VI. Of the surprizinge of a Merchants Shipp in Plimmouth harbor.
THis Merchant a man of worth, arrivinge in the parts of New Canaan, and
findinge that his Plantation was dissolved, some of his men slain, The
Merchant with Supply.
some dead with sickness, and the rest at Plimmouth; he was perplexed in his
mind about the matter, coming as he did with supply, and means to have
rased their fortunes and his one exceedingly and seeinge what had happened
resolved to make some stay in the Plimmouth harbor, and this suited to their
purpose, wherefore the Brethren did congratulate with him at his safe arrival,
and their best of entertainment for a swetning cast, deploring the disaster of
his Plantation, and glozing upon the text, A gloss upon the false text
alleging the mischeivous intent of the Salvages there, which by freindly
intelligence of their neighbors, was discovered before it came to be full
summed: so that they lost not all, allthough they saved not all: and this they
pretended, to proceed from the Fountain of love and zeal to him; and
Christianity, and to chastise the insolency of the Salvages, of which that part
had some dangerous persons. And this as an article of the new creed of Canaan,
would they have received of every new commer there to inhabit; that the
Salvages are a dangerous people, subtle, secreat, and mischeivous, and that it
is dangerous to live separated, but rather together, and so be under their Lee,
that none might trade for Beaver, but at their pleasure, as none do or shall
do there: nay they will not be reduced to any other song yet, of the Salvages
to the southward of Plimmouth, because they would have none come there, saying
that he that will sit down there must come strong: but I have found the
Massachussets Indian more full of humanity, then the Christians, and have had
much better quarter with them; yet I observed not their humors, but they mine,
althoug my great number that I landed were dissolved, and my Company as few as
might be: Where two nations meet one must rule the other must be ruled or no
quietness.
for I know that this falls out infallibly, where two Nations meet, one must
rule, the other be ruled, before a peace can be hoped for: and for a Christian
to submit to the rule of a Salvage you will say, is both shame and dishonor:
(at least) it is my opinion, and my practice was accordingly, and I have the
better quarter by the means thereof. The more Salvages the better quarter, the
more Christians the worser quarter I found, as all the indifferent minded
Planters can testify. Now whiles the Merchant was ruminatinge on this mishapp,
the Plimmouth Planters perceivinge that he had furnished himself with
excellent Commodities, A Machivell plot.
fit for the Merchandise of the Country, (and holding it good to fish in
trobled waters, and so get a snatch unseene) practiced in secret with some
other in the land, whom they thought apt to embrace the benefit of such a
cheat, The Veil.
and it was concluded and resolved upon, that all this shipp and goods should
be confiscated, for business done by him, the Lord knows when, or where a
letter must be framed to them, and hands unto it, to be there warrant, this
should shadow them; That is the first practice they will infane a man, and then
pretend that Justice must be done: They cause the Merchant (secure) to come a
shore, and then take him in hold, showing they are compelled unto it legally,
and enter strait abord peruse the Cargazowne, Shipp and goods confiscated.
and then deliver up the Charge of her to their Confederates: and how much
less this is then Piraty, let any practice in the Admiralty be judge. The
Merchant, his shipp and goods confiscated, himself a prisoner, and threatened
so to be sent and conveyed to England, there to receave the sum of all that
did belong to him a malefactor (and a great one to) this he good man, endured
with patience, long time, until the best of all his goods were quite
dispersed, and every actor his proportion, the Merchant was enlarged, When
every Conspirator had his share the shipp delivered again. Bonds taken not to
prosecute. Report Mr. Weston was mad in New England.
his shipp a burden to the owner now, his undertakinges in these parts being
quite overthrown, was redelivered, and bonds of him were taken not to
prosecute, he being greived hereat, betakes him to drive a trade, between
that and Virginea many years. The brethren (sharp witted) had it spread by
and by amongst his friends in England, that the man was mad. So thought his
wife so thought his other freindes, that had it from a Planter of the Town. So
was it thought of those, that did not know, the Brethren could dissemble: why
thus they are all of them honest men in their particular, Honest men in
particular.
and every man being bound to seek another good, shall in the general do
the best he can to effect it, and so they may be excused, I think.

CHAP. VII. Of Thomas Mortons entertainment at Plimmouth and castinge away
upon an Island.
THis man arrived in those parts, and hearing news of a Town that was much
praised, he was desirous to go thither, and see how things stood, where his
entertainment was there best, I dare be bold to say: for although they had
but 3. Cowes in all, Brave entertainment in a wilderness.
yet had they fresh butter and a sallet of eggs in dainty wise, a dish not
common in a wilderness, there he bestowed some time in the survey of this
plantation. His new come servants in the mean time, were taken to task, to
have their zeal appear, and questioned what preacher was among their company;
and finding none, did seem to condole their estate as if undone, because no
man amongst them had the gift, The means.
to be in Jonas stead, nor they the means, to keep them in that path so hard
to keep.

Our Master say they reads the Bible and the word of God, and uses the book
of common prayer, but this is not the means; the answer is: the means, they
cry: alas poor Souls where is the means, you seem as if betrayed to be
without the means: how can you be stayed from fallinge headlonge to perdition?
Facilis descensus averni: the book of common prayer said they what poor
thing is that, for a man to read in a book? Book learning despised
No, no, good sirs I would you were near us, you might receave comfort by
instruction: give me a man has the guiftes of the spirit, not a book in hand.
I do profess says one, to live without the means, is dangerous, the Lord
does know.

By these insinuations, like the Serpent they did creep and wind into the
good opinion of the illiterate multitude, that were desirous to be freed and
gone (to them no doubdt, which some of them after confessed) and little good
was to be done one them after this charm was used, now plotts and factions'
how they might get loose, and here was some 35. stout knaves, Villainous plots
of knaves.
and some plotted how to steal Master Westons barque, others exasperated
knavishly to work, would practice how to get their Master to an Island; and
there leave him, which he had notice of, and fitted him to try what would be
done, and steps aborde his shallop bound for Cape Anne to the Massachussets,
with an Hogshead of Wine, Sugar he took along, the Sails hoist up and one of
the Conspirators aboard to steer, who in the mid way pretended foul weather
at the harbor mouth, and therefore for a time, he would put in to an Island
near, and make some stay where he thought to tempt his Master to walk the
woods, and so be gone, but their Master to prevent them, Prevented by discretion
caused the sales and oars to be brought a shore, to make a tilt if need
should be, and kindled fire, broched that Hogshed, and caused them fill the can
with lusty liquor, Claret sparklinge neat which was not suffered to grow pale
and flatt, And discovered in drink
but tipled of with quick dexterity, the Master makes a show of keepinge round,
but with close lips did seem to make long draughts, And discovered in drink.
knowinge the wine would make them Protestants, and so the plot was then at
large disclosed and discovered, and they made drowsy, and the inconstant
winds shiftinge at night did force the kellecke home, The Shallop billedged.
and billedge the boat, that they were forced to leave her so, Two men of the
Company cast away swim to shore upon trees.
and cut down trees that grew by the shore, to make Caffes: two of them went
over by help of a fore sail almost a mile to the maine the other two stayed
five days after, till the winds would serve to fill the sails. The first two
went to cape Ann by land, and had foul enough, and foul wether by the way,
the Islanders had fish enough, shelfish and fire to roast, and they could not
perish for lack of food, and wine they had to be sure; and by this you see
they were not then in any want; the wine and goods brought thence, the boat
left there so billedgd that it was not worth the labor to be mended.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Banishment of Master John Layford, and John Oldam from
Plimmouth.
MAster Layford was at the Merchants chardge sent to Plimmouth plantation to be
their Pastor: A Minister required to renounce his calling.
But the Brethren, before they would allow of it, would have him first renounce
his calling, to the office of the Ministry, received in England, as heretical
and Papisticall, (so he confessed) and then to receive a new calling from them,
after their fantastical invention, which he refused, alleging and
maintaining, that his calling as it stood was lawful, and that he would not
renounce it; and so John Oldam his opinion was one the affirmative, and both
together did maintain the Church of England, to be a true Church, although in
some particulars (they said) defective concludinge so against the Tenants
there, and by this means cancelled their good opinion, amonst the number of
the Seperatists, that stay they must not, lest they should be spies, and to
fall foul on this occation, the Brethren thought it would betray their cause,
and make it fall under censure, therefore against Master Layford they had found
out some scandal; to be laid on his former corse of life, to blemish that, and
so to conclude he was a spotted beast, and not to be allowed, where they
ordained to have the Passover kept so zealously; as for John Oldam, they could
see he would be passionate, and moody; and prove himself a mad Jack in his
mood, and as soon moved to be moody, and this impatience would Minister
advantage to them to be ridd of him.

Impatience confuted by example.
Hanniball when he had to do with Fabius, was kept in awe more by the patience
of that one enemy, then by the resolution of the whole army: A well tempered
enemy is a terrible enemy to encounter. They injoyne him to come to their
needeles watch house in person, New Plimmouth press money.
and for refusinge give him a cracked Crown for press money, and make the
blood run down about his ears, a poor trick, yet a good veil though Luscus
may see thorough it; and for his further behavior in the Case, proceed to
sentence him with banishment, The solemnity of banishment.
which was performed after a solemn invention in this manner: A lane of
Musketeers was made, and he compelled in scorn to pass along between, and
to receave a bob upon the bumme by every musketier, and then a board a shallop,
and so convayed to Wessaguscus shore, and staid at Massachussets, to whom
John Layford and some few more did resort, where Master Layford freely executed
his office and preached every Lords day, and yet maintained his wife and
children four or five, upon his industry there, with the blessing of God, and
the plenty of the Land, without the help of his auditory, in an honest and
laudable manner, till he was wearied and made to leave the Country.

CHAP. IX. Of a barren do of Virginea grown fruithfull in New Canaan.
CHildren and the fruit of the Womb, are said in holy writ, to be an
inheritance that comes of the Lord; then they must be coupled in Gods name
first, and not as this and some other have done.

A great happiness comes by propagation.
They are as arrows in the hand of a Giant; and David, is the man, that has
his quiver full of them, and by that rule, happy is that Land and blessed to
that is apt and fit for increase of children.

I have showed you before in the second part, of the discourse, how apt it is
for the increase of Minerals, Vegetables, and sensible Creatures.

Now I will show you, how apt New Canaan is likewise for the increase of the
reasonable Creatures, Children, of all riches being the principal: and I give
you this for an instance.

More Children in New Canaan in 7. years, then in Virginea in 27.
This Country of New Canaan in seven years time could show more Children
livinge, that have been borne there, then in 27 years could be shown in
Virginea; yet here are but a handful of weomen landed, to that of Virginea.

The Country does afford such plenty of Lobsters, and other delicate shellfish,
and Venus is said to be borne of the Sea, or else it was some sallet herb
proper to the Climate or the fountain at Weenaseemute made her become teeming
here, that had tried a camp royal in other parts, where she had been, and
yet never the near, till she came in to New Canaan.

She was delivered (in a voyage to Virginea) about Bussardes bay, to west of
Cape Cod, Delivered near Bussards bay. Dead and buried.
where she had a Son borne, but died without baptism, and was buried; and
being a thing remarkable, had this Epitaph followinge made of purpose to
memorize the worth of the persons.

EPITAPH:
TIme that bringes all things to light.
Does hide this thing out of fight,
Yet fame has left behind a story,
A hopeful race to show the glory:
For underneath this heap of stones,
Lies a percell of small bones,
What hope at last can such impes have,
That from the womb goes to the grave.
CHAP. X. Of a man endued with many spetiall gifts sent over to be Master of
the Ceremonies.
THis was a man approoved of the Brethren, both for his zeal and guiftes, yet
but a Bubble, and at the public Chardge conveyed to New England, I think to
be Master of the Ceremonies, between the Natives, and the Planters: for he
applied himself chiefly to pen the language down in Stenography: Stenography
one gift.
But there for want of use, which he rightly understood not, all was loss of
labor, something it was when next it came to veiw, but what he could not tell.

This man Master Bubble was in the time of John Oldams absence made the house
Chaplain there, and every night he made use of his gifts, Oratory another
gift.
whose oratory luld his auditory fast a sleep, as Mercuries pipes did Argus
eyes: for when he was in; they said he could not tell how to get out: nay he
would hardly out, till he were fired out, his zeal was such: (one fire they
say drives out another,) he would become a great Merchant, A great Merchant a
third gift.
and by any thing that was to be sold so as he might have day and be trusted
never so little time: the price it seemed he stood not much upon, but the day:
for to his friend he showed commodities so priced, as caused him to blame the
buyer, till the man this Bubble did declare, that it was taken up at day, and
did rejoice in the bargain, insistinge on the day, the day, yea marry quoth
his friend if you have doomesday for payment you are then well to pass. But if
he had not, it were as good he had, they were paid all alike.

And now, this Bubbles day is become a common proverb, he obtained house
room at Passonagessit, His day made a common proverb.
and remooved thither, because it stood convenient, for the Beaver trade, and
the rather because the owner of Passonagessit had no Corn left: and this man
seemed a bigg boned man, and therefore thought to be a good laborer, and to
have store of corn, but contrary wise he had none at all, and hoped upon this
friend his host: thithere were brought the trophies of this Master Bubbles
honor: Trophies of honor.
his water tankard and his Porters basket, but no provision, so that one gunne
did serve to help them both to meat; and now the time for foul was almost
past.

This man and his host at dinner: Bubble begins to say grace, yea and a long
one to, His long grace made the meat cold.
till all the meat was cold; he would not give his host leave to say grace,
belike he thought mine host past grace, and further learned as many other
Scholars are: but in the usage and custom of this blind oratory, his host
took himself abused, and the whiles fell to and had half done, before this
man Bubble would open his eyes, to see what stood before him, which made him
more cautius, and learned, that brevis oration penetrat Caelum. Together Bubbles
and he goes in the Canaw to Nut Island for brants, and there his host makes a
shot and breaks the wings of many, Bubble in have and single handed,
paddels out like a Cow in a cage: his host calls back to row two handed like to
a pare of oars, and before this could be performed, the foul had time to
swim to other flocks, and so to escape: the best part of the pray being
lost, maid his host to mutter at him, and so to part for that time
discontended.

CHAP. XI. Of a Composition made by the Sachem, for a Theft committed by some
of his men shevvinge their honest meaning.
THe owner of Passonagessit to have the benefit of company, left his habitation
in the Winter and reposed at Wessaguscus, (to his cost) mean time in the Depth
of Winter; the neighbor Salvages accustomed to buy food, came to the house
(for that intent perhaps) and peepinge in all the windows, The Salvages betake
the house and take the Corn.
(then unglased espied corn. But no body to sell the same, and having company
and help at hand, did make a shift to get into the house, and take out corn
to serve but for the present, left enough behind, the Sachem having knowledge
of the fact, and being advertised likewise, of the displeasure that had been
co^ceaved, by the Proprieter thereof, at this offense prepares a Messenger, the
Salvage that had lived in England, and sends him with commission, for the
trespass of his men who had ten skins perposed for it, to be paid by a
day certain: The Sachem at the time appointed, bringes the Beaver to
Wessaguscus: where the owner lived, but just then was gone abroad, mean time
the skins were by the Wessaguscus men gelded, and the better half by them
juggled away: before the owner came, A dishonest trick.
and he by the Actors persuaded, to be contended with the rest, who not so
pleased did draw the Sachem then to make a new agreement, and so to pay his
remnant left in hand, and ten skins more by a new day asigned, and then to
bring them to passonagessit, but the wessaguscus men went the day before to
the Salvages with this saying, that they were sent to call upon him there for
payement, and received ten skins, and took a Salvage there to justify
that at their house; the owner stayed the while, he verified this, because he
saw the man, before at Wessaguscus: the Sachem did believe the tale, and at
that time delivered up ten skins: On that behalf, in full dischardge of
all demandes, against the trespass, and the trespassers to them, who consented
to him, and them, to the owner, and kept view to themselves, A consenting
trick. The Heathen more just, then the Christians.
and made the Salvage take the tenth, and give the owner all that yet was to
be had, themselves confessinge their demands for him, and that there was but
only one as yet prepared, so that by this you may easily perceive the
uncivilized people, are more just than the civilized.

CHAP. XII. Of a voyadge made by the Master of the Ceremonies of New Canaan to
Neepenett, from whence he came away, and of the manifold dangers he escaped.
THis worthy member Master Bubble, a new Master of the Ceremonies, having a
conceit in-his head, Two Salvage guides conduct John, to Neepenett alone.
that he had hatched a new device for the purchase of Beaver, beyond
Imagination, packes up a sack full of odd implements, and without any
company, but a couple of Indians for guides, (and therefore you may, if you
please,) beeleive they are so dangerous as the Brethren of Plimmouth give it
out, he betakes him to his progress into the Inlande for Beaver, with his
carriadge on his shoulders like Milo, his guides and he in process of time,
come to the place appointed, which was about Neepenett, thereabouts being more
Beavers to be had then this Milo could carry: And both his journey men, glad
he was good man, and his guides were willing to pleasure him, there the
Salvages stay: night came on, but before they were inclined to sleep, this
good man Master Bubble had an evation crept into his head, by misapplying the
Salvages actions, that he must needs be gone in all have, yea and without his
errand, he purposed to do it so cunningely that his flight should not be
suspected, he leaves his shoes in the house, with all his other implements,
and flies, as he was on his way, to increase his fear, suggestinge himself
that he was present by a company of Indians, and that there shafts were let
fly as thick as hail at him, he puts of his breeches, and puts them one his
head, for to save him from the shafts, that flew after him so thick, that no
man could perceave them: and cryinge out avoid Satan, what have ye to do with
me, thus running one his way without his breeches, he was pitifully
scratched, with the brush of the underwoods, as he wandered up and down in
unknown ways: The Salvages in the mean time put up all his implements in the
sack he left behind, and brought them to Wessaguscus, where they thought to
have found him; but understanding he was not returned, were ferefull what to
do: and what would be conceaved of the English was become of this mazed man,
the Master of the Ceremonies; and were in consultation of the matter. One of
the Salvages was of opinion the English would suppose him to be made a way,
fearful he was to come in sight. The other better acquainted with the
English having lived some time in England,) was more confident, and he
persuaded his fellow that the English would be satisfied with relation of the
truth, as having had testimony of his fidelity. So they boldly adventured, to
show what they had brougt, and how the matter stood. They take a note of, what
was in the sack.
The English (when the sack was opened) did take a note in writing of all the
particulers that were in the sack; and heard what was by the Salvages related
of the accidents: but when his shoes were shown, it was thought he would not
have departed without his shoes; and therefore they did conceave that Master
Bubble was made away: by some sinister practice of the Salvages, who
unadvisedly had bin culpable of a crime which now they sought to excuse; and
straightly chardged the Salvages to find him out again, and bring him dead,
or alive; else their wifes and children should be destroyed. Mr. Bubble must be
found again or else they shall be destroyed,
The poor Salvages being in a pitiful perplexity, caused their Countrymen to
seek out for this mazed man; who being in short time found, was brought to
Wessaguscus; where he made a discourse of his travels, and of the perrillous
passages: which did seem to be no less dangerous, then these of that worthy
Knight Errant, Don Quixote, and how miraculously he had bin preserved; and in
conclusion, lamented the great loss of his goods, whereby he thought
himself undone.

The particular whereof being demanded, it appeared, that the Salvages had not
diminished any part of them; Not any thing diminished.
no not so much as one bit of bread: the number being known, and the fragments
laid together, it appeared all the biscuit was preserved, and not any diminished
at all: whereby the Master of the Ceremonies was overjoyed, and the whole
Company made themselves merry at his discourse of all his perrillous adventures

And by this you may observe whether the Salvage people are not full of
humanity, or whether they are a dangerous people as Master Bubble and the rest
of his tribe would persuade you.

CHAP. XIII. Of a lamentable fit of Mellancolly, that the Barrendoe fell into,
(after the death of her infant, seeing herfelfe despised of her Svveete heart,)
whereof she was cured.
WHether this goodly creature of incontinency went to work upon even terms
like Phillis or not it does not appear by any Indenture of covenants then
extant, whereby she might legally challenge the performance of any complete
Marriage at his hands, that had bin tradeing with her as Demopheon here to fore
had bin with his ostis.

Nevertheless (for his future advantage) she endeavored (like Phillis,) to
gain this Demopheon all to herself, who (as it seems) did mean nothing
less, by leaving her for the next co^mer, that had any mind to cool his
courage by that means; the whipping post (as it seems) at that time not being
in public use, for such kind of Cony katchers, but seeing herself rejected,
she grew into such a passion of Mellancolly, on a sudden, that it was
thought, she would exhibit a petition for redress to grim Pluto who had set
her a work, She cannot one the sudden resolve which door to go in at.
and knowing that the house of fate has many entrances, she was pusseld to
find the nearest way. She could not resolve on a sudden: which door would
soonest bring her to his presence handsomely.

If she should make way with a knife, she thought she might spoil her
drinking in after ages, if by poison, she thought it might prolonge her
passage thither: if by drowning, she thought Caron might come the while with
his boat, and wast her out of sight: if she should tie up her complaint in a
halter, she thought the Ropmakers would take exceptions against her good
speed. And in this manner she debated with herself, and demurred upon the
matter: So that she did appear willing enough; but a woman of small
resolution.

Which thing when it was publicly known, made many come to comfort her. One
amongst the rest, was by her requested, on her behalf, to write to her late
unkind Demopheon. The Gentleman being merrily disposed, in steed of writing an
heroical Epistle, composed this Elegi for a memorial of some mirth upon the
Circumstance of the matter, to be sent unto her, as follows:

CARMEN ELEGIACVM.
MElpemene (at whose mischeifous tove,
The screech owls voice is heard; the mandraks grove)
Commands my pen in an Iambick vain,
To tell a dismal tale, that may constrain,
The heart of him to bleed that shall discern,
How much this foul amiss does him concern,
Alecto (grim Aleclo) light thy tortch,
To thy beloved sister next the porch,
That leads unto the mansion house of fate,
Whose farewell makes her friend more fortunate.
A great Squa Sachem can she point to go,
Before grim Minos, and yet no man know.
That knives, and halters, ponds, and poisonous things,
Are always ready when the Devil once brings,
Such deadly sinners: to a deep remorse,
Of concience self accusing that will force,
Them to despair like wicked Kain, whiles death,
Stands ready with all these to stopp their breath.
The bear comes by; that often has bayted ben,
By many a Satyres-whelpe unless you can,
Command your eyes to drop huge milstones forth,
In lamentation of this loss on earth,
Of her, of whom, so much praise we may find,
Go when she will, she will leave none like behind,
She was too good for earth, too bad for heaven.
Why then for hell the match is somewhat even.
After this, the water of the fountain at Ma-re Mount, was thought fit to be
applied unto her for a remedy, she willingly used according to the quality
thereof.

And when this Elegy came to be divulged, she was so conscious of her crime,
that she put up her pipes, and with the next shipp she packt away to
Virginea, (her former habitation) quite cured of her mellancolly with the help
of the water of the fountain at Ma-re Mount.

CHAP. XIV. Of the Revells of New Canaan.
THe Inhabitants of Pasonagessit (having translated the name of their
habitation from that ancient Salvage name to Ma-re Mount; and being resolved to
have the new name confirmed for a memorial to after ages) did devise amongst
themselves to have it performed in a solemn manner with Revels, and merriment
after the old English custom: A Maypole.
prepared to set up a Maypole upon the festival day of Philip and Jacob; and
therefore brewed a barrel of excellent bear, and provided a case of bottles
to be spent, with other good cheer, for all comers of that day. And because
they would have it in a complete form, they had prepared a song fitting to the
time and present occasion. And upon Mayday they brought the Maypole to the
place appointed, with drumes, gunnes, pistols, and other fitting instruments,
for that purpose; and there erected it with the help of Salvages, that came
thither of purpose to see the manner of our Revels. A goodly pine tree of 80.
foot long, was reared up, with a pear of buckshorns nailed one, somewhat
near unto the top of it: where it stood as a fair sea mark for directions;
how to find out the way to mine Host of Ma-re Mount.

And because it should more fully appear to what end it was placed there, they
had a poem in readiness made, which was fixed to the Maypole, to show the new
name confirmed upon that plantation; which allthough it were made according to
the occurrents of the time, it being Enigmattically composed) pusselled the
Seperatists most pitifully to expound it, which (for the better information of
the reader) I have here inserted.

THE POEM.
RIse Oedipeus, and if thou can unfould,
What means Caribdis underneath the mould,
When Scilla sollitary on the ground,
(Sitting in form of Niobe) was found;
Till Amphitrites Darling did acquaint,
Grim Neptune with the Tenor of her plaint,
And causd him send forth Triton with the sound,
Of Trumpet loud, at which the Seas were found,
So full of Protean forms, that the bold shore,
Presented Scilla a new parramore,
The man who brought her over was named Samson Job.
So strong as Sampson and so patient,
As Job himself, directed thus, by fate,
To comfort Scilla so unfortunate.
I do profosse by Cupids beauteous mother,
Here Is Scogans choice for Scilla, and none other;
Though Scilla's sick with gretfe because no sign,
Can there be found of virtue masculine.
Esculapius come, I know right well,
His laboure's lost when you may ring her Knell,
The fatal sisters doom none can withstand,
Nor Cithareas power, who points to land,
With proclamation that the first of May,
At Ma-re Mount shall be kept holly day.
The Maypole called an Idol the Calfe of Horeb,
The setting up of this Maypole was a lamentable spectacle to the precise
seperatists: that lived at new Plimmouth. They termed it an Idol; yea they
called it the Calfe of Horeb: and stood at defiance with the place, naming it
Mount Dagon; threatening to make it a woeful mount and not a merry mount.

The Riddle for want of Oedipus, they could not expound, only they made some
explication of part of it, and said, it was meant by Sampson Job, the carpenter
of the Shipp, that brought over a woman to her husband, that had bin there
long before: and thrived so well, that he sent for her and her children to
come to him; where shortly after he died, having no reason, but because of the
sound of those two words: when as (the truth is) the man they applied it to,
was altogether unknown to the Author.

There was likewise a merry song made, which (to make their Revells more
fashionable) was sung with a Corus, every man bearing his part; which they
performed in a dance, hand in hand about the Maypole, whiles one of the
Company sung, and filled out the good liquor like gammedes and Jupiter.

THE SONG.
Drink and be merry, Cor.
merry, merry boys,
Let all your delight be in Hymen's joys,
Jo to Hymen now the day is come,
About the merry Maypole take a Room.
Make green garlons, bring bottles out;
And fill sweet Nectar, freely about,
Uncover thy head, and fear no harm,
For hers good liquor to keep it warm.
Then drink and be merry, etc.
Io to Hymen, etc.
Nectar is a thing assigned,
By the Deities own mind,
To cure the heart oppressed with grief,
And of good liquors is the chief,
Then drink, etc.
Io to Hymen, etc.
Give to the Mellancolly man,
A cup or two often now and than;
This physick' will soon revive his blood,
And make him be of a merrier mood.
Then drink etc.
Io to Hymen etc.
Give to the Nymphe that's free from scorn,
No Irish; stuff nor Scotch over worn,
Lasses in beaver coats come away,
Ye shall be welcome to us night and day.
To drink and be merry etc.
Jo to Hymen, etc.
This harmeles mirth made by young men (that lived in hope to have wifes
brought over to them, that would save them a labor to make a voyage to fetch
any over) was much distasted, of the precise Seperatists: that keep much a
do, about the tyth of Muit and Cummin; troubling their brains more then
reason would require about things that are indifferent: and from that time
sought occasion against my honest Host of Ma-re Mount to overthrow his
ondertakings, and to destroy his plantation quite and clean. But because they
presumed with their imaginary gifts (which they have out of Phaos box) they
could expound hidden mysteries (to convince them of blindness as well in this,
as in other matters of more consequence) I will illustrate the poem, according
to the true intent of the authors of these Revells, so much distasted by those
Moles.

Oedipus is generally received for the absolute reader of riddles who is
invoaked: Silla and Caribdis are two dangerous places for seamen to encounter,
near unto vennice, and have bin by poets formerly resembled to man and wife.
The like license the author challenged for a pair of his nomination, the one
lamenting for the loss of the other as Niobe for her children. Amphitrite is
an arm of the Sea, by which the news was carried up and down, of a rich
widow, now to be taken up or laid down. By Triton is the fame spread, that
caused the Suitors to muster; (as it had bin to Penellope of Greece) and the
Coast lying circuler, all our passage to and froe, is made more convenient by
Sea, then Land. Many aimed at this mark; but he that played Proteus best and
could comply with her humor must be the man, that would carry her, and he had
need have Sampsons strenght to deal with a Dallila: and as much patience as
Job that should come there, for a thing that I did observe in the life time of
the former.

But marriage and hanging (they say) comes by desteny and Scogans choice it is
better none at all. He that played Proteus (with the help of Priapus) put
their noses out of joint as the Proverb is.

And this the whole company of the Revellers at Ma-re Mount, knew to be the
true sense and exposition of the riddle: that was fixed to the Maypole, which
the Seperatists were at defiance with? some of them affirmed, that the first
institution thereof, was in memory of a whore; not knowing that it was a Trophe
erected at first, in honor of Maja, the Lady of learning which they despise;
vilifying the two universities with uncivile terms; accounting what is there
obtained by studdy is but unnecessary learning; not considering that learning
does enable men's minds to converse with climents of a higher nature then is to
be found within the habitation of the Mole.

CHAP. XV. Of a great Monster supposed to be at Ma-re-Mount; and the
preparation made to destroy it.
THe Seperatists envying the prosperity, and hope of the Plantation at Ma-re
Mount (which they perceaved began to come forward, and to be in a good way
for gain in the Beaver trade) conspired together against mine Host especially,
(who was the owner of that Plantation) and made up a party against him; and
mustred up what aid they could; accounting of him, as of a great Monster.

Many threatening speeches were given out both against his person, and his
Habitation, which they divulged should be consumed with fire: And taking
advantage of the time when his company (which seemed little to regard, their
threats) were gone up into the Inlands, to trade with the Salvages for Beaver.

They set upon my honest host at a place, called Wessaguscus, where (by
accident) they found him. The inhabitants there were in good hope, of the
subvertion of the plantation at Mare Mount, (which they principally aimed at;)
and the rather, because mine host was a man that endeavored to advaunce the
dignity of the Church of England; which they (on the contrary part) would
labor to vilify; with uncivile terms: enveying against the sacred book of
common prayer, and mine host that used it in a laudable manner amongst his
family, as a practice of piety.

There he would be a means to bring sacks to their mill (such is the thirst
after Beaver) and helped the conspiratores to. Surprisee mine host, (who was
there all alone) and they chardged him, (because they would seem to have some
reasonable cause against him (to set a gloss upon their malice) with
criminal things which indeed had been done by such a person, but was of
their conspiracy; mine host demanded of the conspirators who it was, that was
author of that information, that seemed to be their ground for what they now
intended. And because they answered, they would not tell him, he as
peremptorily replied, that he would not stay, whether he had, or he had not
done as they had bin informed.

The answer made no matter (as it seemed) whether it had bin negatively, or
affirmatively made; for they had resolved what he should suffer, because (as
they boasted,) they were now become the greater number: they had shaked of
their shackles of servitude, and were become Masters, and masterles people.

It appears, they were like bears whelps in former time, when mine hosts
plantation was of as much strength as theirs, but now (theirs being stronger,)
they (like overgrowne bears) seemed monsterous. In breife, mine host must
endure to be their prisoner, until they could contrive it so, that they might
send him for England, (as they said,) there to suffer according to the merit
of the fact, which they intended to father upon him; supposing (belike) it
would prove a heinous crime.

Much rejoicing was made that they had gotten their cappitall enemy (as they
concluded him) whom they purposed to hamper in such sort, that he should not
be able to uphold his plantation at Ma-re Mount

The Conspirators sported themselves at my honest host, that meant them no
hurt; and were so joccund that they feasted their bodies, and fell to
tippeling, as if they had obtained a great prize; like the Trojans when they
had the custody of Hippeus pinetree horse.

Mine host fained grief: and could not be persuaded either to eat, or drink,
because he knew emptines would be a means to make him as watchful, as the
Geese kept in the Roman Cappitall: whereon the contrary part, the conspirators
would be so drowsy, that he might have an opportunity to give them a slip, in
stead of a tester. Six persons of the conspiracy were set to watch him at
Wessaguscus: But he kept waking; Mine Host got out of prison.
and in the dead of night (one lying on the bed, for further suerty,) up gets
mine Host, and got to the second door that he was to pass which
(notwithstanding the lock) he got open: and shut it after him with such
violence, that it affrighted some of the conspirators.

The word which was given with an alarm, was, o he is gone, he is gone, what shall
we do he is gone? the rest (half a sleep) start up in a maze, and like rames,
ran their heads one at another full butt in the dark.

The Captain tore his clothes.
Their grand leader Captain Shrimp took on most furiously, and tore his
clothes for anger, to see the empty nest, and their bird gone.

The rest were eager to have torn their hair from their heads, but it was
so short, that it would give them no hold; Now Captain Shrimp thought in the
loss of this prize (which he accoumpted his Master piece,) all his honor
would be lost, forever,

Mine Host got home to ma-re mount
In the mean time mine Host was got home to Ma-re Mount through the woods,
eight miles, round about the head of the river Monatoquit, that parted the two
Plantations: finding his way by the help of the lightening (for it thundered as
he went terribly) and there he prepared powther three pounds dried, for his
present imployement, He provides for his enemies.
and four good gunnes for him, and the two assistants left at his house, with
bullets of several sizes threehounderd, or thereabouts; to be used if the
conspirators should pursue him thither: and these two persons promised their
aides in the quarrel, and confirmed that promise with a health in good rosa
solis.

Now Captain Shrimp, the first Captain in the Land (as he supposed,) must
do some new act to repair this loss, and to vindicate his reputation, who
had sustained blemish, by this oversight. Begins now to study, how to repair
or survive his honor in this manner; calling of Council: they conclude.

He takes eight persons more to him, and (like the nine Worthies of New
Canaan) they imbarque with preparation against Ma-re-Mount, where this Monster
of a man (as their phrase was) had his den; the whole number, (had the rest
not bin from home, being but seven,) would have given Captain Shrimpe (a
quondam Drummer,) such a welcome, as would have made him wish for a Drume as
bigg as Diogenes tubb, that he might have crept into it out of sight.

Now the nine Worthies are approached; and mine Host prepared: having
intelligence by a Salvage, that hastened in love from Wessaguscus, to give him
notice of their intent.

One of mine Hosts men prooved a craven: the other had prooved his wits to
purchase a little valor, before mine Host, had observed his posture.

The nine worthies coming before the Den of this supposed Monster, (this
seven headed hydra, as they termed him,) and began like Don Quixote against
the Windmill to beat a party, A Parley.
and to offer quarter (if mine Host would yeald) for they resolved to send him
for England, and bad him lay by his arms.

But he (who was the Son of a Soldier) having taken up arms in his just
defense, replied, that he would not lay by those arms, because they were so
needful at Sea, if he should be sent over. Yet (to save the effusion of so
much worty blood, as would have issued, out of the veins of these 9. worthies
of New Canaan, if mine Host should have played upon them out at his port holes
(for they came within danger like a flock of wild geese, as if they had bin
tayled one to another, as coults to be sold at a faier) mine Host was content
to yield upon quarter; and did capitulate with them: in what manner it should
be for more certainety, because he knew what Captain Shrimpe was.

Captain Shrimpe promises, that no violence should be offered to his person.
He expressed, that no violence should be offered to his person, none to his
goods, nor any of his Howsehold: but that he should have his arms, and what
else was requisite for the voyage, (which their Herald retornes,) it was agreed
upon, and should be performed.

But mine Host no sooner had set open the door and issued out: but instantly
Captain Shrimpe, and the rest of the worties stepped to him, laid hold of his
arms; and had him down, and so eagerly was every man (...) (not regarding any
agreement made with such a carnal man,) that they fell upon him, as if they
would have eaten him: some of them were so violent, that they would have a
slice with scabbert and all for haste, until an old Soldier (of the Queens
as the Proverb is) that was there by accident, clapped his gunne under the
weapons, and sharply rebuked these worthies for their unworthy practices. The
Worthies rebuked for their unworthy practices.
So the matter was taken into more deliberate consideration.

Captain Shrimpe and the rest of the nine worthies, made themselves (by this
outrageous riot) Masters of mine Host of Ma-re Mount, and disposed of what he
had at his plantation.

This they knew (in the eye of the Salvages) would add to their glory; and
diminish the reputation of mine honest Host, whom they practiced to be ridd
of, upon any terms, as willingly as if he had bin the very Hidra of the time.

CHAP. XVI. How the 9. worthies put mine Host of Ma-re-Mount into the
inchaunted, Castle at Plimmouthy, and terrified him with the Monster Briareus.
THe nine Worthies of New Canaan having now the Law in their own hands (there
being no general Governor in the Land: nor none (...) ^^peration that
regarded, the duty they owe their Sovereign, whose natural borne Subjects
they were: though translated out of Holland: from whence they had learned to
work all to their own ends, and make a great show of Religion, but no
humanity, for they were now to sit in Counsel on the cause.

And much it stood mine honest Host upon, to be very circumspect, and to take
Eacus to task: for that his voice was more allowed of, then both the other:
and had not mine Host confounded all the arguments that Eacus could make in
their defense: and confuted him that swaied the rest, they would have made him
unable to drink in such manner of merriment any more. So that following this
private counsel, given him by one that knew who ruled the roast, the Hiracano
ceased that else would split his pinace.

A conclusion was made, and sentence given, that mine Host should be sent to
England a prisoner. But when he was brought to the ships for that purpose, no
man durst be so fool hardy as to undertake to carry him. So these Worthies set
mine Host upon an Island, without gunne, powther, or shot, or dog, or so much
as knife, Mine Host set upon an Island without any thing to shift for himself.
to get any thing to feed upon: or any other clothes to shelter him with at
winter, then a thin suite which he had one at that time. Home he could not
get to Ma-re-Mount upon this Island. He stayed a month at least, and was
releeved by Salvages that took notice that mine Host was a Sachem of
Passonagessit, and would bring bottles of strong liquor to him, and unite them
selves into a league of brother hood with mine Host; so full of humanity are
these infidels before those Christians.

From this place for England, sailed mine Host in a Plimmoth shipp, (that came
into the Land to fish upon the Coast,) that landed him safe in England at
Plimmouth, and he stayed in England until the ordinary time for shipping to
set forth for these parts; and then returned: Noe man being able to tax him of
any thing.

But the Worthies (in the mean time) hoped they had bin ridd of him.

CHAP. XVII. Of the Baccanall Triumph of the nine worthies of New Canaan.
THe Seperatists were not so contended, (when mine Host of Ma-re-Mount was
gone) but they were as much discontended when he was returned again: and the
rather, because their passages about him, and the business, were so much
derided; and in songs exemplified: which (for better satisfaction of such as
are in that kind affected) I have set forth as it was then in use by the name
of the Baccanall Triumph, as follows:

THE POEM.
Master Ben: Johnson.
I sing the adventures of mine worthy wights,
And pity 't is I cannot call them Knights,
Since they had brawne and brain and were right able,
To be installed of prince Arthures table,
Yet all of them were Squires of low degree,
As did appear by rules of heraldry,
The Magi told of a prodigeous birth,
That shortly should be found upon the earth,
By Archimedes art, which they misconster
Unto their Land would prove a hiddeous monster,
Seven heads it had, and twice so many feet,
Arguing the body to be wondrous great,
Besides a forked tail heaved up on high,
As if it threatened battle to the sky,
The Rumor of this fearful prodigy,
Did canse the effeminate multitude to cry,
For want of great Alcides aid and stood,
Like People that have seent Medusas head,
Great was the grief of heart, great was the moon;
And great the fear conceaved by every one,
Of Hydras hiddeous form and dreadful power,
Doubting in time this Monster would devour,
All their best flocks whose dainty wolle consorts,
It self with Scarlet in all Princes Courts,
Not Jason nor the adventerous youths of Greece,
Did bring from Colcos any ritcher Fleece,
In Emulation of the Gretian force,
These Worthies nine prepared a wooden horse,
And pricked with pride of like success divise,
How they may purchase glory by this prize,
And if they give to Hidraes head the fall,
It will remain a plat form unto all,
Their brave atchivements, and in time to comme,
Per fas aut nefas they will erect a throne.
Cloubs are turned trumps: so now the lot is cast,
With fire and sword, to Hidras den they haste,
Mars in the assendant, Soll in Cancer now,
And Lerna Lake to Plutos court must bow,
What though they rebuked by thundering love,
It Is neither Gods nor men that can remove,
Their minds from making this a dismal day,
These nine will now be actors in this play,
And Sum on Hidra to appear a non,
Before their witles Combination,
But his undaunted spirit nursd with meat,
Such as the Cecrops gave their babes to eat,
Scorned their base accons, for with Cecrops charm,
He knew he could defend himself from harm,
Of Minos, Eacus, and Radamand,
Princes of Limbo who must out of hand,
Consult bout Hidra what must now be done,
Who having sat in Counsel one by one,
Return this answer to the Stiggean feinds,
And first grim Minos spoke: most loving friends,
Hidra prognostics ruin to our state,
And that our Kingdom will grow desolate,
But if one head from thence be taken away,
The Body and the members will decay,
To take in hand, what Eacus this task,
Is such us harebraind Phaeton did ask,
Of Phoebus to begird the world about,
Which granted put the Netherlands to rout,
Presumptions fools learn wit at too much cost,
For life and labor both at once he lost,
Stern Radamantus being last to speak,
Made a great hum and thus did silence break,
What if with rattling chains or Iron bands,
Hidra be bound either by feet or hands,
And after being lashd with smarting rodds,
He be conveyed by Stix unto the godds,
To be accused on the upper ground,
Of Lesae Majestatis his crime found,
It Will be unpossible from thence I trow,
Hidra shall come to trouble us below,
This sentence pleased the friends exceedingly,
That up they tossed their bonnets and did cry,
Long live our Court in great prosperity.
The Sessions ended some did straight devise;
Court Revells antiques and a world of joys,
Brave Christmas gambals, there was open hall,
Kept to the full: and sport the Devil and all,
Labors despised the loomes are laid a way,
And this proclaimed the, Stigean Holli day,
In came grim Minos with his motly beard,
And brought a distillation well prepared,
And Eacus who is as suer as text,
Came in with his preparatives the next,
Then Radamantus last and principal,
Feasted the Worthies in his sumptuous hall,
There Caron Cerberous and the rout of feinds,
Had lap enough and so their pastims ends.
THE ILLVSTRATIONS.
NOw to illustrate this Poem, and make the sense more plain, it is to be
considered that the Persons at Ma-re-Mount were seven, and they had seven
heads and 14. feet, these were accounted Hidra with the seven heads; and the
Maypole with the Horns nailed near the topp, was the forked tail of this
supposed Monster, which they (for want of skill) imposed: yet feared in time
(if they hindered not mine Host) he would hinder the benefit of their Beaver
trade, as he had done (by means of this help) in Kyny back river finely, ere
they were a wares; who coming too late, were much dismaide to find that mine
Host his boat had gleaned away all before they came; which Beaver is a fit
companion for Scarlett: and I believe that Iasons golden Fleece was either the
same, or some other Fleece not of so much value.

This action bred a kind of heart burning in the Plimmouth Planters who after,
sought occasion against mine Host to overthrowe his undertakings, and to
destroy his Plantation, whom they accoumpted a maine enemy to their Church
and State.

Now when they had begun with him, they thought best to proceed: for as much
as they thought themselves far enough from any control of Justice; and
therefore resolved to be their own carvers: (and the father, because they
presumed upon some encouragement they had from the favorites of their Sect in
England:) and with fire and sword nine in number pursued mine Host; who had
escaped their hand sin scorn of what they intended, and betook him to his
habitation in a night of great thunder and lightening, when they durst not
follow him, as hardy, as these nine worthies seemed to be.

It was in the Month of June, that these Marshallists had appointed to go
about this mischeifous project, and deal so crabbidly with mine Host.

After a parley, he capitulated with them about the quarter, they proffered
him, if he would consent to go for England, there to answer (as they
pretended) some thing they could object against him principal to the general:
But what it would be he cared not, neither was it any thing material.

Yet when quarter was agreed upon, they contrary wise, abused him, and carried
him to their town of Plimmouth, where (if they had thought he durst have
gone to England) rather then they would have bin any more affronted by him,
they would have dispatched him, as Captain Shrimp in a rage, professed that he
would do with his Pistol as mine Host should set his foot into the boat.
Howsoever the chief Elders voice in that place was more powerful than any of
the rest; who concluded to send mine Host without any other thing to be done to
him. And this being the final agreement, (contrary to Shrimpe and others,) the
nine Worthies had a great Feast made, and the furmity po t was provided, for
the boats gang by no allowance: and all manner of pastime.

Captain Shrimpe was so overjoyed in the performance of this exployt; that
they had, at that time, extraordinary merriment; a thing not usual amongst
those presisians) and when the wind served, they took mine Host into their
Shallop; hoysed Sail, and carried him to the Northen parts; where they left
him upon a Island.

CHAP. XVIII. Of a Doctor made at a Commencement in New Canaan.
THe Church of Plimmouth having due regard to the weal public, and the
Brethren, that were to come over; and knowing that they would be busily
employed to make provision for the cure of Souls, and therefore might neglect
the body for that time: did hold themselves to be in duty bound, to make
search for a fitting man that might be able, (if so need required) to take the
chardge upon him in that place of employment: A Council called.
and therefore called a Counfell of the whole Synagoge: amongst which company
they chose out a man, that long time had bin nursed up in the tender bosom of
the Church: one that had special gifts: he could wright and read, nay more:
he had taken the oath of abjuration, which is a special stepp, yea and a maine
degree unto perferment, Him they weane: and out of Phaos box fit him with
special gifts of no less worth: they style him Doctor and forth they send
him to gain imployement and opinion.

What luck is it I cannot hit on his name: but I will give you him by a
periphrasis, that you may know him when you meet him next.

He was borne at Wrington in the County of Somerset, where he was bred a
Butcher. He wears a long beard, and a Garment like the Greek that beggd in
Paul's Church. This new made Doctor comes to Salem to congratulate: where he
finds some are newly come from Sea, and ill at ease.

He takes the patient, and the urinall: vies the State there: finds the
Crasis Syptomes, and the attomi natantes: and tells the patient that his
disease was wind, which he had taken by gapeing, feasting, over board at Sea,
but he would quickly ease him of that grief, and quite expel the wind. And
this he did perform, with his gifts he had: and then he handled the patient
so handsomely, that he eased him of all the wind, he had in an instant.

And yet I hope this man may be forgiven, if he were made a fitting Plant for
Heaven.

How he went to work with his gifts is a question: yet he did a great cure
for Captain Littleworth, he cured him of a disease called a wife: and yet I
hope this man may be forgiven, if she were made a fitting plant for heaven.

By this means he was allowed 4. p. a month, and the chirgeons chest, and
made Physician general of Salem: where he exercised his gifts so well, that
of full 42. that there he took to cure, there is not one has more cause to
complain, or can say black's his eye. This saved Captain Littleworths credit,
that had truck'd away the vittels: though it brought forth a scandal on the
Country by it, and then I hope this man may be forgiven, if they were all made
fitting plants for Heaven.

But in mine opinion, he deserves to be set upon a palfrey, and lead up and
down in triumph throw new Canaan, with a collar of Iurdans about his neck, as
was one of like desert in Richard the seconds time through the streets of
London, that men might know where to find a Quacksaluer.

CHAP. XIX. Of the silencing of a Minister in new Canaan.
A silenced Minister out of courteousnesse, came over into new Canaan to play
the spy: He pretended out of a zealous intent to do the Salvages good, and
to teach them. He brought a great Bundell of Horn books with him, and
careful he was (good man) to blott out all the crosses of them, for fear
least the people of the land should become Idolaters. He was in hope, with his
gifts, to prepare a great auditory against great Joshua should arive there.

He applied himself on the week days to the trade of Beaver, but it was (as
might seem) to purchase the principal benefit of the Land, when the time
should come; for he had a hope to be the Caiphas of the Country: and well he
might, for he was higher by the head than any of his tribe that came after him.

This man, it seems, played the spievery handsomely, For in the exercise of
his gifts on the Lords day at Weenasimute, This Caiphas that condemns
Covetousness, and commits it himself.
he espied a Salvage come in with a good Beaver coat, and took occasion to
reproove the covetous desire of his auditory to trade for Beaver on those
days; which made them all use so much modesty about the matter for the
present, that he found opportunity, the same day, to take the Salvage a side
into a corner, where (with the help of his Wampampeack, he had in his pocket
for that purpose in a readiness,) he made a shifte to get that Beaver coat,
which their mouths watered at; and so deceaved them all.

But shortly after, when Joshua came into the Land, he had soon spied out
Caiphas practice; and put him to silence; and either he must put up his pipes,
and be packing or forsake Jonas posture, and play Demas part altogether.

CHAP. XX. Of the Practice of the Seperatists to get a snare to hamper mine
Host of Ma-re-Mount.
ALthough the nine Worthies had left mine Host upon an Island, in such an
inhumane manner, as ye heard before; yet when they understood that he had got
shipping, and was gone to England of his own accord, they dispatched letters
of advise to an Agent they had there: and by the next shipp sent after, to have
a snare made, that might hamper mine Host so, as he might not any more trouble
their conscience: and to that end, The general collection made.
made a general collection of Beaver to defray the chardge, and he was not
thought a good Christian that would not lay much out, for that employment.

Some contributed three pounds; some four, some five pounds, and procured a
pretty quantity by that Devise, which should be given to a cunning man, that
could make a snare to hamper him.

The Agent (according to his directions,) does his endeavoure (in the best
manner he could) to have this instrument made: and used uo little diligence to
have it effected. Noe cost spared for the getting of a skillfull man
His reputation stood upon the task imposed upon him against mine Host, the
only enemy (accounted) of their Church, and State.

Much inquiry was made in London, and about, for a skillfull man that would
work the feate. Noe cost was spared, for gold he had good store, first he
inquires of one: and then another: at the last he heard news of a very famous
man, one that was excellent at making subtle instruments such as that age had
never bin acquainted with.

He was well known to be the man, that had wit and wondrous skill, to make a
cunning instrument, where with to save himself, and his whole family: if all
the world besides should be drowned; and this the best, yea and the best cheap
too; for no good done, the man would nothing take.

To him this agent goes, and prays his aid: Declares his cause, and tells the
substance of his greivance, all at large, and laid before his eyes a heap of
gold.

The heap of gold.
When all was showed, that could be she would, and said what could be said, and all
too little for to have it done; the agent then did see his gold refused, his
cause despised and thought himself disgraced, to leave the work undone: so
that he was much dismayed, yet importuned the cunning, who found no reason to
take the task in hand.

He thought perhaps, mine Host (that had the slight to escape from the nine
Worthies, to chain Argus eyes, and by inchauntment make the doors of the
watch tower fly open at an instant) would not be hamperd; but with much a do:
and so he was unwilling to be troubled with that task.

The agent wondering to see that his gold would do no good, did ask, the
cunning man if he could give him no advise? who said, he would: and what was
that think you? To let mine Host alone, who being shipped again for the parts
of New Canaan, was put in at Plimmouth in the very faces of them, Mine Host a
rived again in Plimmouth.
to their terrible amazement to see him at liberty, and told him he had not
yet fully answered the matter, they could object against him. He only made
this modest reply, that he did perceave they were wilful people, that would
never be answered; and derided them for their practices, and loss of labor.

CHAP. XXI. Of Captain Littlevvorth his new devise, for the purchase of
Beaver.
IN the mean time, whiles these former passages were: There was a great
swelling fellow, of Littleworth, crept over to Salem (by the help of Master
Charter party the Tresorer, Charter party Treasorer.
and Master Ananias increase the Collector for the Company of Seperatists,) to
take upon him their employments for a time.

He resolving to make hay, whiles the Son did shine, first pretended
himself to be sent over as chief Justice of the Massachussets Bay, and Salem
forsooth, and took unto him a counsel and a worthy one no doubt; For the Cow
keeper of Salem, was a prime man in those employments; and to ad a Majesty (as
he thought) to his new assumed dignity, he caused the Patent of the
Massachussets (new brought into the Land) to be carried where he went in his
progress to and froe, as an emblem of his authority: which the vulgar people
not acquainted with, thought it to be some instrument of Music locked up in
that covered case, and thought (for so some said) this man of litttleworth had
bin a fiddler, and the rather, because he had put into the mouths of poor
silly things that were sent a long with him, what skill he had in Engines and
in things of quaint devise: all which prooved in conclusion to be but impostury.

Warrants made by Capt. Littleworth in his name.
This man thinking none so worthy as himself, took upon him infinitely: and
made warrants in his own name (without relation to his Majesty's authority in
that place,) and summoned a general appearance, at the worshipful town of
Salem: there in open assembly was tendered certain Articles, devised between
him and their new Pastor Master Eager (that had renounced his old calling to
the Ministry received in England, by warrant of Gods word: and taken a new one
there by their fantastical way imposed and conferred upon him with some
special gifts had out of Phaos box.)

To these Articles every Planter, old, and new, must sign: or be expelled from
any manner of aboade within the Compass of the Land contained within that grant
then showed: which was so large, it would suffice for Elbow room, for more
then were in all the Land by 700000. such an army might have planted them a
Colony with that cirquit which he challenged. and not contend for room for
their Cattle. But for all that, he that should refuse to subscribe, must pack.

The tenor of the Articles were these: That in all causes, as we
Ecclesiastical, as Political, we should follow the rule of Gods word.

This made a show of a good intent, and all the assembly (only mine Host
replied) did subscribe: Mine Host subscribed not.
he would not unless they would ad this Caution: So as nothing be done
contrary, or repugnant to the Laws of the Kingdom of England. These words he
knew, by former experience, were necessary, and without these, the same would
prove a very mousetrapp to catch some body by his own consent, (which the
rest nothing suspected) for the construction of the word would be made by them
of the Separation, to serve their own turns: and if any man should, in such a
case be accused of a crime (though in it self it were petty) they might set it
on the tenter hooks of their imaginary gifts, and stretch it, to make it seem
cappitall; which was the reason why mine Host refused to subscribe.

It was then agreed upon, that there should be one general trade used within
that Patent (as he said) and a general stock: The Patent.
and every man to put in a part: and every man, for his person, to have shares
alike: and for their stock according to the ratable proportion with in: and this
to continue for 12. months: and then to call an account.

All were united but mine Host refused: two truckmasters were chosen; wages
prefixed; All consented but mine Host.
Host put in a Caviat, that the wages might be paid out of the clear proffit,
which there in black and white was plainly put down.

But before the end of 6. months, the partners in this stock (handled by the
Truckmasters) would have an accoumpt: some of them had perceaved that
Wampambeacke could be pocketted up, and the underlings (that went in the boats
alonge) would be near the Wiser for any thing, hut what was trucked for
Beaver only.

The accoumpt being made between Captain Littleworth, Instead of proffit,
disproffit.
and the two Truckmasters; it was found, that instead of increasing the
proffit, they had decreased it; for the principal stock, by this employment,
was freetted so, that there was a great hole to be seen in the very middle of
it which cost the partners afterward one hundred marks to stopp, and make
good to Captain Littleworth.

But mine Host that sturred not his foot at all for the matter, did not only
save his stock from such a Cancar, but gained six and seven for one: in the
mean time, he derided the Contributers for being caught in that snare.

] CHAP. XXII. Of a Sequestration made in New Canaan.
Captain Littleworth (that had an akeing tooth at at mine Host of
Ma-re-Mount,) devised how he might put a trick upon him, by color of a
Sequestration, and got some persons to pretend that he had corn, and other
goods of theirs in possession; and the rather, because mine Host had store of
corn; and he had improvidently truckt his store, for the present gain of
Beaver: in so much, that his people under his chardge were put to short
allowance; which caused some of them to sicken with conceit of such useage:
and some of them (by the practice of the new entertained Doctor Noddy, with his
Imaginary gifts: They sent therefore to exhibit a petition to grim Minos,
Eacus, and Radamant: where they wished to have the author of their grief to be
converted: and they had procured it quickly: if curses would have caused it:
for good prayers would be of no validity (as they supposed) in this extremity.

Now in this extremity Capt. Littleworth gave commission to such as he had
found ready for such employments, to enter in the house at Ma-re-Mount,
Commission for corn.
and with a shallop, to bring from thence such corn, and other utensilles, as
in their commission he had specified. But mine Host, wary to prevent eminent
mischeife, had conveyed his powther, and shot (and such other things as stood
him in most steed for his present condition) into the woods for safety: and
whiles this was put in practice by him, the shallop was landed, and the
Commissioners entered the house; and wilfully bent against mine honest Host,
that loved good hospitality. Mine Hosts corn and goods carried away by
violence.
After they had feasted their bodies with that they found there, they carried
all his corn away, with some other of his goods, contrary to the Laws of
hospitality: a small parcel of refuse corn only excepted, which they left
mine Host to keep Christmas with.

But when they were gone, mine Host, fell to make use of his gunne, (as one
that had a good faculty in the use of that instrument) and feasted his body
nevertheless with foul, and venison, which he purchased with the help of
that instrument: the plenty of the Country, and the commodiousnes of the place
affording means by the blessing of God; and he did but deride Captain
Littleworth, that made his servants snap short in a Country so much abounding
with plenty of food for an industrious man, with great variety.

CHAP. XXIII. Of a great Bonfire made for joy of the arrival of great Joshua
surnamed Tempervvell into the Land of Canaan.
Seven ships set forth at once, and altogether arrived in the Land of Canaan,
to take a full possession thereof: What are all the 12. Tribes of new Israel
come: No, none but the tribe of Issacar; and some few scattered Levites of the
remnant of those that were descended of old Elies house.

And here comes their Joshua too among them: and they make it a more miraculous
thing for these seven ships to set forth together, and arrive at New Canaan
together, then it was for the Israelites to go over Jordan drishod: perhaps it
was, because they had a wall on the right hand and a wall on the left hand.

These Seperatists suppose there was no more difficulty in the matter, then for
a man to find the way to the Counter at noonedayes, between a Sergeant and
his yeoman: Now you may think mine Host will be hamperd or never.

These are the men that come prepared to ridd the Land, of all pollution. These
are more subtle, Men that come to ridd the land of pollution.
then the Cunning, that did refuse a goodly heap of gold. These men have
brought a very snare indeed; and now mine Host must suffer. The book of Common
Prayer which he used to be despised: and he must not be spared.

Now they are come, his doom before hand was concluded on: they have a warrant
now: A chief one too; and now mine Host must know he is the subject of their
hatred: the Snare must now be used; this instrument must not be brought by
Joshua in vain.

A Court is called of purpose for mine host; he there convented: and must
hear his doom, A Court called about mine Host.
before he go: nor will they admit him to capitulate, and know wherefore
they are so violent to put such things in practice against a man they never saw
before: nor will they allow of it, though he decline their Jurisdiction.

There they all with one assent put him to silence, crying out, hear the
Governor, hear the Govern: A divellish sentence against him.
who gave this sentence against mine Host at first sight: that he should be
first put in the Billbowes, his goods should be all confiscated; his Plantation
should be burned down to the ground, because the habitation of the wicked
should no more appear in Israel; and his person banished from those
territories, and this put in execution with all speed.

The harmeles Salvages (his neighbors) came the while, The Salvages reproove
them.
greived poor silly lambs: to see what they went about; and did reproove
these Eliphants of wit, for their inhumane deed the Lord above did opon their
mouths like Balams Ass, and made them speak in his behalf sentences, of
unexpected divinity, besides morrallity; and told them, that god would not
love them, that burned this good man's house: and plainly said, that they who
were new come would find the want of such a howses in the winter; so much
themselves to him confessed.

The smoke that did assend appeared to be the very Sacrifice of Kain.
Epictetus summa totius Philosophioe.
Mine Host (that a far of abourd a ship did there behold this woeful
spectacle,) knew not what he should do, in this extremity; but bear and
forbear, as Epictetus says: it was bootelesse to exclaim.

He did consider then, these transitory things are but ludibria fortunae as
Cicero calls them. All was burnt down to the ground, and nothing did remain,
but the bare ashes as an emblem of their cruelty: and unles it could (like to
the Phoenix) rise out of these ashes, and be new again, (to the immortal glory
and renown, of this fertile Canaan the new, the stumpes and posts in their
black liveries will mourn; and piety it self will add a voice to the bare
remnant of that Monument, and make it cry for recompense (or else revenge)
against the Sect of cruel Schismatics.

CHAP. XXIV. Of the digrading and creating gentry in New Canaan.
THere was a zealous Professor in the Land of Canaan (grown a great Merchant
in the Beaver trade) that came over for his conscience sake, (as other men have
done) and the means: (as the phrase is) who in his minority had bin prentice
to a tomb maker; who coming to more ripenes of years (though less
discretion,) found a kind of scruple in his conscience, that the trade was in
part against the second commandment: and therefore left it off wholely, and
betook himself to some other employments.

In the end he settled upon this course: where he had hope of preferrement,
and become one of those things that any Judas might hang himself upon, An
Elder.
that is an Elder.

He had bin a man of some recconing in his time (as himself would boast) for
he was an officer, just under the ExChequer at Westminster, in a place called
Phlegeton: there he was comptroller, and conversed with noe plebeians I tell
you: but such as have angels for their attendance, (I mean some Lawyers, with
appertenances (that is Clarks,) with whom a Iugg of Bear, and a crusty roll
in the term, is as current as a three penny scute at Hall time.

There is another place, thereby called sticks: these are to two daingerous
places, by which the infernal gods do swear: but this of Sticks is the more
daingerous of the two, because there, (if a man be once in) he cannot tell how
to get out again handsomely.

I knew an under sheriff was in unawaires, and he labored to be free of it:
yet he broake his back before he got so far as quietus est: There is no
such dainger in Phlegeton, where this man of so much recconing was comptroller.

He being here, waited an opportunity to be made a gentl. and, Joshua
displeased.
now it fell out that a gentl. newly come into the land of Canaan (before he
knew what ground he stood upon) had incurred the displeasure of great Joshua so
highly, that he must therefore be digraded.

No reconciliation could be had for him: all hopes were past for that matter:
Where upon this man of much recconing (pretending a grant of the approach in
avoydance) helps the lame dog over the style; and was as jocund on the
matter as a Magpie over a Mutton.

Wherefore the Heralls with Drums, and Trumpets, proclaiming in a very solemn
manner, that it was the pleasure of great Joshua (for diverse and sundry very
good causes and considerations, Master Temperwell.
Master Temperwell there unto especially mooving) to take away the title,
prerogative and pre-eminence of the Delinquent, so unworthy of it, and to place
the same upon a Professor of more recconing: so that it was made a penal thing
for any man after, to lift the same man again on the top of that style: but
that he should stand perpetually digraded from that prerogative. And the place
by this means being void, this man of so much more reckoning, was received in
like a Cipher to fillup a room, and was made a Gentleman of the first head;
and his Coat of Arms blazoned and tricked out fit for that purpose, in this
Poem following.

THE POEM.
WHat ailes Pigmalion? Is it Lunacy;
Or Doteage on his own Imagery?
Let him remember how he came from Hell,
That after ages by record may tell,
The complete story to postertty;
Put it this way.
Blazon his Coat in form of Heraldry.
He bears argent always at command;
A bar between three crusty rolls at hand:
And for his crest with froth there does appear,
Dextra Paw Elevant a Iugg of bear.
Now that it may the more easily be understood, I have here endeavored to set
it forth in these illustrations following Pigmalion was an Image maker, who
doteing on his own perfection in making the Image of Venus, grew to be amazed
man, like our Gentleman here of the first head: and by the figure Antonomasia
is he herein exemplified.

He was translated from a tomb maker, to be the tapster at hell (which is in
Westminster under the ExChequer office (for benefit of the means) he
translated himself into New England: whereby the help of Beaver, and the
command of a servant or two, he was advaunced to the title of a gentleman;
where I left him to the exercise of his gifts.

CHAP. XXV. Of the manner how the Seperatists do pay debts to them that are
without.
THere was an honest man, one Mr. Innocence Fairecloath, by Mr. Mathias
Charterparty, sent over into New Canaan, to raise a very good marchantable
commodity for his benefit; for whiles the man was bound by covenant to stay for
a time, and to employ such servants, as did there belong to Mr. Charterparty.
He disdained the tenants of the Seperatists: and they also (finding him to be
none,) disdained to be employed by a carnal man (as they termed him) and
sought occasion against him, to do him a mischeife, intelligence was conveyed
to Mr. Charterparty, that this man was a member of the Church of England: and
therefore (in their account) an enemy to their Church, and state. And (to the
end they might have some color against him) some of them practiced to get
into his debte; which he not mistrusting) suffered: and gave credit for such
Commodity as he had sold at a price. When the day of payment came, insteede of
monyes; he being at that time sick and weak, Good Payement.
and stood in need of the Beaver he had contracted for he, had an Epistle
full of zealous exhortations, to provide for the soul, and not to mind these
transitory things that perished with the body; and to be think himself
whether his conscience would be so prompt to demand so great a sum of
Beaver as had bin contracted for. He was further exhorted therein, to consider
he was but a steward for a time, and by all likely hood was going to to give
up an account of his stewardship: and therefore persuaded the creditor not to
load his conscience with such a burden, which he was bound by the Gospel to
ease him of (if it were possible) and for that cause he had framed this
Epistle in such a freindly manner to put him in mind of it. The perusal of
this (lap'd in the paper) was as bad as a potion, to the creditor, to see his
debtor Master Subtilety a zealous professor (as he thought) to deride him in
this extremity, that he could not choose (in admiration of the deceit) but
cast out these words:

Are these your members? if they be all like these I believe the Devil was
the setter up of their Church.

This was called in question, when Mr. Fairecloath least thought of it. Capt.
Little worth must be the man must press it against him, for blasphemy against
the Church of Salem: Blasphemy an example for carnal men.
and to great Joshua Temperwell he goes with a bitter accusation, to have
Master Innocence made an example for all carnal men, to presume to speak the
least word that might tend to the dishonor of the Church of Salem; yea the
mother Church of all that holy Land.

And he convented was before their Synagoge, where no defense would serve his
turn, yet was there none to be seen to accuse him, save the Court alone.

The time of his sickness, nor the urgent cause, were not allowed to be urged
for him; but whatsoever could be thought upon against him was urged, seeing he
was a carnal man of them, that are without. So that it seems by those
proceedings there, the matter was adjudged before he came: He only brought to
hear his sentence in public: which was, to have his tongue bored through;
his nose slit; his face branded; his ears cut; his body to be whipped in every
several plantation of their Jurisdiction: and a fine of forty pounds imposed
with perpetual banishment: and (to execute this vengeance,) shackles (the
Deacon of Charles Town) was as ready as Mephostophiles, when Doctor Faustus
was bent upon mischeife.

He is the purser general of New Canaan, who (with his whipp, with knotts
most terrible) takes this man unto the Counting house: there capitulates with
him, why he should be so hasty for payment, when Gods dear children must pay
as they are able: and he weeps, and sobbes, and his handkercher walks as a
sign of his sorrow for Master Fairecloaths sin, that he should bear no
better affection to the Church and the Saints of New Canaan: and strips
innocence the while; and comforts him.

Though he be made to stay for payment, he should not think it long; the
payment would be sure when it did come, and he should have his due to a doite;
he should not wish for a token more; And then told it him down in such
manner, Notable pay.
that he made Fairecloaths Innocent back, like the picture of Rawhead and
blowdy bones: and his shirte like a pudding wifes aperon. In this employment
shackles takes a great felitity, and glories in the practice of it: This
cruel sentence was stoped, in part by Sir Christopher Gardener (then present
at the execution) by expostulating with Master Temperwell: who was content
(with that whipping, and the cutting of part of his ears) to send Innocence
going, with the loss of all his goods to pay the fine imposed, and perpetual
banishment out of their Lands of New Canaan in terrorem populi.

Lo this is the payment you shall get, if you be one of them they term,
without.

CHAP. XXVI. Of the Charity of the Seperatists.
CHarity is said to be the darling of Religion and is indeed the Mark of a
good Christian: But where we do find a Commission for ministering to the
necessity of the Saints, we do not find any prohibition against casting our
bread upon the waters, where the unsanctified, as well as the sanctified, are
in possibility to make use of it.

I cannot perceave that the Seperatists do allow of helping our poor though
they magnify their practice incontributing to the nourishment of their Saints
For as much as some that are of the number of those whom they term without
(though it were in case of sickness) upon their landing, when a little fresh
victuals would have recovered their healths, yet could they not find any
charitable assistance from the^. Nay mine Host of Ma-re-Mount (if he might
have had the use of his gunne powther, and shot, and his dog: which were
denied) he doubtless would have preserved, such poor helples wretches as were
neglected by those that brought them over; Lame charity
which was so apparent (as it seemed) that one of their own tribe said: the
death of them would be required at some bodies hands one day, (meaning Master
Temperwell.

But such good must not come from a carnal man: if it come from a member, then
it is a sanctified work; if otherwise, it is rejected, as unsanctified.

But when shackles wife, and such as had husbands parents, or friends happened
to be sick, mine Hosts help was used, and instruments provided for him, to
kill fresh vittell with (wherein he was industrious) and the persons, having
fresh vittell, lived.

So doubtless might many others have bin preserved, but they were of the number
left without; neither will those precise people admit a carnal man into their
howses, though they have made use of his in the like case, they are such
antagonists to those, that do not comply with them and seek to be admitted,
to be of their Church that in scorn they say: you may see what it is to be
without.

CHAP. XXVII. Of the practice of their Church.
THe Church of the Seperatists, is governed by Pastors, Elders, and Deacons,
and there is not any of these (thouh he be but a Cow keeper) but is allowed to
exercise his gifts, in the publik assembly on the Lords day; so as he do not
make use of any notes for the help of his memory: for such things they say
smell of Lamp oil, and there must be no such unsavery perfume admitted, to
come into the congregation.

These are all public preachers. There is amongst these people a Deakonesse
made of the sisters, that uses her gifts at home in an assembly of her sex,
by way of repetition, or exhortation: such is their practice.

The Pastor (before he is allowed of) must disclaim his former calling to the
Ministry, as heretical; and take a new calling after their fantastical
inventions: and then he is admitted to be their Pastor.

The manner of disclaimeing is, to renounce his calling with bitter
execrations, for the time that he has heretofore lived in it: and after his
new election, there is great joy conceaved at his commission.

And their Pastors have this pre-eminence above the Civil Magistrate: He
must first consider of the complaint, made against a member: and if he be
disposed to give the party complained of, an admonition, there is no more to
be said: if not; He delivers him over to the Magistrate to deal with him, in
a course of Justice, according to their practice, in cases of that nature.

Of these pastors I have not known many: some I have observed; together with
their carriage in New Canaan: and can inform you what opinion has bin
conceaved of their conditions, in the particular. There is one who (as they
give it out there, that think they speak it to advaunce his worth) has bin
expected to exercise his gifts in an assembly, that stayed his coming, (in the
midst of his Journey) falls into a fit (which they term a zealous
meditation) and was 4. miles past the place appointed, before he came to him
self, or did remember where abouts he went. And how much these things are
different from the actions of mazed men, I leave to any indifferent man to
judge: and if I should say, they are all much alike, they that have seen and
heard, what I have done will not condemme me altogether.

Now, for as much as by the practice of their Church every Elder or Deacon may
preach: it is not amiss to discover their practice in that particular, before
I part with them.

It has bin an old saying, and a true, what is bred in the bone, will not out
of the flesh, nor the stepping into the pulpit that can make the person fit
for the employment. The unfitnes of the person undertaking to be the Messenger,
has brought a blemish upon the messages, Jews the 11. sent a Barber Ambassador.
as in the time of Jews the Eleventh King of France; who (having advaunced his
Barber to place of Honor, and graced him with eminent titles) made him so
presumptuous, to undertake an Embassage to treat with foreign princes of
Civil affairs.

But what was the issue? He behaved himself so unworthily (yet as well as his
breeding would give him leave) that both the Messenger and the message were
despised; The Embassage despised.
and had not he (being discovered) conveyed himself out of their territories,
they had made him pay for his barbarous presumption.

Socrates says, loquere ut te videam. If a man observe these people in the
exercise of their gifts, he may thereby discern the tincture of their proper
calling, the asses ears will peep through the lions hide. I am sorry they
cannot discern their own infirmities I will deal fairly with them; for I
will draw their pictures cap a pe, that you may discern them plainly from
head to foot in their postures that so much bewitch (as I may speak with
modesty,) these illiterate people to be so fantastical, to take Jonas task
upon them without sufficient warrant.

One steps up like the Minister of Justice with the balance only, A Grocer.
not the sword for fear of affrighting his auditory. He points at a text, and
handles it as evenly as he can; and teaches the auditory, that the thing he
has to deliver; must be well waied, for it is a very precious thing, yet much
more precious then gold, or pearl: and he will teach them the means how to
way things of that excellent worth: that a man would suppose, he, and his
auditory were to part stakes by the scale; and the like distribution they have
used about a bag pudding.

Another (of a more cutting disposition) steps in his steed; and he takes a
text, A tailor.
which he devides into many parts: (to speak truly) as many as he list. The
fag end of it he pares away, as a superfluous remnant.

He puts his auditory in comfort, that he will make a garment for them: and
teach them how they shall put it on; and incourages them to be in love with it,
for it is of such a fashion as does best become a Christian man. He will
assuer them that it shall be armor of proffe against all assaults of Satan.
This garment (says he) is not composed as the garments made by a carnal man,
that are sowed with a hot needle, and a burning thread; but it is a garment
that shall out last all the garments: and (if they will make use of it, as he
shall direct them) they shall be able (like saint George) to terrify the
great Dragon error; and defend truth which error with her wide chaps, would
devour: whose mouth shall be filled with the shredds, and parings, which he
continually gapes for under the cutting bourd.

A third, A Tapster.
he supplies the rome: and in the exercise of his gifts begins with a text
that is drawn out of a fountain, that has in it no dreggs of popery. This
shall prove unto you (says he) the Cup of repentance; it is not like unto the
Cup of the Whore of Babylon, who will make men drunk with the dreggs thereof:
It is filled up to the brim with comfortable joyce, and will prove a cordial,
a comfortable cordial to a sick soul, (says he,) And so he handles the
matter as if he dealt by the pint, and the quarte with Nic and Froth.

An other (a very learned man indeed) goes another way to work with his
auditory; A Cobbler.
and exhorts them to walk upright, in the way of their calling, and not (like
carnal men) tread awry. And if they should fail in the performance of that
duty, yet they should seek for amendment whiles it was time; and tells them,
it would be to late to seek for help, when the shop windows were shutt up:
and pricks them forward with a freindly admonition, not to place their delight
in worldly pleasures, which will not last, but in time will come to an end.

But so to handle the matter, that they may be found to wax better and better,
and then they shall be doublely rewarded for their work: and so closes up the
matter in a comfortable manner.

But stay: Here is one stepped up in haste, and (being not minded to hold his
auditory in expectation of any long discourse,) he takes a text; and (for
brevities sake,) divides it into one part: and then runs so fast a fore with
the matter, A very pa^^rick.
that his auditory cannot follow him. Doubtless his Father was some Irish
footeman, by his speed it seems so. And it may be at the hour of death, the
son being present) did participat of his Fathers nature, (according to
Pithagoras) and so the virtue of his Fathers nimble feet (being infused into
his brains) might make his tongue outrunne his wit.

Well, if you mark it, these are special gifts indeed: which the vulgar
people are so taken with, that there is no persuading them that it is so
ridiculous.

This is the means, (O the means,) that they pursue: This that comes without
premeditation: This is the Suparlative: and he that does not approove of this,
they say is a very reprobate.

Many unwarrantable Tenants they have likewise: some of which being come to my
knowledge I will here set down, one whereof being in public practice
maintained, is more notorious then the rest. I will therefore begin with that
and convince them of manifest error by the maintenance of it, which is this:

That it is the Magistrates office absolutely (and not the Minsters) to join
the people in lawful matrimony. Tenent 1.
And for this they vouch the History of Ruth, saying Boas was married to Ruth
in presence of the Elders of the people. Herein they mistake the scope of the
text.

2. That it is a relic of popery to make use of a ring in marriage: and that
it is a diabolical circle for the Devil to dance in.

3. That the purification used for weomen after delivery is not to be used.

4. That no child shall be baptized, whose parents are not received into their
Church first.

5. That no person shall be admitted to the Sacrament of the Lords supper that
is without.

6. That the book of Common prayer is an idol: and all that use it, Idolaters.

7. That every man is bound to believe a professor upon his bare affirmation
only, before a Protestant upon oath.

8. That no person has any right to Gods creatures, but Gods children only
who are themselves: and that all others are but usurpers of the Creatures.

9. And that for the general good of their Church, and common wealth they are
to neglect father, mother and all freindship.

10. Much a do they keep about their Church discipline, as if that were the
most essential part of their Religion, Tithes are banished from thence, all
except the tyth of Muit and Commin.

11. They differ from us some thing in the creed too, for if they get the
goods of one, that is without, into their hands; he shall be kept without
remedy for any satisfaction: and they believe, that this is not cosenage.

12. And lastly they differ from us, in the manner of praying; for they wink
when they pray, because they think themselves so perfect in the high way to
heaven, that they can find it blindfould: so do not I.

CHAP. XXVIII. Of their Policy inpublik Justice.
NOw that I have anottomized, the two extreme parts of this Politic
Commonwealth the head and the inferior members, I will show you the heart and
read a short lecture over that too; which is Justice.

I have a petition to exhibit to the high and mighty Mr. Temperwell; and I
have my choice whether I shall make my plaint in a case of conscience, or bring
it with in the Compass of a point in law. And because I will go the surest way
to work, at first, I will see how others are answered in the like kind,
whether it be with hab or nab, as the Judge did the Countryman.

Here comes Mr. Hopewell: his petition is in a case of conscience (as he
says.) But see great Joshua allows conscience to be of his side: yet cuts him
off; with this answer; Law is flat against him. Well let me see another. I
marry: Here comes one Master Doubtnot: his matter depends (I am sure) upon a
point in Law: alas what will it not do, look ye it is affirmed that Law is on
his side: but Conscience (like a blanket over) spreades it. This passage is
like to the Procustes of Room me thinks: and therefore I may very well say of
them. Even so by racking out the joints and chopping of the head,
Procustes fitted all his guests unto his Iron bed.


And if these speed no better, with whom they are friends, that neither find
Law nor Conscience to help them: I do not wonder to see mine Host of
Ma-re-Mount speed so ill, that has bin proclaimed an enemy so many years in
New Canaan, to their Church and State.

CHAP. XXIX. How mine Host was put into a whales belly.
THe Seperatists (after they had burned Ma-re-Mount, they could not get any
shipp to undertake the carriage of mine Host from thence, either by fair
means, or foul,) they were enforced (contrary to their expectation) to be
troubled with his company: and by that means had time to consider more of the
man, then they had done of the matter: wherein at length it was discovered,
that they (by means of their credulity of the intelligence given them in
England of the matter, and the false Carecter of the man) had run themselves
headlonge into an error: and had done that ona sudden, which they repented at
leisure: but could not tell which way to help it as it stood now. They could
debate upon it; and especially upon two difficult points, whereof one must be
concluded upon. If they sent mine Host a way by banishment, he is in
possibility to survive, to their disgrace for the injury done: if they suffer
him to stay, and put him in statu quo prius, all the vulgar people will
conclude they have bin too rash in burning a house that was useful, and count
them men unadvised.

So that it seems (by their discourse about the matter) they stood betwixt
Hawke and Bussard: and could not tell which hand to incline unto. They had
sounded him secretly: he was content with it, go which way it would. Nay
shackles himself, (who was employed in the burning of the house, and therefore
feared to be caught in England) and others were so forward in putting mine Host
in statu quo prius, after they had found their error, (which was so apparent
that Luceus eyes would have served to have found it out in less time) that
they would contribute 40. shillings a piece toward it; and affirmed, that
every man according to his ability that had a hand in this black design should
be taxed to a Contribution in like nature: it would be done exactly.

Now (whiles this was in agitation, and was well urged by some of those partys,
to have bin the upshot) unexpected (in the depth of winter, when all ships
were gone out of the land) In comes Mr. Wethercock a proper Mariner; and they
said; he could observe the wind: blow it high, blow it low, he was resolved
to lie at hull rather than encounter such a storm as mine Host had met with:
and this was a man for their turn.

He would do any office for the brethren, if they (who he knew had a strong
purse, and his conscience waited on the strings of it, if all the zeal he
had) would bear him out in it: which they professed they would. He undertakes
to ridd them of mine Host by one means or another. They gave him the best
means they could, according to the present condition of the work; and letters
of credence to the favoures of that Sect in England; with which (his business
there being done, and his shipp cleared) he hoyst the Sails, and put to Sea:
since which time mine Host has not troubled the brethren, but only at the
Counsel table: where now Sub indice lis est.

CHAP. XXX. Of Sir Christopher Cardiner Knight, and how he spedd amongst the
Seperatists.
SIr Christopher Gardener, (a Knight, that had bin a traveller, both by Sea and
Land; a good judicious gentleman in the Mathematticke, and other Sciences
useful for Plantations Kimistry, etc. and also being a practical Enginer)
came into those parts, intending discovery.

But the Seperatists love not those good parts, when they proceed from a
carnal man (as they call every good Protestant,) in short time had found the
means to pick a quarrel with him. The means is, that they pursue to obtain
what they aim at: the word is there the means.

So that when they find any man like to prove an enemy to their Church, and
state, then straight the means must be used for defense. The first precept in
their Politiques is, to defame the man at whom they aim. and then he is a
holy Israelite in their opinions, who can spread that fame brodest, like butter
upon a loaf: no matter how thin; it will serve for a veil: and then this man
(who they have thus depraved) is a spotted unclean leaper: he must out, least
he pollute the Land, and them that are clean.

If this be one of their gifts, then Machevill had as good gifts as they. Let
them raife a scandal on any, though never so innocent; yet they kow it is
never wiped clean out: the staind marks remains: which has bin well observed
by one, in these words of his: Stick Candles against a Virgin walls white back:
If they will not burn yet at the least they will black.


And thus they dealt with Sir Christopher: and plotted by all the ways, and
means they could, to overthrow his undertakings in those parts.

And therefore I cannot choose, but conclude, that these Seperatists have
special gifts: for they are given to envy, and malice extremely.

The knowledge of their defamacion could not please the gentleman well, when it
came to his ear, which would cause him to make some reply, (as they supposed)
to take exceptions at, as they did against Fair cloth: and this would be a
means, they thought, to blow the coal, and so to kindle a brand that might
fire him out of the Country too, and send him after mine Host of Ma-re-Mount.

They take occasion (some of them) to come to his house when he was gone up
into the Country: and finding he was from home) so went to work, that they
left him neither house, nor habitation, nor servant, nor any thing to help him,
if he should return: but of that they had noe hope (as they gave it out) for
he was gone (as they affirmed) to lead a Salvage life; and for that cause
took no company with him: and they, having considered of the matter, thought
it not fit that any such man should live in so remoate a place, within the
Compass of their patent. So they fired the place; and carried away the persons,
and goods.

Sir Christopher was gone with a guide (a Salvage) into the in land parts for
discovery: but, before he was returned, he met with a Salvage that told the
guide, Sir Christopher would be killed: Master Temperwell (who had now found
out matter against him) would have him dead, or alive. This he related; and
would have the gentleman not to go to the place appointed, because of the
danger, that was supposed.

But Sir Christopher was nothing dismayed: he would on, whatsoever come of it;
and so met with the Salvages: and between them was a terrible skermish: But
they had the worst of it, and he escaped well enough.

The guide was glad of it, and learnd of his fellows that they were promised a
great reward, for what they should do in this employment.

Which thing (when Sir Christopher understood,) he gave thanks to God; and
after (upon this occasion, to sollace himself) in his table book, he
composed this sonnet, which I have here inserted for a memorial.

THE SONNET.
WOlfes in Sheeps clothing why will ye,
Think to deceave God that does see,
Your simulated sartity.
For my part I do wish you could,
Your own infirmities behold,
For then you would not be so bold,
Like Sophists why will you dispute,
With wisdom so, you do confute,
None but your selves: for shame be mute.
Least great Jehovah with his power,
Do come upon you in an hour,
When you least think and you devour.
This Sonnet the Gentleman composed, as a testimony of his love toward them,
that were so ill affected toward him; from whom they might have received much
good, if they had bin so wise to have embraced him in a loving fashion.

But they despise the help, that shall come from a carnal man (as they termed
him) who (after his return from those designs) finding how they had used him
with such disrespect, took shipping, and disposed of himself for England, and
discovered their practices in those parts toward his Majesty's true hearted
Subjects, which they made weary of their aboade in those parts.

CHAP. XXXI. Of mine Host of Ma-re-Mount how he played Jonas after he had
bin in the Whales belly for a time.
MIne Host of Ma-re-Mount being put to Sea, had delivered him, for his relief
by the way, (because the shipp was unvitteled, and the Seamen put to straight
allowance, which could hold out, but to the Canaries) a part of his own
provision, being two months proportion; in all but 3. small pieces of porke;
which made him expect to be famished before the voyage should be ended, by all
likelihood. Yet he thought he would make one good meal, before he died:
like the Colony servant in Virginea, that before he should go to the
gallows) called to his wife to set on the loblolly pot, and let him have one
good meal before he went; who had committed a petty crime, that in those
days, was made a cappitall offense.

And now mine Host being merrily disposed, on went the pieces of porke, where
with he feasted his body, and cherished the poor Sailers: and got out of them
what Mr. Wethercock, their Master purposed to do with him that he had no more
provision: and along they sailed from place to place, from Island to Island, in a
pitiful wether beaten ship; where mine Host was in more dainger (without all
question) then Jonas, when he was in the Whales belly; and it was the great
mercy of God that they had not all perished. Vittelled they were but for a
month when they wayd Ancor, and left the first port.

They were a pray for the enemy for want of powther, if they had met them:
besides the vessel was a very slugg, and so unserviceable, that the Master
called a counsel of all the company in general, to have their opinions,
which way to go, and how to bear the helm, who all under their hand affirmed
the shipp to be unserviceable: so that in fine the Master, and men, and all
were at their wits end about it: yet they employed the Carpenters to search,
and caulke her sides, and do their best whiles they were in her. Nine months
they made a shifte to use her, and shifted for supply of vittells at all the
Islands they touched at; though it were so poorly, that all those helps, and
the short allowance of a biscuit a day, and a few Lymons taken in at the
Canaries, served but to bring the vessel in view of the lands end.

They were in such a desperate case, that (if God in his great mercy had not
favored them, and disposed the winds fair until the vessel was in
Plimmouth road,) they had without question perished; for when they let drop an
Anchor, near the Island of S. Michaels not one bit of food left for all that
starving allowance of this wretched wethercock; that if he would have lanched
out his beaver, might have bought more vittells in New England then he and the
whole ship with the Cargazoun was worth, (as the passingers he carried who
vittelled themselves affirmed,) But he played the miserable wretch, and had
possessed his men with the contrary; who repented them of waying anchor before
they knew so much.

Mine Host of Ma-re-Mount (after he had bin in the Whales belly) was set a
shore to see if he would now play Jonas, so metamorphosed with a long voyage,
that he looked like Lazarus in the painted cloth.

But mine Host (after due consideration of the premises) thought it fitter for
him to play Jonas in this kind, then for the Seperatists to play Jonas in that
kind as they do. He therefore bid Wethercock tell the Seperatists, that they
would be made in due time to repent those malicious practices, and so would he
too; for he was a Seperatist amongst the Seperatists as far as his wit would
give him leave; though when he came in Company of basket makers, he would do
his indevoure to make them pin the basket, if he could, as I have seen him.
And now mine Host being merrily disposed, having past many perilous
adventures in that desperate Whales belly, began in a posture like Jonas, and
cried Repent you cruel Seperatists repent, there are as yet but 40. days if
Jove vouchsafe to thunder, Charter and the Kingdom of the Seperatists will
fall a sunder: Repent you cruel Schismatics repent. And in that posture he
greeted them by letters returned into new Canaan; and ever (as opportunity was
fitted for the purpose) he was both heard etc seen in the posture of Jonas
against the^ crying repent you cruel Seperatists, repent, there are as yet but
40. days if Jove vouchsafe to thunder. The Charter and the Kingdom of the
Seperatists will fall a sunder: Repent you cruel Schismatics repent; If you
will hear any more of this proclamation meet him at the next markettowne, for
Cynthius aurem vellet.

A TABLE OF THE CONTENTS OF THE THREE BOOKS.
The Tenants of the first Book.
Chapter. 1. PRooving New England the principal part of all America and most
commodious and fit for habitation and generation. Chapter. 2. Of the original
of the Natives. Chapter. 3. Of a great martallity happened amongst the Natives.
Chapter. 4. Of their howses and habitations. Chapter. 5. Of their Religion.
Chapter. 6. Of the Indians apparel. Chapter. 7. Of their Childbearing.
Chapter. 8. Of their reverence and respect to age. Chapter. 9. Of their
Juggelling tricks. Chapter. 10. Of their Duelles. Chapter. 11. Of the
maintenance of their reputation. Chapter. 12. Of their Traffic and trade one
with another. Chapter. 13. Of their Magazines and Storehowses. Chapter. 14. Of
their Subtilety. Chapter. 15. Of their admirable perfection in the use of
their senses. Chapter. 16. Of their acknowledgement of the creation and
immortality of the Soul. Chapter. 17. Of their Annalls and Funerals. Chapter.
18. Of their Custom in burning the Country. Chapter. 19. Of their Inclination
to drunckennes. Chapter. 20. Of there Philosophical life.
The Tenants of the second Book.
Chap. 1. The general Survey of the Country. Chap. 2. What trees are there and
how commodious. Chap. 3. What Potherbes are there and for Sallets. Chap. 4. Of
the Birds of the air and fethered Fewes. Chap. 5. Of the Beasts of the
^orrest. Chap. 6. Of Stones and Mineralls. Chap. 7. Of the Fishes and what
commodity they preove. Chap. 8. Of the goodness of the Country and the
Fountains. Chap. 9. A Perspective to view the Country by. Chap. 10. Of the
great Lake of Erocoise.
The Tenants of the third Book.
Chap. 1. Of a great legue made between the Salvages and English. Chap. 2. Of
the entertainment of Master Westons people. Chap. 3. Of a great Battle
fought between the English and the Indians. Chap. 4. Of a Parliament held at
Wessaguscus. Chap. 5. Of a Massacre made upon the Salvages. Chap. 6. Of the
Surprising of a Merchants Shipp. Chap. 7. Of Thomas Mortons Entertainment and
wrack. Chap. 8. Of the banishment of John Layford, and John Oldam. Chap. 9. Of
a barren do of Virginea grown Fruithfull. Chap. 10. Of the Master of the
Ceremonies. Chap. 11. Of (...) ^mposition made for a Salvages theft. Chap. 12.
Of a voyage made by the Master of the Ceremonies for Beaver. Chap. 13. A
lamentable fit of mellancolly cured. Chap. 14. The Revells of New Canaan.
Chap. 15. Of a great Monster supposed to be at Ma-re-Mount. Chap. 16. How the
nine Worthies of New Canaan put mine Host of Ma-re-Mount into an inchaunted
Castle. Chap. 17. Of the baccanall Triumph of New Canaan. Chap. 18. Of a
Doctor mad^ at a commencement. Chap. 19. Of the silencing of a Minister. Chap.
20. Of a practice to get a snare to hemper mine Host of Ma re Mount. Chap. 21.
Of Captain Littleworths devise for the purchase of Deaver. Chap. 22. Of a
Sequestration in New Canaan. Chap. 23. Of a great bonfire made in New Canaan.
Chap. 24. Of the digradinge and creatinge of Gentry. Chap. 25. Of the manner
how the Seperatists pay their debts. Chap. 26. Of th Charity of the
Seperatists. Chap. 27. Of the practice of their Church. Chap. 28. Of their
Policy in publik Justice. Chap. 29. How mine Host was put into a Whales belly.
Chap. 30. How Sir Christopher Gardener Knight speed amongst the Seperatists.
Chap. 31. How mine Host of Ma-re-Mount play^. Jonas after he got out of the
Whales belly.
FINIS.

