A just and moderate Answer To a most injurious, and slanderous Pamphlet,
entitled, An exact Discovery of Romish doctrine in case of Conspiracy and
Rebellion.

Wherein the innocence of Catholic religion is proved, and every objection
returned upon the Protestant Accuser, and his own profession.

Maltese cross

Psalm. 57. verse. 1. Si vere vtique, Iustitiam loquimini: recta iudicate filij
hominum.

With license of Superior.

TO THE MOST EXCELLENT and mighty Prince, our gracious and dread Sovereign,
JAMES, by the grace of God, King of great Britain, France and Ireland,
defender of the faith.
TWo things (most Gracious Sovereign) among the rest of chi^fest regard, in
terrene and humane affairs, were ever apprised at the highest value: Life, the
present being: Fame and Reputation, the beauty and splendour theereof: The
first giving esse, aft^r non esse, to the greatest earthly Creature, the other
maintaining in some sort, a per^ptuall life, and glorious living, when we be
dead.

Therefore, by how much the possessors of those dignities, be more popular,
public, and greater in number, State, or preeminence: ^y so many degrees,
unworthily and trecherouslie to be deprived of them, is more injurious, guil^ie
of wickedness, and obnoxious to Restitution.

Concerning the former; The late intended Conspiracy against the life of your
Royal Majesty, (the Life, Union, Rule, and Direction to these united
Kingdoms) so many Nobles, and Persons of esteem, was so heinous impiety, that
nothing which is holy can make it Legitimate; no pretense of Religion can be
alleged, to excuse it: God and heaven condemn it, Men and earth detest it:
Innocents bewail it, the Nocent and unhappy Delinquents themselves,
perceiving how their Religion reproves it, in repentance have lamented it:
Protestants exclaim against it, and your dutiful, Religious, and learned
Catholics, Priests, and others, which have endured most for their profession,
hold it in greatest horror, and make it a subject of their grievous sorrow,
that any of their profession should attempt so barbarous and unnatural
cruelty, or practice any disobedience at all to your Highness.

And will swear, protest, promise, and perform to your Majesty, whatsoever
Loyalty, Obedience, and duty is due from a subject to his Temporal Prince,
by the word of God, law of Nature, or has be^ne used by the subjects of this
Kingdom, to any your P^ogenito^s Christian, from the first to the last:
acknowledge and rend^r to your honorable Counsel, and all Magistrat^s in
ciui^l causes, so much Honor, Reverence and Submission, and to all other
Protestant subjects, like amity and neighborly affection, as if they were of
the same Religion, which we pr^fesse.

Concerning the second, of public reproache, and defamation, (most worthy
Prince) if it only concerned the Catholics of this Nation, although it be no
easy question to prove, that men in such matters, and at such times, are
masters of their fame: yet they could be content to bury it in their grave of
oblivion with so many miseri^s which they have long sustained, for their holy
faith; and to say with the Apostle, Maledicimur et benedicimus, persecutionem
patimur et sustinemu^, blasphemamur et obsecramus: but when the Purgamenta
huius mundi, and omnium peripsema, must be made the badge of all maintainers of
that worship, and all be styled s^ditious and traitorous Persons, quite
contrary to your Highness often Assertions, and public Proclamations; That
all Catholic subjects to all foreign Princes, your Confederates, must wear
that Liuerie, and their Sovereigns be attended with such servants; All
Catholic schools termed Seminaries of rebellions: and so directly not only
the reputations of all those Vni^ersities, Princes, and Prelates of the Church
of God, but God himself (whose house it is, and whose honor can neither be
given nor taken away) is thus condemned: as is set forth in a late pamphlett
entitled, An exact Discovery of Romish doctrine in case of Conspiracy:
Silence would be too suspicious, of neglect in many greatest duties, to God in
heaven, his Church on earth, to your Majesty, and the whole Catholic world.

Therefore I po^e wretch and sinner an unworthy member of that sacred body of
Christ, and one of your Highness obedient subjects, in all submission crave
pardon, not only to make demonstrance of Catholics due and expected Loyalty,
to your Sovereign Authority, and refute the friuoulous objections of that
Author: But with David against Goliath in the behalf of King Saul, and the
people of God, to strike with his own sword, and return all and every of his
deadly reasons, upon himself, and his own Profession.

Which* as I may lawfully observe, by common consent of all, entreating of the
law of conscience, in this case, being only to use our own right of just
defense, and not to offend or defame Accusers, (which charitable exposition, I
desire of all Protestant Readers:) So, if I had traveled no farther into that
doctrine, then to the last printed book by your Majesty's Printer, of the late
intended conspiracy, I might as easily perform it: for that Protestant author
gives it out as a general Rule and undoubted Maxim, to all professors of
worship, to take arms, if their religion be in hazard: and that no private man
could think his life more happily bestowed, than to fight pro Aris: which is
greater liberty, than any opinion which our adversary can find among
Catholic Writers, so by him attached of treason and rebellion. But he shall
receive a more plain and plentiful recital, both of public positions and
practices, from all his neighboring Allies in religion, to prove his own
profession, to be both Seminary and Granary of such provision.

Which I am more enforced unto, because this discouerer, by so many, not usual
Catholic Authors, alleged in his book, discloseth his inueterate malice
against us, that he was now in his desired oppo^tunitie, delivered with joy of
that, wherewith he had travailed so long in pain: or to renew in subtle
m^nner, his old good affection to your Majesty, does marshall you even now,
(otherwise all his re^sons be too childish) in the number of c^uell Tyrants,
Excommunicates, Apostat^es, and the infamous of all ages, not only Princes, but
base persons. So that either for disloyalty to your Highness, or inured
inflamed hatred unto us, or both, he can sinde no cent^r of his slanders,
except your Majesty be m^de the man and mark, where at the pen^ll canons and
constitutions of holy Church, did point and level hundreds of years, before
you were borne, ^r his relig^on received life.

This is the miserable and distressed state, of many thousands your most loyal
and loving subjects, (dread Liege) for their faithful duty to God, and a
religion taught in this kingdom, and embraced by all your progenitors, and our
ancestors, so many hundred years, from their first conversion: that every
adversary may preach, and print against us, and make their challenges; as
though either for ignorance we could not, or for distrust of our cause, we were
unwilling to make them answer, or come to trial: when quite contrary, we
have, often, earnestly, and by all means we could, desired to have it
granted, with equal conditions, against the most selected and best learned
Doctors of that religion.

And at this present, when your cheifest Protestant Clergy, (Bishops, and
others) is assembled, we most humbly entreat, this so reasonable a Placet;
that although they will not (as we fear) easily consent to an indifferent
choice, opposition, and defense in questions; yet, at the least, (to avoid the
wonder of the world) they will be content, that we may have public audience,
for those articles, opinions* and practice, for which we are so much condemned,
and persecuted. If we shall not be able to defend or prove, any position
generally maintained in our doctrine, to be conformable to those rules in
divinity, which your Majesty, and the protestant laws of England (we can offer
no more) have confirmed for holy, the canonical Scriptures, the first general
Counsels, the days of Constantine, and the Primative Church; let the
penalties be imposed and executed against us. If we perform it, or this
petition may not be admitted, we trust, that both our office to God, and duty
to Prince, is discharged in this point.

Your royal Person, and that honorable consistory now assembled, or hold^n in
your doctrine, to be the supreme sentencer, even in spiritual business in
this kingdom: we therefore hope you will not (in a Court from whence no
appeal is allowed, and in matters of such consequence) proceed to judgment,
or determine of execution, before the arraigned is sommoned to answer, has
received, or refused trial, is, or can be proved guilty: for it is a Sages
sentence: Iudicem and Aram esse idem; even in ordinary (...). 3. Rhetor.
Judges: because people injured or distressed fly to them both for refuge. And
we humbly crave license to say unto you, as Liberius, Pope of Rome, answered
Constantius the Emperor, persuading Theodor. dialog. hist. trip, l, 5. c. 17
him to subscribe to the banishement of saint Athanasius, the great Gretian
Patriarch, O Imperator, Iudicia ecclesiastica decet tam maxima proferri
iustitia. If we be condemned, and our cause be just, and religion true, it is
God, and not man, against whom you proceed in sentence: if our profession be
erroneous, and yet for consent with so many Nations, and so long continuance,
it is left unpunished; you only pardon the frailty and ignorance of earthly
men, and fight not with the heavenly.

Deny not that to us, your ever true and obedient subjects, in a religion so
ancient, which your colleged Princes, the King of Spain, and Archduke, do
offer to the so many years disobedient Netherlanders, upon their temporal
submittance, in so late an embraced doctrine. That which the Arrian Emperors of
the East, permitted to the Catholics, (Bishops, Priests, Churches,
tolleration:) what the barbarian Vandalls often offered, and sometimes truly
performed in Afric; what the Turkish Emperor in Greece, and Protestant
Princes in Germany, and other places allow to them of our religion, can be no
singular offense, to grant unto us once in so many years, though our religion
were untrue. It would be acceptable to all Catholic Princes, conformable to
the examples of protestant Rulers, not unanswerable to your own princely
piety, pity and promise, no disgust to any equally minded Protestant, or
Puritan at home, a Iubily to us distressed; and (to answer all the discouerers
quarrels in one sentence) a warrant of security to your Majesty, in all
opinions against those terrors and dangers which he conceiteth: from which, and
all others, of what kind soever, we most humbly beseech the infinite Majesty
of God, to preserve your Highness, and send you, your Queen, and posterity,
all happiness and felicity in heaven and earth.

Amen.
A general Censure of this slanderous Pamphlet; proouing, that no one Argument
therein can conclude the Authors Intent.
CHAP. I.
THis Discouerer of Terrors and Dangers never before imagined, like unto the
espiall of King Alexander, which either Qu. Cu^^. in vi^^ Alexand.
having his fantasy and interior powers distempered, or his external senses
out of order, or both far from frameing right apprehension, and true
judgment, brought word to his wise triumphant Emperor, that an army of
enemies was approaching to assault him, when they were but a small company of
silie Apes, imitating soldiers with a march on the Mountains, doubts not to
call such his deluded vision, An exact Discovery of Romish Doctrine in the case
of Conspiracy and Rebellion: and a little after, A Plain Discovery of the
Rebellious Doctrine of the Romish Church; and terms Romish Schools (to use
his own words) Seminaries of Rebellions, and tells us, Popish Priests, as
also their Adherents, be worthily executed for seditious and traiterous
persons. Hitherto is the strange Discriall of this great Discouerer, not as yet
yielding any Reason, but that we may think his brain distempered, conceiting
Apes, for mortal Enemies, their sticks and Reeds for deadly wounding weapons.
Therefore supposing, for his Reports of so improbable things, he should be
deluded as a man illuded, and strangely mis-taken, except he pretended some
strange and vn-vsuall Argument, for his rare Intelligence, falling into a
second extreamitie, like a far Trauailer, gives forth, that these wonders
be collected out of the express Dogmaticall Principles, of Popish Priests and
Doctors, and from their Public Positions and Practices, and accordingly
entituleth every leaf, Romish Positions and Practices of Rebellion. What
simply meaning mind would not be amazed with such a message, especially when
he professes these things to be collected, not without direction from
Superiors.

But, to overthrow his last Assertion; first, There is neither name of Author
(the Current of time streaming for him) to the Pamphlet, nor License and
Privilege of Impression, as all Books published by Authority by English
Protestants ought to have: And therefore to be accounted a Libell.

Touching the other, of proouing his Intent by our own Dogmaticall Principles,
and Public Positions, it is so impudent an untruth, That if all his falsely
applied Authorities were to be admitted for Gospel, yet not one such
Dogmaticall and Public Position or Practice, to the d^sgrace of our holy
Religion, and to ratify his slanderous accus^tion, is registered in his whole
Discovery, Except this Accuser will accuse and convict himself of treason,
both with God and man, to endite his Majesty our gracious Sovereign Rat. 1.
page 1. 2. 3. 4 5. and rat. 2. 3.
of highest disobedience to his King and Creator in heaven, engrossing him in
the Catologue of censured, excommunicate, and denounced Heretics, Apostataes,
Tirants, and Usurpers: which if he intends to do, at his first entrance he
has committed a crime Laesae Maiestatis if the law of Q. Elizabeth be not
dead Statut. 13. Eliz^b. ^a. 1.
with her self. If he will not be expounded in such sense, and to place all
the honorable and inferior Magistrates, and Protestants also not in Authority,
in that order, proportion of degrees observed (a paradoxe most monstrous, and
not to be imagined by any learned Catholic) he warreth not against the Roman
church, and schools, his aimed object; but against poetically or childishlie
feigned Prosopopeis, and Chimeres of his own creation; for against only such
his Arguments have their force, against such as we esteem them, they are too
foolish.

Secondly, to give life to his feeble or dead objections, we must R^^ 1. page
1. 2, 3. 4 5. 6. 7.
condescend at his high will and pleasure, not only that all Protestants of
England are formal heretics, sentenced against, and censured, (all which we
absolutely deny:) But that all penal decrees in the Canon and Papal law
cited in his Treatise, are due and belonging unto them, which the whole
Christian world will witness against: And that in no Kingdom where
Protestants be planted, England, Scotland, Ireland, France, S^^^eland,
Heluetia, Lorraine, Denmar^e, any part of Germany, Bohemia, Poland or any
other they be practiced as in force* or put in execution.

Thirdly, we must give consent (against all Catholic schools) Rat. 2. page 9.
10. 11.
that there is no difference between the chief spiritual power and
preeminence which we give to Popes, and mere civil sovereign Authority over
Princes, and all temporal things, when we only attribute the first, and not
the second to the Roman See.

Fourthly, we must not deny to this Discouerer, but if the Pope Rat. 4. page
14. 15 16. 17. 18 19. 22 23. 24. 25, etc.
commands Arms against our Prince (a metaphisicall and needless fear to be
put in practice) we would formally be conformed to such precept: yet when we
give a true, real, present, and actual instance, that the same Papal
Authority now commands all Catholics to perform all dutiful loyalty and
obedience to his Majesty, (more then the protestant Clergy of England can
justify for themselves) and quia Papa siciubet, et prohibet the contrary: it
will be no satisfaction for good behavior to this obiector. These and more
such absurdities must be yielded unto, if any one of his Arguments is to be
respected. But I must needs All Protestants agree in di^obedience to Princes of
a contrary Religion.
put him in mind, that he has beheld his visage too much in the glass of
Wickliffe, Husse, Waldo, Luther, Munster, Swinglius, Calvin, Beza, Knoxe,
Cranmer, Ridley, Latimer, Sands, Rogesr, and all Protestants of all places, (as
I will demonstrate hereafter) howsoever they varied in other questions, yet all
jumping together in this, that Kings and Magistrates of a different Religion,
are not to be obeyed, but contemned, contradicted, deposed, and not worthy to
be accounted either Princes or men: And this colored, bloody, and stained
spectacle or speculum, has so deluded his eyes, that he can see nothing but
rebellions, seditions, and disobedience in professors of Religion, though never
so holy and approved. But as we d^ffer from him and his adherents, in so many
chiefest articles of Religion; so we utterly renounce both their doctrine and
practice in this point.

The first Reason against Catholics confuted, and returned upon Protestaats.
CHAP.. II.
I Will come to his particular Reasons: The first whereupon (as a most certain
ground and foundation, he frames the rest of his building) is registered in
these words. Their general Assumption whereupon all their rebellious
Positious are founded, is this; that all Protestants are heretics, and
excommunicate. Whereby it appears by his own judicial decree, that if
Catholics do not teach, that all Protestants are heretics and excomunicate,
that then no positions which we maintain, are rebellious, because he tells
us all such are builded upon that Assumption.

Wherefore to purge us of all these crimes, by the first sentence of this
Accuser; I answer, this position (all Protestants are heretics and
excommunicate) is neither a general Assumption in Catholic Religion, neither
do I suppose that any one particular learned Catholic in this kingdom (yet
such can best judge of their country case) does or will defend this opinion,
which he calls our general Assumpsion.

For first, there is not at this present one Protestant absolutely (then not
all Protestants) esteemed with us to be in that ca^e, within the Dominions of
our Sovereign, of what condition soever to my knowledge: neither is there
danger thereof hereafter, except such wicked and slanderous writings (as
this Disconerie) be made incitemen^ and citations for such censures. For
although many, or most of the opinions defended by the Protestants of England
were condem^^d for heresies, both in the primative and later days of the
Church of Christ, in Iouinian, Vigilantius, Aerius, Berengarius, Waldo,
Wickliffe, Husse, and others: yet it does not presently follow, that all which
imitate those doctrines should be termed Heretics, as the first obstinate
Inuentors, and pertinatious defendors of those novelties were. For according to
the sentence of S. Thomas, Halensis, Siluester, Durandus, D. Th. 2. 2. q. 11.
ar. 2. H^ll 1. p. q. 181. m. 1.. 1. Durand. 4. did. 13. ^. 5. art. 6 Syl. v.
Haeres. n. 5. August. l. de vtilit. Cre^. in princip.
and the common opinion of Schools, ignorance (even vincible) excuses from
heresy. And this is the doctrine of S. Augustine, who in his book de
vtil^tate credendi writes thus, He is an Heretic who for temporal
Commodity, or Vayne-glory, or Principallitie, either begets or follows
false Opinyon, but he who believes Heretics (the case of the major part of
english Protestants) is a man illuded with a certain Imagination of pyetie and
truth. And he affirms, that the first (whereof I hope England is not so
plentiful) is an Heretic, and not the other. And against the Donatists he
tells us, tbat he which holds that of Christ which Photinus the heretic
did, thinking it to be the Catholic faith (as August. l. 4 c^^. Donaust. c. 1^.
hundreds of thousands of ignorantly seduced Protestants do, which hear no
other doctrine but ministers Sermons) is not yet an Heretic, except when the
truth of the Catholic doctrine is made manifest, he will resist it. And Cardin
all Allane himself Cardin. Al lib. ^^persec^^. An^^.
so often objected ^n ^his discovery, thus writes of that holy father and this
question. Beatus Augustinus a^monuit, decipi ab Haereticus quis di^itur, and
Haeretu is credere, nec tamen proprie est Haereticus. He is not properly an
Heretic, which is deceived of Heretics, and believes Her^t^cks.

S^condly, by common consent of Catholic Doctors, both Adrian, quandl^^. 3.
art, 1. Sylu. v. Hae^^s q. 2. Ga^r. 4 did. 1^. q. 2. Alph. de Cast. Io. de
tu^r. Clement. 1. ex^r. Ioh. 22. Bull. Martin. 5. ^etit. 1000 minis Answ of
Oxford by Adm^nit. 1 and 2. parliam. C^^^. against ^. W. etc.
sufficient ^nowl^dge of the truth proposed, and obstinate pertinacie in not
emb^^ceing it, wi^h such defense of the contrary, is required to Heresy: in
which case the principal preachers themselves in England, which have so often
changed their opinions, and did volun^a^ily submit they. Religion (both
P^^^t^n^s in their millinary Pe^^t^on, and the Vniuersi^ie^ Protest^nts in
their Answer) to his M^iestie^ ^e^su^e, to be changed or continued and in
essential point^ and ne^^ssarie ^^^^^ation as the Pu^^tanes have often written,
wi^^ the cond^^^e them to have ^^ faith ^t all, (true faith cannot be ch^^nged
corrected) then to be obst^nately addicted ^o their profes^ion.

Thirdly many defend that although a man desires to be ignorant of the tr^th
and so professes heresy in ig^^rance, (though he sinn^^h g^ie^ousl^ in such
case) yet he is not to be accounted an Heretic.

Fourthly, Ca^u^ ho^d^th, that a man dou^^^^^ in his f^^^h ( (...) l. 1^. de
loc. ^. 9. ^^ 4.
common and g^^^r^ll t^i^g with ^nglish ^r^t^st^nts) is not preperl^ an
Heret^^ke.

Fifthly, all Here^i^kes (as inte^nall) be not s^biect to Cens^^^ and
Exco^m^n^ca^^on.

Sixthly, before ^^com^^n^c^ti^n, no comm^ni^a^ion is f^rbiden (...)
with any, (...) obi^cte^h from ^a^^^mitanus, that where the (...) is noto^^on
(such as ^his (...) us. Heresy 1.) (...) not any decl^rat^on of ^^^ s^ntence
of Excommuni^^^ion: (...) absol^tely against the gre^test (...).
general (...)* by w^ose dec^^e the (...) must be both so censu^^d and (...)
which, consents Cunerns, Navarre, and others.

Sixthly, also after such proceedings, (except specially excepted) Council.
Constable. Suares de Censur. gloss. c. Cum desideras de sent. excommun.
the case of wife, children, servants etc. brings exemption.

Seauenthly, no Protestant, or heretic, or Archehereticke, not excommunicate
by name (as none in England is) lies subject to any penalty pretended.

circa omnia temporalia; therefore he may both depose Princes, and command
subjects to arm against them, once excommunicate.

De Episcopis vero vel quibuslibet Clericis quod nec sua Decret 2 pa^^. cause.
23. q. 8. De episcopis, etc.
authoritate, nec authoritate, Romani pontific^ arma accipere valiant, facile
probatur. Neither Bishops nor any Clerks may take arms either by their own
authority, or the authority of the Pope of Rome. And reasons be added there,
authorized by Gregory 13. alleged here against us in this Treatise. Therefore
all of that order be absolutely freed from that jealousy, and may answer with
Ambros* orat. contra Auxent.
S. Ambrose against Auxentius. Quid ergo turbamini, volens nunquam ius deseram:
coactus re pugnare non noui potero dolere, poero flere, potero gemere, aduersus
arma, milites, Gothos quoque, lacrimae meae, mea armasunt, talia enim sunt
manimenta Sacer^otis, aliter nec debeo, nec possum resistere. Therefore why are
you troubled, willingly I never will forsake right, compelled I know not to
resist, I may be sorry, I may weep, I may groan against Arms, sould^ers and
the Goths also, my tears are my armor, for such are the defense of Priests,
otherwise I neither ought, nor can resist.

Secondly, I answer, if any man hold that opinion, of such a power over
Princes in Popes, yet they will plead, it is more tolerable to defend such
authority in one supreme Pastor and spiritual governor in the Church, whereof
Princes be sheep, and not sheepeheardes (as the late wise Lord Treasurer
acknowledged of Queen Elizabeth, that she was Ouis, and not Pastor) then to
commit the censuring of Princes cases, to such seditious judges, and
superiors, as Protestant both public positions and practices assign; by
which, not only every Wickliffe, Luther, Calvin, Cranmer, Knoxe, and such
supreme men, but the artizans and basest people in every Eldershippe, may
sit in judgment upon their Sovereign, Cite, Excomunicate and Depose him,
even for ordinary offenses, as themselves expound convenient for their own
advantage, as I will allege from their public opinions hereafter.

De iusta abdicat. Henric. 3. teaches and excomuni consensu, that it is
lawful for a private man to kill a Tyrant. Alphons. Castr. contr. Haeres. v.
tyrannus. Petrus Gregorius in fine 2. to. de Republ. Cune^us ^e offic. priecip.
christian. Hentic. quodl. 6. q. 23. Turrec^. l. 2. c. 113. Couo^. Victor de
potest. eccl. council. 1. q. ^ Palate. 4 D. 25. Turrect. l. 1. c. 87.
consent of Catholic authors, Alphonsus de Castro, Petrus, Gregorius, Cunerus
and others, but against the general council of Constance it self, to which,
all Catholics must conform them selves.

Secondly, I answer for all Catholics in general, to the maine Objection,
that Henricus, Victor, Johannes de Turrecr, Couoruuius and the common opinion
of Schools do teach, that there is no such mere Temporal and Regal power in
Popes, over Princes, and civil affairs; but a Supreme spiritual, as that is
which they claim in Temporalls in ordine ad Spiritualia, and is not (to use
this Disputers words) Aciuill power Sovereign over Kings directly; but only a
spiritual preeminence (the subject, object, office and end thereof being such)
for the spiritual good and behoof of the church of Christ, committed to his
Vicar and chief Delegate here on earth, by commission of feeding, governing,
ruling, binding, loosing, shutting, opening, and the like in holy Scripture,
and authoritatiuely citeing, summoning, admonishing and censuring both sheep
and other sheepeheards of our Saviors flock.

Yet thirdly I answer, that the defendors of this sentence do farther teach,
that this jurisdiction and power against sheep or inferior sheepeheards; is
not to be put in practice, but in cases of obstinacy, contempt, and
incorrigibilitie in the offender, and being only for the profit and utility
of the Spouse of Christ, and his mystical body, it may not be exercised where
greater loss, damage, and hazard, then good and profit is to ensue from
thence. The cause must be just, the suggestion not untrue, the means not
turbulent tending to destruction.

Fourthly, the maintainers of this doctrine do not urge greater indignity, or
defend any sentence more offensive (in equallingement) to any prelate* sheep,
or shepherd, then to the chiefest sheepehea^d under Christ, the Pope
him^e^fe: for they all with one consent affirm, that in case of heresi^ (now
in question) he (...). v. pa^ 2.. 4. palud ib. and ei^t. Turrecr. li. 2 sum.
c. ^0^. l 4 c. 18. Aug. de An^on. ^ast^. l. de just. haeret. ^^nit. ^ot. 4*
d^^t. 12 q. ^. ^^tic. 2. Can. l. 4 de loc. c. vlt. Co^dub. l b. quaestion^r q.
11.
is either actually and really deposed, or to be deposed. The Canonists do
hold he is ipso facto deposed, if he fall into her^sie; with whom Io de
Turrecrem. Augustin^s de Ancona, Castro, and other Divines consent, which
C^nsure Wickcl^ffe and hi^ Protestant succ^ssors did imp^^e upon P^inc^s and
temporal Magistrates, either for h^r^si^ or any other ^rime. Others, as S^^us,
^anus, and Cordubensi^ affir^e, in that (...) ^o be depos^d, And such ^^ the
discipline of the Church of God. that these men, and all Catho^ike ^cho^les
(even in Rome it self) as confid^nt^y disp^t th^s^ q^estions, for wh^^ ^a^se,
h^w and when, and by Panormita^. sup. ca^ Significa^^i. Canonist in c. Si P^^^.
whom Popes may be d^posed, a^ they do^ eith^r speak or write of the greatest
p^iui^edges of that Apostolic See. And Panormitanus a Canonist, with others,
i^ so confident in this business, that they teach, a Pope may be d^posed for
any sin, that is scandalous to the Ch^^ch of Christ, if he be inc^^rigible.

Fifthly, the present Professor^ which handle this q^^stion between Popes and
P^inces, do not hold any sin^ul^r opinion tending to the indignity or
dommage of any Pr^testant Regent, more than to all others in equ^ll terms; b^^
what is now by them main^ained, was public doctrine before Protestancie had
either pr^nce or people to e^brace ^t, and at t^i^ ti^e do justify ^he like
sen^^nce c^ncerning all Catholi^e Rulers, in ^q^all ballaunce of comp^^ison,
and that openly without ^^proofe in their own dom^^^ons.

Sixthly, to give contentment to all that will not be contentious, or ^ff^ct to
be singular in persec^^ing or domag^ng ^he Church of God. Th^^e Authors do not
s^y, that ^he (...) power ^^ simp^y and ^^^olutely subject to the Papal and
Sp^r^tuall au^hori^ie, but in case of injuries offered, or great imp^diment of
the spiritual* good, more preeminent then the t^mporall. And in such c^uses
even in temporal affairs, and among such powers and Princes, injuries
offered, and just right denied, or hindered, gives a prerogative to equalles
iure belli, among Kings and civil Regents, to recover their own, redeem
their wrong, ^equite their injuries, where the offender denies to make
requital.

Therefore, seeing this Discouerer cannot find any such civil power
sovereign over Kings challenged by Popes, and against which he so much
inueigheth, nor any other more peculiarly intended against Protestant Princes,
then all others in like proceedings; let him draw his weapon against those by
whom he is assaulted in this kind. First against the Canonists and the Legists
even in England, and of the Arches, except they will dissent from the more
received opinion of like prof^ssors: secondly against himself and all
Protest^nt write s. Against the first, because (which is his case in question)
they defend that the empror is lord of all the world, insom^ch that Bartholus
the great Leg^s^ affirms, Ba^thol. in extra^ag. ad rep. imen. gloss per
venerab. Qui filii, etc.
that peradventure it is h^resie to te^ch the contrary (...) (says he) it is
against the scripture, Exist ed^ctum a Caesare v^ d^^^r^beretur or^is, where
the whole wo^ld and Princes thereof were at his designement: And (which the
Protestants allege for tempor^ll Princes supremacy) omnis anima potestatibus
sublimiorjbus subdita sit: therefore (as he reasons) all Princes be subject
to him, as the highest power. And in this case of Arms and death (which this
man so often obiecteth) the cause is more dangerous in respect, that in the
whole papal and canon law of the Popes, there is no penalty of death against
any heretic, or excommunicate, neither is such punnishement to be inflicted
by any spiritual Judge, or executioner: But that kind of revenge or justice,
is only Codic. haeret. leg. Adrian et Cod^c. de Iudaeis leg. Quicunque.
provided by the imperial and civil Constitutions, and by temporal Authority
and brach^um scecuiare to be put in practice.

Lastly, let him battle against himself, and his Protestant Protestants
Religion of all others is the greatest e^nemy to Princes and Catholic worship
the most favorable.
brethren, which of all people in the wo^lde, that ever were, or be, are the
most guilty in these proceedings, as I will at large demonstrate hereafter) and
Catholics of all most innocent. For seeing all professors of Religion,
Israelites, P^gans, Catholics, Protestants, and all others ever prescribed
some means and manner to keep both Rulers and the ruled in order: of all
people to whom that authority was attributed by any. The Popes of Rome
(proportion of time and place cousidered) have been the actors of the fewest
translations of titles in Princes. Not above four or five examples can be
given in the whole christian world in above 1500 years, and not many
excommunications from the first of ^hillip^e the first Christian Emperor (as
some suppose by the Eusch histor.
Pope of Rome) or of Archad^^s by Pope Innoc n^^us the first within 400 years
after Christ; when the Prophettes and Priests of Nice^hor. h^st. in Arc^ad.
Jury deposed more in one Kingdom; and the excess of the Paans is not to be
recited. And the Protestants themselves since their original have deposed as
many or ^ore, th^n all the Popes in to many years, and that only for
Religion, when for that qua^r^ll not one Prince in the Popedom has lost his
Diadem, nor any without common consent of the Christian world. For
Protestants* I instance in the Prince of Geneua deposed; and in the King of
Spain, and the present Arche-duke in the Low Countries, expelled from their
Right, the King of Polonia in Sweueland at this present in little better
estate, the Queen Regent in Scotland so made a subject, and his Majesty's
mother deposed, the Emperor denied his allowance of tribute for the Turkishe
wars, his Towns taken, and ^ept against him, the Duke of Loraine, and others
in the like predicament.

And the violent attempts which they have undertaken, by rebellion against
their Princes, for this quarrel of Religion, have been more, then all
excommunications of Princes by Popes, for any respect what^oe^er; the
particulars will appear in their proper place.

And whence can all these impious practices proceed, with so gener^ll ap^l^^^e,
but from their most impious and rebellious publiqu^ position? you have heard
before, that the process of Popes is such in this business that no Prince (except
more wicked th^n any now living, or as vnfo^tunate as some four or five in all
the time of Christian^ty in the world) need stand in danger.

Contrariewise, by Protestant religion, no sinner, or no King: Constable. Council.
in a^^ Wickcl. Lu^^^^. to. 6. page (...). Luth. Cal^in in Dan. Suingl lib. 4.
Philipp. Nichol. fund^m. Calvin. Sect etc.
Luther denies all obedience to Princes differing from him in Religion;
calling them Pilates, Tyrants, Herod's, Judas, and that his Protestants hands
must be imbrued with blood in such cases. Calvin tells, that ipso facto they
are bereaved. If no permission of Swinglius doctrine, no Prince with him, and
all be Martirs that be slain in rebellion for that quarrel. The english
Protestant Confer. 14. 1604 page 47. Luther. lib. capt. Babyl.
Notes (as his Majesty is witne^) upon the Bible do not disalowe the killing
of a Prince in such cases. And this is to be perfect Protestant disciples of
their Apostle Luther, who taught, no law can be imposed upon Christians, but
as they will, all humane laws must be taken away. Therefore says Calvin,
Beza, Test^tr ordin. Burg. in Reman sup. edict. Reg. Gall, Petr. Frar, or*
contr. Sect. Defen^ Reg. and Relig.
Athomannus, Spiphazius, and the rest of that holy Sinode, that Kings,
Queens, their children, and post^ritie (l^st Kings a^^se again) and all
Magistrates must be put to death, and so every particular Protestant must be
more then a Pope, an Emperor, or rather a god, to put Princes to death at
their pleasute: and we must say with the Consistorian Protestants, not only
^uerie private man may be executioner of Princes: but teach, that it is
necess^^ie to assign rewards for such murderers of Rulers; we must not call
them Kings or Superiors* but Tirants, Monsters, and not worthy of life. But
more of this hereafter, in their general positions and practices.

The rest of the penal^ies which this Author alleges as belonging Catholics
deny no temporal society o^ duty to Protestants.
to the excommunicate, and such heretics, and which he writes, that
Cat^olikes do teach, are due, and to be extended upon all Protestants of
England, be thus recited: to spoil Protestants of their goods; deny t^thes to
the Ministers; not paying debts to Creditors; servants not d^t^full to Masters;
wives not beneuolent to Hu^bands; Parents dis-inhe^iting Children; children not
obeying P^rents; kinsmen to kindred, and countriemen to their Country to be
unkind. But I have answered before, that these societies are not to be denied
to the Protestants of England, because we do not est^eme them in that case of
heretics, and excommunicates. Secondly the world is witness for us, and
against this Obiector, that we as truly and sincerely perform these
communications and respects to our country protestants, as they them selves,
and rather in more ample manner. And although Tithes be due to spiritual
Ministers, for Sacraments and holy things, which we do not receive from
them, yet we do not withdraw Council. Constable. in artic. Wickcliff.
their payment to the protestant Clergy, neither say as their martyr
Wickliffe did; that they be but alms, and may be taken away at princes
pleasures. Thirdly I answer, that those canonical punishments he cites
against the censured, were not of purpose ordaind against his protestancy; but
the decrees of such proceedings may be great-grandfather to that Religion: not
now in use either in this kingdom, France, Heluetia, Sweueland, Denmark, and
most part of Germany, or in farther circuit. And if the penal constitutions of
the general Council of Trent representing Pope, Prelates, Princes, and the
whole church of Christ, are not yet after forty years continuance received in
the recited Provinces, or Kingedomes: There is not so great danger, that those
Papal pains will ever give to this man so much cause of so outrageous
exclamations. They were long before the birth of protestancie, provided for
countries and people whence heresies had not entered, not where such opinions
have preeminence. And if it should please his Majesty to restore the Catholic
faith in England, yet there is not peril that protestants should fall to such
fears of these penal constitutions to be admitted: penalties are not so soon
imposed, their nature is to be restricted and not dilated. If so many other
kingdoms under Catholic Regents, France, Sweueland, Bohemia, Polonia,
Transiluania etc. do not consent to their admittance: This Island one of the
last by cituation, and so long at variaunce with the Roman Church, is not
likely to be the first in that, wherein nature desires to be the last. We
have not now an other Queen Marie, Inheretrix to the Crown, to be joined in
mariadge with a potent Prince, in whose Dominions they be in force; simbolizing
with husband, conformity in country discipline is never like to breed you
scruples in this behalf. And yet in such a metaphisicall case (nemo laeditur
nisi a seipso) though you have anowed to be an heretic and excommunicate, you
must be cited, and admonished before censure, and obstinate before and after,
or else your danger is not deadly.

Thus I have proved at lardge, as my violent and distressed leisure would give
me allowance, that the chiefest building of all these slanders against us, is
ruinate and ou^rthrowne; that we do not esteem all Protestants for heretics
and excommunicate, as he pretends: neither that they are subject to such
penalties, as he alleges; that they are not censured, or as such to be
deprived of any civil society, communication, their goods, lives, liberties,
dignities, honor, homage, fealty, subjection, duty, love, or any thing
precious, their proper and peculiar; but contrariewise to enjoy and possess
those priueledges, in as ample manner and freedom, as if they were of the same
Religion which we defend.

Answer to the first Reason. Now I will with brevity answer to his particular
pretended reasons, grounded upon the general before confuted: And first to his
first Sillogisme, or rather Sophisme; the mayor proposition whereof is already
overthrown, and only requiring repetition, is as follows: They who by their
slanderous doctrine make all Protestants (in their common censure heretics)
so odious and unworthy of any civil or natural society, must necessarily be
adjudged seditious, and intolerable among the Protestants: My answer is
absolute before, that no learned Catholic so reputeth the Protestants, or any
one Protestant of this kingdom; but attributes (or ought so to do by his
Religion) as much terrene honor, homage, duty and love to our King, his
honorable Counsel, and all in Authority in their degrees, and unfeigned
affection to the rest, as if they were of the same faith and profession in
Religion.

Then the minor proposition (if the same medium be kept) must needs be false,
which is this: But the Romish Seminaries and Jesuits do brand all Protestants
with detestable crimes; thereby to deny them all civil and natural Respects.
Ergo. I answer, If the first part of this second proposition, be understood of
the wickedness of many English Protestants, not only condemned of their
brethren Admonit. 1. and 2. Parliam. perit. 1000. Minist. Cartw. against I. W.
Puritanes, but by themselves confessed, and their own laws so convicted: it
proves them for such; but proves not sedition, but true and loyal dealing in
Catholics, which do not say with Protestants, masters and martirs, Wickliffe
and Husse, and their brothers Council. Con^^. i^ Wickl. artic. Io. Husse, etc.
Waldensians; that wicked men in Magistracy be deptiued of Rule and
Jurisdiction: but against their own fellows in profession, defend their
offices, power, authority and preeminence.

If the Discouerer will have the force of this proposition to remain in the
later sentence, (thereby to deny them all civil and natural Respects) It is
both improperly spoken, and slanderously objected against Catholics; which
neither deny to Protestants in Authority, or others, any civil or natural
Respect, for their crimes and sins, neither charge any one amongst so many
millions, with Canonical demerite or impediment of such respects.

Therefore first, Such opinions of some p^iuate Catholics, Andreas ^urg. Mr.
Rainolds, D. Gifford, Mr. Wright. that Protestants hold no article of faith,
Caluinismeis Turcisine, no better then Turci^me; compared to Atheism, is no
more then other Protestancy especially of Calvin and the Engl^^h Protest
described by their ^^ll^wes. Nichol. ^^ fun^^m. De^^n. and Co^l^g. Tub^^g. in
praesa.
Protestants ch^^dge Calvin with. And what is this to the Protestants of this
kingedome, except they mean to bring Arrianisme, Nestorianisme, and Turcisme
into the world, as Philippus Nicholaus a lea^ned protestant minister, and the
protestant Deane and College of ^ubing write of Calvin, and ^w^nglius. The
re^ited protestant has written a whole Book of that Subject, giving it for
Title, Fundamentorum Caluinianae Sectae cum veteribus Arrianis et Nestorianis
communium Dete^^io. And yet the Turks Alcoran being made by Arrians and
Nestorians (as the Preface there recounteth) Praefat. sup.
Caluins doctrine is proved by him, to agree with them in 17. or 18. chief
a^ticles. And in the seventh Chapter he plainly c. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7 8. 9,
10 11, etc. s^^r. Cap. 7. supr.
writes, that these Casuinists and Swinglians will not be quiet, until they
have brought Mahumetisme and Turcisme into the West, as by the Arrians and
Nestorians it came into the East. And among all people is most ielous of the
Sacramentary Brabenders, Frankes, Heluetians, English and Scots in this
behalf; and affirms, that Arrianisme, Turcisme and Swinglianisme, be the
mother of Antechrist. And he brings in Luther prophesying (as Cap 9. ^upr.
he calls it) that the Sacramentaries would never cease, until they denied
Christ to be God, which M. Willet, D. Fulke, and others Will. Synops. contr.
gene^. 19 Fulke in nouo Testamento. Conci 1. Nicaen. in Symbol. con^il Ephesians.
Const^nt. 1. H. ^rought. Ad^erus. o^ Co^up. an. 1604. Will. Antilog. Aduertism.
sup. page 2. 3
have almost f^lly effected, denying Christ to have received his substance of
his Father, or that he is Deus de deo, God of God, as the first general
Councels have defined.

I will next allege Mr. H. Broughton a late english Protestant writer in the
last year, and a man most highly commended by the great recited Summist, in
his newborn Antilogie; who tells his Protestant Brethren, or rather Fathers
(he speaks chiefly to the Bishops) in England, that their Translation of
Scriptures into english is such; that it causes millions of millions to reject
the new Testament, and to run to eternal flames. In his second Chapter he
challenges their public translation, of perverting the holy text of the
old Testament in eight hundred and eight and forty places. He tells the
late Archbishop of Canterbury, that he might with as good learning have
subscribed to the Alcoran, as consent with such Protestants, as he did. He
plainly writes these words: Christianity denied in England by public
Authority. He tells the Bishops, that they betray the Gospel to the Jews,
and agree with the enemies of our Lord. Their Bible is inferior to the Alcaron.
The Bishopps notes betray our Lord, and Redeemer, and befoole the Rocks of
Salvation. They are the very poison to all the Gospel. The Libian sands may
as well be reckoned, as Bilsons (the Bishop of winchester) Heresies. He has a
mind to be f^mous for millions of errors. And speaking in his own person
says thus: I gave I. C. (so he calls the late protestant Archbishop of
Canterbury) the Anathema, Maranatha. No doubt but such a man would
excommunicate a King, if he had come in his way, at that time.

The admonition to the Parliament written with no small consent, Admonit. patl.
uses these words. No man in whom there is any spark of grace or conscience,
can live in the commonwealth of England, whose inhabitants be all Infidelles,
and they be all Infidelle* that go to their churches. Arch-bishoppes and
Bishops government is both Antichristian Admonit. 2. page 25. 33. Suppl.
verse. 56.
and deuilish. Antichrist is among them. It is traitorous against the Majesty
of Christ, It is accursed. It is an unlawful, false, and bastardly government.
It shall be easier for Sodom and Gomorrhe in Admonit. 2. pa. 3
the day of judgment, than for the court of Parliament, where the Protestant
Religion was confirmed. There is no right Religion established Admonit. 1. page
2. 32.
in England. I cannot for want of time, and need not for lack of witness,
recite more testimonies in this business. These be sufficient for Catholics
excuse, and to return the Argument upon Protestants. And let this Obiector
understand, that these men which be so well conceated of his doctrine, and
together teach, that all such sins, and less, deserve excommunication in
what person soever, with the penalties thereof; and that they are deposed from
their Seats by such offenses, may justly come within the compass of his
Conclusion, and Ergo: for by his own allowed mayor proposition, whosoever do
make Protestants so odious, and unworthy of any civil etc. is se^^^ious, and
intolerable among Protestants: But as I have proved ^^ ^^^^estants
themselves, Protestants do so, or be such, or (...) are so to be esteemed by
this Reasoner.

The second Reason answered, and returned upon Protestants. CHAP. III.
THe second Reason is contained in these words; Whosoever do profess any
civil power sovereign over Kings, whether directly or indirectly, are to be
accounted seditious. I would wish him to except the Emperor of the Princes of
Germany, and such as be subject to the Empire, and such cases. Then to pass
over the Turkish regiment, I say transeat mayor for Christendom: And thus I
frame the minor. But all Protestant writers do ordinarily both teach and
practice this Doctrine, as I have proved before, and will more plentifully
perform hereafter. For this place I only instance in this united kingdom,
Britany, and principally in two Queen Mary's.

Against her that reigned in this part which we inhabit, it was Protestants
seditious by this man's Argument
the public consent of the chiefest Protestant Bishops and Divines, Cranmer,
Ridley, Latimer, Sands, Rogers, and the rest, principal Preachers, That she
might be deposed, and not only she, but her sister Queen Elizabeth, a
Protestant, and the family of his Majesty should be defeated. And was
publicly put in practice both with wit and weapons, to the uttermost of the
greatest Protestants power, the Dukes of Northumberland and Suffolk, and many
other of great estate. And this not only contrary to the law of God, and the
express Statutes of this kingdom, but their own oath to the Lady Mary when
she was Princess in her fathers life. The public practice also of
Protestants in the attempt of sir Thomas Wyat, warranted by the Protestant
Clergy, with diverse others in the short regiment of that Queen, may be given
for instance. Therefore let no man object hereafter, that the Positions
Protestan^s may not condemn their Puritan Brethren.
and Practices of R^bellion proceed only from the Puritan Protestants; for
such pure Protestancie had not audience in England at that time, but the
defenders there of were called New vp-start arrogant spirits by Latymer, and
such Protestants as I Latim. Sermon. before King Edward the fixed.
have condemned guilty in this kind. And yet the present Protestant Writers
of England, which teach, that the true Church can not err in things essential
to true Religion, and necessary to salvation, and communicate in Sermons,
Sacraments, Doctrine, and subscription to articles (the very notes of the
Church in their proceedings) cannot condemn these traitorous and rebellious
positions and practices in Puritanes, for great and damnable offenses in
Religion, or impediments of Salvation: therefore by this disputers Argument,
they are to be accounted seditious.

Now I will recite his second proposition against us, which is this. But all
Popish priests do profess a double prerogative over Kings: Democraticall and
Monarchical: namely, both people and Pope: ergo: To the Popes Authority I
have already sufficiently answered, and will demonstratiuely prove farther
hereafter, that as it is defended by catholic doctors, it is far more
favorable and defensive to Princes titles, then either doctrine or practice of
Protestants, or any other professors of Religion, whereof I have also entreated
before. Concerning his conceat of Catholics defending a democraticall
prerogative in the people over all Kings: (so be his words) It fights with
his own assertion, and present position of the Popes Monarchical prerogative
over all Kings (which likewise is his sentence.) For where there is a
Monarchy, and Monarchical power or government in one, there is
vnpossibillitie of a Democracie and Democraticall Power and Regencie in the
people: otherwise these propositions be true: Kings be subjects to subjects,
and subjects be Kings of Kings, servants be masters to their masters, Masters
be servants to their servants, Fathers be children of their Children, and
Children be fathers to their Fathers: and the like relations must be inuerted
by this Logicians Argument.

But let us hear what public Positions he will bring from our Writers, to
prove our opinion of a democraticall power in the people over Princes, which I
have confuted by his own proposition. He only cites the Author de iusta
abdicat Henric. 2 to say that Maiestas Regni est in populo, potius quam in
persona Regis: That D. Stapleton affirms, people are not ordained for the
Prince: but the Prince for the people: and Mr. Rainolas to call a King a
creature of Man's Creation: the like he cites out of Dolman. All which in
equal sense his Majesty himself in open Parliament does not so much seem to
dislike; especially in vacancie of a King or the original of kingdoms, of
which cases those Authors The kings speech Parli. 1.
do principally entreat. And in such circumstances I demand of this
Obiector, whether there ever was, or could be a King, and Ruler over people,
where there was no people to be ruled, or consent to be ruled. But people both
were in the beginning without kings, and made election of diverse kinds of
regiment, as they thought fittest and most secure for their defense, and
government in peace: some Monarchical, some Aristaraticall, others
Democraticall: although none made election of a Monachy by one, and Democracie
by the multitude at once in one Commonwealth, as this simple Disputer did argue
before against Princes titles; for that is impossible, as I have made
demonstration. And his Majesty's words be these: Although a Kingdom and The
kings speech supt.
people be Relata* yet can he be no King, if he want people and Subjects: but
there be many people in the world that lack a head, as when Regal Lines be
extinct, people be yet without Kings; but not e contra: So where regiment
passes by election. In Polonia at the death of every King, the case is such,
because that Kingdom and Principallitie goes by voices: So in Venice: So in
the Empire by the seven Princes, called Princes Electours, supplying the
peoples suffrages, and consents. And this the Discouerer Rat. 3. infr.
himself has remembered in framing his next Reason, wherein he makes mention
of Election, and calls a seditious to hinder the right thereof. But slanders
and contradictions be neither wilful wickedness, nor unlearned ignorance in
this Accuser. How the Protestants, both clergy and people, claim Sovereignty
over Princes, is spoken before, and often proved in this Treatise.

The third Reason confuted, and returned. CHAP. IIII.
THe mayor Proposition of his third reason, is; Whosoever upon any pretended
Supremacy, whether of Pope or people, do deny the necessary right of Election,
or of Succession of Protestant Princes, are to be holden amongst all
Protestants, seditious: his Contradiction in this against the former reason, I
have spoken of in the last Argument. And for this present, I grant this mayor,
and make this my minor: But Protestants, and English Protestants, Protestants
are seditious by this Argument.
do deny the necessary right of Election, or Succession of Protestant Princes:
ergo; the minor is proved before in Cranmer, Ridley, Latimer, Sands, Rogers,
and the Dukes of Northumberland, and Suffolk, with their Protestant Preachers
and forces against the Succession of Queen Elizabeth, a Protestant, and
(though then not borne) his Majesty a Protestant King. I add further, that his
Highness title was expressly contradicted, and written against of purpose, in a
book to that end, by Hales, (a companion to Knoxe) an English Protestant; to
which, no Protestant (to my knowledge) did ever give answer, or denial. But
many Catholics confuted it, as the Catholic Bishop of Rosse, in Scotland, and
three Catholics of distinct professions in England; S^r Anthony Brown,
Knight, and Judge of the common Law, Doctor Morgan, a Divine, and Doctor Mytch,
(or like name) a civil Lawyer.

Now let us hear his second proposition against Catholics, Thus it is: But
all Popish Priests, do utterly abolish the title of Succession, in all
Protestant Princes, etc. go, This he would prove against all Priests, because
To^let, (and conformably to him, Doctor Stapleton, Master Raynolds, Symancha,
and the Author of Philopatre) writes Nulla est Imperatoris, aut Regis Electio,
si cum Eligitur, excommunicatus est. The Election of an Emperor or King, is
non, if he be excommunicate when he is chosen.

I answer: First, here he contradicts himself again, making election and
consent of the people, an essential thing to Princes titles. Secondly, let all
be true which he cites, and that they so teach: yet, if five particular men
could make a general council, and their sentence be termed a public
position; yet they speak only of a Prince, excommunicate before his Election;
which case is not now in rerumnatura, much less in England. His Majesty was
not excommunicate before his Election, neither is he now, but is both elected
and settled in his throne, both without any contradiction of the Pope, and with
his Iubet of all obedience, and prohibet of denial thereof. All the Catholics
of this Kingedome, applauded it as much as Protestants. And his union and
league with Catholic Princes and people abroad, is sufficient answer, that
this is a malicious slander of holy Priesthood; and proves Catholics
innocent, Protestants guilty, and this man an unjust accuser. The Argument
retu^ned upon Protestants, with a recita^l of their seditious doctrine


But for brevity, to pass over foreign Protestants in this place, I will
put this disputer in mind of his brethrens dogmaticall principles and
positions, in this united Kingdom. The Protestant Writers and Preachers of
England defended, that Wyat was no Traitor to Queen Mary. And thus they wrote
expressly; It is lawful to kill Kings, and both by Gods law, and man's law,
Queen Goodm page 103 obed pa. 99. 113. Goodm. pa. 99.
Mary ought to be put to death, (what Priest of England did ever so write,
speak, or think of any Protestant his Sovereign?) she was a tyrant, a
monster, a cruel beast. And yet the purer sort of Protestants affirmd of
Queen Elizabeth, (as his Lordship of Canterbury Hay an. page 13 15. 23. D^ing.
poli^. p^g. 133. 134. sup.
wi^nesseth) That she was worse then her sister Many, and they more suppressed
by her, then by the other. They did write; That she was not to be obeyed, being
against their proceedings, and openly moved the greatest Sub^egents in England,
to take arms against her; affirming, if they Suppli^a^. to the gouer. of Wales
pa. 16. 36, 37, 38, 39 D^ng. pos^t. lib 4 e. 3* 4 Goodm p. 144. 145. Obed. page
110. Knos. hist. page 37 ^. Obed. page 99. 103. 104. Goodm. pa. 99. Buchan. i^^.
^^g page 40. 58 Obed. pa. 111
refused it, they ceased to be Magistrates. These also ensuing, be more of
their holy dogmaticall principles. Evil Princes, ought by the law of God, to
be deposed, and inferior Magistrates ought to do it cheefely: It is lawful to
kill wicked Kings: It were good that rewards were appointed by the people, for
such as kill tyrants, as commonly there are, for those that have killed either
woolues, or bears, or taken their whelps. The people have the same power over
their King, that the King has over any one person. Judges ought by the law of
God, to sommon Princes before them, and to proceed against them, as against
all other offenders: the people may arraigne the Prince: the Ministers may
Buchan. pa. 62 Cartwr. replic. 2. page 65. Obed. page 115. 116. Bucha. p. 70.
excommunicate him: any Minister may excommunicate the greatest Prince: he that
is excommunicate, is not worthy to enjoy any life upon earth. Whereby is
evident, the monstrous dissimulation of this people, which sometimes, for their
advantage, will not be scrupulous to deny, that with other articles of their
religion, and the cheifest, and to say; that they only claim power to
excommunicate, not to depose and kill Princes. And to testify how easily,
Suru. pretend. holy D^^cipl. page 283. 284. Buchan. page 6 13. Obed. page 25
and for what ordinary offenses Princes may be thus entreated, the present
Protestant Archbishop of Canterbury is witness, that fornication,
drunkenness, swearing, cursing, fighting, chiding, brawling, breaking of the
Sabbath, wanton and vain words, and the like, be sufficient incitements and
causes of such proceedings with them. And they tell us further; That the people
are better then the King, and of greater authority: the people have right to
bestow the Crown at their pleasure: the authority which Princes have, is given
them from the people, and the people may take it away again, as men may revoke
their Proxies, and letters of Attorney.

Now I would demand of this obiector, whether they be members of the Roman
Catholic Church, or the pillars of his Protestant Congregation, that
congregateth and gathers together such monsters as holy children, which
teaches a double prerogative over Princes: one in the people, when inferior
Magistrates, and not Magistrates may, (and must by their doctrine) depose Kings
and Sovereigns: and likewise their ministry, (as before) has as ample, or a
more preeminent authority. Which also concluded from these English Protestant
principles; If Magistrates transgress Gods laws themselves, and command
others to do Goodm. pa. 119. 139.
the like, then have they lost that honor and obedience, which otherwise their
subjects did owe unto them, and ought no more to be taken for Magistrates, but
to be examined, condemned, and punished, as private transgressors. When
Magistrates do cease to do their duties the people are as it were without
officers, and then God gives the sword into their Pa. 185. 180. 184
hands.

And such was the universal practice of all protestants (especially
Caluenists) in all places of their holy preaching, Germany, Heluetia, Denmark,
France, England, and Scotland, with others in fo^mer times: and at this
present, the Protestants in Hungary, Transiluania, Sweueland, and the Low
Countries, in actual sedition and rebellion against their Sovereigns,
Emperor, King, and Princes, are instance.

Concerning that spiritual supremacy, which the laws of England The Kings
supremacy denied by all Puritans, and e^ther den^ed, or doubted of by all
english protestant writers.
atrribute to his Majesty, it can be no question, but all Puritans do deny
it; which not only teach a superior power, both in people and Ministers, to
which the rest of the Protestants of the same congregation, (as before) must
needs consent: But also in this regard, that the government of their
Eldership, or Bresbitery, (incomposible with Princes Supremacy) is the cheifest
article of their religion, and distinctiue note of their reformed Church.

Then to come to the present Protestant writers, an^ their designements, the
Archbishop of Canterbury is the man which makes Suru. of pre^, Di^cipl.
relation, that this was a common proposition: Princes have no more to do with
matters of the Church, then the Ministers have with the affairs of the
Commonwealth. And there it is alleged* that such government by Princes, is
worse then by the Pope, for diverse reasons Pa. 25^ 253. 254 255 ^^6 etc. sup.
there recited, and not confuted by any Protestant: I will recite the sentences
of the principal.

Protestants of this time, Doctor Fulke in plain terms acknowledges, D Fulke
h^br. c 13 ^ect 9. 1. pe^r. 2. v. 13. ^^ct 5. Ioh. c. 21. 1. petr. 5. Mat. c.
16. Bell. mo^iu. lib. 2. fol. 78, 79. 80. 81 Suru. part. 3. c. 10 pa. 426. and
1. part. page 34. Whit^ker contra Bellar controu. 1. q 8. D. (...). li. de
council.
that Emperors and Kings, owe obedience to the Clergy, and cannot prescribe
lawe^ of Religion to Bishop^, by their judgments. Master Bell writes the
Ecclesiastical affairs to be in the Cle^rgy, as to decide controversies, and
that the King has only charge and authority, to command the Ministers to
preach, and gives him no definitive sentence. Doctor Whitaker is all for the
private spirit, and brings diverse reasons* all peculiar for that purpose.
Such also is Doctor Su^liues sentence; and yet he adds, that general
Couns^lls are absolutely necessary: then Kings judgments not sufficient: And a
general Counsel (none yet among them) necessary before their religion may be
approved. Master Hooker, and Docter Couell, make the Ecclesiastical power
supreme Hooker l. 5. eccl. Polit c. 77. D. Couel. c. 4. Defense of Hooker pl.
Innoc c. 1. D. Dow. ep^st. ded^c. cont. Bellat. Bills. tit. li. true. Differ.
Willet Synops. controu 7. 9. 1.
in such business, and the Temporal, to be dependant and subordinate. Doctor
Downam assigns the Princes office to maintain the truth, supposed to be
otherwise determined. Bishop Bilson says; that the Princes lawful power is to
command for truth. Master Willet tells us; that the Prince in his kingdom
is neither the mystical head, nor ministerial head, but a politic head of
the Church, and to see that every member do his office and duty; and he uses
these words: Neither do we give unto the Prince absolute power (then no
supremacy) to make ecclesiastical laws. And his Majesty is witness, that
many other Protestant Confer. 14 Ian. an. 1603. p. 82. 83
Preachers before him, were content to pass over that title with silence,
which they would not perform in such audience, if in opinion they did
maintain that supreme ecclesiastical prerogative in Princes. And to add one
former example more: Doctor ^. So^e against Barrow and Greenwood, etc. p. 17. 18
Some writes thus: The greatest Prince whatsoever, is to obey such as teach
them out of Gods book. And does not disallow this sentence in such sense. From
this ohedience there is no exception nor exemption of Kings, nor Princes, be
they never so great, if they have souls, and be Christian men, they must be
subject to some Bishop, Priest, or other Prelate.

The fourth Reason confuted, and returned CHAP. V.
THe fourth Reason is thus delivered. When the King is established in his
Throne by common consent of the Kingdom: (here also is a contradiction to his
second reason, which does not allow of such consent) Whosoere shall manacle the
hands of his subjects, detracting all obedience, may justly by order of law be
challenged and condemned for a disordered and rebellious person. This is the
first proposition, The Argument returned upon Protestants
which I grant unto, and thereby I frame this second: But ordinarily
Protestant preachers and professors do thus manacle the hands of Subjects, and
detract all obedience as is most manifest in their public positions and
practices before, and more amply to be recited hereafter: Ergo: they may justly
by order of law be challenged and condemned for disordered and ^ebellious
persons.

Let us hear the rest of his Silogisme: All Popish priests, says he, Priests
cleared, and proved innocent.
do dissolve the oath of obedience to all Protestant governors: Ergo, How
slanderous and false this assumption is, I have proved before; and the
duetifull behavior of Catholics in all parts of the world to their
Protestant Princes, not any at this present with consent of their priests
denying obedience, (the case of Protestant Ministers and Subjects in diverse
places, being in contrary practice and experience,) gives condemnation to his
Asser^ion. Secondly, all the Authorities which he brings from Cardinal
Tollet, Massouius, and others, private men, entreat of such as be nominatim
excommunicate. In which state there is not any one Protestant governor at this
time; neither can any just fear thereof be reasonably apprehended, by the
Popes general proceedings in this behalf, except any Protestant prince (which
God forbid) should be incited by such unchristian spirits as this Discouerer
seems to be possessed with, to exceed all others in persecuting Catholics,
or offering indignities to the church of Christ. Thirdly, I answer, that the
opinions of Tollet, Massouius, Panormitane, Gregorius de Valentia, Bannes, and
the Author of Philopater (all the private Writers he aleadgeth in this place)
though they did approve (as they do destroy) his conceit; yet such private men
can neither make a dogmaticall principle, nor public position, by which his
promise was to make probation. And in this his affirming, That all priests do
dissolve the oath of obedience to all Protestant Governors, the Authority which
binds them all to such opinion, can be no less, then a Dogmaticall and
public Doctrine, And these may also suffice for his next objections, from the
practice of Pope Gregory 7. Pius 5. and Gregory 9. To whom I farther answer
in particular.

And first to Gsegory the 7. who as this man urges, absolved all from
obedience to Excommunicates. I answer for all Catholics in general: That this
nothing concerned Protestants, then not thought of in the world, neither any
heretics (then not reigning) Fox to. ^. Mon. in Greg 7. Will. Antil Genebr.
Chron in Greg. 7. Plat in Greg. 7.
but only such as he had other quarrels and contentions against.

But he urges the gloss upon Gregory the ninth, to have both excommunicated
all heretics, and to have absolved subjects from their obedience, and cites
for his authority, Greg. 9. Pont. lib. 5. Decret. tit. 7. Cap. 5. glossa. I
answer that in the place alleged Decr. per Greg. 13.
there is no mention of any such matter, or any thing like unto it: only there
is cited the Affrican Council in these words. Si quis Episcopus heredes
instituerit extraneos a consanguinitate sua, vel haereticos etiam consanguineos
aut Paganos praetulerit saltem post mortem ei Anathema dicatur, atque eius
nomen inter Dei Sacerdotes nullo modo recitetur. And this Canon both for
substance and antiquity opposes it self against him.

Lastly, he brings again the Bull of Pius the fifth against Q. Elizabeth. To
which, answer is made before: whereto I add, that many grave and learned men
have affirmed the information of the case of Queen Elizabeth to the
Apostolic See, whereupon that censure of excommunication was awarded against
her, to have been untrue. And that Pius the fifth then Pope, and inflictor
thereof, an holy man, bewailed the proceedings upon such suggestion. And that
many Catholics of both conditions, were both sorry for the censure, and it was
defended by D. Sanders, D. Br^stow or any other Inglish writer, rather wishing
the controversy betwixt two Superiors the one temporal, the other spiritual,
had bin reserved to the high Tribunal in heaven (then so subject to many
iealosies) had been so prosecuted in earth: among which, Cardinal Allane
writes of that matter in these words. Hoc tamen scimus Card. Allen. ad per.
^cu^.
multos Catholicos illud factum agree tulisse, optasseque omnino vt ea res tam
grauis, varijsque obnoxia suspitionibus, literis commissa nunquam fuisset, sed
sublimioribus Potestatibus, Deique potissimum Iudicio reseruata, vt vel in hoc
seculo, vel in altero, cum and Pontifices and Principes rationem reddent
villicationis suae, de hac re controuersia decideret inter nostros Superiores.
Notwithstanding, this we know, that many Catholics did think hardly of that
deed, and did wish, that if so great a matter and subject to diverse suspicions,
had never bin committed to writing, but reserved to higher powers, and most
chiefly to the judgment of God, that either in this world or in the world to
come, when both Popes and Princes must render account of their Bailifewicke,
the controue^sie of this matter should be tried between our Superiors. Then,
if the case was such, between the Pope, and that deceased Princes; I cannot
conceive, how any equally minded Protestant can be of mind, that the Pope so
strictly commanding obedience of all Cathol^kes in England to his Majesty,
will, or can be so contrary unto himself, to publish a contrary command
against a King, offering in public Parliament, to meet with the Roman Church
Kings speech parliam. 1.
all Novelties taken away (we wish no more) and in the mean time acknowledging
the same Roman Church to be our Mother Church, and that his mind was ever free
from perfection or thralling his subjects in matters of couscience. Of such a
King, Bellarmine himself cited against us will be witness, that he thinks
Be^lar. ^ib. 5. de Romans pont. c. 7
the Pope cannot so proceed against him.

The fifth Reason confuted, and returned. CHAP. VI.
THe fifth Reason is nothing in effect, but the former confuted: now again
repeated with malice, and suting also with the three next ensuing, and is thus
objected:

Whosoever suggesteth a Doctrine of forcible deposing of Princes from their
thrones, are therein manifestly rebellious. Let us grant this Mayor
Proposition: then thus I make my Minor. But Protestants be such, as both their
public opinions and practis^s before, and after convince. Ergo, they are
manifestly rebellious by this disputer.

Now let us hear what dogmaticall authority, principle, or position he
produces to justify his accusation: That all Popish Priests (his phrase)
defend and approve these things. For although I have confuted this in the
former, yet I will rather multiply repetitions, then leave any suspicion
behind me, to omit any of his oppositions.

First, for the violent deposing of Kings and Emperors, he cites Costerus,
to say; That the power to depose Kings and Emperors, was ever in the Popes of
Rome; penes Romanos pontifices, which he translateth peculiar to the Pope. But
he must understand, that here is no speech of violence, violent deposing, or
forcible d^posing, which is his proposition to be proved. We will proceed. He
cites Molma to say; that, Depositio Imperatoris ex iusta causa pertinet ad
summum Pontificem.

But first again, here is no speech of force or violence, and so not to your
purpose. Secondly, there is at this present, a great difference between the
Emperor which is created by the Popes I. Cerem. Romans eccl. in Coron. Imperat.
laws, and with his solemnities, and from whom he receives his sword: and a
King that is absolute, and not so created, or depending for power or
jurisdiction, such as our Sovereign in England is. And Molina himself, cited
in this place by our accuser, insinuates the same d^sparitie and reason in
these words: Quia Imperator est tanquam minister summi pontificis, etc. Because
the Emperor is as it were the Popes Minister, exercising the sword of
Jurisdiction at his will; ad natum summi pontificis: which is altogether untrue
of his Majesty, not so receiving or exercising authority.

To Bellarmine I have answered before, that his opinion is against this
discouerer. For he allows not of censures against Princes, where they grow
not to violence and persecution. Concerning Doctor Saunders and Philopater, I
have already spoken sufficiently, and yet their citations do not conclude
violence in the case of excommunicates, whereof they entreat. Bannes alleged
to defend; That an Apostata King, may be deposed by the Commonwealth, means
such a Prince as Julian the Apostata, a renowncer of Christianity, which is
properly termed Apostata. And conformable is the Allegation from Simancha,
which be all the authorities he brings to bind all Popish (his Epitheton)
Priests to defend violent deposing of Kings: which not one of those particular
writers affirm, but was both the public opinion and practice of protestants,
in a^l opportunities and occasions, as is often remembered in this defense.

Now let us hear the supposed public practice in this point. He alleges
three authorities only of particular men, which sentence be not sufficient to
pronounce their judgment or allowance to be public. But let them be urged to
his greatest advantage. The first is, against Henry the third of France,
excommunicate, from the Author De iusta abdic. Henr. 3. affirming only; that
the French subjects which armed aganst him, did it secura conscientia, with
secure conscience, as against a violater of public faith, violatore publicae
fidei.

I answer: first, this is no English case, except this discouerer will inrole
his Majesty in the number of excommunicates, and violaters of public
fidelity, which is most injurious to his Highness, and in Catholics, would
be called treacherous. And yet this Author does only affirm; that they did it,
or might do it in conscience. But he does not justify (which this man must
generally prove) that all those, and the rest of the French subi^cts, were
bound in conscience to take Arms against him: and yet, if he had so said,
there is an evident inequality assigned between the cases in comparison.

His second authority, is an opinion of Divines, in a College at Salaman, in
Spain, (no public authority, if true) that all Catholics which did not
follow the O-neale, did sin mo^tally. Queen Elizabeth then being
excommunicate, and that Xistus quintus did rather allow, then app^oue their
opinion. But first, who sees not the disparity of those Princes, before
compared. Secondly, that school followed their information; which being
untrue, their sentence fails, which the experience it self of that time,
conuinceth: for most Catholics practiced the contrary to that judgment,
resisted O-neele, and defended Queen Elizabeth. And Xistus quintus, never did
see the resolution of that school. The practices of Protestants, are no
novelties in such affairs.

The sixth Reason confuted, and returned. CHAP. VII.
THus he proceeds to his sixth Reason: Whosoever do intend, design, or
practice the murder of Princes, must necessarily be holden for desperate
Traitors. This is the Mayor proposition which I grant, and thus proceed in
form: But Luther, Munster, Suinglius, Calvin, Bezae, Spiphanius, Cranmer,
Ridley, Latimer, Sands, Knoxe, Goodman, and other Clergy Protestants, with
their Adherents and Disciples, did intend, design; and (so much as they could)
practice such impiety, as I have demonstratiuely proved. Ergo, they must
necessarily, by this man's argument, be holden for desperate Traitors.

But against Catholics he urges: That all popish Priests, are guilty in some
of these kinds: that is, intending, designing, or practicing the murder of
Princes. Ergo, I answer, that the late Lord Treasurer, reputed the Author of
the book entitled, The execution of Justice, etc. was thought, in his days,
to be a man, not second to many in political wisdom, and affairs of
Commonwealth: And I think, much to be preferr^d before this Discouerer, for
Execut. of Just.
place and wisdom, and yet he will tell us the quite contrary, to this
assertion; That there were many Catholic Priests and Bishops also in this
kingdom, which, although they were deprived of their preferments, and
impr^^oned by Queen Elizabeth, yet they were so far from being contained
within the circuit of this man's proposition, that they be dignified by that
wise Counceller, with these titles; faithful and quiet subjects, very quiet
subjects, inclined to dutifulness to the Queens Majesty, and the like. And
for such, he recites very many famous men, Doctor Heath Archbishop of York,
Doctor ^oole, Bishop of Peterborough, Doctor Tunstall, Bishop of Durham,
Bishops of Winchester, Carlisle, Ely, Lincoln, together with Abbots, Deanes,
etc. Therefore by this authority, the obiecters general proposition, of all
Priests guiltiness, cannot be true. But he urges; That all Priests profess
it lawful to take Arms against their Kings; and what other meaning (says he)
can Arms have, but blood?

I have answered him before that this is false, by the chief Protestants
declaration of many Priests quietness, loyalty, and obedience. Secondly, I
tell this disputer, that he has made a sound argument, to prove all the
Protestant Ministers of England, Scotlund, France, Heluetia, Germany,
Sweueland, and other Nations before, with their confederate Protestants,
convinced of sedition, for taking, or persuading Arms against their
Sovereigns, to be likewise guilty of the blood and murder of those Princes,
in their designements.

If Arms can have no other meaning but only blood, as this bloody Sentencer
affirms; for all the world can witness that they took Arms against their
Rulers: But against Catholics, which know both an offensive, and defensive
war, his bloody judgment can give no deadly wound, though he had proved
(which is most falsely spoken) that all Priests profess it lawful to take
Arms against their Kings: which I have before returned upon the Protestant
profession. And yet how doubtfully, and with equivocation, (against which, he^
argues in his ninth Reason) does he speak in this place: neither expressing
in what case, or against what Prince, A^mes are defended lawful.

But I will answer him (as before) except he will make his Majesty (for whom
he would seem to plead) an usurping Tyrant, an Apostata from Christian
faith, incorrigible in impiety, and a monster (as it were) among men, it is a
protestant doctrine, and no Catholic opinion, that either blood must be
exacted, or Arms taken against a Prince.

Seeing his own reputation has no happier success, let us examine his
authorities. He first brings the Author of Just. abdic. Hen. 3, to say; that
Tyrannum occidere honestum est: it is honest to kill a Tyrant. Well, then King
James is a Tyrant by this judgment: otherwise, both he and his Author, be
Judges against himself; for that writer expressly names a Tyrant. And to show
this man's further dutiful affection to his Prince, he must mean an Read
Peter N^u^r. Domin. So^o, Cuner, and others.
usurping Tyrant, which is no King, but an intrudor: for by the common opinion,
such a Tyrant is understood in this case, by the general Council of
Constance, to which, that Author, and all Catholics must give assent, and
yield obedience. But such Divines (as this discouerer) which are above
general Counsels, the whole Church of Christ, and all authority, may make
Tyrants of whom they list, and depose Princes at their pleasures. And this
futeth best with their holy spirit: For if every man among them, may judge of
all Fathers, Popes, Counsels, Scriptures, and authorities, which be the
highest, they may with less presumption, ch^llenge to be Superiors, and sit in
judgment of all terrene, and temporal business.

He brings no other authors for priests intending, designing or practicing
the murder of Princes, but only cites Mr. Rainolds, Gregorius de valentia,
and Simancha about censured heretics, often before answered in his sense and
meaning: But his holy obedience and duty can find no other company in the
christian world, for his King, and Sovereign, but Tirants, excommunicate
heretics, and such exploded persons.

For practice in this point, he only alleges three authoriiies, besides this
late unhappy Stratageme. His first testimony is from Gallobelgicus, who among
other of his far fetched intelligences should affirm, that one Arnolde in
Paris ascribed the Tirannie of the Spaniards in the Indies, to the Jesuits.
But Lewis Granado, Metellus Sequanus and others of greater credit, who speak
dolefully, and bitterly against that Tirannie, be of other mind: And we
entreat now of Christian Princes, and not of poor Infidel and Pagan common
people. Therefore if this were true, yet to no purpose, if there were no
priests but Jesuits. But it is well known that Arnoldus was a professed enemy
to that Society, and is confuted by Montanus and others. And yet Gallobelgicus
is not without his hyperbolical Locutions.

His second example is, that Rodolphu^ Comes, (which he translateth Duke
Rodolph) foght against the Emperor Henry the 4. excommunicate. To which he
joins the often repeated Bull of Pius the fifth against Queen Elizabeth, both
answered before. And still this man cannot ballaunce his Sovereign with any
but excommunicates, Indian infidells, Tirants, Apostataes etc.

Lastly; he adds the late conspiracy against the house of Parliament. But as
he has heard, that all priests were not so well pleased in the former
proc^dings with the deceased Queen: So I trust they will be innocent in so
vile a practice against our present Sovereign; And it is most certain that
this example serves not for his purpose, of proving all priests to intend,
design, or practice such things. For first, the cheifest priest the Pope had
absolutely fo^bidden all disobedience, and strictly commanded obedience unto
his Majesty, by English Catholi^es, priests, or other, and by his absolute
power of spiritual superiority, as by these words; Quia Papaiubet, the
obedience, and prohibe^ the disobedience. The chief superior of priests in
England, in spiritual things, the Archpriest had so received, and promulged
the same command long since, in August last. And upon his first notice of the
pretended wickedness* condemned it by his particular letters for an
intolerable, uncharitable, scandalous, and desp^r^te fact, against the order
of holy Church, against the prescript of a general Council, against the
s^ntence of the best writers of this age, against the Popes commandment: and
consorting with the error of Wickliffe, (the protestant Saint and Martyr)
condemned in the Catholic general council at Constance.

Then, if the secular priests of England will acknowledge, either the
Archpriest for their superior at home, or the Pope at Rome, (as all, both
regular and others must do) neither all the priests of this Nation, nor any
one (except disobedient to his superior) was guilty of this conspiracy, or did,
or does either intend, design, or practice such irreligious wickedness. And
both holy and happy is that religion to be esteemed, among whose professors in
this The di^course of the la^e intended treas^n.
Kingdom, so many thousands, and in the days of so manifold disgraces and
miseries for that faith, so small a company of cheifest Agents, or Assistants
are charged with that offense.

We have heard, read, seen, and tasted of many conspiracies and rebellions by
protestants, and more and greater by them, (proportion of time and Countries
observed) where both Kings, whole kingdoms, and Commonweals, have been put
in hazard, and yet they were dogmaticall men in that profession, accounted
Prophets, Apostles, Evangelists, and conspired thousands for every one
particular person in this recited: and yet their conspiracies were not
condemned by their Preachers and Doctors, but justified and applauded, not
forbidden, but commanded by their spiritual masters, and their rebels,
slain in such actual seditions against Princes, not reproved, but approved
and canonized for holy Martyrs. When all things be contrary in this case, by
the protestant disourse it self of this tragedy. And if proof can be made, of
any one of holy priestly order, to have been an Agent in so unholy business,
he will be as much abandoned of all good priests and Catholics, as of the
protestants themselves, for that disloyalty. The ignominy and perpetual
reproach wherewith the names of unhappy Watson, and Clarke are stained, with
all of our religion, will be a witness in any case of like comparison.

The seventh Reason confuted, and returned. CHAP. VIII.
HIs seventh Sillogisme is this: Seeing it is in a manner all one to commit a
villante, and to commend it, we may argue, that whosoever shall justify acts
of treasons and parricides, are not unguilty of the same crimes. To this I
grant, and add, (which is evidently proved before) that the cheifest teachers
and professors of Protestancy, do not only justify, but commend, canonize
for holy, encourage, command, and reward such proceedings: therefore they are
not unguilty of the same crimes.

And whereas he sets down for his less Proposition: But all Priests do
justify such heinous parricides. Ergo, I have proved before, both by their
own authority, continual experience, and at this time, that such assertions
be most false and slanderous.

But he will maintain his sentence, because Bellarmine says; Many Popes have
worthily deprived many Princes, of their regal authority. The examples be in
Leo 3. Frederick 1. Otho 5. and Childericke, King of France. To Objections of
which nature, I have often answered before. And sincere dealing* would have
alleged the true causes of such process, with those Princes, which take away
the envy of this matter, prove a flat disparitie in the cases compared, and
bring eternal shame to many Protestant rebellions, and often deposing Princes
for meaner quarrels, and for no true cause at all. The rebellions and attempts
be too many to be recited. The examples of Princes deposed, or deprived of
their Kingdoms, Countries, or territories, by Protestants, (meaner then Popes)
be more in so short a time, then in all the papal government, Queen Mary of
Scotland, the King of Spain, and Enfanta in Flanders, the Emperor in diverse
parts of Germany, and elsewhere, in former time, the present Emperor in
Hungary, the Prince of Transyluania, the Prince of Geneua, Marquess of Embden,
Duke of Loraine, king of Denmark, king of France, king of Sweueland, in their
territories surprised, invaded, taken, sold to enemies, or kept by rebbells,
(no such thing in the Popes cases, never making themselves the richer by others
losses) yield testimony in this business.

Next comes in a gratias agimus, for the death of King Henry the third of
France, by the Author of the book, de iusta abdicat. Hen. 3. which was a
Catholic. But I tell him, that also a Catholic, Doctor Barkeley, a professor
at Mussipont, has confuted that book, which also may serve for other
citations from thence, which I have answered before.

He accuses Cardinal Alane, for approving the rendering of Dauontore, unto
the hands of the King of Spain, the true owner. By which, he condemns
himself, to be within the compass of his own conclusion of rebellion, and to
justify such acts of treason: for all the world can witness, that Town truly
to belong to that King. Then, not the surrendering of it to the lawful Prince,
(which he condemns) but the wrongful withholding of it, (which he
approves) was treason and rebellion.

And such as this discouerer is, such also the rest of his Clergy protestant
brethren in England, must be esteemed, even in this point: for in their name,
the first defense of those disobedient and seditious Netherlanders* was
undertaken. And so, both by public positions, and practices, they teach and
justify acts of treason, and rebellion, both in themselves, and their
evangelical brethren, so many years, in so many disloyal attempts, rapines,
intrusions, dis-inheritings, deposings, piracies, murders, and extremest
outrages, against their natural and true Sovereigns; and not in one only act
and oration, (one of Gallobelgicus excessive reports) made of the death of
Henry the third in France. Ergo, Protestanrs are not unguilty of these crimes.

The eight Reason confuted, and returned upon Protestants. CHAP. IX.
THus he frames his next Argument. Those Snakes that do^ naturally sting, so
soon as they get warmth, may not be harbored in the bosom of the
Commonwealth. To which proposition I say, concedo: and further add by such
assertion, that the protestant Preachers, and professors of the reformed
Churches, may not be harbored in any kingdom, or civil Country: for they are
proved before, naturally to sting, (and kill, if they can) so soon as they
have obtained power to perform it. Which I will now also, more plentifully
demonstrate in this chapter, when I have exempted Catholics from the
accusation, in the second proposition; which is: But all Priests profess
rebellions, as soon as they can presume of their strength. Ergo.

His cheifest proof of this, is from Bannes, who (as he tells us) teaches;
that a King may be deposed, where there is euidens noticia criminis, evident
knowledge of his sin. I answer; That such opinion is to be reproved, as
against, not only Cunerus Navarre, etc. but the great Laterane general
Council, to which, Bannes, and all Catholics, must submit their sentences:
which also discharges us of this forged slander, and condemns the accuser,
of unjust calumniation.

But he urges further from the same Author, holding the English Catholics
excused; quia non se eximunt ex superiorum potestate, nec bellum contra eos
gerunt: quia non suppetunt illis vires, ob sequentia pericula: which this
discouerer thus translateth; The English Catholics, who now do not take Arms
against the Protestants, are excused, because they want sufficient power. I
answer: If this be the opinion of Bannes, he speaks ignorantly in this case:
For the Pope himself, Gregory the thirteenth, had declared, for the
instruction of the vnl^a^ned, that we might perform all duties of obedience,
notwithstanding any censure. And this we may prove by the next objection it
self, of this accuser* acknowledging how the Pope dispensed (as he terms his
declaration) That the Catholics in England, might profess a large obedience:
(his own words) notwithstanding the excommunication of the Queen.

But where he adds this restraint; rebus sic stantibus, and that it was
recalled by Xistus the fifth, in the year 1588. when the Spaniards pretended
invasion. I answer in the first case: That Cardinal Allane, better acquainted
in these affairs, than any protestant Writer, so long after in England,
relates the Popes declaration, for Cardin. All. ad pers^cut. Angl.
Catholics obedience to Q^eene Elizabeth, without any restraint or limitation:
neither does this man discover where he finds such restricting clause. And
as for Pope X^stus Reuocation, if any such was, (which he rather imagines,
then proves) it is not in force in any opinion* not being published.

The case of the Earl of Tyrone, whatsoever it was, is not now imputed against
him, as his liberty and favor in England, since then be witness. Therefore
it might better be suppressed, than urged by this discouerer.

Hitherto I have answered to all the objections of this disputer, against
Catholic religion, showing the innocence thereof in the offenses objected, and
that Protestants be guilty in all, and every of the pretended crimes. And in
that order, I have made return of every Argument, upon the discouerer, and his
own profession. But seeing his confusion and rep^tition of the same, or
eq^iuolent reasons, was such, as (I have noted before) that I could not give
him so ample allowance in that kind, as his courtesy deserved, except I would
fall into the like repeating error, I have reserved some payment to this place.
Before performance whereof, I desire my Reader to remember the substance of his
mayor propositions, in all his syllogismes, that the less^r and minors with
their consequence, may be better considered. Then thus he writes: are
manifestly rebellious, desperate traitors, and not to be harbored in the bosom
of the Commonwealth. This is the general Mayor proposition in all his eight
recited Arguments, being one and the same (for the most part) in substance and
effect; but va^ied and repeated so often, with this man's protracted malice
Therefore, joining all these together in one, for my first proposition, granted
by my adversary for most certain, I make this my second general proposition.
But the Cle^rgy Protestant professors and patrons, in all times and places, as
opportunity has been ministered* were in this case described: which, (besides
my former probations) thus I demonstrate from their most dogm^^tica^l Protest
(...) Ger^any.
principle, and public professors, positions, and pract^^es.

First, Martin Luther the first known Protestant, was accounted so
dogmaticall, principle, and public, both for doctrine, and practice that the
prime Protestants of that time, Amsdorsius, Sarcer^^s* M^^^hesius, Michael,
Neander, and others, honored him Am^^orf praefat. (...) 16. (...). Carolost.
A^dr. Musc ^raes. ^^germ d^ d^abol. Luther. to. 1. ^^nt. germ fol. 522. 79 to.
3. fo. 334. to. 4. to. 5. fol. ^98 Colloq. mensal. for. 488 l. con^^. Henry 8.
in Psa. 71 etc. ^^. 3. fol 533. 326. 360. Colloq. mensal. fol 342 343. ^up.
edict. Imp.
with ^^ese preeminent titles, an other Saint John Baptist, the third and
(...), E^ias, the last tiumpet of God, an Angel^ of God, a great Prophet,
mighty in word and work, a man according to the heart of God, the mouth of
Christ, a God of Divines, the only Divine of Divines, supreme Father of the
Church, etc.

And himself gives himself no inferior style; a faithful Prophet, an
Apostle, Evangelist, a living Saint, receiving his Gospel from God, Isaias,
etc. such a Master above all Doctors, Popes, and Counsels, may be termed a
public man, and his positions public. Then he says, that he cares not for
Kings: and so careless he is in this case, that he censured king Henry the
eight of England, the Marquess of Brandenburge the Princes of the imperial
orders, the Princes of Germany, the Duke of B^unswicke, to be unworthy, either
of obedi^nce from subjects, or life in themselves. And giving the same doom of
his own natural Sovereign, George, Duke of Saxony names him the calamity
of his Country, a Tyrant passing all Tyrants, Pilat, Herod, Judas: So he
scorned To. 6. germ fol. 6. Georg. Wicell. deretect. Luth. Luther. epist ad
(...). inst. germ. ^^. potest ^ecul. li. cont. 2. Edict, Imper.
the Emperor, and wrote directly against his Edicts: he taught, that
Protestants hands must be imbrued with blood, teaching that he had warrant from
God to battle against Princes: He tells us, it is the nature of the
Gospel, to raise wars and seditions; that among christians, there is no
magistrate, no superior: that it is to be entreated by many prayers (so holy a
thing is rebellion in his sight, that it must be bought with prayers) that the
countrymen obey not their Princes: no law, or fillable of law can be imposed
upon christians, more then themselves will, neither by men nor Angels: there
is no hope of remedy, except all humane laws be taken away.

Munster was of the same opinion and practice, and called rebellion Cacl in
act. Luth. Ann. 1525.
for his religion, the war of God; affirming, that he had received especial
commandment from God, to war against Kings, and had promise of victory
from heaven. And thereupon such rebellions ensued, that of his own adherents
and traitorous protestants, were slain within the space of three mon^ths, one
hundred and thirty thousands. The rebellions, murders, and destructions which
they performed and publicly practiced, by words and Arms, cannot be
recounted. And not only Luther. l. captiuit Babyl l. de bell. cont. Turc.
Munster in chro. pantal. chronol. fol. 121 etc.
these miseries by their own rebellions, but by Luthers doctrine; that
Christians might not fight against the Turk; in short time, Belgrade and
Rhodes were taken, Hungary was entered, King Lodowicke slain, Buda conquered,
and Verima Austrae besieged with two hundred and fifty thousand Turkish
soldiers. And the Protestants of that Nation, were not content with these
public opinions and practices of rebellion in themselves against their
Emperors Ferdinande and Charles, whom they persecuted and besieged, but
conspired with the Turk himself, both against them, and the whole christian
world. And their successors in Hungary, these last years, no better behaved
themselves: these directly admitted the Turks entry: the first endeavored to
perform it, as their own Caspaectalio hist. Symp. ad Sabell^c. Defens. Stap.
contr. Illerich. and Sleid, petr. Frar. ora^. cont. Sectar. Sleidan. l. 22.
letters of conspiracy, and the coming of the Bassa of Buda, against
Ferdinando into Pannonia, were witnesses. And Sleydan himself, a German
Protestant gives testimony; that this was the doctrine of their divines of
Magdenburge publicly teaching in defense of such rebellions, that such wa^res
were lawful.

For Sweueland, the protestants themselves give also testimony; Sweueland.
Chit. chron. an. 1593 1594.
that the Catholic King thereof, was enforced by his rebellious gospellers, to
make himself a subject unto their designements, and condescend, that no
Catholic should bear office in that kingdom, and catholic service for the
King should be confined only to his own Chapel. And what rebellions did the
Protestant Petr. Fa^. orat. contr. sect.
Nobillitie, by advise of their Clergy, raise against their Prince for this
cause in former times? And who is ignorant of their still continued seditions
and rebellions?

In Denmark, the same dogmaticall opinions were both publicly defended and
put in execution: What insurrections and rebellions Petr. Frar. sup.
d^d the Protestants of that kingdom maintain by this title? Did they not
assault the King under years, and in minority with open wars? Did they not
confederate and colleague themselves with the professed enemies of the
kingdom, sell the Cities to strangers, challenge regal power to their
rebellions, and such like intolerable treasons?

Let us come to Heluetia, and especially Geneua, the mother Church of the
^eformed, Master Calvin, the supreme head of the Consistory there, has told
us before; that Princes (not agreeing Bez. l. iur magist. in supqit. Sutclif
answ. l. to suphl.
with him in religion) are rather to be spitted upon, than obeyed; they ^re not
worthy to be numbered among men, they are bereaved of all authority. Beza, his
successor in place, succceded him also both in opinion and practice, arming
subjects against their Prince. And as Master Doctor Sutliffe says in effect,
overthrowing all authority of Christian Kings and Magistrates, and giving power
to subjects, not only to take Arms, but to depose and kill the Prince, if he
impugn their religion. And accordingly in practice, the Protestants there, (as
Calvin himself, Doctor Sutliffe, Calvin Sutel. sup. kiru. pret. discipl.
and the Archbishop of Canterbury be witnesses) deposed their Sovereign from
his temporal right, and ever since, continue in that state of rebellion. And
not content with rebellion to one and their own Lord and Ruler, they
celebrated a Council, wherein it was concluded; that King Francis the second,
then king Petr. Fra^. orat. contr. sectar. de^ens. Reg. and relig.
of France, his wife, the Queen, his children, Queen mother, the Nobility,
and all good Magistrates of that kingdom, should by a certain day, by
treacherous deceits, be put to death.

In Burgundy, a like Assembly and Conuenticle was called, kept, and therein
decreed at Cabillon; that three worms must be taken forth of the world: (these
men were not content to make their opinion and practice, to one, or a few
kingdoms) first, the Church of Rome: secondly, the noble families of ancient
houses: and thirdly, all civil policy, government, and jurisdiction. How
faithfully the Protestant Netherlanders, labored by all seditions and
rebellion, so many years, and still persevere to have the canon of this holy
Council observed; it is too lamentable to be repeated, that subjects should
maintain it, or any Christians should applaud it.

Let us come to France. Were not Calvin, Beza, Othomanus, Spiphanius, Claud.
de sanct. de Saccad. eglif. fol 58. 55.
and such public and dogmaticall Protestants, the eggers and instruments of
all those slaughters, rebellions, and oppressions in that Monarchy, wherein
they took all law, authority, and Petr. Frar. sup.
execution thereof, from the King and Magistrates. They conspired in one night,
to rob all the Chu^ches in France: how did they depose Magistrates, fell
Cities, give the spoils to strangers, etc. what murdering of priests and
religious men, hanging, cutting, bowelling, rending, strangling, fleaing,
drowning, stabbing, shooting through with gunnes and arrows, of religious
Priests, wearing chains of their ears cut off, about their necks? how many
were buried alive, and little infants themselves cut in sunder, ^nforcing men
to eat their indecent parts, cut off, and roasted; and opening the bellies when
they lived, to see whether they digested them, or no; I cease to recount the
unspeakable tyranny of those Protestant traitors, whom no conditions, peace,
or grant, could satisfy.

After the remembered conspiracy against King Francis, his Genebr. chron. ann.
1560.
Mother, wife, children, Nobles, and Magistrates at Geneua, in the year 1560.
within two years after 1562. they raised such rebellions and civil wars
against King Charles the ninth, that as Genebrande writes, France was more
endammaged by one years civil wars, than in all wars past by strangers.
The King of Navarre, and Duke Nyuers, with others, were slain; the Duke of
Guise treacherously murdered, by Pultrotus Canickname in France, for that fact
suborned by Beza, and the Protestant Admiral, and they enforced the Kings to
grant them peace and conditions, but they kept neither: for in the year 1567.
they made a new rebellion, and being subdued, accept again of peace, but
Genebr. chron. 1567. Geneb. chro^. in these ye^^es.
break it again: for in the year 1569. they rebel: and in the next year
1570. and yet in the year 1575. break again into rebellion. And such were
the miserable murders and cala^^^ies which they brought to that distressed
kingdom, that i^ (...) first civil wars and rebellions, above 100000. were
slain, as Gaspar Coligne, a principal Captain in those rebellions, witnessed
in an oration before the King. And when Charles the ninth forbade by Edict,
that no such Protestant should publicly H^stor F^ucase Popelim. li. 27. stat
Relig. in gal. Sub. Carol. 9. lib. 3 page 347.
preach, thirteen thousands of them armed, assembled at such a sermon, in the
suburbs of Paris it self, and their rebellious malice and disobedience, did
not only extend to their living Kings, but endured against the dead: as they
most rebelliously persecuted King Francis when he lived, so being dead, they
burnt his heart in rebellious de^pight. So they dealt with King Lewis the
eleventh, defaced his Image, dismembring every part thereof, and burned his
body.

Concerning this united Kingdom of Britain, I have spoken before
sufficiently, for the confusion of all Protestants thereof for ever. I will
add something, and first for Scotland. Was not their Gospel there planted by
force and violence to Princes, and by the public Dogmaticall decrees of
Calvin, and Knoxe Knox hist of the church of Scotland page 143. 144. Holins.
hist. Scot. anno 1546. Knox sup. pa. 217 218. 256 258. Holinsh. sup. ann. 1559.
Knox page 265. 268. 269. Holinsh. sup. Knox sup. page 501. 502. 503. and vsque
page 531. Holinsh. supr. an. 1566. Dang. pos. l. 1. c. 6.
Apostles, and their conspiracies and practice? I refer the Reader to Knoxe
himself, to know what public subscriptions and conspiracies to this end,
what authoritatiue Sermons to the Religious, and Monasteries, what
pro^estations of violences against the Queens Edict, and Parliament, what
contempt of Authority, they used, in commanding the Nobles under penalty of
excommunication to assist them, the Bishops and Clergy, not to resist them,
writing, and sending to all their Sect, to join in Rebellion with them; no
Law or commandment of Prince obeyed. They took upon them the Regality it
self, they coined money by their Authority, seized the Inns and renounced all
obedience unto their Princes, terming her obedient subjects and partakers, a
Faction, and threatened them with punishment for Treason. How wickedly did they
reject her Authority in Parliament, and made themselves Supreme, both in
Ecclesiastical and Temporal business? Did they not murder the Kings and
Queens Secretary in their sight, and intended the same to the Queen her
self, then great with child with our present Sovereign, so to have brought
all into their own hands, the Issue and Posterity Regal taken away? And
when that holy last recited Queen, Mother to his Majesty was first
imprisoned, then expelled her Kingdom by these Rebels, and escaped
murdering, her Husband being slain by their villainies. How did they condemn
all decrees of the State, deposed the Bishops as Antichristian by their
supremacy? What comminatory letters did they write to his Majesty which now
Reigns, then young in years, and the Nobles of that Land to effect their
designements? did not they wholly disclaim from the Kings Authority, and not
that only, but made him their subject in prescribing laws unto him? did not
they surprise and imprison him as Declarat. B 1. 2. 3. 4 parliament. Sect. ann.
1584.
their Vassal? what Traitorous and more than Rebellious excommunications and
censures did they impose upon him? how many Declarat. 1582. parlia. 1584. c. 7.
Conspiracies did they contriue, how did they force him at Striueling,
besiedged him, took the Castle, imprisoned the King with violence, v^till he
had signed their high wills and pleasures.

For England I have spoken already more then I desired, had not such wicked
accusations against us urged me to breach of silence. And now I will only say,
that the public and Dogmaticall positions and practices of Rebellions by the
greatest Protestant subjects of this Kingdom, the Dukes of Northumberland and
Suffolk, (again and again) so many Nobles to be pas^ed with oblivion, all
their whole Cleagie, Archbishop, Bishops and others, not only against the law
of God and their Queen, but oaths of fidelity to K. Henry the eight, that I
am bold to affirm, no Protestant obi^ctor can give instaunces in any time or
Nation of Catholic Regiment or Subjects, where so great and manifold
outrages have been committed. And yet that which Catholics lost by the new
proce^dings, so many thousands of Monasteries, Religious howses, Churches,
their Religion, Sacraments, Prayers and Sacrifice for their souls sakes and
their posterity, Corrodies, Pensions, and Education for their children, was a
greater loss to them and their prof^ssion, then ever Protestants with their
new Faith will bestow, recompense, or equivalent benefit upon the world.

Now let us reuiew this Disciferers examples of practice agenst Henry the
third of France, the resistment of this present King of that country, the
Bull of Pius Quintus against Queen Elizabeth, Henry the fourth Emperor
excommunicate, Leo the third, Frederick the first, Otho the fifth, and King
Childericke. Henry the second in like case, which be these practical
objections he can find worthy of reciting against us, since the first
conversion of Kings and Countries to Christ. Among all which tragedies, let him
single forth what kingdom, country, territory, or town, the Pope possesses,
detaineth, or keeps against any of those, or any other christian Prince. And
compare them with the Protestants proceedings with Princes, in this short time
of their new Gospel, and their usurped ministerial and popular outrages,
rebellions, exc^mmunications, deposings, and violence to Princes, do far
exceed, both for number, and extremest injuries. And so many Countries,
States, Towns, and territories, both violently taken, and still kept from the
true possessors, and reserved to themselves, as Princes; does not only argue
the impiety of injuries past, and a continued state of rebellion, but gives
demonstration of their continued opinions, to practice the same generally in
all times and places, as occasions shall give them power and advantage. Ergo,
Protestants, (and not Catholics) by this man's arguments, be seditious, tray
terous, rebellious, intolerable.

The ninth Reason confuted, and returned. CHAP. X.
THus he frames his next Reason; Whosoever does perfidiously either deny, or
violate with men of diverse religion, an oath, etc. must necessarily be
esteemed of them, a person perfidious and treacherous.

This is his Mayor proposition, wherein he must needs make some exceptions of
the lawfulness* etc. of the thing sworn, or else the Protestants which swore
loyalty to Queen Mary, in her Fathers life, might not safely take Arms
against her, to advance a forged title: and the Protestants which had sworn
obedience to the Pope, could not deny their subjection; and whatsoever
wickedness is sworn, must be performed: as Saint Paul, and Saint John Baptist
death, because their death was sworn by Herod and the Jews. But if his
proposition be true, Protestants be perfidious and treacherous, by the example
of England recited, and all the Countries before remembered: where Protestants
broke their oaths of loyalty with their Princes, kept not oaths of conditions
with subjects. But he thus obiecteth: Popish Priests are guilty of such
perfidie. And in his prosecuting of this assertion, he disputes against
aequiuocation, although the interrogatorie be unjustly proposed, and charge
us with these words of Cardinal Tollet; Cum Iudex non vindice petit Iuramentum
vel contra Iustitiam, licet vti Tollet. li. 4. Inst. Sacerd. c. 21. 22.
aequiuocatione secundum mentem suam contramentem Iudicis, vt puta quaerenti
fecisti ne illud? respondeat non feci, intelligendo inter se non hoc tempore
aut vt narrem tibi aut aliquid simile. Let this be the case as himself has
alleged it. Th^n for Tollet, sometimes a Jesuit, I cite another Jesuit,
famous among Casuists Emanuel Sa, who in his Aphorisms, writes of this matter
^n these words; Quidam Sa Aphoris. mendacium 4.
dicunt eum qui non tenetur respondere ad intentionem Rogantis, posse
respondere aliquid subintelligendo, vt non esse, scilicet it a vt dicere es
teneatur, velse non habere, scilicet vt ei det, licet alij id non admittunt and
forte potiori ratione. Whereby it is manifest, that all Catholics do not
allow of aequiuocation, where he is not bound to answer the Judge, or examiner
proceeding unjustly, and not according to law and equity: that a man in such
case, is not bound to answer at all, if the question concerns his life,
liberty, or fame, his Majesty, his honorable Council: and the Protestant
Bishops have consented Conference 14. Ianuar. 1604.
unto, in the conference with Puritans, whether he may aequiuocate or no, they
do not mention: but other Protestants, as Cranmer, Luther, Calvin, and others,
have both taught and practiced it as lawful, and so do all English Puritans,
and most Protestants, (even in religious business) which all men of learning
do condemn, as I will prove in this chapter.

For our excuse in this place and question, Catholics do generally agree, that
to aequiuocate before a competent Judge, (such as we allow all Magistrates in
England, in temporal causes, in as ample Cap. quacunque act. 22. q. 5. Naurar.
c. 12. Numb. 8. D. Thom. 2. 2. q. 89. act. 7. ad 14.
manner, as if they were of our religion) keeping the order of law, is a
mortal sin; so the canon law it self, so Navarre, Saint Thomas, and others
teach. And if it be defended by diverse Catholics, (as Protestants also) that
in case of unjust and injurious interrogatorie, aequiuocacion may be used, I
desire to know against what virtue this discouerer can discover this to be a
sin. First, it is not against justice; for we supposed the interrogatory to
be unjust, then the injustice is in the Judge, exceeding his commission, and
offering injury to the Respondent; and not in him which neither contradicts
any law, or offers injustice to him, to whom no justice belongs in that
cause.

Secondly, agenst verity and truth it cannot be, for the thing affirmed or
denied, is true in the sense of the Respondent, as we still suppose, and he is
not bound to answer in other sense, as before: yea, to answer in the sense of
the iniu^ious examiner, rather seems a breach of law and duty with him, then
an observation thereof. Therefore, seeing as Saint Augustine writes, mentiri,
to lie, is eontra ^entemire, to go against a man's mind and meaning; there is
neither lie, injustice, or any sin in this case; but only in the ex^m^ner,
there is vsurp^tion against the law, and injury to the examminate: and this
doctrine of equivocation in this sense, is no late invention. The Sc^ipture
tells us, how Jacob told his father Isaac, that he was his first begotten
Son Esau, Gen cap. 27. Ierem. ^. 38. ver. 26. 27.
which was not so in the sense of the Patriarch Isaac: such aequiuocacion also
the Prophet Jeremy used to the people, when following the advice of the King,
he told otherwise then the truth, in their sense, one thing for another: so
the Scriptures affirm in diverse senses, that Saint John Baptist was E^ya^, and
was not. Our Savior himself said to his Apostles, he would not go up to
Jerusalem, and yet secretly he went: he fained to his Disciples, going to
Emaus, that he would go further. Concerning, the Popes dispensacion in oths,
when this discouerer can prove abuse in Catholic doctrine, in such cases he
shall have further answer: in the mean time, he may understand that meaner
superiors then Popes, may irritate the oaths and vows also of their subjects.
So the father may Gloss. 32. q. 2. Mul^er, 31.. 34. Sa v. princeps. 3.
deal with his child in diverse cases, and other superiors of their subjects:
so temporal Princes may do, and also legittimate their children, not
legitimate, as many teach: so King Hen^y the eight both thought and practiced
with his daughters, Queen Mary, and Queen Elizabeth, whom he had
illegittimate, and after, declared the contrary, and made them legittimate by
statute.

Now I plainly answer to his proposition of breaking oaths, That all
Catholics of this kingdom, both priests and others, do, and ought, sincerly
to acknowledge his Majesty to be as absolute and really true King of all his
kingdoms, and over all his subjects of what profession or calling soever, as
ever any Catholic King his predecessor was either of them jointly united or
disioyned, and that as much temporal duty and obedience belongs unto him,
and in their degrees to his honorable Counsel and inferior Magistrates,
concerning the affairs of Commonwealth; and that among other duties, to deny
to swear, or violate an oath, iuridice, justly, and according to course of law
proposed, and to equivocate therein, is a sin damnable: and that it is the
error of Wickliffe and later Protestants to be of other mind. But seeing the
internal cogitations of men, only naturally known to God, defiling the soul,
and not offensive to external peace, and government, how wicked soever they be
of their own nature, belong only to the consistory of God, and internum forum,
we hope it will not be offensive, to entreat that the natural consciences be
not arrained in external courts, which the Pope himself does not, nor can do,
especially where no crime can be objected, Nauarr c. 18. Number. 29. D. Tho. 2.
2. q. 6. articul. 1. 2. Gaiet. 16. cap. Quando de poenit d. 1. c. si omnia q.
1. c. 2. de maiorit. and obed. cap. 2. de Confess. Conference 14. 1604. page 92.
where there is no such law ordained, where not so much as a semi-plea,
probation, or any accusation at all is precedent with the judge, or known to
the conueuted: And this is not only conformable to the law of nature,
conscience, and canonical proceedings, even allowed and practiced in England,
but publicly confirmed by his Majesty, the Archbishop of Canterbury, the
Nobles and Bishops of this kingdom in the late conference. The words of his
Majesty be, Nemo cogitur detegere suam turpitudinem in such a case, and that
fame and scandal must be looked unto, with a condemning of the Statish
protestants in that point. The Archbishopps words be these, If any article did
touch Page ^^.
the party any way, either for life, liberty, or scandal, he might refuse to
answer, neither was he urged thereunto; semblable was the consent of all. And
if this Rule was general, I hope Catholics be not exempted.

As concerning interrogatories de futuris contingentibus, first things
hereafter to have an uncertain being, conce^ne not a present certain state,
secondly the Angeiles themselves naturally know them not; thirdly the soul
of Man is ignorant of them; no creature does by natural science understand
them: for all such knowledge is either by the object present, that is not in
this case, or by the effect, that is to come, or by the cause which is here
most uncertain. Therefore, the examine of such things we intre^te may be left
to God, who only in that sense, is Scrutat or cordis, and comprehends al
causes more excellently then thems^l^es; ^th^rwise it would be hard to
descipher, how he himself knows such things.

B^t to speak to this obiector, concerning his protestants proceedings in
dissimula^ion and aeq^^^ocating; Was not the behavior of Luther the
E^angelist, so vile in this kind, that never any pill^ry-mate so beh^ued
himself, as his own friends, Fox, Sleiden, and other Protestants give
demonstration, and not only in Fox 2. in Luth. Sleidan lib. 1. Staphil apolog
Cocl. in act Luther.
ciui^l but d^uine matters* where, b^ all judgment, no aequiuocation may be
allowed: yet at his pleasure now, he appealed to Pope, now d^^i^d it now
recanted his errors, presently defended them, now s^b^^tted him self to
Cardinal C^^etan, now refused it, now teach^ng one now another religion, a^
best served his purpose: all hi^ own w^itings be still witn^sses against him.
So did the Protestants of England dissemble, flatter, change, and rechange,
both their faith, and their fashions, to please King Henry the eight, the
protector^ of King Edward the sixth, and Queen Elizabeth, as histories and
statutes are testimony to their confusion. The like (and worse) cogging, lying
aequiuocating, and dissembling was practiced by Calum, as the Lord Archbishop
of Canterbury, Beza, and Suru. pret diseipl. Beza ^n vi^. Ca^u. Staphil Apolog.
others bear r^cord: for which, he was banished Geneua, for a lying and
dissembling seducer; and by such trades, deluded the Artizans and ^it^zens
there, the second ti^e restord himself, and obtaind principallity by such
means. So also he ^oosened the Tygurines, and among his Dis^iples, Iura
per^^ra, se^ua fidem (scili^et Calui^ia^um) was made a dogmatical princ^ple. In
England, Cramner the p^otestant Archbishop o^ Canterbury in his time, and the
most ^ubli^e man of that profession, cannot be excused, (Fox himself being
Judge) from c^unterfaiting the hands of 50. conuoca^^on Fox 10. ^ in C^^nmar.
men to give a lying credit to his false cause, as Doctor Weston proved against
him in the public Schools of Oxford; and in the same place, Doctor Marti^
made demonstration, how he had forsworn himse^^e, and been perjured in a
most high degree, twice at the least, swearing obedience to the Sea of Rome.
And most certain it is, that so often he had sworn to the supremacy of King
Henry the eight, and King Edward the sixth: and yet, after all this again, in
the days of Queen^ Mary, he swore a new obedience to the Pope. And Cranmer
himself confessed, he had sworn such contrary oaths, but excused it by
aequiuocation, (so much condemned by this accuser) affirming, as his words do
signify, that he spoke one thing, and meant another, which in causes of
religion (such as this) all men condemn for greatest wickedness. For what
authority soever men have to examine, God has always a true right unto his
honor, not to be denied. Such was the proceeding also of Bucer, and Peter
Martyr, the two great Protestant professors of divinity in Cambridge and
Oxford, whom the whole English Gospel could not match; and yet contrary to
their fo^mer profession and doctrine, they taught what the Parliament would
please to appoint. And I would demand, whether all the Protest^nt Adherents, to
the Dukes of Northumberland and Suffolk, were not in this case of
aequiuocation: and is it not both now ordinary to Pu^itans, who in
acknowledging externally his Majesty's supremacy, and suppr^ssing their
Presb^terie, an essential point of their faith, and note of their Church, do
not as they believe in mind. And externally communicate in Churches, ^eruice
and sacraments with Protestants, whom, and whose religion they condemn to
hell: and the Protestants dissemble l^kewise in the Kings supremacy.

The tenth Reason confuted and returned. CHAP. XI.
THe tenth and last Objection, being no new Reason, but an Epilogus of the
former, that is; All Romish Priests, as Priests to profess some, and other
some: All of those sed^ious posirions, are before confuted and proved in every
particular, to be untrue, and needs no further answer, being before evident;
that neither all Priests, nor any one Priest, as a Priest does, or can
maintain any one disobedient or seditious opinion.

And whatsoever this man, more maliciously, than truly or wisely, says; That
all Priests in the Popish Seminaries, vow obedience to their superiors: and
therefore, that the superiors maintaining such Seditious positions, the
scholars are bound to their do^^rine. These assertions be most falsely
objected, for first the scholars do not vow any obedience to their
Superiors; and that obedience which they promise, and practice, is in observing
the collegiall ^^^es and constitutions: as in Cambridge and Oxford, all
Scholars, when they be matriculated and ingraffed to the University, do
accustom; there is neither vow, oath, nor promise to obey the^ in their
doctrine. Secondly, this cannot be either vowed* punished, or performed: for no
Rector of any college is ordinarily a Reader of divinity in his College.
Thirdly, the Caholike Students neither of England or any other Nation are bound
to defend their masters reading, but in matters of faith, and generally
received doctrine* And although Bellarmine did some times read contro^ersies in
Rome, And Doctor Gifford was a professor in Rhemes, Doctor Stapleton at
Louaine, and the Cardinal at Doway, (which be all readers to English, which he
alleges;) yet not all English Priests, nor the tenth part of them, were
Auditors and Scholars to these professors: and yet there is not any one
sentence alleged, from any of them, or any other Catholic, which in true
sense will bring any prejudice to our most holy and innocent cause, as I have
made demonstration.

Thus it absolutely remains proved (most gracious Prince) that if the opinion
of any Divines, concerning deposing Princes, or making war against them by
subjects, be treasonable, and not tolerable in a Commonweal, it is in the
Protestant profession, by many degrees, exceeding any other, both for opinion
and practice: and that the opinion of Catholics, is the least dangerous to
this, or any State.

And for this Discouerer, if his late recited Arguments, that scholars must
agree with their Masters in sentence, shall stand good, himself, (with all
Ministers of his profession) being the disciples of so many seditions, and
rebellions, Pedagogues, his, and their Ancestors in protestancy, must also with
them be guilty in that kind.

The Conclusion.
Wherefore (most merciful Sovereign) the poor, innocent, and distressed
Catholics of this kingedome, humbly entreat license, to propose that question
to your Majesty, our earthly King; which guiltless and holy Job, in his
greatest Job c. ^.
afflictions, so confidently in this manner, disputed with his Crea^or and King
in heaven: Answer me, how great iniquities and sins I have, show unto me my
wickedness and offenses: why do you hide your face, and suppose me for your
enemy? you show your power against a leaf, tossed with the wind, and do
persecute dried stubble. Non pecca^^, and in amaritudinibus moratur oculus
meus: we have not (as we hope) sinned against you, and yet our eyes remain in
bitterness of tears, and can behold nothing but matter of mourning and
lamentation. Our nature and Nation, cannot turn your gracious aspect away: for
all of this Dominion, and your most favored be therein, in the same case with
your Suppliants: that ancient faith and religion which we defend, cannot be
cause to such offense; for so all Catholics in the world, that be, and ever
were, were to be censured by their Princes, with such measure. To profess that
religion in a Protestant regiment, cannot breed such variance; for so all
other Catholic subjects, in all protestant Countries, were in the same case.

And if one and the same religion, can (by any not appearing reason) be feared
by some, subject to suspicions at home, which their politic wisdom may
suppose, no foreign protestant government has so sufficiently attended and
considered; we have in the sincerity of our souls, without all aequiuocation
or doubtful sense, purged our selves from all jealosie of those opinions,
pretenses, or practices, which our enemies could discover, worthy to b^
objected. In answer whereof we have both made manifest proof, that we do not
otherwise esteem of the Protestants of this nation, then our selves, and those
of the same faith with us, in all civil societies and communications; that we
give the some temporal duty, loyalty, and obedience, to our Sovereign,
honor to Nobles, and love to all; that although we differ in religion, yet we
are so far from making Protestants odious, and unworthy of mutual
communications in civil affairs, that we defend their dignities, magest^acy
and rule, against men of their own profession. We do not assign any
sovereign mere civil power over Princes as the Protestants in all places have
taught and practiced, neither any spiritual preeminence in any externe
Prelate, prejudicial to Princes right. as our opposers do in Presbiteries,
and private Ministers; we have not denied either election, or succession of
Protestant Princes, as our adversaries have done, both to Catholics and
Protestants, for their own aduan^age: our doctrine denies no obedience to
you, which was ever given to any Christian Prince of England, from the first,
unto the last King Henry the seventh, by whom, and whose eldest Catholic
Daughter, your Highness is inthroned. We do not suggest the discouerers
objected forcible deposition of elected Princes: Protestants have deprived more
in this short being of their Gospel, by their popular mutenies and private
authority, than all Popes in all ages of christian religion, with public
consent of Princes and people, have condiscended unto. Protestants have taken
Arms and raised general rebellions, more often against Princes, not to be
condemned, than all Popes have imposed censures, by public complaint, against
those which are noted in histories, for extraordinary impious. If any has
otherwise proceeded, no Catholic may defend it: we do not, nor may not by
our religion, intend, design, or practice, justify, or defend the murder of
Princes, or profess rebellions: the discipline of the holy Church and general
Counsels, (rules in our religion) deny it for lawful: what privileges
protestancy claims, what it has taught and practiced in that point, Hungary,
Transiluania, Germany, Bohemia, Denmark, Heluetia, Flanders, Sweueland,
France, Em^en, your Majesty's kingdoms, and your self have been witnesses,
for many years. We do not allow in opinion, or may practice in act,
aequiuocation, concealed, double or secret sense, in affairs of Commonweal,
and iuridicall interrogatories, and profession of religion. They be Protestants
which defend and practice it in such causes, not justifiable in true divinity.
Our Priests, neither under that reduplicatiue formalitie (as Priests) nor
otherwise maintain by our religion, any position or pactise seditions, or not
obedient: if any particular men for want of learning, have seemed to speak or
think, or for want of grace, dealt or practiced in other sense, (no religion
made all men Saints) religion did not teach it, and Catholics generally
condemn it.

Therefore our confidence cannot but continue, that the Royal promises of your
highest Authority, of Lenity, of no blood for Religion, shall not be recalled.
The demerritt of a few, is no general impediment. The Scriptures instruct us,
anima quae peccauerit ipsa moriatur; one man must not be are the burden of
others sins. All Schools agree, that no man can condignelie meritte first
grace, to any other, though but one; then the transgression of one, or few,
cannot be demeritte, for innocents to be afflicted; great is the difference of
the members in a natural, and civil body, in this cause, though the first do
suffer in some sense together, by connection in nature, yet in the second, the
case and reason is different.

Remember most worthy Prince, not only how grievous, but how general the
penalties against your Catholics be enacted: And yet new threatenings be made,
that new and more strange (as nec inter gentes) shall be ordained: The bodies,
honors, reputations, and riches of husbands, to be punished for their wives
religion, and souls; to which they are neither husbands, nor superiors.
Children to be taken from Parents, Parents to be deprived of their education;
which Catholic Princes do not, and in conscience, cannot offer to the Jews
themselves, though (in some opinion) the slaves of Christians. Children,
servants, kinsmen, and neighbors are to be made hired Espialls, to betray their
parents, masters, kindred, friends, in things, as unlawful, which the whole
Catholic world honors for holy, and they venture their souls and
fempitermtie that they be such, commendable Arts, Functions of physic etc.
which have not connection with Religion, are to be put to silence in Catholics.
The severe penalty for not monethlie professing the Protestant faith in
Churches, (when in all divinity the precept of Profession of true and
undoubted faith, in se, and ex se binds but seldom) is to be increased: And
others of such condition, too many here to be mentioned, and too grieuou^ and
unnatural (we hope) in your Princely opinion, to be concluded by a Kings
consent. Therefore, under savor for all, I instance in one most heavy and
general in those of our deceased Queen.

All Priests though never so dutiful or obedient be censured for Traitors,
equally with the greatest offender in sin of Treason, when many guiltless
souls of that sacred order, would not for thousands of worlds once consent to
any such, or a far inferior offense. A thing most strange and beyond all
example, that men in respect only of their calling, and function, and that
function so reverenced by all our forefathers, should without further cause be
condemned as guilty of so a detested crime. We defend holy priesthood to be a
sacrament, which being ordained by God, cannot be changed by man, Pope,
Prelate, or humane power but remains in all things, substance, and doctrine,
the same which in those days when it was so honorably esteemed of all your
christian progenitors, and when our mother Church kept her first integrity by
your Highness judgment as we are ready to make defense. And if your Majesty
should decree the like law against any degree, or profes^ion of your other
subjects; or the king of France, (or other Prince in other estate of men)
should enact by Parliament, that all Ministers in his Dominions made contrary
to the Roman use, approved in his Territories) should be Traitors; the pulpits
of England would not be silent, to reprove it of great absurdity. We ^ope
therefore; that the rare example of one Queen, will not over balance so many
your holy and wise Progenitors, and all Princes of the world in this point. And
if one against so many hundreds, could carry (against so many reasons)
equiuolent motive of imitation: yet we trust, as you do not inheritte by
Queen Elizabeth, (or King Edward the sixth, or King Henry the eight) whose
next line and life, rather suspended your Title, then gave you the Diadem of
these united dominions; but by Queen Margaret, and Queen Marie of Scotland,
Catholic p^inces, and King Henry the seventh, of England, of the same
Religion, with all their, and your common Ancestors; so you rather will
inheri^te the steps of them, so many, and holy, in this path, which left you
so great a Title, both to heaven and earth, then follow the lone example, of
one woman, or the father, and son, a child, from whom no such preeminens is, or
can be derived.

It is the honor of our King in Heaven, (most mighty Sovereign) for which we
continue in combatte: that Religion which the whole Catholic world in all
general Councelles, Popes, Doctors, and learned men, has ever professed,
wherein this Nation (as our Protestants acknowledge) one thousand years since,
Ioh. Bal. l. de Script. Angl. in August. monach. Will. Tetrastyl.
was converted, all our Christian auncestry embraced, and which all Princes (in
the school of Christ) of whom your Majesty is descended, maintained in
themselves, and subjects. That which is so general, cannot be surrendered by a
small number, of one kingdom: It is not in the power of Man to resign the
honor of God. Protestants and Puritans, which have turns, and changes, for all
occasions, which communicate in spiritual things, with so many different in
profession, which can subscribe, and swear to Parliament articles, and yet
renownce them, take oath of Princes supreamacy, yet speak, preach, and print
against it, communicate in Churches, service and sacraments with them, which
they say, be infidells, and that none going to their Churches, can be saved,
submit their faith and religion to stand, or be changed, as pleases Princes,
which had not any Church, Chapel, Prince, or subject, of their religion,
until the days of Luther; and now is the same no further, then in one time or
Country, may without great loss to themselves, damage to others, or new
dishonor to God, change as the wind serves, their spirit suggesteth, or
appetite desires. Such men may easily and only condescend, to change their
right, and relinquish their interest: being such as the Apostle thus
describes: Always learning, and never attaining to the knowledge 2. Timoth.
3* v. 7
of truth.

Yet nevertheless (dread Liege) if it will please your Majesty to vouchsafe us
license to request, and grace to obtain, that your own princely sentence and
censure may stand: that we ought not to depart further from the Roman Church,
(our mother Church by your judgment) than she has departed from her self,
when she was in her best, and flourishing state. And that the time of
Constantine was incorrupted in religion, we humbly again offer trial before
your Highness, with equal c^nditions of Schools, agenst the most selected
and chosen Protestant Bishops and doctors of your dominions, to prove, or
defend any, or every substantial article, which we now profess, to be
agreeable unto (and not discenting) the known, public, Catholic doctrine of
that mother Church, in those your mentioned incorrup^ed days of Christianity.

And seeing the disfavor and penalties against lay Catholics, are grounded
upon their Recusancy, to be present at your protestant Service; we humbly
beseech, it may be called to memory, how they have protested in several
supplications, one to your Majesty, before the end of the last Parliament; and
the other to Queen Elizabeth, in the seven and twenty year of her reign, to
be builded only upon fear of offending God. To which, their so long and
manilold disgraces, losses, imprisonments, and sufferings, are sufficient
witness; and for further trial thereof, have offered to repair to your
Protestant Churches and Service, without further exception, if the learned of
your religion can, and do prove to the learned of their profession, that it
may be performed without offense to God: which is so much in the opinion of all
divines, as any christian subjects can offer in this cause. In which mind, as
I doubt not but they still continue, so I am assured, that the Priests of
England will give like consent. This if your Protestant Clergy do refuse, or
do not satisfy so Christian a request, we hope your Majesty, being wise,
learned, judicious, and gracious, will perceive, that the severity of the laws
against them, for that cause, is not to be put in practice. These things in
most humble manner, we commend to your highest and merciful consideration: And
so, desiring of the Almighty, to grant all happiness and prosperity to your
Majesty, and posterity, we conclude in all dutiful subjection, with that
ancient Father: We will faithfully serve you in your Palace, we will
accompany other your subjects in the market, we will join with them in the
field against your enemies; only to you we leave the Churches.

FINIS.
Fauls escaped.
In the Ep^ste, or, are. tam, cum.

Chap. 1. Rogesr, Rogers.

Chap. 2. Haereticus, Haereticis. manimenta, munimenta. not above four or
fine, not many. the Prophets and Priests of Judah deposed: under the Prophets
and Priests of Judah were deposed. not now, and are not now.

Chap. 4. Philopatre, Philopater. which, which is.

Chap. 5. and it was, and that it was. if, it.

Chap. 6. natum, nutum. violatore, violatorem. approve, reprove.

Chap. 9. vermia, Austrae. vienna, Austriae. Canickname, a nickname. 100000,
1000000. Inns, Irons.

Chap. 10. vindice, iuridiee. mentire, mentiri. natural consciences, internal
consciences. a semiplea, a semiplene. statish Protestants, Scottish
Protestants. Caluinianum, caluinianam.

Chap. 11. punished, promised.


