A COURTLY Controversy, between Love and Learning.

Pleasantly passed in Disputation, between a Lady and a Gentleman of
Scienna*

Wherein is no offense offered to the virtuous nor any ill motion to delight
the vicious.

Honor alit Arts*

Imprinted at London by John Charlewood, for Henry Carre, dwelling in the old
Change, at the sign of the three Connies. 1581.

To the Courteous, and worthy minded Gentleman, Master George Gifford, as
also to the virtuous Gentlewoman his wife: a happy and continual society of
mutual love, with all gracious benefits, to be plentifully plant^d between
them.
Four things* (Right courteous) the Philosophers highly (...) to have
continual residence in a noble and a gentle mind; a courage to repel the
encroching enemy; a ha^^ to consider a loyal free^d: a hand to reward the
gif^^ of the simple: and clemency to accept and pardon a well meaning mind.

All these by nature spreading gallantly in you both, urged me to commend this
little motion of great goodwill, under your wunted favor and freendly
patronage: Knowing that the hardest Adamant, dipped in the blood of a Lion or a
Goat, will mollify from the hardness it contains by nature. Even so the
simplest work, presented to persons of so great wisdom and gravity, will be
construed according to the good meaning of the man, and not after the unlearned
phrase of the simple matter.

Thus remaining, both in duty and desire, the most affectioned to your
continual well fare: I wish as great content to you in the reading, as it has
been both pain and pleasure to me in the writing.

Yours, both now and always. A. M.

To the freendly Reader.
IT were needless gentle Reader, to use a large preamble in so brief a
purpose: or to trifle the time in tediousnes, when a word or twain may
suffice. It is a custom, and I would be loath to break it, to desire thy
freendship, in reading this little fancy: which how far it is from any ill
intent, so far I wish evil suspect may be from thy mind. This is all my
reque^^, to read with advise, reward with gentleness: and then take thy choice,
either of Love or Learning.

Thy friend. A. Monday.

The Argument.
PAlunor, a Scholar long time in Scienna, no less seen in Science, then in
secreates of Nature, comes to Padua, and having by Fortune, found to his
content, a place meet for his purpose, not only applyant to his s^rious
studies, but also prospectiue in each kind of pleasure: he endeuoreth
himself to his wunted exercise, in so much that he was renowned for a Poet,
but how? not as our Poets, that prefer the praise of women: but he only was a
Poet more to contemn love, then by any way to commend it. And therefore he
was of women utterly abandoned, insomuch that the women gave him this name,
Poeta Puella, a Maidenlie Poet. And being one day walking for his delight, in
a pleasant plotte not far from his lodging he was descried by a Lady named
Caliphia; who of long time had heard of his contempt, and wrong oppinion in
love. And being desirous to use some conference with him, (...) that both
time and place fitted so well, she addresseth her self no lefse to salute him:
then he seeing her pretense, prepared to counteruaile such courtesy, which
being by both performed; she with a sweet and sober voice, began to say.
Sir, if my sudden approach might be no prejudice to your learned practices, or
otherwise my demand not unto you disdainefull: I then would crave your doom
concerning a doubt which yet resteth^ unresolved, and the case not so curious
as I am persuaded to have solution by your skill. The Scholar heerat somewhat
abashed, more to see her person in his presence, whom he knew to be the prize
of Padua, then for any despair he had in disclosing her demand: with
courteous and cold communication reaunswered to be at her command;
reverently beseeching her* not to conceal any cause which she deemed his
learning could define. Which courtesy she so well accepted, that turning to
such as were in her company: she willed them to walk aside, till she by
sign, gave show to have them come. And being bashful, began so sweetly for
to blushe: that the blood brought to her beauty a far better favor then
before. And thus her tale begins.

A Delicate Discourse betwixt a Lady, and a Scholar of Scienna.
Lady. I Have desired of long time, to have heard your oppinion, but sure my
hope never hapt so well as my will did wish, till now at this instant, when
least I lookte, it is my chance to gain my desire. And therefore not refusing
opportunity so well offered, nor your courtesy proffered, know you Sir in
brief, my demand is this. Whether Learning may live without Love, or Love
live without Learning: Lo this is all, it is no difficult demand, and yet
sure it is doubtful to me, therefore I beseech your opinion heerin.


Scholar. Madame, as your reason does crave no rash reply, so are the causes
to be scande according to their virtue, the c^mmodity of the one contemnes the
discommodity of the other: and sure* they both are not to be spared, yet may
the one be utterly rejected, and that is Love. For touching the nature of ye
same, although by a natural instincte, men have rather given themselves
thereto then otherwise: the thing of it self is but a vain desire, a
pleasant flame or fury kindled by affection, a bitter sweet: or rather as I
might term it ^^perefanion Cacone, a sweet evil ^auste with a sower sap:
the commodity whereof cannot be so commended, but the abuses thereof more
utterly abhorred. For why? as the thing it self ought to be preferred as most
sacred and profounde, so the inexecrable vices lincked there unto, and the
mischeefes so many which thereof ensues: makes the delight more odious then
honorable, so that there is no comparion, but that Learning may better live
without Love, then Love without Learning. For as Love is generally rather
thought a vice, more then a virtue: so Learning from his original is thought
the only touch, that tries such vanities to be rather detested then desired.
But now as touching Learning and the sweet commodity thereof* I say that it
is the Key of the Common wealth, the only Loadestone of ma^s^ life, the Nurse
and Foster mother (...) Science, the sure supporter and vpholder of virtue: yea
and the stronge^ and trusty Tower, that serves to^ guard and govern Princes.
Sure, if I should say so much of Learning, as if liberty would permit I could
be well content to discourse: my tongue should not wax so weary, as your ears
would be desirous to hear the depthe of such a tale. For to Learning, is
not only the charge of the Common wealth committed: but also there depends
thereupon the divine direction, and sauegarde to man's soul. Without learning
there could be no Law, without Law no L^ue, yea and without Love no life: So
that Learning by Law does rather maintain Love, then Love by Law
maintain learning. Beside, I could tell of a number, which by learning have
been advanced to honor, whereas yet by Love I have heard of very few. For
what was ever with the Romans so much in estimation as Learning? always the
Senate was supplied with singular Scholars, they regarded not the value but
the virtue: so that Learning found there more liberty then Love. Here was
wunne wealth by wisdom.
A simple Sheepeheards son, by Learning has proved a Praetor, yea or rather
Dictator of Room. How many Clownes have been brought to the like honor by
Love? if none, then Madame you are to be loouing subject to Learning, to whom
I give the Soueraignetie. And as for Love, this I pronounce, it is generally
vice, though a particular virtue, and sure a very mere vanitye; better to be
wanted then wished: for by authority, as well sacred as profane, there is left
to us a memory of the manifold mischeifes, that thereby have chanced. And
therefore (Madame) my answer is this, Learning excels Love, if to the
contrary you think your self able to defend my argument: you here have
liberty to prove at your pleasure.


Lady. I thank you for it, but I perceive if I were so ignorant, that I
could not my self define on such a doubt: I were much the better to refer my
want to your wisdom, for you argue, but you will not allow: either you deem
me too simple to compare with your skill, or my wit too weak to counteruaile
your wisdom. But Sir, surmise you now dispute with a Dame, and not a Docter:
as I am not altogether a Sophister, so think me not so ignorant: but that I
can sound the depthe of a greater doubt then I have yet demanded. And
whereas you rather infer the praise only to Learning and not to Love: I will
prove that Love in a public weal, is to be allowed abooue Learuing, and
Learning more better to be spared then Love. First consider, that Love is no
particular property: but that the same is general and common to all living
creatures, but of humanity most honored. Secondly consider the original
from whence Love takes his beginning. And lastely, Philosophy in a woman.
scanne the sense according to the simple meaning: and then tell me how great a
matter is included in this little word Love. You will not deny, but by nature
men are learned to love, and by Love, Nature had her beginning. How can it
then be chosen, but Love herein was Schoolemaister to Learning: seeing the
original was Love by Nature? which brought forth Scholars though not
trained in Schools.


Scholar. Not so, for as Love at the first was rather Subject unto Nature,
then either Nature or Love a subject unto Learning: so time herein was to be
preferred before either. Theology.
For time brought forth Nature, and Nature engendered Love, of Love came
Law, and of Law Learning. So that I say, learning had his orriginall from
the beginning, and Love by the divine substance of the Deity, gave aid to
Nature: which after made Love a Schoolemaister, and Learning a Scholar. But
how? that men ought to love Learning, and not Learning to like of Love. For
why? the discommodities thereof are so dangerous: as that Patriarchs,
Prophets, Princes, yea and the most notable Philosophers, do utterly esteem
it as an enemy to all virtue.

How many Princes, and other of as great power, have (by profane and sacred
authority) been seduced by this deceitefull Love? I read of Sallomon, David
his Father, Genesis.
yea Abraham and Lot, whom though all these were chosen Uessels of the Lord,
yet could they not but doat upon this vain desire. And therefore, these have
left behind them, a staff to lead the ignorant, least as they did, they
feel the scourges of Folly. And yet Abraham forgot Gods promise, and doated
upon Agar: David earnestly repented, and Solomon when he perceived he had
sinned, asked mercy of the Lord. Therefore I must appropriate to them, that
love: thus saying. Dulce bellum in expertis, War is sweet to those that
never felt it. And so Madam is Love, but his savor is sower.


Lady. You have made a long protestation, but I pray you tell me, if Love
had not been liked of such holy fathers: whether had they hazarded their
souls or not, for so sweet a sin?


Scholar. I deem that although by Nature they sinned, having a lust rather to
flesh then faith: yet by repentance their sin was but small, and that their
sins left us a sacred Testimony, to eschew so vain a delight as Love, which
in the end is repentance. As said Demostenes, when he at Corinthe desired
Lays of Love, Whereof arose th^s Proverb.
whose price being too high pitched for his person, Non lice^ omnibus adire
Corinthum.
he answered: I will not buie repentance so dear. Lo Lady, how little was
love esteemed, allthough Lays offered her self for a sum, which was then
the third Thirioletta or Harlot of the world. How think you heerin?


Lady. Marie very well, for as I remember, the most wisest, learned, yea
and most Poets and Philosophers, were made by Lays a laughing stock, who
heareing one day great praise spoken of the Philosophers and School of Athens:
as one suddenly breaking out in laughter, she replied thus. Are these (quoth
she) they whom you report for their learning Lays had more.
so much renowned: Scholars then ever had Socrates.
and come to Corinth to learn of Lays? Now certainly (quoth she) I am the
Philosopher, and they are my Pupils or Scholars: for all their study could
never comprehend, what I in Corinth have given them to understand. How think
you now to Lays? was she not as skillful in Learning as in Love?


Scholar. In neither of both.


Lady. Why? she was beautiful.


Scholar. Yea, but more bountefull: for she was better learned in lust then
in Lays was Daughter to one of the preests of Apollo.
love, or else she had been the only Dame and delight of Pirrhus. But she
learned Love, and all her delight was to train her Disciples with the like.
So, that her learning proved lust, her beauty a wrimpled bravery, and all
her Doctrine none other but destruction. If I should stand upon authority, I
could recite a number through her folly brought to misery: and sure at y^ time
when she lived, there were other twain, Lamia the Concubine of Demetrius, and
Flora being an Italian, far more of honor then either Lays or Lamia. And
therefore (Madam) you cannot ascribe any lawde unto Lays: s^eing that by
lust, she was both enemy to Love, and foe unto learning. For there is
neither Poet, Orator, nor Philosopher: but utterly abhors Lays, with her
adherents in all their labors.


Lady. Which are they? express.


Scholar. Why? Plato, Aristotell, Socrates, Isocrates, Demostenes, and
Pericles.


Lady. Why? were all these by Women wronged?


Scholar. No, but the evils that happened to others in their time: made them
the more carnest to envy ^ooue.


Lady. Yet Ovid liked (...), A Philosopher subject to Folly.
Virgill did not hate it, nor as I remember Aristotle abhor it, for if ^ had,
his Hermia had never rid him: he had not been subject to the spur, nor her
beauty been the occasion to snaffle his skill, but he doated on delight.


Scholar. Yet excepting his folly, who was comparable to him either in life or
learning?


Lady. Marry that was Love, by whom Learning lost his liberty, and Lust
received the benefit of both. For the fancy of the flesh killed the desire
of knowledge, and therefore lust at that time restrained Reason, and (...)
(...)


Lady. And why Sir?


Scholar. For that Plato rather was amorous, to try the inconstancy of Looue^
then for any affection borne to Archenasse.


Lady. Now certayn^ly Plato (...) beholding to you, (...) more beholding to
(...) would not (...) unwisely have defended (...). But since you are (...)
far, of trothe take (...) losopher, and then make (...) to Venus, as well for
the (...) best.

I am sure you were (...) of S^crates, and for (...) bear him, you will not
^eare (...) abused: Written (...) Clearel^^^^
but: yet I pray (...) angrye with Aspasi^, though she Schooled your Socrates
according to her own skill. If she being a woman had power to teach such a
Tutor: How then can you deny, but Love is the only Lamp of Learning* the
Adamant which draws you to amorous delight, yea and the very Idol whom you
seek, although you ferue the Saint, and sew unto the shrine. Tush Sir, if
Trees could speak, Stones bewray their meanings, or (...) the delight which
they (...) by Love: what were (...) more, then now there (...) And yet I dare
auouche, (...) natural conjunction as (...) creatures, as for exam^^^ (...)
Female from the Mals, ^he (...) dies, yea both perhap^^ (...) therefore
generally, in all things, Love is to be preferred (...). For why? Learning
(...) esteemed but with the wi^e, nor ^ath any lasting, perpetuit^ (...)
permit: But Love is immortal, not to be by death destroyed.

And therefore Sir, you play on a wrong Pipe, to condemn Love, and commend
learning.


Scholar. Certainly Madame, you weary your self although to small purpose,
for you choose such occasions as best may serve your (...)* but you never
regard the wrong which you d^^ to the Author.


Lady. Why? have I (...)


Scholar. Not one, but all.


Lady. Oh Sir, I blame you (...) seueare, seeing that your (...) Science is
almost spoiled (...) You could do very^ (...) should not say somewhat for
them and your self. But (...) that, I now will somewhat digre^^^, to show you
of a rare example that happened by (...) ^ if you will bestow time to hear it.


Scholar. Certainly Madame y^ I will, or else you might deem me very ingrate.


Lady. W^ll, then Sir attend.

As I remember Athineus writes, that a certain Courtezan named (...)
Milesienna, A proper example by three Loouers, written by Athineus.
no less adorned with regardes of Nature, then (...) ^er person preferred in
heart of (...) personages: was desired of many, not of the inferior sort, but of
the best, insomuch, as that in the end* she fixed her fancy to favor (...)
the named Colophomen, (...) ^^quisite in beauty: with (...) her dearest and
daintiest (...), she chose to perform her amorous pleasures, although others
had some interest, yet to him she was at (...) command.

Nevertheless, as I will not herein commend her last^uious life: so I will
not forget to ^^we a rare regard of loyaltye, to be in this common Courtezan.

^

She determined (...) to give him over first, (...) should understand she
(...) new made choice: and (...) one day to put the same (...) what time her
loouer (...) thinking to be no less welcome t^en before: he found his Lady had
changed her coppie, the (...) was altered, her countenance seemed to him
(...) could as the Ise of the Mountay^^, making no accoumpt either of his
proffers or of his complaints. Which when Colophomen once conceived (...) (...)

The youngman departing (...) rate of all hope, either to (...) grace of his
Lady, or the (...) compass the Chain of (...) last hazarding the hap of both
(...) me th^to Bachide, and unto her (...) the dollerous disco^rse, late
hap^pened twixt him, and his (...) fr^e^d. Not forgetting to beseech (...) of
her ^ountie, in committing to the court^fie of his a^ncient (...) Chain, whom
he so dearly (...) Bachide, A singular courtesy in a Courtezan.
which beheld with what care her Colophomen was (...), and how beside, of long
time the familiarity was great twixt (...) (...) young man: saying. (...) shall
never cause my (...) to be contemned, take the (...) therefore, and present thy
Lady (...) therewith: and say, that (...) then she should be ielous (...) of
her Jewel, I send her my Jewel to drive away her jealousy. The young man
having the Chain depa^ted, how glad, that I commit to the (...) of Loouers.
And finding his friend Milisienna, presents her therewith: not forgetting to
add thereto the words of Bachide. Which when Milisienna had well (...), and
saw the courtesy, (...) also resignes her (...) Colophomen to be at her (...)
for her self, to be at the (...) pleasure of them both. (...) not to put in
practice, ought (...) should be prejudice to either (...) persons: So to
conclude, they (...) were contented to impart then (...) alike to Colophomen. I
do (...) now, which of these had the greater conquest: she y^ bestowed her
Chain so bountefully, or she that reto^ned it with so great a reward, as to
commit her friend to the liking of the other.


Scholar. Certainly, she that gave the Chain was the greatest Conqueror,
for that she did hazard it without hope of any hap ^ and (...)


Lady. (...) is this your oppinion?


Scholar. (...), but to what end serves (...), I cannot perceive it?


Lady. Nay you will not, and that is (...), for if you did, you then might
(...) how secreat the effects of Love wrought in these three: but especially
in the man, for he being forsaken of Milesinna, with charge never to pre^^^^
her presence, without the (...) of B^chide: did (...) haz^^^ (...) so that his
hap hung (...) unless he brought the (...)


Scholar. Alas Madame, this is but (...) example, to appro^ue this (...)
loyal either of the one or (...): for you confess them (...), the^ are they
common by (...) and look what kind does, (...) hardly be reformed. Therefore
(...) Lo^ue was Lust, their courte^^^ (...) unchaste: yea and all their praise
(...) to be counted pernici^us, then to be preferred for perfect. But now
Madame) ^eeing we are ent^ed (...) far into examples of Love (...) you of
o^e more notable then any yet rehearsed, which Plutarche has written in
contempt of Love, and his law, and that is this.

(...) years in her unchaste and las^iuious love: she was a^ length
demanded (...), and so delightful to (...), that by the sudden glau^ce (...)
from her enticing looks (...) caught in the mischeeu^^ (...) and net of her
beauty. In (...), as his own former plea^^^^ (...) were utterly abandoned: and
(...) his fancy fixed to behold the (...) favor of his Lamia. In so much, as
that he would u^uallye swea^e by Lamia, as had she been a Godde^^^: and as
Plu^a^ (...) at such time when the Athenian^ to assist him in his wars, (...)
of their courte^ies eleven, Tallents of silver to pay his Soldiers: 11.
Ta^ents of Silver given to a H^rlot.
he regarding more the Love of his Lamia, then the safety or (...)

(...) take my Lamias life, thou leauest (...) her love behind with me. She
being dead (as some writers affirm) was by him kissed and embraced as (...)
when she lived: and when he saw n^ remedy, but y^ law of nature must have her
due, he causd her sepulcher to be made before his window, whereas he used once
a day whilste he lived to wail ye death of her. In so much ye it was proponed
by the Philosophers of Athens, (...) (...) works yet live, and in spite of
(...), they vaunt of victory. Therefore (Madame) here was love lost with
Lamia, and though Demetrius, (...) her, his Learning did loathe her. And
therefore I hope this example may make you content not to strive any further.


Lady. Nay Sir, you shall not so shake me off, seeing you by common Courtizans
do rather gain glory, then by loyal love used of constant Ladies: I will
now requite your example with the like, although I might rather blushe then to
boaste thereof. Yet seeing we stand upon example hitherto, only upon praise
and disprayse of Love: I purpose now to wade a little farther, and either to
prove Love Sovereign of Learning, or Learning superior, and love his
Subject. I am sure you are not ignorant of Flora, for that I heard you name
her of late, the life of whom, though I wish not to commend: so will I not
condemn her wisdom, in the subtle Schooling and Nurtering of her Pupils or
Scholars.

FLora was of birth noble, of nature gentle, of personage beautiful, and of
Love liberal, in so much that over the place where she dwelt, she set up this
scrole or prescripte. Except King Prince, A large title.
Dictator, Praetor, Consul, Censor or Questor, here is no place for any to
enter. As for Emperor or Keyser, they were not then known, this was her use,
she never set her honor like Lays to salery: for Lays would commonly have
her hyer before hand. Now Flora had this fetch, she as not respecting Goulde
or Silver, gave her self to be governed by her Loouer. And so by this means
she got treasure infinite, for why? this was her common phrase, being one day
demanded the cause by Noble men, why she refused to ask what she would have,
she answered thus.

I commit my self (quoth she) to Princes and Noble men, that according to my
beautye, I may be pertaker of their bounty. For (quoth she) by the Gods whom I
do serve, there was never man gave me so little, but that I had more then I
looked for, or double to my demand. There ought (quoth she) no sage woman to
set her self to sale, for all things in y^ world are rated at a price, except
Love, and y^ is not to be paid but with Love: so that none ought to demand
duty for the amorous pleasure she does to a man, but for the Love she
bears unto him. This was ye opinion of this Courtezan, who though she were
common, it was not so much for coin as courtesy. She sought to none, yet was
she sought of all. The learned thought no shame to be her Scholars. Then
Ergo Love was here more regardant then Learning when Consuls and Censores
left all for lust and Love of Flora. Whether was Wit or Wisdom here best
Scholar? Wit wan Love and wealth, and Wisdom lost wealth and gaynde Lust.


Scholar. Sure Madame, you scan the sense contrary, for though Flora found
such fortune, as that the wisest and wealthiest were bondmen unto her beauty:
yet she never held Learning in subjection. Learning still had liberty to
triumph over Love, although the learned were snared by her subtilty. So that
if Love have conquered any, blame the Book bearer, and not the Book: for
Learning it self never yet has nor will bend to beauty, I stand upon this
oppinion.


Lady. Of trothe I believe you think your self in your study, or else you
would not speak so obscure: but what figure you take I know not, but well I
note all your words are per Allegoriam. But Sir according to my Lodgicke, I
will approve, that as long as the Learned are living, they enjoy Learning, and
the benefit thereof: you cannot separate them a sunder, for conquer one and
take both. Even as a man should say, take my heart and take my life, naming
two when one would suffice. Therefore Sir, I say that if Loone subdue the
Learned, she then is conqueror of both: unless you will make a distinction,
touching the person of the one, and the property of the other, and that you
cannot, for that they both are so fast lincked as nothing can sunder them:
therefore you err, if to the contrary you conster the case.


Scholar. Well, then I perceive you will have it: either to what perfection
you please, or else you will not give over. And therefore as I remember,
Cornelius Suetonius.
Cornelius Suetonius shows a notable example, to the utter abollishing of
Love, which you term amorous or pleasant pastimes: and for because that you
will not be persuaded, that Love can any way be rejected rightfully: I will
now by example prove it to be so odious, as you your self shall confess it
has varyed from the laws of Nature: and this is the example.

THe Tirant Nero, who not only long time moste^ inordinately and beastly,
spoiled a number of Uir^ins and chaste Ladies: A most horrible act of Nero.
both against God. and the Law of nature.
but also finding a beautiful Boy, more pleasant in his eyes then any other
Uirgin or woman: caused his secrets to be spoiled, thinking thereby to have him
transformed to his own pleasure, by such a Metamorphosis as of a man to have a
woman. Not long after he married him, naming him Sporus, endowing him with such
secret duties, as to a Wife are due by dowry. Here was lust more the^ law of
Nature, and yet it was Love. But I hope you will not allow this, seeing that
Nature was here a foe unto her self, in kindling so great a fire in Nero, as
could not be quenched without such a cursed conjunction. This Lust of Nero
quite extinguished the glory of Love, and makes the same so odious to the
ears of such as read this tragedy: that men rather seek by reason to bridle
such fiery affections, then to be found acquainted with such pestilent
passions. So that Cornelius and Suetonius do leave their Learning, to be a
Lamp or Loadstone unto our lives, that though we seek to be rather thralle to
Love, then by Learning to have liberty: yet their counsel is herein to be
ruled by Learning, and not to raunge beyond reason: so that Learning is here
utter enemy to love.

Furthermore, sith I am so far entered, I will yet make a farther discourse
of the unnatural Love of a Father to his own Child: that the terror of the
tale may give light as in a Glass, to behold how unchaste and inconstant
Love, is for the most part.


Lady. Begin your tale, I attend the same with diligence.


Scholar. WEll Madame, then know you when Diophes was King of Egypt,
Herodotus.
whose substance, treasure and revenues, were utterly consumen and spent, to
maintain a sumptuous work, which he had then in hand: the number of whose
workmen, was not so f^we as one hundred thousand. Who laboring long time
upon a pyle (as the Author affirms) wasted so much wealth: as that he was
not only destitute, but also desperate to comprehend the same. A father
compels his own daughter to live laciuiously.
And seeing by no means possible the same could be finished but only by the
mean of money, which then he did want: He comes to his Daughter, and
commands her earnestly to give her self to sensual prostitution, menacing
her not only to pitch a great price upon her honor: but also to embrace every
one that brought to her commodity. Which soon after she fulfilled, no less
with regard to her own profit, then also to perform her promise to her
father. For look how many dealt or had dalliau^ce with her, of every such she
demanded a Stone: whereby at last she gathered such a gain, that the price
thereof builded the Piramides, a certain hill which bears on the top one
hundredth and fifty foot. This Love you must needs confess was neither good
nor godly: and therefore Learning in this place had been better then Love. For
then the excessive expense of the father, had never sought the sale and the
spoil of his own seed: but here was Lust and no Learning, which forced
folly both in Father and Daughter.

Farther more as I remember, A strange kind of loouing.
Lodouicus Vartomanus writes of a strange and wonderful wooing or love
making: which in a province in India named Tarnassery, is commonly used, and
thus it is.

WHat time as any young man becomes amorous of any Dame: he comes to her,
and taking a piece of woollen cloathe which he dippeth in Oil, he clappeth the
same to his naked arm, and setting fire thereto: he protests by his Gods to
endure no less torment for her whom he looueth, then that which in her sight
she seeeth him to receive: signifying thereby, that there is no torment or
martyrdom that may be ministered to a man, but that he is able to abide the
same for her sake. But what think you Madame? wrought Love or Learning first
the effect? If it were Love, what need he then to scorche his skin? If it
were Learning, as it ca^ be no other, unless Divine inspiration put it in his
head, which if it were, yet was it Learning, although applied leawdely, to a
more lascivious Lust.

How think you Madame? have you examples enowe, or will you any more?


Lady. My sense is almost surprised with these detestable, yea or rather
devilish discourses: for amongst all these evils, although I confess they have
been contributores to Cupid, there has not yet been any without spot: and
yet the bad is as good as the best to reason with you. But leaving them as they
are, not yielding any whit to Learning: What think you now Sir? of such Dames
whose virtues have been vaunted of the wisest, praised of Philosophers and
Poets: yea, and so lamented of the learned, as that neither Pen nor Poet was
able to discourse the Love and loyalty, which in their lives they ought to
their husbands? ne like case, to Record the revenge with living, with their
Husbands loss, they used on themselves?

First to begin with Porcia, Porcia consumed her self with hot coals.
the Daughter of Cato, and wife unto Brutus: who when she understood of the
slaughter of her spowse: not having an instrument for death, so ready as she
wished, to show the love and loyalty she bare to her Brutus, devoured burning
coals. Cleopatra Queen of Egypt, ^ppianus Alex.
at such time as the death of her Anthonius, was once to her revealed: no
myrthe, no meat, no delight, was so much desired of her as death Whom when
Octauius Caesar had perceived, and saw by her passions, that she could not
prevent the same without peril of her person: he caused her to be strongely
guarded, war^ly watched, yea and so circumspectly conducted, as that he deemed
her safe, from seeking slaughter of her self. But how brought she to pass her
will? she approved a stranger torment, then either sword or fire: and that
which most dear she always reserved for Anthonius, she refused not to bestow
bountefully on venomous Serpents, wherewith her corpse was clean consumed.
Thyrdly, let us not forget that loyal Lady Arthemezia, Queen of Caria, and
wife of Mansolus: who when her Husbands death was blown into her ears, wept
so bitterly with such abundance of tears, that well nighe all the moisture
in her body, converted into watery humores, yea, or rather floods of Salt
drops. Whose death, when with mourning and sorrowing, she had sufficiently
supplied: she caused a most sumptuous Sepulcher or Shrine to be made, and as
the bodies wasted and consumed, so drank she up still the duste of her dear
Mansolus: never leaving, til the very bones had satisfied her, as the rest
before. Thus was her self the Sepulcher of her spowse, deeming the woormes
unworthy for him, although they were fed with her self. Furthermore, Liuie
recites, that when it was reported to Iulya, Titus Liuius.
how Pompaeus her husband was slain in the feelde: she took the same so
sorrowful, that in the presence of Pompaeus, she passed her life. Also the
wife of Brucollo an Allemaigne, when for treason her husband was by the Emperor
Claudius Marcello condemned to be devoured of Lions: she sued unto the Emperor,
to participate the torment of her Husband. And when she saw no intercession
would serve, neither for his surety of life, nor for her self, who desired to
accompany him to death: she brake into such a fury, Augustino de panchio.
as not regarding the torment, she spoke the most vile and reprochefull
words she could invent, against the Emperor Claudius. Yea, and if his Guard
had not been, she had slain him. Which the Noble Emperor seeing, and
considering of the cause: not only pardoned her Husband and her self, but
also gave them largely for to live.

How think you now sir? whether does Love or Learning here get most
praise? Learning in this place preferres Love, or else there had been no
memory made of the lives of these chaste and constant Ladies. And therefore
Learning has made a Register, and vollume of their virtues, wishing others to
immitate the like, as did these honest Matrons, whose lives is the only Lamp
or Loadestone for Ladies. How think you Sir? can you allege any thing to the
contrary?


Scholar. I cannot well condemn them, ne will I else commend any part^^^ler
person.


Lady. Why? were they not chaste and constant to their husbands: that would
not refuse to accompany them to the death?


Scholar. I will not deny, but their death did argue a great sign of
constan^ie: for that in such extremeties, the loss of life is a Touchestone,
either to try Love to be faithful, or else to be feigned. For otherwise,
there are many, that will vow in show to taste any torment, for the health or
surety of their husbands, Death tries the trothe of all men.
but the deeds dye wi^h the death of the Husband. And therefore, for troth, I
must give praise to those whom you have named: but ^ouching their death; for
that the same was done desperately, there can be no cause of praise preferred
to such persons. For that by sacred writ, we are (...), in what sorrow or (...)
soever we be, not to shorten (...) days by any stroke of death: but patiently
to take the same, until by the providence of God, we find ease of all such
evils. And therefore Learning has left no such lawde of the death of these
Dames, although their lives be worthy the writing. Therefore (Madame) you must
vale now, and give place to Learning: or else you err much in your oppinion,
for that you by their deaths, make them to be renowned, which rather deserve
utterly, to be reprochefully reputed. In that they, to feed their fond and
amorous affection, would by the loss of their (...), breathe life into the
bodies of their buried husband (...) wish with my heart, all women (...) follow
the same: but touching their deaths, that I refer to Divines: but surely, on
my part it is utterly detested. For I can appropriate no (...) to such a
pernicious (...) ne can any man commend the same to be done of constancy, but
rather frantic or foolishly, And therefore (Madame) I cannot allow your
argument to be good.


Lady. Why Sir? I am sure I have forged no fable, whereby to make their praise
a president (...) my purpose: ^e seek I to attribute to their dooinges any
larger discourse, then I can affirm ^y authority. And therefore, i^ (...) the
contrary, have declared of (...) ^ene dead. And if by their deaths they have
rather merited reproach then renown: who then is in the fault, but those y^
have painted their praise, in place of dysprayse. For if their lives were
honorable, and their deaths odyous: their lives should have been registered,
and their deaths been put in oblivion. But I will not be persuaded (although
you deem their desperation to be damnable) but that those Dames do yet live
in delight (...) for at that time they rather chused death to win a (...)
life there^y, A good hope.
then to live licenciously, to die a double death.

And therefore ^y opinion is, these Ladies, although they knew not
Christianity: (...) had and have they^ fowls, the glory and gain of (...) on,
and therefore Learning (...) l^ttle to contend with (...)

But now unto a farther (...) you will not allow Love to be (...) over
Learning: and therefore (...) approve it by an example, (...) shall be no less
familiar then faithful: What, will you then give over?


Scholar. Madame, I will ^iue you the hearing, and as I like your reason, so
shall you hear my reply: if it be good, I will allow it, if otherwise, I must
and will confess the con^rarie.


Lady. Well then Sir to the purpose.

WHen the King of Hetruria had Titus Liuius.
sent his def^aunce to the Senate of Room, and that his Legates expected the
answer of the Senator^: Mutius Sc^^uola and Coclius (then Consuls) being in
the Senate: the^^ was a controversy between (...) they were divided on
contra^^^ (...), part held it best to make (...) with the Hetrurians, and
(...) some to give answer to the ^^ntrary, but especially Coclius, who (...)
an eloquent Oration openly (...) the Senate: persuaded the Ro^^ines not to take
truce, but valiantly to prove themselves, as their noble Progenitors had done
before them. Whose Oration being ended, as you know Scaeuola replied, that
Coclius had little care of his Country, so to persuade them to wars: when by
their wisdoms, they were able to appease the hatred of the Hetrurian King.
But whilst they contended about this case, a Messenger came running (...) into
ye Senate house, and brought ridings how the enemy was at (...): the Feildes
were covered with armed men, and the Walls of Room at point to b^ scaled.
Which Co^^^us hea^ing, now my Lords (quoth he) defend Room by your wisdom
and Learning, I leave you: and with that word suddenly departed, and hastily
(...) himself, came first to (...) where, by an assault, the enemy (...)
ready to enter. One man fought against a whole Army.
But Coclius (...) more the sauegarde of his (...) then surety of himself,
stood in (...) fence and kept the Bridge (...) the whole Host of He^rurians:
and when he saw no remedy, he fired the Bridge twixte him and the enemy, and
taking his half Sheelde, which then he had left, he refused not to leap into
Tyber, and so to hazard his life* rather then to leave to his foes the
conquest and spoil of his Country. Here was Love more then Learning: for if
Learning could have defended Room, I deem it sufficiently supplied with
Scholars. But here was Love conquer^^, and whilste Love labored by life to
free Room from ruin Learning lay soft at home, expectyng, when the enemy
would come to fight with words, But had Love, both by Coclius, and after by
Mucius Scaeuola^ been no better Soldiers to their Country by their Love,
then such S^hollers by their (...) walls of Rome should then (...) at this
day, the sloth of their (...) Senators, and praise the Love and virtue of
Coclius and (...). And though the one held (...) a wrong opinion, against the
other: when Mutius Scaeuola had heard what a valliant exployt was by Coclius
atcheiued: What (quoth he) shall Mutins he mewed up in the Senate, and hear
such fame ringe in Rome of Coclius? No. And with that word, he departed to the
Camp of his enemy, where he by his endeavor showed such a Love to his Countey:
as never was the like since the death of Curtius. Curtius who leapte into the
gulf at Room.
Whose example if I seem to pass with out praise: I should sure eclipse the
honor that by him was done to Room, and also wrong much the Knight, who for
his Country counted his life to be as nothing. These and such other examples
are ryfe in memory, and therefore I but give notyce of their noble nature. But
Sir, how many were in Room of your profession, that for the public weal,
would put himself in peril like to any of these? that is to say, Coclius,
Curtius, or Mutius Scaeuola. And how if I named Marcius, Regulus, Manlius,
Coriolanus, yea, or Scipio, surnamed Africanus? these were all Scholars, yea
and Senators. But how many showed like Love to Room as they did, and had so
small a guerdon for their good will?

Manlius, A sor^^ recompense for true service.
after long and many years, venturing his life in the quarrel and right of
his Country: When he came unto Room, was thrown over the walls into the
river Tyber, Coriol^nus was banished, and when he (...) Voltians against the
(...) Room: they then fearing their destruction, sent out his Mother, Wife,
and children, with charge not to return, till they with him had gotten truce.
Which once understood of the Voltians, when he returned to his Camp, he ^as of
them trayterouslie slain. M^r^us Regulus after many notable things by him
a^chieued: was cruelly stoned, or pres^ to death by his own Countrymen, whom
he had done so much for. Scipio likewise, spending all his time, in the wars
and defense of his Country: never found any such enemy as Room, which rewarde^
him with banishment. So that he dyed in a Uillage in the Country, accusing
Room to be the enemy, and author of all his evils. A (...)
Hanniball likewise, found Carthage so unkind, that flying in his old age to
Prusius ^or succor, (...): and so rather then to yield to his foes, poisoned
himself. These fellows looued not to pra^^ of Table Philosophy, nor to make
a (...)* sitting in their Ladies lapp^s. For these Loouers never went to
study, what elloquenc^ they should use to please their Loouers: but bluntly
powered it out, that both earth and Skies, resounded the Echo df their envy.

And furthermore, A rare example.
when as Dametria understood, that her son, sent in the defense of his
Country, failed to show his valliancie according as it was in charge to him
committed. How answered she the Messenger? Has not my son (quoth she) wun
fame to his Country? No certainly (quoth he) but utter dishonor by his
cowardnes. Well (quoth she) and what he has lost among his foes, at his
return he shall find amongst his friends: he shall never bring confusion to
his Country, nor sorrow to my so^le: (...) reward, (...) son within a while
came home, and having then proo^^^ valiant indeed^, came, according to the
ancient custom of C^nquer^^s. Which wh^ she saw; she with tears seemed
tenderly to welcome him: But in the dead time of his sleep she murdered him.
And being demanded the cause, she replied thus. Hereby (quoth she) I have
freeed my self and ^ountrey from a cowarde, and given victory to him by death,
that could not attain it by life: meaning, that by his death, his Country
should never come to ruin by his cause.

Here was a strange kind of Love, when the Common wealth was nourished
before nature and the liberty thereof pawned by the price and corpse of her
own Child. But she esteemed not his life so much, as the Love she ought to
her Country: yet was she Learned, and (...) Law of nature, thought her son
woorthye to taste such a torment.

Also Genutius, A most rare constancy in Genutius, who to keep inuiolate the
Roman law, c^used his own Son to be slain^.
when his enemies Camp and his were so nigh, as that the one would (in time of
tru^^) visit ^he other: he commanded upon pain of death, no man for any
cause, the Trumpet of truce once sounded, should encounter his enemy.

Not long after, it hapened a noble youth coming toward the Camp of
Genutius, from the other side, both in signs and words of reproach
challenged Briaro, the son of Genutius: who knowing the danger, yet seeing
the hautie heart of his enemy, answered. Never shall it be said that a
Consulles son of Room, will suffer himself to be so scorned: and turning
himself toward his foe, gave him that, which to crakers and praters is most
due, in so much that he slew him. Whereat the Soldiers reioysyng, thinking
to have had praise of (...): bewrays the whole sum. Which when he heard,
being m^^ued therewith, that his commandment was no more regarded: Go
(quoth he) take him, whippe him at a ^^ake, and after strike of his head. Never
shall the Law of the Romans, be broken by Genutius.

How think you Sir? he was Consul, and he both knew Love, Learning and
Law: yet was Love preferred here before both. Therefore, you now cannot
otherwise, but accoumpte this saying true. Amor vinci^ omnia. For here
generally Love is still Conqueror, and Learning the only Uassaile and Subject
unto Love.


Scholar. You have waded very far, in searching authorityes, but sure
Madame, you are yet wide of the white, your Shaftes are well shot, but they
light very short of the Mark: and therefore Madame, I hold it best you rather
give over with indifferency, then to weary, your self, and loose all in the
end.


Lady. Well said Sir, I am content that I serve you vain (...), to give you
delight by my (...), to try your wit and capacetie: and seeing you are so
plesauntly disposed, have with you for company, but first, I pray you make me
resolution (...) this demand.

Who was the wisest that (...) was, the Learned that ever was, the Loouingst
that ever was, the liberallest that ever was, and the strongest that ever was.
Lo this is all, therefore command your wits into your counting house, and
let me see how finely you can define of this Demand: it is as good for you as
a Doncaster bitte, therefore hemme, and to it with a courage. What? faynte you
all ready? nay soft, you must yet sift a little farther, turn the backside of
your brains once the backside of your brains once more over (...) now man? no
metuas, be not afraid.


Scholar. Tush Madame, these your quippes I (...) delightful as your
disputation, (...) etting that pass: I now apply my self, to the answer of
your demand.

The (...) that ever was sin^^ (...) was S^llomon: for that there was no
Riddle, nor Allegor (...), but by his wisdom he made (...) ^a^e open. But yet
for all his wisdom he fell from God, and was by Loo^e, made thrall to a number
of vices. But why (Madame) stand we here upon? Me thinks you in^er (...)
upon necessity, because you want matter to follow your argument* which if you
do: I shall not only (...) in (...) a Lady, but rejoice that by my means,
your mind shall be altered from Love.


Lady. Forward Sir, you have yet mist the mark, and gone some what down the
wind: but shoot once more. Who was the Learned that ever was?


Scholar. If a man may aim (...) then were the sons of (...), the
learned: for knowing and (...) the secreates and Mysteries of the Heavens,
they found, that the world should be destroyed, either (...) fire or water. And
therefore to leave a memory behind them of such (...) hidden mystery, they
erected (...), the one of earth, and the (...) of brass: in which they
orderly engraued the Science of Astrology and Astronomis, thinking that if the
world were consumed with fire the (...) of Earth should yet be (...), and if
with water, then the other of Brass. So that I deem them the Learned, for
that they were the founders of Learning.


Lady. All this is labor lost, well, what and who was the loouingst that ever
was*


Scholar. The (...) that ever was, I deee^ (...) our Savior Christ: whose
(...) was such toward us poor sinners, that he disdayned not to leave Heaven,
to come and take (...) nature here upon him on earth, (...) so of his mercy he
might make ^^tis^action for our sins, whose (...) otherwise had been ^leane
(...) of salvation. So that I affirm^ his Love toward us, never was, is, or
shall be the like.


Lady. So sir, come no more, a^ that scantling I pray you, for you have hit
the Clowte in the midst (...) again, who was the liberalle^^ that ever was?


Scholar. The liberallest that ever was, was Esau, for he sold both his
inheritance, and also the blessing of God, to his brother for a mess of
Pottage. I never knew a more liberal gift upon so little gain. And as for
the strongest that ever was: I confess that Sampson was he, for that he was
almost invincible, if he had not fallen in his faith.


Lady. Well, and is this your definition: are you content to yield it up so?


Scholar. Yea sure.


Lady. If you do, it is little to your prais^* for that except in one point,
you have failed in all. Yea, and in that too, for that all these virtues
expressed, are resident with one person: and you have proved them contrary,
to be dispersed. But what will you say, if I prove them all in one?


Scholar. I say then (Madame) that you do^ very well.


Lady. Nay: but if I approve i^ true, and like case conclude Love to be
Nurse to Learning. Will you ^o affirm, and cease longer to contend thereof?


Scholar. On that condition I will, I promise you: but if you fail to do it,
how then?


Lady. Then will I give chief prize and praise to Learning.


Scholar. Well then Madame, begin at ^our pleasure.


Lady. The Wisest, Learned, Loouing^^^, Liberallest, and Strongest that ever
was, is Iehoua, the only maker and creator of all things, who by his wisdom
made the world, and in the same has not only planted and placed all kind of
creatures: but also made man, to be the only Lord of all creatures else living.
So that who may compare with his wisdom? or who can comprehend a work of
such wonder?

As touching now the Learned that ever was, I likewise affirm that the
Learning and Lesson, which he first taught our Father Abraham, was so profound,
(...) of so great importance: that all the Divines in the world, could never
define the mystery thereof.

Thirdly, you confess him to be the Loouingst that ever was, and I mus^ needs
allow it. For what greater Love could he show to man: then first to make
him, being nothing but slime, like to his most glorious and divine Image.
Secondly, when man had transgressed, and was by the Law condemned, how
Loouingly sent he, according to his promise, his only son our Savior, to
pay our ransom, and to deliver us from death and damnation. What Love was
ever like to this? and yet this Love was meant to man, before the beginning of
the world.

And now touching his liberallitie, what Prince in the world from the East to
the West, has power to do the like? First, he has given us the world
frankely to live in, and all the creatures therein contained, to be at our
com^^ndement: he feeds us, he clothes us, he prouides us h^rbor, he has
given generally all the world, and all things therein. What can be more wished?
or who ever was so liberal? Lastely, the strongest that ever was, like case he
is: for at his word, both Heaven and the Earth shall fail, the Mountains
fall, yea, and the Seas ^^ell abooue the tops of the same. So that our God is
invincible, and his works not to be wondered at, but praised.

And therefore Sir, now confess your self subdued, for Love here got the
upper hand of Learning: how say you? can you deny this? have I not proved it
both by Philosophy, and also by Divinity


Scholar. (...) I must commend (...), for Love in deed, in this (...) to
L^^rning. For that the: same Love has no end, no^ knew no beg^^ning: And
therefore it must (...) orriginall of Learning.


Lady. Well, I am glad yet that one so simple as I, have confused (...) a
Scholar, I well may (...) this victory. But yet for (...) ^^e that you have
done unto me, in this our long (...)* I will conceal the conquest to my
self, upon condition that you shall count your self conquered. For I would
not ingratefully requite you, in consideration, that the cause of this long
conf^rence was only through my mean: and therefore Sir, take it in good part
I ^ray you, that I seemed so homely with you, for I honor the Learned and
love them as my life.


Scholar. (...)* if ought in me yet (...), has brought liking to your honor:
I am glad you fo^nde me here so luckily: And as for your conquest, of trothe I
must confess you have (...) it: and therefore by deserte, you may best make
boaste thereof. But if hereafter, when opportunity shall permit, it be
(...) to use the like: I rest at your ^^mmaunde in any thing I (...).


Lady. Sir* (...) you, and for that I see (...) ^^^teth, I leave you to your
fo^mer exercise: in hope hereafter you will not inuaye against Love. And thus
good Sir fare you well, when I have the like occasion: I will not make dainty
in (...) of your company.


Scholar. Nor I (Madame) (...) strange, in performing your (...).

(...)


FINIS. A. M.

