THE Excellency of the mystery of Christ Jesus.

Declared in an exposition, or meditation upon the 16. verse of the first
Epistle of Saint Paul unto Timothy.

Ephesians. 3.14. etc. For this cause I bow my knees unto the Father of our Lord
Jesus Christ,

15 (Of whom is named the whole family in Heaven and in earth)

16 That he might grant you according to the riches of his glory, that ye
may be strengthened by his Spirit in the inner man,

17 That Christ may dwell in your hearts by faith, that ye being rooted and
grounded in love,

18 May be able to comprehend with all saints, what is the breadth, and length,
and depth, and height:

19 And to know the love of Christ, which passes knowledge, that ye may be
filled with all fulness of God.

AT LONDON Printed by Thomas Orwin, for Raphe Iackson, and William Young. 1590.

To the two right Honorable sisters, the Lady Margaret, Countess of
Comberland, and the Lady Anne, Countess of Warwick; grace, mercy, and peace,
be multiplied from God the father, and from the Lord Jesus Christ his son.
Sundry reasons moved me (most Honorable Madames) both to publish this
simple treatise, and to dedicate the same unto your Ladyships. First of al, I
wished with Job that my words were written, Job. 11.23.
yea that they were imprinted in a book; not, for that J longed to bring
forth some new discourse into the world (which is pestered with infinite
unnecessary pamphlets and treatises) but, for that I greatly desired to spread
that Doctrine far and nere, wherein only the fountain of Salvation, and the
flower of al sound consolation consists. Secondly, in these days (wherein is
so much disorder and distractions) I deemed it a most necessary thing, eue^ in
open street (as it were) to point again unto that Lamb of God, which takes
away the sins of the World, that the simple may know what to stick unto,
and where to begin the building of the spiritual house of their professing the
word, and serving God aright. Thirdly, howsoever the fixing of such a rude
stock, as this homely discourse is, in the ground of the Lords orchard, is
indeed a work of no such art or cunning, as whereby the learned may be
increased in knowledge, yet may it be a means to stir up some Paul's or
Apolloes, hereupon to ingraft more choice and excellent siens, and hereafter to
set such noble pla^ts of the tree of life, out of which most precious fruits
may spring, to the benefit and comfort of the Church, after that once the Lord
has powered down his blessing on the^. For indeed the Doctrine of the mystery
of Christ Jesus, is such a treasure house of al good things and such a root of
true and eternal happiness, that wheresoever it is taught with wisdom and with
power, and received with reverence and obedience, there glory will assuredly
dwell and remain. Yea there such prosperity shall abou^d in city and country,
that grace and faith shall meet together, righteousness and peace shall kiss
each other, Psa. 85.11.12.
faith shall bud out of the earth, and righteousness shall look down from
heaven.

These were (Madames) the chiefest of those reasons, whereby I was brought at
last, after long withholding this my meditation from the press, to permit and
commit it thereunto, albeit in mine own opinion most unworthy to come under
it, but (in the judgment of certain special friends of mine, unto who^ a
sight thereof has bin imparted) convenient, yea almost necessary to be
published.

Now as concerning the causes which made me be so bold, as to dedicate this
simple treatise unto your Ladyships, they neither are in number fewer, than
those which induce me to let it come abroad, nor less weighty in importance.
First, for as much as the Lord has cast upon you all kinds of Honor in a
manner, so that you seem to stand amidst the multitude of innumerable
Christians, or members of the Church among us, as Paragons preferred in degree
above the rest, and Countesses of excellent and high account; me thinks, if
any have gathered an heap of sweet and pleasant flowers out of the Scripture,
for the use or comfort of the professors of the gospel, that such a garland is
first to be proffered unto your right honorable heads, and must needs best fit,
and most seemly become your noble temples.

Again, seeing the favor which you have vouchsafed to bear and express
toward me has been special, J thought it my duty to repay some token of
thankefulnes, first and especially unto your Ladyships: of whom what
remembrance J have, and toward whom what reverence J bear. Finally, unto whom
how great prosperity J wish, J know not by what means better to declare or
testify, than by dedicating a treatise unto you, to give you occasion, both to
know Christ Jesus more fully, and to grow in him more firmly. Last of all,
whereas, albeit your estates are full of the riches of Gods mercy, yet they
are not so free from all adversity, but that the Lord of late has exercised
you with such losses and crosses, as the Prophets speak of, when they mention
the tender mother bewailing her first borne, Zac. 12.10
and the loving yoke-fellowe girding her self with sackcloth for the husband
of her youth: Joel. 1.8.
it may be that in the mystery of Christ Jesus, through the blessing of the
Lord, you shall find some cordial powder, which shall drive away your
doleful pensiveness in some part: yea if you search it thoroughly, and make
it your own, it will undoubtedly give you an Ornament in place of ashes, Esa.
61.3, 4
an oynteme^t of joy in steed of mourning, a Garment of praise in lievv of a
broken spirit, that ye may be called the oaks of righteousness; that as the
plants of Iehoua ye may glory; that ye may build the ancient vvast places,
that ye may restore the old deserts; that ye may renew the desolate cities,
the deserts of many generations.

Accept then (Christian Madames) from thankful heart, and reuerens hand, this
little book concerning the excellency of Christ Jesus, presented unto your
Ladyships, (not for that J aim at any preferment, or such by-markes as it
(...)) but only for the causes before alleged. Vouchsafe to protect it with
your favor, to pardon the defects and faults therein escaped: to conclude, to
profit by thee mystery there in described. Being now assured you will do
above that which is requested, J most humbly commend your Ladyships to the
tuition and heavenly blessing of that good God, who has so loved man in his
Son Christ Jesus, as to prepare for him, those things which neither eye has
seen, nor ear has heard, nor (...) conceived: (...) be all 1. Cor. 2.9.
(...)

(...) P.M.

The excellency of the mystery of Christ Jesus.
1. Tim. 3. Chap. 16. ver. And that mystery of godliness is great by one
assent, God has been manifested in the flesh, justified in the spirit, seen
by the Angels, preach^^ (...) among the nations, bele^^^^ in the world, and
received up in glory.
THe drift of the Apostle Paul in this most precious sentence, is to move
Timothy to behave himself very religiously and reverently in the church of
God, as may appear both in the beginning of the verse, immediately before set
down in this chapter, and in the latter end of the sixth verse of the next
Chapter. One argument to this intent and purpose, has bin already brought by
him in the last words of the former sentence; whereof this is the effect:
seeing the house or Church of God, whereof thou art a Minister, is not a
sinagogue of error, or a temple of types and figures, but a proper pillar of
truth: thou art as a pa^^^^^ of the Christian flock, to walk very orderly,
religiously and holylie, in all respects. Another reason tending unto the self
same end, is contained in this conclusion of the Chapter, whereof this is the
sum: forasmuch as the Gospel is a most excellent mystery, it behooves
thee, a steward of such secrets, to show all wisdom and faithfulness in the
course of thy conversation, and in the execution of thy ministry.

Now the excellency of the Gospel is partly affirmed, and (as it were)
enlarged by degrees, in the six first words of this verse, being these, And,
that, mysteries, of godliness, is great, without doubt: partly proved and
confirmed by six several reasons in the latter end of the sentence, which
reasons are these; God has been manifested in the flesh; justified in the
spirit, seen by the Angels; preached among the nations; believed in the world;
and received up in glory.

The first note here declaring the excellency of Christian Religion, is the
particle or word, And: the which not only (as a knot) binds the former
sentence or reason, and this together: but as an exposition of the last word
thereof, which was [trueth] declares, that the maine verity, which the house
of God, or the Christian Church, chiefelie and continually vpholdeth; is the
mystery of godliness, or faith in Christ Jesus. It was very needful for Paul
to expound himself after this manner, and to insinuate this matter unto
Timothy, and in him to all the faithful Ministers and believers of the
Gospel. For else, they taking through error their marks amisle, and thinking
the holding of any truth, a sufficient proof or note of this true Church,
might conclude the Jewish sinagogue or some such like assembly, to be the
house of GOD; because therein some truth is kept and found: or again, they
running into another extremity, might rashly condemn some believing and
christian churches, (as the Church at Corinth) because cause even they
sometimes err or dissent about some points of truth, which yet are of less
importance.

To the end therefore that all the faithful may in all times and places, and
among all persons, know which is the Lords holy camp, resort thereto, and
remain therein; the Apostle shows here, that it may always be discerned by
this banner or ensign of the Mystery of the Gospel. Those congregations then
are undoubtedly the true Churches of God, which firmly hold the articles of
faith, and soundly acknowledge Christ Jesus to be the Son of God, and the
only foundation of salvation: howsoever otherwise peradventure they be far
from spotles perfection. Revel. 1.2, 3. c.
Had not the Churches of Asia much dross, and many cracks? Did not the Church
of Ephesus, somewhat cool and quench the burning lamp of her former love? Were
there not sundry members of the church at Sardis, which had names of life on
them, but wounds of death in them? How came it to pass that in the Christian
assembly at Pergamus, there were such as held the doctrine of Balaam, if that
the eye thereof did not wink, or was not fast a sleep? And where was the rod
or shepherds crook of the pastor of the Congregation at Thyatyra: when
Iezabel was suffered to deceive the servants of the Lord? How lukewarm were
even the best waters in all Laodicea, when our Savior cried out thus against
the fountain of them, would to God thou were either hot or cold? These
faults were found in all these Churches: yea in the messengers sent unto them,
and therefore in the members of them. And yet what are these Churches in his
account, who walked in the midst of them, but golden candlesticks? What names
does the give to the messengers of these congregations, but Stars: so called
by him in regard of their places, and the shining of those graces, which were
somewhat dimmed, but not quite quenched? Finally what promises makes he, or
what speeches uses he to the members of those believing assemblies? but that
(upon condition, that they repented and continued in well doing) they should
eat of the tree of life, feed on the hidden manna, rule over the Nations, and
stand as pillars in the Temple of GOD for ever?

He does not advise them to forsake their mutual fellowship, he does not
deny them to be members of his body, because they did not rent themselves
from the bodies of their Congregations so diseased and infected, he wills
them not to disclaim the eyes which directed them no better, he affirms not,
that their teachers are none of his Ministers, their Sacraments no Sacraments
unto him, because his order was not observed or executed, and because certain
Balaams and Iezabels were mingled in the assembly with his servants. Yea on the
contrary side; notwithstanding all these wants, neglects, disorders, offenses
and blemishes whatsoever, he allows and accepts the good things which were
in any professors, and calls these assemblies golden candlesticks (as before
has been showed) concluding that whosoever has an ear, is to hear what the
spirit speaks unto the Churches, so that look what judgment our savior
Christ Jesus gave touching the Churches of Asia, the same are all Christians to
have of the Churches of Europe, not one of which is without some spot or
wrinckle. Wherefore let every one take heed how he leaves our assemblies and
Christian congregations in this (...) ^ast going about to be more (...) than
the rule, more bright than the sun, more right handed than the right hand it
self, to conclude, more perfect (...) the word of God: whilst he ^^^^^efull
and endeuoreth to avoid one extremetie, through ignorance or blind zeal he
run into another.

Now if those reuolters (which so wander on the right hand, as that they
condemn our Christian Congregations which receive and acknowledge the great
mystery of Christ Jesus here spoken of) cannot be excused, neither are to be
justified in regard of their error, or rash separation: notwithstanding that
they neither deny any of the Articles of faith, nor fall down before stocks
or stones? what is to be said of those recusants on the contrary side, and as
it (...) ^he left hand which art such (...) to Christ Jesus, that Antichrist is
unto them all in all, and that they embrace the mys^^^^^ of all iniquity and
blasphem^^ even the abominable and execrable heresy of popery?

These Enemies of the grace of GOD, affirm and vaunt that the Church of Rome
is the house of God, and the pillar of truth, whereas rather it is indeed a
den of thieves, and a sea of al impiety and devilish apostacy or
backsliding from the faith. But as for the church of England, it pleases them
not, and therefore they either come not at all to our assemblies (because
indeed they have sworn obedience to the sinagogue of Antichrist) or if any
resort now and the^ unto our church, it is for that the Machiuell in their
head, has for the time gotten the upper hand of the Pope in their belly. They
say they believe in Christ, yea and in the holy Trinity: but seeing they lay
another foundation of salvation, besides the son of God, to wit, the
abominable idol of the mass, they cannot be the true worshippers of GOD, yea
they must needs be most vile idolaters. They talk much of good works, but
seeing thereby they profess to be saved, as for the same deserving the favor
of God, and eternal life; the very Publicans and sinners, repenting and
confessing their sins, shall be taken up into heaven, when they with all their
merits shall be cast into hell. They worship a paltrie pope, and fall down
daily before graven images and idols; in the mean season they make no
conscience to rise up in arms against Christian Princes, and to hatch the
eggs of Asps against Gods people. They call themselves Catholics, as if
forsooth they were of the company of true believers, or the right worshippers
of God, but in truth they are a generation of vipers, which from time to time
have persecuted, tormented, and put to death the servants of God, and daily
thirst after, and long to suck their blood. It is no marvel then if the
fruits of Antichrist, hate the assemblies of Christ Jesus or refuse to join
with us in the word and the Sacraments, but rather it is to be wondered at,
that the worshippers of the true God, detest not with a perfect hatred, such
malicious idolaters as those Papists are, which wish for a day, who have
attempted so many treasons, and bear a false heart against their native
country, besides a bloody rage against the Religion.

Now as there are such recusants, as (utterly refusing to come to the
assemblies, wherein the mystery of godliness is acknowledged and believed) do
dangerously keep out the Arc and house of God, marked with the blood of the
Lamb Christ Jesus; so there are a great number of profane professors, who
imagine themselves to be in the bosom of the Church, when they are indeed in
the very bottom of the wrath of God, and who very seldom and sparingly
resorting unto the preaching of the word and the Sacraments amongst us, make as
it were an open profession of ungodliness and impiety.

Whose heart would not rue to think upon, or behold this kind of people, in
whom reigns an intolerable neglect and contempt of holy things? These on the
Sabbath in the forenoone, peradventure will be at Church, but in the afternoon
at the alehouse. Once in a tweluemonth (as at Easter) they will come to the
Communion, but after the receiving of it, it is their custom to run into all
excess of riot, gadding and madding after their pleasures and vanities. They
acknowledge Baptism to be a Sacrament, and bring their Children to Church to
be Baptized, but when the Minister comes to administer it to any infant,
they depart from the assembly, no more accounting of this sacred seal of the
new covenant, than as of some common or profane washing. They will not refuse
to pray some times, but they will continually swear and blaspheme. They deny
not altogether to hear Sermons or preaching of the word, but they like better
of gaming, dising, carding, dancing, fensing, drincking, and feasting than of
that. They do not condemn the Gospel, nor the exercises of Religion, as
reading the Word, singing, prayer or such like. But their only life is to be
occupied rather, in gossiping, in prating, and resorting unto plays and places
of all disorder. Yet those are in their own eyes, and also in common account
of the most, the only or best professors of the word, whose ways yet are so
impious, and whose prophanenes so apparent. But let them take heed, Heb. 10.24.
(so to conclude this point) how they tread the son of GOD under foot, and
do account the blood of the covenant common, whereby they are sanctified, or
be injurious to the spirit of grace: for we know him that has said,
Venegeance is mine, and I will repaie it says the Lord.

The second word here to be considered is the Article, That, showing in this
place, that the mystery spoken of, has in it some special dignity, John.
1.29.
and excellency. John the Baptist pointing to our Savior, used the same
word, or Article to the same effect, when he said. Behold^ That Lamb; the
same Evangelist John also, going about to put a difference between the
Messiah, and other, John. 1.8.
calls Christ that light. As therefore the sun coming forth like a
bridegroom out of his chamber shines more clearly than all the Stars in the
firmament beside: so even among the other doctrines of the Scripture, this
excels, wherein the glory of the Heavenly Bridegroom Christ Jesus is
presented unto our view. Furthermore as a pearl far surpasses pibble stones:
so this truth all the precepts of philosophers, all the sciences and arts set
down in books, and studied by men. Seeing then this mystery is so peerles a
pearl, what wise christian merchant is there, who would not sell his
pleasures, profits, yea life and all to buie it? Again who is there so
deprived of understanding, who once having gotten some sight of it, or right in
it, would sell such a jewel for sin, for honor, for gain, or for the whole
world? The counsel then of Solomon touching this matter is always to be
remembered by every Christian, Pro. 23.23.
Buie the truth, but sell it not, even wisdom, instruction, and
understanding. Now the truth and wisdom, which the wise King means, is that
mystery here spoken of, which Philosophy seeks, but divinity finds, and
godliness possesses.

Again, hereupon it follows, that there is a certain dignity and
pre-eminence of the dispensers of the mysteries of the Gospel, even above the
ministers of the law, inasmuch as the mystery of Christianity, has in it
such a special excellency, and prerogative. For as our Apostle reasons
elsewhere, 2. Cor. 3.9.
if the ministry of co^demnatio^ were glorious: much more does the ministry
of righteousness, exceed in glory. Our Savior also affirms in the Gospel,
Luc. 7.28.
not only that John was more then a Prophet, but that he which is least in the
Kingdom of Heaven is greater than he. For even as a piece of an oken board,
albeit little worth as of it self, yet when it has in the p^^^ure of the
Prince most flourishingly and lively painted, is more worth, and more to be
esteemed for that cause; than a board of Cedar, which wants the same image,
or has it but darkely and rudely purtrayed and drawn out: so the ministry of
the Gospel; representing our Heavenly Sovereign Christ Jesus most plainly
and clearly, is therefore to be preferred, and in deed more honorable, than
the Ministry of the Law.

Wherefore their condemnation sleeps not, who in these days are so far of
from esteeming or reuerencing the messengers of the word, that they reject them
as the doung and ofscouring of the earth. For if a mortal Prince cannot abide,
that his Ambassadors should be despised or abused: much more will the Lord
revenge the contempt, w^^ch is showed against those, whom he sends on his
message, yea on this glorious and most famous embassage of the gospel. For he
has said in his word, Touch not mine anointed, and do my Prophets no harm.
Zach. 2.8.
He that touches you, touches the apple of mine eye. He that despises you,
despises me.

The third point in this commendation of the Gospel by us to be observed, is,
that it is a (mystery). The which word in the Greek tongue does signify a
secret or an hidden matter: it is also usually applied, to note out those
precepts and things, which are sacred, and chiefelie to be regarded. But
albeit the Gospel is here termed a mystery: yet the apostles meaning is not,
that it is such a secret, as ought not to be communicated to the common
multitude. For the Lord enioining his Disciples to teach all Nations, and to
preach the Gospel unto every creature, Mar. 16.15
whether Male or Female, learned or unlearned, young or old, in them wills
and warranteth all his Ministers, to impart this Doctrine to all sorts of
people.

Neither is the Doctrine of the new Testament in any such sort here termed a
mystery, as if it were after a more dark manner set down and delivered unto
us, than the book of the Law, or the old covenant. For in former ages (says
this our Apostle elsewhere) this secret was not so manifested unto the sons
of me^, Ephe. 3.5.
as now it has been revealed to the saints and Prophets by the spirit. For as
one says very well, the old Testament is the new enclosed in obscurity, and
the new is the old unfolded in the light.

These two covenants differ in circumstance and manner, but they are the same,
and agree in substance and effect. But first the power of the Gospel is a
mystery to all the reprobate, whose eyes the GOD of this World has so
blinded, that they cannot see the truth unto Salvation, neither do they
soundly and continually feel, that they are in Gods fouour: yea because
Christ Jesus the root of mortification, and sanctification is not planted in
them, they are unable and unfit to every good work.

Secondly, Tit. 1.16.
the very matter of the Gospel it self is mystical and secret: the
beginnings or first principles whereof, as the natural man by any light within
him, 1. Cor. 2.14
or sight of the creatures without him cannot perceive: so neither can the
spiritual man (although taught by the word, and lightened by grace) reach or
sound the full deapth or bottom. For howsoever every true Christian borne
again by the spirit, always sees so much of this mystery, as is sufficient
for his salvation: yet none has attained, or can come to the perfect
understanding thereof. There is in deed no skill or trade, although never so
hard, or full of curious points, which some persons of pregnant wits, or very
quick conceits, are not able soon to learn, or at least by much labor and
endeavor so to attain, that at last they come to the perfection thereof, and
excel therein. But as concerning the saving and bottomless knowledge of
Christ Jesus, (which is in deed the only art or piece of cunning in the
world,) it so far passes the reach, not only of men, but of Angels, that no
creature is able fully to conceive it, neither does any comprehend it. If any
mortal wight ever saw the depth of this secret, was it any other beside this
our Paul, who being taken up into the third Heavens, heard words, which cannot
be uttered, and contrary to his custom magnifieth his knowledge in this
mystery? No other out of doubt, than the beholder of Paradise, the
schoolefellowe of the Angels, the Preacher of the Gentiles: finally, he who
wished himself accursed for his countriemen the Jews. Nevertheless even this
great Apostle affirms of himself, 1. Co. 13.11
that he knows but in part; and of us, that we see but as in a glass
darkly. As for the heavenly Angels, why does the Apostle Peeter say, 1. Pet.
1.22
that even they desire thoroughly to view the mystery here spoken of, if they
understand it perfectly and exactly?

And now then, seeing this secret is hidden from the reprobate, seeing as it is
the power of God unto salvation to the elect, so even to them it is as a
treasure hid (in a great part) in the ground; seeing the Angels pry into the
riches of Gods wisdom herein with great delight: concerns it not every
Christian, to exercise himself very diligently in the knowledge, feeling and
practice of this mystery? Certainly whosoever shall not know God, as he is
made known in Jesus Christ, as aliens or strangers from the common wealth of
Israel, shall at the day of judgment feel the fire of vengeance fall upon them.
2. The 1.8.
Again, whosoever having known this truth in some measure, shall carelessly,
contemptuously, willingly, wholly finally fall from all knowledge, feeling,
working and practice of it, Heb. 6.4.
can no more be renewed to repentance by any good means tending thereunto,
than any fruit which has fallen from the tree can so be set on the bough
again, as that it shall grow thereon, or tha^ a dead man can be recovered to
life by Physic, or an earthen vessel broken to pieces or to powder, be
joined together firmly by the potters skill. For, when the whole lamp of
good works shall quite be quenched, when all the drops of faith shall be
cast or spurted out, when shipwreck shall be made of the maine stock of Gods
gracious spirit, when the nourishing food of the word shall be loathed and
rejected, when the strength of hope, concerning a blessed estate at the
resurrection, shall utterly be consumed; what repentance can there be: the life
whereof is faith; the strength whereof is hope, the food whereof is the word,
the fountain whereof is the spirit, the fruits whereof are good works?

Nay, in that these profane backsliders, willingly push from them all
godliness and the Gospel, what do they herein, but crucify the son of God,
unto themselves, as if he were a vile person, or an cuill dooer, piercing him
through, albeit not with nails, yet with most grievous and innumerable sins:
yea making a gazing or mocking stock of him, albeit not by putting vinegar to
his nostrels, or thrusting his heart through with a spear, yet by vexing his
spirit, and not esteeming or trusting in his blood, as if it had no price or
virtue in it, but were like unto the blood of beasts or of mortal men.

This is the fearful estate of backsliders from the Gospel, not of those, in
whom many good things are, yea or one spark of faith or obedience to Gods
laws, is found and abiding. So wretched is the condition of those, who only
have the branches of the spirit, not of those, who have in them the root of
this mystery, Christ Jesus. For as concerning the right Christians, they are
not lamps quickly quenched for want of oil, but lights always shining in
good works; Phil. 2.15.
they are not like cooks or tasters, which let not their meats or drinks go
down, but such which keep faith in a good conscience, so that it turns into
their spiritual nourishment: 1. Tim. 3.9
they are not partners of the holy spirit for a year or two; nor bankrupt
Merchants, which break upon a sudden; but such as abound daily more and more,
1. Cor. 1.5. 1. Tim. 6.18
and wax wealthy in spiritual gifts: they are not day laborers or hired
servants which for a short time only sit under the Lords roof, or eat at his
table; but as Children of adoption, they feed daily on the word, and remain
in the house of God for ever: Psalm 23.5.6.
they are not such diseased or bedred persons, who faint with weakness, and die
for want of breath: but being strengthened by hope in the inner man, Ephe. 3.16.
they more than con quer like valiant Captains, getting the victory over
sin, satan, and all temptations. Romans 8 37.
Now this happy estate they attain unto by the seeing of the height, depth,
length, breadth, and that knowledge of the love of Christ, which surpasses all
knowledge. Ephe. 3.18.


Wherefore, I am. 1.25.
whosoever shall look into this glass of the Gospel, so reverently, earnestly
and continually, that he shall be transformed into the image of Christ, 2.
Cor. 3 18
from glory to glory, as by the spirit of the Lord: he shall be by so much
far of from the misery of reuolters, by how much he profits in this
mystery, 2. Pet. 1.8.
and by so much nearer unto heavenly happiness, by how much more carefully and
happily, he walks in this way leading thereunto. Wherefore also every one
ought to be, Heb. 5.11.12, 13, 14. 15.
not a rude or young schollet, but well learned in this secret, not a child or
babe, but a strong and old man in the mystery of Christ, both as concerning
the knowledge, feeling and practice thereof.

In the fourth place it is to be observed, that Christian Religion is not only
here called a secret, but a mystery of godliness, or of the right worship of
God. The Ministry of the leuiticall Priesthood, and the whole service of God
used by the Jewish people, was a pattern of godliness. For first, there was
among the Israelites and over them, an high Priest, Exodus 29.7.
consecrated with sundry solemn ceremonies, as namely, anointing of him with
oil, Leuit. 8.23
putting the blood of the Sacrifice on the lap of his right ear, and upon the
thumb of his right hand, and upon the great toe of his right foot, to
conclude, clothing him with most precious and glorious garments. Exodus 29.^.
Now his office was, Heb 9.7.
once a year to enter into the most holy place, and to offer up gifts and
sacrifice unto the Lord, Heb. 8.3. Leuit. 24.3 1. Sa. 2.28.
as also to dress the lamps, and to set them before the Lord, and to burn
incense before him, and to wear before him an Ephod.

Secondly, there were inferior Priests of the sons of Aaron also, whose
service was, Number. 4.16
to teach, to pray, to sacrifice continually, to offer incense, to preserve the
oil, Mat. 2.7.
to look unto the holy vessels, and to do other such works. Thirdly, the
rest of the Levites, which descended not from Aaron, but from Greshom and
Merari, 1. Cron. 1.13
were appointed to sundry offices: some to play upon instruments of music in
the temple, some to sing, Romans 2.17.11.27.
some to keep the doors, some to other services. Last of all the Jewish
people being all, first circumcised, brought their beasts to sacrifice, and
their other gifts to offer, received the Passcouer, and walked in those
ordinances and statutes, which the Lord had prescribed unto them.

All these were worshippers not of idols but of the true God, Luke 1.6.
following and performing in their services, not the inventions of men, but the
prescript and ordinances of the living Lord. Wherefore this policy of the
Jews, (I say) was a pattern of godliness; but the substance of it is only to
be found in the gospel, and in the Christian Church. For first of all, over
the Christian assembly of the faithful, Heb 7.26.
there is not a sinful, but an holy and perfect high Priest, who having been
anointed with the oil of gladness above his fellows, Luke 24 39
and consecrated by afflictions and blood in his hands and feet, has not
only offered prayers and tears to God, Heb 5.7.
but sacrificed his own soul and body: which having rightly done in all
respects, now he makes intercesio^ in such sort to his father, Romans 8.34.
that he cannot but grant to every one of the faithful, whatsoever is
needful for him. Moreover al Christians by him are made (as it were) princely
priests unto the Lord, 2. Pet. 2.5.
levites to laud him, and Jews in the spirit to worship him, Ephe. 5.19.
so that every belecuer practices godliness in a mystery, Romans 2.29.
and performs the right service of God in an excellent manner. Romans 12.1.
Does not the Christian, of what calling soever, as a Priest spiritual, not
only offer up his heart, but his whole body, as an holy, lively and
acceptable sacrifice to God? Approaches he not by faith unto the throne of
grace? Does not he pray for himself and others with groans, which cannot be
expressed? Romans 8.26
Does he not take heed, 1. These. 5.19
that he quench not the Spirit? Sings he not Psalms and hymns with
spiritual songs in his heart unto the Lord? Col. 3.16.
Labors he not to keep the doors of his lips from corrupt speech? Psalm.
141.3.
Is not he circumcised inwardly, or does not the Spirit write the laws of
GOD in his heart? 2. Cor. 3.3.
Certainly let Christ Jesus once dwell in the heart of any by faith, and he
will forthwith make that man to walk in performing sincerely (though not
perfectly) euevey one of the commandments of the Law. Romans 8.10 Jam. 2.11.12.
For first of all, the Christian cannot but know the father, Joh. 14.9.
whose son dwells in him: neither can he but trust in his Savior, who shed
his blood for him. As for the holy spirit, Rom 8.32. Psalm. 16.7. and 116.1.
which has bestowed the riches of his grace on him, he must of necessity both
love and reverence his Majesty, and so consequently acknowledge, fear, love,
Iam. 4.12
and trust in one true GOD in three persons. Now seeing the Christian has but
one Master, Prophet or lawgiuer, he will not for all the goods in the world
once bow the knee to Antichrist, neither will he receive any inventions or
traditions of man, 2. Cor. 6.11
which apparantlie are contrary to the doctrine of Christ Jesus.

Moreover, seeing that prince governs him, whose kingdom can not be shaken,
Heb. 12.2^
he has a power of serving God with shamefastnes, and warines, whereby it
comes to pass, that he banisheth oaths and blasphemies out of his mouth,
neither takes he the grace of God in vain: but when he uses the Sacraments,
beholds the creatures, or hears the word, 1. Th. 2.13.
suffers all these as wholesome medicines to have in him due operations.
Again, in as much as his heavenly captain has brought him into the Lords
rest, he is so far off from profaning the Sabbath day, by absenting himself
from the public exercises of religion, or by working, or loytering, Heb. 4.8,
9, 10.
that every day is to him as a sanctified Sabbath, inwardly exercising himself
from time to time, in praying and practicing the will of God, laboring not to
walk in his own way, Esaias. 58.13
nor to speak a vain word. To conclude, he makes conscience of despising any
superiors whosoever, Col. 3.18. etc.
of not governing his inferiors aright, of being angry, quarrelling, Mat 5.22
etc.
and fighting, of being intemperate, or unchaste in gestures, speeches, diet and
apparel; of covetousness, sloth, unthriftiness and deceit, of slaundeting,
lying, teuiling, taunting, yea even of desiring, wishing, or thinking evil;
because not only a virtue of mortification, Col. 3.1, 2, 3, 4, 5.
but a power and strength of sanctification, preserves and guides his soul
and body. And is not this then the best and the chiefest godliness in deed, yea
is not this the only right and excellent manner of serving of God? Romans 12.1


Now hereby it appears that popery is but a counterfaite of piety, and not
so much as ^ pattern thereof, as was the Jewish policy or order of serving
God. That heresy (as the foolish woman spoken of in the Proverbs) is very
full of words and motions, Pro. 9.13.
with questions about the true worship of GOD, which it knows not. Oh how
zealous are the massemo^gers about their unbloody sacrifice, which has cost so
much blood? They acknowledge a sacrifice; it is well: and sacrificing priests,
such are al Christians: and an altar, it is true, we have a sacred sanctuary
Christ Jesus. But the bread forsooth must be turned into the body of Christ,
and his body must be offered up again, a shaueling must be the sacrificer,
such a one, who (as if he were a worker of feats) can turn about in a circle,
and occupy his fingers about making crosses, cast his arms all abroad, lift
them up and pull them down again, mumble unto himself, and by and by speak
unto others with a loud voice; whisper a while to the bread, and the^ break
out into a shrill note or song

But to let such popish and apish toys pass, true godliness consists not (as
has been showed) either in humane traditions, or will worship, or in bodily
exercises, 1. Tim. 4.^
as abstaining from meats, drinks, sleep, or such humbling of the body, (as
it is separated from the mortifying of the soul,) 2. Tim. 3.5
nor in a bare profession of the truth, but in faith in Jesus Christ, and
obedience to his laws, both inwardly and outwardly performed.

The fifth point to be considered by us in this commendation of the Gospel is,
that the mystery of godliness is great, excellent, or notable. It is first of
all very great in fame, and renown, according as the Prophet shows; when
going about to entreat of the mystery of the incarnation, the sufferings and
the glorifying of the son of God, he cries out twice in one Psalm. O Lord
how excellent is thy name throughout the world! Psalm. 8. 1. Cor. 1.24
But again, the Gospel is as great in fruit, as it is in fame, in regard
whereof it is truly called the Power of God unto salvation, the wisdom of
God, Romans 16. Ioh. 6.68.
finally, the word of life. For this is eternal life to know the true God,
and him, whom he has sent Jesus Chrst. The magnificence of this mystery
furthermore appears; in the figures and types of the Law, as the tabernacle,
the temple, the red sea, the cloud, the manna, and the redemption of Israel
out of Aegipt. For if the figures were so excellent, what is the body? If such
glorious things are spoken in the scripture of the types, what may be thought
of the truth it self? To be brief, the spouse in the divine book of the
song of songs, playing (if I may so speak) the very blab, and blazing to al
men the secrets of her love, The Song of Songs. 5.10, 11.
telling that Christ Jesus is white and ruddie, the chief among ten thousand,
that his head is as fine gold, his locks curled and black as a Raven;
declared plainly, and sufficiently witnesses, that this mystery concerning
Christ and his Church, is great indeed. It is, as has been showed, very great
in fame (for the sound of it has gone throughout the world) great also in
fruit, To. 16.18.
(For it makes wise unto salvation) moreover great in quality (for hereof the
types of the law are even but shadows): 1. Tim. 3.15
but last of all it is furthermore so great in quantity, Col. 2.17.
that the most skillful Geometrician in the World, is not able to take the
measure of it by any means, for that is altogether infinite. Ephe. 3 8.


The Prophet speaking of this matter in the Psalm and directing his speech
unto the Lord, says thus. Thy mercy O Lord reaches unto the heavens, Psalm.
3.6.
and thy truth unto the clouds, thy righteousness is like unto the mountains,
thy judgments are like a great deep, O Lord thou sauest both man and beast.
In deed our Apostle Paul writing to the Fphesians, affirms, that he prayed
for them unto the Lord, that they might be able to comprehend with all the
saints, that height, length, breadth and depth, which reaches to the heavens,
to the seas, to the ends of the earth, and the furthest parts of the World.
But he means not in this his supplication, to show, that any is able to
attain unto the perfection of this knowledge, which passes all knowledge, but
only he wishes, that the Ephesians may have an ability or gift from above,
to see these measures in an acceptable measure for their comfort and the
fortifying of their faith. For speaking of himself in his epistle to the
Philippians (who saw no doubt into this mystery, as far as any mortal man)
he professes that he had not yet attained this knowledge, neither was
perfited, Phil 3.12.
but that he did follow after the same to apprehend it. The wise Agur also
entreating of this matter, not only confesses that he had not learned this
wisdom, or knowledge of holy things: but demands the question, Who has
ascended into Heaven, Pro 30.1.2 etc.
and descended thence? Who can gather the wind in his fist? Who can bind the
Waters in his garment? Who can establish the borders of the earth? What is the
name of such a one? and what is his sons name?

In the which words (as it seems) that great clarke or Prophet intends to
show, not only that none knows the father, but the son, and he to whom the
son will reveal him, but that none perfectly knows either of the^ both,
as may appear in that he says, there is not any, which can measure or rule
these great creatures or elements, namely the earth, the waters, and the air,
and in that he asks what the name of the Father and of the Son is?

Seeing now the mystery of the gospel is so great, yea in alrespects so
excellent, it behooves the dispe^sers thereof, with great care and conscience to
execute that holy ministry, whereunto they are set apart. For how else shall
they be able to answer in any respect unto that honorable function whereunto
they are called? Yea how can they but stain and pollute the peerlesse pearl
committed to their trust, to keep and carry? It behooves them therefore,
first of all, as wise builders, 1. Cor. 3.10
chiefelie and especially to lay the foundation Christ Jesus, and to declare
unto their people the articles of faith, which are the maine and principal
pillars (as it were) of the spiritual building. Secondly, as the foundation is
noble, so upon the same, not the wood, hay, or straw of Rhetorical,
Philosophical, or human skill or eloquence, but the gold, silver and
precious stones, of a simple, grave, and spiritual manner of teaching, is to be
laid. Thirdly, the affection and judgment of the interpreter of the word ought
always so to be sanctified and upright, as that, in as much as he deals
with the Lords oracles, he mangle not, nor wryth or wrest the Scripture, 1.
Tim. 2.15.
but cut it aright, as the priests, under the law, did the things, which were
offered and sacrificed. To conclude, seeing an evil end does make the best
actions, that may be, abominable, if the Gospel be taught of envy, of vain
glory, of flattery, Phil. 1.15.
or misapplied by such sinister intents or purposes, then it is not handled
according to the nature or dignity of so heavenly a doctrine, but abused and
polluted by man's corruption.

Likewise as the teachers of the Gospel ought by so much the more faithfully
and watchfully deal in the Lords oracles, by how much the mystery of
Christian Religion excels the policy of the Jews: so the hearers of the
doctrine of christ Jesus ought by so much the more attentively hearken unto,
Heb. 2.1.
and reverently receive the message of their Ministers, by how much greater
grace is offered unto them now, than was in old time to the Israelites. For if
every transgression and breach of the Law, received a just recompense of
reward, how shall they then escape, if they neglect so great salvation, as is
offered in the Gospel? They are therefore to know, that they are not to hear
such as teach any false Christ's, or deny the foundation of Christian Religion,
either expressly or by consequence. For they are not so much as to go out
unto them, they are not to bid them God speed, not to receive them to house, 2
Ioh. 1.10.
neither yet to think them otherwise than accursed. Gal. 8
Secondly, they are to hear all those, who truly teach Christ Jesus
crucified, without preferring of persons for outward respects, or holding on
Paul, Cephas, or Apollos. But especially they are to hear, 1. Cor. 3.12
reverence, and ordinarily to resort unto, those ordinary sufficient
preachers, which the Lord in his providence has placed over them. Obey (says
the Apostle to the Hebrews) your guides, Heb. 13.7.
and submit your selves unto them: for they watch for your souls, that they
may do this with joy, and not with sorrow, for that is unprofitable for you.

But how do they obey their ordinary watchful teachers, who do not so much
as use to hear them scant once in a month, nay in a twelve month? We beseech
you brethren (says Paul to the Thessalonians) acknowledge those who
trauellamong you, 1. These. 5.12.
and rule over you in the Lord, and admonish you, and esteem them more than
most exceedingly, as dear unto you, for their work sake. Let therefore all so
account of their ordinary teachers, as Paul advised the Thessalonians to
esteem those Pastors or Preachers which labored among them and as the
Philippians stood affected toward Epaphroditus their peculiar shepherd, whom
the Apostle made have to send back unto them, that they at the very sight of
him might rejoice. For what? Is the Minister bound, trow we, Phil. 2.28.
and commanded by God, ordinarily to teach, and to expound the word and is the
hearer privileged from resorting unto his sermons diligently, Heb. 10.25
and joining with him in public prayers? Shall the blood of the flock be
required at the shepherds hands, if he be dumb, or slothful: and hangs
there no woe over the head of the sheep, Ezech. 33.9
if they stray out of the fold, or refuse to hear the voice of their
shepherd? Does the loving Wife prefer her Husband in love before all other,
how beautiful soever? Does the soldier wait upon his Captain, although
other in the host be stronger than he? Does the servant attend on his Master,
albeit others are more honorable? Finally, does the Child keep in, and like
best of his fathers house, notwithstanding, that there be many, which keep
better tables? And will not Christians, like best of their ordinary teachers,
and cleave unto their peculiar and allotted Ministers, albeit they perceive in
them some wants or infirmities, or see greater graces or gifts shine in the
candles or stars of other Churches.

But moreover, it is not sufficient for a professor of the Gospel to hear
usually his true and faithful shepherd, and to proceed no further: but he
must take heed also, what he hears, as our Savior exhorts. Col. 3.16
Yea and after what manner he hears both him and other, he must hear the
Word, not foolishlie, but wisely, applying every good Doctrine and exhortation
to himself; not carelessly, 1. These. 2 13
bu^ reuerentie, as the Word of GOD, and not of man: not senseleslie, but with
feeling, taking a delight therein, 2. Cor 7.7, 8, 9, 10, 11.
and following with affection every tune thereof.

Finally not doubtingly, but with faith, believing that every promise, Heb.
4.2.
and threatening of the word, shall surely come to pass. After such a forte the
people in Nehemiah his time heard the word both read, Nch. 8.1. etc.
opened, and applied by Ezra, and the Leuits. For then, whilst the Law was in
reading, the cares of all the people were attent; in the time of prayer, they
lifted up their hands, and bowed down their bodies. Finally, when the
threatenings of the word were applied by Preaching, they fell a weeping; and when
again they were comforted by their teachers, they rejoiced.

But now, although our attention and reverence should exceed theirs, Heb. 2.1.
(as the Apostle shows) yet it is far behind the same. Nay what confusion
and irreuerence, almost in every congregation, it not to be seen amongst us?
Do not usually (O irreligious times) some talk in the midst of the exercises
of Religion, some run out of the Church before the Sermon be ended, some sleep
in their pewes, some turn the eyes of all upon them by their strange and
masking appatell? Finally, almost all show some sign of neglect or contempt of
the word of God, or other? But to let these pass, the true Christian heater,
will not only be careful to hear the word in a right manner, but to resort
thereunto with an holy intent and affection. For as Solomon shows, Pro. 21.27.
The sacrifice of the wicked is abomination unto the Lord: how much more, when
he offers it with an evil mind? The Christian then desires the sincere
milk of the Word not to cavil at it, no, nor to know it only, but to grow
thereby. This, (if it were considered, 1. Pet. 2.2.
as it ought to be) would make those, who often resort to the hearing of
Sermons, not only talkers, Iam. 2.26.
but practisers of Religion, not only discerners, but haters of sin, Psalm.
119.104.
not only such as delight in good exercises, but performers of holy duties,
Psalm. 119.9.
not praisers only of their teachers in words, but commenders of them by
their lives and conuersations. 2. Cor. 3.1 2
For in deed he is the best hearer, which washing his specks and spots by
the Law of liberty, is by hearing transformed into the image of Christ, and
he most commends his teacher, whose heart and life is written and graven
with the letters of faith and repentance.

Now to come to the last point or note of the excellency of the Gospel, it is
affirmed here to be great by one assent. True it is in deed that a great
number of profane people, make no account of the Gospel, being either Dogs
or Swine, Mat. 7.6.
despising and abusing pearls and holy things. But as concerning the true
members of the Church, every one of them with heart and hand subscribeth to
this Doctrine, so that according as Esaias notably expressing this matter has
foretold, This man says I am the Lords, Esaias. 44.5.
and this man calls himself by the name of Iaacob, another writes with his
hand, I am the eternals, and names himself by the name of Israel. Evident it
is also, 1. Tim. 4.1
that many Heretics have oppugned, and do deny the very articles of our
faith. But what the instruments of Satan say or gainsay, is not to be regarded.
This is that, which here our Apostle would declare, namely that all the Lords
faithful servants and messengers have with one voice received and published,
and are with their lives and blood ready to seal the truth of the Gospel. To
conclude, it cannot be denied that there are diverse truths in the word, To.
14.1, 2.
which true Christians with one consent yield not always unto. For either they
vary one from another in the exposition of some places of Scripture, or they
differ in judgment about questions of lawfulnes or unlawfulness, 1. Cor. 14.31,
32, 33.
of order or disorder, 1. Cor. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11. chapters.
or they dissent in some inferior points of truth (If I may so speak) which
yet are not to be oppugned, Mat. 5.19
yea are by all means on the contrary side to be embraced, Exo. 10.26
held fast, and preferred before gold or silver, or the whole World. But
oftentimes it is to be seen, that even those, who in interpretations of
certain sentences in the word, Act. 15.39.
and in opinions touching things lawful or unlawful differ furthest asunder,
concur and consent together most nerely and fully in the Articles of the faith,
the principles of the Gospel, and all the fundamental grounds of Christian
Religion. Whereby it appears that the unity of the members of the Catholic
Church consists not in thinking the same things always, or liking the same
persons, but in the general consent, Ephe. 4.13.
which is given unto the mystery of Christ Jesus. In deed all are to labor
to the unity of the spirit, to judge and speak even al one thing; 1. Cor 11.19
but in this world such a perfect knot shall never be knit. But although
Christians disagree sometime in affections or opinions: yet there is always
among them sound unity in deed, To. 12.4.5
because they maintain one maine verity.

Neither by reason of divisions, which must be, and have been in all ages, among
believers and professors of the Gospel, is there just cause given unto any to
depart from the Church of GOD, or to doubt whether there be at all any
certain saving truth, or to say, there are such dissentions in the World,
that a man cannot know what to believe. The Virgin Marie, Simeon, Luke 1, 2,
3. chap.
Elizabeth, and the Disciples saw the saving and the certain truth, when the
sinagogue of the Jews erred even touching the Messiah, and was divided into
diverse most pestilent and contrary sects. The Christians in the days of the
ancient Fathers saw the truth, and walked in the right way, when the Arrians,
Eutichians, and such other Heretics spread their poison throughout the whole
world. Now then, to doubt whether there be any certain truth, (when the
articles of the faith are received by one assent, and the Churches of England,
France, Scotland, Har. con. apolo. eccl. Angl.
and the Low Countries subscribe unto the Doctrine of the Gospel, and when
many Martyrs have of late sealed the Doctrine of faith with their blood, yea
diverse living Martyrs confirm the same by word and deed) is to call into
question, whether there be a Sun in the Sky, and to doubt whether it shine in
the firmament at noone day.

Thus we see the former part of this sentence laid open before our eyes,
wherein that excellency of the Gospel is by six words plainly affirmed,
the which in the second part of this verse is confirmed or proved effectually
by six forcible reasons. All these arguments together with the former words,
may briefly be cast after this sort into one frame of proof, whereby the
whole matter entreated of in this sentence may yet more evidently be declared
and more fully concluded.

That truth, wherein is showed and whereby is proved that God has been
manifested in the flesh, justified in the spirit, seen of Angels, preached
among the nations, believed in the world, and received up in glory, is great
by one assent and without all coutrouersie. The mystery of godlynes is that
truth, wherein al these things are showed, and whereby they are demonstrated.
The mystery of godlynes therefore is great by one assent and without all
controversy.
The last part of this reason has in the beginning of this sentence been set
down, which ought not to seem strange unto any, namely that the conclusion is
set in the first or second place, seeing this is an usual thing both in the
Scriptures, and in all good Writers.

The middle part of the proof is contained and expressed in the conclusion of
this sentence, which now we are to proceed unto and consider. The first part
of the sillogisme is included in the last words of the verse going before,
wherein was affirmed, that the whole Church of God vpholdeth this excellent
truth. Now although the Apostle had not insinuated any such matter, as that the
truth, which testifies or proclaims such wonderful and profitable things,
as here are set down, is great by one assent, or without controversy: yet this
is so clear a a point, that it seems to be written with the beams of the
sun, and not to need any further speech or proof.

To the end then we may not go about to light a candle, where it shines
clearly and brightly, but be led forward (as it were) to perfection, and to
the end we may the better understand, this chief principle of Christian
Religion, God has been manifested in the flesh, let us a while consider the
nature of the heavenly godhead. As concerning the power, wisdom, Romans 1.19.
and Majesty of the godhead, it is in some part or sort made known unto us by
the creatures, and especially by the Scriptures. Wherefore whosoever shall say
with Pharaoh, Exodus 5.2.
I know not God, shall show himself herein a lier, or a profane person. But
as touching the nature or form of the Lords being, 1. Tim. 6.16.
it is a thing so incomprehensible in it self, that men are by no means able
fully to understand it: yea, without Christ they cannot (save only in small
measure, and dark manner) conceive what it is. For that knowledge of God,
which is conueighed into me^ only by certain titles given him, or by the
creatures, is bur such a co^ceauing of his Majesty, as the patterns of things
in this world, Romans ^.20
lead the mind unto, and engender. As for example, when the Lord is called
the Lord of Hosts, in this title we rather see his works than him, or if we
see him in any measure, it is by the help of earthly creatures, and by
comparison, (as it were) not simply by himself. Again, when we conceive him
as perfectly wise, just and merciful, Act. 14.16, 17.
we rather rife to the knowledge of his effects, than of his being, by the
consideration of these virtues, which being in men by measure, are properties
and qualities only, howsoever being in GOD without measure, they are things
essential. Exodus 3.14.
Now as touching, the great titles of Iehoua, the eternal, I am, or I will be,
and such like, whereby God in scripture is often called, they show by those
creatures, which are substances, moving and subsisting in the World, Reu. 1.4.
that the Lord has a being by himself, and for himself, but that he is a
perpetual, infinite, unchangeable, and glorious essence, cannot so well be
gathered by the sight of frail, 1. Per. 1.24
mutable and base creatures, as is manifested by Christ Jesus, The gospel of
John. 1 18 Heb. 13.8
both God and man, who is the same to day and to morrow, and for ever, and in
whom the whole Godhead dwells bodily.

Neither in deed arises unto man any spark of sound comfort at all, Ephe.
4.18.
out of the beholding of the nature of the godhead alone, Romans 2.1.
as it is severally or confusedly considered by it self without. Christ, but
rather so glistering a light and flame is able to cause the most strong and
piercing eye in the world to dazzle, and the most hardy and valiant hear to
quake for horror. Wherefore we are always, when we turn our fight toward the
Godhead, with a certain reverent and discerning spirit, to look upon three
persons having their being therein, as upon three Suns in one, Mat. 2.19.
(it I may so speak with that profound divine Nazianzen, who often most
singularly writes of this matter) all of the same nature, glory, eternity,
and perfection.

The first of these persons is the father, Mat. 3.17.
who as he is without all beginning, so this person caused from eternity the
two other persons, Heb. 1.3.
and this father works from himself by his son, and by his spirit. The
second person is the son, who, as he was eternally begotten by the person of
the Father only: Ioh. 3.16. Heb. 1.3.
so from him as the fountain, being himself as the stream, he works by
the holy Ghost, as the conduit pipe (if that I may so speak) and by earthly
things in some rude sort shadoweth out these heavenly, which nothing in the
World can fully or in all respects represent or express? Ioh. 15.26.
The holy Ghost is the third person in trinity, proceeding from the Father,
and the son, and working from them both immediately, by himself, in such
sort, as that not only he quickens the whole world, but sanctifies the
whole Church. For he, even he, replenisheth with graces the Angels, he
inspireth the Prophets, he teaches the Lawgiuers wisdom, Basil. ho. mil. de
side.
he sanctifies the Ministers of the word, he makes Captains valiant, he
absolueth the innocent, he aduaunceth those that are modest, he works gifts
of healing, he reuiueth the dead, he loses the captives, he makes
strangers children by adoption. It he find a believing Publican, he makes him
an Evangelist. If he be in a Fisher man, he frames him to be a Divine. If he
get a repentant persecutor, he appoynteth and fashioneth him to be an Apostle
of the Gentiles, a preacher of the Gospel, an elect vessel. By him the weak
are made strong, the poor rich, the ignorant and those which are void of
eloquence become even wiser than the wisest. All the which works with infinite
more are also wrought by the Father and the Son, 1. Ioh. 5.17
and not only by the holy Ghost: but as these three persons are distinct in
properties, which cannot be communicated to each other, as the Father, in that
he is unbegotten, the Son begotten, the holy Ghost proceeding: so they differ
in the manner or order of their works, which in common they put into
execution, 1. Cor. 8.6.
seeing the Father begins the work from himself, the Son works it from
the Father by the spirit, the holy Ghost perfecteth it from them both by his
own immediate hand, and last stitch as it were.

But because the name of God in this place, as elsewhere in the scripture, is
restrained to the second person in the Trinity, namely the Son, withdrawing
our eyes from the two other persons, and only fixing our sight upon this lamp
of all our joy, and garland of our comfort, let us consider a little longer his
eternal generation or begetting. For when here it is said, that God has been
manifested in the flesh, the meaning of the Apostle is not that either the
father or the spirit ever took our nature on them: but only that Christ the
natural and eternal son of God, taking to himself the seed of Abraham,
was subject unto all humane infirmities, sin ouely excepted. After the like
manner by this our Apostle is the name of God being common to all the three
persons, so used in the Acts, as that it is only meant of the second person,
when he wills the Elders of Ephesus to feed the Church of God, which he has
purchased with his own blood. Act. 20.28.
But, I say, before we come to consider the conception or birth of Christ, the
which had a beginning in time, order requires that in the former place we view
his heavenly generation or begetting from alleternitie.

The author of the Epistle to the Hebrews, calling this second person the
brightness of his fathers glory, Heb. 1.3.
declares, that even as the Sun in the Sky naturally begets the bright
beam: so GOD the father not only of his will, but by nature begat his Son,
the bright beam of this glory. The same Apostle calls also the Son of
God, the graven image of his fathers person, even as the Lord himself in Exodus
terms him the Angel in whom his name is written: Exo. 23.21.
no doubt, because the person of the Father is wholly imprinted in, and
expressed by the person of the Son. In some such like sense by our Paul to
the Colossians, Col. 1.15.
he is termed the image of the invisible God, his father, whom indeed he
does so resemble, and so lively represent in all respects, that rather he
seems the same with his father, than like unto him, being herein unlike unto
natural children of this world, in that they in part only are like unto their
mortal parents, but he in eternity, nature and virtue is wholly like, or
rather one with his heavenly father. Wherefore John in his Gospel fitly
calls him the only begotten of his father, Ioh. 1.18
of whom only, as he was begotten, so was he begotten after an only manner,
and therefore he loves him with an only love, and in him only is well
pleased. In this respect Solomon in that excellent book of the Proverbs very
elegantlie names this son the daily delight or joy of his father,
affirming that he is one, Pro. 1.30.
which nourishes and cheareth up, or sporteth before him continually, as being
from all eternity the sweet word in his bosom, such a lovely branch of
beauty, and flower of delight, as that it is impossible that any earthly
parents should take such pleasure in the sweet looks, most witty speeches, or
virtuous actions of their only child, as the eternal GOD is well pleased or
solaceth himself in this his son. Howbeit, this eternal generation also
even of the Son or Word, being viewed in any shape of glory, or other nature
than of man, Esa. 6.5.
is able to make the Prophet Esaias himself cry out, Woe is me, for I am cut
off, seeing I am a man of polluted lips. And that the manifesting of this
second person unto man in any shape of glory or power, rather offers him
occasion to stand a loofe of, than to draw nere to God, it may appear by that
caveat, which the son of God gives Moses, appearing into him in a fiery
bush, come not near to this place.

To the end then, Exodus 3.5.
that we might have the greater boldness, and an access unto the throne of
grace, full of hope and confidence, it pleased God, who is by nature invisible,
to be manifested in the flesh, as here the Apostle speaks. For had the son
of GOD remained still for ever only an invisible person, flesh and blood never
could or would with comfort have approached to so glorious and infinite a
Majesty, which it had most grieuouslie offended, Genesis 3.8.
and wherein it perceived no sign or pledge of reconciliation. Or had he taken
on him the nature of Angels, which never he did, although by reason of the
execution of his office, he sometimes in called in scripture by the name of an
Angel) well might the elect Angels have endured his presence, or triumphed
exceedingly, or the damned spirits, which left their standing places, lift up
their heads to some hope: but as for men, they should still have remained in
despair and perplexity, who, both have been often amassed and troubled above
measure, Heb. 2.17. Luke 1.12.
when heavenly powers or principalities have appeared at any time unto them,
and always were only revived with this hope, that Christ should not take unto
him the nature of Angels, but the seed of the woman, the seed of Abraham, and
the seed of David. Or again, had the Lord spoken unto us by the voice of
thunder, Heb. 12.18
or revealed himself in the light, or otherwise been manifested in the shape of
any creature; the nature of man having offended, would not well be satisfied,
nor yet could be restored. Finally, had he taken unto him the noble nature of
Adam, or put on him that princely condition, which man had before his
transgression, dust and ashes might with grief have remembered whence it had
fallen: but such sound comfort or strong hope, as now we feel, Heb. 2.17.
could not arise unto us by that gay garment. Wherefore our Savior being in
the form of GOD, and accounting it no robbery to be equal with God, that the
fruit might be ours, the suffering his, hiding (as it were) for a time the
brightness of his Marestie, not regarding the Angels, which had fallen, would
in his wonderful mercy and unspeakable humility put on him, not the form of
any other creature, not Adams royaltic, but the ragged coat of a poor
servant, Psalm 2.5.
yea the weakness and vileness (as it were) of a worm.

Oh, Psalm 22.6.
what is that which now I do behold? What? the graven image of Gods own
person and Majesty, printed within mine earthly and filthy stamp and molde?
What? the brightness of the heavenly glory and excellency, dimmed and
darkened with my frailty and infirmity? What? the eternal and most blessed
son of the highest, to become a worm and no man, an outcast of the people,
and a contempt of the nations? What? the Angel, in whom the name of God is
written, passing over the Angels, which had offended, and leaving them all in
the chains of darkness, notwithstanding they were of a more excellent nature
and an higher degree; but taking compassion on sinful and wretched mankind,
made one with us, or God with man, that the baser creature should be made like
an elect Angel? What? the only begotten and the sweet joy of the heavenly
palace, covered and girded round about with my weakness, thirst, hunger,
drowsinesse, and such like infirmities of body, nay with agonies, fears,
passions, and affections of the soul? Oh where are ye now a days ye
Christian hearers and professors, 1. Pet. 11.
who desire with the Prophets and godly people of old time to see these
mysteries unfolded? or who thirst even with ancient Kings and Princes to
hear the doctrines or discourses of the work of your redemption? Luke 10.24
Nay, nay, where are you, ye skillful and faithful sheapheards and teachers,
who continually resound the praises of that chief shepherd of the Christian
flock, Psalm. 24.
which causes his sheep to lie down in green pastures, and leads them by
the calm waters? Come forth, and paint Christ Jesus as crucified before the
eyes of your people, Gal. 3.1.
show them the prince, valor and virtue of this mystery. Nevertheless,
whenever even those, whose hearts are furnished with most divine knowledge,
shall come to handle this chief argument of Divinity, albeit they shall also
speak with the tongues of men or Angels: yet shall they never be able fully
to declare or unfold this one secret of the incarnation of our Lord, or by
any speeches sufficiently to show the excellency of this matter, which is
most wonderful in many respects. For who can but marvel, how the Virgin Marie
should be the mother of the son of God, and yet not only be a virgin
before the conception, Luk 5.14.
but a virgin at the conception, yea, a virgin after the conception of him?
What reason of man can conceive how the holy Ghost should ouershadowe the
virgin Marie in such sort, as that taking out of her the whole lump of the
humane nature of Christ, by him it should not only be severed from all
corruption, but united and knit unto the divine, after such an unspeakable and
incomprehensible manner, as that a divine nature and an humane consisting of a
soul and body, should vnseparablie and eternally be joined and concur in
one and the self same person the son of the highest?

But seeing we are conceived and formed in sin, to the end, that not only
actual iniquity might be washed away, but even original and natural
uncleanness, cured and cleansed, it behooved the branch to arise out of the stock
of Iesse, and a fountain to be set open unto the house of David and the
inhabitants of Jerusalem for the purging of sin: finally a scepter to be
erected against the reign of death, who meddled with those which never sinned
actuallie, as Adam did.

But the speech by the Apostle here used is very diligently to be observed,
Romans 5.14
namely that God not only has been in the flesh, but that he has been
manifested in the flesh. The which words import thus much, namely that the
son of God first conceived in the virgins womb, was afterward brought forth
into the world. Of this matter as the Prophet Esaias long before had expresselie
and plainly prophesied, saying in the person of all the faithful, that unto
us a child is borne, Esa. 9.6.
and unto us a son is given: so it was meet and convenient, that this
heavenly light should break out as the Sun, and the salvation of Gods
people shine forth, and be held up as a burning lamp. For so long as this
most excellent treasure was hid in the womb of the Virgin, the price or glory
of it not being seen, but shut up (as it were) neither could the beauty of it
(unknown as yet) be earnestly and generally desired, neither could the use
or fruit of it so well be felt, or so fully be enjoyed. But after that Christ
Jesus once pight his tent amongst us for the time, neither only lay in the
maunger, but walked on the earth, the faithful disciples saw his glory, as
the glory of the only begotten of God, and believers or Christians have more
fully since that time been made partakers of his grace. Ioh. 1.19.


Now, what a wonderful thing again is this to consider, namely, that the
ancient of days was borne in time: he, whom the heavens can not contain, Naz.
did lie in a cratch; the preserver of all things did suck his mothers breast;
the feeder of Israel hungered and thirsted; the only wise increased in wisdom;
he, who knows al things, was ignorant of some things: finally, the King of
glory became in all things like unto man, sin only excepted? These mysteries
are marvelous indeed, but they are no less comfortable than wonderful,
seeing now we may behold the son of GOD approaching unto us, not as a
mighty giant with a bar of iron to break us all to pieces, not as an
earthly King or Captain guarded with an host of armed Soldiers to destroy us,
but as a child, whom without fear we may take in our arms, or as our
natural brother, in whom we may acknowledge flesh of our flesh and one of
our bones. Heb. 2.17.
The law was indeed given with thunder, and with lightnings, with storm and
tempest, and the sound of a tro^pet, Heb. 12.18.
and it was pronounced out of the midst of a flaming fire: but as for the
Gospel, it was proclaimed without any sign of terror at all, yea on the
contrary side, it began so to be published and witnessed by the Lords
appearing and doctrine, as that God gave testimony thereunto with many wonders
and tokens of good will and mercy.

The next point here offered by the Apostle to our consideration is, that God
has been also justified in the spirit. Before has bin showed that the son
of God being in the form of GOD, and equal to GOD, abased, emptied and
humbled himself, and drawing a curtain (as it were) over his infinite
Majesty, walked in the shape of a poor servant, and manifested himself to be
also man in all points like to us, sin only excepted. Now, here is further
declared, that the glory of his divine nature, power and office, so shined
through his flesh, and through the course of his whole conversation, even (as
it were) through a glass or a lantern (if I may so speak) that thereby
appeared who he was, even that Mediator between GOD and man, that Messiah or
person anointed with the oil of gladness above his fellows, Psalm. 45.7.
touching whom the Scriptures foretold and spoke many honorable things, who
also has wrought the work of our redemption. For, as the Prophet Esaias
testifies of him, the spirit of the Lord Iehoua was vpo^him, Esa 61.1.
yea the spirit of Iehoua rested on him: namely, the spirit of wisdom and of
understanding, the spirit of comfort and of power, Esa. 11.2.
the spirit of knowledge and of the scare of God.

The son of God being thus endued with the gifts of the spirit above
measure, being sent, anointed, sealed, and consecrated to the office of a
Savior, the whole Godhead dwelling in him bodily: finally, he loving his
Church most entirely, as the same Prophet testifies, at the last put on
righteousness as a breast plate, Esa. 59.17.
and an helmet of salvation upon his head, yea armed himself with the garments
of vengeance for clothing, and araied him self with zeal as with a cloak.
Whereby may further be gathered after what sort in this place, and in what
respect the Messiah being God and man is said to be justified by the spirit.
In sum, thus much is meant, that the power of his Godhead, being contrary (in
regard of exceeding glory) to the weak nature of his manhood, but joined
therwithal, did not only enable him fully to perform the work of our
salvation, but declare him to be a perfect King, Priest and Prophet, the
fountain of wisdom, righteousness, sanctification and redemption. True it is
indeed, 1. Co. 1.30
that, although in the days of his flesh, our Savior lined most innocentlie,
wrought many miracles, spoke and taught as never any did, yet the wicked, who
were in those days, rejected and condemned him. Nevertheless, as the sacred
story declares, not only wisdom was justified of her children, but the
same stone, Luke 20.17
which the builders refused, was by the father made the head corner stone: yea
the son in three days builded up that temple, where of Salomons temple was
but a tipe: finally, the innocent lise, the heavenly doctrine, the wonderful
signs, the singular gifts of our Savior, wherewith he was endued without
measure, proved and proclaimed to all the world, that even that glorious
spirit rested on him, 1. Pet. 3.18 19.
which preached unto the disobedient in the time of Noah, and which not only
reuined him, Romans 1.4.
when he had been dead concerning the flesh, but quickens all the elect to
faith, obedience, Rom ^.11.
and eternal life.

Albeit then the weakness of the flesh of Christ was such that he seemed to be
the most abject of all me^, yea rather a worm than a man, as before we have
heard; yet the glory of his spirit was so great, on the contrary side, that
thereby he was declared not to be a mere man or an Angel, but the son of
God, and perfected unto all the particular works of a saving Prince or
redeemer. He took unto him the seed of Abraham, The story of the gos. pel.
but in this seed were all the nations of the earth blessed. Compassed he was
in his mothers womb, but John the Baptist at his presence sprang in Elizabeth's
belly. Laid he was in a cratch, but worshipped therein by the wise men of
the East. He was baptized in Jordan, but he baptized with the holy Ghost and
with fire. He was hungry, but he fed many thousands: subject to sleep, but
he caused the winds and waves to couch: tribute he paid, but out of a fish:
he wept for Lazarus, but he raised him from the dead. O rare and most royal,
O sweet and bountiful Savior, whether should I rather wonder at thy
sufferings, or at this thy glory? Surely at the sight of thy mercy I stand
astonished. Judas sells thee for a little paltrie silver, but thou redeemest
the world with thy most precious heart blood. O when I think upon that night,
wherein thou wast betrayed: when I conceive in mind thy sweates like clots of
blood, rolling from thy body down unto the ground: when I behold the
officers, which kept thee, beating thy neck, and smiting thy tender face: when
I look on the red furrows, which Pilates cruel whip made on thy back: when I
feel the print made in thine hands and feet with the nails: when I see thy
veins and sinews streyned and racked on the Cross: I plainly perceive it
was not without great cause, that thou did request thy heavenly father, to
let so bitter a cup pass from thee, if it had been possible. But when I view
the burden of the sins of the whole World laid on thy shoulders, when I mark
the curse of the Law seasing on thine head, when I perceive the wrath of thy
Father consuming all thy bones, when I observe the executioners stripping thee
out of all thy garments, when I note the Jews with mocks and mowes, deriding
thine afflicted estate, when I consider satan and the feends of hell in the
malapart soldiers, the crooked herald Pilate, and the unrepentant malefactor
assaulting thy faith: I cannot but cry out, O wonderful redeemer, what a
spirit of courage and long suffering rested on thee? Now last of all when I
hear thee cry, My God, my God, why haste thou forsaken me, when I peer into
thine heart pierced unto the bottom with the Spear of a profane Souldiout,
when I gaze on thy breath flying out of thy body, when I pry into the grave
where thy body was laid, when I think on thine aboade in the earth for the
space of three days and three nights, reckoned in some sort, (after which
manner, and according to which time Jonas sometimes lodged in the belly of the
Whale) how do I marvel, that thy father did not rather suffer the whole world
to perish, than thee his natural some, more precious than a thousand worlds; to
taste or sustain one of the Jest of these indignities? But here by appears
the unspeakable mercy of God thy father, as also thine own exceeding love and
favor toward ma^kinde, yea moreover the glory of the spirit, which rested on
thee, that thou would endure such torments for thine enemies, and that thou
would by thy Cross crucify the World, by thy death kill sin, by thy
burial put the Law into the grave, by thine enduring of the curse bestow a
blessing, by thine abode under the ground, take away the sting of the grave;
finally, by all thy sufferings satisfy for all our sins, and conquer him,
who has the power of death, Heb. 2.14.
to wit, the Devil.

Now hereby it is evident, that he of whom we speak, was not only man but
God; not only the son of man, but the son of GOD; not only a servant, but
the Lord; not only a shepherd, but a Prince of peaces finally the way the
truth, the life, the vine, the head of the church and that just one, who was
justified by the spirit. For had there been in Christ Jesus any dram of sin
or corruption, nay had there not been in him all fulness of power and holiness,
so many crimes and transgressions being laid to his charge, and imputed unto
him before the tribunal seat of Almighty GOD, and such principalities and
powers pursuing and assaulting him, neither could he have been acquitted as an
innocent person, nor escape as a stronger champion than all his adversaries.
But because there was no guile found in his mouth, and his own right hand being
able to save him, he did cast abroad the indignation of his wrath upon his
enemies, and infinitely surpassing Sampson in strength, overcame the gates of
hell; he became that just one, which justifies many, and that perfect
redeemer, who having been a faithful mediator on earth, reigns now as a
glorious high Priest, Heb. 1.3.
king and Prophet in Heaven as exalted for these injuries done unto him, and
justified also by the glory bestowed on him.

The third point of this mystery is, that God manifested in the flesh, and
justified, in the Spirit, has been also seen of Angels. It appears by the
sacred story, that even the damned Angels, or unclean spirits saw the son
of God manifested in the flesh. Mat. 4.1.
For we read that not only satan their head, tempted him in the wilderness, but
that a whole legion of foul feends acknowledged him to be the son of God,
Luke 8.28.
and judge of the World. Wherefore even the evil Angels saw Jesus our Lord,
as the seed of the Woman, who should break the head of the Serpent, as a
Champion to wrestle or encounter with them; last of all, as a conqueror by his
power and strength to overcome them.

But either only or chiefly Saint Paul means here, that the Elect Angels saw
Christ as visible GOD, or as both GOD and man. These heavenly spirits from the
very beginning of their creation, enjoyed in deed the presence of the second
person in the Trinity, Esa. 6 3.
yea and they worshipped him as their GOD and King: nevertheless they wanted
the visible spectacle of the glory here spoken of, until the time of the
Lords incarnation and manifestation to the World, and justification by the
Spirit. But when once the Father brought his first begotten into the World, and
presented him in the flesh, as a mirror of all wisdom, mercy, justice, and
perfect excellency; then the Angels in the son, whose person and godhead
from the beginning of their creation they beheld continually, saw that human
nature and glory, Ephe. 3.10.
which before was never subject unto their view. Heb. 1.6.
For they saw now the invisible word to become visible God, they perceived also
the world to be made subject not unto them, but unto man, Heb. 2.5, 6 7, 8, 9.
even the mediator between God and man, that second Adam Jesus Christ. After
this manner at the last, in fulness of time, the son of God being, presented
unto the view of the Elect Angels, they saw him as their joy, as may appear,
in that they sang at his birth: Luke 2.13.
they saw him as their Lord, upon whom they ascended, Ioh. 1.25.
and descended, they saw him as the head of the body of the Church, Heb. 1.14.
whose members they serve: last of all they saw him as the mercy seat, toward
which they turn their faces continually. Exo. 25.17, 18.


And who is there now, which remembering that solemn day of Christ his
incarnation, beholding the Pageant (as I may say) of his human nature,
whereat the very Angels gaze and assemble, to conclude, considering the
progress, (as it were) of the Lord from Heaven to earth, together with his
return from earth to Heaven (where the Angels continually behold his face, and
now enjoy his bodily presence) would not skip for joy with John the Baptist,
cry out with Elizabeth, enlarge his tongue with Zachary, magnify the Lord
with the Virgin Marie, desire to be dissolved with Simeon, and provoke not
only his own soul, but the Angels to praise GOD with David, for presenting
such a spectacle to the view of his creatures, and revealing his son both
unto men and spirits.

When as the common people of any country or kingdom, first understanding the
kings intent to make some progress, or to solace and show himself abroad,
afterward upon this occasion resort or flock, to the place where he passes by
or may best be seen, there do see his Majesty's face, or hear him utter a few
words: herein they think a great part of their happiness to consist, and hereof
they boast full often one to another: not without just cause. For certainly the
very countenance and presence of the gracious sovereign, carries with it the
Majesty of God himself, the honor of an Angel, the glory of the sun, the
comelines of the moon, the brightness of a Start, the blessing of the dew, the
fruit of a tree of life, and (to speak in one Word) the price of a peerlesse
pearl. Now the^, when as the immortal king, the ruler of all princes
presented himself to the view of shepherds, wise me^, Galileans, inhabitants
of Jerusalem, and diverse other of his meaner sort of subjects, albeit they saw
his face but for a little time, or heard his words but for a short season, this
was a just cause to them of singular comfort, and a great sign of his favor,
yea, as a day or time of high solemnity. But does not then the magnificence of
the Lord on the one side, and the happiness of the Angels, on the other, much
more appear herein, that since they as peers of the heavenly kingdom were
first assembled and drawn unto their prince Christ Jesus, putting on him the
nature of man and coming into the world, they have not ceased to behold and
enjoy his corporal presence, and now sitting (as it were) in court or
Parliament with him continually, see his royalty, and hear him speak such
speeches, as no ear of man has heard, nor heart can conceive. Yes happy sure
are all Christians, which are subjects to Christ Jesus, and see him by the eye
of faith, though not of the body: more happy are the Angels, which stand ever
before him, and hear his wisdom. Most blessed be the Lord God the father,
which so loved his son, as to set him one the throne of Israel, because the
Lord loved Israel for ever, and made him king to do equity and righteousness.

From this love of GOD it has proceeded also, that Christ Jesus has been
preached among the Nations, The Angels, of whom we sake a little before, were
not only beholders of Christ Jesus, but Heralds, who blazed abroad his arms,
and proclaimed the mysteries of his conception, birth, resurrection and
ascension. Next after John the baptist, the Lord himself, and the Angels,
succeeded the Apostles, and seventy disciples, who all were immediately called
by our savior himself to preach the word and to work miracles, Luke 9.1. Luke
10.1.
and were sent not to one place or congregation only; but the 12. Apostles to
many nations, the 70. disciples to many cities: as our saviors commandment
and their practice testifies.

After these seventy and besides the twelve Apostles; the Lord
extraordinarily raised up and added in mercy to the forenamed laborers in his
harvest, Evangelists: and these again were of two sorts: for some of them
penned stories of the gospel, Act. 21.8 1 Timothy 4.5 Act. 11.28.
as Luke and Mark: some only published the gospel by preaching, as Timothy
and Phillip. At the same time were also Prophets raised up, endued with an
extraordinary gift of foretelling things to come, as Agabus. But because,
neither the extraordinary gifts of such Apostles, Evangelists, and Prophets,
were always to remain in the Church, neither could their persons being
mortal, continue in the World for ever, ordinary messengers or Ministers of
the Gospel, called both by GOD and man, and allotted to one place, were by the
Apostles them selves created and ordained in their time, who instructed some of
them the Church of Lystra, some of Iconium, some of Antiochia, Act. 14.24.
some the Church of Ephesus, Revel. 2, 3. chap.
some the Church of Smyrna, some of Corinth, some of Phillippi, some other
congregations. Phillip. 1.1
This kind of Preachers of the Word having continued from the Apostles times,
and being to remain to the end of the World have spread the fame of the
Gospel so far and near, and so planted and watered it in their Countries and
charges, as that not only by the Apostles Ministry, but hence it comes to
pass, that there are many Christians in the World at this day, many
congregations professing the truth, yea many Countries embracing Christ Jesus,
as namely, Germany, France, England, Scotland, Denmark, with many other
renowned in this respect. Wherefore the gospel has been preached not only in
Judea, but among the nations, as here is said, neither unto a few nations, but
what people almost is there, unto some of whom at one time or other the same of
Christ Jesus has not been brought alter some sort or manner at the least?

In deed even before the coming of the son of God into the world, the Jews
had among them those shadows, which covered shining light; and those Prophets,
who spoke in their hearing of the Messiah, to come. Moreover the Gentiles had
sometime messengers and Prophets sent unto them, as may appear in Jonas, who
preached to the Ninevites; but since that Christ Jesus has been manifested in
the flesh, the Gospel has both been more plainly and sullie made known to
the Israelites than before, and generally in common imparted and communicated
unto other nations. For the partition wall having been pulled down by him, Col.
2.14.
that makes one of two, and the bonds of the law cancelled by his sufferings,
who sacrificed himself for the whole world, al nations were to be called to
the Passover which had been slain, and the gerall pardon of forgiveness of
sins was to be offered unto all sorts of people. Well then, neither did the
Lord suffer the stiffenecked Jews to be without a great light, nor the
Gentiles to remain without the knowledge of Christ Jesus: but he caused him to
be preached to Jew and Gentile; male and female, bond and free, to show that
he would have all sorts of people to come unto repentance and to be saved.

So that hereby it is evident that the blood of Jesus Christ speaks far
more excellent and comfortable things, than did the blood of Abel. For what is
the voice thereof, but Come unto me al you which are heavy lade^, Mat. 11.28.
and I will refresh you. Albeit your sins were as crimson, Esa. 1.18.
they shall be like to snow, although they were as scarlet, they shall be like
the wool. What intercession makes it to God the father, Ioh. 17.52.
but Father forgive them they know not what they do, holy father preserve
them in thy name, sanctify them in thy truth. Father it is my will that those
whom thou have given me, be with me where I am. To conclude, what things
speaks the blood of Christ to men, but such as are most comfortable and sound
to this effect. I have washed away the heinous rebellion and blasphemy of
diverse of those Jews, who indeed crucified the King of glory: Act. 2.37, 38
but for this bloody deed unfeignedly and heartily repented. I have cleansed
and sanctified a whole cloud of penitent sinners among the Gentiles, which
sometimes worshipped Idols, Leui. 18.24.
offered their children unto Molech, Deu. 18.11.
used necromancie, followed after southsayers, and witches, exercised curious
Arts, Act. 18.19. 1. These. 1.9.
were laden with all sorts of impieties and iniquities, and quite dead in their
sins. Seeing these or such like are the sugared words and promises, which the
blood of Christ Jesus speaks and applies unto the heart of his Jerusalem and
people; how can any distressed and bruised soul imagine that the God of mercy
will despise the sacrifice of sorrow and mournful supplications, which it
offers? Who will now add unto his other innumerable iniquities this the
greatest of all other, no to believe his Savior: who has not only promised
to save him, but confirmed his promise by oath, not only sworn so to do, but
sealed his oath with blood; not only assured in under a broad seal, but
testified it by infinite example? To conclude this point, he which trusts in
the son of God, 1. Ioh. 5.10.
says Saint John, has that witness in himself, he which believes not God,
makes him a lier. Well, if any want faith or the feeling thereof, here we see
by the Lords ordinance that the preaching of the word is the most principal
and most effectual means of ingrafting and nourishing the same. For how did
so many thousands in the Apostles times come unto faith, To. 10.14.
but by hearing the glad tidings of the Gospel? How did they hear these
joyful glad tidings, but by their teachers preaching among them? How did
certain choice messengers and servants of God preach to the rest, and that
with so happy success, but by the Lords sending them on his embassage, and
blessing his own holy and heavenly ordinance? Private persons neither were in
ancient times, neither now are licensed or permitted by the Lord, to be
Prophets, Apostles, or Pastors to themselves, or to another. 1. Cor. 12.29.
The public Ministers of the word, are those, whom the Lord has set apart,
to be stewards over the household of faith, 1. Cor. 4.1.
his vessels and messengers to carry and declare the doctrine of faith:
finally, his under-officers to set on the seals of faith. Private conference,
private prayer, private reading of the scriptures, are indeed very profitable
exercises of faith, when they are used together with the public ministry of
the word and continually quickened by the same. For the preaching of the word
is so lively and mighty in operation, that it is not only as seed to beget
men to salvation, but as milk to nourish them in faith and obedience, as wine
to cheer them in distress, as honey to delight the^, as gold to enrich them,
as a light to direct them; but also as a fire to kindle them unto mutual
conference, Luke 24.32.
to earnest prayer, and to diligent searching of the scriptures. But when the
public Ministry shall be so severed from these private exercises as the
soul is from the body, and as that it shall wilfully be neglected, Luke.
7.30, 31.
refused, and contemned by any; certainly such as despise the Lords ordinance
and the kingdom of GOD against themselves, are not to think that their paths,
whether loose or straight, either please the almighty, or will bring them to
happiness, seeing they leave the royal and beaten way, wherein the faithful
usually walk unto salvation, and which the Lord himself has paued and
chalked out unto that intent and purpose.

Whereby as the necessity of the preaching of the word, so the excellency of
the mystery of the Gospel yet further is made manifest unto us. The Kings and
Princes of this world, have under them their deputies and inferious officers in
all places of their jurisdiction, who determine causes, and govern those
towns and places which are committed unto their care and charge. Even so
Christ Jesus the King of glory ascending into heaven, and leading captivity
captive, Psalm. 68.17.
gave gifts unto men, and placed under him spiritual Magistrates in his
church. Indeed the calling of the civil Magistrate, is not only such an
ordinance of God, as both every soul ought to be subject unto, Romans 13.1
and every estate honor and reverence as the highest and brightest glory
under heaven: 1 Pet. 2.17
but such a gift of his unto the Christian Church, 1. Tim. 2 2
as that when she enioieth it, she enioieth a crown of comfort and assistance;
when she wants it, she wants a tower of succor and defense. Lamen. 2.2
Wherefore the eternal wisdom of God (touching who^ all this while we speak)
going about in the book of the Proverbs to declare, what great gifts she has
in her hand to give to mankind, and uses to bestow on her Church, breaks
out into this speech as on a sudden, By me Kings reign, and Princes decree
justice. In the prophecy of Esaias, Pro. ^.15.
the Lord foretelling how bountifully he would deal with his Church in the
last days, Esa. 49.23.
affirms and promises, that Kings shall be nursing fathers, and Queens
shall be nursing mothers unto it. But besides the politic government or
cruil Magistracy, the Lord has given to his Church the order of the
Ministry or state ecclesiastical, that these two callings might be as the
two eyes of the world, or as the two pearls, of the Christian assembly upon
earth. For as this our Apostle testifies unto the Ephesians, our Savior
ascending into heaven gave gifts unto men, to wit, (as he expounds these
gifts) the callings of Apostles, Evangelists, Ephe. 4.8.
and such other ministers of the word. The common wealth of Israel then is not
without her spiritual Magistrates, but she partly has had, partly has, her
governors of sundry sorts, as the Apostle declares. Wherein (as before has
been affirmed, and after shall be made more evident, the excellency of the
mystery of Christ Jesus, and also of his ministry appears; which is
occupied about the souls of men, and was cast down from his treasure house
above, as a most precious Jewel, even then when our Savior ascended into
heaven. But moreover behold, our heavenly sovereign Christ, has sent forth
his ambassadors to the Jews, Graecians, Scythians, Fgyptians, Morians, Medes.
Persians, yea (as here is affirmed) unto all nations, among which, by the^, his
name has been, and is proclaimed. Nay, (that which is more) the Lords
messengers, and publishers of his will, succeed one another from generation to
generation, remaining in spite of Satan and of the wicked, in all places and
ages. As for the Monarchs or Emperors of this world, they use to send their
ambassadors, not unto the ends of the world or all nations, but to some few
countries, and near unto the^. Their custom is, to cause their decrees to be
proclaimed only in some Cities, or for a few days, not from time to time, and
in all the coasts of the earth. But the Lords Legates thus succeeding one
another, and preaching in many countries, it comes to pass that the kingdom
of Christ Jesus, by the course of the word, is, has been, and shall be from
time to time, glorified, and enlarged in all places.

For, as further is added in the next argument of the excellency of the
Gospel, God has been believed in the world. Wherein the mighty power and
exceeding bounty of the Lord is further manifested unto us. For preaching is a
sign of grace offered, but faith of grace bestowed, and of eternal salvation.
By the gift of faith enemies are made children; beggars, princes; limbs of
satan, members of Christ; firebrarnds of hell, Ephe. 3.6.
heirs of heaven; old creatures, new; slaves, freemen; captives, conquerours;
yea, more than conquerours in Christ Jesus. Now, herein the riches of God
mercy further appear, that Christ Jesus is believed not in a corner of the
world, but throughout the world. I will make mention (says the Lord by the
Prophet) of Rahab and Babell among them that know me: behold the Philistian
with him of Tire, and the Ethiopian is borne there. Psalm. 87.
And of Sion it shall be said, many are borne in her, and he even the most
high shall establish her. The Lord shall count, when he writes his people,
this man is borne there, Selab. This assembly of the faithful people of all
times, places, and sorts of persons, called in the Scripture, not Rome, but
heavenly Jerusalem, is that Catholic or universal Church, which, Gal. 4.26.
whosoever has not his mother on earth, cannot have GOD his father in heaven.
Part of this Church is already in the highest heavens triumphing, part of it
warfaring here on the earth below, part of it neither in heaven nor on earth
as yet, but hereafter to be first in this world, secondly in the world to
come. The triumphant believers are hidden in the heavens, the pilgrim believers
being mingled as yellowe corn with chafe on earth, are scant discerned, the
believers to be borne have no being, save in the loins only of their
forefathers. Faith is a thing not grounded on sense or reason, God is
invisible, Christ was a crucified person, and is withdrawn from us as
concerning his bodily presence, the spirit is secret, the world is wide, men
are wicked, tyrants rage: yet GOD has been believed, is believed, and shall be
believed in the world. O depth unsearchable! O glorious mystery! The use
hereof is, that every one try whether he have that annoynting, that seal,
Ephe. 4.27. 2. Co. 1.22
that earnest ponie, and that witness of the spirit in him or no: which if he
find, he is to be more thankful to God for it, than if he had received the
greatest benefit in the world besides. If he feel not, to sobbe and sigh, and
pray that God would testify to his spirit, that he is his father, and bestow
on him this good and heavenly gift, rather than any earthly blessing
whatsoeeuer. But chiefly he is to forsake his evil course of life, Esa. 1.16.
and to walk with God and man in the vprightnes of his heart, which grace
going before, the peace of heart will undoubtedly follow after, arising from
the sight of the generality and largenes of Gods promises, Heb. 8.10.
and the experience of Gods daily mercies, Psalm. 77.
and knowledge of the mystery of christ Jesus here extolled. Ephe. 3.18.


The last point of this mystery or proof of the excellency thereof is, that
God has been taken up inglorie. It was more than a miracle, that the worm
before spoken of, should return to life, and that the second Jonas lying three
days and three nights not alive, but quite dead in the belly of the earth, did
break the iron bands of the grave, and stand upon the ground, yea in diverse
places preach this Gospel to his disciples, Luke 24.13.
after that he was risen again from the dead. Act. 1.9.
But what was it then that his flesh should mount upon the clouds as it were
upon an horse? Heb. 1.3.
What was his entrance into the tabernacles not made with hands? Psalm. 97.7.
what was the Angels worshipping of him, and the fathers enstalling him in a
throne at his right hand? Certainly the glory of the resurrection of our
Savior, seems not to be glorious, in regard of that exceeding glory, into
which he is exalted by his ascension, far above all powers and
principalities, and all creatures whatsoever.

Now, here we may behold the son of GOD leading captivity captive, giving
gifts unto men, teaching us as Eagles to mount aloft, sitting by the father as
the next person, by whom he governs the Church, providing and dressing (as
it were) many Tabernacles for the elect, and preparing a tribunal seat to
return to judge the earth. Wherefore as his ascending into heaven, was
exceeding glorious, so his descending thence shall yet much more abound in
glory. For then he shall appear unto the eyes not of a few, but of all
flesh, Rom 1.7.
not in the contemptible shape of a base servant, but in the bright and
dreadful majesty of the King and Judge of the whole world. Act. 1.11
At that great day (the day of Doom or Judgment known only to GOD, but
which cannot be far of from men) these writs, to wit, the Sun darkened, Luk
21.25 Mat. 24.11
the moon bloody, the stars trembling, the planets falling down, shall go
abroad to summon the inhabitants of the earth, unto the court where in all
causes shall be ended, and all confusion of this world shall be corrected.
Then, oh where shall the amazed people and chayned prisoners, either fast their
footing, or hide their heads, Luke 24.16. 2. Pet. 3.10.
when tottering* Heavens, and trembling earth, with toring sea, arresting them
before the Tribunal seat of the son of God, the clowdie roabe of the
revenging Judge shall terrify the eyes both of mortal wightes and devils? 1.
These. 4.16
And will not the last Trumpet blown with the blast not of a man, but of that
Archangel, cause the ears of the creatures to tingle and burn, when it shall
sound a doleful and fearful alarm? Yet again much more dreadful must
needs be the smokie fire, 1. These. 1.8
which, as breathed out of the nostrels of the angry Judge, shall cause the
Elements to boil, the towns and Cities of the world to be turned into ashes,
the faces and skins of men to be changed as into tinder. Then, then the
graves, Reu. 20.13 14
the waves, the pittes, yea hell it self also, (as the general iay lours of
the whole World) shall bring forth their dead and buried prisoners, to receive
their final doom at this solemn sessions. Thus all sorts of people arrained
at the bar, and gathered by the Angels (as by sericants or officers) shall by
them with their hands, Mat. 13.49
and bills or swords as it were, be held and hemmed in on every side. Here
now the scrowles of men's consciences, as evidences, Reu. 20.^^
must needs be unfolded, the books spoken off in the Revelation shall also
be unclasped, and openly read. After that all mortal wights have thus been
gathered together, then shall a separation be made of them by the Judge, Mat.
10.32.
by whom they shall be divided into two sorts, Elect and reprobate, and placed
at his two sides, the right hand and the left. After these things, Christ first
shall pronounce sentence on the chosen, saying to them; Mat. 25.34
Come ye blessed of my father, possess as heirs the kingdom prepared for
you, before the foundations of the world were laid: Then placing the Elect on
thrones, 1. Cor. 6, 2.
as benchers together with him, to judge the World, he shall pronounce the
sentence of condemnation on the reprobate, saying to them, Depart from me ye
cursed into everlasting fire, Mat. 25.41
which is prepared for the devil, and his Angels. Thus shall al men for ever
enjoy their due reward, the second life, or the second death.

And Omortall men, what do ye then mean so to love the world, as if it never
should have an end? O ungodly wretches and enemies to all piety in these days,
as profane as Esan, yea more profane and ungodly than he, or Herod ever was,
will ye needs fulfill the iniquity of your fathers, graund-fathers, great
graund-fathers? Well then, proceed to worship stocks, and stones, to hear
Masses, and to creep to Crosses: cease not to swear daily, hourly,
continually, falsely, vainly, proudly, blasphemously, as ye do without
controlement; brave it, sport it, feast it, loyter it, or (if ye will do
something) labor, drudge, run, and ride on the Lords sabbath, as your manner
is; disdain, despise, curse, murmur and rebel against your magistrates,
teachers, parents, masters, superiors; imb^ue your hearts, hands, tongues, and
weapons in innocent blood, sparing neither bodies, good names, nor souls of
old fathers, men, women, little children; bath your selves in daintines,
wantonness, idleness, drunkenness, hunting, hanking, carding, dicing, and all
kinds of pastime: vnderpin your houses with the bones of your poor tenaunts,
neighbors, brethren, kinsfolk; lay the foundations of them on their carcases,
hang the^ about with the^ir skins, yea, and with the skins of their wives
and children (a goodly kind of tapisterie) plaster them with their entralles,
paint them with their blood, wash them every day with their tears. To conclude
(O crooked and perverse generation) trample under your feet the precious blood
of GOD, manifested in the flesh, justified in the spirit, seen of Angels,
preached unto the Nations, believed in the world, received up in glory: but
know, that for all these things he shall come unto judgment.

Nevertheless as concerning those, unto whom the mystery of godliness seems
without doubt very great, unto whom Christ Jesus is the only treasure in the
world, who endeavor with vprightnes to obey his laws and word, there is no
cause why they should quake to think on his return to judgment: but rather
great reason, why they should pray. come Lord Jesus, Reu. 22.20
come quickly. For seeing he has shed his precious blood for you, will he, or
can he pronounce a bloody sentence against you? Is it credible that the head,
which laid it self down for the body, will adiudge his members unto torment?
Should the spouse, bought with a price above gold orsiluer, and loved more
entirely than any treasure, be afraid to see her most amiable husbands face* Is
there no more favor or tender affection in an elder brother, than to deal
with boanes of his boanes, and flesh of his flesh rigorously? Will a gracious
King rather cruelly slay his subjects, craving pardon, than show his mercy in
saving and advancing them to honor? Was the Son of GOD sometimes so careful
a shepherd, as to seek that which was lost, and will he not preserve that
which he has found? To conclude therefore, he was first manifested in the
flesh, and after received up in glory, that whosoever believe in him, should
not perish, but have life everlasting, and be made Kings and Priests with him
for ever, obeying the Lord without resistance, serving him without corruption,
governed by him as by a glorified priest and Prophet, without such temporal
means as now are in use, yea as are very necessary and profitable for the
faithful, warfaring here on earth. But at that time shall tongues cease and
prophecy be abolished, 1. Cor. 13.1.
and Christ Jesus shall deliver up to his Father the temporal part of his
rule, 1. Cor. 15.24.
which now he exercises not only in the world, but in the Church. For now he
instructs his people by the Ministry of men, then they shall not need any
such teachers, now he feeds them by outward Sacraments, but then he shall
be the only Lamb and bread of life; now he fights against or resists
satan, but then he shall so break his head, that he shall fully conquer him.

Finally, now he is to come to judge the world, and to raise up the dead, but
hereafter he shall cease from these works. Nevertheless still he shall
remain the light, glory, Revel. 21.22, 23.
and flower of the temple, governing both Angels and men immediately by his
person and his spirit.

Thus Elect creatures shall (as members) be united unto God, and God shall be
all in all, even the Father to whom with the Son, and the Spirit, three
persons and one heavenly Majesty, be all praise and glory both now and ever,
Amen, Amen.

Romans 11.33. O there deepenes of the riches both of the wisdom and knowledge of
God, how unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways past finding out.
FINIS.
A request to the Chri stian Reader.
GEntle Reader, I have herein, only drawn the picture of Christ Jesus after
a rude and simple manner, as it were with a piece of chalk, or with a coal.
But if thou shall seek him in the Ministry or preaching of the word, and
the Lord withal shall cause the day star to arise in thine heart, thou shall
see him so lively painted before thine eyes, and behold him so clerelie as in
a Cristall glass, that thou shall be transformed into his image from glory to
glory, not continuing in sin, because grace does abound. (for thou have not
so learned Christ) but putting off the old man, Ephesians. 4.
and putting on the new man, which is created according to God in righteousness
and true holiness. No more unto thee (whosoever thou art which love Christ
Jesus) at this present, save only thus much, let him be the treasure of ^hine
heart. Many say, oh if one would cause us to see good: oh Iehoua lift thou up
the light of thy countenance on us. Psalm. 4.7.
Then shall thou put greater joy into our heart, than of the time wherein
their corn and new wine have been increased. Farewell.


