THE ARRAIGNMENT AND CONVICTION OF VSVRIE.

THAT IS, The iniquity, and unlawfulness of usury, displayed in six Sermons,
preached at Saint Edmunds Bury in Suffolk, upon Proverb. 28. 8.

By MILES MOSS, Minister of the word, and Bacheler of Divinity. Seen and
allowed by authority. The especial contents of this book, are declared in
the page next before the treatise it self.

Read all, or censure none.

Ambros. lib. de Tobia. Cap. 10. Nihil interest inter Funus, and Foenus:
Nihil inter mortem distat, and sortem:
Personat funebrem vlulatum, foenoris vsura.
AT LONDON Printed by the widow Orwin, for Thomas Man. 1595.

TO THE MOST REVEREND FATHER IN GOD, JOHN ARCHBISHOP OF CANTVRburie, Primate of
all England, and Metropolitan, and one of the LL. of her Majesty's most
Honorable privy Counsel: Miles Moss wishes the increase of all the graces
of God, necessary to true godliness in this life, and to everlasting salvation
in the life to come.
THe inscription and dedication of books, to men of note and regard in their
time, either for religion, or virtue, or learning, or authority: is well
known to your Grace, (Right Honorable and most reverend father,) for
continuance to be very ancient, and for use to be exceeding profitable.
Ancient it is, as appears by the writings of the fathers. Damascene
dedicateth one of his treatises to the Tractat. de Logica.
Bishop of Maiume, another to the Introductio dignitatum elementaris.
Bishop of Laodicea. Arnobius inscribeth his commentaries upon the Psalms,
Arnob. Prolog. Com. in Psalm.
Charissimis Patribus, Laurentio and Rustico Episcopis: To his dear fathers
Laurentius and Rusticus Bishops. Lactant. ins^it. lib. 1. ca. 1.
Lactantius his Institutions, unto Constantine the Emperor. Justinius Martyr,
his treatise Just. Mart. de verit christ relig. tom. 2.
of the truth of Christian Religion, to Marcus Pompeius. Saint Augustine, some
of his books Enchirid. tom. 3.
ad Laurentium, some De spirit. and litera tom. 3.
ad Marcellinum, some De mendacio. tom. 4.
ad Consentium, some Contra duas Epist. pelagianorum. tom. 7.
ad Bonifacium: some particularly directed to one man, and some unto another.
Yea S. Luke himself, though he wrote (as did also the other Evangelists) 2.
Tim. 3.16.
by special inspiration: yet he entituleth the Acts of the Apostles, Act.
1.1.
unto one Theophilus, Gualther. hom. 1. in Act. 1.
some special familiar friend of his, or a man of special note for his faith
and religion in the church, as most learned men have observed on that place.
That he must needs be a man of great ignorance, and small reading, who will
judge it to be the newfanglenes or vaineglorie of this age, for men to
consecrate their labors, and dedicate their studies, to the honor and service
of their superiors.

And as this custom is very ancient, so is it also exceeding profitable. For
first, the sacred memory of worthy men, is by the continuance of the books
that are dedicated unto them, preserved from forgetfulness, and challenged from
the ruin of time. Which time, if it grow to be (...). Old and long
continued, Sophocles, Ajax.
(...): (as he says in Sophocles,) it will as well ouerwhelme with darkness,
things which are now lightsome and glorious, as it will reveal and bring to
light, things that yet lie hidden and unknown. The greatest men, for want of
memorials have in continuance of time, been buried in oblivion. Secondly, this
cannot but cheer up and encourage men of virtue and of godliness, to persevere
and to grow old in goodness, when they see that their persons are regarded of
men that now live, and their names are like (by the books which are now
dedicated unto them,) to be registered, and recorded to the generations to
come. For, although virtue be a thing worthy to be affected, and labored
after of and for it self, because August. de lib. arbit. lib. 2. Cap. 18.
it is one of the greatest good things that fall into the nature of man: and
there is not any substance which we possess, Isocrates paraines. ad Demonicum.
(...), Either more honorable, or more durable then virtue: Yet such is the
corruption and wretchedness of our nature, that we are hardly induced thereto,
or vpholden therein, without casting some eye, toward carnal respects, and
seeking therein some outward benefit.

-- Iuuenal. lib. 4. Satyr. 10.
Quis enim virtutem amplectitur ipsam, Praemia si tollas?

The orator said well, Cicero Rhetor. lib. 3.
Neque solum laudis causa rectum sequi conuenit, No man should (and wise men
will not) follow right and goodness only for praise and commendation. Sed si
laus consequitur, duplicatur recti appetendi voluntas. But yet, if commendation
and honor do follow of well doing, the desire and appetite of goodness is
doubled and increased. Thirdly, by the learning and authority of those to
whom books are dedicated, the books themselves are protected from the
causeless censures of the ignorant, and the biting teeth of the Carper.
Hesiode feigned that Hesiod. in Theogonia.
Momus was begotten, or brought forth of the night, for that, (as I suppose) he
walks in darkness, and stingeth in silence as a serpent in the grass. Now, as
the brightness of the sun dispelleth the darkness of the night: so the honor,
yea the very name of a mighty man restrains the malice of the Carper.
Maiestas vindex veritatis: Authority will support that truth, which otherwise
by the malice of men would be trodden under feet. Hecuba told Ulysses, that
his worthiness and estimation ( (...)) was such, and so great, that he was able
to persuade whatsoever he would: yea Euripides traged. Hecuba.
(...), though he spoke the things that were evil and unjust. How much more
then shall the patronage, of a great and honorable man, give countenance, and
credit, and safe conduct to a treatise, the matter whereof is sound, and the
publishing whereof is profitable.

These and some other respects have caused me to resolve, to commend this my
poor labor, and endeavor unto the defense and protection of some worthy
personage: yea though I knew right well, that 3. Ez^a. 4.14.
The truth is great and prevails of it self, and God the author of truth is
all sufficiently able to defend it. And among all others, to present it to
your Grace and favor, for these reasons and causes following.

First, the question of usury, being controuerted in these days among many
(and those very learned) divines: requires and needs an arbitrer of much
reading, experience, and moderation. Oecolampadius said, O^colampad. Epist. 16.
lib. 1.
De vsuris iudicare non est omnium: Every man is not a fit judge in this
cause of usury. And Aristot. Topic. lib. 2.
if no man chooses a young man for a judge, or a guide: Quia non constat eos
esse prudentes, because there is not sufficient evidence of their wisdom: then
should I have showed my self a very young man, if I had chosen any that is
young, either in years, or learning, or experience, to be a determinor of this
controversy, or a protector of this cause.

Secondly, your Grace is reported to be one, who neither lends, nor takes
upon usury, which is not in this age every such man's commendation. And
therefore being free from the guiltines of this sin, you may the more freely
give sentence upon the ungodliness thereof. Ambros. super Beati immaculati. and
habetur 3. quaest. 7. Iudicet.
Iudicet ille de alterius e^^ore (says S. Ambrose) q^^ non habet in seipso
quod condemnet: Iudicet, qui non agit eadem quae in alio putauerit punienda.
Let him judge of an other man's default, who has not the same fault to condemn
in himself: Let him judge of another, who commits not the same things which
he deemeth worthy the punishing in another.

Thirdly, your place and calling has given you a special stroke in the
maintenance of the laws of the Church of England: by which laws, and which
Church, usury is simply and generally prohibited. And therefore you the
fittest man to patronize those, whose writings do condemn it. Polyanth. tit.
Lex.
(...) says Menander. The Magistrate is the strength of the law: And then
shall the Canons of the Church concerning usury be reverenced and regarded,
when by those that are Church governors they be urged and maintained.

If it shall please your Grace to take a view of this treatise, you shall find
these two things observed throughout the whole course of the same. The one,
that in this question of usury, I have not declined (as touching the general
conclusion) from the received judgment (...) the ancient Divines: nor
delivered any thing contrary to the Canons of our Church. Secondly, that I have
not entered into any by controversies not pertinent to this purpose. For I
deemed it the part of a scholar, to hold him to his task, (as the Proverb
is,) and to pursue without unnecessary digressions, the purpose that he has
in hand. What labor I have taken, and what authors I have turned over in
studying of this argument my self only know, and it were in vain to brag or
to boast of them, especially to your Grace. What I have attained unto herein by
my labor and reading, I leave unto your grave and reverend censure. If it
please you to accept this mine endeavor, I have my full desire: If to protect
it, the benefit which the Church reapeth thereby (if happily it prove any)
shall be ascribed to your gracious favor. The almighty God continue and
increase upon you the riches of his grace, to the glory of his name, to the
benefit of his Church, and the public wealth of this realm, through Jesus
Christ our Lord. Bury S. Edmunds this first of January. 1595.

Your Graces most humble, always at commandment in the Lord. MILES MOSS.

To the Christian Reader.
IT is a sound position both of August contra mendaciu^ ad Consent. cap. 15
Hieron. contra Iouin. lib 2.
the elder, and the Tho. Aquin. 12ae. quaest. 73. art. 2. Bulling. Decad. 3.
ser. 10.
latter Divines, against the Stoicke Philosophers, and Iouinian heretics;
Peccata non esse paria: that all sins are not equal but that there are some
greater, some smaller, some lighter, some heavier offenses. For, as all sins
are not of the same nature: so all men sin not in the same measure and
degree. Among other degrees, and diversity of offenses, some sin of
ignorance and know it not: and that is natural weakness. Others know that they
sin, and excuse it: and that is little better then presumption. Others cannot
excuse their sin, but rage and storm against those that reprove it: and that
differs not much from malice. David sinned often, and knew it not, therefore
he desires to be Psalm. 19.12.
cleansed from his secret faults. Adam saw his sin and excused it: Genesis 3.12.
The woman gave me, and I did eat. 1. King. 13.4.
Jeroboam could not excuse his sin, and yet he stretched out his hand to
offer violence, to the Prophet that reproved his Idolatry.

Now all these degrees, and differences of sin, are in no one more pregnant
or evident, then in this evil of Usury. For, some commit usury, not knowing
it to be sin: either because they have not the word, or they use not the word
for the enlightening of their hearts. Those that be ignorant for want of the
word, are without question much to be pitied: and yet is their want that way,
the just punishment of sin. Those that are ignorant for not using the word,
are sharply to be reproved as those whose ignorance acrewing from their own
negligence, is mere sin unto them. August. ad Sextum Romans presbyt. epist.
10^.
In vtrisque non est iusta excusatio, sed iusta condemnatio, says Augustine:
Neither of both can justly be excused: nay, either of both is justly to be
condemned. Others commit usury, and stand to excuse it: alleging for
themselves, either the authority of men, which is little, or the example of
others, which is less. Or again, either endeavoring to prove the thing good
which is fearful, or pretending that they cannot otherwise live, which is
miserable To them that object other men's authority, I answer, as Lactantius
did to the Gentiles, who grounded their religion upon the authority of their
ancestors: Lactant. de Origin erroris lib. 2. cap. 7.
Id solum rectum est, quod ratio praescribit: Not that which men say, but that
which reason warranteth, is right and to be approved. To them that allege
examples, I answer with the ancient proverb, Viuitur praeceptis non exemplis:
We must live by precepts, and not by examples. And with that of Moses in
Exodus, Exodus 23.2.
Thou shall not follow a multitude to do evil. To them which justify usury
to be lawful, I stand not here to make answer: for to that end serves the
treatise following. Only, I apply unto them, that which Cypria^ spoke of some
teachers of his time, Cyprian. de Simplicitate praelatorum.
Ambulantes in tenebris, habere se lucem existimant: Walking in darkness, they
suppose they have the light. Asserentes noctem pro die, interitum pro salute:
They hold the night for day, and destruction for salvation. Vt dum verisimilia
mentiuntur, veritatem subtilitate frustrentur: That while they feign and devise
an opinion, somewhat like to be true, they may adnihilate the truth it self
by their subtilties. To them that pretend, they cannot otherwise live, I
reply, that either they must accuse nature for an unjust stepmother, (which
one of the Fathers Lactant. de Opificio Dei. cap. 3.
counted a point of great folly:) or they must accuse their parents for want
of frugall education, which were undutifulness in a child: Or rather themselves
of sloth and idleness, (which indeed is the usurers sin:) Or lastly, they must
say as those that excuse themselves by destiny, August. in Psalm. 91.
Fatum m^^m ^e duxit* It was my destiny, I was borne, or I was ordained to
live by usury. Others, yet there are, who knowing the practice to be evil,
and themselves not being able to excuse it, they turn their nose upon the very
wind, like the weathercocke, and like mad men rage at those that would bind
them for their benefit: and are like the swine of which Christ speaks in the
Gospel, Matthew. 7.6.
who when they have pearls thrown before them, turn again, and all to rent
those that cast them.

This third kind of Usurers, as they are the worst in nature, and in the
highest degree of sin: so are they those of whom I have most cause to
complain* There is no Usurer about us (that I know) so simple and ignorant,
but he can relate what is said against usury in the word. And on the other
side, there is none so well learned about us, (I dare avouch) that is able to
justify and defend it by the word. And yet have they so raged and stormed at
me since the preaching of these sermons: that I had almost waxed proud with
conceit that I had spoken much against them. For* as it is the nature of the
greater and stronger beasts, to despise the barking whelpe and then only to
turn again when they feel themselves bitten and touched indeed: so I began
to conceive of these Usurers, that because now they stormed therefore they were
stung: and because they fretted earnestly, therefore they were touched
thoroughly. If that be true which is reported, (for I have not vouchsafed to
fifth and examine the cause) some have vowed the answer of my book before it
comes forth: some are said to have many a reason already devised against it
in their brain* some have threatened that I shall never borrowe: some have
slandered me behind my back: some have spoken foul things to my face: yea,
I have been bitten and backbitten, as one said of me publikelie of late, M.K.
in mine own pulpit. The best and most temperate men of that trade, though
before they seemed desirous to hear the cause debated: yet since that time
they have dealt with me, as Laban dealt with Jacob, when he saw how God had
blessed him: Genes. 31.2.
their countenance has not been toward me, Sicut heri and nudiustertius. So
dangerous a thing was it to charm a serpent, and to rouse the slumbring lion:
and so truly was it said of Hierome, Hierom. contra Iouin. lib 2
Amara est veritas, and qui eam praedicant replentur amaritudine: The truth is
bitter and unsavory unto the corrupt tastes of men: and they that preach it,
are filled with bitterness. Veritas odium parit.

Yea, whereas I thank God, I may say without boasting, as did the Prophet,
Iere. 15.10.
I have neither lent nor taken upon usury: (for I have followed my calling,
and not busied my self much with the affairs of the world, which Tremellius
rightly notes to be the sense of that place) yet have there not wanted some,
that have charged me with both, and have under that name censured me as one
most unfit to deal in this argument: because (as they say) I have lent and
taken upon usury. Now, God be merciful unto me in mine other offenses: but
had he no more in other, then they in this sin to say against me: I might
lift mine head full high, and carry mine heart full merri^* The joining of
issue with them in this point, I defer, till (...) in a further declaration.
All that I will say for the present is this. If I were guilty of taking
usury, I protest I would not justify it: If I were guilty of giving usury,
I would swear, and vow it was against my will. But, say I were guilty of the
former, and had lent upon usury when my judgment was lesser, Act. 17.30.
The time of this ignorance God regarded not: And what I have been in times
passed, makes nothing to them. Say I were guilty of the latter, and had taken
upon usury, when my necessity was greater: they know the case is ouerruled by
the Philosopher, Aristot. Ethic. lib. 5 cap. 11.
Qui iniuriam patitur non peccat: He that suffers the wrong, offends not.
And the great Schooleman has determined in this point, Tho Aquin. 22ae.
quaest. 78. art. 4.
Vti peccato alterius ad bonum, licitum est: It is a lawful thing to use
another man's sin, to good end and purpose. But the sum of that point is
this: If I have done both, or either of both, that helps not their cause: If
I have not done both, nor neither of both, the greater is their sin.

Two things I require of the good Christian reader. The one: that thou stumble
not at the title of this treatise. So many having written of this argument, it
was not the easiest thing to find a name whereby to distinguish it from other
men's labors. All that I have aimed at therein is, that nomen might be rei
notamen, (as August. de Genesi ad literam cap. 6. tom. 3.
S. Augustine speaks) that is, that the title of the book might deliver the
substance and matter therein contained. Other quilitie or new devise I have
affected none.

The other is this: that thou hold it not strange to see, that after The Death
of Usury, published the last year by one man, thou have now the year
following his Arraignment and Conviction by another. For first, many times it
falls out, that malefactors are executed before their examination,
Arraignment and Conviction be published to the world. Secondly, The death of
Usury came forth from Cambridge, where I hope no less but it is dead
indeed. Scholars have not so great store of money that they can, nor so
little store of learning that they will be practisers of Usury.

-- Ingenuas didicisse fideliter arts
Emollit mores.
But this Arraignment and Conviction of Usury, comes forth from London:
where though it has in former time been pleaded against by D. Wilson,
concluded against by M. Caesar, and now of later times reproved by M. Turnbull,
and examined by M. Smith: yet is it not hitherto thoroughly convicted in the
consciences of the people, much less put to death and executed as it should.
Thirdly, we see that Judges of life and death, do not all hold their Sessions
or Assizes at one and the same time. But when some have executed fellons in one
shire: some begin their arraignment in another. And therefore what shall let me
to follow their example, and after the Assizes ended, and usury executed at
Cambridge, to proceed on to The Arraignment and Conviction thereof, in the
city of London.

This I speak not, as if I could speak nothing else in this case, but as
sparing and pitying the Author of that treatise, who has ploughed with my
heifer, and whose books have been published under my name, to my great
prejudice and discredit. But I remember what Solomon says: P^o. 29.11.
A fool powers out all his mind: but a wiseman keeps it till afterward.
All therefore that I will add is this, If this book benefit thee, thank God
that gave the means. If it offend thee, yet know that I meant well, and aimed
at thy good, and have written without gall unto any man's person. And so I bid
thee farewell in Christ. This 6. of February 1594.

Thine in the Lord, Miles Moss.

The names of the special Authors used in this treatise: besides the books of
the holy and Canonical Scriptures.
A.
AELianus. Alciatus. Alexander de Ales. Alexand. ab Alexand. Alphonsus.
Ambrosius. Anthoninus. Appianus. Aquileius. T. Aquinas. Archidiaconus. Aretius.
Aristophanes. Aristoteles. Arnobius. Augustinus.
B.
Babington. Baldus. Balsamon. Barnardus. Barthol. Caepol. Basilius.
Bastinguius. Bertrandus. Beza. G. Biel. Bodinus. Boemus Aubanus. Brentius. Ioh.
Bromyard. Bucerus. Bullingerus.
C.
Caelius Secundus. Caietanus. Caluinus. Canones Apost. Canones London.
Centuriae. Chemnitius. Chrysostomus. Chytreus. Cicero. Clemens Alexandrinus.
Codex. Concilium Agathense. Concilium Arelatense. Conciliu^ Carthagine^se.
Conciliu^ Elebertinum. Concilium Laterane^se. Concilium Lugdune^se. Concilium
Nicenum. M. Cope. Cyprianus.
D.
Damascenus. Danaeus. Didacus Couar. Digesta.
E.
Erasmus Roterod. H. E^banus. Euripides.
F.
P. Fagius. B. Fumus.
G.
Galatinus. Galenus. Glanuile. Goffredus. Gratianus. Gregorius Nazia^zenus.
Gregorius Nissenus. Gregorius Theologus. Gualtherus.
H.
Hemingius. Herbrandus. Hesiodus. Hieronimus. Homerus. Hostiensis. Hugo
Cardinalis. L. Humfredus.
I.
B. Iuel. Josephus. Isocrates. Iuuenalis. Iustinianus. Justinius Martyr.
K.
Io. Knewstub.
L.
Lactantius. Io. Langius. Lauaterus. Leo. Lipsius. Ludolphus. Lutherus.
Lycosthenes. Lyra.
M.
Marloratus. Martinus ab Azpilc. P. Martyr. Mattheus Parisiensis. Melacthon.
Menander. Mercerus. Molanus. Molineus. Monumenta patrum. Musc^l^s.
N.
Natalis C^mes. Io. Northbroke.
O.
Oecolampadius. Origines.
P.
Pagninus. Panormitanus. Pellicanus. F. Petrarcha. Petrus de Anchorano. Philo.
Plato. Plautus. Plinius. Plutarchus. Polyanthea. Pomeranus. Postilla mayor.
R.
Rainerus. Raimundus. Ruffinus.
S.
Sarcerius. Scotus. Selneccerus. R. Selomo. Sextus decretalium. Sophocles.
Sozomenus. Statuta Regni Angliae. Ph. Stubs. Suetonius. Suidas. Su^ma Angel. de
Clauas. Survey of pretended discipline. Synodus Hildesheime^sis.
T.
C. Tacitus. Theophilactus. Tremellius.
V.
Vatablus. Viguerius. Virgilius. Vrsinus.
W.
B. Westhemerus. Wigandus. D. Wilson. Wittebergenses theses. Wolfius.
X.
Xistus Betul^ius.
Z.
Zanchius. Zegedinus. Zuingerus. Zuinglius.
TO THE READER.
I Desire thee good reader not to ascribe this my recital of authors to pride
or affectation of vain glory. I am occasioned thereunto by one, who taking
the names of my mouth, and not understanding them, has published them in print
far otherwise then they were delivered by me, or they are in themselves.
Farewell.

In this treatise, are handled these four principal points.
1. Usury is described, what it is, and what are the kinds and branches
thereof. Page 10.

2. It is proved to be manifestly forbidden by the word of God: and sundry
reasons are alleged, why it is justly and worthily condemned. Page 75.

3. The objections are answered, which are usually made out of the Scriptures,
for the defense of some kind of usury, and toward some kind of persons.
Page 112.

4. Diverse causes are showed why usury should not be practiced of a
christian (especially not of an English man) no not though it could be proved,
that it is not simply forbidden in the Scriptures. Page 145.

The Arraignment and Conviction of Usury.
THE TEXT.
Proverb. 28.8. He that increases his riches by usury and interest, gathers
them for him that will be merciful to the poor.
The first Sermon: the special contents whereof are these:
1 The interpreting and unfolding of the text. 2 The necessity and occasion of
handling this argument. 3 The name deriuation* kinds and branches of Usury. 4
The definition of open and actual Usury.
THere he two things very requisite to a Preacher of the word: the one that
the Scripture which he handles be soundly interpreted: the other that the
doctrine which he delivers from it, be directly and necessarily collected.
The neglect of the former is the occasion of errors, and to want the latter is
to build without foundation. And therefore before I proceed to the handling of
the matter and argument contained in this scripture, some things are of
necessity to be observed concerning the sense and interpretation of the words.

First this is not so fitly translated, by usury and interest: for neither is
usury and interest all one (as afterward shall appear) neither is interest
condemned by the word of God. And besides that, this reading, by usury and
interest, agrees not either with the original, or with any of the
interpretors. For the Hebrew has Beneshech vetarbith: and the Greek has
(...): Tremellius, Pagnine, and other of the Latins translate it Vsura and
foenore. Now neither Tarbith in the Hebrew, nor (...) in the Greek, nor Foenus
in the Latin, can properly be interpreted, Interest in the English: But rather
Superabundantia, or Incrementu^, or Augme^tum, that is, Superabundance, or
Increase, as Vatablus has well observed on this place. And yet is this defect
favorably to be ce^sured, yea easily to be pardoned in our English
tra^slators: partly in regard of the want of our English tongue, whose penury
affoordeth not always two several words to express one and the same thing:
partly because the old translation reads it, Vsura and foenore liberali. Now
Foenus liberale, is often given (at the least it may be given) in consideration
of Interest: and partly also because the use and custom of speaking has
confounded the sense of these two words in our usual language. We say
commonly, he takes upon Interest, he pays Interest, he lends upon
Interest: when our meaning and intendement is to say, he takes upon usury, he
pays usury, he lends for usury. And therefore the words being confounded
in our common use of speech, no marvel though they be coupled and united
together of the interpretors in this place.

Secondly, as touching the meaning of this Scripture, we are to know that when
Solomon says here, the usurer gathers his riches for him that will be
merciful to the poor, this is not spoken according to the mind and
intendment of the usurer, as if this were his desire or purpose in gathering of
his wealth, that he might have whereof to be liberal and to give alms unto
the needy. For first, the covetous man does nothing well, but when he dies,
says the ancient Proverb. Secondly, usury is a sin which shuts up
compassion, as after shall appear. And thirdly, where shall you find men
less pitiful then are usurers to the poor? But this is spoken of Solomon in
respect of the providence of God, which oftentimes makes good use of riches
evil gotten: and so disposes of the issue of things, as that the wealth which
the owner hordeth up by evil means (namely by usury) he draws forth to
good purpose, namely to the benefit of the poor.

But now, how and by what means God conuerteth the usurers wealth to the
relieuing of the needy, that is the doubt and question which arises to be
resolved in this place. One of the Rab. Sell. ex Tanhuma, referente Mercero. in
Pro. 28 8.
Rabbis refers it, ad magistratum and fiscum, to the confiscation of the
usurers goods unto the Magistrate: for thereunto we see that the riches and
wealth of great men are many times deuolued. God often suffers men which by
evil means have gathered their riches, to fall into the danger of politic
penal laws and so to forfeite their goods to the crown: whereof it comes
(or it may come) to pass, that of those goods so gathered and so forfeited by
iniquity, the poor may be relieved, high ways may be repaired, public
charges may be defrayed, the burden of the Church and of the common weal may
be eased to the people. And so, He that increases his riches by usury and
interest, gathers them for him that will be merciful to the poor. F.
Vatablus annot. in Pro. 28.8.
Others refer this unto the government and sentence of the Magistrate: as if
Solomon would speak to this effect and purpose. An usurer shall by his riches
evil gathered together, thus help and relieve the poor. The good and godly
magistrate seeing him by so evil and ungodly means rake wealth together into
his hands, will enact such laws, and take such order as shall defeat him of
his wealth, and will more profitablie, and more righteouslie imploye it: namely
(among other particulars) to the relieuing of the poor. L. Lauater comment. in
Pro. 28.8.
Others refer this speech unto the usurers heir, or to him to whom the
usurer leaves and bequeath his goods. He shall leave them to a liberal man
that will be merciful unto the poor. Now though I condemn not this sense,
yet I do not so much approve it, partly because an usurer will hardly be
induced to bequeath his goods to him who he fears will mercifully and
liberally employ them: and partly because that though the father that puts
to usury may sometimes have a kind and a merciful son as appears by the
Ezech. 18.14 17.
Prophet: yet to behold this is almost as rare a thing as it is to see a
black Swan floating on the waters. For commonly such egg such chickin, such
syer such child: the father an usurer, the son unmerciful. And therefore I
rather follow those Con. Pelican. comment. in Prou. 28.8.
who not descending into any particular means (because they are infinite in
the hand of God) do generally apply this sentence unto his holy providence.
As if he had said: God hating the usurer and condemning his course, does one
way or other defeat him and his of their hope and expectation, and the goods
which he gathers by oppressing of the poor, those he conueyeth to another
which of a merciful mind will be liberal to the poor. So that this sentence
of Solomon is almost all one with that which else where he has in this book
of the Proverbs. Prou 13.22.
The riches of the sinner is laid up for the just. And with that which Zophar
speaks in the book of Job: Job. 20.15.
Hec has devoured substance, and he shall vomit it: for God shall draw it
out of his belly. And with that which Luther speaks in his treatise of
Usury: M. Luther. lib. de taxanda vsura tom. 7.
Nec vnquam opes vsuris partae, sunt durabiles and perpetuae, Riches gotten by
usury are never permanent or durable. For one way or other, sooner or later,
the Lord by his providence will defeat the usurer of them: and convey them
into the hands of those, which of charity will employ them to the benefit of
the poor. That whereas the usurer cares not who waxes poor so he may grow
rich, nay takes the way to devour the poor, nay is the means to make the
rich poor: he himself and his substance shall (far beyond his meaning and
expectation) be made a means to ease, and help, and relieve the poor. As
here Solomon says: He that increases, etc.

So that the drift of the holy Ghost in this Scripture is to dissuade from the
practicing of usury: and that he does by an argument drawn from the miserable
effect which shall betide such riches so gathered in the end. Namely, that
whereas men gather riches with a purpose and desire that they may abide to
themselves, and to their posterity: yea and whereas, commonly and ordinarily
men by the wealth, that they lawfully procure, do mainetaine themselves,
relieve others, and provide for their children in time to come: it shall by the
hand of GOD fall out far otherwise with the usurer, his wealth shall be
taken from him, yea it may be from all that are his, and cast as it were into
the lap of one that will be merciful to the poor.

This scripture therefore gives (as we see) direct occasion to entreat of
usury: then which there are not many arguments more necessary or profitable
to be handled in these days. For first, lending upon usury is grown so
common and usual among men, as that free lending to the needy is utterly
overthrown. M. Bucer comment in Psalm. 15.
Eo res abijt (says Bucer) vt impudens habeatur qui mutuu^ petat citra
foenoris oblationem: The world is grown to that pass, that he is counted a
shameless man which makes request to borrow without offering of usury.
Secondly, men are grown so cunning and expert to do evil, that because they
know usury is forbidden by the laws both of God and men, Gratian. decret.
part 2. cause. 14. quaest. 3
Nolunt facere contra legem, sed faciunt fraudem legi (says Gratian:) They
will not break the law for fear of danger: but they will deceive the law
without fear of God. And to defeat the law, to bleare the eyes of the world,
and to avoid danger Master Smith Sermon. 1. upon usury, fol. 12.
they have devised more sorts of usury then there are tricks at cards, as
one says well writing of this argument. Thirdly, men are not only grown to
this pass, that they color and cloak this sin with a pretense of
righteousness: but some have so far forgotten themselves, as that they run
on openly to defend it. Lauat. comment in Ezec. 2. Homil. 5.
Nostro tempore (says Lauater) non desunt homines a quibus ebriet as,
scortatio, vsurae, and alia scelerae impudentissime defenduntur: Our age
wants not men of whom drunkenness, whoredom, usury, and other heinous crimes
are most impudently defended. Defended? nay: Luther de tax vsur. tom. 7
Praedicatur plaenis buccis summam esse virtutem, and opus praeclarum (says
Luther:) Usury is commended with full mouth to be an excellent virtue, a
notable work: a most reasonable gain: a trade without which no common weal
can stand or endure. So deeply have some men surfetted with feeding upon the
poisoned gain of usury. Now when as men are grown to this height and excess
of iniquity, that they will not lend but upon usury, they will cover and
cloak it with pretense of just dealing, they will defend it, nay they will
commend it to the world: high time it is that the Lords men of war take into
their hands Ephesi. 6.17.
the sword of the spirit which is the word of God, if not to cut the throat of
this evil (for that seems to some to be impossible) yet to hacke it and
maime it in the members, and to make it hang the head: least it be a reproach
unto us in the generations to come, that so gross and palpable a sin has
passed vncomptrolled.

If any man demand a reason why after so many that have labored in this
argument, and among so many brethren in this country more able to deal in
such a cause then my self: I the most unworthy and insufficient of a great
number have presumed to set foot into this floor, and to wage battle with
so many and so mighty adversaries: him I do desire with patience and charity
to hear this Apology in mine own behalf. First, I have been challenged more
then once for the doctrine which sometimes in preaching I have been supposed to
deliver concerning usury. As that I have called it Theft and Robbery: which
notwithstanding I have not done: but sometimes have showed that it is forbidden
under this commandment Exodus 20.15.
Thou shall not steal: sometimes I have alleged the judgment of Io. Iuel
Ser. in 1 Thessalonians. 4.6.
B. Jewel, who not only calls it Theft, but makes it worse then Theft by
many degrees. And had I plainly called it Theft, I might have had the
authority of Ambrose, of Augustine, of Hierome, of Bernhard, of diverse godly
and learned writers to have supported the truth of that accusation. Secondly,
I have been challenged, that sometimes in preaching I have coupled and recited
usury with the most grievous offenses: as namely with Adultery, Drunkenness,
Perjury, Oppression, Extortion, and such like. Now this I have done I
confess: but I have not done it of private malice to any Usurers person, nor
without the president and example of many notable men both holy and profane.
Tulli. de offic. lib. 1.
Tullie reckons Usurers with Toll-takers and Customers, a kind of men in
those days of most base account and filthy conversation, as may be gathered
even out of the holy scriptures. D Wilson fol. 147.
Aristotle says, that Usurers and Bawdes may well go together: for they gain
by filthy means all that they get. August. de baptis contra Donatist. lib. 4
cap. 2.
Saint Augustine coupleth them with Covetous men and Thieves. W. Musculus com.
in Ioh. 4.12.
Musculus joins Usury with Deceit and Perjury: Lauater in Ezech. 2. hom. 5
Lauater recites it with Drunkenness and Adultery. So common a thing has it
always been among learned men to fetter Usurers with the vilest offenders, as
those that deserved most shameful disgrace. Thirdly, I have been challenged,
that in preaching against Usury, I have alleged nor could allege nothing
against it but the 15 Psalm. A challenge most false and untrue. For in
Catechizing I have stood upon Exodus 22. Leuit. 25. Deuteronomy. 23. and some other
places to that purpose. And if I could allege no more then the 15. Psalm,
yet were that alone sufficient to stop the mouths of all the Usurers in the
world: seeing that 2. Tim. 3.16.
The whole scripture is given by inspiration of God, and 2. Pet. 2.20.
no prophecy in the scripture is of any private motion. But now, what I am
able to allege more against usury then the 15. Psalm, shall by Gods grace
appear in this treatise following. Last of all, besides that I have been thus
sundry ways challenged (and so justly provoked) to deal more largely and
thoroughly in the matter: this also is to be added as not the least spur to
prick me forward thereunto: namely, that I have been called forth and
required to this business, not only of many of the common sort of men (which
notwithstanding were not to be neglected) but also most of the Brethren about
me, and some even of the best gifts and account, have exhorted me to begin, and
encouraged me to continue this argument and treatise of usury.

Three things I would require of this Auditorie, during the time of this
treatise and the handling of this controversy. First, that you expect not from
me much feruencie of spirit or vehemency of speech. For I do willingly
abstain from all appearance of heat or choler conceived against any
particular man practicing this trade of usury. And besides that, feruencie and
vehemency of speech do belong more naturally to admonition, reprehension,
and exhortation: whereas I must now be wholly taken up in doctrine, and
reasons, and allegations. Secondly, my petition is, that I may without offense
make recital of Doctors, of Councels, of Ciuilians, of Canonists, in a word,
of writers of all sorts, of all times, of all religions. A thing which I am not
wont (you know) much to affect in my usual ministry: yet must I now of
necessity use some liberty in that vain, not only because the matter is
disputable between the greatest men of learning on both opinions: but also
because the question is greater concerning both the scriptures alleged, and
the reasons used in this case, then I may presume to define or determine by
mine own authority. You shall therefore rather hear what their judgments
and arguments are whose opinion I favor: then what my self can say, or might
say, or dare say, in so difficult a question. Thirdly, my desire is, that you
which are now present, and have begun with patience to attend upon this
business, will vouchsafe also your presence at other times when this argument
shall be handled, and continue hearers even unto the end. For wise men know that
all cannot be delivered at once: especially in so large a field, wherein so many
have run their race at length with much variety of style and plenty of
invention. And besides, that which is wanting in one sermon may be supplied in
another: that which is spoken more darkly and slenderly at one time, may be
unfolded more clearly and prosecuted more fully at another. Therefore until
you have heard all, I desire that you suspend your judgment concerning all:
yea and when in the end any slip shall appear, ascribe it not to wilfulnes,
but to ignorance, not to malice, but to oversight. For I say as he of old:
Errare possum, Haereticus esse nolo.


The first principal point, declaring what the word usury signifies: how
many ways it is taken: what it imports in this argument: how many kinds and
branches there are thereof. Lastly, usury is described, and the parts of the
description are examined and unfolded.

THe name of usury is among diverse writers used in diverse significations.
Naturally and properly, and as one says: Martin. Ab Azpil^ueta enchirid. cap
17. number. 206.
Prima sui significatione, In the original signification, It imports the use
or occupying, or employing of any thing. As Erasmus said well, Erasmus
Ecclesiast sieve de rat council. lib. 2 tom. 5.
Vsura nobis ab vtendo dicitur: Usury is named among us of using, or usage.
And Molanus says, Io. Molanus compe^d. Theol. practicae, tract. 2. cap. 26.
council. 1. sect. 1.
Vsura ab vtendo idem est quod vsus: Usury comes of using and is the same
that use is, or usage. And so it appears to signify properly, not only by
the Etymology and deriuation of the word, Vsura quasi vsus rei, Usury as it
were the use of a thing: but also by the taking of it in very approved
writers. Plautus says, Plaut. comoed. Amphitr^o in Prol.
Alcumenam vxorem caepit vsurariam: He took Alcumena to use as his wife. And
again, Plaut. Amphit. act. 5. Scena. 2.
Alcumenae vsuram corporis caepi: I had the use of Alcumenaes body. Every
where we shall read in Tullie, Quintilian, and other approved Latinists, Zuing
lius lib. 1. epist. 22.
Vsura horae, the use of an hours space: Cicero. orat. pro Caio Rabirio. L.
Humfred. de vita Iuel. page 135.
Vsura lucis, the use of the light: Vsura temporis, the use of the time: Frui
vsura, to enjoy the use of a thing: and many such phrases to like purpose. This
also may appear more plainly by the distinction which the Latins do make
between vsuarius and vsurarius: Callopin tit. vsura.
Vsuarius they call him which the Graecians name (...): The man that takes,
receives, or enjoys the use of a thing. Vsurarius they call him which the
Graecians name (...): The man from whom the use or occupying of a thing is
taken and received. So that in the native and proper signification of the word,
usury is the use of any thing: and an usurer is any man from whom or by who^
the use of any thing is had and enjoyed. Now this kind of usury and usurers
no man that has his right wits and senses, will once dare to challenge or
condemn generally as unlawful. For the end and perfection of things is their
use: the benefit and commodity of things consists in their use: yea and men
do therefore live and dwell together, to the end that by the mutual use of
the things which they severally enjoy, each one might be more commodious and
beneficial to another. And therefore this being so, that speech of Bullinger
may well be received in this sense: H. Bullinger. Decad. 3. ser. 1.
Vsurae vocabulum inhonestum non est: Abusus reddidit inhonestum: The name of
usury is not dishonest of it self, or in the own nature: the abuse of usury
or usage is that which has made it dishonest, and of so bad account among men.
For usury is properly the use of a thing: which is of necessity common to al
men in the world. No man can live without the use of many things, and
consequently not without this kind of usury.

But now the name of usury is translated by a Trope from his native
signification, and is commonly taken metonymice, causa pro effecto: the cause
for the effect: usury for the gain or increase arising from the use of a
thing. And of usury taken in that sense I find diverse sorts mentioned among
learned writers.

1 The first I may call Foenus natural, natural usury. And that is a kind of
usury B. Aretius. prob. part. 1. loc. 50.
Qua negotiantur homines cum ipsa terra matre: In which or by which (says
Aretius) men traffic with their common mother the earth: namely, in the trade
of husbandry and tilling of the ground. The reason of this Metaphore is,
because as the usurer by putting forth a sum of money or goods, into the
hands of the borrower, does increase and augment it, and receives again his
own with advantage: so the husbandman casting forth his seed into the bowels
of the earth, Cicer. lib. de Senect.
Terra nunquam sine vsura reddit quod accepit, It never returns that which it
received without usury, or increase. Now this kind of natural usury, which
is nothing else but the tilling and husbanding of the earth unto gain and
increase, no wiseman did ever condemn: nay, no man can justly condemn by the
word of God. For it is Genesis 3.23.
the ordinance of God himself: it is the ancientest trade, Gen 4.2.
first practiced in the beginning of the world: it is the trade Pelican. com.
in Pro. 12.11.
Patribus sanctis olim in vsu, which the holy fathers of old time followed.
Yea, howsoever the husbandman is now abased and contemned, yet husbandry in
times passed was Ibidem.
Labor Romany Nobilibus gloriosus: A trade in which the Noblemen and Senators
of Rome employed themselves without discredit, yea with glory and renown.
And therefore howsoever the Manichees (blasphemous heretics yt they were)
said, August. in Psalm 140.
It was better to be an usurer then a husbandman by profession: because
(forsooth) the usurer does not pull up or tear in pieces the members of God
which are the trees, the herbs, the apples, the fruits of the earth, as (say
they) the husbandman does: yet it is certain that as the reason is ungodly, so
their assertion is false. For the husbandman as concerning his trade, lives
August. de oper. monachorum cap. 13.
Innocenter and honest: An honest and harmless life. Yea husbandry is
August de Haeres cap 46.
Omnium artium innocentissima: (says S. Augustine) The most innocent or
harmless of all the Arts, Trades, Sciences, Crafts, mysteries used and
practiced among men. This Natural usury therefore which consists in gaining
and increasing by tilling, and compassing, and sowing of the earth, and lastly,
in reaping of the fruits which are yielded from the fame: must pass by us not
so much as once snebbed or controuled, much less must it be condemned from
this sentence of Solomon, or any other part of the word of God.

2. There is an other kind of usury which may not unfitly be called Foenus
Spirituale, Spiritual usury. And of that there are two sorts. The first is
giving of alms, munificence and liberality toward the poor and needy: of
which kind the ancient writers suppose that of Solomon to be spoken: Pro. 19 17.
Foeneratur Domino qui miseretur pauperis: He lends (as it were) to usury to
the Lord that is merciful to the poor. For so the old translation reads it
from the Greek: (...). And the reason thereof is this: Io. Mercerus. com. in
Pro. 19.17.
Quemadmodum qui homini mutuum dat, expectat vt sibi mutuum reddatur: Sic
certissime expectet quod quis erogat in pauperem, sibi a Domino etiam cum
amplissimo foenore reddendum. Even as he which lends, looks justly to
receive his own again: so let him that is merciful to the poor most
assuredly expect that the things which he lays out shall be rendered again
of God with a most liberal increase, as it were with a threefolde usury. Now
Io. Chrysostom. hom. 3. in Genesis 1.
Vide vsurae raram naturam and admirabilem (says Chrysostom speaking of that
place of Solomon, and of this kind of usury) Behold the rare and wonderful
nature or operation of this usury: that where other usury is condemned of
God, this he promises to recompense with abundant increase. This kind of
usury is D. Wilson. in Prologo.
good and praise worthy: For God himself has commanded it, Mat. 5.42.
Give to him that asks: and again, Deuteronomy. 15.10.
Thou shall give him, and let not thy heart grieve to give him. Whereof Saint
Augustine said well, August. in Psalm. 36. Ser. 3.
Deus noster qui te prohibet esse foeneratorem, iubet te esse foeneratorem: and
dicitur tibi, foenera Deo. God (says he) which forbids thee in other cases
to be an usurer, in this case, and in this sense commands thee to be an
usurer: and it is said unto thee, Lend upon usury unto God. And as this usury
is commendable in it self, and commanded of God: so is it also very
profitable and commodious to him that uses it. For Pro. 19.17.
The Lord (says the scripture) will recompense him, that which he has given.
And whereas Chrysostom. homil. 5. in Mat. 2.
Illae acquirunt gehenuam, Istae vsurae regnum: (says Chrysostom) The common
vsuries purchase hell unto their masters, but this kind of usury obtains a
kingdom, and glory, and everlasting salvation. This kind therefore of putting
forth to usury and increase, namely to be liberal to the poor, that so God
may recompense thee with advantage: is that whereto all men are to be
exhorted, as to a most commendable, yea a most profitable thing: and therefore
no where forbidden in the word of God.

There is another branch of this Spiritual usury, and that is the profitable
employing of the gifts which we have received from God to the advancing of
his glory, and the benefit of men. Of this usury Origin speaks preaching
to the people: Origin. homil. 3. in Psalm. 36.
Ecce and nunc vos omnes, quibus haec loquor, pecuniam accipitis foe^eratam,
verba mea: haec pecunia Domini est. Behold (says he) all ye to whom I speak
these things, do take my words as money to usury: this is the Lords money,
which you must use to increase. Of this usury also our Savior Christ speaks
in the parable, Mat. 25.27.
Thou ought to have put forth my money to the exchangers, and then at my
coming should I have received mine own with vantage (The Greek has (...),
the old translation, Cum vsura, M. Beza, Cum foenore, that is in english, with
usury.) Now the money there spoken of is taken Dimisius Carthus com. in Psa.
14.
Pro commisso talento, For the talent, or gift, or grace of God committed to a
man. The putting, forth of this money signifies Theophilact. com. in Mat. 25.
Operum exhibitionem, The yielding of works; as Theophilacte does well expound
it: that is, the laboring and endeavoring to glorify God, and to do good to
men by the gifts which we have received. The advantage or usury there spoken
of, is partly Tho. Aquin. 22. ae. Quaest. 78. Artic 1.
Superexcrescentia bonorum spiritualium: The increase of the spiritual gifts
themselves by the use: (for as Iron grows the brighter by wearing, so do the
gifts of God grow the greater by using.) And partly it is Dionis. Carthus. com
in Psa. 14.
Fructus scientile datae, vel gratiae, vel beneficij: The fruit and
commodity, which a man reapeth to himself, or yields to another from the
knowledge, the grace, the benefit, which God has bestowed upon him. And this
kind of usury, that is, the employing and putting forth of Gods gifts within
us to the best advantage of him and our selves, must not be condemned, neither
can it be condemned from the holy scriptures. For GOD himself requires it,
Luke 19 23.
Wherefore gave thou not my money to the bancke? and it is the end why he
gives his gifts to men: for he says, Luk 19.13.
Occupy till I come. And if any man will (like an unprofitable servant) hide
his talent in a napkin, and bury it in the earth, Mat. 2^.28.30.
not only his talent shall be taken from him and given unto an other: but also
he shall be cast into utter darkness where shall be weeping and gnashing of
teeth.

3. These two kinds of usury being thus shortly passed over, as not so
pertinent to this present treatise; I come unto the third, which for difference
and distinction sake we may call Foenus civil, aut politicum: Civil, or
politic usury. Which is when gain and increase is raised from the use of
worldly goods, which are things belonging to the civil and politic estates of
men. And of this kind of usury, I find that there are two sorts: One is
Actual or Outward, when by act and outward deed, increase is made by the use
of a thing. An other is Mental or Inward, which consists only in the hope
and purpose, and expectation of the man. So says Caietanus, Caietanus
Cardinal. Summula tit. vsura.
Vsura distinguitur in mentalem ta^tum, and in vsuram extrinsecam: Usury is
distinguished into that which is only mental, or committed only in the mind,
and to that which is outward, or which bewrays it self by some outward
act. So says also Viguerius, Io. Viguerius Instit. Theol. cap. 5.. 3. ver. 15.
Vsura diuiditur in mentalem and extrinsecam: Usury is divided into that which
is Mental, and that which is Outward. So says also Io. Molanus comp. Theol.
pract. tract. 2. cap. 26. council. 1 sect. 7.
Molanus, and diverse others too tedious to repeat. Of Outward actual usury
there are also two kinds: The one Voluntary, the other by Compact. Voluntary
usury I take to be that which men commonly call Foenus liberale, and is then
performed, when the borrower having profited, and benefited himself by another
man's goods, which he borrowed, does voluntarily, unbound, or unrequired, yield
a thankful, or kind remembrance to the lender: not as a recompense of the
other man's lending, but as a testimony of his own thankfulness. Now I am not
ignorant that other men have judged otherwise of this point. Pellicane puts
this difference between Vsura and Foenus: Pelican. com in Pro 28 8.
Vsura dicitur quod supra sortem datur ex pacto: Foenus quod libere datur supra
sortem sine pacto* Usury is that which is given by covenant above the
principal: and Foenorie is that which is given freely and without covenant
more then the principal. But this distinction I approve not, unless he put to
foenus the addition of liberale, to discern it, and specify it for a kind by
it self: because it is evident that vsura and foenus are taken promiscue, both
in one sense, and both in the worst part among all writers. Others have thus
distinguished between usury, and liberal or voluntary Foenorie: Hugo
Cardinalis in Prou. 28.8.
Vsura est quod datur supra sortem ex pacto praecedente, scilicet inter
vsurarium and debitorem: Foenus liberale est retributio mutuatae pecuniae in
debitoris libera voluntate constituta: Usury is that which is given above the
principal by covenant, made before between the usurer and the detter:
Voluntary Foenorie is the repayment of the money borrowed, consisting in the
free will or choice of the detter. And he adds: Ita solet definiri: So is it
usually defined. Now usually it may be, but truly, and soundly (in my
suppose) it cannot be thus defined. For by this means Foenorie shall be only
the repayment of such a debt, as which a man may choose (because he is not
bound) whether he will discharge or no. In which sense I do not remember that
ever I read the word used in any kind of writer. And besides that, neither can
he be called Foenerator which lends without covenant or assurance to receive
his own again: neither can that be called mutuata pecunia, which a man so
puts forth, as he leaves it free in ye choice of the borrower, whether he
will ever repay it or no. And therefore without question, Ita nequit desiniri.
Voluntary or liberal Foenorie cannot so be defined. Unles per retributionem
mutuatae pecuniae, we understand, not the repayment of the principal, but a
recompense and consideration made for the lending. I do therefore so
understand voluntary usury, as I have before described it: and being so taken
and understood, I see not how it can be condemned by the word of GOD. For
first, it is only a testimony of thankfulness, and not a recompense of a
benefit. Secondly, it is the free will of the giver: now what is freer then
gift? And again, Volenti non fit iniuria: If he will give it unasked or
uncompelled, he has no injury offered in the taking. Thirdly, he that lends
might lawfully before he lent receive a free gift of the borrower. Tho. Aquin.
2^ a. quaest. 78. art. 2.
Nec peioris conditionis efficitur per hoc quod mutuauit, says the School
man: His lending has not put him into a worser condition: but that he may as
lawfully take a free gift after he has lent, as he might before his lending.
And therefore this voluntary usury I leave also uncondemned: and do rather
condemn the old translation, which joins together Vsura and Foenus liberale
in this sentence of Solomon.

But to proceed: As there is usury given of free will, so is there also
usury due by Compact. And that is committed, when he that lends Couenanteth
with the borrower to receive again not only his own, and his principal, but
also increase and advantage. Of which Compacting usury, some is more open and
direct, and therefore I call it Vsura explicata, manifest or unfolded usury:
some again is more close and secret, and therefore I call that, Vsura
palliata, cloaked, or covert usury. According to which division Molanus
speaks thus: Molanus comp. theol ^ract. tract. 2. cap. 26. conc. 2. sect. 13.
Exterior vsura aliquando clara est, aliquando vero titulo honesti palliatur:
Outward or actual usury sometimes is clear, and manifest: but sometimes it
is cloaked or covered with the title of honesty. And another more plainly,
Martinus ab Azpilcueta ^nchirid. cap. 17. number. 207.
Contractus mutui est duplex, verus and palliatus. Ita duplex est vsura: vera
quae in vero mutuo, and velata seu palliata quae in palliato versatur. The
contract of lending is of two sorts: the one direct or indeed: the other
cloaked or pretended. And so is usury of two sorts also: the one true usury,
or usury indeed which is occupied about true lending: the other covert or
cloaked usury, which is occupied about lending cloaked or pretended. And these
be the special kinds of outward or actual usury.

Then follows that which is Mentalis vsura: The usury of the mind, The
practiser whereof is called Didacus Couar* relect. part. 2.
Mentalis vsurarius: A mental usurer, or one that commits usury only
inwardly with himself and with his own mind. For Viguer. instit. theol. cap.
5.. 3 ver. 15.
Mentalis consistit in spe lucri absque vlla conuentione: Mental usury
consists in the hope of gain without any covenant, says Viguerius. If a man
therefore lend, demanding no gain of the borrower, nor couenanting with him
for usury and increase: outwardly, in deed, and act he can be no usurer. But
if his purpose, and desire, and expectation be, that the borrower should not
bring his goods weeping home, but that he should tender him consideration for
the use of his goods: such a man has in his mind committed usury before God,
and comes within the compass of Salomons censure in this place. I am not
ignorant that there are many other distinctions or divisions made of usury: as
Aret. prob. part. 1, loc. 50.
Simplex and Coniuncta: terrestris and nautica: Centesima, Semissalis,
Trientaria, etc. But these either are comprehended under those already
specified, or else they are not in use and practice among us: and therefore I
hold it not necessary at large to dilate them. But now these branches of
usury being thus expressed, it remains that we proceed to the handling of so
many of them as fall into controversy and question in these days. And those
are by name, first Outward or Actual compacting usury, and the two branches
thereof viz. Open and Cloaked usury: secondly, that which is only mental or
committed in the mind. And therefore these only my purpose is to discuss in
the treatise following.

But by the way let me note thus much from that which has been already
delivered concerning the name, the diverse acceptions, and the several kinds
of usury. It is true, and it must be confessed that there are to be found in
diverse godly writers large tolerations (that I may not say approbations) of
some kind of usury. Master Calvin says, Io. Calvin. epist. resp. de vsuris.
Nullo testimonio scripturae mihi satis constat vsuras omnino damnatas esse: It
does not sufficiently appear to me by any testimony of scripture, that usury
is wholly or generally condemned. Bucer says, Bucer com. in Mat. 5.
Vsura sieve foenus, hoc est, quicquid commodi ex data mutuo pecunia vel re alia
ad creditorem a de bitone supra sortem redit, per se nulla lege prohibetur*
Usury or foenorie, that is, all kind of commodity which arises by the
lending of money, or any other thing, from the borrower to the lender over and
above the principal: by it self or simply is forbidden by no law. Bullinger.
decad 3. Ser. 1.
Bullinger seems to be of the same mind, and some others also, who for
their great godliness and learning are much to be regarded. Now I would have no
man to conceive that my purpose is to neglect or contemn so excellent men, and
so well deserving of the Church of God. No, I acknowledge that Bucer was Theod.
Beza de coena Dom. contra Ioach. Wertphal. ad cap. 22.
^^re pius, a very godly man, and Bullinger was Beza respons. ad Franciscum
Balduinum.
vir doctissimus, a very learned man: as Master Beza, a man very godly, and
learned himself, has entitled the^ in his writings. But especially, Master
Calvin was a man (as Zanchius testifies of him) who is justly to this day
Hieron. Zanchius miscelan. epist. ad Lantgrauiu^ page 36.
honorifice memoriae, of honorable memory vt ibi a (...) E^ropa, as all Europe
witnesses. Yea further, he was a man praestanti pietate, maxima eruditione,
singulari in rebus omnibus iudicio, of great godliness, exceeding learning, and
singular judgment in all things. God forbid therefore that I should contemn
them and their judgments. But this is that which I would have here to be
observed, concerning these men and others of their opinion. Since the name of
usury is taken so largely, and since there are so many kinds and branches of
usury, whereof diverse have already been by me acknowledged to be lawful:
it is no great marvel though they have spoken so favorably of some kind of
usury, or of usury in general, taking it (it may be) in the largest
signification. And why do I say, it may be they took it in the largest
signification? When as it is evident that some of them did so take it in deed.
For Bullinger defines usury after this sort, Bullinger. decad 3. Sermon. 1.
Vsura est, cum alteri concedis vsum tui Peculij, vtpote agri, vel domus, vel
pecuniae, vel alterius alicuius rei, vnde in annum percipis fructum aliquem:
Usury is, when thou yeeldest to another the use of thy goods, as of thy
ground, of thy house, of thy money, or of any other thing, whereof thou
re^pest a yearly commodity. Now if under the name of usury, we understand
whatsoever commodity arises to a man from the leating of his cattle, of his
house, of his land, or such like: then it is evident that (as these learned men
and others affirm) all kind of usury, simply and generally is not
forbidden in the word of God: neither do they (taking usury so largely)
oppositely and directly oppugn the drifte of this treatise. I conclude
therefore this point with that saying of the School man, Gabriel Biel. in
quartum senten. did. 15. quaest. 11. art. 1. c.
Vsura quandoque capitur multum large, pro omni acceptione vltra sortem in
mutuo, and sic non omnis vsura est illicita, Usury is taken sometimes very
largely in signification viz. for any thing which is taken in lending above
the principal, and so all usury is not unlawful. For voluntary thankefulnes
has been justified already, and interest shall be justified hereafter in this
discourse. Besides that, the name of usury includes the very use of any
thing, and it has diverse kinds which before have been approved to be
lawful. So much therefore in this place for those men's opinions. Now I return
to the handling of the branches of usury, which are most common among us and
shall be showed to be unlawful by the word of God.

And first of that outward and actual usury, which is open and manifest,
Outward Open Actual. usury.
and apparent to be such as it is indeed in the eyes and judgment of men.
This is that kind which has spread it self furthest, and has grown most
common in all places and corners of the world. And therefore of this kind most
writers of all countries do entreat: giving (every man according to the
abundance of his own sense) diverse definitions or descriptions thereof. All
which but once to remember and relate, would almost make a volume of it self.
Many therefore shall for breuities sake be only quoted in the margent: and
those which are recited shall for the better understanding of the simple be
divided into four several ranks.

1. The first sort of definitions of Usury.
The first rank shall be of those which do thus define it or to this effect
Ludolphus de vita Christi. part 2. cap. 49.
Vsura est quod ex mutuo vltra sortem accipitur: Usury is whatsoever for
lending is taken above the principal. Or again, Petrus de Anchorano consil.
49.
Quicquid recipitur vltra sortem vsura est: Whatsoever is taken above the
principal is usury.

To which effect it is also defined of Aret prob. part. 1. loc. 50. tit. De
vsuris. Glanuil. lib. 7. cap. 16. and lib. 10. cap. 3. D. Wilson. fol. 34.


These definitions exclude as we see the taking or receiving of any thing for
lending, whatsoever, or upon what occasion soever: and therefore are indeed
more large then can well be justified by the word of God. For first they
exclude Foenus liberale, which has before been approved to be lawful.
Secondly, they cut off the very giving and receiving of thanks and good will
between the borrower and the lender. Whereas very nature teaches a man to be
thankful for a benefit, and to repay good will to him that has deserved it.
Phil. Melancthon. Dial. lib. 1.
The Persians (we read) punished ingratitude with death, and Suetonius Claud.
Caes. cap. 25.
Claudius Caesar reduced unthankful persons into bondage: and why then should
unthankfulness be tolerated among Christians? No, the School men Tho. Aquin.
22 ae quast. 106 art. 1.
have canonized gratitude for a special virtue: and so is it certainly to be
houlden and reputed. These definitions therefore I receive not, for the reasons
before mentioned and alleged.

2. The second sort of definitions of Usury.
There be others which describe usury after this manner, Council. Agathense
decret. 2.
Vsura est vbi amplius requiritur quam datur. Verbi gratia: Si dederis solidos
december and amplius quaesieris, vel dederis frumenti modium vnum, and super
aliquid exegeris: Usury is when any thing is required, or demanded, more then
was given or lent forth. As for example; If thou lendest ten shillings and
demaundest more, or lendest a bushel of corn and demaundest more, this act
is usury. This definition steppeth a degree beyond the former sort. For where
the other spoke only of giving and receiving more then the principal: this
imports a requiring, a demanding, and an exacting of more then the
principal. And yet this definition cannot be sound, nor sufficient to express
unlawful usury. For if all kind of demanding more then the principal be
usury, then here is cut off all the taking of the forfeiture of any band or
obligation, for any cause or consideration whatsoever: because in so doing, a
man demands and receives more, yea as much again as the due debte and
principal. Now it is true, that this taking of forfeitures, is a grinding of
the faces of the poor too common in this uncharitable age, and it is a kind
of gain which our fathers in former ages scarce knew, but seldom or never
practiced. Yet no man may simply and absolutely forbid another, even by
bands to take security of his own: neither may men peremptorily be
condemned, when being damnified for want of their own, they seek to make
themselves whole or to save themselves harmless by the penalty and
forfeiture of bands.

Provided always that such bands, obligations, penalties, and forfeitures,
pass not between man and man G. Biel. in quartum sent. did. 15. quaest. 11.
art. 1. c.
In fraudem vsurarum: To cloak usury withal, or to prevent the laws which
prohibit usury. Quia, si in fraudem vsurarum poenam adijcit, vsurarius est.
For if a man lend any thing, and take the borrowers band for the payment of
it, with intent that at the day the penalty and forfeiture of the band, shall
pay for the forbearing of the money: then certainly he is an usurer. Now it
is to be presumed says the same Schooleman, that the lender imposes a
penalty upon the borrower, to cloak the act or to avoid the danger of
usury, when as either Ibidem.
The lender wishes rather, that the borrower would pass his day, and so he
might take the forfeiture: then that he should pay him at his day, and so
avoid the penalty. Or else, when the lender knows at the time of lending,
that the borrower is not like to make restitution at his appointed day. Or
thirdly, If the lender imposes a greater penalty upon the non payment then,
his damage can possibly be for the forbearing of his goods. These are three
rules which if they were well seen into and observed, would cut off many
vsurarious bargains that pass between man and man, under pretense of bills
and bands, forfeitures and obligations. It being a common practice in these
days, that when men lend upon bands, with intent of usury: when the day is
passed and the band is forfeited, though they have for want of their money at
the appointed day sustained no certain, nay no likely damage, yet to pay
themselves sometimes double and treble usury by the forfeiture of the band.
And if they take not the extremity, and the whole, they will be of necessity
accounted very honest and religious dealers. But of that by the way.

As those which define usury after this second sort do thereby cut off all
obligations and forfeitures: so do they also thereby exclude all due and
lawful Interest. P. Melancth. lib definit. appellat.
Interest is (says Melanchton) a debte which he owes by the law of nature,
that has been to another an effectual cause of damage and loss, or has
indeed hindered his just and lawful gain. So that Interest is justly due
Panormitan. c conquest. de vsuris cit. a Gab in 4 sent. did* 15. quaest. 11.
art. 1. f.
Non solum ex damno contingente, sed etiam ex lucre cessante: Not only when a
man has lent, and for want of receiving again of his own in appointed time,
he suffers damage, but also when wanting his own to employ for his best
advantage his gain and increase is hindered. As for example, I lent freely,
looking to receive mine own again at a certain appointed day. The day came,
I received it not. For want of it, I forfeited at that day a band to an other
man, and the forfeiture is exacted of me in part, or to the utmost. I doubt not
but reason and conscience will, that I may demand such recompense of him to
whom I lent freely, as I am compelled for want of mine own, to make to
another to whom my band and obligation by that means is forfeited. And thus
is Interest demanded Ex damno contingente* In confideration of the damage I
have sustained. Again, I am (for the purpose) an occupier, and have money
lying by me, which may pleasure an other man for a time, and will serve mine
own turn well enough, if at such a day it be repaied. I lend freely: I cannot
receive it at my appointed time. For want of it, I cannot at such a fair make
such provision for my house, or so furnish my shop with wares, as my necessity
and occupation does require, whereon my living and maintenance depends. I
doubt not, but I may in equity and conscience demand, that he which borrowed
my money, where with I might have furnished my self of these things, should
make recompense answerable to ye benefit and advantage, whereof for want of
mine own I have been hindered. And this is Interest demanded Ex lucro
oessante: In consideration of my gain which by want of mine own has been
abated. The reason of both these is drawn (says Melanchton) Melan. lib.
definit. appellat.
Ex naturali aequalitate: From natural justice. For this is a law of natural
equity, Ibidem.
Nemo locupletetur cum alterius iniuria: Let no man enrich himself by
hindering of an another* And the Apostle will not that even in giving of alms,
(much less in lending and borrowing) we should so deal as 2. Cor. 8.13.
Other men should be eased by the grieuing of our selves. Now if I lend to
pleasure an other, and for want of mine own at the appointed time, I am
indamaged to my creditour, or hindered of my lawful gain: he is enriched by
my harm, and eased by my grief, and therefore recompense due unto me by the
very law of nature. Interest then is not unjust nor unlawful: and
consequently the definition of usury last above named* because it excludes
all penal forfeitures, and all reasonable Interest, is not to be received.

Note by the way for the better discovery of the usurers evil dealing, that
howsoever he to gloss with the world, is wont to confound the names of
Interest and usury: and men are wont to say, that they take Interest, and
lend upon Interest; when indeed they take usury and lend upon usury: yet that
there are two manifest and essential differences between usury and Interest,
which do so distinguish the one from the other, as that they cannot possibly
be confounded. One difference is this: Usury is an overplus or gain taken
more then was lent: Interest is never gain or overplus above the principal,
but a recompense demanded, and due for the damage that is taken, or the gain
that is hindered through lending. An other difference is this: usury accreweth
and grows due by lending, from the day of borrowing, unto the appointed time
of payment: Interest is never due but from the appointed day of payment
forward, and for so long as I forbear my goods after the day, in which I did
covenant to receive them again. So that, if once I have lent freely unto a
certain day, I shall not demand Interest for any damage sustained, or gain
hindered during that term of time, for which I have lent unto another. But if
at the couenanted time I receive not mine own again, then what harm soever
do betide me after that day for the forbearing thereof, reason will that it be
recompensed of the borrower. And so much of Interest, and of the difference
between it and usury.

3. The third sort of definitions of Usury.
A third manner of defining usury is this.

Nich. Selneccerus instit. christ. rel. part. 2. page 615.
Selneccerus says, Vsura est lucrum supra sortem exactum: Usury is a gain
exacted above the principal. And so says Brentius, Brent. com. in Leuit. 25.
Vsuram de finiunt esse lucru^, quod ad mutuum accedit, seu vbi praeter sortem
soluitur aliquid propter mutuatione^: Men (says he) do define usury to be a
gain that is added to that which is lent* or when over and besides the
principal, any thing is paid for lending.

To which effect it is also defined of Luther. de taxand. vsurato 7. Melanch.
lib. de fin. appel. Tho. Aquin. 22^. quast. 78. in principio. Lauat. in Eze.
18. hom 76. Da. Chytraeus. in Exodus 22. Viguerius. instit. theol. cap. 5.. 3.
ver. 14. D. Wilson. fol. 85.


Now these descriptions are somewhat more perfect then those that went before:
for they do add the mention of Gain unto Exaction. And whereas the other
affirmed that whatsoever is exacted more then the principal, that is usury:
(so condemning both penalties and Interest, things which are lawful in common
equity,) these definitions do import that usury is neither penalty nor
Interest, taken for the forbearing of any thing longer then the appointed day:
but that it is a gain, an overplus, and increase arising from the very act of
lending. And yet these seem not to me to be perfect and absolute enough to the
purpose. For put the case that I lend an hundred pounds to a merchant
aduenturer, with these conditions: viz. if he gain not by employing of it, I
require no gain: if he loose in the employing of it (doing his good and honest
endeavor, that there be not Culpalata, as the Ciulians speak) I will bear
half the loss: if he gain nothing, but only save the principal, I will
have that wholly repayed again: if he not only save the principal, but
gain by the employing of it also, I will not only have ye principal, but part
of the gain also. In this case I demand gain of yt which I lent, even
because I lent it: and yet I take not this gain to be usury or unlawful.
First, because I do herein adventure the principal. Secondly, because I am
contented to partake the loss. Thirdly, there is neither certainty of gain,
neither if I do gain, is there any measure or proportion of gain agreed
upon. It may be some man will judge this to be Co^tractus societatis. The
contract of society, or partnership* If it be, yet it differs very little
from lending. If it be lending, the^ does it annihilate the definitions last
above mentioned: as those which do not sufficiently describe that kind of
usury which is unlawful and condemned by the word of God.

Not much unlike or differing from this, is the right Contract of Society, or
partnership in deed: An instance whereof may (for examples sake) be delivered
in a Scholar: who has ready money left him of his father, but has no trade
wherein to employ it, because he has been continually trained up in learning*
He having a friend that is a Merchant, commits the occupying of his money
unto him: with condition that they shall divide the gain equally between
them, if it increase, and bear the loss equally between them if it decay.
The sum of the covenant is thus much in effect. The Scholar shall after a
sort lend the Merchant his money, and the Merchant shall after a sort lend
the Scholar his labor: both shall be combined, and the loss or gain shall
be equally divided. This was never judged to be usury: neither shall it ever
be justly reproved from the Scriptures.

4. The fourth sort of definitions of Usury.
There are yet others which do describe usury after an other manner, and in
another form of words. The Divines of Wittenberge, have thus concluded of it,
Theses Wittenberg. de vsura. thesi. 2. citat. ab Aret. Prob. part. 1. loc. 50.
Sunt vsurarij seu foeneratores, quicunque ex pecunia mutuo data vel minimum
etiam obolum, vel haustum frigidae aquae, ex conuentione vltra sortem
accipiunt. Those are usurers, who, for money lent forth, do by covenant
receive even the least half pe^nie, or a draught of cold water, over, or more
then the principal. To this effect also is it defined of that reverend B. of
Sarisburie, Laurent. Humfred. epist. nuncupat. in vita Iuelli. page 4.
Ecclesiae nostrae decus and ornamentum, who was in his time an honor and
ornament to our church: as D. Hu^fric truly reports. He entreating ex
professo of this argument: has left usury thus defined in his writings. Io.
Iuel. Ser. in 1 Thessalonians. 4.6.
Usury is a kind of lending of money, or corn, or oil, or wine, or of any
other thing, wherein upon covenant and bargain we receive again the whole
principal which we delivered, and somewhat more for the use and occupying of
the same.

To which effect it is also defined of Zegeddinus loc. com p. 457. Hugo card.
comment. in Pro. 28.8. Ioh. Molanus co^pend. Theol. practicae tract. 2. cap.
26. consil. 3. sect. 14. D. Wilson. fol. 84. M. Smith. ser. 1. upon Usury. fo.
3 M. Turnbul sermon. 4. in Psalm. 15. M. Perkins. Armil. aur. in praec. 8. cap.
27. Raymundus Goffredus.


Now these definitions do add unto the former the point or particular of
compact. At the least wise they do more openly and clearly explain that,
which the others have delivered concerning debte and exaction. For the borrower
can owe nothing but by covenant: the creditour can exact nothing but by
covenant. And therefore since in usury there is debt, and there may be
exaction: there must of necessity be also in usury, not only lending and
gain, but also couenanting and compacting for gain.

But now because these three things may concur viz. 1. Lending 2. Lending
for gain. 3. Couenanting for gain: and yet not make unlawful usury (as has
been before exemplified in the third rank or order of definitions:) therefore
I add the fourth circumstance unto the former three, and that is, The not
aduenturing of the principal. And this fourth point I take up and adioyne to
the former out of the Council of Laterane. Council. Lateran. sub Leone 10.
sess. 10.
Eapropria est vsurdrum interpretatio, quando videlicet ex vsurei quae non
germinat, nullo labor, nullo sumptu, Nulleue Periculo luorum foetusque
conquiri studetur. This is the proper interpretation of usury, (say the
Fathers assembled in that Council) when men labor to get gain and increase
from the use of a thing which grows or increases not: and that with no
labor, with no cost, with no danger, or aduenturing. And therefore conferring
al these definitions together, and gleaning out of them all, that which I hold
most essential to this purpose: I do thus define that Open, Outward, and
Actual usury whereof I now entreat, and which I take to be forbidden by the
word of God.

Usury is a lending for gain, by compact, not aduenturing the principal.

Or more plainly thus.

Usury is, when a man not aduenturing the goods which he lends,
couenanteth to receive again more then he lends, even upon this
consideration, because he lent them.

Note by the way, that I here do define the action or sin of usury, and not
the usury it self, as many have done in the former descriptions. For one said
rightly, Mar. ab Azpilcueta enchirid. cap. 17. number. 207.
Aliud est peccatum vsurae, and aliud vsura: The sin of usury is one thing,
and usury it self is an other thing. The sin of usury is to take or to
desire vsurarious gain: but usury it self is the gain which in the own
nature may be valued for money, and is demanded principally for the duty
either of direct or colored lending. Now the sin or fault of usury, is the
thing which is condemned in the word of God, and therefore that is it which I
deemed here most fit to be described. And in this kind of usury thus
described and laid forth, I do observe four things which must of necessity
concur and meet together. 1. The first is Lending. 2. The second is lending
for Gain. 3. The third is Compacting for gain. 4. The fourth is, The not
aduenturing of the principal. Of which four particulars, as of things
whereupon depends the weight and substance of this controversy, my purpose
is severally and largely to entreat in the sermon following.

The end of the first Sermon Preached March 19. 1592.
The second Sermon: the special contents whereof are these.
1. Usury is committed in lending only. 2. Usury is in lending for gain. 3.
Usury is compacting for gain. 4. In usury is no aduenturing of the
principal.
And so consequently here is discussed.
1. What lending is, and how it differs from other contractes. 2. What gain
is, and what it is to lend for gain. 3. What it is to compact, and how many
ways a man may covenant. 4. How the usurer aduentureth, and not aduentureth
his principal.
THe first of the four things, necessarily required to the definition of this
usury, is that it be committed in lending. Bullinger. decad 3. Sermon. 1.
Dicunt vsuram in solo mutuo (quod debet esse gratuitum) committi: non in
reliquis contractibus. Men say that usury is only committed in lending,
(which should be free) and not in other contracts. Now indeed, learned men do
say and affirm so. Chemnit. loc. com tom. 2. tit. de paupertate cap. 6.
Chemnitius says: Fit in contractu mutui: Usury is committed in the contract
of lending. Brentius says: Brent. com. in Leuit. 25.
Vsura fit tantum in mutuo: Usury is committed only in lending. D. Wilson
says: D. Wilson fol 86.
There cannot be any usury where lending is not. And therefore the scripture
says, speaking of usury: Exodus 22.25.
Si pecuniam mutuam dederis. If thou lend money: for so is it read in all old
and new translations. And the Greek interpretor has; (...): The same word
which Christ uses, Luke 6. and all men translate, Luk 6.35.
Mutuum date: Lend looking for nothing again.

Now since usury is only in lending, it is necessary that we consider what
lending is: and consequently, that we have some recourse unto the lawyers
schools, to whom the handling of contracts does specially appertain. And yet
so, as that in speaking thereof, we shall not wholly transgress the bounds
and limits of Divinity. For although, Chemnit. loc. com. tom. 2. tit. de
pauperta. cap. 6.
The matter and form of contracts be to be derived from the lawyers and
philosophers: yet the Divine adds to them the efficient cause, which is the
ordinance of God: and speaks more highly of the final cause, then either the
lawyer, or philosopher by his profession can apprehend. Ibidem.
For the rule of Divinity (says Chemnitius) is this. Ita exercendos
contractus, vt conspiciatur fides, and exerceatur dilectio: Contractes, and
bargains must so be used among men, as they may show their faith, and exercise
their love toward their brethren. A thing which I thought good the rather to
observe, lest either Divines should think that matters of bargaining and
contracting belong no way to their profession: or that in speaking of them at
this present, I should be thought to assume that unto me, which be seems
not my calling.

But to return to the point: If we will know what lending is, and what manner
of bargain a man makes when he lends to his neighbor: me thinks
Hemingius has well described the nature thereof unto us. Hemming. com. in Iac.
5.
Mutuatio est contractus quo transfertur rei Dominium in alterum, nullo quidem
pretio interposito, sed cum pacto, vt eadem res reddatur in specie. Lending is
such a contract, or bargain, as transferreth the dominion or property of a
thing, from one unto an other, for no consideration of any price or recompense,
but only with covenant, that the same kind of thing be rendered and repayed
again, Now I would have these words of Hemingius to be thoroughly waighed and
considered. For every one of them has his weight and moment: and they do not
only distinguish lending from all other kind of bargaining: but also do
manifestly show that an usurer can practice no other contract, but only
lending: yea, and only that kind of lending which is called mutuation. First,
in that when we lend, we covenant with the borrower, that the same thing, or
the like thing, shall be repayed and restored again: therein and by this
point is lending distinguished from giving. For L. 1. and L. Donari. ff. de
Donationibus and L. Donari. ff. de Reg. Iur.
Donatio proprie est, qua aliquis dat ^a mente, vt statim velit accipientis
fieri, nec vllo casu ad se reuerti. Giving is, when a man bestows a thing
upon an other, with this mind and purpose, that he would presently have it
become his that does receive it, and never in any wise to be returned again
unto himself. From whence then we may easily observe, that the usurer gives
not forth his money or his goods: in as much as he has no purpose to make
them become for ever, the goods of the receiver: but couenanteth, that in time
they shall again return unto himself. And therefore, though sometimes we
read this phrase or manner of speaking in the holy scripture. Leuit 25.37.
Thou shall not give him thy money to usury: and again, Psalm. 15.5.
He that gives not his money to usury, and such like: yet we must not be so
simple, as to gather from thence, that the usurer practices the contract and
covenant of giving: for as much as he indenteth for the return, and repaying
again of such things as are delivered. Whereof it is that though the prophet
Ezechiel do use also the same phrase of Ezech. 18.13.
giving forth to usury: yet he adds thereunto, the taking of increase: which
notes, that it is such a kind of giving, that is practiced in usury, as
caryeth taking with it. As if a man would say in this case, and in this sense,
as it is said in Authors of some kind of contracting. Gratian. decret. Part.
2. Cause. 14. Quaest. 3.
Do vt des, vel do vt facias: I give thee, that thou may give me: or I give
thee this, that thou may do me that. Thus then we see how lending and
giving differ: and that the usurer does not in putting forth of his money,
exercise the contracte of giving unto men.

From giving then, let us proceed to letting: and let us consider whether the
usurer does let forth his goods or no. For that is also a phrase of speech
which they have among themselves: namely, that they do let their money, or put
it forth to lettage or loan, Now what is letting? Melancthon. lib. defin.
appellat. Et L. a ff. locati. L. i.. Si quis seruum. ff. deposit.
Locatio est contractus, in quo res transfertur ad certum tempus, quoad vsum,
procerto pretio. non quoad dominium, etc. Letting (says Melancthon) is a
contract, in which a thing is transferred or made over from one man to another,
as touching the use, but not as touching the property for a certain price,
and for a certain time. As for example, I let thee my servant by the day, to
labor in thy harvest: I let thee my horse by the week, to ride upon, my house
by the year to dwell in, my land to occupy, etc. not that my servant, or
horse, or house, or land should become thine own in property, and should
abide by thee for ever: but that thou should have the use, and profit, and
benefit of them for a certain season. So that herein lending and letting
differ. Lending makes a translation of the property: letting does only make
an alienation of the use. Whereof it comes to pass, that in lending L Pignus
C. de Pignorat. act.
Transfertur periculum in accipientem. The hazard, or aduenturing of the thing
which is lent, is conveyed from the lender, to the borrower or receiver. So as,
if that which he borrows do perish or decay: the borrower is bound to make
it good again. And why? Because the property or dominion of a thing was in
him: now the casualtie of things belongs to the owner. But it is otherwise in
letting: L Si quis domum.. Si Colonus. and L. Si merces. Vis mayor ff. locati.
If a man let a thing, and by casualtie it perish in the use: the hyrer shall
not be bound to make it good, because the dominion and property rests not
in him. To which also may be added, the reason that the Lord himself touching
that case gives in the scriptures: Exodus 22.15.
If it be an hired thing, it came for his hyer. The hyrer paid for the use,
and therefore he shall not stand to the adventure of the thing. And
consequently, as it has been before declared, that the usurer gives not: so
is it evident from hence, that he lets not his goods. For first, the usurer
does alienate the property of his goods, from himself to the borrower.
Secondly, he does impose the casualtie of that which he lends upon the neck
of him that does receive it. Neither of which two things, are usually, or
justly practiced in the contract of letting: the usurer therefore does not let
his goods.

From letting, let us go on to buying and selling. Melancthon. lib. defin.
appellat.
Emptio est contractus, quo res transfertur quoad dominium pro iusto pretio:
Nec retinet emptorius retrahendi pretij. Buying is a contract, by which a thing
is transferred or alienated, from one man to another, as touching the dominion
or property, for a certain price: and the buyer has no right to recall* or
withdraw the price, or consideration again* From which it may appear in few
words: First, that buying and selling, do differ much from lending. For
lending, is the translation of the dominion of a thing, Nullo interposito
pretio: For no price or consideration: but selling is the alienating of a
thing, Pro iusto pretio: For a set price to be paid, and consideration to be
made. Secondly, it may appear that the usurer practices not the contract of
bargain and sale. For he does not alienate his goods for a certain price, and
for ever, as in buying and selling men always do: but he does alienate the
property and use of the^ only for a time, and for that temporal alienation
and use, demands recompense and consideration. Therefore he buyeth and sells
not.

From selling, let us pass on to exchanging: and let us enquire if the usurer
exchangeth his goods. Exchanging is thus defined. Summa. Angel. de Clauas. tit.
permutatio.
Permutatio est vnius rei certae, pro alterare certa vicaria praestatio.
Exchanging is the yielding of one certain thing, in the stead, or in the room
of an other certain thing. As thus: A man exchangeth his coat for an other
man's cloak, or ten coombes of Rye for eight coombes of Wheat: or one house
for an other, or one piece of land for an other, etc. And this does manifestly
differ from lending. For in lending I look for mine own again: in
exchanging, I look for some other thing in lue of mine own. In lending, I
look that Eadem res reddatur in specie. The same thing which I lent, should
be rendered again in the own kind. As money for money, wares for wares,
corn for corn, etc. In exchanging, it is not necessary that the recompense
be of the same kind: for a man may excha^ge house for land, corn for cattle,
gold for silver, etc. Now then, it is manifest that the usurer in putting
forth of his goods, exchangeth them not. For he does not covenant to take one
certain thing, in the stead of an other certain thing: as money or wares in
the stead of his money or wares: but he couenanteth to have his money again,
and an other certain thing for ye use of his money; his wares again, and an
other certain thing for the use of his wares. The usurer therefore exchangeth
not.

From exchanging, I proceed to accommodating: a kind of contract, whereunto
the scarsitie of our english tongue yields no proper nor peculiar name. The
Latins have two kinds of lending, Mutuatio, and Accommodatio: we for
distinctions sake, must call them (though somewhat barbarously) mutuating, and
accommodating. And these two kinds of lending, do differ very apparently in
two material points. For first, in that kind of lending, which they call
Mutuatio, and which I have before defined: L. 2. Appellata. and. Si creditum
ff. Si certum petatur.. 1. Iustit. Quibus mod. re cont.
there is a transferring of the property and dominion of the thing which is
lent, from the lender to the borrower. As for example: I lend a man money, or
corn, or wares: I make them in lending to become his own, so as he may do
with them what himself lists: he may exchange them, he may sell them, he
may give them away, yea (if he list) he may cast them away: for they are his
proper own. And therefore it is called D. L. 2.. Appellata.
Mutuum, quod de meo fit tuum: as a man would say, Mine thine, or mine, by this
lending I make thine. But in that kind of lending, which is called
Accommodatio, or accommodating: it is far otherwise. For there is only a
transferring of the use (not of the property) to the borrower: and therefore
he cannot every way use the thing borrowed as his own. As for example: I lend
a man my horse: he shall not by virtue of my lending, do with him what he
will, as with his own: he shall not kill him, he shall not give him away, he
shall not sell him away, he shall not exchange him away. And why? the horse is
none of his. And why that? I did not make him by this kind of lending owner of
my horse, nor transfer the property or dominion unto him: but I yielded unto
him only the use and benefit of my horse. And therefore he shall ride him,
he shall labor him, he shall imploye him in drawing, in carriage and such
like: but he shall not do with my horse whatsoever himself lists, because
by this kind of lending I have transferred only the use and not the property
of my goods. Secondly, mutuating and accommodating, do differ in this: Zach.
Vrsinus Doct. Christ. part. 2. in praecept. 8. and L. 3. ff. Si cert. Petatur.
Datur aliquid in mutuatione, non vt reddatur idem, sed simile aut
aequipoll^ns: A thing is mutuated, not with condition that the very same thing
shall be repayed again, but the like, or the equivalent. As for example: I
lend ten pounds, not with purpose or condition to receive the very same
coin, and the same pieces again, but with condition to receive other ten
pound: be it in gold, when that which I lent was silver, or be it in
testers, when that which I lent was in shillings, it is not material: I have
the like, or that which is equivalent to mine own, and that is all which I
expected, or couenanted for in mutuating. But now, it is far otherwise in
accommodating. For, Vrsinus Ibid.
Commodatio est, cum quod ad vsum, vel vsus alicuius rei conceditur alicui ad
certum tempus, ita vt sine pretio idem indiuiduum reddatur integrum, and
incorruptum: Accommodating is, when the use of a thing is granted to a man for
a certain time, with condition that without price, or recompense, the self
same particular which was lent, shall be repaied again sound, and not
impaired. As for example, I lend a man my horse, not with condition that he
shall send me home again as much money as my horse is worth, or a cow for my
horse, or any other horse for mine* but he shall deliver me again the same
horse which I lent him. So that (as I said) these two kinds of lending which
for distinctions sake we call mutuating, and accommodating, do differ in these
two points. First, in the one there is an alienation both of the use and
property: in the other, only of the use, and not of the property. Secondly,
in the one it is sufficient to repay the like, or the equivalent to that which
was borrowed: in the other it is required that the same particular, and none
else, be restored again unto the lender. Now, by this which has been spoken,
it may appear, that the usurer does not accommodate his goods, or practice
that kind of lending which we call accommodation. For first, he gives the
borrower interest in the property of his goods: else the borrower might not
do with them what himself listed. Secondly, he requires not again the
selfsame particular which he lent, but the like or the worth only: none of
both which are done in the contract of accommodatio^. The usurer therefore
accommodateth not.

There be diverse other kinds of contractes. As Selnecerus Instit. Christ.
rel. part. 2. page 614.
Depositum, Pignus, Stipulatio, Fideiussio, Emphyteusis, Societas, Mandatum,
with the rest. But because the committing of usury does hardly fall into some
of these, and rarely into others: therefore for breuities sake I have thought
good to ouerpasse them in this treatise. The reasons why I have made mention of
those before rehearsed are these. Namely, that we might see, 1. what lending
is. 2. How it differs from other contracts. 3. That this Outward, Open, and
Actual usury, of which yet we speak, is committed only in the bargain of
lending. For the usurer gives not, he lets not, he sells not, he
exchangeth not, he accommodateth not, etc. Therefore he lends only: and
usury is only in the contract of lending: and so consequently, usury is a
lending, which is the first point contained in the definition thereof.

Now before I proceed to the handling of the second particular, it is very
requisite that we observe two necessary consequences or inferences, arising
from that which has been already delivered, concerning this point of
lending. The first is this. We have heard that lending or mutuation is such a
contract, as together with the use does tra^sferre the dominion and property
of the thing unto the borrower. From whence must necessarily follow, that
Obiectum mutui, The things subject to this kind of lending, must be only
such as whose use and property cannot be severed: so as a man cannot yield
another the use of them, but he must also yield the property: and he cannot
yield the property, but he must also yield the use. Of which nature and
condition are only such things as consist and pass from man to man by L. 2..
1. ff. Si cert. petat.
1. number. 2. weight. 3. and measure: and therefore in things of those kinds
only, (and in none other) can usury be committed. G. Biel. in 4. Sent. Did.
15. Quaest. 1^ art. 1. b.
Nota quod non potest committi vsura, nisi in his rebus tantum, circa quas
contingit fieri mutuum: scilicet quae consistunt in numero, pondere, and
mensura. Note (says one) that usury cannot be committed, but only in such
things which are subject to that kind of lending which we mutuation: that is
to say, in such things as consist in number, weight, and measure. In number, as
money: In weight, as lead: In measure, as corn, and such like commodities:
these are the things that can only be lent, and taken upon usury. For usury
is only in that kind of lending: and such things only as consist in number,
weight, and measure, are subject to that kind of lending: and therefore only
in such things can usury be committed.

The second inference arising from the premises is this. Usury is in lending,
and therefore may be committed in any thing which is subject to lending: that
is in any thing which consists in number, weight, and measure. And this is
the rather to be observed, because it is a received opinion among the vulgar
sort, yt usury is committed only in the putting forth and taking up of money.
Whereas Hemingius said truly, Heming. com. in Iac. 5. and Conc. Agathens.
In omni rerum mutuatione vsura dicitur. Usury is said to be committed, (and
may be committed) in the mutuating or lending of any thing. And this the very
words of the text do make plain in the scriptures: Deuteronomy. 23.19.
Thou shall not (says Moses in Deuteronomy.) give to usury to thy brother, as usury
of money, usury of meat, usury of any thing that is put to usury. And again
in Leuiticus: Leuit. 25.27.
Thou shall not give him thy money to usury, nor lend him thy victuals to
increase. So that, there is not only usury of money, but also usury of meat
and victuals, yea of many other things which are put forth, and may be put
forth to usury, as has been before expressed. S. Hierome says thus, Hierom.
com. in Ezech. 18.
Putant quidam, vsuram tantum esse in pecunia. Some are of this mind, that
usury is only committed in money. Quod praeuidens Scriptura, omni rei aufert
superabundantiam: vt plus non recipias quam dedisti: Which the scripture
foreseeing, or preventing, takes away increase in every thing: that in nothing
may thou receive more then thou have delivered. And an other says: Balsam.
annot. in epist. Gregor. Nisseni ad Latotum Mitelenes Episcopum can. 6
Foenus est, quod Graece (...) dicitur. Usury is that which the Graecians call
overplus or increase. Vt quando quis dat vinum, vel frumentum, vel oleum, vel
aliquid aliud, vt in eodem genere plus quam dederit, accipiat: As for example
(says he) when a man delivers forth wine, or corn, or oil, or any thing
else, that he may receive in the same kind more then he delivered. Therefore
says M. Calvin Lauat. com. in lib. Joshua* in epist. ad Episc. Winton.
that most learned and excellent man, (as Lauater rightly calls him:) Calvin
sermon. 134. in Deuteronomy. 23.
It is but a mockery, if I shall say, as for me I have not taken any profit
by usury for my money: but I have taken for my corn, or for my wine, and that
was given unto me for recompense. For if thou lend any thing and take
increase for it, thou committest usury: in as much as usury may be committed
in all such things as pass from one man to an other in this kind of lending.
So that (to conclude this first point at length) by that which has been spoken
concerning lending, it may evidently appear: First, that in usury there must
be lending of necessity, because it is committed in no other kind of
contract. Secondly, that usury is only committed in such things as consist in
number, weight, and measure: for they only are subject to that kind of
lending. Thirdly, that usury may be committed not only in the lending of
money, but also in the lending of many other things: and that for the reasons
which have been before rehearsed.

THe second thing to be observed in this kind of usury, is, that there be
lending for gain. For if a man lend ten pounds, only to receive ten pounds
again, and no more: or if he lend ten coombes of corn, only to receive the
same measure again, and no more: this lending cannot any way be called usury,
because he takes no gain, nor increase, for that which he has delivered.
Neither may any man dare to condemn such kind of lending for unlawful: nay
it is that which God often commands, and requires in the scriptures. Christ
says in the Gospel, Luc. 6 35.
Lend, looking for nothing again. And in an other place: Math. 5.42.
From him that would borrowe turn not away: and many such speeches to like
purpose. And as God has commanded it, so godly men have always practiced it:
Psalm. 112.5.
A good man is merciful and lends, says the Psalmist. And S. Ambrose says
of Tobias, Ambros. lib. de Tobia. ca. 2.
Quod commodauit pecuniam, and non foenerauit, iusti seruauit officium. In that
he lent freely and not upon usury, he performed the duty of a just and
righteous man. And Justinius Martyr pleading for the Christians, and justifying
their godly conversation, says. Justin. Martyr. orat. Anthenagorae pro
Christianis.
That they did so far perform duties of humanity, as they loved not only
their friends, but even their enemies also. Et mutuo damus ijs a quibus nos
nihil recepturos esse speramus: and we lend (says he) to them of whom we
hope not to receive any thing again. And certainly that free lending in
these days is so scante, and that all lending is almost turned into usury, is
no small argument that true Christians, righteous and merciful men, begin to
grow rare and geason in the world. But to return to the purpose. It is
certain that usury is such a lending as carries with it gain and increase:
for therefore are usury and increase so often united and combined in the
Leuit. 25 37. Ezech. 18.8.13.
scriptures. We must therefore inquire what gain and gaining means: that so
we may yet further see into the nature of usury. The Schooleman says, G. Biel
in quartum. Sent. Did. 15. Quaest. 11 art. 1. a.
Est lucrum, incrementum pecuniae, vel pecunia mensurabile: Gain is the
increase of money, or of that which can be measured and valued by money. For
unless there be an increase by the use of a thing, over and besides the
return of the principal it self, yea besides the expenses which the putting
forth of the principal carries with it: it is no gain. Summa Angelica tit.
lucrum and glo. in l. mutuis. ff. pro socio.
Lucrum non dicitur nisi deductis expensis: A man is not said to gain, until
he have deducted his expenses, and then some overplus remain and abide unto
him. So that, if after a man have lent, and all charges be defrayed which his
lending carried with it, then he receive, or covenant to receive, any money or
moneys worth more then his own, this is gain or increase.

Here then arise two things to be considered of us. First, since usury is only
lending for gain, and gain is only that increase which is money or moneys
worth: therefore it follows, that if a man lend not to gain, either money or
any thing that may be valued by money, he cannot be said to lend for usury.
As for example: a man may lend to gain the favor of God, who requires
lending, and has promised to reward it: now the favor of God, and his
reward, are things which cannot be valued with money. A man may lend to give
good example: now the benefit of good example, cannot be valued with money. A
man may lend to purchase the love and liking of another: now love is a thing
that cannot be valued with money. And therefore though he that lends to any
of these ends gains exceedingly, if he obtain that which he aymeth at:
yet therein he commits no usury, because he gains neither money nor any
thing that can be prized for money. Again, I may lend so to requite the
kindenes which I have received from another man. This is not usury: for it is
not lending for gain: because I do not thereby increase mine own, but as it
were exchange a benefit, or rather make a requital and repayment of a
benefit. Yea, I go further: a man may lend to save his own, and yet not
commit usury: because he lends not for gain or increase. As for example:
one owes me already ten pounds, and yet he comes to me to borrowe five
pounds more. I consider that the debte is desperate, and therefore make him
this answer, that if he will put me in good security to pay at such a time the
ten pounds, which already he owes me, and together with that, the five
pounds which now he requires, I am content to satisfy his demand,
Gabriel. Biel. in quartum senten. did. 15. quaest. 11. art. 1. a.
Non committo vsuram: Herein I commit no usury. And why? Quia illa december
quae recipio, non veniunt nomine lucri, quia alias mea sunt and mihi debita.
Because the ten pounds which I receive, with the five pounds that last I
lent, come not in as gain or increase: for they were mine and due to me
before. Again, put the case I hear that to morrow one is purposed to come to
borrowe money of me, who I know is hardly able to pay again: and whom
therefore I am loath to trust. To defeat him I lend away my money this day
unto another: that when he comes I may answer in truth that I have no money
by me to lend him. I may perhaps herein not be so charitable as I should: but
it is evident that I commit no usury. For I did not lend away my money to
gain more then mine own, but only to save that which was mine own, and to
keep it out of danger. Now if I lend not to gain, I cannot come within the
compass of usury.

A second thing arising to be observed from that which has been spoken
concerning gain and increase is this. Usury is lending for gain, and gain
is either money or moneys worth: and therefore, he that lends, to gain by
lending, any thing that is money or moneys worth, that man commits usury.
Therefore are they much deceived which think that they commit not usury,
unless for their money lending, they receive sheere money again. Ambros lib.
de Tobia. cap. 14.
Et esca vsura est, and vestis vsura est, and quodcunque sorti accedit vsura
est: If thou take victuals (says Ambrose) that is usury: if thou take
apparel, that is usury: and whatsoever is above the principal, that is
usury. Quod velis ei nomen imponas, vsura est: call it what thou will, or name
it what thou will, it is usury. Saint Hierome also is of the same opinion.
Hierom. com. in Ezech. 18.
Alij pro pecunia foenerata solent munuscula accipere diuersi generis: there be
some (says he) who for the money that they have lent, are wont to receive
gifts, or rewards of another kind. Et non intelligunt vsuram appellari, and
superabundantiam, quicquid illud est, si ab eo quod dederint, plus accipiant:
and they understand not that all whatsoever it be, is called usury and
increase, if they receive any thing more then that which they delivered. And
therefore in these cases which follow, and in the like to these, is usury
manifestly committed. I borrow forty pounds for a year, I promise to the
lender, that for the use of his money I will bestow a gown cloth upon his
wife, or a nagge upon himself, or a piece of plate upon one of his children:
he that lends in these or the like considerations commits usury. Again,
I know a man that is in special favor with the L. Keeper, the L. Chief
Justice, the L. Chief Barron, or some such like great personage in authority:
I will lend him a piece of money, and for the use of it he shall do no more
but procure me an office in the Chauncerie, in the Kings bench, in the
Exchequer, or some other place: that man that so lends, and to such purpose,
commits usury Again, a Lord of a manner has diverse poor Tennants that
want money, and come to him to borrow. He demands what occupations they are
of: the one answers he is a day labourer. I will (says he) lend you thus
much money, and for the use of it, you shall help me so many days in
harvest. Another answers, he is a husbandman, I will (says he) lend you
thus much money, and for the use of it, you shall till me thus many acres of
land. This man (together with the rest before specified) commits usury: for
he lends for gain, and although he requires no money for increase, yet
he requires that which is monyes worth, and the worth whereof may be valued
and prized for money. So that as touching this second point of lending for
gain, there are these three things to be considered. First, lending for gain
is lending for increase of money or moneys worth. Secondly, lending for any
thing which is not money or moneys worth, is not lending for gain, and
therefore no usury. Thirdly, the lending for the gain of anything which is
money or moneys worth, is within the compass of Outward, open, and actual
usury.

THe third point observed in the definition of usury, is couenanting and
compacting. For this kind of usury does not only lend for gain, but also
makes composition and agreement for gain. The scripture says, Exodus 22.25.
Ne imponetis ei vsuram: Thou shall not impose usury upon him: for so both
Pagnine and Tremellius translate it: and the Greek has (...): and Vatab.
annot. in Exodus 22.25.
Vatablus observes that it is verbatim from the Hebrew, No^ ponetis super eum:
Thou shall not put usury upon him. Now usury cannot be imposed or put upon a
man without covenant or compact. Besides that, diverse do Alberic. in L.
iubemus. C de sacrosanc. Ecclijs.
define usury to be an increase or gain arising by lending, Debitum or
Exactum. Now gain can neither be due to the lender, nor exacted of the
lender, unless there have some covenant or compact passed for it before. And
therefore learned men speaking of these matters, do call them Beza annot. in
Luc. 6.35.
Foeneratoriae pactiones, or Selneccer. instit. Christ. rel. part. 2. p. 616.
Contractus vsurarij: Vsurarious covenants or contracts. There is then in this
kind of usury, couenanting or contracting for gain.

Now what it is to covenant, I shall not need to stand long to declare. One
said truly, Wolf. Musc. loc. com. tit. de foed. and testam. Dei.
Quid foedus sit and pactum, notius est quam vt sit annotandum: What a
covenant, or bargain, or compact means, is so well known that it need not
be described. The Grecians call couenantes, (...) Selneccer. instit. Christ.
rel. part. 2. p. 610.
(...), for the commutation, exchange, or reciprocal passion, and sympathy or
agreement, which is between them that covenant together. And therefore the
lawyers do thus define a covenant: In leg. 1 ff. de pactis.
Pactum est quod inter aliquos conuenit: A bargain is that whereof diverse do
agree: Or thus: Po^yanth. tit. pactum.
Pactum est duorum pluriumue in idem placitum, seu consensus. A covenant is the
agreement or consent of two or more, about the same thing. And therefore whereas
there is an agreement and consent between the lender demanding, and the
borrower promising increase: there is this couenanting, or compacting for
gain. Now this consent, and so consequently this couenanting may pass between
man and man, by diverse means and ways. For first, there is Pactum tacitum: A
secret kind of couenanting, whereas an agreement and consent is by necessary
or probable consequence intended, or collected, although it be by no means
expressed and manifested unto others. For a man may covenant, and consent by
silence. As for example: Summa Angelica. tit. matrimonium.
The parents of two children do in their presence and hearing, entreat and
conclude of a marriage, to be contracted and solemnized between those their
children. The children standing by, hear the conference and conclusion of
their parents: but do neither demand any thing, nor answer any thing, nor
object any thing, nor reply any thing, nor affirm any thing, nor deny any
thing that is spoken. In this case is intended the consent of the children to
the conclusion of the parents. And why? reason presupposes, that if either
party had been discontented with the match, they would by one means or other
have signified their dislike. In such cases as this, by like suppositions, it
is grown into a proverb, Qui tacet consentire videtur: He that holds his
peace, and replyeth not, seems to consent. And this may not be thought
strange of any, that a man should covenant by silence. For a man may answer by
silence: Plutarc. lib. de immodica verecundia.
Silentium sapientibus responsum est. Silence is an answer to a wise man. A
man may accuse by silence. Menander said, Polyanth. tit. Silentium.
(...): By silence thou accusest more sharply. A man may defend himself by
silence: as did Math. 27.12
Our Savior Christ when so many men laid so many things falsely to his charge.
Now if a man may answer by silence, if he may accuse by silence, if he may
defend himself by silence: then may it easily appear that a man may yield
his consent, and enter a contract by silence. And therefore put the case that I
come to a man to borrowe an hundred pounds: ye shall have it (says he) but ye
shall give me ten pounds for the years use of my money. I stand still and
answer nothing to the contrary, but take my hundred pounds and go my way.
Here is intended pactum tacitum, a secret consenting or couenanting for usury.
Again, put the case I come to a man to borrowe money, and without any demand
made on his part, my self do offer of mine own accord to give him usury.
He goes away, and says nothing, but fetches the money, and tells it, and
delivers it. Here is also pactum tacitum, a covert or secret couenanting for
gain, because by their silence, a mutual consent and agreement is intended
howsoever no way expressed, or declared. And I warrant you the usurer will not
forget to urge it, if the borrower be negligent in performing of his offer. And
this I thought good to note, least men should be overtaken with a covenant in
this kind of usury, before they be aware, and should depart from the usurer,
further tied and entangled, then ever they suspected.

But to proceed. As there is a secret and intended kind of agreement, so is
there also Pactum expressum, A covenant revealed or expressed: and that is also
of two sorts: Nudum, and vestitum: A bare, and an invested covenant. A bare
covenant, is a man's sole promise, by which he witnesses or protests his
consent to that whereupon they are agreed. As for the purpose. I will lend you
so much money (says the usurer) but I tell you withal, you shall give me
interest for the forbearing thereof. Contented says the borrower, that I will
by Gods grace, and thank you too. In this case they have consented and
couenanted by bare word and promise, the one to take, the other to pay usury.
And this is Nudum pactum, A bare or naked covenant. A covenant is invested
three manner of ways, viz. 1. Re. 2. Verbis. 3. Literis. By things: By
words: By writings. By things, as by a pawn. And therefore he which
lends, and takes any Real pawn for the payment of usury, he couenanteth
and compacteth for usury. By words, as Stipulatio, and Fideiussio. And
therefore he which lends, and takes before witness the borrowers solemn
promise, for the payment of increase: or lends and takes an other man's word
for the borrowers payment of the increase: that man couenanteth and compacteth
for usury. By writing: as by bill, or book, or obligation. And therefore, he
that lends and takes of the borrower a bill of his hand, or his hand to his
book, or his band, or obligation for the payment of usury, that man does
covenant and contract for gain. I do not take upon me curiously to enter
into all kinds of contracts mentioned by Ciuilians: these only have I noted,
as most usual and most incident to this case of usury: that both the borrower
and lender may know, how that many ways they may in borrowing and lending
give consent and make compacte of gaining. The conclusion of this point is
this: whosoever when he lends, does take the consent of the borrower for
payment of increase, and does take this consent of his, by pawn, by
stipulation, by suerties, by his own promise, by his bill, by his hand, by his
obligation, yea by his secret and intended consent: that man couenanteth for
gain, and is within the compass of Outward, Open, and Actual usury intended
in this definition.

THere is yet a fourth point to be observed in this kind of usury: and that
is, that the usurer never hazardeth, nor aduentureth the goods which he
lends forth. That which is lent forth they commonly call the principal: in
latin they call it Sors: which is as much to say, as hazard, or chance, or
lotte. Hieron. epist. ad Marcell^m. tom. 3.
Sortis dilatio vsuram parturit, says Hierome: The forbearing of the
principal brings forth usury. And Erasmus in his annotations upon that
place of Hierome says thus: Erasm schol. Ibi.
Sors est principalis pecunia quae parit vsuram: The lot is the principal
money or goods that begets usury. Now the usurer never aduentureth or
hazardeth the loss of his principal: for he will have all sufficient security
for the repaiment and restoring of it back again to himself. Luther de
taxand. vsura. tom. 7.
Nec tamen vsurarius iste (says Luther) Quicquam periouli vel in corpore, vel
in bonis, aut mercibus, in se recipit, aut patitur. And yet will not the usurer
take upon him any adventure, or hazard, either in his body, or goods. And
therefore the name that usurers give to their principal, to call it Sors,
which signifies lot or chance: does not otherwise agree to any thing which the
usurer lends, then (...) (as we say) that is, when men by speaking one
thing, will understand the clean contrary. As a mountain is in latin
called M^ns, a non mouendo: Because it moves not. Or as a wood is called
Lucus, a non lucendo: Because it gives no light: even so, and not otherwise,
may the usurers money be called Sors, a non sortiendo: Because he hazardeth
it not. Peter Martyr says, P. Martyr loc. com. clas. 1. loc. 7* Sec. 3. Ex. 1.
Sam. 10.19.
Nihil aliud est sortiri, quam aliquid agere, ex cuius euentu rem incognitam
possimus deprehendere. To cast lottes (in which, things are put upon chance) is
nothing else, but to do some act, by the event whereof we may find out some
thing which is hidden or unknown. According to which description, the usurer
is far enough from lotte or aduenturing. For he lends not, as desirous to
know how the borrower shall speed, but as being assured before hand what
himself shall gain: and he lends not, as depending upon the event of the
borrowers labor, but upon the safety and assurance of his own security.
Therefore, even as there is in these days little use of lottes themselves
among men: so is there no right use at all of the name of lotte among usurers.
Unless perhaps some man will say that the usurers goods may be called lotte,
as S. Augustine said that Absalom was called his fathers peace. Augustine. com.
in Psalm. 3.
Ideo Absalom patris pax dicitur, quia pater habuit pacem quam ille non habuit.
Therefore is Absalom interpreted his fathers peace, because his father had that
peace, which himself had not. In the like manner may that which the usurer
lends, be called Sors, lot, or hazard, or adventure, because the borrower
has that hazard which the usurer has not. For it may be (and it often falls
out) that the borrower does loose, but it is most certain that the usurer
shall gain. S. Ambrose does notably descante upon this name of lotte and
chance, which usurers give to their principal. Ambros lib. de. Tobia cap. 4
Sortem dicitis quod debetur. Ye call (says he) that which is owing unto you,
lotte or chance. And not amiss. Etenim, velut vrna ferali misera sors
voluitur, perituri debitoris luenda supplicio: For the lot is cast into the
deadly pot or barrel, which when it is drawn out, must prove the borrowers
bane. Et fortassis ideo sors, quia in euentu sunt patrimonia quae sub hac art
voluuntur: Or perhaps (says he) therefore ye call it lot, or hazard, because
the patrimonies or lands which are pawned or morgaged under this art of
usury, are in hazard never to be redeemed, and a great chance is it if ever
they be recovered. But as for the goods which the usurer lends, it is far
against his will, if they be any way aduentered. And yet M. Bucer (a man whom
they are wont to allege in their defense) says plainly that we must not
lend to our brethren that need Bucer. com. in mat. 5.
Certa restitutionis sp^, With a certain hope of restitution, much less then
with all security and assurance, not only of the principal, but also of the
increase.

But I am not ignorant what the usurer will reply in this behalf. Why sir
(will he say) whenever, or howsoever, or to whomsoever I lend, it is
evident that I hazard and adventure my goods. For, say that I take the
borrowers band or bill, or pawn, or suerties, or promise for mine own
security: yet it may come to pass, that he and his suerties may prove
banckroute, his and their goods may by some offense be confiscated and
forfeited to the crown, he or they may flee the country, or keep the house,
that they are not to be gotten: nay evidences may be stolen, lost, brent,
caught out of my hand by cousenage, etc. a thousand ways are there, by which
notwithstanding mine assurance, I may be defeated of mine own. And therefore it
is evident that I adventure my goods. Now to this objection of theirs, I answer
two manner of ways. First I say, that in this sort and this respect, every
man aduentureth his goods, even he that has sufficient pawn in hand, yea
even he that keeps his money fast locked in his cofers: for they may be burnt,
or stolen, or by cousenage conveyed away. All the goods of this life are of
this nature Mat. 6.19.
The rust and moth may corrupt them, thieves may break through and steal them
away. And yet I trow no man will say that he does adventure his money, who
takes for it sufficient pawn in hand, or who keeps it by himself under
lock and key in his own closet. I put an example to make the cause plain.
We have in England two sorts of Merchants, Merchant Adventurers, and Merchant
Retaylers. The Retayler cannot but hazard much, for he must trust often,
sometimes for round sums, sometimes for a great while, sometimes upon the
borrowers bare word, or hand to his book, (which assurance no usurer will
take) and yet no man calls him a Merchant Aduenturer, neither is he assumed
into their hall and company. How much less then can an usurer be called an
aduenturer of his goods, when he will neither trust, nor lend for long time,
nor but upon all sufficient security? Secondly, to the plea of the usurer
touching the aduenturing of his goods, I answer in this sort. There is
aduenturing in a double respect, 1. First, Quoad euentum. 2. Secondly, Quoad
media. A man may adventure as touching the issue: and as touching the means.
As touching the issue, it is confessed that the usurer aduentureth: and no
gramercie, for he cannot possibly do otherwise. Because no man can see the
end of a thing when he begins it, and because the ouerruling providence of
God will work when it pleases, sometimes beyond means, sometimes without
means, sometimes contrary to means: therefore is it, that no man can say
assuredly what the issue of any thing will prove. But as touching the means,
the usurer works so sure, as he cannot in any reason be said to adventure.
As for example: it is said in the Acts of the Apostles, Act. 12 4, 5, 6.
that Herod apprehended Peter, and cast him into prison, and delivered him to
four quaternions* of Soldiers, to be kept, and bound him with two iron
cheynes, and set watch before the door of the prison, and about Peter's
lodging, that he should not escape. The extraordinary providence of God did
(indeed) deliver him: but will any wise man say that Herod when he had used
all these means of safety did adventure Peter's coming out? Even so, when the
usurer has bound the borrower Plutarch. lib. de non foenerando.
with bands and pawnes as it were with fetters (for so Plutarche speaks:)
and when he has tied him as fast, and made him as sure, as his own head can
devise, or laws will permit: it may be that one way or other, God by his
secret providence may defeat him: but will any man say, that the usurer
aduentureth, or means to adventure, or thinks that he does adventure the
principal? No assuredly. For because he will not adventure, he will never
lend to usury to a man that is not very sufficient for to pay. Ibidem.
Nemo foeneratur pauperi: None will lend to usury to a poor man. Nay, he will
not lend two years together to a rich man, but with new suerties, for fear
(I trow) that he, or they should be undone in few years by usury: and so
not being able to pay, the usurer should loose his advantage. It is evident
therefore that he aduentureth not the principal.

The conclusion of this whole sermon is thus much. We have examined the four
points concurring to usury. And from thence it appears, that whosoever he
be, that so lends any thing, as the property is transferred to the borrower
together with the use: and does covenant with him that borrows either by
word, or suertie, or bill, or band, or pawn, or secret consent, or by any
other kind of bargain: to receive more then his own again, that is any
thing which is either money or moneys worth: and does not adventure the estate
and return of that which he lends: he is that Outward, Open, and Actual
usurer, who is before defined, and whose practice we shall afterward show to
be condemned, not only in this sentence of Solomon, but also in many other
places of Scripture.

The end of the second Sermon, preached April 23. 1593.
The third Sermon: the special contents whereof are these. 1. Covert and
cloaked usury is described, what it is, and how it seazeth upon lawful
contractes. 2. Mental usury is described, which consists in the sole hope
and expectation of gain. 3. The Scriptures are alleged which do condemn
usury. 4. Two reasons are rendered why it is condemned in the Scriptures, viz.
because that 1. It overthrows lending. 2. It overthrows charity.


Covert Cloaked usury.
Hitherto we have handled only that kind of usury which (as Erasmus phraseth
it) Erasmus sermon. in Psalm. 14. tom. 5.
aperta facie est quod dicitur: shows it self with open face, or in the own
likeness. Now because that Ioh. 3.20.
Every man that does evil hates the light, and Francisc. Petrarcha de remedio
vtriusque fortunae. lib. 1. dial. 56.
usury is a note, miseri, deiecti, and inertis animi, Of a miserable, base,
and abject mind: therefore some to cover their sin, and to uphold their
credit, have devised fair cloakes to shroude their ragged garments, and have
begotten a more cunning, and subtle kind of traffic in the world. One said
not untruely: Rainer. Pan. theol. part 2. tit. de vsuri^. cap 7.
Inter alias, sunt tredecim casus quos in fraudem vsurarum malitia cupiditatis
quotidie inuenit: there are among others thirteen cases or devises, which the
wickedness of couetuous men has time after time, devised to elude, or to cover
the practice of usury. Now, it was well that he said, there were thirteen
cases, inter alios among others: least he should have bounded so large a
field, with two strait an hedge. For there are thirteen hundred, yea
thirteen thousand devises, which men of evil conscience have invented to
avoid the show and danger of usury. Nay, who can reckon them by thousands,
when as Erasmus says Erasmus ser. in Psalm. 14. tom. 5.
sunt innumerae: they are innumerable, as the stars in the sky, or the sand
by the sea shore, which cannot be reckoned or measured for multitude? And
they must needs be innumerable, because (as Bullinger says) Bullinger. Decad.
3. Sermon. 1.
In dies exoriuntur nouae: They arise daily spicke and span new, one in
another neck. And although the laws do by express words, forbid all
crafts and cheuisances, and devices made to such purpose: yet as Cornelius
Tacitus reports of this evil in Rome, so may it be said of our usurers in
England: Cornel. Tacitus Annalium. lib. 6.
Toties repressae, miras per arts rursum oriebantur: Usurers and their
deceits, being often repressed by the laws and statutes of this realm, are
notwithstanding by wonderful devises, and subtilties risen up again.

All which cloakes and subtilties, if I would go about to discover, I should
attempt to tread an endless maze, and enter a labirinth, out of which Theseus
himself were not able to reduce me. For as their shifts are infinite on the
one side, so are they exceeding subtle and crafty on the other. Antoninus
Archiep^sc Florent. tom 2. tit 1 cap. 6.. 11.
In vsurario est palliatio, and excusatio sui vitij multum fraudulentissima: In
the usurer there is a cloaking and excusing of his defaulte to too fraudulent,
and deceitefull. Like are common usurers unto the monster Hydra: for they have
many heads, that is, infinite devises: and withal every head is the head of a
serpent: which serpent Genesis 3.1.
was more subtle (says the scripture) then any beast of the field which the
Lord God had made. And therefore whereas it cannot be rightly said of usury,
that it is an Art, or Trade, or Occupation, or Science: to the end that it
may have a name whereby to be known in law, I suppose that we may with M.
Smith fitly call it a M. Smith. sermon. 1. upon usury. fol. 12.
mystery. Such a mystery, and such an intricate practice it is, that as John
says in the Revelation, Apoc. 2.17.
Christ will give a name to him that overcomes, which no man knows, saving
he that receives it: so may it be said by allusion of the usurer (though he
be not worthy to be compaxed to so good a thing,) that he handles arts, and
practices devises, which no man can discern, but he that uses them: Aret.
Prob. part. 1. loc. 50. de vsuris.
Non put o quenquam scire arts vsurarum, nisi solos eos qui in illius praxi
indies versantur: I do not think (says Aretius,) that any man knows
thoroughly the arts of usury, but only those which are daily conversant in
the practice of the same. And therefore as it is impossible for a man to
picture that same Empusa, of whom it is said in Aristophanes.

Aristophanes in Ranis. Natalis Comes muthol. lib. 8. cap. 8.
(...).
(...).
She seems every thing,
Now an ox, now an ass, etc. Now one thing now another: even so do I suppose
it to be impossible in any perfection to describe this variable and
changeable, (I mean this cloaked and covert kind of usury.) For sometimes it
seems to be buying, sometimes selling, sometimes letting, sometimes pawning,
sometimes one thing, sometimes another: always being usury, and yet never
plainly appearing to be usury.

Now be it I must endeavor to describe it: for I have promised so much, and
this argument does exact it at my hand. Yet this must I protest in this boulde
attempt, that I neither have purpose to be long, nor hope to accomplish any
great exployte about it. For who could ever draw a full and lively picture
of Proteus that changeable sea God? Or what building can a man there erect and
raise up where the sand is so quick, as he can lay no foundation? Yet will I
assay it: Quid enim tentare nocebit? That I may as it were at a back window,
let in some small glimmering light, which may give occasion to others that are
clearer of sight, and better at leisure to discern more thoroughly into this
intricate mystery. And that which I do, I will do with this mind, not as
taking delighte in beholding the face, or drawing the picture of so misshapen a
monster: no more then the Poets affected the qualities of those Furies which
they raised from hell unto the stage. But with that mind where withal the
holy Ghost has recorded unto us Genesis 4.8.
the unnaturalness of Caine, Genesis 4.23.
the cruelty of Lamech, 1. Sam. 25.10.11.
the covetousness of Nabal, 1. Sam. 16.14.23.
the fury of Saul, and such like wicked vices of ungodly men: even that
their sins being displayed before our faces, they might be the more
loathsome to behold, and so the more easily avoided.

The ground of this point, I derive from that which I find in Rainerius,
Bromyard, and others of the schoolmen, who show by diverse instances, how
usury cloaketh it self under the pretense of buying and selling, of letting,
of exchanging, etc. which are contractes approved by God, and by the practice
of all good men. Therefore I do thus define, this same Palliatam vsuram, This
cloaked kind of usury. Covert usury, is lending for gain, under the color
of some lawful contracte. And indeed if we will thoroughly examine the thing,
whereas there are diverse lawful kinds of bargaining, (as has been before
declared) we shall find that usury is often committed under pretense and
color of them all.

For first, in buying and selling men play the usurers many ways. As for
example: Rainer. Pantheol. part. 2. tit. de vsura. cap. 7.
A man buyeth corn yet in the field, (it may be in the blade) for five
shillinges a coombe: and it is likely that in harvest, it will be worth twelve,
or thirteen shillings a coombe: Ibidem.
Tunc vsuram facit, Then that man commits usury. Of which very kind almost
are a great number of maulsters, and others among us, which do buy barley
before hand for four shillinges a coombe, and at the time of their delivery,
it is worth six shillinges, or a noble: and so for forbearing their money, and
laying it out aforehand, they gain six shillinges in twelve, ten shillings
in the pound: far above the rate that the law admits in usury. And no
doubt unless this exception some what help them, Ibidem.
Probabiliter dubitatur vtrum fructus illi plus vel minus valere debeant: It is
doubtful, and uncertain, whether at the time of the delivery the corn will be
more or less worth: unless I say this point will help them, that at the
time of their buying, they are uncertain whether the price of corn will rise
or fall, before the time of delivery: it seems a thing apparent to me that
such men come within the compass of cloaked usury. Again, I sell wares, I
give three months day of payment, and for that I am to forbear my money so
long, I sell above mine ordinary price, and above a reasonable gain: herein
(no question) I commit usury. For I sell the time, and make gain of lending.
A note very necessary to be observed of shop keepers, and occupiers: that
they learn, not to disgrace their honest trades of merchandise, by putting
upon the^ the dishonest cloak of usury. Again, Io. Bromyard. Summa.
Praedicant. tit. de vsura.
a man comes to me to borrow money: I answer I will lend him no money to
usury. But if he will buy a horse, or a gelding for ten pound, (which is scarce
worth ten shillings) I will lend him so much money, til such a time. So ye price
which he pays for the horse, more then he is worth, shall fully recompense
the loan, and usury of the money. Such an usurer my self once knew in the
world (if happily his own son does report the truth of his father) who was
supposed to have many hundreds out to usury at once. All his old hosen, and
dublettes, and coats, when they were past his own wearing, proved unto him
the richest part of his wardrobe. For a man could not borrow a hundred pound,
but he must buy of him an old frise coat, or a cast doublet, or some such
like princely robe: and the price of it was not commonly less the^ twenty
marks, or ten pounds, answerable to the loan of the money which he lent
forth. Again, I sell a commodity for the price which the market now goes at,
with this condition, that if it be more worth at the Easter, or Whitsontide
following, I will have more for it: but if it prove less worth, I will not have
my former price abated. Rainer. Pan. Theol ^art. 2. tit. vsu^a. c. 7.
Talem (inquit Hostiensis) iudico vsurarium: cum ipsum in pactis claudicare
videam. Such an one (says Hostiensis) I judge to be an usurer, because I see
him to hault, and not to deal directly in bargaining. Again, I come to a man,
and desire him to lend me an hundred pound upon usury. He answers, he
has not so much ready money by him, but to do me a pleasure he will lend
me a hundred pounds worth of plate to sell, and so to make money: the plate
perhaps being hardly worth the money. I am no sooner gone out of the door, but
the usurer provides a broaker to meet me, and to buy his plate of me again.
Now for ready money perhaps I sell the plate for four score pound. The
broaker carries back the plate to the owner, and from him brings four score
pound in ready money to the borrower. The borrower must pay the lender an
hundred pound for his plate at the day appointed, and ten pound for the
usury in the mean season. So in fine, the poor man pays loan after
thirty pound in the hundred, and yet must think himself befriended of the
merchant. Thus and a thousand ways more is usury committed under pretense and
color of buying and selling.

Usury is likewise cloaked, and comes many times disguised in the form and
habit of letting. As thus: Bromyard Summa praedicant. tit. vsura.
I buy a Bullock, or a Cow, of him that has none to sell. And knowing that he
has none, I say to him, coming to borrow money: I do here deliver you so
much money for such a beast. But now I will let you that beast for such a time,
at this or that price. In this case (says Bromyard) Vt Deum decipiant pecuniam
animal vocant: That they may deceive God, they term their money by the name of
a living creature: and they take loan for lending of money, under pretense of
letting a beast. Again, Ibidem.
one comes to me to borrowe money: I answer I will lend him no money, but
cattle if he please. He replyeth that he has no need of cattle, but he
must use ready money. Why then (say I) take thus much money of me, buy with it
thus many milchkine. At the years end, ye shall give me thus much money for
the hire of every Cow, and ye shall therewith restore to me the kine
themselves, in that form in which I deliver them unto you: that is (to deal
plainly) in so much ready money. Here seems to be hiring of kine in the
borrower, and letting of kine in the lender, and yet at the years end all
proves but thus much loan for the forbearing of so much money: and so it is
usury under pretense of letting. Again, one comes to me to borrow a hundred
pound for seven years. I answer that he shall have it with this condition:
he shall hyre of me a house and certain land, at such a yearly rent, and he
shall take a lease of them for the space of seven years. The house and land
perhaps are hardly worth ten pound a year, yet I covenant to receive twenty
pound a year rent. So it comes to pass, that the rent of the lease, pays
the loan of the money, even ten pound for the hundred, and usury is
committed under pretense of letting. Or thus again. A man comes to me to
borrowe twenty pound. I answer, I cannot forbear so much to lend him: but I
have twenty pound in old gold, or fair gold, which I am loath to forgo, or
to have it changed: and to do him a pleasure I will lend him that, to lay to
pawn to another, and to borrowe so much money upon. But withal for my
kindness, he shall give me twenty shillings for having my money to lay to
pawn to another. This is neither of the two kinds of lending: it is neither
mutuating, nor accommodating. Mutuating it is not, for he does not transfer
the dominion and property of his money to the borrower. Accommodating it is
not, because his money goes not free: therefore of necessity it is letting,
or usury, taken under pretense of letting.

As it is with letting, so it is also with lending: for usury is many times
committed under pretense of free lending. As for example: Lauater comment. in
Ezech. 18. homil. 76.
An occupier or shopkeeper will take all kind of gold that is brought unto him
for payment: as clipped Angels, light french Crowns, souldred Sovereigns, and
such like. Provided always that he will not take them for payment, unless he
have recompense according to the want: for one six pence, for another a
groate, for an an other twelve pence allowa^ce, or more or less. Now this
light gold, or souldred gold, or clipped gold, will he keep by him, and will
lend it out freely to any man that desires to borrow. All the recompense that
he requires, is no more then that which he lends out, viz. ten pound for
ten pound, twenty pound for twenty pound, that is, (as it seems) only his
own again. But when the day of payment comes, where he lent Angels that
wanted six grains, and french crowns scarce worth five shillinges: he will
be paid again with good, lawful, and current english money. So in every
piece of gold which he lent, will he gain twelve pence, or six pence, or a
groate, and yet seems to lend freely, and without any consideration. Again, I
come to an usurer to borrow ten pound for a year. He answers, he cannot so
long forbear his money: but to do me a pleasure he will lend me so much for
a month. And he will lend it for so long Gratis, Freely: (he means indeed
Gratis the Nowne, not Gratis the Aduerbe: Gratis, that is, gratis hominibus, To
men which he hops in their consideration and recompense will prove
thankful.) All that he will require, is a band for the repayment of his own
again. But he knows well enough, that it is an hundred to one that he which
comes to borrow ten pound for a year, shall not be like nor able to pay
it again within a month. Well yet this he offers freely, and the borrower
being pent is glad to accept of any thing. He takes the money, he enters a
band, the month is soon expired. He cannot provide the money so speedily,
for want of return, and therefore the band is forfeited. Then will the usurer
pay himself his loan with the forfeiture of the ba^d, it may be thrice as
much as the loan is worth: and yet make the poor borrower believe that he
does much befriend him, in not taking the whole forfeiture: considering that he
brake day with him, who lent his money out of his purse freely, and without any
consideration. Thus the poor man pays thoroughly for his borrowing, and the
usurer is thoroughly satisfied for his lending.

From lending let us pass on to exchanging: and we shall see that many times
under show of exchange, men commit usury. As for the purpose Erasmus conci. in
Psalm. 14. tom. 5.
I lend the value of a thousand florentines in silver, and I covenant to
receive for the^ a thousand flore^tines in gold: Qui (vt fere fit) pluris
aestimantur (says Erasmus) which are more worth then they go for in silver.
Annon manifest committit vsuram? His opinion is, that such a man does
manifestly commit usury. Again, put the case that Angels go current for an
eleven shillings in France, which are worth but ten shillings in England. I
will lend a man a hundred Angels in England, upon condition that he shall repay
an hundred angels to my factour in France. In the one example there is but an
exchange of coin in an other kind, in the other only a commutation of place:
yet in both, the lender takes manifest increase for the forbearing of his
money, and so commits usury.

The last which I will add shall be laying to pawn, because the other
contractes which remain vnspecified, are not so commonly nor easily abused to
this evil. Now under pretense of laying to pawn, usury is commonly and too
commonly committed. As in this example. I lend twenty pound for a year, and
for assurance of mine own, I take a pawn worth forty marks: with a bill of
sale, that if he fail payment at the day appointed, his goods shall be mine.
I know that at his time he is nothing like to pay it, and at his day he does
not pay it: for his default I seize upon his pawn, and take it to mine own
use. So I gain twenty nobles for the lending of twenty pound, which is
apparent to be extreme and notorious usury.

No man must expect that I deliver all the mysteries of this secret knowledge.
Had I an hundred tounges, or a marble memory, or an infatigable industry, I
could no more utter, or record, or find out, the innumerable devices which
usurers have to oppress the poor: then he in the Poet Virgil Aenead. 6.
could utter the punishments of hell wherewith the wicked were tormented of the
Furies. Hesiode describing in the person of Periclimenus the nature of a
covetous crafty man, who used all steightes to enriche himself, and to
beguile the poor (for so Natal. Comes. muthol. lib. 8. cap. 8.
Natalis Comes does expound him,) he says, that sometimes he was like a
foul, sometimes like a Be, sometimes like an ante, sometimes like a serpent:
yea he adds -- (...)
(...).


So many shapes he had, as no man can express. So may we say of usurers:
sometimes they appear in one shape, sometimes in another, sometimes they take
one course, sometimes another: yea they have many a quillitie, and many a
subtlety, which no writer that has not been bound twice seven years
prentise to the trade, is able to disclose. To end this point therefore, and
to proceed to that which remains: Homer thus describes Dolon the Troya^,
namely that he was Homer. Iliad. 10.
Vir locuples auri atque aeris, sed prorsus inepta
So Helius Eobanus translateth it from the Greek.
Deformis facie, verum pernicibus aptus
Et volucer pedibus, cursuque inuictus anhelo.


A man very rich and swift of foot, but very deformed and evil favored. The
service which he did was in ye night. His armor was an helmet of a goats
skin upon his head, and a breastplate of woolues skin upon his body. His
weapons were a bow at his back, and a dart in his hand, and so he marches on
to descry the Grecian army. Now surely such men are these same Dolosi
Dolones, these subtle and crafty usurers: rich in their purses, deformed in
their conditions: swift to lend for advantage, more swift to take for any
thing: so nimble, as no man can go beyond them. They never practice but
covertly, as it were in the dark. And no marvel, for their whole trade is
the work of darkness. Amorous are they as goats in their words, but bloody
and cruel as wolves in their hearts: and with their devices do they shoot,
and dart through the poor and needy people. Happy were the common weal, if
they were served like Dolon: namely, if some wise Ulysses would make search
after them, and some valiant Diomedes would smite them to the earth, and strip
them of their goods. So should the Grecian army abide vnbetrayed: that is,
(as I now expound it) so should the comminalty live vnrobbed, and unspoiled of
their wealth: yea so should the poor rejoice, and those that are needy should
be glad.

THus far have I spoken of that kind of usury, Mental usury.
which is committed in fact, and betrayeth it self to the world by some
outward action. Now it remains, that we entreat of that kind, which lurketh
secretly in the heart, as it were a serpent in the bosom. We know that the
laws of God do, as in other respects, so namely in this particular, differ
and dissent from the laws of earthly princes. Men's laws can only restrain
the outward deeds, committed by the members of the body: but the laws of God
restrain the evil thoughts, and conceits, and intentions of the heart.
Therefore the Psalmist said: Psalm. 19.7.
The law of the Lord is perfect, converting the soul: (or as Tremelius
reads it) Restituens animam, Restoring, or making up again, the decayed
breaches of the soul. Now it could not restore the soul, if it could not
work upon it: and it could not work upon it to restoration, unless as a
skillful Surgeon, it could search, and launch all the festered, and
corrupted corners of the same. The law of God condemns him for a murderer,
not only which in deed runs his neighbor through, but him also which has
the same purpose and intendment. And therefore was Saul a murderer, 1. Sam.
18.11
in casting his iaueling at David, with a purpose to nail him to the wall:
though David by Gods providence avoided the blow, and escaped safe out of his
presence. Again, the law of God condemns him for an Adulterer, not only
who actuallie has had unlawful copulation with a woman, but also him that
does intend and purpose it, yea who does Math. 5.28.
but lust after a woman in his heart. Whereof Solomon censureth him Pro. 7.7, 8,
9.
for a child, and a fool, that in the twie light walks in the streets, and
haunteth the harlots house, though as then he can have but a purpose and
intendment, to commit uncleanness. So is it also with the law of theft. He is
not only a robber that takes away another ma^s goods with his hands, but he
also that intends that injury to his neighbor. Yea, if we will believe S.
Augustine, there is so much power and virtue, in the inte^tion and purpose
wherewith a man goes about the doing of a thing, that if it be good the action
is good, if it be evil, the action is evil also. For thus he writes speaking
to the Manichees August. de moribus Manichaeorum lib. 2. cap. 13. ^om. 1.
Quod quaero a vobis quo fine faciatis? I demand of you (says he) to what end
ye abstain from eating of flesh, and drinking of wine? Finis enim quo
referu^tur ea quae facimus, Idest, propter quem faciamus quicquid facimus, si
non solum inculpabilis sed etiam laudabilis fuerit, tunc demum etiam facta
nostra laud aliqua digna sunt. For the end whereunto those things are
referred which we do, that is, for which or in consideration whereof we do
whatsoever we do, if that be not only not to be blamed, but also be good and
commendable, then are the things which we do worthy of some praise and
commendation. Sin ille iure meritoque culpatur quem spectamus and intuemur, cum
in aliquo versamur officio, id quoque officium nemo improbandum vituperandumque
dubitauerit. But if the end which we respect and aim at, when we perform any
duty, be rightly and worthelie to be blamed, the^ no man may doubt but that
duty or work is also to be condemned. I am not now to dispute, how soundly
all this is delivered of S. Augustine: this I am sure may soundly be gathered
from him, and affirmed with him, that there is so much vigor and power in our
intentions, as that where those be evil, there the actions themselves ca^n^t
be approved, no not though the things which are done be good, lawful, and
necessary in their own nature.

Now, this is that which I would have to be observed concerning usury: namely
that not only to covenant, and to compact for increase, but also to lend with
Intent, and purpose, and hope, to receive increase, that is evil and condemned
by the word of God. This kind Io. Molan. comp. theol. pract. tract. 2. cap.
26. consil. 2. sec. 8.
learned writers are wont to call, Mentalis vsura, usury of the mind: or
usury committed in the intention of the mind. One says to this purpose,
Barthol Fumus Auriae Armil. tit. vsura, sec. 37.
Committitur vsura mentalis sine pacto, quando quis mutuat cum spe habe^di
aliquid pecunia appreciabile supra sortem. Mental usury is committed without
covenant, when a man lends with hope of receiving some what that is moneys
worth, above or besides the principal. And Gratian says Gratian decret. part.
2, cause. 14. Quaest. 3.
Non solum quodcu^que lucrum, sed etiam ipsa spes facit hominem vsurarium,
sicut spes facit hominem Simoniacum: not only every gain in lending, but
also the very hope of gain, ^^ turn or repayme^t of his own principal again.
For he that so does, lends not money or wares, but gives money or wares unto
his neighbor. Now of free giving Christ had spoken in ye verses Luc
6.30.31.32.33,
going before: Aret. Prob. part. 1. loc. 50. tit. de vsura.
Sed quod mox addit, (...), hoc est mutuum date, non de eadem specie iam
loquitur, sed express de mutuo: but that which he presently adds, Lend
looking for nothing again, he speaks not of the same kind of contracting,
namely of giving, but expreslie of lending to another. And the meaning of our
Savior Christ is in those words (Lend, looking for nothing again) that men
should not be like the Scribes and Pharisees, who would only benefit those
which were able, or willing to benefit them again, and from whom they looked
for as great or greater commodity: but that they should lend also to the poor
and needy, yea and that Bucer. com. in Psalm. 15.
Citra omnem spem gratiae, aut paris beneficentiae: without any hope of favor
or of the like recompense again. And therefore one said not amiss Rainer.
Pantheol. part 2. tit. de vsura. cap. 1.
potest mutuans sperare tria: he that lends may hope or expect three things
of the borower. 1. Mutui aequalitatem. 2. ream actionem. 3. personalem
subuentionem in articulo necessitatis. The lender may expect, first that the
borower do repay the aequall measure, or value of that which he lent him:
secondly, he may expect that he may have his action in law against the borower,
if his own be not repayed: thirdly he may expect, that the party whom he
now releeueth by lending will yield him again personal relief in the time
of his necessity. Unto which three, I may also add the fourth particular, and
that is, the lender may lawfully expect the love and good will of the borower.
For that has he justly deserved by his kindness: and besides love is not a
thing which can be valued for money: and therefore he that expects love
cannot be said to expect gain from lending.

Provided always, that the lender do not so expect the love of the borrower,
as that in the seeking thereof, he has too far a reach, and casts his eyes
upon some gain, or commodity whereunto by the good will of him that borrows,
he hops to be preferred. As for the purpose. G. Biel. in quartum sent. did.
15. quaest. 11. a.
Si quis Papae, aut Principi mutuaret, ad captandam beneuolentiam: vt postea
possit consequi beneficium, vel castrum, aut huiusmodi. If a man will lend to
the Pope, or to the Prince, to purchase their favor, that being in favor with
them, he might afterward obtain a benefice of the Pope, or a Castle, or
Lordship of the Prince. This man's expectation of love and favor to such an
end and purpose, makes him to become a Mental usurer. Ibidem.
Tunc enim esset spes lucri: and per conseque^s vsura. For there (says the
Schooleman) is the hope of gain seazing on his mind, and consequently, there
is usury committed. But otherwise, if a man without an ouerreaching head, do
only expecte in lending, the procuring of the favor, and friendship of the
borrower: this hope can make him no usurer, for the reason before expressed.

And so much for the first principal point of this treatise, namely for the
defining or describing of those three kinds of usury, which are most usually
practiced among men in these days: together with the unfolding of the parts
and branches of the same. Wherein I have been the longer: partly, because I
held it exceeding necessary, to determine what that usury is against which we
are about to conclude: and partly, because I find that few writers have
largely, and thoroughly labored in this point.

The second principal point: declaring that usury is unlawful, and that it
is for many causes, and reasons worthily condemned by the word of God.

THus then I have in some measure showed what usury is: now it follows, that
I prove it to be unlawful, and to be plainly and justly forbidden in the
holy scriptures. In the handling of which point, I must of necessity conioyne
those three kinds of usury together, whereof I have severally discoursed
before: lest otherwise the treatise should grow infinite, and too tedious to
the hearers. And indeed, well may they in this point be united and coupled
together: because if the one of them be unlawful, it will follow that the
other must needs be condemned. As for example: If to commit usury in act,
and to take usury in deed, be an unlawful thing, then is the intent, and
purpose of taking usury, evil and unlawful also. For it is a sound, and
certain principle in divinity: P. Martyr. loc. com. clas. 2. loc. 10. sect. 1.
Si finis illicita, and praua fuerit, ipsa quoque intentio erit mala. If the
end of the action, which a man aymeth at in doing thereof be evil, and
unlawful, then must the intendment, and purposing of that action, be evil and
ungodly also. So, if Actual usury be unlawful, then mental usury is
condemned. Again, if open, and plain dealing usury be unlawful, the^ much
more that which is cloaked and deceitefull. For S. Augustine said well,
August. in Psalm. 63.
Simulat a aequitas non est aequitas, sed duplex iniquitas, quia and iniquitas
est, and simulatio: Fained or dissembled equity, is no equity, but a double
iniquity, because it has in it both iniquity and dissimulation. So if open
usury be unlawful, then cloaked usury is much more condemned. Therefore
reprove one, and reprove all three, condemn one, and condemn all three
kinds from the word of God. Now it is manifest that the word of God
condemns usury. Moses says: Exodus 22.25.
If thou lend money to my people, that is, to the poor with thee, thou shall
not be as an usurer unto him: ye shall not oppress him with usury.

And again: Leuit. 25.35.
If thy brother be impouerished, and fallen in decay with thee, thou shall
relieve him, and as a stranger and soiourner so shall he live with thee. Thou
shall take no usury of him nor vantage, 36.
but thou shall fear thy God, that thy brother may live with thee.

And again: Deuteronomy. 23.19.
Thou shall not give to usury to thy brother: as usury of money, usury of
meat, usury of any thing that is put to usury.

Unto a stranger thou may lend upon usury, 20.
but thou shall not lend upon usury unto thy brother, that the Lord thy God
may bless thee in all that thou set thy hand to, in the land whither thou
go to possess it.

Yea, and the Psalmist questioning with God, as desirous to know, Psalm. 15.5.
Who shall dwell in his tabernacle, and who shall rest in his holy mountain?

Among other properties belonging to a man that should go to heaven, he
names this for one, He that gives not his money to usury.

And the Prophet Ezekiel, describing the wicked son of a godly father, who
should dye for the abomination that he had done himself, and should not live
for the righteousness of his father: he notes this for one branch of
wickedness, that should among others bring him to destruction Ezech. 18.13.
if he has given forth upon usury, or has taken increase.

And in another place, the same Prophet displaying and reproving the
transgressions of Jerusalem, he says, Ezekiel 22.12.
In thee have they taken gifts to shed blood, thou have taken usury, and
the increase, and thou have defrauded thy neighbors by extortion, and have
forgotten me says the Lord God.

I might allege further to this purpose that which David has, Psalm. 55.
Where complaining of the malice and cruelty of his enemies, he says, Psalm
55.11.
Non defecit de plateis eius vsura and dolus: Usury and deceit departs not
from their streets. For so the old Latin translation reads it, and the
greek interpretor has (...), Usury and deceipte. And so Basil. in. Psalm. 14.
Basile, Ambros. de Tobia cap. 4.
Ambrose, August. in Psalm. 54.
and Augustine among the fathers, and among the new writers Io. Iuel. in 1.
These. 4 6.
B. Iuel, and Aret. loc. com. part. 1. loc. 50. de vsura.
Aretius, do quote it to this purpose.

I might allege also that which is written, Psalm. 72. where Solomon describing
the prosperity and blessedness of his government, (being therein a figure of
Christ) among other benefits which by it should be conveyed to the people, he
notes this for one, Psalm. 72.14.
Ex vsuris and iniquitate redimet animas eorum: He shall deliver their souls
from usury and iniquity. For so the old latin translation reads it, and
the greek has (...): And so latter divines, both of our L. A.
own, and also of Aret. Prob. part. 1. loc. 50. tit. de vsuris.
other countries, have used and received it. But because the Hebrew word which
the holy ghost uses in those places seems to be somewhat more large, then
that it can be restrained necessarily to the name of usury, and that which
the old translation reads vsura, usury, and ex vsura, out of usury: that
Pagnine and Tremelius translate fraus, deceit, and a dolo, from deceit:
therefore I will not urge those places too far for the confirmation of this
argument. Neither in deed need I, considering that other places which are
alleged, and may be alleged in this behalf, are as D. Wilson said, D.
Wilson, fol 21.
Manifest scriptures: and as B. Iuel said, B. Iuel. epist. before Wilsons
usury.
evident witnesses to this purpose.

Unto the Scriptures, I think it not much amiss, next to adioyne the Oracle
or Prophecy of Sibylla. Not as matching her authority with the canonical
word of God, though the heathen call her Lactantius lib. 1. de salsa relig
cap 6.
Sibyllam, quasi (...) (after the Aeolian language) a consilijs deorum
enuntiandis: because she revealed (as they thought) the will of the gods. For
I do rather reckon the Sibyls in the number of those, which Saint Augustine
calls Augustine. lib. exposit. epist. ad Romans tom. 4.
Prophetae non ipsius: Prophets that were none of Gods; or, none of Gods
Prophets. Yet I suppose that her testimony is much to be regarded, because it
is holden even of Christians, that she spoke: Ivstinus Martyr orat ad
gentiles. tom. 1.
Afflatu quodam mirisico, By a marvelous kind of inspiration: yea, Ibidem.
mirifico praepotentis numinis afflatu, By the merueilous inspiration of some
mighty God: for so Justinius Martyr doubted not to affirm. Now, she
proph^sying of Christ's coming to judgment, and how at his coming, all kind
of malefactors should be gathered before him: among others which were to be
conuented, and to be condemned of him, she reckons the usurers for one
sort of evil people. Her words be these Monument. patrum Sibyllin. orac lib.
2.
-- (...)
(...) --


Then shall come before him (among murderers, adulterers, drunkards, and such
like) the usurers, which heap up increase upon increase: they also in
Sibyllaes judgment shall be appointed to destruction.

And surely it is no marvel, though the word of God, and others speaking by
an extraordinary spirit, have forbidden and condemned usury. For, not to
stand upon that which is of some other alleged to this purpose, namely that
the usurer D. Wilson. fol. 33.
sells the time and the air, and so is not only contrary to God, who
gives those things freely unto all, but also injurious unto men, in taking
money for those things which are none of his own: neither yet to stand upon
that speech of S. Basile, Basil in Psalm.
Sine terra plantans, fine femine metens: The usurer is such a kind of
husbandman who planteth having no ground, and reapeth having no seed: I say,
not to stand upon these, nor some other arguments which are used of diverse
writers to this purpose: this is one special reason why God has forbidden
usury in the word. The first reason against usury: it overthrows lending.
Namely, that whereas lending is a great and a necessary duty of charity, and
such a duty, as without which no society of men, can either long or well
endure: usury is such a thing, as ouerturneth both: 1. The nature. 2. The
equity. 3. The use of lending.

1. First, it ouerturneth the nature of lending: for usury lends for gain,
and lending in nature is free. Gratian decret. part. 2. cause. 14. quaest. 3.
Duo sunt contractus qui de natura sui gratuiti sunt, mutuum and commodatum:
There be two kinds of contractes (says Gratian) which in their own nature are
free: mutuating for the one, and accommodating for the other: being both
several kinds of lending, as has been before expressed. And we have heard
that lending is defined to be, Heming. com in. Iac. 5
Translatio dominij nullo interposito pretio: The transferring of the dominion,
or propriety of a thing to an other, without price or consideration. And who
ever doubted that had common sense, but that the laws concerning lending so
often repeated in the scriptures, do employ Officium gratuitum, An office
freely, and of mere kindness, and without recompense to be performed to our
brethren? Therefore Brentius said truly, Brentius com. in Leuit. 15.
In mutuo exigit lex naturae, vt praeter sortem nihil accipias: In lending, the
law of nature requires that thou receive nothing again more then the
principal. And Chemn^tius says, Chemnit. loc. com. tit. de paupertate ca. 6.
tom. 2.
Quando mutuans paciscitur aliquid vltra sortem, hoc fit contra naturam
contractus mutui. When he that lends, couenanteth to receive again more then
the principal, this is done or this he does contrary to the nature of
lending. Whereof it is that Vrsinus Vrsinus Compend. doct. Christ. part. 3. in
praecept. 8.
justly reckons usury among the corruptions which creep into lawful
contractes. And Selneccerus says, Selneccerus instit. Christ. rel. part. 2.
page 615.
Mut ^^^^onem esse officium: and liberalem contractum: That lending is a duty
which of right we owe to men, and a contract liberal and free in the own
nature: Et deprauari vsuris: And that it is depraved, or corrupted by usury.
As indeed it must* of necessity be corrupted by usury, considering that
lending is free in nature, and the usurer lends for gain. Therefore even as
he which first devised Genesis 36.24.
the breeding of Mules, conjoined those kinds which nature had severed, and
Leuit. 19.19.
God had forbidden to be mingled: and by that mixture of his, brought forth but
a beast, which though it be of some use unto men, yet it is but a corruption
and monster in nature: even so, he that first coupled gain unto lending, has
united those things which reason and common sense have severed a sunder, and
has brought forth by his device but Aristot. Polit. lib. 7.
An (...) beast, yea Io. Iuel. in 1 Thessalonians 4.6.
A monster in nature, Suidas in Aristoph. de nubibus.
yea a swelling monster: howsoever in this unkindly and unnatural age of the
world, it be by supposition reputed profitable unto men. For lending is free
in nature, and therefore usury ouerturneth the nature of lending.

2. Secondly, as usury ouerturneth the nature, so does it also the equity of
lending. What equity is to be observed between the lender, and the borrower
may best appear by the law of God: for Psalm. 19.9.
The judgments of the Lord are truth, yea, they are righteous altogether. Now
Gods law concerning lending was this: Exodus 22 14.
If a man borrow ought of his neighbor, and it be hurt, or else die, the owner
thereof not being by, he shall surely make it good. Now against the equity of
this law, the usurer offends diverse and sundry ways* For if the words be
well marked, we shall see that in lending God provided only that the lender
should be no loser: for the borrower was but to make good yt which he had
received. But the usurer will be sure not only to save his own, but also will
covenant and contract, at the least wise he will purpose within himself to be
a gainer. Again, the law of God did repose the hazard, and adventure of the
thing which was lent, upon ye head of the lender: See more of these points in
G. Babington. quaest. and answers upon the commandments. page 363. and in Io.
Knewstub. Lect. 8. in Exodus 20.
so as if his goods perished in the borrowers hand, he the owner thereof being
by, seeing it, and taking knowledge thereof, the borrower was not bound to
make it good. But the usurer will never adventure the principal, sincke he,
or swim he that borrows, lose he never so much, and be his casualtie never
so apparent: yet the usurer will be sure at the least to receive his own, if
not with great advantage. Again, the law of God did bind the borrower to no more
but only to make good the things which perished, or decayed, or waxed the worse
by the usage. For he says, If it be hurt or die, he shall surely make it
good. But the usurer will gain by the lending of that which either decays
not at all in the use, as money and coin, or if it do decay, may be restored
full as good, as corn, wine, oil, and such like merchandise. Again, the law
of God required the friendship and good will of the lendor no better, nor with
no more then the receiving of his own again. Now the usurer will profess
that he lends for good will, and that if you were not his special friend,
he would not forbear his goods: and yet will he be requited with a great
deal more then his own again. So dear and precious a thing is an usurers
friendship. So that if there be any equity in the law which God made for
lending, thou certainly there is no equity but much iniquity and
unrighteousness in usury.

3. Thirdly as usury does overthrow the nature and equity, so does it also
cut down, and abandon the use and practice of lending. Evident and lamentable
experience teaches, that whereas in the days of our forefathers, when usury
was counted a deadly sin, a poor man, or a young occupyer might easily borow
of a rich man xl. s. or twenty nobles freely, and pay it again at convenient
leisure: now since men made no conscience of this evil, a man cannot borow
five shillinges, no not xii. pence for a week, but he must pay an egg for
usury. Therefore B. Iuel said truly, Io. Iuel in. 1. These. 4.6.
That usury is a thing which hardneth the heart. And another as truly, Hugo
Cardinalis in Psalm. 15.
Foenus interficit misericordiam: usury cutteth the throat of mercy and
compassion. S. James complains of the couetuous men of his time that Iam.
5.2.3.
their riches corrupted, and their gold and silver cankred* From whence a
learned man yet living among us coniectureth not improbably, that the people of
that time hated and detested usury. For had they not hated usury, though of
unmercifulness they would give nothing, no nor lend freely to the poor: yet L.
A.
Si foeneratorias arts adhibere voluissent, facile aurum atque aessuum ab
aerugine vindicassent: If they would have lent forth to usury, they might
easily have preserved their gold and silver from rust and corruption. And this
wisdom (if it be wisdom) the men of our time have sounded to the depth.
For though they will neither give of alms, nor lend of love: yet by putting
forth their whole stock to usury, they well enough provide that their money
rusteth not in their cofers. So usury is succeeded into the place of lending.
Let this then be the conclusion of the first argument. Since lending is a duty
so often commanded of God, and so profitable (yea necessary) unto men, and
usury is a practice which ouerturneth the nature, the equity, and the use of
lending: no marvel though God has so often forbidden and condemned it in
holy Scriptures.

The second reason against usury: it overthrows charity.
To proceedest out this unto another argument. Usury is justly condemned in
the word, as that which is directly opposite, and as it were a sworn professed
enemy to Christian charity. Love and charity has a wonderful praise set
upon it by the holy Ghost, S. Paul says, Romans 1^.10.
Love is the fulfilling of the law. And again, 1. Tim. 1.5.
The end of the commandment is love. And again, Galat. 5.14.
All the law is fulfilled in one word* which is this, thou shall love thy
neighbor as thy self. That as Cicer. de Ora.
he said of Pronu^^^^^on in an Orator, so we may say of love in a Christian:
the first, the second, the third point of the law, the beginning, the midst,
the ending of all duties to men, is love toward our neighbor. Now the squire
and rule of this love, our Savior Christ delivers to be this* Math. 7.12.
Whatsoever ye would that men should do to you, even so do ye to them* for
this is the, law and the Prophets. Which rule and squire of love, as the
usurer seldom respects, so does he never observe. For tell me thou that
demaundest increase of another, if thou have occasion to borow thy self,
would thou rather give interest, then receive freely and for naught?
experience denies it: reason is against it. D. Wilson. fol. 175.
Who would not rather travail without a burden upon his back, then with a
burden? or who would not have the sweet and avoid the sower? eue^ so, who
had not rather have goods given then sold, lent the^ let unto him? would
thou so? the^ if thou in thy need would borow freely, and yet wilt not le^d
to another man but upon increase: you do not to him, as thou would be done
unto thy self, and therefore obseruest not the law of charity. That if (as
Vrsinus says) the questions arising about usury may be determined by this
speech, or general rule, Zach. Vrsinus ^o^p. doc. Christ. part. 3. in
praecept. 8.
Quod tibi non vis fieri alteri ne feceris: do not to another that which thou
would not have done unto thy self: then may it easily be concluded what is
to be thought and judged concerning this case of usury: namely, that it will
not, nor cannot stand with ye general rule of charity. And therefore B. Iuel
said, Humfred. in vita Iuel. page 232.
Charitas Christiana non foeneratur: Christian charity puts not forth to
usury. And M. Beza says that which is more, T. Beza ann^t. in Matthew. 19.8.
Foenerari prohibet Christiana charitas: Christian charity forbids men to
take usury. But the Cardinal said that which is most of all, Hugo Cardinalis
in Psalm. 15.
vsura direct opponitur charitati: usury is directly opposite unto charity.
Yea, and Hemingius says plainly and directly to this point, Heming. Co^. in
Iam. 5.
stabilita vsura ever titur charitatis norma, quam Deus aeternam esse vult:
establish or allow usury, and the rule of love is quite overthrown: which
rule God would have to abide and remain for ever. Conclude we then in this
manner. Love is the very sum and substance of the law: but the usurer
ouerturneth the general rule of love, (for he does not to another, as himself
would be done unto:) ergo he and his practices, are worthily condemned in the
word of God.

But me thinks I hear some usurer or other, whispering with himself, and
replying in this manner against that which has been spoken. Why sir? I do as
I would be done unto. For if I were in want my self, I would be glad to take
up money for ten in the hundred, or to give a greater price to have wares
with half years day of payment: yea and take him for my friend too which so
would deal by me. To which objection of theirs, I answer diverse and sundry
ways. First, I say with Chemnitius, Chemnit. loc. com. tom. 2. tit. de
paupertate cap. 6.
Simulatus praetextus est: This pretense which the usurer makes, that he would
be glad in his need to borrow upon increase, is fained, and false, and
counterfeite. Nemo enim est qui non mallet gratuito mutuo subleuari in
egestate: For there is no man (says he) which had not rather be relieved in
his necessity by free lending, then by taking upon usury. And where shall you
al most find an usurer, who if his own money be abroad, will very readily
borrowe money or wares upon usury, to relieve his present necessity?
Secondly, I say that as touching that speech of our Savior Christ, Math. 7 12.
Whatsoever ye would that men should do to you, even so do to them: Gualter.
homil. 61. in. Luc. 6.
Ante omnia inquirendum erit, ad quam hominis voluntatem lex ista extendi
debeat. It is first of all (or principally) to be considered, unto what kind
of will in a man, that law or speech of Christ, is to be extended. For in all
things, and in all respects, it is evident that this rule holds not: Do as
thou would be done unto. If it did, then would it follow, that the
magistrate must of love spare the convicted malefact or, because if he were in
the malefactors case, he would be glad to be spared and pardoned himself. And
then ye covetous man should be bound by the law of love, to give all his goods
unto another, because his gripple mind is such, as he would willingly another
man should give all that he has unto him. And a number of such absurdities
would follow, if the rule were general, and without exception, Do as thou
would be done unto. This rule therefore of love prescribed unto men, Ibidem:
and Brentius hom. 59. in Luc. 6.
Debet ad eam voluntatem restringi quae non pugnat cum aequitate, and legibus
naturae: Must be restrained to such a will, as is not repugnant to equity, and
the law of nature. Look what a man wills to be done to himself Mich.
Cope. com. in Pro. 28.8.
of a mind well governed by love, and look what a man wills to himself,
Erasm. Sarcerius schol. in Luc. 6.
scilicet a natura, by the motion and instinct of nature: that let him yield
in the like case to another: for that is the law and the Prophets. Now alas,
when a man is driven into a straight by an unnatural necessity, how can his
will well follow the light of nature? And when his will is so tossed up and
down, as that he is compelled to will that, which if he were his own man he
would not, yea and misliketh utterly that which of necessity he wills: how
can his will be said to be moderated with equity and reason? And when his
straightnes and exigent compels him to reach out his hand to unlawful
means, and so to forget both God, himself, and his neighbor: how can that
mind be said to be well governed by love? Therefore from such a will so
straightened, so degenerating from kind, and so far from love, to prescribe a
rule, unto free kindenes and love ^ has neither ground from the word of God,
neither is it agreeable to common wisdom and reason among men. Thirdly, I
answer to this objection of the usurer: say that thou would be glad in thy
necessity to borrow upon usury of another: yet this will of thine is not
simple nor free, but thou wishest and willest so to do, only to avoid a
further danger. As the Mariner tossed with an extreme tempest upon the sea,
to avoid utter shipwreck casts his goods and fraught not unwillingly over
the board: which not withstanding, he would not willingly have done, but to
escape the loss of his life that was more dear unto him. Now these and the
like are called mixtae actiones, mingled actions: done partly voluntarily, and
willingly, partly inuoluntarilie and unwillingly. A man would not do such a
thing simply if he were at his free choice, yet he will do such a thing to
avoid a greater evil. So that to will, and not to will, do after a sort
concur in one and the same action. But now the meaning of Christ's rule is:
whatsoever we would willingly and cheerfully, that others should do to us,
following the light of nature, and ordering our minds by love: that the law
of charity binds us to yield, and to perform to others. And therefore that
pretense of doing as we would be done unto, is but an apron of fig leaves
too slenderly sowed together, and not able thoroughly to shroude from sight
the usurers uncharitable shame. He does not as he would be done unto, and
therefore fulfilleth not (nay he ouerturneth) the law of charity: and
consequently he and his practices are worthily condemned in the holy
Scriptures.

The end of the third Sermon preached Maij. 7. 1593.
The fourth Sermon: the special contents whereof are these. Two other reasons
are alleged against usury: viz. that
1. It ouerturneth equality, and euenho^de in bargaining: because that, 1. It
demands consideration for that which is none of the usurers own. 2. It
demands two recompenses, for one entire thing. By reason of which
inequality, it comes to pass that usury is so commonly the overthrow,
both of 1. Private families. 2. Public estates and commonweals.


2. It is a finne which the usurers practice, against the light of their own*
consciences, and so against the law of nature, The third reason against usury,
it ouerturneth equality.
which rules in the same.

THere is yet a further evil incident into usury, and that is, that it
ouerturneth euenhoode, and equality in dealing, between man and man, and
therefore in that respect also is it justly forbidden in the word of God. Now
that it ouerturneth equity and euenhoode, the Schoolmen ha^^ showed by these
reasons. 1. First, Scotus in 4. distin. 18. quaest. 2. G. B^^l. in quartum
sent. did. 15. quaest. 11. art. 1. d.
the usurer demanding increase for that which he lent: seeks gain of that,
which for the time is another man's, and none of his own. For by lending, he
did transfer the dominion and property of his own goods, into another man's
hands: so as, not he which did lend, but he which did borrowe, is for the
couenanted time of lending, Lord and owner thereof. If therefore the lender
demand increase for the time which he lent, he seeks gain of that which
for the time was none of his own. Now, to require gain of that which is
another man's, is a very unjust and unequal demand. And therefore said one
not of the meanest Ciuillians: Barthol. Caepol. tract. cautelarum caut. 125.
Vna est ratio principalis quare in mutuo vsura est prohibita, quia ille qui
recipit mutuum, si aliquid solueret vltra, solueret de re sua, vel propter rem
suam: This is one principal reason, why usury is forbidden in lending,
because if he that borrows, should pay anything more then that which he
received: he should pay it of his own goods, or for his own goods: for as
much as in deed, the lender has made them the borrowers for the appointed
season. And this is also the reason which Melancthon uses to this purpose.
Melancthon lib. definit. appellat.
Pugnant vsurae cum aequalitate, usury (says he) fights with equality. And
why? His reason follows, Nemo debet lucrari ex alieno: Accipiens vsuras
lucratur de alieno: quia mutuatio transtulit dominium. Non est igitur iustum
lucrum. Equality says: No man ought to make gain of another man's goods. But
he that takes usury, makes gain of that which is another man's: because the
lending has transferred the dominion of the goods from the lender to the
borrower. Therefore it is no just nor equal gain.

Why? but sir (will the usurer object,) grant that by lending I do make my
goods for the time to become another man's: yet why may I not justly demand
gain and increase of the borrower, even in this consideration only? Namely,
because I am contented for the time, to put out of mine own hand into his, the
dominion and property of my goods? I answer: that if thou sellest any thing to
another man, thou may so do in deed. The nature of that contract
permits thee to take consideration, for the making over and alienation of
thy goods unto another: but thou in putting forth to usury, do exercise
only the contract of lending. Now lending is translatio dominij nullo
interposito pretio: a transferring of the dominion of a thing, from one man to
another, without any price, or consideration, as has been before declared. If
then thou take consideration, thou lendest not: but because thou professest
to lend, therefore for translation of the property thou must crave no
consideration. Lactantius describing diverse particular duties to be
exercised of a christian man, among others he names this for one. Lactant. de
vero cultu. lib. 6 cap. 18.
Pecuniae, si quam crediderit, non accipiat vsuram: If he lend any money, let
him take no usury for it. And why? Mark his reasons: Vt and beneficium sit
incolume quod succurrit necessitati, and abstineat se prorsus alieno^ Partly,
that it may be a mere or entire good turn, which relieueth necessity: and
partly, that he which lends may wholly abstain, from taking of that which
is another man's. And he adds further, In hoc enim genere officij, debet suo
esse contentus, quem oporteat alias ne proprio quidem parcere, vt bonum faciat:
plus autem accipere quam dederit, iniustum est: For in this kind of duty (he
means, in lending) he that lends must be content with his own, who at
other times must not spare his own goods, but willingly part with them to do
good. Now to receive more then he lent, is an unjust, or unequal thing. Out of
which speech of Lactantius, these points may fitly, and profitablie be
observed. First, he that lends to relieve necessity must yield Beneficium
incolume, a free good turn: Ergo, he must take no consideration. Secondly,
his lending must be free, least he seize upon another man's goods. Thirdly,
because he that takes increase by lending, seazeth upon that which is none of
his own, therefore he does that which is unequal and unjust. So that, from
him it may be gathered, that to make thy goods another man's by lending, and
then to demand gain of that which thy self have made none of thine, is a
very unjust and unreasonable thing.

A second reason, by which the school^men do them the inequality, and want of
euenhoode committed in usury, is this. They say (and it is true,) that usury
is committed only in that kind of lending, which is called mutuum or
mutuation* And mutuation is only of such things, as consist in number, weight,
and measure. Now it is evident that in such things as pass from man to man by
number, or ^aight, or measure, the use of them cannot be severed from the
propriety, nor the propriety from the use: but they must of necessity pass
together without division, or separation. As for example, (that the simplest
may understand me) I cannot lend a man money, or corn, or oil, or such like
things, but I must make them fully his, to do with them what he will: if I do
not, he can make no use of them, nor receive benefit by them. So as he ca^
not have the use of them, unless he have the propriety: and what shall he do
with the propriety for a time, unless he may have the use of them also? Well
then: if I lend money, and so with the money the use of it, as one entire thing
(because the use cannot be severed from the propriety) and I demand again
not only money, which of necessity brings use with it, but also more money
for the use of my money: I demand two things for one, and several things,
for them which cannot be severed. And this is the reason of Thomas Aquinas
against usury, which he makes plain by this example. Tho. Aquin. 22ae.
quaest. 78. art. 1,
If a man would sell wine severally, and by it self, and would withal, sell
the use of that wine severally, and by it self: he should sell the same thing
twice, or should sell that which is not: and so he should manifestly offend
in injustice. Et simili ratione iniustitia^ committit, qui mutuat vinum, aut
triticum, petens sibi duas recompensationes: vnam quidem restitutionem aequalis
re^, aliam vero pretium vsus, quod vsura dicitur. By the like reason, he
commits injustice or inequality, which lends wine, or wheat, to another,
and demands two recompenses for the same: one for the thing it self,
another for consideration of the use. Which second consideration, or recompense
taken for the use of such a thing, is that which is called usury.

Now it is true, that the usurers do object in their own defense (as
Chemnitius also has observed,) that Chemnit. loc. co^. Tom. 2 tit. de
paupertate. Cap. 6.
they do not fell twice over the goods, or principal it self, but they sell
Realem vtilitatem, a real commodity, Quae creditori abest, and debitori
adest: which the creditour wants for the time that he lends, and the debtor
enioieth for the time that he boroweth. Well: grant that to be so, (for
indeed who will borow any thing, but in respect of there all commodity which
it is supposed to carry with it?) Yet by that reason, a man may take two prices
for many things that are sold. As for the purpose. I sell a man Bullion gold.
Now gold besides the metal it self which is precious, yea and besides the
benefit which arises from it being coined, in buying and selling etc. it has
also this real commodity, that it is profitable many ways to Physic, and
to health, as a very sovereign and cordial thing. Shall I therefore take one
price for the gold it self, and another for the use, or benefit, or real
commodity of gold? what were this, but to sell one thing twice, and to take
two prices for one commodity, and so to commit a monstrous inequality?

Therefore, to return to the purpose, Aristotle who saw much into matters of
common society, said that Aristot. Polit. lib. 1.
By usury was taken away, medium and norma aut regula omnium virtutum: the
measure and squire and rule of all virtues: namely Arithmeticall proportion,
whereby equal things are equally recompensed, which rule the usurer
observes not, because he demands two considerations for one and the same
thing. Hereof it is that B. Iuel said, L. Humfr^d. in vita Iuelli. page 224.
vsura mutatio iniqua est: usury is a kind of unequal exchanging, or
bargaining. And Hemingius says, Hemingius com. in Iac. 5.
Manif^ste inaequalitatem parit: to take gain for lending, breeds a manifest
inequality. And the states assembled in our English Parliament concluded, that
Anno. 3. He^rici. 7. cap. 5. and Anno. 11. Henrici. 7. cap. 8.
It is contrary to the law of natural justice. Ac res ostendit (says
Melancthon) Melancthon. lib. definit. appellat.
propter hanc inaequalitatem exhauriri magnam partem hominum, eamque ob causam
saepe seditiones in Imperijs ortas esse: experience it self teaches, that by
reason of this inequality which is committed in making gain of lending, a
number of men are consumed, and for that cause many seditions, rebellions, and
tumults, do often arise in kingdoms and commonweals. Now I would have men
thoroughly to observe this speech of Melancthon, as that which I mean to make
ye foundation of many things now to be delivered. And well may I lay his
judgment for a foundation, because P. Fagius epist* ante Chald. Par^^phrast.
tom. 1.
his writings testify, that he was in his time maximum and singular decus
literarum: a great and singular ornament of learning, as P. Fagius has truly
reported of him. That speech of his delivers two points of great weight, and
worthy of our deep consideration. Namely that whereas by the equality which
is in other contractes, as in buying, in selling, in letting, in exchanging and
such like, men do usually grow wealthy, in their private families, yea and the
public estate of the common weal is supported and maintained: it comes to
pass by the inequality which is in this corrupt contract of usury, that 1.
private families are commonly impouerished, and 2. commonweals are usually
disturbed.

And first to speak of the want and straitnes which usury begets in
private families: we have an evident example thereof in the holy scriptures.
Nehem. 5.2.3.4.5.
The people complain in the days of Nehemiah, that by reason of the burdens
(or usury, for so Pagnine translateth it verse. 7.) which the richer sort did
impose upon them, their children were brought into bondage, their lands and
vineyardes were gaged to other men, And there was no power in their hands,
that is, (as Tremellius well expounds it,) Tremel. annot. in Nehem. 5.5.
They had no substance or ability to redeem them home again. So dry were
they drawn, and so low were they brought by borrowing upon usury. The prophet
Amos complains bitterly of the oppressors of his time, Amos 8.4 6.
how they did swallow up the poor, and make the needy of the land to fail:
how they sought to buy the poor for silver, and the needy for shoes: to be
their servants, for so Vatablus annot. in Amos 8.6.
Vatablus does apply it. Which extremities, as they are common to al covetous
men: so (says Gualter) Gualther hom. 27 in Amos 8.
Obseruabis ista vsurarijs and foeneratoribus potissimum obijci: Observe that
these things are principally objected, and laid to the charge of usurers, and
those that lend for increase. Which is as if he should say, that they play of
all others the principal act of this tragedy, and that they are the men
especially, which swallowe up the poor, and bring the needy into bondage.
Ambrose also complains of the iniquity of his time in this behalf: Ambros.
lib. de Tobia. ca. 8.
Vidi ego miserabile spectaculum, I have seen (says he) a miserable sight, or
spectacle in my time. Liberos pro paterno debito in auctionem; deduci, and
teneri calamitatis haeredes, qui non essent participes successionis. I have
seen children set forth to sale to pay the fathers debt which accrewed by
usury, (for of that he speaks in that place,) and so they became heirs of
their fathers calamity, who were not succeeders to their inheritance. What
should I say more? the Emperor Seuerus Aret. loc. com. part. 1. loc. 50. de
vsuris.
allowed the taking of four in the hundred, Cum nonnullos foenoris causa agro
paterno exutos intellexisset: Because he saw that many by usury wasted away
all their fathers lands. And if foreign examples wanted abroad, yet how
pitiful, and how manifold are our instances at home, of noble men's sons by
usury decaying their houses, of Merchant men by usury wasting their stocks,
of husbandmen by usury compelled to sell their crops aforehand half for
naught? that nothing is more true then is that saying of Melancthon, namely
that a number of men are consumed and drawn dry by usury. Which consumption
of so many, could not so usually, and commonly be effected by this trade: if
there were not a marvelous inequality, even in the contracte and manner of
bargaining used in the same.

Hereof it is that Bernhard called usury Bernhard Syluest. de cura rei
familiaris.
Venenum patrimonij, The poison of a man's patrimony, or inheritance: that Cato
said, Cicero offic. 2. Ambros. de Tobia cap. 14.
Foenerari est hominem occidere, To lend to usury was to kill a man: that Leo
said Leo magnus Ser. 6. de ^ciunio decimi mensis cap. 3.
Foenus pecuniae* funus est animae: that is as one interprets it, Io.
Northbrooke. the poor man's garden.
The death of life: because that usury is as it were a poison to the life, and
a moth to the goods of men. Hereof it is also that Chrysostom compared usury
to Chrysostom. in Mat. 5.
the stinging of the serpent Aspis, which casts a man into a certain kind
of pleasant and delightful sleep: but in the sleep he dies away without
recovery. That the great lawyer Baldus cons. 449.
compared it to the worm Teredo, whereof Plin. not. hist. lib. 11. cap. 2. and
lib. 16. cap. 41.
Pliny makes mention in his natural history: which is as soft as silk in
the feeling of the hand, but biteth so hard with the teeth, that if eats the
strongest timber. For indeed such a thing is usury: it seems for the
present to benefit and refresh, but in the end, it will devour and consume. And
such a man is an usurer, soft in his words, and fair in his promises: but by
his deeds he stingeth to death, and wastes the greatest substance. Hereof
further it is, that Plutarch compares the usurers to the Plutarch lib. de non
foenera^do.
Vultures and Ravens that will pick the guts out of a man's belly: and that
Alphonsus the king of Arragon compared them to the Harpiae, Virgil. Aenead. 3.
that devoured the Trojans victuals: Licost. Apotheg. tit. vsurae.
V^po^e labores mortalium depescentes: As those that do eat up the fruits of
other men's labors* Hereof also Caelius Secundus calls usury Caelius
Secundus lect. antiquar. lib. 12. cap. 20.
Tabem pestifera^: A deadly or contagious ague. And fitly: for by it poor men
are cast into many a shaking fit, and at last are pyned to the bones. Yea the
Pope himself (who does not easily condemn sin and insquitie) compares
usury unto Sextus decretalium. D. Wilson fol. 92.
a Gulf or whirlepoole, which does devour souls, and utterly wastes wealth.
These, and the like, (of which kind* I meet with diverse in reading of this
argument) are: hard speeches, and hard comparisons (I confess,) and such as
might make an honest minded man to loath the practice, yea the very name of
usury. Yet thus have wise men, and learned men, spoken and written of it,
because they have observed by experience, that (as B. Iuel said) Io. Iuel. Ser.
in 1 Thessalonians. 4.6.
Usury consumes the rioh, eats up the poor, makes bancker outs, undoes
houshoulds, and (as before was delivered out of Melancthon) draws dry
hundreds, yea thousands of people in the world, and is the utter destruction of
infinite families. Which destruction of private families, I am persuaded that
men of all ages and places could never have observed, so usually and ordinarily
to arise from usury, more then from buying, selling, letting, exchanging, and
such like contracts: if there were not a marvelous inequality, and want of
euenhood, in the very practice of usury.

But now, upon this I know the usurer is ready to reply, that many have gained
greatly by borowing upon usury. And he will not stick to give instances of
some, who by this means have recovered their houses and lands which lay to
morgage, like to be lost: and of some manlisters who at the first began with
little stock of their own, but by using money taken up in this order, have
grown very wealthy. Yea, and I lent money to such a man, and such a man,
(says he) and he brought my money again at the day with many thanks, and
professed that he gained greatly by me. And how then is this such a monstrous
decay to private families, as you have before reported? Now, to this I may make
answer diverse and sundry ways: first, I doubt not but some me^ may gain by
taking upon usury: for they may light on a match which shall yield them
treble increase. So may a man gain that ouerbuyeth his wares, or ouerhireth
his farm or over exchangeth his horse: he may happen on such gain in selling
the same wares, or letting the same farm, or exchanging the same horse again,
as shall yield double or treble recompense, for the harm of his former
bargain. But that excuses not the unrighteousness of the first seller,
letter, or exchanger: no more does this, the iniquity of the usurer. So that a
man may say in this case of him that boroweth as Leo said of him that lends,
Leo primus sermon. 6. de ieiunio decimi me^sis. cap. 3.
Quilibet sequatur euentus, mala semper est ratio foenerantis: what event
soever betyde him that boroweth upon usury, gain he or gain he not, the
course of lending forth upon usury is evil and ungodly. Secondly, I say, that
though one, or two, or some few have gained by taking upon usury: yet One
swallow makes not summer, neither can a few gayners, argue this trade to be
commodious. S. Basile does notably answer the usurers objection in this
behalf. Basil. com. i^ Psalm. 14.
Multi (inquies) ex foenore diuites facti sunt. Plures ob hoc magis puto
laqueos attigerunt. Thou will say unto me, that many have grown rich by
usury. But I answer (says he) that I suppose more by that means have come
to ha^g themselves, or have been brought to the galowes. Now, tu diuites factos
respicis, eos vero qui desperauerunt, animumque desponderunt non numeras: thou
look to those and repeatest those that have grown rich by usury: but thou
namest not those which have grown desperate and faint hearted, and have come to
their end by usury. D. Wilson has a pretty history to this purpose, not
unworthy the remembering. D Wilson. fol. 189.
A man coming into a certain Church, and seeing it fraught full of Images
made of wax, demanded what might be the cause of such an unwonted sight?
answer was made, that those whom these Images did represent were certain
persons which on a time were saved from drowning, by calling upon our Lady. Nay
then (quoth he again,) where be the Images of those (I pray you) that called
upon our Lady, and were drowned notwithstanding? so say I in this case. If any
man will set before me the instances, and as it were the Images of those, who
took up money on usury, and grew rich thereby: I would demand on the other
side that he show forth the hundreds, and thousands of those, who by that
means have utterly impouerished, and overthrown their own estate. They will
be found a million for one: yea to be without all comparison. Thirdly, I
answer to that objection of theirs ( viz. many have grown rich by taking
goods upon usury,) with that saying of Hemingius, whom some of the^ suppose
to be a patron to their practice. Hemingius com. in Iac. 5.
Nihil boni per se ex vsura esse potest, sed potius malorum pelagus: there can
no good arise from usury of it self, but rather a maine sea of evil. Verum
si quid fortuito boni, ex vsuris prouenire videtur, id ne quaquam vsuris, sed
mutuationi tribuendum est: If by chance (says he) there seem any commodity
to arise from usury, that is not to be ascribed to the lending upon usury,
but to the lending which is in usury. If a man gain by borowing upon usury,
it is because he borrowed, not because he borrowed for increase. Borowing
yields a benefit: but borowing for usury is that which abateth the height,
and greatness of the benefit. Fourthly, and lastly, I answer to this point,
that to m^ke him gain who takes upon usury, many must of necessity loose
and be hindered. For he that deals by money taken upon usury, if he will
gain, must use the more craft and subteltie in his trade: and besides that, L.
Humfred. in vita Iuelli. page 221.
Cogitur merces suas tantopluris vendere, and populus cogitur eas pluris emere,
he is compelled to sell his wares, and the people are compelled to buy his
wares at a higher and greater price. Wherefore S. Chrysostom said well, Ide^.
page 2^2.
Foeneratorem communem esse hostem omnium, that the usurer is a common enemy
to all the common weal. Now then what is this, but even to save a stick, and
burn a house, to save aioynt and loose the body, to help one and spoil a
thousand? and this is the best effect of some men's gaining by usury. Therefore
said Bodine well, Bodinus de repub. lib. 5. cap. 2.
Nulla est tenuium subleuandorum via compendiosior, quam omne genus foenoris ex
lege diuina prohiber^: there is no more compendious or ready way, to ease the
poor and needy: then to forbid all kind of usury, according to the law of
God.

Well then: if we proceed on from private familyes, to whole commonweals, we
shall see that usury has decayed whole cities, and provinces and kingdoms.
The Romans give testimony to this, who D. Wilson in epist.
never began to decay, till usury lorded amongst them. The Germans give
testimony to this, who before they knew what usury meant, Aret. Prob. part. 1.
loc. 50. tit. de vsuris.
Sese soli auderent Romany opponere: they durst oppose themselves by
themselves against the Romans. Hodie in delicijs, and are alieno, and gloriam
bellicam and germanicam integritatem amiserunt: now wasting themselves by
delight and usury, they have lost both their warlike valor, and the Germane
sincerity. According as Luther complained of it in his time: Luther de taxanda
vsura tom. 7.
Detestanda auaritia, and vsura funditus eam corruperunt, and euerterunt:
Detestable covetousness, and usury, have wholly corrupted, and overthrown
it. Again. The Egyptians give testimony to this. Alex. ab Alex. lib. 1. cap.
7.
Omnis Aegyptus foenore obruta: says Alexander ab Alexandria: All Egypt is
overwhelmed with usury. The Spaniardes give testimony to this, who are said
D. Wilson. fol 180.
to loose their gain which they gather among the Indians, by the usury which
upon their return they bargain to pay unto the Genowaies. Yea England has
in former ages given testimony to this: for riotes have been raised in the
land, Anno 47. He^rici. 3. D. Wilson. fol. 198.
against the Jews, and many hundreds of them slain, for the usury which they
exacted of the Christians. What should I say more? Cornelius Tacitus speaks
thus of the estate of Rome. Cornel. Tacit. annal. lib. 6.
Sane vetus vrbi foenebre malum, and seditionum discordiarumque creberrima
causa: usury is an ancient evil to the City and a most usual cause of
discord and sedition. S. Hierome says, Hierom. con. in Esaias. 58.6.
In cunctis is vrbibus seditionis causa vel maxima est: It is a special cause
of sedition in all Cities. Pomeranus says (as Marloret does allege him,) In
1. Tim. 3.3.
vitanda est vsura, tanquam praesentissimum and ecclesiae, and reipublicae
venenum. usury is to be avoided, as a strong poison both to Church and common
weal. In word: all men almost do agree in this, that it is the confusion of
countries, and the bale of commonweals. Now I demand whence possibly it can
be, that whole countries and cities, should be so usually, and so generally
ouerturned by usury: but even from the unreasonableness, inequality, want of
euenhoode, and want of due proportion committed in the very manner of the
contracting it self?

And therefore, we find that the great common wealth men of all ages, though
they knew, and saw evidently, how without diverse kinds of bargaining and
contracting, society among men could not possibly be maintained: yet they have
always prohibited, and condemned usury, as a thing carrying with it so great
inequallitie, that it, and the public good, could not well stand together.
Plato. de leg. lib. 5.
Plato banished usury out of his common wealth. Aret. Prob. part. 1. loc. 50.
de vsuris.
Lycurgus drove all the usurers out of Sparta. Ibidem.
Agis brent all the usurers books in Athens: which fact Agesilaus beholding,
said that he never saw Clarius lumen, or (as Northbrooke reports it) Io.
Northbrooke poor man's garden.
Puriorem ignem, a more clear, or excellent, or purer fire: for indeed, it
purified the city of a mass of corruptions. D. Wilson. in epist.
Solon took away the usurers books and gains, and brought in nouas tabulas,
new laws, or statutes, which are said in greek to be (...), because they
eased the people of an intolerable burden. And if from the Grecians, we will
pass over to the Latins, Appian says, that Appian. Alexand. Rom hist. de
bello. civil lib. 1.
The ancient Romans abhorred usury, even as did the Grecians. And Cornelius
Tacitus says of it, Cornel Tacit. annal. lib. 6.
Cohibebatur antiquis, and minus corruptis moribus: It was restrained in
ancient times, when manners were less corrupted among them. And the reason
why they abhorred usury (says Appian) was this, Appian. Ibi.
Because it was a trafique, very burdensome to the poor, and a thing that
ministered matter of strife and enmity. We read further concerning the
histories of the Romans, that Aret. prob part. 1. loc. 50. de vsuris.
Cato freed all Sicilia of usury. Luther. de taxand. vsur. tom. 7.
Genitius the Tribune made a decree against usury. C. Suetonius. Iuel. Caesar*
cap. 42.
Julius Caesar took order that creditours should be paid, deducta summa aeris
alieni, si quid vsurae nomine numeratum, aut praescriptum fuisset: deducting
that sum of money out of the debte, which did arise or grow due for usury.
And if from the Latins, we will proceed to take a view of other nations: we
shall see, that they also have condemned usury. Appian. romans hist. de bell.
civil. lib. 1.
The Persians liked it not, Vt non aliena a fraud and mendacio: as a thing
which they thought carried with it lying and deceipte. The Indians liked it not,
Aelianus var. hist. lib. 4. cap. 1
Indi ad vsuram p^cu^iam non locan^: the Indians put forth no money to usury.
The Frenchmen liked it not Cent. 1.3. cap. 7.
S. Lewis the King of France, returning home from Dameata, Io. Boemus Aubanus
de ritibus gentium. lib. 1. cap. 5.
a city in Egypt, sometimes called Memphis,) Commanded all usurers, Jews,
Disers, or gamesters, and blasphemers of God, to depart, out of his kingdom.
The Englishmen never liked it: though sometimes they have tolerated it, to
avoid a greater inconvenience. Before the conquest King D. Wilson. fol. 64.
Edgar, and Saint Edward (as they called him:) since the conquest, King Edward
the first, and diverse others: and of late memory King Edward the sixth, did
quite and clean banish it out of the land, as after shall appear. In a
word, Bodinus de repub. lib. 5. cap. 2.
Not only the law of God, verum etiam sapientissimi quique legislatores, and
Philosophi (says Bodine,) but also all wise law giuers, and Philosophers have
utterly condemned usury. Now (to make an end at length) shall we think,
that men of all ages, countries, and languages, who have been so provident to
plant, and to continue the estate of common wealths: and who by their
providence, have in their times raised their countries, and kingdoms, unto a
wonderful and glorious estate: have all doted with a general consent, and been
utterly deceived in this one case of usury? or shall we not rather think,
that these men saw in reason a marvelous inconuenie^ce, arising from this kind
of bargaining, which inferred a destruction upon their government and
country? which if men in carnal reason did find out by experience, no
marvel though God who is the planter, preserver, and approuer of commonweals, has wholly forbidden it in the word.

I might now proceed to another argument, but that me thinks I hear the
usurer thus replying against that which has been last delivered. It is true
indeed (will some men say,) usury is able to overthrow, and sometimes (I
confess) it has overthrown whole families, yea whole countries, and
kingdoms: but that is immoderate, extreme, oppressing, griping, and biting
usury. So as hence it follows not, that this should be ascribed as an
ordinary effect to every degree, and measure of usury. To which I answer,
that it is true indeed, usury the lesser it is, the less it hurts: the
greater it is, the sooner it consumes. As poison the weaker it is, the longer
nature resists it: and the stronger it is, the sooner it kills. And as a
burden the heauyer it is, the faster it wearyeth, but a light burden (says
the Proverb,) will prove heavy with far caryage: so is it with usury, the
greater, and the smaller, both eat and consume, but the first in the shorter,
the last in the longer continuance. But let us examine from experience (which
is the foundation of wisdom,) if the measure, and moderating of usury, be
able to make it commodious to a state: And if in the greatest moderation that
can be made of so bad a practice, it have not proved the decay of families,
and common wealths, as have been before expressed. We read that Justinian
ordained by his decree, L. eos. c. de vsuris.
that noble men might let for four in the hundred, merchants for eight in the
hundred, Adventurers for twelve in the hundred, all other common persons for
six in the hundred. Long before Justinian: Aret. Prob. part. 1. loc. 50. tit.
de vsuris.
Alexander Seuerus rated usury at four in the hundred. Long before him,
Ibidem.
Antonius Pius the Emperor: did himself let money for four in the hundred:
Vt plurimos adiuuare^, that he might relieve many: and by his practice, as it
were pull down the higher price of usury. Long before them all, Luther de
Taxand. vsura tom. 7.
V. Publicula* M. Rutilius, Hortensius the dictator, and others moderated
usury in Rome. Aret. Prob. part. 1. loc. 50. tit de vsuris.
Lucullus restrained the usurers in Asia: And Cicero epist. ad Atticum lib. 5.
epist. 20.
Tullie in Sicilia. Yea when the Romans were in their flourishing estate,
Cornel. Tacit. annal. lib. 6.
they decreed by their ^^tables, that no man should take above one ounce (that
is one pound) in the hundred. Dein, rogatione tribunitia ad Semuntias redacta:
Afterward, at the entreaty of the tribunes, it was allowed to an ounce and an
half, that is, thirty shillings in the hundred. But yet for all that,
Postremo vetita vsura (says Tacitus:) they saw the inconvenience of that
moderated usury, to prove so great, that at the last all usury was forbidden:
that is, Just. Lipsius annot. in Cornel. Tacit.
Sublatum omne foenus, All kind of usury was clean taken away: for so
Lipsius in his annotations does expound him. And yet, as the world goes now,
one and an half in the hundred, is but a very mean and reasonable rate. And
as it was among the Romans, so have we had a taste of it in this realm of
England. In the days of Henry the eight, Anno. 37.
usury was tolerated to ten in the hundred: and these Alcyon days of Queen
Elizabeth, Anno. 13.
have permitted it in the one case of Orphans. Thus princes have from time to
time done Beza anno^. in Mat. 19.8.
that* which only they could do: and that is this, Fo^noris modum certum
constituunt* They prescribe a certain measure, and set as it were certain
bounds, and li^tes to usury. But have they been able by this moderation of
ten, or eight, or six, or four, or three, or one in the hundred, to prevent
the decay, and subversion of the comminaltie? No. We see the Empire of Rome, is
at this day rather a shadow and a name, then in deed and in truth, an estate
of authority. And for our selves, let us observe, if since the repealing of
King Edwards statute, the number of poor have not increased in every town, if
the prices of all things have not risen, if the wealth of the country be not
grown into few men's hands, if the usurers trade be not at this day the only
gain of England. And therefore although I will not take upon me to censure the
estate nor statute now in force, (for I know that policy must tolerate those
things which cannot be abolished:) yet I doubt not, but I may say as D. Wilson
has said before me, D. Wilson. fol. 69.
I like King Edwards statute best of all: As that which comes nearest to the
word of God, and therefore carries with it the most hope of blessing to a
christian common weal. In which regard may that truly be spoken of Bodine,
Bodin. de repub. lib. 5. ca. 2.
Tutius est vsurarum non modo radices, sed etiam fibras omnes amputare: neque
id reipublicae, nec corporibus vllis, aut collegijs, vlla vtilitatis, aut
pietatis specie permittere. It is the safest way to cut off (or to pull up) not
only the greater roots, but also all the small strings of usury: and not to
permit it to the common weal, or any corporations, or colleges, under any
pretense of commodity, or godliness. Let then (at length) the conclusion of
this third argument be this. Bullinger says, Bullinger. d^^ad. 3 sermon. 1.
Damnatur vsura in Scripturis, quatenus coniungitur cum iniquitate, and
pernicie proximi: Usury is condemned in the scriptures, so far as it carries
with it unrighteousness, and hurt to a man's neighbor. Now of that nature and
quality is all usury. It carries unrighteousness with it, by reason of the
inequality in bargaining. For what can be more unrighteous, then for a man to
exact gain for that which is none of his own? or to take two recompenses for
one and the same thing? yea, I may add the third reason, to those two of the
schoolmen. What can be more unrighteous in bargaining, then for the one
party to take all the pains, and the other none: for the one party to bear
all the hazard, and the other none: and yet he that takes no pains, and
bears no hazard to be certain of a sufficient increase, when the other is
sure of none? by reason of which unrighteousness and inequality in this kind of
contracting, we see how usually and ordinarily families are decayed, and
kingdoms overthrown. And therefore no marvel if God whose providence
watches over every kingdom, yea over every family in the world, has so
evidently and so expressly condemned it in the word.

THe fourth, The fourth reason against usury: it is contrary to the law of
nature.
and the last argument which I mean to use against usury, shall be drawn from
the usurers themselves. For this is not the least that can be said against it,
namely that it is a practice which is judged and condemned in the usurers own
conscience. And that may appear by diverse and sundry reasons. First, they
will not willingly be known to be usurers: no some of them will protest and
swear deeply that they are no usurers. And that they may not be known to
be such as they are, they will either lend very closely, requiring faithful
secrecy of the borrower: or they will color their lending upon usury, with
the pretense of some lawful contracte, or they will when they have couenanted
for gain, take certain notes, or (as I may call them) certain letters
pattens, consigned with the borrowers hand, in which he shall make it known to
all men by those presents, that the usurer has lent him freely* and without
any motion of increase. Secondly, that their own consciences do condemn them
in their profession, may appear by this also: namely, that though they be
known, and reputed to be common usurers, yet they take it a great disgrace to
be so called and termed of others. Yea, and whereas other men have names and
titles given them from their trades, by which they are commonly written, and
distinguished: as, such a man merchant, mercer, grocer, tailor, cordiner, and
such like: there is none of this trade, but does both in speaking, and writing,
disdain (nay abhor) the name and title of an usurer. Thirdly, that in their
consciences they find this to be no lawful practice, may appear, in that
they dare not call a spade, a spade, nor usury, usury. But whereas we are
wont to say in our common and grosser speech, such a man, or such a man takes
usury: they say in somewhat a finer phrase, he takes vsance, or he takes
interest, or he takes consideration: as being indeed ashamed of the direct
name of usury. Now what does the seeking of such couerts argue, but that
themselves in themselves are condemned for their dealing. That even as S. Paul
said of an heretic, that he Titus 3.11.
Sins being damned of his own self, because Calvin Com. in Titus 3.11.
with an evil conscience or against his conscience, he sins willingly, and
of set purpose, (for so M. Calvin speaks upon that place:) so I am afraid it
may be said of a number of them, that in their sinning, they are condemned of
themselves: because wittingly and willingly, they follow a practice, contrary
to the check, and touch, and light of their own conscience.

Now let us a little consider what this conscience is, which thus checketh
them, and casts shame upon them in their doing. The learned writers both
Philo. Gregor. Theol. citantur a Io. Langio. in Just. Martyrem. de vita
christiana tom. 3.
old, and Calvin instit. lib. 4. cap. 10. sect. 3.
new, have called conscience, Forum, A court, or judgment seat, and
Consistorium, A consistory: because in it men are conuented, accused,
examined, acquitted, or condemned, as before the judgment seat of the
magistrate, or consistory of the church. Wherefore the Apostle speaking of the
heathen says, that Romans 2.15.
Their consciences do bear witness to them, and their thoughts do accuse, or
excuse one an other. Yea, to proceed further, Basile calls conscience,
Basil. in princip. Proverb. citatur a Tho. Aquin. Summae part. 1. quaest. 79.
art. 13.
natural iudicatorium, The natural judgment seat, or the judgment seat of
nature: because (as I take it) the law which passes and rules in this court
for current, is not only the written word of God, where it is known and
received, but also the law of nature, which (as the Apostle says) is Romans
2.15.
Written in their hearts. Well then: the usurers consciences do accuse and
convict them. And what are their consciences? judgment seats erected of God
in their hearts, in which the law of nature does rule and pronounce sentence
upon them. And what is this law of nature? Bullinger said, Bullinger. Decad.
2. ser. 1.
Est dictamen conscientiae, adeoque directio quaedam, ab ipso Deo hominum
animis and cordibus insita, admonens quid vel faciant, vel omittant. The law
of nature is the verdict of the conscience, and a certain direction of God
himself, engraven in the minds of men, teaching them what to do, and what to
omit. The great Schooleman says, it is Tho. Aquin. 12 ^ quaest 91. art. 2.
Participatio legis aeternae, in rationali creatura: The participation of the
eternal law of God, in the reasonable creature. Others say it is, Musculus
loc. com tit. do legibus cap. 3.
Sententia communis, cui omnes homines pariter assentimur, atque adeo quam Deus
insculpsit cuiusque animo, ad formandos moros accommodatam. The law of nature,
is the common rule whereunto we all assent, and which God has engraven in
every man's mind, for the direction of his life. From al which sayings, this
one thing may certainly be concluded, namely, that the law of nature is the
work and instinct of God: as Musculus also proves by these arguments. Ibidem.
First, because it approves good, and condemns evil. Secondly, because it
is not attained by learning, and art. Thirdly, because it is agreeable to the
written word. Well then: I infer thus much upon the premises. The law of
nature is put into us of God, and this law of nature is the squire of the
conscience: and the conscience of the usurer condemns him of evil: Ergo, he
and his practices are condemned of the law of nature, which by the instinct of
GOD rules in his heart. Now if it be condemned of the law of nature: no
marvel though it be forbidden in the written word. For what difference is
there between the law of nature, and the written word, but this, that the
latter is as it were a termination, and specification of the former: and the
one was written in tables of stone, but the other is engraven in the hearts of
men?

And in this sense no doubt, that may truly be affirmed which I meet withal
in the writings of many learned men, and which it seems they have all drawn
from Aristotle's fountain: namely that usury is Aristot. Polit. lib. 1. cap.
10.
Contra legem naturae, contrary to the law of nature. Not so much because it
is against nature, for money to begette money, (in which sense one said that
usury was Hugo Caerdinalis in Psalm. 15.
Sodomia naturae, a kind of Sodomie in nature:) but because it does contrary
the verdit of the conscience, and so by consequent the law of nature, which
rules in the same. And that it is contrary to the law of nature may further
appear: because not only the gentiles Io. Wigandus. Syntagma part 1. colum.
45.
who do derive all their streams of virtue from that law of nature, have
condemned it in their writings: but also, because diverse christians which are
ignorant of the word in this case, or knowing it, do either despise it or
make exception against it: are notwithstanding from the light of nature
flushing in their consciences, compelled to hang down their heads at the very
naming of usury.

Let this then be the conclusion of the second part of this treatise: seeing
that usury overthrows the nature, and equity, and use of lending: seeng it
ouer-turneth charity, and the rule of charity, do as thou would be done
unto seeing it carries with it so much inequality, as it is by that means the
usual overthrow of private families and public estates: lastly, seeing it
is by the light of nature judged, and condemned for evil in the usurers own
conscience: no marvel though the word of God have so manifestly, and so
often forbidden it as a wicked, and unrighteous practice.

The end of the fourth Sermon preached Iunij 4. 1593.
The fifth Sermon* beginning the third principal and general point of this
treatise.
For this Sermon handles the special objections, which are wont to be made
out of the places of Scripture before alleged, for the defense of some kind
of usury. As namely that:
1. The laws that condemn usury in the word are only judicial, not
moral. 2. The laws of usury have received exception. 3. They forbid only
lending upon usury to the poor. 4. They condemn only biting usury. Unto
which objections diverse answers are severally made in this Sermon.
THere is no Scripture so evident, but it has been, or may be misconstrued:
neither is there any truth, so clear and bright, whereupon the invention of
man may not cast some cloudie darkness. That never appeared more evidently, in
any one thing, then in this case of usury. For although those places of Moses,
before alleged, out of the books of Exodus, Leuiticus, and Deuteronomie, be
as plain, as plain may be, and such against which, antiquity never took
exception: Yet are there even out of those scriptures, objections made, and
reasons devised, for the approbation of some kind, and measure of usury. As
for the purpose.

Object. 1. 1. The first objection in defense of usury: the law of Moses is
only political.
First, it is objected, that Calvin epist. resp. de vsuris.
the law of Moses concerning usury, is political only: Ergo, illa non
tenemur, vltra quam aequitas ferat, and humanitas: therefore we are not bound
unto it, further then equity, and humanity permits.

Answer. To which objection, I answer: first, that this is a very causeles
Ergo, an inference, and Illation, made without cause: the law is political:
Ergo, we are not further bound unto it, then equity, and humanity will
bear. For, although those laws of Moses be acknowledged, and confessed to be
moral, yet even then, they bind us no further, then equity, and humanity
will permit: the moral law, being in it self, the pattern, and squire of
all equity, and humanity among men. And that may appear, by other precepts,
and commandments of Moses, of which no man ever doubted, but they were
branches, and members of the moral law: and yet they bind us no further,
then equity, and humanity do require. As for example, this is a branch of
the moral law: Leuit. 19.32
Thou shall rise up before the hoare head, and honor the person of the old
man: and yet, a prince that is a child, is not by this law bound to rise up,
or to stoop down, to an old man, that is a beggar. Why so? Aequitas non
fert, and humanitas: Equity, and humanity will not bear it. Again, this is
a branch of the moral law: Exodus 23.8.
Thou shall take no gift, for the gift blinds the wise, and peruerteth the
words of the righteous. And yet, is it not simply unlawful, for a
Magistrate, to take a gift of a stranger, or of a near neighbor, which has
no cause like to come before him, or of him, whose cause he has dispatched,
with speed and righteous favor. And why? Aequitas fert, and humanitas:
equity and humanity will permit it. Again, this is a branch of the moral
law: Pro. 25.21.
If he, that hates thee, be hungry, give him bread to eat, and if he be
thirsty, give him water to drink. But now, what if mine enemy, be also a
malicious professed enemy to God? What if my liberality, be like to minister
fuel to his malice? What if I cannot both feed him, and my self, or my
family? then, am I not bound, to ease and relieve him. Why? Aequitas non
fert, and humanitas: Equity and humanity, will not bear it. So then, this is
a very causeles, and unnecessary inference: the law of Moses is political:
therefore we are not bound unto it, further then equity, and humanity will
permit. For, though the law of Moses, concerning usury, be confessed to be
moral: yet must equity, and humanity, prescribe bounds, and limits
thereunto.

But, further I answer, for the discussing of this question, that, I see no
reason, why those precepts of Moses, concerning usury, should be reckoned
among the judicial, and not among the moral laws. For first, sure I am, that
most learned men, of all ages, and of all kinds, have numbered them, among the
morals, and alleged them, and spoken of them, in their writings, as of moral
laws. As for instance, (to go no further, then mine own reading) among the
Fathers, Basile, Chrysostom, Clemens Alexandrinus, Gregorius Nissenus, Origin,
Ambrose, Ciprian, Augustine, Hierome and others: among the schoolmen, Thomas
Aquinas, Peter Lumbard, Dionisius Carthusianus, Gabriel Biel, Lira, Rainerus,
Aquileius, and others: among the late writers, Luther, Melancthon, Brentius,
Musculus, Chemnitius, Aretius, Hemingius, Wigandus, Zegedinus, Molanus,
Viguerius, Wolphius, and a number of others: who do all, in their writings,
speak of this argument, as of a moral duty, and allege those places of
Moses, as moral laws.

And whereas here it may be replied, that diverse godly men, of rare learning,
and singular judgment, as Calvin, Bucer, Bullinger, Danaeus, Lauater, Carolus
Molineus, and some others, have judged those laws of Moses, to be but
Judicial, and therefore have tolerated, yea approved some kind of usury: to
this I think good, not to answer, without some Preface, and preamble used in
their behalf. I do acknowledge (and that unfeignedly) that these men have
been great lights, to dispell the darkness of this latter age, and to be
such, as from whose opinion, and judgment, I do not dissent, without some
fear, and suspicion of my self, nor without great reverence yielded to them:
and after a sort, leave, and pardon, and license craved of them. Especially M.
Calvin: who for his pains taken in the Church of God, may be truly called,
(as not long since he was called, in this town) M. B.
venerable or honorable Calvin, whose Survey of the pretended discipline page
63.
modesty, humility, sobriety, learning, and judgment, they do highly
reverence, that differ from him in some opinions: and when they speak the
least of him, do give this verdict, that Ide^. page 127.
he was surely an excellent man. For mine own part, I do so honor the
soundness of his doctrine, and the excellency of his gifts, that I highly
thank God that ever his books were extant in the world: and I wish that I had
(with B. Iuel) the art of memory, so as I might be able to repeat at my
fingers ends, L. Humfred in vita Iuel. page 236.
(as he could very roundly) not only Caluins Institutions, but all the
treatises, and Commentaries, and Epistles which he framed. And I say as a
learned man said of our time, Bastinguius admonit. to the reader before his
comment. upon the Catechism of the County Palatine of Rhine.
That which Fabius says of Cicero, that have I always applied to that writer:
let him know that he has profited much, who is much delighted in M. Calvin.
And although if a man should call me a Caluiniste, (as the Papists call us all
in disgrace) I would say with Zanchius, Zanchius Miscelan. epist. ad
Lantgrauium.
Caluinianum me esse pernego: I deny to bear the name of a Caluiniste, more
then of a Lutheran, or a Zuinglian, or some other. For (as he there also
says,) Christianus sum, my title and style which I bear is to be a Christian:
yet as Tullie professed that he had rather err with Plato then hold the truth
with others: so, if it were lawful to err with any man, I would err with M.
Calvin. And I had rather hold with him in some things which ye world judges to
be errors: then profess many things, which contrary to him the Papists and
others have deemed to be truth. But The good Homer sometime fell on sleep: and
Bernhard himself saw not all things: and M. Calvin being but a man, had in
this point his ignorance and error after the manner of men. His heresy I dare
not call it, though I am not ignorant that some affirm Archidiaconus 31.
quest. 1 Card. Cle 1. de vsur. citantur a Wilsono. fol. 144.
usury to be heresy: and one says that, Martin. Ab Aspilcuet enchirid. cap.
17. numero. 207.
It is heresy to deny usury to be a deadly sin. Yet (I say) his heresy I
dare not call it, (as some have adventured to do of late,) partly, because
that he did not Calvin. epist. respons. de vsuris. tantum abest vt istud pro
edicto vel axiom. haberi velim. etc.
obstinatly defend it, as it appears by his Epistle written of that argument:
and partly because that this opinion of usury, neither concerns any article
of faith, nor any thing which by consequence follows upon an article of
faith: both which must co^curre August. de ciuit. Dei. lib. 18. cap. 51. Thom.
Aquin 22 ae. quaest. 11. articulo. 2. Pet. Martyr. loc. com. clas. 2. loc. 4.
sect. 50.
by the judgment of divines to the constitution, and naming of an heresy. But
his error I hope I may call it without offense, not only because my self
(which is little) do deem it so to be: but also (and much rather) because
he, and the rest of his opinion, are in this point surcharged with a multitude
of learned men, of the contrary judgment, as has been before declared. For a
man may say in this case with Alciate, Andreas Alciat respons. lib. 1. consil.
3. sect. 12.
Omnes militant in casunostro: all men (almost, or in comparison) fight under
our banner, or are of our opinion. Yea, and because S. Hierome said well,
Hierom. comment in Esaias. cap. 3.
Non statim multitudinis acquiescamus iudicio, we must not presently, (without
further consideration) rest upon the judgment of the multitude: therefore, it
is s^co^dly to be added, that they are overcome, not only with the greater
number, but also with the better arguments. And thirdly it must be noted, that
Calvin and Bucer and others of that judgment D. Wilson. fol. 179.
did (as D. Wilson has well observed) somewhat enlarge this law by a charitable
exposition, partly for the hardness of men's hearts, and partly for very
necessities sake, to help the needy banished men then dwelling among them. In
which cases we see that God himself has yielded much to the weakness of men.
For because of the hardness of men's hearts, Deuteronomy. 24.1. Mat. 19.7.8.
God permitted a bill of divorce to Israel, beyond the bounds of the seventh
commandment. And in respect of necessity, David Mat. 12.34.
is tolerated eating of the show bread, which otherwise was not lawful for
him to eat, neither for them which were with him, but only for the Exodus
29.33. Leuit. 8.31.
Priests. Lastly (to make an end of this point) me thinks, any usurer should
be ashamed to allege in his defense the opinion and authority of M. Calvin:
considering that, first, they approve not his judgment in a number of other
things, and therefore in this may be justly suspected to be partial:
secondly, because none of them will observe the laws and circumstances, which
he has prescribed in this case of usury: thirdly because Calvin him self
when he has delivered this opinion of usury, requires that Calvin. epist.
respons. de vsuris.
no man stand upon his judgment for the full and absolute determination of
this controversy. And therefore vainly, and unjustly is M. Calvin ascited, as
a Patron of their unlawful practice.

But, to return thither from whence I have a little digressed: it is not
otherwise like, but that the precepts of Moses concerning usury, are parts
and parcels of the moral law. For David in the 50. Psalm Psalm. 15.5.
reckons it among moral duties. And Ezekiell in one place hedgeth it in,
with Ezekiel. 22.12
Briberie on the one side, and with defrauding of our neighbor on the other:
which are both notorious breaches of the moral law. And in another place, he
combineth usury, and Idolatry together. For so I read that place with
Tremellius (per appositionem) in his 18. chapter: Ezekiel. 18.12.13.
adstercoreos deos attollat oculos suos abhominationem faciens, in vsuram det,
and foenus accipiat: has lift up his eyes to Idols, committing abomination.
(And then it follows immediately in the next verse) gives to usury and
takes increase. Of which coupling of those sins in that place together, S.
Ambrose has thus observed, Ambros. lib. Tobia. cap. 15.
vide quomodo foenatorem cum Idololatria copulauit, quasi crimen aequaret: note
(says he) how the Prophet in this place, has coupled an usurer with an
Idolater, as if usury did match or conterpoyse the sin of Idolatry. Now,
who knows not, that no breach of the Judicial law is equal to Idolatry,
and that Idolatry is one of the greatest trespasses against the moral law? If
therefore usury do in any measure answer Idolatry, it will follow from
thence, that the committing thereof, is a breach of the moral law.

Besides, I see no reason why the laws concerning usury should not be reputed
and taken for moral, as well as those which concern Incest: of which no
divine (to my knowledge) ever doubted, but that they ought to abide perpetual
and inviolable, as precepts of the moral law. For, if it be objected that the
laws of usury have received some exceptions: it is evident that the laws of
Incest have received exception and dispensation also. In the time of the law,
Deuteronomy. 25 5,
one brother was permitted (nay commanded,) to raise up seed unto another,
deceasing without issue: contrary to that law which said, Leuit. 18.16
thou shall not discover the shame of thy brothers wife. Yea, in the first:
beginning and creation of the world, (when notwithstanding) ye moral law was
written in Ada^s heart, the laws of Incest received manifest exception. For the
text says, that Gen 4.17.
Cain knew his wife, which conceived and bare Henoch. Now whom could he know
for a wife, or of whom could he beget children at that time, but either of
Heuah his own mother, or of some of her daughters, his own sisters? For Genesis
3.20.
Heuah was the mother of all living: and Caine was her eldest son in the
first generation. Now, to say that Caine knew his mother, is unsavory, and a
Paradoxe: the other therefore follows of necessity. And it is certain, that
besides their sons Caine and Habell Josephus antiquit. Iudaic. lib. 1. cap. 3.
natae sunt eis etia^ filiae (as Josephus speaks) there were also daughters
borne unto Adam and Heuah, howsoever they be not mentioned (because there was
no great occasion to mention them) in the Scriptures. So then of a daughter of
Adam which was Caines own sister, did Caine make a wife and beget issue,
contrary to that law which said, Leuit. 18.9.
Thou shall not discover the shame of thy sister, the daughter of thy mother.
Such exceptions therefore had the laws of Incest of which notwithstanding no
man ever doubted, but that they were branches of the moral law. And if any man
will object against this instance of Caine, that the law of Incest was to be
broken in the first creation for very necessities sake: I answer, that it
being granted that God would create but one man and one woman in the
beginning, and that by them alone he would propagate mankind: it was of
necessity to fall out, that men must come nigh to the kindred of their own
flesh to uncover their shame, Leuit. 18.6.
contrary to the law. But this was necessitas ex hypothesi, necessity by
supposition, not simple nor absolute as the Logitians speak. For what
necessity could compel God, to create only one man and one woman, to be the
fountain of mankind, when Malachy. 2.15.
he had abundance of spirit (as the Prophet speaks,) and could as easily
have made many women of many ribs, yea many women of one ribbe; as he made
one Heua of one bone to be the mother of us all. I conclude therefore a pari
from the comparison of the equal. The laws of Incest are moral, and yet have
received sundry exceptio^s: and why not then, likewise the laws of usury:
howsoever they received sometime some such exception, as can no way exempt them
from the compass of the moral law? But that remains afterward to be
declared.

Lastly for this first obiecton, the very reasons which God annexeth as
appendices or appurtenances to the laws of usury, may euince them to be
moral. For the Lord says in Exodus, Exodus 22.25.
Ye shall not oppress him with usury. Now to oppress thy neighbor, is
against the moral law: and therefore if usury be oppression of thy
neighbor (as after shall be showed) then without question usury is against
the moral law. Again, Moses alleges this for a reason why GOD forbids a
man to take usury of his brother: Leuit. 25.35
So (says he) shall he live with thee, that is, so shall he be able in some
measure, to support his outward estate: yea, that his life may be with thee,
for so Tremel. annot in Leuit. 25.35.
Tremellius observes it to be read verbatim from the Hebrew. Now, to do, or
not to do a thing by which thy brothers good estate may be furthered, or
hindered, or by which his life may be shortened, or prolonged: are things, the
forbidding, or commanding whereof belongs to the moral law. And therefore
in consideration of the premises, I conclude it to be mine opinion (submitting
my reasons to them that are able to confute these, and to allege better to
the contrary) that the precepts concerning usury delivered by Moses, and
afterward revived by the Prophets, are essential branches and parts not of
the judicial or political law, which was proper to those times and that
nation of the Jews: but of the moral law of God, common to all the nations,
and times, and countries of the world: and so consequently to be kept
inuiolablie, and without exception of us and of the generations to come.

Object. 2. The second objection in defense of usury: it was permitted to be
exacted of strangers.
But it is secondly objected that the laws touching usury cannot be moral
because they have received special exception, yea and by them usury is in
some case suffered and permitted. For Moses says, Deuteronomy 23. Deuteronomy. 23.20.
Extraneo foeneraberis, unto a stranger thou may lend upon usury. Now, the
duties of the moral law, are the same to a stranger, that they are to our
nearest friend: and therefore since usury is forbidden to the one and
permitted to the other, it seems that it is no transgression against the
moral law.

Answer. To this I answer. First, that it is no good argument to conclude in
this manner: the laws of usury receive exception: Ergo, they are no part of
the moral law. For, besides the instance before given of incest, it is
manifest that many other moral laws have by the special dispensation of God
the law giver, received evident exceptions. As for example, this is a moral
law: Exodus 20.8.10.
Remember the Sabbath day to keep it holy. And again, In it thou shall do no
manner of work. And yet, Joshua 6.3.4.
the Israelites are commanded to march about Jericho in their armor, with the
Priests, and the arc carried before them, and to continue their marching in
that order, for the space of seven days together. One of which seven, must of
necessity be the Sabbath, in which God had forbidden the Jews, by the moral
law to do any manner of work. Again this is a moral law, Exodus 20.13.
thou shall not kill: and yet, Genesis 22.2.
Abraham had a special commandment to sacrifice his son. Again this is a
moral law, Exodus 20.15.
Thou shall not steal, and yet God Exodus 11.2.
commands the Israelites to borrow, with a purpose of robbing the Egyptians.
Even so, and in like manner, this may be a moral law, Thou shall not lend to
usury, and yet upon special occasion receive this special exception,
extraneo foeneraberis, to a stranger thou may lend upon usury. And no
marvel: for, if that be true which is said in our common speech, the Prince
is above her law, and we see that she may do, and does many times, by her
royal prerogative give mandatum, and dispensation contrary to the law: far
be it from us to imagine, that GOD who is the most absolute Lord of all the
world, should not have authority, to give exception, and dispensation, even to
his moral law.

Secondly, I answer to this objection: that in this speech of Moses, unto a
stranger thou may lend upon usury: we are to consider what kind of
aliants, and strangers they were, toward whom the practicing of usury was
permitted. I am not ignorant, that some by the name of a stranger in that
place, do comprehend Calvin sermon. 134. in deuteronomy. 23.
all the nations and countries adjacent to Palestina, as Egypt, Syria, the Isles
of the sea, and such like. Now, although I dare not resolutelie deny, but it
may be so, yet I am very hardly induced, and persuaded to believe that it
should be so. Partly, because we have not so much as one jot, or title in the
Scriptures, that mentions any usury exercised between Judea, and other
countries: which it is not likely, the holy Ghost would altogether have
omitted, (if it had been so) to note a difference of the Jewish traffic,
between themselves and with other nations. And partly also, I can hardly
condescend to that opinion, because it is not easy to say, that foenus
nauticum, or bills of mart, or such like exchanges, were then used among
merchants, as are now in ure and practice among us: without which conueyances,
or the like, security cannot be made between trades men, or merchants of
diverse jurisdictions. I do therefore understand with S. Ambrose, by the name
of strangers in that place, Ambros. lib. de Tobia. c. 15.
the Amalekites and Amorites, and the other nations of the Gentiles: which
being not utterly rooted out by the Israelites, at their first entrance into
the land of Canaan, grew up and increased among them, to their incredible
annoyance. So Paulus Fagius says, that diverse learned men conceived of that
place, P. Fagius annot. in paraphras. Caldaic. in deuteronomy. 23.20.
Sunt quidam in hac sententia, quod haec vsura de qua hic agitur, solum
concessa fuerit Iudaeis, in septem illas gentes quarum vniuersam facultatem
dominus Israelitis tradidit: There are some of this opinion, that the usury
here spoken of, was only permitted to the Jews, to be exercised upon these
seven nations, all whose goods God had given to Israel. In deed, I am right
sure that Tremelius, and Iunius, do so understand that place. For they
translate the text, Extraneo isti dabis in vsuram, Deuteronomy. 23.20.
to this stranger thou shall lend to usury: As if Moses had after a sort
poynted with his fingers to the strangers then in presence, and within the
view of the eye among them. And so they do also interpret that place.
Extraneo isti: viz. Tremel. and Iun. annot. in deuteronomy. 23.20.
reliquijs istis Cenah hanaeorum to this stranger, that is, to these remainders
of the Canenites, thou may lend to usury, Yea, and they render in that their
exposition, a reason why God permitted the Jews, to exact usury of those
strangers: Illas enim deus exitio destinauerat, and paulatim consumi volebat:
for them God had ordained to destruction, and would have them Deuteronomy. 7.22.
consumed, and wasted away by little and little. Now, because he saw that
usury was a means to humble them, yea, to waste them, and to eat them up,
therefore toward them he permitted usury. S. Ambrose has a notable sentence
of that speech of Moses, Extraneo foeneraberis, to a stranger then may lend
upon usury. Ambros. lib. de Tobia. e. 15.
Ibi (inquit) vsuram exige, cui merito nocere desideras. Cui iure inferuntur
arma, huic legitime indicantur vsurae. Quem bello ^on potes facile vincere, d^
hoc cito potes centesima vendicare te: Of him (says Moses) demand usury,
whom thou willingly desire to harm. Against whom thou may take up
weapon, upon him may thou lawfully impose usury, whom thou can not
overcome by force of arms in battle, of him may thou soon rid, and
free thy self by usury. And again, Ab hoc vsuram exige, quem non sit crimen
occidere: demand usury of him, whom it is no offense to sley. And a little
after: Ergo vbi ius belli, ibi etiam ius vsurae: Therefore, where war is
lawful, there only is usury lawful also. The sentence of Ambrose,
imports, that because it was lawful for the Jews, any way to annoy the
gentiles, yea to leauie war against them, yea to (...) them, and to put them
to death: therefore it was, that God permitted them to take usury of the
strangers, that by this means they might the sooner be wasted and consumed. A
prince may use a condemned malefactor as he lists himself. He may put him
to grind in the mill, to dig in the mines, to row in the galleys, or to
execute any other slavish service. And why? For he might flea him with the
sword, and take away his life. So, God might justly give over these gentiles
to the violence, oppression, and usury of the Jews: because he had already
adjudged them as notorious malefactors to an utter and final subversion. Now
then, what makes this exception: to a stranger thou may lend upon usury,
for any man to justify his lending upon increase to his neighbor: whereas God
permitted the practice thereof only tow^rdes those whom he would have to be
consumed, as one special means to further forward, and to hasten on their
destruction. For it is as if God had spoken more plainly in this case or the
like: thou shall only kill him whose blood I will have to be shed: thou shall
only steal from him, whom I would have to be impouerished: and so, thou shall
only take usury of him, whom I would have to be consumed. Such is the
exception against the law of usury: and such only is the ease in which it
was permitted.

Thirdly I answer unto this objection, that although in that place of
Deuteronomie, there should be comprehended under the name of stranger all the
nations of the world, with which the Jews had to deal in traffic: yet was
it but Lyra in Exodus 22.
permissio minor is mali, ad maius euitandum: the permitting of a lesser evil,
only to avoid the greater. He was contented to permit taking of usury of a
stranger, least the Jews being couetously minded, should exercise that
tyranny toward their own brethren and he was contented to permit them to
lend for usury to some, least for want of gain, they would have refused to
lend unto any. As we see this to be the grievous evil of these days, that
because some men may not lend upon usury, therefore they shut up their
compassion from lending at all. Chen^nitius says well, that: Chemnit. loc.
com. tom. 2. tit. de paupertate. cap 6.
God in the old Testament showed himself to be and theologus and legislator:
he dealt both as a divine, and as a lawgeuer or Politician. As a Theologian or a
divine he always prescribed, that which was only and perfectly good: as a
lawgeuer he did sometimes tolerate that, in respect of some circumstance,
which was not simply, nor exactly good of it self. Vt in societate civilly
istius populi peiora vitarentur, minora quaedam mala, non quidem approbauit,
sed forensi and politico fine toleranda permisit hactenus, quod per magistratum
ciuilem non puniebantur. As for example (says he) that some worser things
might be avoided, in the civil society of this people of the Jews: he did
not approve, but tolerate, to a Political end, and purpose, certain smaller
evils, so far only that they should not be punished of the civil
Magistrate. And therefore, M. Beza speaking of that same bill of divorce, which
Moses tolerated among the Jews for the hardness of their hearts, Beza annot.
in Mat. 19.8.
does exemplify that fact of his, by that toleration of usury, which
Magistrates, and Princes are compelled in these days to admit, for very
necessity. God as a divine forbad both, but as a lawgeuer, he permitted both
unto his people.

And that this lending to usury to a stranger, was but permissiue concessum,
granted only by permission for a time, and not to endure for ever, may partly
appear by the confession of the Jews themselves. For, Petrus Galatinus, de
arcanis catholicae veritatis. libro. 11. cap. 4.
Galatinus reports out of their Talmud, yt it was the judgment of the Jewish
Rabbines, that in that place of the Psalm, Psalm. 15.5.
He that has not given his money to usury, God did not only forbid it
toward the Jews: but etiam ad vsuram Goi, even toward him, which was a
Gentile. Therefore we see, that as Polygamie, or the having of many wives, was
long tolerated among the Fathers, but at the last, toward the breaking out of
the clearer light of the Gospel, it was evidently, and flatly condemned by
Malac. 2.15.
Malachie: so, howsoever usury toward strangers was long and many years
permitted among the Jews: yet when the strangers began to be worn out,
according to the promise of God made unto the fathers: then was it absolutely
and generally condemned, first by David as the Jews themselves confess, and
afterward morefully by Ezekiell, as appears in his prophecy. And therefore
S. Hierome writes thus upon that place of Ezekiell: Hieron. com. Ezekiel. 18.
dicitur Deuteronomy. 23. fraetri non foeneraberis, alieno foeneraberis. Sed vide
profectum. In principio legis a fratribus tantum foenus tollitur: in Propheta
ab omnibus vsura prohibetur. It is said (says Hierome) Deuteronomy. 23. thou shall
not lend upon usury to thy brother: but to a stranger thou shall lend upon
usury. Note herein the growing on, or the going forward of the law
inperfection. In the beginning of the law, usury was only forbidden to be
taken of their brethren: in this Prophet, usury is forbidden toward all men.
And another agreeing with S. Hierome, writes thus upon the same place of
Ezekiel: Dionis. Carthus cum. in Ezekiel. 18.
Ecce, hoe loco vsura generaliter prohibetur: Behold (says he) in this place
of Ezekiell usury is forbidden generally, or simply, or altogether. Vnde quod
Moses concessit filijs Israel, extraneis ad vsuram accommodare, permissiue
fecit propter imperfectionem eorum: Quemadmodum and libellum repudij ipsis
permisit. From whence it may appear, that Moses granting the children of
Israel leave or license to lend upon usury to strangers, did it only
permissiuely, or by way of toleration, for their imperfections sake. As in like
manner he permitted unto them the bill of divorce. Parents will tolerate much
ignorance, much wantonness, much rudeness in their children during the time
of their nonage and infancy. Even so under the Paedagogie of the law, and
during the infa^cie of his Church, did God permit and tolerate many
imperfections among his people: which now in these days of grace, and of the
fullness of the spirit, ought as clouds before the wind, to be dispersed and
vanish away.

Fourthly, I answer that, that permissiue speech of Moses, unto a stranger
thou may lend upon usury, yields no liberty to us to exercise usury one
toward another. For as much as we are all brethren in Christ, and fellow
heirs together of everlasting salvation. Clemens Alexandrinus has a notable
sentence to this purpose. Clemens Alexand. Stromat. lib. 2.
Lex prohibet fratri foenerari: fratrem nominans, non eum solum, qui est ex
ysdem natus parentibus, sed etiam qui fuerit eiusde^ tribus, eiusdemque
sententiae, and eiusdem verbi particeps. The law forbids to lend to usury
to our brother: under the name of a brother comprehending not only him which
was borne of the same parents, but him also which was of the same tribe, and of
the same opinion, and partaker of the same word. Now, we are all sprung from
the same stock, bred in the same country, professing the same Religion,
partakers all of the same word and Gospel. Yea, I may say with the Apostle
Ephesians. 4.4 5.6.
we are all one body, we have all one spirit, one hope of our calling, one
Lord, one faith, one baptism, one God and father of all, which is above all,
and thorough all, and in us all. And therefore, if the Jew might but lend unto a
stranger upon usury: it is more then Jewish for us to exact it of a Christian.

I might add more reasons why God permitted the Jews, to lend upon usury to
the strangers, as namely, Io. Woulfius in Deuteronomy. 23.
because the Israelites fed their own poor, so as they burdened no man: and
yet besides that, they fed the poor strangers also. In consideration whereof,
they might by this means seek the better to bear their charges. Again, they
received Proselites which were converted from gentilisme as their own, and fed
them, nourished them, and maintained the^ together with their own people. For
the better maintenance whereof, God gave them this liberty to exact usury of
the strangers. But I need not stand upon these: for that is sufficient which
is already answered concerning the second objection.

Object 3. The third objection, in defense of usury: it is only forbidden to
the poor.
It is further objected touching the scriptures before alleged against usury,
that although they be granted to be precepts of the moral law: yet they only
forbid lending upon usury unto the poor and needy. As it seems may appear
by the very words of Moses himself. For he says in one place Exodus 22 25.
If thou lend to my people, that is to the poor with thee, thou shall not be
as an usurer unto him. And Vatablus annot. in Exodus 22.25.
Vatablus observes that these words, to the poor with thee, are put (...),
to expound whom in that place he understands by the name of his people:
nempe pauperes, that is to say the poor. The poor they are only his people
of whom he will have no usury to be taken. And in another place he says,
Leuit. 25.35.
If thy brother be impouerished, and fallen in decay with thee, etc. thou
shall take no usury of him. By which places it may seem, that so we lend not
to a man that is poor and needy, but to one that is rich and has abundance,
of him we may take usury without breach of the law.

Answ. Now, to this also I answer diverse and sundry ways. First, I say with
B. Iuel, L. Humfred. de vita Iuelli page 221.
Quae est ista dialectica? What manner of logic or reasoning is this? A man
may not take usury of the poor: Ergo, he may take usury of the rich. This
is a plain Non sequitur, It follows not in art. Let us see the like in other
examples. Solomon says in the Proverbs, Pro. 22.22.
Rob not the poor, because he is poor: shall I thence conclude, Ergo, I may
rob the rich, because he is rich? Again, the law says, Deuteronomy. 27.24.
Cursed be he that smites his neighbor secretly: shall I thence conclude
that it is lawful for a man to smite his neighbor openly? so when Moses
says, Lend not to the poor for usury: Does it follow from thence, therefore
I may lend for usury to the rich? Nothing less: it carries no consequence at
all. And therefore Chemnitius has very fully and plainly resolved this doubt,
Chemnit. loc. com. part. 2. tit. de paupertate cap. 6.
Quod quibusdam testimonijs pauperum fit mentio, eadem ratione fit, sicut in
quinto and septimo praeceptis plerunque nominantur viduae, pupilli, pauperes,
ne illis inferatur iniuria. Whereas (says he) in certain testimonies of
scripture concerning usury, Note that Chemnitius reckons them for the 5. and
7. which we reckon for the 6. and 8. commandments: because he makes the two
first but one.
there is mention made of the poor by name, that is done for the same reason,
(or cause) for which in the fifth and seventh commandments the widows,
orphans, and poor folks are commonly recited by name, that no injury should
be offered unto them Sed inde non sequitur, ergo iniuria quae fit coniugatis,
adultis, potentibus, diuitibus, etc. non est peccatum. But (says he) howsoever
God in the precepts belonging to those commandments, make mention by name
of widows, orphans, and poor folks: yet, it follows not from thence,
that an injury done to married persons, to persons of full years, to mighty
men, to rich men, etc. is no sin. Even so is it in this case: howsoever GOD
in the laws of usury make mention of the poor by name, for some causes which
afterward shall be alleged: yet it follows not from hence, by any
consequence of argument, that therefore to lend upon usury to the rich, is no
offense or breach of the law.

Secondly, to this point I answer, that howsoever in these places aforenamed,
there is special mention made of the poor: yet in other places, where the
same thing is forbidden, there is no mention, nor recital of them at all. As
Deuteronomy 23. Psalm. 15 Ezec. 18. and others. Yea, and it is not nothing to this
purpose, that Josephus justifying against Appion the laws and statutes of the
Jews, recites this for one, Josephus contra Appionem. lib. 2.
Mutuans non accipiat vsuras: it is says he, a law among us, that the lender
shall take no usury: making no mention, or exception of the poor and needy
at al. Now, why should those places which mention the poor by name, rather
restrain the other which make no mention of them: then the other which make no
mention of the poor, should enlarge those that name them? especially, if we
consider that those places which mention not the poor, were the later written.
Now, L. A.
Posteriores libri, ideo fere scripti, vt priorum interpretes essent: The
latter books of the scripture were written somewhat to this purpose, that they
might be interpreters and expositors of the former. And therefore, the latter
written scriptures concerning usury, making no mention of the poor, may argue
that the former scriptures are not to be tied and restrained to them alone.

Thirdly, I answer, that if the law of lending to the poor without usury,
should infer the lawfulnes of lending to the rich upon usury: then it is
evident that Gods intendement in those laws for the benefit of the poor,
should rather prove a hurt and hinderance unto them: because by this means it
would come to pass that the poor should not borrowe at all. For, who will
lend to the poor for nothing, that might lawfully lend to the rich for
usury? of which point we have so lamentable and evident experience in these
days, as no man, no not the usurer himself is able to gainesay it. Yet of the
two it were better for the poor man that he should borrow upon usury, then
that he should not be able to borrow at all: now borrow at al he shall not, if
it be lawful to lend to the rich for usury, and not unto him. And therefore
as one said, Maledicta glossa quae corrumpit textum: Accursed be that gloss or
commentary that destroys the text: so may I say in this case, evil fare
that interpretation which overthrows the intent and purpose of the
commandment.

Fourthly, and lastly, I answer to this third objection: that it is no marvel
though God in the laws of usury do specially and by name forbid lending in
that manner to the poor. For, he does it, partly to show what care he
himself has over them, who are commonly and usually neglected of men: and
partly, because the poor are soonest and easiest oppressed of the rich, as the
lowest hedge is easiliest stepped over: yea, and partly also, because usury
sits hardest upon the skirtes of the poor, and will sooner bite and devour
them, then it will the rich, able, and substantial men in the world. So that
for these causes the poor had need of a special caveat, to be put in on
their behalf. We see that God speaks to the same effect in other places:
Esaias. 1.17.
Judge the fatherles and defend the widow. And again, Pro. 31.9.
Judge the afflicted and the poor. And again, Pro. 23.10.
Enter not into the fields of the fatherles. And again, Zach. 7.10.
Oppress not the widdowe, nor the fatherles, the stranger nor the poor: and
many such other speeches has God, concerning those parties in the holy
scripture. Not as intending to infer thereby that we need not, or we ought
not to judge the child that has a father, the wife that has a husband, the
rich that has plenty: nor as if it were lawful for us, unjustly to seize
upon the possessions of the mighty, or to oppress our home borne brethren.
But because the orphane, the widdowe, the poor, the stranger, are easily
forgotten, seldom regarded, and soon overthrown: therefore is it, that
specially, and by name, they are so often, and so particularly mentioned in the
word. Even so, let us know that God deals after the same manner, when he
mentions the poor in this case of usury. It is no humanity to draw the
dagger to stab a man, who is thine equal in years and in valor of body. But
for a man to draw his weapon on a child, who has neither wisdom, nor
strength to resist: is shameful cowardnes, yea barbarous cruelty. So, it is
inhumanitie for an usurer to gripe a man that is rich and well able to pay: but
with that sword of his, to run quite thorough the heart of the needy (to
whom it were more alms to give the principal:) that, that is the horrible
iniquity which God specially, and by name has as it were (...) forbidden in
those places of scripture, that make mention of the poor.

Object. 4. There is yet a fourth objection made as touching the places of
Scripture before alleged against usury. The fourth objection in defense of
usury: only biting usury is forbidden.
For, say that the laws concerning usury be moral, and that they inhibite
such lending both to rich and poor: yet they condemn not al measure of
usury, but only that which is excessive, and biting, and which carries with
it a devouring and oppressing of an other. And that (say some) appears by the
express words of the text. For Moses says, Exodus 22.25.
Ye shall not oppress him by usury: Ergo, if I oppress not my brother, if
my usury be not so great as it bite, or devour him: I am not for lending in
that sort condemned by the law of God. Yea, and that the scripture only
forbids biting usury, may appear (say they) also by the nature and
Etimologie of the word, which the holy Ghost uses to that purpose. For, usury
is called in the hebrew tongue Naeshaech, which Lauat comment. in Ezekiel. 18.
homil. 76.
as Lauater and Bodin. de repub. lib. 5. ca. 2.
others have truly observed, signifies properly Morsus, a biting or gnawing of
a thing. And it is a word borrowed as some think, Lauater. comment. in Pro.
28.8.
from the biting or stinging of a serpent: as others have judged D Wilson. fol.
47.
from the gnawing, or tyring of a dog upon a bone. So that, unless usury
be Naeshaech, biting, unless by it a man sting his neighbor, as a serpent,
or pray upon him as a dog upon a carrion: some hold opinion that it is not
forbidden in the word of God.

Answ. Now to this objection I might answer shortly, Gal. de Hippoc. and
Platon. decretis. Lib. 2. cap. 2.
(...): The Etymology of a word is but a slender witness. But I have further
to answer unto it, more ways then one. First, I say, that not only biting
usury, but generally all measure of usury is forbidden in the word. For the
text is plain, Exodus 22.25.
If thou lend money to my people, etc. non eris ei sicut vsurarius: (Tremel.
tanquam foenerator,) Thou shall not be as an usurer unto him. Now, what is this
that he says, Thou shall not be as an usurer unto him? his meaning is, thou
shall not deal with him as usurers are wont to deal with men. Well then, if
thou lend couenanting for gain, and adventure not the principal: whether it
bite him, or bite him not, whether thou demand of him more or less for
increase: yet in that manner of bargaining, thou art to him as an usurer, for
thou contractest with him in that manner which an usurer practices toward
men, and therefore thou art therein condemned by the word of God.

Besides that, it is evident from the Scripture, that not only bitting usury
(Naeshaech) but generally all Increase of that kind and nature (which the
Hebrews call Tarbith) is forbidden in the law. For Moses says in Leuiticus
Leuit. 25.36.37.
thou shall take no usury of him, nor vantage. And again in ye same place,
Thou shall not give him thy money to usury, nor lend him thy victuals for
increase. And Ezekiell condemns the people of his time, not only for taking
of usury (Naeshaech) but also for taking of increase, (Tarbith.) Ezekiel. 22.12.
Thou have taken usury and the increase. And therefore, Gregorius Nissenus
doubted not to say Gregor. Nissen. epist. ad Latoium Mitelenes episcopu^
bibliothec. Patrum tom. 1. col. 344.
Apud diuinam Scripturam, and foenus, and vsura sunt prohibita: both increase
(which the Latins call foenus, the Grecians (...), the Hebricians Tarbith) and
also usury (which the Latins call vsura, the Grecians (...), the Hebricians
Naeshaech) is forbidden in the holy Scriptures. S. Ambrose says plainly,
speaking of that place of Moses Leuit. 25. Ambros. lib. de Tobia. cap. 1^.
Generaliter haec sententia Dei omne sortis excludit augmentum: this sentence
of God recited in that place does generally exclude all increase above the
principal. Yea, M. Calvin himself Call. sermon. 134 in Deuteronomy. 23.
will have no man to rest precisely upon that name of usury, which signifies
biting, and which word Moses uses speaking of that matter Deuteronomy. 23. His reason
is, because Ezekiell condemning usury Ezekiel. 18.^3. Ezekiel. 22.12.
places there not only the word Naeshaech which signifies biting, but also
the other word, which signifies increase. As if he had said (says Calvin) all
that is above the principal.. So yt, it is evident to a man whose skill is but
mean in ye tongues, yt the Etymology of the Hebrew word can yield no sound
argument for ye defense of any kind of usury: no though it be not biting nor
oppresses not the borower.

Thirdly, it may be added to answer this objection, that though it be granted
and yielded unto them, that the Scripture condemns only biting usury: yet
eue^ that is a sufficient argument alone, to condemn all kind of usury which
is practiced under the sun. For it is as clear as the light of the sun,
that all usury biteth, and carries with it an oppressing of the borower. Bucer
says truly Bucer com. in Psalm. 15.
Amordendo dicitur, tacit enim hominem mordet, rodis, and conficit: usury
has the name of biting: for it does secretly bite, gnawe, and consume a man.
And Paulus Fagius has observed that P. Fag. Chald. Paraphrast. annot in Exodus
22.24.
the Chaldeans call usury Hafuliah, a perdendo scilicet, because it
destroys, and overthrows a man. Yea, so general, and common a thing it is
for usury to bite, that as it self is called of the Hebricians naeshaech a
biting: so the usurer is called mashic, quia morsum infligit, because he
gives the bite Aret. Prob. part. 1. loc. 50. de vsuri^.
says Aretius. And the borrower is called Nashic, quiamorsus est: because he
is bitten and oppressed thereby. So that, whersoeuer there is one that lends,
and another that boroweth upon usury: there is a biting, a biter, and one that
is bitten assembled and met together.

Now, it is true indeed which B. Iuel said, L. Humfred. in vita Iuelli. page
220.
vsura alia est acerbior, alia mitior: some usury is more hard, and some is
more soft For there is great difference in biting. As for example. There is
great difference between the biting of a flea, and the biting of a dog, and
the biting of a Lion: yet all are bitings, and the least will draw blood. So,
there is difference between him that takes five, and him that takes ten, and
him that takes twenty in the hundred: yet all is biting, and the least will
consume a man in continuance. And if any man that pays usury, do perhaps not
feel the bitting or oppression thereof, yet that is not because he is not
bitten indeed, but because either he is so benumbed with want, that he
feels no more then a man that is stung with an adder, when he is fast on
sleep: or it is because that Lauater. com. in pro. 28.8.
tecte mordet: it biteth closely and secretly: or lastly, it is because that,
Musculus co^. in Psalm. 15.
primo beneficium confer videtur: usury seems at the first to yield the
borower a benefit. And so, he is deceived with the sweetness of the taste at
the first drinking, as a man that takes down poison into his bowels. Lira
has a notable similitude to this purpose, which he alleges out of one of the
Rabbines, Lira com. in Exodus 22.
sicut serpens mordens in silentio parum percipitur, vel sentitur in principio:
sed posted inflatur homo, and diffunditur effectus illius morsus parui, p^r
totum corpus: sic vsurae malum non sentitur in principio, sed postea ascendit
ad magnam summam, and deuorat totam hominis substantiam. As a serpent that
stingeth privily, is little perceived or felt at the first, but afterward,
the man that is stong swells, and the effect of that little stinging, is
dispersed thorough the whole body: So the inconvenience of usury, is not felt
in the beginning, but in time it amounts to a great sum, and deuoureth a
man's whole substance. It may be also, that the riches and abundance of him that
boroweth is so great coming in other ways, that it makes so full a supply to
the payment of increase, for that which he boroweth, as by that means he
feels not the biting and griping of the usury which he pays. And even as
we see it is in theft or robbery, if a man steal but twelve pence out of a
rich man's purse, though the want of it be little felt, by reason of his store
and abundance, yet he is hindered that loses it, and he is a thief that
takes it: even so is it in usury, though it be taken of a rich man, and in so
small a measure, as that his abundance hardly suffers the evil thereof to be
perceived, yet is he bitten that pays it, and he that takes it an
oppressor.

To conclude the answer to this fourth objection: that which alleged out of
the text, Exodus 22.25.
ye shall not oppress him with usury, is of little moment to the usurers
behoof. For, whereas we read it in our English, ye shall not oppress him with
usury, Tremellius reads it ne imponite, and Pagnine, ne imponetis impose not
(or, ye shall not impose) usury upon him.. And the Greek interpretour in the
same manner (...), thou shall not put usury upon him. So that, according to
all their readings, not only the oppressing of a man by usury, but also the
very imposing of usury upon a man, is condemned in that place of Moses All
that the usurer, ca^ gain by urging of the English translation is this. That
which the Greek and Latin interpretours do call imposing of usury, that the
English translatours call more plainly oppressing by usury. As noting, that
he which imposes usury upon his neighbor, does thereby bite him, oppress
him, yea devour and consume him. Such is the deadly effect of this poisoned
practice.

The end of the fifth Sermon preached Iunii 18. 159^.
The sixte and last Sermon: the special contents whereof are these.
1. One other objection is answered which commonly is made in defense of
usury: namely that it is no where forbidden in the new testament. 2. The
inconvenience of usury is showed, how unfit it is for a Christian to practice,
though it were in any measure lawful. Because that
1. It makes the practisers thereof subject to the curses of many. 2. It is a
thing of very evil report. 3. They can have no resolution of conscience that
they do well that use it. 4. They are but the instruments of evil unto men.
5. The positive laws of men both in Church and commonweals do prohibit it:
especially in this realm of England.

The fifth objection in defense of usury: it is not forbidden in the new
testament.
Object. 5. IT is lastly objected, that the places before alleged against
usury, are taken only out of Moses and the Prophets: and that usury is no
where forbidden, no not so much as once named, in the writings of the
Evangelists, and Apostles, contained in the new testament. From whence, they
will conclude (I trow) either that the new testament gives more liberty to
sin, then the old, which were monstrous blasphemy against the Gospel of
Christ: or at the least, (to speak the best of them) that the laws touching
usury are not moral: and so, not to abide to us that are christians, under
these days of the Gospel.

Answ. Whereunto may be answered: first, that this is no good argument, nor
consequence in reason, usury is not named in the new Testament: Ergo, it is
not forbidden in the moral law. For many sins are forbidden in the moral
law; which are no where mentioned in the new testament. As for example, the
sins of Polygamie, of Tyranny, of Treason, of Jealousy, and many others,
which come not to my remembrance, are manifest breaches of the moral law. And
yet, I suppose, that no man can show them to be condemned, and reproved by
those very nanies, in the new testament. Yea, I proceed further: there are
infinite breaches, and trespasses against the moral law, which are not
specified by name, either in the old, or in the new testament. The law of God
condemns many things, a puri, amaiori, a reinoni, etc. by condemning the
equal, or the greater, or the lesser offense. Sometimes, it includes the
particulars in the general, and sometimes, the general in one particular:
sometimes, it condemns the cause, from the iniquity of the effect:
sometimes, the effect, from the iniquity of the cause: whereas
notwithstanding, the thing that is condemned, is no where recited by name, in
the holy scriptures. Nazianzene said truly, Citat. ab Herbrando loc. com. cap.
de trinitate.
Quaedam and sunt, and dicuntur in scripturis: quae dam sunt in scripturis, and
non dicuntur. Some things are both contained, and named in the scriptures:
some things are contained in the scriptures, but are not named in them. Which
saying of that ancient father, as it may be verified in many particulars, (for
the Trinity, the persons in the Trinity, the unity of substance in the
Godhead, are things contained in deed, but no where expressly named in the word
of God:) so is it most certainly true, in this case which we have in hand. A
thousand, and a thousand particular offenses, are there against the moral
law, which were never recorded, nor ever shall be found particularly named,
in the books, either of the old, or of the new testament.

But to join with them, in a nearer issue: dare any usurer say, and affirm,
that usury is not forbidden in the new testame^^ ^urely, if it be not, then
was that great council of Laterane far received, in which some thirteen, or
fourteen score Bishops were assembled, and gathered together. For they doubted
not, to pronounce that usury was forbidden, Conoil. Lateran. part. 1. cap. 25.
tom. 2.
Vtriusque tituli pagina, that is, (as I expound it) In both the volumes of the
Bible. And again, the same Council Council. Lateran. part 16. tit. de vsuris.
cap. 1.
Vsurarum crimen, vtriusque testamenti pagina detestatur: The volume of both
the testaments, or both the old and the new testament, does detest, or abhor
the sin of usury. Furthermore, if usury be not forbidden in the new
testament: then was Basile far deceived, who persuaded men, even by this
reason, to abstain from usury, Basil* in Psa. 14.
Vt tam ex veteri, quam noua lege instructus, bona cum spe, ad dominum migrare
valeas: That being instructed, or directed, as well by the old law, as by the
new, thou may with good comfort go unto God. Then also were Ambrose, and
Hierome much deceived, who, although they both acknowledged, that usury was
flatly, and all sufficiently condemned in the old testament: yet Ambrose said,
Ambros. lib. de Tobia. cap. 15.
Euangelium dicit, quod est before: The gospel says that, which is more full,
or speaks more fully in this matter. And Hierome said, Hieron. com. in Ezekiel
18.
In Euangelio, virtutis augmentum est. The Gospel goes further in this case,
then the law. For the law forbids usury, but the Gospel commands the
contrary virtue: he means free lending, without increase. Yea, then were
also the divines of Wittenberge far deceived, who said that usury was
forbidden, Theses Wittenberg. citat. ab Aret. loc. com part. 1. loc. 50. tit.
de vsuris.
Nedum iure positiuo, Not only by the positive laws of men: Sed etiam
vtroque, tum veteri, tum nouo testamento: But also both in the old, and new
testament. Then also was B. Iuel far deceived, who said, that usury was B.
Iuel epist. before D. Wilsons usury.
manifestly condemned, not only by heathens, by christians, by the old
fathers, by the ancient Councels, by Emperors, by Bishops, by decrees, by
Canons, by all sects of all regions, and of all religions: But also, (which is
the point, serving to this present purpose,) By the Gospel of Christ: by the
mouth of God. Lastly, if usury be not forbidden in the new testament, then
were Melancthon, Erasmus, Xystus Betuleius, Aretius, and a number of others,
very learned men, far deceived, and overtaken in this argument. By whose
writings, and allegations of scripture, it does manifestly appear, that they
deemed usury to be a thing forbidden, even in the new testament. But alas,
alas, they are not the men, that are deluded, and deceived: but it is the
usurer himself, who in this case, voluntarily deceives himself, shutting his
eyes against the clear light of the word, as a batte, or an owl, that cannot
endure to behold the beams of the sun. For the truth is, that usury is
every where forbidden, even in the books of the new testament. The fathers
disputing against the Arrians, who denied God the son, to be of the same
substance, and essence with the Father: Pet. Martyr. loc com. clas. 3. loc. 4.
sect. 89.
Mordicus propugnare, acretinere voluerunt (...), Would defend, and hold tooth
and nail, the word, or name consubstantiall. And therefore we see, that
whereas the Nicene Council concluded: thus of the son of God. Ruffinus
eccles. hist. lib 1. cap. 5.
(...), patri, ho^ est eiusdem cum patre substantiae, Consubstantiall with the
father, that is of the same substance with the father. The Western Bishops
did, Sozom. hist. Eccles. lib. 3. cap. 12.
Mordicus adhaerescere, cleave close to that decree of the Nicene Council,
against the Bishops of the East. And the Council of Constantinople, concluded
in the same words, Bullinger. confess. Eccles. ante Decad.
Consubstantialem patri, Consubstantiall with the father. And lastly, Sozomen.
lib. 6. cap. 4.
the Council of Antioch, approved and expounded the word consubstantiall, to
justify, and to clear it, from the cauils of the Arrians. P. Martyr. loc.
com. clas. 3. loc. 4. sect. 89.
Quod etiam pro suo iure facere potuerunt, says Peter Martyr: the fathers
might lawfully, and rightly, thus stick close, to the defense of the word
consubstantiall: Maxim vero, cum viderent eam vocem, ex diuinis literis
necessario conclude: Especially, when they saw, that that word, though it were
not named, yet was necessarily concluded, and gathered out of the holy
scriptures. Now I note the example, and practice of the fathers, to this end
and purpose. It appears thereby, that they held for truth, and for the word
of God, not only that which was named, and expressed in the scriptures: but
also that, which by inference, or illation, might be concluded from the same.
And therefore, although the scripture has no where the very name, or word
consubstantiall: yet because the matter which they would signify in that
word, was partly expressed, and partly, to be concluded from the scripture:
therefore, they doubted not, to receive it, as a point of faith, grounded
assuredly upon the word of God. And so say I, concerning this case of usury.
It is true, that the very name, and word of usury, is no where found, nor
mentioned in the new testament: yet because the matter, and practice signified
in that word, is by necessary consequence, and conclusion, inferred to be
forbidden in the writings of the Evangelists, and Apostles: therefore, I
doubt not, but I may boldly affirm this for truth, that usury is condemned
even in the new Testament. Now, that it is by many, and manifest inferences,
condemned in the new Testament, may easily appear in these instances, and
examples. The new Testament says, Mat. 7.12.
what soever ye would, that men should do to you, eue^ so do ye to them. Now,
usury observes not this rule: for the usurer imposes that burden upon
another, which he will not gladly bear himself: therefore usury is forbidden,
in the new Testament. Again, the new Testament says, Mat. 5.4.2.
From him that will borow of thee, turn not away therein commending unto us
the loving, and charitable duty; and use of lending. Now usury, ouerturneth
the nature, and equity, and use of lending: therefore usury is forbidden, in
the new Testament. Again, the new Testament says 1. These. 4.6.
that no man oppress, or defraude his brother in any matter. But usury, if it
be open, and direct, it oppresses, if it be covert and secret, it both
oppresses and defraudeth a man: therefore, usury is forbidden, in the new
Testament. Again, the new Testament says, Ephesians. 4.28.
Let him that stole, steel no more. Now Barthol. Westhimerus in Psalm. 15.
vsura, furtum est: Si enim vsura, furtum non esset; nequaquam Deus
prohibuisset: usury is theft: for if it had not been theft, God would never
have forbidden it. And S Hierome said, Hieron. citat. ab Heming. and alijs.
vsuras quaerere, vel fraudare, vel rapere, nihil differunt: to take usury of
a man, differs nothing from cosening, and robbing of a man. And S. Ambrose
said, Ambros. lib. de bono mortis. citat. a Great. decret. part 2. cause. 14.
quaest. 4.
Si quis vsura^ accipit rapina^ facit: if a man take usury, he commits
robbery. Well the^, ye new Testament forbids theft: and usury is one
branch and kind of theft: therefore usury is forbidden in the new Testament*
Last of all, the new Testament says, Luc. 6.35.
Lend looking for nothing again. Concerning which speech of Christ, although I
acknowledge with M. Beza, that Beza annot. in Luc. 6.35.
they are deceived which wrest this place to thee direct prohibition of usury:
yet I doubt not, but from that place a man may draw a very sufficient argument
against usury, and conclude as does M. Beza upon that saying, Ibidem.
Illud tamen certum est, si iuuandus est proximus, etiam nulla recipiendae
sortis habita ratione* multo magis prohiberi foeneratorias pactiones. Yet this
(says he) is certain, that if our neighbor must be helped by lending, even
without any regard had of receiving, the very principal again, then much more
vsurarious covenants are forbidden and condemned. So then in M. Beza his
judgment, usury is by inference forbidden in the new Testament. It is
therefore no good argument to reason thus, usury is not named, or it is not
forbidden in the new Testament: ergo the laws concerning usury are not
moral. For though usury be not named, yet is it by many inferences condemned
in the new Testament: which is an argument yt it is a breach, and transgression
even of the moral law.

It were needless, and superfluous for any man to attempt the answering of all
obiectio^s, made in the defense of this unlawful practice. If the Scriptures
alleges before against usury, be cleared of those doubts, which have been
before objected: and it be proved that ye laws concerning usury are moral,
and that they forbid it both to friend and stranger, yea both to rich and
poor: and that they condemn not only griping, and oppressing usury, but all
measure thereof be it never so small: and lastly if it appear to be condemned
not only in the old, but also in the new Testament: then all other cauils
which caruall reason has devised, must fade and fall to nothing. For reason
must yield unto the word of God, and the necessity of man's life unto the
authority of the Scripture. It was a good rule prescribed by S. Augustine,
August. de doctrina Christiana. lib. 2. cap. 7.
Opus est mitescere pietate: men (says he) must be mild, or soft, or
tractable in godliness. Neque contradicere diuinae Scripturae, sieve
intellectae si aliqua vitia nostra percutit, sieve non intellectae, quasi nos
melius sapere, meliusque percipere possimus. We must not contradict or gain
say the holy Scripture, neither that part of it which we understand if perhaps
it reproves any of our defaults, neither yet that part which we understand
not, as if we were wiser and could better prescribe duties or doctrine unto
men. The Scripture in cases manifest must be obeyed, though it gainsay our
will and affections, in hidden things, it must be believed, though it
co^tradict our opinion and judgment: else we shall never attain to the sound
knowledge thereof, nor conscionably practice that which we know, nor in the end
receive the reward of our conscionable practice.

The fourth, and last principal point. In which is declared, that usury is
not to be practiced of a Christian man, no not though it were not simply
forbidden in the word of God.

BUt go to: say it should be granted, that there is no express word of God
co^demning simply and generally these kinds of usury: yet does it not
therefore follow that the practice of them is clear from all default. The
Apostle says, 1. Cor. 10.23.
all things are lawful for me, but all things are not expedient. Noting,
that some things may be done lawfully in respect of themselves, which cannot
be done expediently in respect of circumstances. Now, how inexpedient it is for
any Christian man to lend upon usury (though it were lawful in it self)
shall evidently I hope appear by that which follows.

1. First, Solomon by this reason condemns their covetousness, who in time
of scarsitie hoard up the victuals, from sale to the people: Pro. 11.26.
He that withdraws the corn, the people will curse him, that is, (as one
well expounds it) Pelican. com. in pro. 11.26.
male is audit passim, eidem male precabuntur egen^ familia Dei, odietur vt
durus and perfidus, deo crit and hominibus odiosus. Such a man shall be every
where evil spoken of, the poor (who are Gods family) will banne and curse
him, he shall be hated as an hard hearted and miserly wretch. In a word, he
shall be hated both of God and man. Now, if there be any strength in that
argument, to dissuade men from hardness of heart, and uncharitableness
toward the poor in that case, namely that in so doing, they hale the curse
of the people upon their heads: then certainly, this is a very sufficient
reason, to dissuade men from practicing of usury, even because that, he which
^endeth to usury the people will curse him. For indeed, every man whether he
be rich or poor, whether he borowe or boroweth not, will curse and banne an
usurer. He that is rich and needs not to borow, if he be a man of a tender
heart, and has any sympathy of another man's misery, will curse an usurer for
pinching of the poor. He that is poor, (and therefore needs to borow,) but
cannot borow for want of sufficient security to put in, he curses the usurer
for the hardness of his heart* He that has need to borow, and does borow,
many times curses the usurer to his face, when he carries home his borrowed
goods, for the griping and oppression which in the end he feels from that
practice. So that, whether we speak of poor men, or of rich, of him that
boroweth, or of him ye boroweth not: usury is always (as B. Iuel said of it)
Io. Iuel. sermon. in. 1. These. 4.6.
the curse of God and the curse of the people. And therefore, if it be hateful
to us, to have every ma^s tongue to curse us, and every man's heart to malign us:
then let us abstain from this cursed course of usury.

2. Besides that, we may not, nay we cannot be ignorant how the Scripture
requires us only to do such things as are of good report in the world. Romans
12.17.
Procure (says the Apostle) things honest in the sight of all me^. And again:
Phil. 4.8.
whatsoever things are of good report, etc. think on these things. And no
marvel, though the Scripture excite us hereunto. For, by doing things which
are well reported of, a man shall grow to good report him self. Now, Eccles.
7.3.
A good name is better then a good ointment: yea, Pro. 22.1.
it is to be chosen before much riches, says Solomon. For indeed, it is
always more comfortable then the one, and many times more profitable then the
other. S. Augustine said truly, that August. de bono viduitatis cap 22.
such as care not what report goes of them, and make no account of their
estimation, deal not only unwisely for them selves, but also uncharitably
toward others. And why? Nobis necessaria est vita nostra, alijs fama nostra:
our good life is necessary for our selves, that it may be rewarded: but a
good name is necessary for others: that those which are already of our
profession may be thereby credited, and those which are not, may be drawn on
to christianity. For the good report of the professor avails much to ye
spreading of his profession. Lacta^tius speaking of this very case of usury,
says that Lactant. lib. 6. de vero cultu. cap. 18.
A just or an honest man, will not defile himself with any, such kind of
gain, but will have always this care and respect, vt idipsum quod commodat
inter bona nomina nominetur: that, that which he lends may be lent in such
order, as that it may be well reported of, and well spoken of among the people.
A benefit, which he that lends to usury can never attain. For who is of so
ill report, and of so little estimation, as is the usurer for his trade? not
the catch powle, not the promoter, not the executioner, no not the very
scauenger. And no marvel: for the worst of them is of some use and benefit
to the common weal, but this man is the subversion and the destruction
thereof. Bromyard gives an instance of a certain preacher, who knowing that
there were many usurers among his auditorie, brake out in his Sermon into
asking of the question, Io. Bromyard summa praedic^nt. tit. vsura.
Si aliquis esset vsurarius, if there were ever an usurer there present? when
every man held his peace, and no man made answer to that question, he
demanded again, Si ibi aliquis esset Cloacarius, if there were ever a
scauenger there? (I give it the cleanliest name for reverence sake: otherwise
ye know what Cloacarius means.) One rising up, and answering for himself,
yea, there was one there, and he was that one: the preacher thereupon infers
this inuectiue against usurers. Ecce videtis quam vile sit officium
vsurariorum: behold (says he) you may see hereby how vile a trade the trade of
usurers is. Quia cum alius pro art sua vilissima respondeat, ipsi pro art sua
loqui erubescunt: for when this man answers for himself and in defense of his
most filthy trade, they blush and are ashamed to answer for theirs. Now, why
would an usurer be ashamed to profess his trade in the most public assembly,
if it were of good report and account among men? Plutarch says Plutarch. lib.
de non foenerando.
that the Publicane was a most infamous person, even among the heathen: and so
much also the Scriptures do witness unto us. Mat. 9.11.
The Pharisees noted it as a contemptible thing in our Savior Christ, that he
did eat and drink with Publicanes. Now, foeneratores Publicanos agunt (says
Plutarch:) the usurers play the Publicanes. And so they do indeed. For ye
Publicanes were Calvin. harmoni. in mat. 5.46.
vectigaliu^ redemptores, such as gathered tols or customs, or tributes, or
taskes, or subsidies of the people. And the usurers will have their custom
penny, a man must pay their task or he cannot escape their hands, he must pay
deep tribut that is subject to their dominion. And as for their co^ditio^s,
the Publicanes were such as Beza annot. in mat. 9.10.
rapacitate prouinciales exugere^t: by their rauenousnes and gripplenes, did
suck up, and soake dry the poor people of the Provinces under their
jurisdiction. Wherein they were a lively pattern of ye greediness and
covetousness of the usurer: whereby he casts into an irrecouerable
consumption, all those which for their disease seek physic at his hands. Well
then, the Publicane was an infamous person: and the usurer plays the
Publicane: and therefore no marvel though he be of bad report among men.

But it is objected in this behalf, that the base account which is made of
usury among us in these days, arises from the iniquity of the time: and is
of some imputed to the rashness and want of discretion, in the Ministers of
the word, who with salt terms and ignominious speeches, have brought the
usurers, and their doings into so great disgrace. To which it may be truly
answered, that this is but a seely devise of the usurers themselves. For, it is
evident that in other countries, and in former times, usury has been always
accounted a very base and ignominious trade. Those which travail daily from us
into the low countries, do affirm, that no man dare there be seen (for
shame) to enter into the Lumbardes house, for so they call the usurer in that
country. Yea, that it is not so much discredit to be seen going in, or
coming out of the common stews, as it is to be found houering about the
door of the usurer: which argues that in those places, it is reputed a very
opprobrious thing. Petrarch says that there is not Petrarch. de remedio
vtriusque fortunae. lib. 1. Dialog. 56
foedius studium, a more filthy profession then usury, and that of former
time, usurers were separated as leapers from the society of men. Yea, B Iuel
went further and reached to a longer day: for he says, L. Humfred. in vita
Iuelli. page 227.
haec, semper turpis fuit, this was always counted a filthy trade. And
Chrysostom says, Chrysostom. hom. 57. in Mat. 17.
extremae impude^tiae signum, foenus semper iudicatum est: usury was always
judged a toke^ of extreme impude^cie. That is, (more plainly) he was always
accounted a notable impudent man, and one past all shame, that durst without
blushing, take up the practice of usury. Among many things which be alleged
to that purpose: that is famous which is recorded in one of the Centuries. The
place is long, but it is so worthy a president of this matter, and so clear a
looking glass, for an usurer to discern his face withal: as that I thought
it no small offense, either to pass it over in silence, or to contract it into
a shorter room. The words are these: Centur. 12. cap. 4. e P. Cantor.
Antiquitus in tota ciuitate vix vnus foenerator inueniebatur, and ille quidem
occultus, nec foenerabatur nisi pauperibus: nec tamen nisi clam, data fide quod
non publicaretur. De quo si forte praua oriretur suspicio, dicebatur domus
illius domus diaboli, vinea, puteus, ager diaboli: and doinceps osculumpacis
non dabatur ei in missa: ignis a vicinis in domo e^us non sumebatur, sed nec
aliquis cum eo aliquod participium habebat. Pueri ad eius occursum pauescebant,
and alterutrum eum digito monstrabant. Adeo enim detestabile tunc temporis fuit
vitium vsurae. The words in english are thus much in effect. In old time
scarce one usurer was to be found or heard of in a whole city, and he dealt
but very secretly, and closely neither, and he lent to usury to none but to
the poor, and he would not lend to them neither, but privily, and binding
them by a faithful promise that they should not disclose him. And if happily
there arose any evil suspicion of him that way in the city, then his house
was commonly called the devils house, the vineyarde, the well head, the field
of the devil. The paxe was not offered to him to kiss in the time of the
celebratio^ of the mass: the neighbors would not fetch fire from his house:
no not any man would have any fellowship with him. The children were afraid
to meet him in the streets, as if they met a bugge or a monster: and one
would point at him with the finger to an other. So detestable in those days
was the sin of usury. Thus we see, that it is not the sole opinion of this
time, but of all times, not of this countri^ only, but of other countries
also, so basely and ig^^niniously to account of usury.

And if any man will yet further reply, that this vile account which is made of
usury, is but the private conceipte of some particular persons: let him know
that mighty princes* and whole estates, have dorreed and concluded of usury,
that it should be accounted and reputed to all purposes for a very infamous
action. Luther says, Luther. de taxanda. vsura tom. 7.
Vetuit Caesar ne vsurarius haberetur and iudicaratur vir bonus and honestus.
Caesar forbad that an ^surer should be accounted or adjudged in law (or in
common estimation) for a good and an honest man. And D. Wilson says, D.
Wilson. fol. 136.
that in law, they are defamed persons, and that the law defames them. So
that, L^improbum. and ibi Bald C. de insamibus.
put the case my brother make an usurer his heir, I may break the testament,
and by excluding of him be admitted my self, by complaint of a testament made
against office or good right: because he is thereby constituted the heir whom
the law has disabled to inherit, as an infamous person. And surely no
marvel though usurers be of so bad and evil report, and have been ever
reputed as men of extreme infamy. For first, their course of life is baser
then any, Zuinger. Tab. in Aristot. de repub. lib. 1. cap. 11.
Vita foener atoria omnium specierum vitae (...) abiectissima, and odiosissima.
The usurers life is more base, and hateful then any kind of life or trade
which is employed about goods or money. Secondly, their conditions are commonly
as bad as any. M. Calvin says, Calvin. epist. respons. de vsuris.
Adeoplus quam rarum est eundem esse hominem probum and foeneratorem: It is
more then rare (or it is very seldom seen) that one and the same person,
should be both an honest man, and an usurer Now, their trade being so base, and
their conditions so evil: no marvel though shame follow them at the heels,
as the shadow does the body by nature. For, Ignominia comes turpitudinis: Shame
is the companion of beastlines. But to conclude at length the point now in
hand: since the word of God inioyneth us to do things of good report, and
usury is a thing which all times, all countries, all sorts of people have
held in extreme contempt: though it should be granted, that no express word
of God does absolutely condemn it, yet we see how unbeseeming, and inexpedient
a thing it is, to be practiced of a christian.

3. But to proceed. The Apostle says writing to the Romans, that Romans 14.23.
Whatsoever is not of faith is sin. And the name of faith I take with M.
Calvin in that place, Calvin. com. in Romans 14.23.
Pro constanti animae persuasione and firma certitudine. For a constant
persuasion and certain assurance of the heart. As if Paul had said: whatsoever
a man does, not being resolutely persuaded in his conscience, ruled by the
word of God, that therein he does well and pleases God: this is reckoned and
imputed for sin unto him. Now, I can but wonder in my heart, what kind of
(...), what full persuasion and resolution of conscience, the usurer can gather
to himself, that he does well, and pleases God in the practicing of usury.
Considering that, first, there is no example of any godly man to be found
either in holy scriptures, or humane writers, that ever took up that kind of
profession. No, B. Iuel whose writings do argue him to be a man that had red*
exceeding much, says confidently and boldly, Io Iuel. sermon. in 1. These. 4.6.
Such a kind of bargaining no good man or godly ever used. Secondly,
considering that most learned men of all ages, and places, have condemned it.
Yea, he went far that said, (and yet was he wise enough to consider what he
said,) D. Wilson fol. 192.
God, nature, reason, all scripture, all law, all authors, all Doctors, yea
all Councels beside, are utterly against usury. Thirdly, considering that
those which are supposed to speak most for usury, as Calvin, Bucer,
Bullinger, and some others, when they entreat of this argument, they touch it
tenderly, as if a man did handle a soar, and they use many preambles before
they come to it, to prevent the evil advantage which bad men would happily
gather from their words, and they approve it not, but with many and those very
strict limitations: and lastly, M. Calvin will have no man to hold his
opinion and judgment for a decree and general rule in that case. Now, when a
man has no example to go before him, when he has the opinions of so many
against him, when he shall see that those which justify it, speak very
sparingly, and they that admit it do it very warily, and the best of them will
not have men to rest upon their opinion: I wonder whence it is that our usurers
are so resolute without doubting to approve it, and without all fear to
practice it. Antoninus said well, and it is a maxim in law, Antoninus. summae
part. 1. ^i. 20. de regulis iuris.
In dubijs tutior via est eligenda: In doubtful cases we must take the safer
way. This case of usury, though in it self I hold it out of doubt, yet by
reason of some new writers, is among many grown into question: therefore
wisdom would, that men should advise themselves to sail the surest course.
And which is that? Alciate does by his card plainly point it out unto us:
Andreas Alciat. respons. lib. 1. Council. 3. cap. 24.
Cum dubium est, an aliquid peccatum sit vel non: credendum est esse peccatum,
quia id tutius. When it is a doubt or a question, whether a thing be sin or
no: it is to be believed and held that it is a sin: because that is the
safest opinion. Therefore if any man doubt (as I see not but the most resolute
usurer may doubt) whether usury be a sin or no: let him believe and hold
that it is a sin, till he clearly see the contrary, and so abstain from
it as from an unlawful and ungodly thing. So shall he be sure to take the
safest way. For, neither in the doing of the thing, nor in the wavering of the
mind, shall he offend against the majesty of God.

4. I will not stand long to show, that this is one of the evils which David
wishes to light upon his enemy: namely, that he and his goods might fall into
the usurers hands. Psalm. 109.11.
Let the extortioner catch all that he has, and let the strangers spoil his
labor. Now, it is to be noted, that the word which we in our english read
extortioner, the Greek interpretor translateth (...) and Tremellius, Pagnine,
yea and the old translation also reads, Foenerator, an usurer: Let the
usurer catch all that he has. And Musculus commenting upon that place of the
Psalm, observes from thence two notable things worthy of our consideration.
The first, Musculus. com. in Psalm. 109.11.
Maledictionis genus esse si quis incidat in illorum laqueos: It is a kind of
curse to fall into the usurers bands. The second, Esse illos non
benedictionis, sed maledictionis ministros: The usurers are the ministers not
of blessing, but of cursing unto men. Now, if the borrower did well consider of
the one, namely that it is a curse to grow in debt to an usurer: and if the
lender did lay to heart the other, namely that he is but an instrument or hand
to hale Gods curse upon a man: I suppose that neither borrowing, nor lending
upon usury, would seem so small a matter, nor prove so common a thing, as it
does with most men at this day in the world.

5. But I come to ye which I suppose to be very material, and which should
bind us that are Englismen especially, from the lending upon usury: yea
though it were not directly nor generally condemned in the word of God. It is
to be considered (and wise men I doubt not do observe it) that those men of
learning, which speak most for usury, do refer the approving or disprouing,
the enlarging or restrayning thereof unto the authority of the civil
Magistrate. That if the governor, or magistrate allow it to be used, then it is
allowable: if he abolish it, the^ it is to be abolished. M. Calvin prescribes
this rule among others to be observed in usury, Calvin. epist. respons. de
vsuris.
ne excedatur certus modus, constitutus in quanis regione: that the usurer
exceed not in taking the certain rate ordained in every country. Whereby it
appears that he referred the moderation of usury unto the Magistrate and
governor. Bucer. com. in Psalm. 15.
Bucer commends Justinians law for the moderating of usury, and approves
the equity of the Roman laws in that behalf. From whence it may be
gathered, that he also reposed the disposing of usury, in the discretion of
the Magistrate. Bullinger says, Bullinger. decad. 3. sermon. 1.
sancti magistratus erit, coercere vsurarios aequis legibus, co^stituereque pro
temporu^ and locoru^, personarum and reru^ qualitate, quod aequum, iustum, and
sanctum fuerit: It is the duty of a godly Magistrate, to restrain the usurers
by equal laws, and to ordeine in this case that which is just, and equal,
and holy, as the times, and places, and persons, and matters shall require.
Therefore in his opinion if the Magistrate see it good to allow it, he may: if
he see it not good, he need not allow it at all. For, so far he may allow,
or not allow it, as he shall see by circumstances that it is expedient. Lauater
says, Lauater. homil. 76. ^^ Ezekiel 18.
particulare iudicium de contractuum formis, aequalitate and iustitia, peti
debet ex bonis and aequis legibus: the particular judgment of the forms,
equality, and justice of contractes, must be sought and fetched from good,
and equal laws. Therefore by his judgment, the laws (and so consequently
the Magistrate, who is the mouth of the law) must determine either of the
lawfulness, or the unlawfulness of this case of usury. But Zuinglius has a
notable place to this purpose, so notable, that though it be long, yet I will
not fear tediousness in the repeating thereof. Zuinglius. lib. de duplici
iustitia. tom.
De vsura and foenore sic sentio: as touching usury and increase thus I
think, or this is my judgment. Quando magistratuum leges foenus exercere
permittunt, iam illud soluere debent, quicunque pecuniam ijs conditionibus
receperunt: when the laws of the magistrate do permit the exercising of
usury, they ought to pay the usury which have taken money upon such
conditions. But he adds a little after, Si magistratus ea integritate est, vt
foenus non ferat, nec foeneratoribus ius dicat, nullo iure foenus deberi
affirmo. If the magistrate be of that integrity, that he will not permit
usury, nor give sentence for the usurer, or hear the cause of the usurer:
then I affirm, that the increase is due to be paid by no law. Then we see his
opinion is, that where the Magistrate permits usury, there the borower is
bound to pay the increase: but where the magistrate permits it not, there it
is by no law due unto the lender. And consequently we see, that it was his
judgment, that the permission, or not permission of usury (as touching the
people) depends upon the Magistrate. All these testimonies. I repeat to
show, that it is the opinion eue^ of those that seem most to favor usury,
that the approving, tolerating, rejecting, and moderating thereof, depends
upon the positive laws of countries, and the civil authority of the
Magistrate. Which if it do, then we that are inhabitants of this Realm, and
members of the Church of England: have not left unto us so much as a fig
leaf to cover our nakedness, I mean we have not the least color, or
pretense in the world, to defend the practicing of usury in our country. For
it is to be known and acknowledged, to the glory of God, and to the honor of
our Church, and to the everlasting renown of Queen Elizabeth and her
government, that all the authority, and all the laws which are now in force,
both in the Church and common weal, have forbidden and do forbid usury,
throughout the whole realm of England. For the manifestation whereof, we are
to consider that the strength and state of our country, depends partly upon
the common law, partly upon the statute law, partly upon the civil law, and
partly upon the canon law. Now, all these so far as they are at this day in
force, do condemn and inhibite usury.

And first for the common law. I find that Glanuill sometimes Lord chief
Justice of England in the days of Henry the second, delivers this for the
law of the land, namely D. Wilson. fol. 196. Glanuil. lib. 7. cap. 16.
that all the goods of an usurer, whither he dye making a will, or not making
a will, are proper to the king. Agreeable to this is that, which Mathaeus
Parisiensis reports in his writings. His words are these. Mathaeus Paris.
in vita Richards 1.
Quicquid laici in vita sua donauerint, vel quocunque titulo a se alienauerint,
etsi vsurarij fuisse dicuntur, post mortem non reuocabitur: whatsoever lay men
have given away in their life time, or by what title soever they have alienated
any thing from themselves: although they were said to be usurers while they
lived, yet after their death it shall not be revoked. Quae vero post mortem non
alienata fuerint, si cognitum fuerit ipsos te^pore mortis fuisse vsurarios,
confiscabuntur. But the things which were not alienated after their death, if
it be known that at the time of their death they were usurers: they shall be
confiscated or forfeyted to the crown. So then by the ancient common law of
this land, usury is prohibited, upon the penalty of the loss of all the
goods of the usurer.

Proceed we from thence unto the statute law: and we shall see that from time
to time, diverse kings of this Realm, have by their Acts and Statutes
condemned usury. In the days of Edward the third Anno. 15 cap. 5.
the conisance of the usurers deceased, was allotted to the king: The conisance
of usurers alive, to the ordinaries of holy Church. In the days of Henry the
seventh, by one statute: Anno. 3. cap. 5
All vsurarious bargains were made void, and of none effect: and by another,
Anno. 11. c. 8.
usurers were punished with the forfeiture of the moytie, put forth to usury.
In the days of Henry the eight, Anno. 37. c. 9.
those that took above ten in the hundred, were punished with the forfeiture
of the treble value of the goods put forth to usury. Anno. 5. and. 6 Eduardi.
6. cap. 20.
The which act (says the Parliament assembled in the reign of Edward the
sixth,) was not meant nor intended, for the maintenance and allowance of usury,
etc. As by the title and preamble of the same act, it does plainly appear.
For indeed, howsoever king Henry's statute does tolerate for necessities sake,
the lending for usury in some rate and measure: yet the preamble thereof does
manifestly and flatly call it, an unlawful thing. But whatsoever king Henry
intended, it is clear that king Edward the sixth by his statute, condemned
indeed all kinds and all measure of usury: and affirmed directly, that
Ibidem.
usury is by the word of God utterly prohibited, as a vice most odious and
detestable. Lastly, came Queen Elisabeth Beza. epist. ad Angliae reginam. ante
no^um testamentum.
nobilissimum instrumentum, that most noble instrument of God, as M. Beza
rightly calls her. She indeed repealed king Edwardes statute, Anno. 13. c. 8.
because (as her Act alleges,) It had not done so much good as was hoped
for: but rather the said vice of usury, and specially by way of sale of wares
and shifts of interest, had much more exceedingly abounded. The usurer being
therein like unto the water, which the more it is pent, the more it swells:
and like a thief, who when he is locked in at the prison door, breaks out
at the window. Even so, the usurers being by king Edwards statute absolutely
restrained, from all measure of usury: they fell to shifts, subtelties, and
devices, yea and that with the more greediness, by how much it was the more
generally forbidden. For Nitimur in vetitum s^mper cupimusque negata:
The more we are restrained from ought, the more we run thereto.


In consideration whereof, she revoked and adnihilated K Edwards statute: but
did she therefore approve or justify usury? no: one said well, that Phil
Stubs. The Anatomy of abuses fol. 75
Those that say that the laws in England do allow of usury, and license men
to commit it freely: do slaundor the laws, and are worthy of reprehension.
For, that Queen Elisabeths statute does not allow nor approve usury, may
appear evidently by these reasons. First, it is entitled An Act, (not for or
in defense, but) against usury. Secondly, it calls usury a vice, or sin:
the vice of usury. Thirdly, it says, that all usury is forbidden by the law
of God, and is sin and detestable. Fourthly, whereas commonly penal laws are
administered with as favorable exposition as conveniently they can be, for the
benefit of the subject offending: in this statute, there is a special prouiso
that It shall be most largely and strongly construed to the suppressing of
usury. And lastly, it is so far from approving any, as that it punishes
usury even to the lowest degree and measure. For, whereas whosoever lends to
usury, must of necessity lend either for ten, or above ten, or under
ten in the hundred: it punishes him that lends for above ten, with a
treble forfeiture of the principal: and him that lends for ten, or under
ten, with the forfeiture of the usury and increase. So that, neither the
taking of ten, nor more then ten, nor less then ten, no not the taking
of one penie in the hundred is approved by that statute.

O sir (will some man say) but Queen Elisabeths statute, exempteth from the
penalty thereof, all usury taken for the relief of orphans in the city of
London, and such other places. I answer: the law generally condemns usury
in it self and in the own nature: but it is compelled to tolerate it in that
particular case, for very necessities sake. M Beza has a notable saying, fully
fitting this purpose. Beza annot. in Math. 19.8.
Leges ciuiles si been sunt constitutae, nihil quidem praecipiunt quod Deus
prohibuerit, and nihil prohibet quod Deus praeceperit: The civil laws of
princes, if they be rightly ordained, do command nothing which God
forbids, neither do they forbid any thing which God commands. Sed
improbitate hominum, coguntur multa duntaxat moderari, quae penitus tollere non
possunt: But by reason of the wickedness of men, they are compelled only to
moderate many things, which they cannot altogether take away. Et haec sunt
quae permitti legibus dicuntur: And these are the things which are said to be
permitted, or tolerated by law. An instance of this he gives in this very
case of usury: which many magistrates are compelled to permit, because they
see it cannot be utterly abolished. And this is it, which is to be said in
defense of Queen Elizabeth's statute, concerning that clause. Iniquity has
now gotten the upper hand so much, and men's hearts are grown so hard, and so
cold in the duties of charity: as that the governors of this age, have been
compelled to tolerate that one point, for the relief of poor children and
orphans, which otherwise they feared for want of due provision would fall to
utter decay. God bears many things at our hands by reason of our
obstinacy, and we must bear many things amongst men for their want of
charity. For otherwise, we know what the Church of England teaches: namely,
that Romans 3.8.
We must not do evil that good may come thereof. And if the Council. Lateran
sub. Alexand. ^ part. 16 it is. de vsuris. cap. 1.
Council of Laterane rightly resolved, that as a man must not lie to save an
other man's life, so he must not lend to usury to redeem a Christian out of
the hand of the Turk: then may we easily gather what is to be judged of money
lent to usury for the maintenance of orphans. And thirdly, it is evident yt
if people were as they might, and as they should be, there were other means by
which orphans might be provided for. As Chemnit. loc. com. tom. 2. tit. de
paupertate. cap. 6.
Contractus redemptionis, contractus societatis: The laying to morgage, the
bargaining by society: and such other contracts allowed by law, and
justifiable by the word of God. We see that in the days of K. Edward, men
being more merciful, and more careful over the poor, then now they are among
us: the orphans were well and sufficiently provided for, even when usury was
altogether and utterly prohibited. But it is not for us to dispute what might
be done if men would, (for nothing is hard to willing minds:) but we are to
consider what can now be done, as the times serve, and as men are affected:
which was the only reason no doubt, why they that condemned usury in
general, were compelled to exempt that one particular from penalty. So then
by the common and statute law of this land, usury is condemned.

Come we now unto the civil law, and we shall find that therein also usury is
prohibited. For the understanding whereof, we are to remember, that the body
of the civil law, is divided as it were into three parts. The first contains
the laws made before the Roman estate became a monarchy: and with them,
those laws which were made after it arose to a monarchy, from the time of
Julius Caesar, unto the reign of Constantine the great. And these are called
Pandectae, the laws or volumes of the pandects. The second part contains
those laws which were made from the time of Constantine, unto the reign of
Justinian the Emperor: comprehe^ding also some of Justinians laws. And those
be called the Code, or the laws of the Code. The third contains the latter
laws made by Justinian: and they be commonly called Nouellae constitutiones,
or Autenticae, The laws of the Autentiques. Now, it must be confessed, that by
the Pandects, and the Code, usury is not simply forbidden, Leos. 1. c. de
vsuris.
but tolerated and permitted unto a certain rate. But by the Autentiques,
which are the latter laws, (and so do abrogate the former) it is evident and
manifest that usury is altogether prohibited. For, Justinian among other
decrees of his, enacted this for a law: Constitut. 131. de ecclesiasticis
canonibus, and priuilegijs, etc. vel de ecclesiasticis titulis.
Sancimus vt sanctie ecclesiastici canones, qui a sanctis quatuor concilijs,
(hoc est, Niceno december trecentorum and octo, Constantinopolitano centum
quinquaginta doctorum patrum, Ephesino primo, in quo Nestorius condemnatus est,
and Calcedonensi, in quo Eutiches cum Nestorio anathemate percussus est,)
expositi and confirmati sunt, vicem legum obtineant. We decree (says the
Emperor) that the holy ecclesiastical canons, which were published and
confirmed, by the four holy councels, (that is, by the council of Nice,
consisting of three hundred and eighteen, by the council of Constantinople,
consisting of a hundred and fifty learned fathers, by the first council of
Ephesus, in which Nestorius was condemned, and by the council of Calcedon, in
which Eutiches and Nestorius were both accursed,) shall have the place, or the
power, or the authority of laws* By this constitution of Justinian, all the
decrees of the Council of Nice, are (among the rest) established and ratified
for Autenticall laws. Now, the council of Nice concluded directly, and
expressly against usury, in this form of words. Council. Nicen. cap. 18.
Quoniam multi Clerici auaritiae causa turpia lucra sectantes, obliti diuini
praecepti quo dictum est, (qui pecuniam suam non dedit ad vsuram,) foenerantes,
centesimas exigunt: statuit hoc sanctum concilium, vt si quis inuentus fuerit
post hanc definitionem vsuras accipere, vel ex quolibet tali negotio turpia
lucra sectari, vel etiam species frumentorum ad septuplum dare: omnis qui tale
aliquid conatus fuerit ad quaestum, deijciatur a Clero, and alienus habeatur ab
ecclesiastico gradu. Because many Clergy men following of covetousness
filthy lucre, forgetting the commandment of God which says, Psalm. 15.5.
He that has not given his money to usury: exact after ten in the hundred:
this holy council enacteth, that if any man shall be found to take usury
after this decree made, or by any such practice to follow filthy lucre, or to
put forth any kind of grain to increase: he that attempteth any such thing
for gain, shall be cast out of the clergy, and reckoned as none of any
ecclesiastical degree. Thus did the council of Nice conclude against usury:
and Justinian ratified this with the other canons of that council for a law:
therefore by that law usury is condemned.

Now if any man reply (as happily some will) that the Council forbids
usury only in Ecclesiastical persons, and so will infer, that
notwithstanding that canon, it is lawful in the common people: he must know
that howsoever Church men, or Clergy men, (as we call them) are only named
and specified in that decree: yet because the reason which induced them to
enact that Canon is drawn from the word of God, (for they allege the words
of the Psalmist to that purpose:) and the word of God is a rule and squire,
not only to the Clergy, but also to the layetie, that is, both to men of the
Church, and to men of the Common weal: therefore the received judgment of the
law and lawyers is, that usury is by it forbidden in all estates, degrees,
and callinges of men. So then usury is prohibited by the civil law.

And is the Canon law any whit more beneficial to this trade? Nay: that above
all the rest damneth it (as we say) even to the pit of hell. For, the Canons of
the Church forbid it upon great penalty both in the Clergy, and in the Lay
people: for so you must give me leave to speak now after the manner of
Lawyers. In the Clergy. The Canons ascribed to the Apostles say, Canon.
Apostol. cap. 43.
Episcopus aut Presbyter, aut Diaconus, qui vsuras a mutuum accipientibus
exigit, vel desineto, vel deponitor: The Bishop, or Priest, or Deacon which
exacteth usury of the borower, let him either surcease to do it, or let him
be deposed from his office. The Council of Arles said, Council. Arelat.
secundum. cap. 14.
depositus a clero, a communione alienus habeatur: let him that takes usury,
be deposed from the Clergy, and be secluded from the communion. The Counsel of
Carthage said, Council. Carthag. 6 cap. 17.
Abijciatur a clero, and alienus a Canone sit: let him be cast out of the
Clergy, and secluded from the Canon. A number of other testimonies might be
alleged, some of which I will be contented only to quote for breuities sake.
Council. Turonic. 1. cap. 13. Council. Laodicen. cap. 5 Council. Coloniens. part.
2. cap. 31. All which, with many others, do strongly inhibite usury in the
Clergy. And as for the Laytie (by which name they understand all those that
are not entered into the holy orders of the Church) against them the
constitutio^s and Canons of the law, are yet more severe. For the law Council
Aelebert. cap. 20.
excommunicateth them, Council. lateran. part. 1. cap. 25.
debarreth them of the communion, Council. Lugdunens. tom. 3.
disanulleth their testaments, Statut. Synod. Hildesheimensi^. cap. 46.
denies unto them Christian burial, D Wilson. fol 138.
permits not a Minister to visit them in time of sickness, nor any man to
be present at the making of their wills, Ibidem fol. 139.
nor any public Notarie to draw their wills. Ibidem.
No the law says, no man ought to take care what become of an usurer, though
he beg his bread, or dye for hunger: because his life is as hateful as it
is abominable. But among many other things, I may not forget that our late
English Canons agreed upon by the Convocation house for this province of
Canterbury, Canones aediti Londin. Anno. 1584. cap. 4.
do couple usury with the most grievous sins of heresy, schism, perjury,
incest, and Adultery. And do ordeine that the sentence of excommunication,
shall not be denounced against an usurer, but by the Archbishop, or Bishop, or
Archdeacon, or by a Prebendarie at the least, in his own proper person.
Whereby it appears, that the authority of the Church of England, would not
only proceed against usury according to the penalty of the ancient Canons:
but would also set such a brande, and a mark upon the face thereof, as it might
be noted, and reputed, for a right grievous and heinous offense. Thus then we
see, that both the common and statute law of this land on the one side, and the
Civil, and Canon law on the other side: that is to say, all the authority and
power both of the common wealth and Church of England, have forbidden and
condemned usury. That we may truly say in this respect as he said in Plautus:
Plautus. Mestellar. Act. 3.
Nullum aedipol genus hodie est hominum tetrius,
Nec minus bono cum iure quam Danisticum.
There is not a worser kind of men living, nor any that deals with less
justice, or equity, or conscience, or approbation of law, then does the
usurer. Now, we have heard it declared before, that those which speak most for
usury, have notwithstanding submits the approving, the rejecting, the
tolerating, the moderating of usury, unto the statutes of several countries,
and the authority or determination of the Magistrate. And therefore if the
usurers will stand to their judgments, to whom they are wont to appeal as to
their special patrons: then certainly, forasmuch as they live here in a Church
and Kingdom, in which usury is so generally by all kinds of government
prohibited and condemned: they may not be any practisers thereof, of, no not
though it were not simply forbidden by the word of God.

I Come now at length to the shutting up and conclusion of this whole treatise.
Seeing we have learned, not only what usury is, and what are the kinds and
branches thereof: but also that it is forbidden in the word, upon very great
and sufficient reasons, and that it is in so many respects, an unfit thing to
be practiced of a christian man: I exhort all those who have hitherto kept
themselves unspotted of this evil, that so they abide and continue still. And
I say to them with our Savior Christ in the Revelation: Apoc. 22.11.
He that is righteous, let him be righteous still: and he that is holy, let
him be holy still. Partake not the usurers sin, lest ye be also partakers of
his punishment. Those that have been overtaken with this evil, not seeing (it
may be) the iniquity thereof, I exhort as the Apostle does the Ephesians,
Ephesians. 4 28.
Let him that stole steal no more: Let him that has lent to usury, lend to
usury no more* Esaias. 58.6.
Loose the bands of wickedness, take off the heavy burdens: that is, (as
Hierome expounds it) Hieron com. in Esa. 58.
discharge the poor men of their bands, at the leastwise of their interest,
in which and for which they stand bound unto you. Ease them of that burden,
wherewith they are so laden, as a number are daily pulled upon their knees, yea
laid along, yea swallowed up of poverty. Leave off that trade, surcease that
course: the way to goodness is never entered too late. Cyprian said well,
Cyprian. ser. de passione Christi.
Nec in vltimis Dei clementia poenitentes excludit: The mercy of God excludes
not them that repent at the last hour. Cyprian. ser. de Coena D^min^.
Nec serum est quod verum, nec irremissibile quod voluntarium: The repentance
is never too late that is done in truth, neither is that repentance without
pardon which is willingly done. But if any man be so far gone in this
disease, that he is past recovery, and his heart is so far hardened, as it
cannot be pierced with the word: to him I say as it is in the Revelation,
Apoc. 22 1^.
He that is unjust, let him be unjust still: and he which is filthy, let him
be filthy still. Continue in thine evil, delight in thine evil, bless thy
self in thine evil. But withal, take yt which follows in the same place,
as a stinge in the tail: Apoc. 22.12.
And behold I come shortly, and my reward is with me, to give every man
according as his works shall be* It is not long, before the Lord Jesus will
come against thee in judgment, either particularly at the day of thy death, or
generally in the end of the world. And then, that God who has promised that,
Psalm. 15.1.5.
He which gives not his money to usury shall dwell in his tabernacle, and
rest in his holy mountain: He will take thee that do the contrary, and cast
thee into a clean contrary place, even into utter darkness, where shall be
weeping and gnashing of teeth.

And because the nature of worldly men is such, that the loss of their goods
will rende their hearts in pieces, when the fear of the loss of heaven will
not once stir their affections: therefore let me end my speech to them, with
that sentence of Solomon, where with I began this treatise: Pro. 28.8.
He that increases his riches by usury and interest, gathers them for him
that will be merciful to the poor. If God be true and this be the word of
God, let them fear, that as God took the goods Genesis 31.9.
of covetous Laban, and gave them to holy Jacob: so he will take the riches
which they have unlawfully gathered, from them, and from their house, and from
their children: and will bestow them upon others, who shall show themselves
better imployers, and disposers of his blessings. And least this sentence of
Solomon should seem to be a frivolous surmise, and want his due effect, let
me make relation of some examples, which Hemingius a godly and learned man,
has observed and recorded from his own experience. Heming. com* in lac. ^.
He says, that when he was a child there were only two usurers known, and of
note in the whole kingdom and country where he dwelt. One was a man but of
mean place, and dwelt in Chersoneso Cimbrica: so he names the place, and I
cannot otherwise express it, because I know not the country. This man grew
exceeding rich by le^ding upon usury, and died (as it seems) leaving
abundance of wealth. And yet after his death, the children that he left behind
him fell into extreme poverty. In so much that a daughter of his was found to
have not so much as a whole coat on her back to cover her nakedness, and was
many times seen, Obire sordidissimum ministerium, To do most base or vile
service to get her living: and yet could not thereby keep herself from
beggary. The other usurer, he says, was borne of a better house, and had much
wealth left him of his auncesters. But, following this trade, and growing very
rich thereby: it came to pass that afterward part of his goods were
confiscated to the crown, and the rest served to the maintenance of luxury,
and prodigality. To these I might add some examples of our own. And if we
were wise to observe the proceedings of God among us, it were no hard thing to
point out beggarly children that have descended from vsurarious parents. But
those are more safely commended to your secret meditations, then publicly
detected to the world. This only let me admonish you of, that as you tender
the continuance of that wealth which you love so well, and as you desire to
reserve it to the benefit of your posterity: so have a special care not to
increase it by usury and interest, lest God translate it from you to another
family, and make you to gather it for him, that will be mer^^full unto the
poor.

Last of all, since the sword is committed to the Magistrate that the evil may
fear, and since he is the minister of God for the suppressing of sin: let me
exhort him, that he bend the point and edge of his authority, toward the
throat of this unjust and uncharitable practice. Ye know that by the
statute, Statut. Anno 13. Elisab. ca. 8
Justices of Oyer and Terminer, and Justices of assizes in their circuites,
Justices of peace in their Sessions, Mayors, Sherifes, and Baylifes of Cities,
have full power and authority to inquire, hear, and to determine of the main
breaches of this law, touching the offense of usury. Let it never be reported
in the generations to come, that usury has in our time gone away uncontrolled
by authority, or that Magistrates herein have borne the sword in vain, or
that the country has not been in this case benefited by their government. And
the ecclesiastical governors I exhort, that since the same statute has given
them liberty also to punish and to censure the extremity of this evil: they
would bend themselves and their strength, to suppress this unchristian, this
heathenish, this Jewish kind of practice. It was the complaint of the commons
in France, Bertrand. contra Petrum de Coniers in Bibliothec. Patrum tom. 5.
colum. 889.
that the Officials were too strict, and too busy, and too gripple in
inquiring after usury: and that for covetousness of his goods they would
convent every man for an usurer, and draw him within the compass of that
default. But certainly, it may be the complainte of the commons of England,
that many Officials are too loose and remiss in pursuing of this offense. No
man is presented, no man is ascited, no man is convicted, no man is punished
ever since I could remember, by the ecclesiastical law for the committing of
usury. And yet the poor people every where complain of a number of men, that
by one means or other take above the rate of ten, yea of twenty in the
hundred: the punishment of which excess, the statute has flatly permitted
unto the ecclesiastical governors. And certainly the daily growth and
increase of this evil seems for to argue, that both Divines, and Lawyers,
both preachers in the church, and governors of the church have been too
sparing, the one in reproving, the other in punishing and suppressing this
enormitie. Luther said, Luthe. de taxanda. vsura. tom. 7.
Illi qui in scholis profitentur, diligenter haec inuentuti inculcare debebant:
They which are public professors in schools, should beat upon these points
diligently, to the youth that are their auditors. Et illi qui in foro causas
agunt litigatores, diligenter and serio hac de re debebant monere and edocere.
And they that handle causes in the courts, should diligently and earnestly
admonish and instruct the people of this matter. Yea, he would have
schoolemasters to teach their scholars while they are children, to detest and
abhor the very name of usury. But now, while men are neither taught to leave
this sin, nor punished for the committing of this sin: each man takes
liberty to do herein that which is right in his own eyes, yea which is
gainefull to his own purse. As if there were no king in Israel, that is, as
if there were no government, neither in the Church, nor common weal of
England. But thanked be God there is government in both: and that government
which I hope will be hereafter more vigilant in this case. To conclude: my
fellow ministers I exhort, that they lift up their voices as trumpets, and tell
the people of this sin. Heming. in lac. 5.
Non tamen sine spirituali prudentia: Yet not without spiritual wisdom: which
may direct us, when, and where, and to whom, and in what manner to speak of
this argument. But let us take heed that wisdom quench not our zeal, and
while we will become too discrete, we forget how forward we should be in
reproving of evil. If we be instant in admonition this way to the people, and
then seek unto God for a blessing upon our labors: it may be that our own
eyes may see in our time the languishing and decaying of this offense, to the
glory of God, and the benefit of his Church. To which God be honor, and to
which Church be peace both now and ever. Amen.

The end of the sixth Sermon preached Iulij. 2. 1593.
Barnard. sermon. 61. in Cant. Meritum meum Miseratio Domini.
M. M.

