THE MIRROVR or Glass of Health.

Necessary and needful for every person to look in, that will keep their
body from the Sickness of the Pestylence, and it shows how the Planets do
reygne in every hour of the day and night, with the natures and expositions of
the xii. Signs, divided by the twelve Months of the year.

And shows the remedies for diverse Infirmyties and diseases that hurts the
body of Man.

Imprinted at London, in Fleetestreate, beneath the Conduite, at the Sign of
S. John Euaungelist, by Hugh Iackson.

The Prologue of the Author.
I Do you well to wit that this Book profyteth greatly to every Surgion, for
to know in what sign, or in what degree of the sign, the sun and the moon
sits every day in any of the twelve signs, and not only it is profitable to
Surgions, but also to Physicians and to all that use to give medicines or
laxatiues, or to use any Bassions, or cutting, or letting of blood. For as the
Sun passes through all the twelve Signs by the space of a year, abiding in
a sign thirty days, right so does the Moon pass through all the twelve
signs, that in thyrty days, aabydynge in a Sign three score hours.

And as the Moon among all Planettes is next the earth in course, so she has
most effect of working in these earthly things after the disposytion of the
nature of the sygns that she has her course in. And therefore it is full
necessary truly, to know the state, the course, and the nature of the moon,
for thereby a man may know when it is good to begin many diverse things, and
when it is not good. And also what weather is most likely to fall, after the
nature of the signs, whether dry or moist, hot or cold, there shall follow
after the nature of the sign that she is in. In diverse conjunctions of
Planets that is joined therewith, and therefore naturally in order, I purpose
me to declare shortly in the sixth Chapter, the nature and the state of every
sign that she passes by.()

Here follows the Table of this present Book.
THE first part of this Book shows diverse causes, how the Pestylence may
be engendered. Capitulo.i. The second part shows, how man woman, and child,
should preserve and keep them from the pestilence. Capitulo.ii. The third
part shows, and if it be that man, woman, or child be taken with the
pestilence, what remedies and medicines is best therefore. cap.iii. After that
follows the seven days with the Planets. cap. iiii. How the Planettes
raygne in every hour of the day and of the night, and the first is the hours
of Sunday. Cap. v. The natures and expositions of the twelve signs divided by
the.xiii. Months of the year. cap. vi. For the headache. ca. vii. For the
aching of the head. ca. viii. For to spurge the head. ca. ix. Also for to spurge
the head. ca. x. For the toothach. ca. xi. For the ach of a hollow tooth. ca.
xii. Also for the toothach. ca. xiii. Also for the toothach. cap. xiiii. Also
yet for the toothach. cap. xv. For the stench in the mouth. ca. xvi. For
stinking breath. ca. xvii. for ach and worms in the ears. Capitulo. xviii. A
precious water for poison and specially against the pestilence ca. xix. for
running eyes. cap. xx. for red blered eyes. cap. xxi. for eyes that been
dasuned or dark. Capitulo. xxii. A precious water for the sight of the eyes.
ca. xxiii. for the pin and the web in the eye. Capitulo. xxiiii. For all
evils in the eyes. ca. xxv. for boiling in the eye. ca. xxvi. for a stinking
breath. ca. xxvii. for a hot swolen stomach. ca. xxviii. for the stomach
that aketh, comes of cold. cap. xxix. For to force the stomach. ca. xxx. For
the stomach and the belly that aketh. ca. xxxi. For a man that is sick at the
stomach or in the belly, or at the heart or head, or were bitten with any
venomous beast. ca. xxxii. For rising under the stomach. Capitulo. xxxiii. A
good plaster for the rysyng under the stomach. ca. xxxiiii. For heat in the
stomach. ca. xxxv. For brenning in the stomach. Capitulo. xxxvi. For to avoid
flume out of the stomach and the head. Cap. xxxvii. For all evils in the
stomach. ca. xxxviii. For a disease at the heart. Cap. xxxix. For weakness of
the heart. cap. xl. For faintness of the heart. cap. xli. For the heart that is
inco^bred. ca. xlii. For a man woman or child, that is broken in the bellye.
cap. xliii. A plaster to knit him. cap. xliiii. For that plaster in May. cap.
xlv. For to break wind in the belly. ca. xlvi. For a swolen womb. cap. xlvii.
For aching of the womb. cap. xviii. For the heart breaking. cap. xlix. For sore
sides within. cap. l. Contra telamet masculam in Oculo. cap. li. For a woman's
pape that is sore. Capitulo. lii. For the liver that is corrupt, and wasted.
cap. liii. For heat in the liver. cap. liiii. Also for the hete in the liver
of a man, that his color is yellow. cap. lv. For a man's breast that is
encombred. cap. xlvi. For a man that has worms in his belly, and his body
lean. cap. lvii. For the breast and the lunges. Capitulo. lviii. For to avoid
and destroy flume. Capitulo. lix. For the stone. cap. lx. Another for the
stone. cap. lxi. For the Colyke, Strangury, and the Stone. Cap. lxii. For a man
that is a leper, and it take in his legs, and go upward. cap. lxiii. For a
derte in a man's flesh. Ca. lxiiii. For a sauce flume vysage. ca. lxv. For him
that may not hold his water. cap. lxvi. Another for the same. ca. lxvii. For
to destroy flume. ca. lxviii. For a womb that is hard. ca. lxix. For the
bloody menyson. cap. lxx. For a man's stones that be swolen. ca. lxxi. For to
make one slender. ca. lxxii. For him that lacks wynd. ca. lxxiii. For him
that is costife. ca. lxxiiii. For a wicked blast in the vysage. Capitulo. lxxv.
For the shingles. ca. lxxvi. For the cough. ca. lxxvii. For the perrillous
cough. cap. lxxviii. Also for the chincough. ca. lxxix. For the Itch. ca. lxxx.
For to draw a byle from one place to another. cap. lxxxi. For him that pisseth
blood. ca. lxxxii. For him that has lost his mind. Capitulo. lxxxiii. Another
for the same. ca. lxxxiiii. For him that has the frensy. ca. lxxxv For one
that vomiteth to much. Capitulo. lxxxvi. For a disease in the ears. ca.
lxxxvii. For a man that his ears swones within. cap. lxxxviii. For synowes
that shrink after that they have been hurt, and blede again. Capitulo. lxxxix.
For to staunch blood. cap. xc. For to staunch blood. cap. xci. For the
empostume. cap. xcii. For spitting of blood. ca. xciii. For wild fire, that is
called the fire of Hell. ca. xciiii. For biting of a mad dog. ca. xcv. For to
do away a wen. ca. xcvi. For to break a felon in a night. Capitulo. xcvii.
For the megrim. cap. xcviii. for the Morfew. cap. xcix. For to stop the flix.
ca. C. for the Canker, wild fire, and ignis sancti Antoni. cap. Ci. for to
make heir to grow. cap. Cii. For to do away heir. ca. C. iii. for a scalde
head. ca. C. iiii. For the yellow Iaundes. ca. Cv. for the black Iaundes. ca.
Cvi. For worms and heat in the hands Capitulo. Cvii. For the Gout. ca.
Cviii. For sore knees that does swell and ache. cap. Cix. For the falling
evil. cap. Cx. For brenning and scalding. ca. Cxi. Also for brenning with
fire. ca. cxii. To heal hurtes and wounds. ca. cxiii. To make a Salve to
draw, and to heal. ca. Cxiiii. For stinging of adders, and Snakes Capitulo.
Cxv. For him that may not sleep. ca. cxvi. For the Palsye cap. Cxvii. A good
drink for the Pox. ca. Cxviii. A salve for the Pox. cap. Cxix. For the gowt or
the sweling of joints knobbes and knorres that comes of the ach of the pox.
Cap. cxx.
Here ends the Table.
Here begins the first part of this Book, that shows diverse causes how
the Pestilence may be engendered. Capitulo. i.
COnsydering that this treatise is very needful and necessary against the
sickness of the pestilence, and for a common wealth and health of the Queens
liege people, I Thomas Moulton doctor of Divinity, of the order of the Friar
Preachers, the which for to gather moves me for diverse causes, the one is
prayers of mine own brethren.

Another is cause of prayers of many worthy Gentles.

And another is compassyon that I have of the poor people, that was and is
destroyed every day thereby, for defaute of help.

And the fourth cause that moves the most of all, pure conscience, for every
christen man, and woman, is bound by the law of conscience, and they know
their even christen in great perril, or that is lykely to fall to great
mischief, to help them if he may by his wit with his travail, and with his
goods. And these four causes moved me to compounde and to gather this
treatise, and to set it in printe so in english, that every man both learned
and lewd, rich and poor, may the better understand it, and do thereafter.
And so every man, woman, and child to be their own Phisytion in time of need,
against the vengeance and corruption of the pestilence, that now is reigning
with other diseases many mo, and this treatise for the pestilence is divided,
and parted in.iii. parts, and consequently insueth the seven days with the
Planets, with the natures and expositions of the xii. signs, divided by
the.xii. months of the year, with the remedies for many diverse other diseases
that hurts and greeueth the body of man.

And the first part of this book tells diverse causes how the pestilence may
be gendred.

The second part tells how man, woman and child, shall preserve and keep
themselves from the pestilence, if so the man woman or child be cutable, that
falls therein.

The third part tells the remedy, help, and medicine against the
pestilence.

In the first part I say of this treatise, as I told, be showed diverse causes,
which may be the ground of this Pestilence that now reigns, I find by the
treatinge of four Doctoures, the four Pillars that vpholdeth holy church,
that is to say S. Auste^, S. Ierom, S. Gregory, and S. Ambrose, where they
speak of this matter, they say, that syn that raygneth among the people, and
namely that sin that reigns among head men, and the governors of the
church, and of the law, is cause of the Pestylence Vengeance, taken for sin.
Hereof I find ensample and Figure in holy Wryt, in the second book of
Kings, in the.xxiii. Chapyter. There shows holy Writ openly, that for the
sin of King David, God sent unto him his Prophet, and gave him choice of three
things, whether that he had lever that GOD should send upon him for his sin,
and of his people, hunger seven year, or else he had leauer that he should
send upon him pursuit of enemies, and to be overcome of them three months, or
yet that he had lever that he should send upon him Pestilence three days and
three nights. And than King David truly chose Pestylence, so that from that
time, that he had chosen thus pestilence, or it was none of the day, there was
dead. xxvii.M. of his people. And then King David saw that vengeance was taken
for his sin by pestylence, mourningly with great sorrow and great compassyon
of heart, he cried God almyghtye mercy, and when he had done, anon the
pestylence seaced. And for sin that reigned in the people, hydyous pestilence
has been taken, as was showed on Jerusalem, as tells Vincent in speculo
Historiali, and Eusebius tells the same. Therefore every man in what degree
or what state he be, put away sin thorough heartily sorrow, and very
contricion, asking of good mekely mercy and forgiveness entyrely, and amending
their life, then he puts away the cause of pestilence, that in case his
vengeance taken for sin, and sothlye, saving we ought not to deem lightly of
Gods priuities, this may be well one cause of that hydeous pestilence, that now
is reigning.

And they say generally in this realm, and truth it is that many tokens are
showed, that men likely deem that this sin is cause in part of this
pestilence, as the corrupt air and the venime thereof, the which was caused
by a conjunction of Saturn and Iouis, the which Planets their working within
few years, and the malice of thy complexion, and of other sin, this left
in the air and beneath, the which malice and venime has his respect and his
influence more in the complexion of man then of beast, in as much as the
working of ye conjunction and of other sin was more principally in the sin of
mankind, then in the sin of another manner of beast. But the working of other
conjunctions diverse are before hand had their working in the signs of other
beasts, and their influence in ye co^plections of the^. And therefore the
malice of the conjunctions was cause why that the morel fell of such beast,
more then of other that time, but this conjunction aforesaid, the which was
wrought more principally in the sin of mankind, more then of any other, whose
venime and malice yet reigning, is the cause of the corruption of the air, the
which air corrupt, is cause of the Pestilence that now is reigning, but
nevertheless if so that it be impossyble by: all Philosophers, that the
Elemente of the Air, should in his own kind, and in his own substance be
corrupt or else infecte, sythen it is simple and clean is his substance,
wrought without any venom or corruption. Nevertheless yet by the way of
vaporous fumosytyes and humors the which that are corrupt and drawn from the
earth beneath, by virtue at tractife of the bodies that been above, and minged
with the air, so by accidental cause is the air corrupt and in part cause of
this pestilence. But than thou may meue against me, and say that if so were
that the venomous air, and the corruption thereof should be cause of
pestilence: or else man, woman, and child, should be infect thereby, that it
seems every man, woman and child, should be infect and corrupt by the
pestilence. In the country there y^ air corrupt is reigning, sythen the air
in such a place is common to al manner of men. To this answered Auicen in his
Canon in the part there he treats, De cura februm: that if all the pestilence
air be reygning in a country, and if it be common to all the inhabitants of
that country, yet there shall none be infect therewith, but they that be
repleat, and full of corrupt humors, the which corrupt humors have their
respect, and acording to receive the corruption and the venime of the air,
else in what country, or Cittye that such air were corrupt or venomed, in all
manner of men that receives that air in the same country, or in the same
cittye, should be venomed and dead thereby, ye see well and know well, that the
Element of the fire, has no predomination nor will not bren, but matter that
is combustible, and according to receive fire. On the same wise the Elemente of
the air that is pestilence corrupt, in fecteth neither man, woman, nor child,
but such as have such venomyd and corupt humors within them self disposed to
the same, the Pestylence thereof in such time that such pestilence air
raignech in.

After dyuersity of venomous humors and corruption in men reigning. And
through the working of that venomous pestilence air or diverse sickness and
perilous gendred in man, woman, and child. And this alteracion in kind, is
wrought by the malice and influence of the coniuction aforesaid, the which
malice of coniunctio^, is likewise to be cause of many other wonderful
alteracions betwixt King and King, Lord and Lord, man and man, woman, and
woman, father and son, brother and brother, and many other. Also it is lykely
to be cause of deposing of Lords out of Lorshippes, and inhaunsing and
inhighing of knaves. And Emperoures of mighty men, spoiling and destroying of
Kyngdoms and Lordships. And also it is like to be cause of great fyres, great
mists and great water by land. And cause of many great perils by ye sea.

Also it is lykely to be cause of many wonderful tokenings of great winds, and
many other wonderful things. Also destroying of many cities, and principally
of the Sarisins sect, and of many other wonderful sickness. Also the Sismy of
holy Church is lykely to cease, and diverse states to end, and therewith many
things is lykely to fall, by the judgment of Astronomy, ye which I will not
write for diverse causes. But know it well all manner of men, that these
things, I rehearse not as things told by prophesy, but as conclusions
following and showing by Astronomy, and also by Astrology, for as declares
Ipocras in his Book, that he made (De Epidimia) there shall never Phisytion be
true in working ne sure Practisor of Physic, but he work and practice by
rules of Astronomy, for Ipocras says, that it is impossible yt a man shall
cure a sickness, but if he know the cause of his sickness, there is some
sycknesse that is caused by moving and working of the bodies above, the which a
man may not know without Astronomy and Astrology, than it seems well that it
is impossible to a man to cure sickness generally, but he can of Astromye and
of Astrology. For as I find in Lybro Interprecationem, all the four Elements
and al other things beneath, that been compound of them, are gendred by the
course of the planets above, and all the lively bodies beneath have in part,
there being their heal, and the sickness by the moving of the bodies above.

Thus ends the first part of this Pestilence Treatise.
Here follows the second part that shows how man should preserve and keep
him from the Pestylence. Cap. ij.
THe second part of this Treatise is how thou shalt govern and preserve thy
self from the malice of the Pestilence air, and from the venime and
corruption that is gendred thereby, the which party is principal cause of
this pestilence that now is reigning. The first and the principal preservation
there against, is this. To govern thee well and wiselye, and for to fly all that may gender any Fever or Ague. First, thou needs to keep thee severally
from all manner of excess and outrage of meat and drink, and namely from all
manner of Feuores meats, as Gose, Dove, Byrds, Malards, Venison, Lampray,
Scate and Eeles. And also other Feuores meats, eat no great meat, no Onyons,
nor leekes, nor garlike, nor no fruit. For all these gathers and ingendreth
vnkyndlye heates, and so brings a man to an ague, and he be in any wise of
nigh disposytion thereto, and use no Bathes nor Stues, sweat not to much, for
all opens the pores of a man's body, and makes the venomous air to enter,
and for to infect the blood, and the spiritual members of man, and for to
destroy al lively spirits in man. Also keep thee from haunting of lechery, for
that both opens the pores, and destroys the kind natural, and also
enfeebleth the spiritual members, and the lively spyrytes of man.

Also in the time of pestilence, in no wise suffer to great thirst, and if
thou thirst, look thou drink but mesurably, and not but for to slaken thy
thirst, and namely such drinks as will abate thy heat, as is Tisan water
mingled with vyneger, or water of Borage, water of let use, water of Roses,
water of Scabious, water of Turmentill, water of Diten mingled in even
portions, or else by them self. For these drinks if the Pestylence reign in
the heat of the summer been profitable, and soueraynly to them that been
colorike of complexion, for they be hoater and dryer the^ other, also to sleep
on afternones and when thou shall go to bed, shut thy doors and thy wyndowes
close, and in an earthen pan full of Charcole fire, cast this powder made of
these things, of Lorell leaves, dried Rosemary, and dried Frankensence, of each
of them a like much, and cast half a sponeful of this powered in the fire.

Also use fire in thy chamber all the times of the day and of the night, of
these things, as fire of Ienoper and if you may not get this Ienoper, make the
fire of clean dry Ash wood and use to cast in the fire always Frankense^ce,
Storax, Calamint, Lapdanum, and the fumosities of these and the smoke if the
air be corrupt, of the virtue actractiue of ye lively spirits, and the
spiritual members outward by the veins of the heart, and so inuenomes it, and
these hastes a man to his death. But if the nature of the Pestilence be
gendred betwixt the thigh and the body, it is a tokening that it comes from
infection of the liver, and than if the matter appear in ye scher beside the
privy members, bleed on the foot in the same side, on the vain that is
betwixt thy great toe, and the next toe, for if the botch be drawing thither.
And thou blede on the arm, the matter the^ will draw up again to the liver,
and so to the heart and that is perrillous. And if the botch be more outward to
the side, and farther from the preuy members, blede the^ on the vayn between
the anckle and the foot, and the heel, or else on the vain that is under the
ankle that is called the Sophem: or else look yt thou be soon ventused with a
ve^tosing, best beneth the botch, but that is very paynful. Nevertheless in case
that the vayn may not be taken or else that the vain may not bleed, it must
needs be suffered, in such perrill may thou be. If the matter appear in the
clensing part of the head consider well on what side it appears, and bleed on
the vain, or on the arm the which vain lies next the Cardiacle, the which
Cardiacle lies in the midst of the arm, right in the bouth of the arm, or
else blede on the vain that is on the hand, that is betwixt the thombe and
the next finger, or else be ventosed betwixt the shoulders. But take good
heed, that when so ever thou haste bled of any of these veins, take good
heed that thou sleep not after thy blood letting of.xiii. hours. If thou be
rich and may well spend, then it were good to have this Pomamber, evermore in
thy hand, hold it to thy nose that thou may receive the savor and smell thereof,
for co^forting of the brain, (and of all other Spiritual members, the which
thou shalt make thus, take Lapdanum, pured one ounce storax, calamint,
disolued Roses, Cloves, Maces, of each one three halfepeny wayght, and make the^
in powder, that ought to be made in powder, and five sponeful of oil debay, an
ounce of Virgin wax, and dissolve them, and when they be dissolved, put all
together and myngle them well, unto they be cold, and make thereof a ball the
quantity of a walnutte, and that is called the Pomeamber, the sent or the
smell thereof will comfort the lively spyrites in man, and if thou rule thee
thus as I have taught thee, thou may by the grace of god and by his governance
preserve thy self from the Pestylence.

Thus ends the second part of the Pestilence treatise.
And here follows the third part that shows and a man be taken with the
pestilence, what remedy and medicine is best therefore. Cap. iij.
HEre the third part of this treatise, tells what is against this sickness
of the pestylence, that reigns among the people, and what medicine is best
therefore. Auicen in his Canon on the part, there he treats De dura februm,
there is no sickness that falls in kind but there is medicine in kind for it.
Therefore if so be it be taken in due time, than if thou shalt fall into this
sickness, look that thou be letten blood, as I have told. And if there be any
fever, or any ague annexed thereto and the corrupt blood be drawn away, on
this bleeding as I have told. (And the princypall members ventused,) the heart
ought then to be comforted with good Letwers, or with cold water stilled, the
which Letwers be these, that will withdraw vnkindlye heates, as conserve of
Vyolets, conserve of Borage, conserve of Buglos drawn with sugar, decoct with
water of Turmentill, water of Endive, Water of Roses, water of Borage, mingled
by even portion. And then take these every day, and every hour of the day,
with water of Turmentil, water of Scabious, water of Vyolets, or else water of
Endive.

Also it were needful to have this water distilled of these herbs, of Detan
of Scabious of Turmentill, of Vyolets, of Endive, and Letise, and for to drink
these mingled with white wit of Gascan, or else of Rochell wit, and namely,
the whilst that unkindly heat reigns.

Also it were needful to have water of Roses, and Byttayne to wash thy
temples withal, and thy pulse withal, of thy Arm and thy hands.

And also it were needeful to take of the last, that is to say of Rose, and of
(...) and put thereof in a saucer of pewter, or in a silver piece, and chause it
of little, and ^^p a linen Cloth.iiij. wide, and were it therein. And the
(...) thou art in thy great heat of the agrie, lay the linen cloth were in
the water upon thy temples, and upon thy forehead, and another upon thy liver.
Take also two other clothes lapped and were on the same wise, and lay in
every armehole one, and this practysyng shall do thee great ease, whether
thou be curable and shall live, or incurable, and shall die.

But the most nedeefull thing of all, if so he that this were in any wise
aforesaid, is for to draw the botch by craft away from the clensyng place a
great space from the heart. And that shall I tell the how, and in all my
practisyng in Physic this.xviij. year, I wyft it never fall but twyse, and
that was not long of the medicine. And one other time but of other defautes the
which I will not write, at this time, though it will expel, and vorde it. And
look in the time of pestilence that thy codmares be always freshlye washen, and
after the washing, look that they be dipped in the fine water of Roses, and on
the same wise the kerchefe that thou lappest thy head in on nights, and let
it dry by the fire: and not by the pestylence air. And when thou layest thee
down to sleep, lay under thy head and under the end of thy pillow that is
toward thy vysage, Rosemary, Isope, Souerayn mynts, Perial, Rial, Lorel leaves,
put in thy mouth Maces, and Cloves, or else Nutmegges, look every day yt thou
take of fine Treacle proved the quantity of a bean, and a half. Also bear in
thy purse these manner of spyces, Maces, Cloves, Duybybes, Canel, or else
Cynamon, and chewe thereof, and eat thereof all the times of the day.

And if thou be a poor man, and may not intend to the costs of these
things. Take then every day fasting, mine syppes in fine vyneger of white
wine, or else of read wine, and drink to them a saucer full of Vyneger, or
thou pass out of thy house or place.

Also one of the best governance of all, is in blood letting, for thou shalts
understand that a man is in spirytuall members principal, that is for to say,
the heart, the liver, and the brayn, and every one of these has his place given
him by kind, by the which he may avoid al such superfluities, and clear
himself.

The heart has his clensing place in the arm hole.

The cleansing place of the liver, is betwixt the thigh and the body.

The cleansing place of the brayn, is under the ears of the ear roots, and
the throat.

Then this sickness of the pestilence comes thus, when the poores of a man
are open, then first enters the venomous and the corrupt air, and as soon
as it has maistry, and mingled with man's blood, then runs it to the heart,
that is root and ground of man's life, for to destroy mankind, and for to
infect and destroy all lively spirits in a man, and so fynallye for to kill
and flea him, but the heart and the clean blood, flies all that is noyous,
and contrarious unto kind. And in as much as in him is expelled all such manner
of corruption, and venomous from him, to his clensyng place to the armehole:
But than for that place is sometime stopped that it may not out, and it passes
then all the principal member, next that is the liver for to destroy it.

And then it does as the heart does in his kind. And expels it from him to
his clensing place, betwixt the thigh and the body, for it is also spared in
case, and stopped it may not out, but passes the meats and the veins unto
the third principal member, that is the brain, but then he would expel it to
his clensing place that is under the ears, and it may not in case out,
therefore the stopping and the sparing of the meats and poores and for
thickness of the foul and corrupt blood, and the venomous matter is moving,
that is mingled therewith, and thus long time the matter is moving or it
rests in any place, sometime twelve hours, and sometime.xxiiij. hours, and
sometime more and sometime less, after the degree and the gentleness, and the
greatness of the sickness corruptions and venomous that be gendred. But the^ at
the last sometime within.xxiiij. hours, it passes not out of ye clensing place,
nor at no other place thorough bleding, then it festures in some place and cast
a man into an ague and makes a botch in some of the three cleansing places, or
else next to them on some vain, ye shall well wit that a botche groundeth him
evermore and sets him on a vain, and lets the blood that than it may not
have his kind lie course by the vain as he should have, but it is infect
thereby. And so all the principal and spyrituall members are infect, and thus
sleieth men.

Thus ends the third part of this Pestilence treatise. And hereafter
follows the.vij. days, with the Planets. Capitulo. iij.
IN these seven planets thou oughtst to know that the Sunday has his doing
under the Sun.

The Monday under the Moon.

The Tewesday under Mars.

The Wednesday under Mercurye.

The Thurseday under Jupiter.

The Friday under Venus.

The saturday under Saturn.

Note-well that all the true act and operation, ought to be made under this
Planet and is best and it be made on his proper day of the Planet, and the
hour proper exempte.

Under Saturn is the life edifyce, doctrine, and ^^tacion comprynse.

Under, Jupiter, obtayn honor, richesse, and gay costly garments.

Under Mars, battle, prison, marriage, and inimite.

Under the sun, Esperaunce, Gain, Fortune, and Heritage.

Under Venus, Love, socyetye, Life, loving, and Pilgrymage.

Under Mercury, sickness, Mysery, Death, and fearfulness.

Under the Moon, sloth, evil thoughts, and theft.

Here follows, how the Planettes reign in every hour of the day, and of
the night. And the first is the hour of the Sunday. Cap. v.
THe first hour of Sunday reigns Soll, the second Venus, the third
Mercurye, and fourth Luna, the fyfte Saturn, the syxte Iupyter, the seventh
Mars, the eyghte Soll, the ninth Venus, the tenth Mercury, the.xi. Luna, the.
xii. Saturn.

The hour of the Sunday night.

The first hour Jupiter, the second Mars, the third Soll. the.iiij. Venus,
the fyfte Mercury, the syxte Luna, the.vij. Saturn, the eyghte Jupiter, the
ninth Mars, the tenth Soll, the eleventh Venus, the twelf Mercury.

The hours of the Mondaye.

The first hour Luna, the second Saturn, the.iij. Jupiter, the fourth Mars,
the fyft Soll, the sixth Venus, the seventh Mercury, the eight Luna, the ninth
Saturn, the.x. Jupiter, the leuenth Mars, the twelfe Sol.

The hours of the Monday night.

The first Venus, the second Mercury, the third Luna, the fourth Saturn, the
fyfte Jupiter, the syxte Mars, the seventh Soll, the eyghte Venus, the.ix.
Mercury, the tenth Luna, the eleventh Saturn, the.xij. Jupiter.

The hours of the Tewesdaye.

The first Mars, the second Soll, the third Venus, the fourth Mercury, the.v.
Luna, the.vj. Saturn, the seventh Jupiter, the.viij. Mars, ye.ix. Sol, the.x.
Venus, the.xi. Mercury, the.xii. Luna.

The hours of the Tuesday night.

The first Saturn, the.ij. Jupiter, the.iii. Mars, the fourth Sol, the.v.
Venus, the sixth Mercury, the seventh Luna, the eight Saturn, the nynth Jupiter,
the.x. Mars, the.xi. Sol, the twelfe Venus.

The hours of the Wednesday.

The first Mercury, the second Luna, the third Saturn, the fourth Jupiter,
the.v. Mars, the syxte Sol, the seventh Venus, the eight Mercury, the ninth
Luna, the tenth Saturn, the eleventh Jupiter, the twelf Mars.

The hours of the Wednesday night.

The first Sol, the second Venus, the.iii. Mercury, ye.iiii. Luna, the.v.
Saturn, the sixte Jupiter, the.vii. Mars, the eight Sol, the.ix. Venus the.x.
Mercury, the.xi. Luna, the.xii. Saturn.

The hours of the Thurseday.

The first Jupiter, the second Mars, the third Soll, the fourth Venus, the
fyfte Mercurye, the syxte Luna, the seventh Saturn, the right Jupiter, the
ninth Mars, the tenth Soll, the eleventh Venus, the twelfe Mercury.

The hours of the Thurseday night.

The first Luna, the second Saturn, the third Jupiter, the fourth Mars, the
fyft Sol, the syxt Venus, the seventh Mercury, the eight Luna, the nynth
Saturn, the tenth Jupiter, the.xj. Mars, the.xij. Sol.

The hours of the Friday.

The first Venus, the second Mercury, the third Luna, the fourth Saturn, the
fyfte Jupiter, the syxte Mars, the seventh* Soll, the eyghte Venus, the ninth
Mercury, the tenth Luna, the.xj. Saturn, the twelfe Jupiter.

The hours of the Frydaye night.

The first Mars, the second Soll, the third Venus, the fourth Mercury, the
fyfte Luna, the sixth Saturn. the seventh Jupiter, the eight Mars, the ninth
Sol, the tenth Venus, the eleventh Mercury, the xii. Luna.

The hours of Saterdaye.

The first Saturn, the second Iupyter, the third Mars, the fourth Sol, the
fyft Venus, the sixte Mercury, the.vij. Luna, the eyghte Saturn, the ninth
Jupiter, the.x. Mars, the.xj. Sol, the.xij. Venus.

The hours of the saturday night The first Mercury, the second Luna, the
third Saturn, the fourth Jupiter, the fifth Mars, the sixth Sol, the seventh
Venus, the.viij. Mercury, the ninth Luna, the.x. Saturn, the.xj. Iupyter,
the.xij. Mars.

Note that Jupiter and Venus be good, Saturn and Mars evil, Sol and Luna
indifferente, Mercurye is good with them that be good, and evil with them that
be evil.

Also note well that the hours of the planets been differente, to them of the
Clockes, for the hours of the Clocks he egal always of.lx. minutes but they of
the planets when the day and the night been egal, that yt sun is in one of
the Equinocts, they be ^gall, but as soon as the days longs or shorteth, so
does the natural hours, by this it is conuenyent always for the day to have
twelve temporal hours, and the night.xii. temporal hours, and when the days
be long, and the hours long, and the days short, and the hours short, in
likewise the night, and nevertheless, an hour of the day, and an hour of the
night, both together has.lx. minutes, as for two hours artificyals, that the
one leaves and the other takes. And then take we out Planets from the sun
rysyng, and not before upon the sun going down, and then all the remnaunt is
night, and about the month of Dece^ber, the days have but eight hours,
artificials of the Clock, and they have twelve temporals, then let the eyghte
hours Artificials be divided in twelve egall parts, and it shall be twelve
times.lx. minutes, and every part shall be a temporal hour, that shall be of a
fortye minutes, and no mo, thus in December the temporal hours of the day have
but forty minutes. But the hours of the night have.lxxx. minutes. For that time
the nights have but sixteen hours artificials if they be divided in the
twelve parts, be.lxxx. minutes, for every temporal hour of the night in
December, have.lxxx. minutes and.xl. For an hour of the day, been six score
mynutes in two temporal hours, as many in twelve hours artificials, that
been each of forty minutes, in the month of June is the contrary, in March and
in September all hours be equal, as is the days in other months by equal
portion.

Thus ends the.vij. Planettes, upon the.vij. days in the week.

And hereafter follows the natures and expositions of the.xij. signs, divided
by the.xij. months in the year.
March has the sign of the Ram. And is indifferent for taking of purgacion,
and is very good to let blood.

ARies is a sygn moveable, hot and dry, colorike, nature of fire, and has
Lordship in man's head, and the face, and the parties longing to the head, when
the moon is in that sign beware of cutting in the head, or in the face, or in
any vayn that longs to the head.

Also it is perrillous in the beginning of Aryes, to take any headache, or any
hurting in the head, for it were ^^ken of long during, or else of death, but it
is not so perrillous in the end of it, and this sign is moveable Oriental, of
masculyne kind, then is good to work all things that is wrought with fire,
and it is good to take vyages toward the east, and it is good to let blood on
the arm, and to bath thee, and to sow seeds and to make matrymonies, and to
begin all good works, that would soon have end, and is evil to do things
which thou would should last long, for as much as the Ram is a beast, that
raungeth, and casts up again the meat that he eats tofore. Therefore there
then should no medecyne nor passion be taken inward, while the Moon is in
that sign, for all natural medicines and passions received in that time, men
should cast them up again, and so it falls in all the signs that been
raunging, as Aries, Taurus, and Caprycorne, and the last party of Sagittarie.
In all these there should no passions be given, for dread of casting up
again. For this Sign ryseth out of the Orient, and causes the time to be
hot and dry. The man that is borne under the sign of Aries, by kind of
complexyon is Chollorick, and shall be witty and wise, and deceyueable, small of
bones, yellow of color and kind of heart. The Sun enters into the sign of
Aries, the.xv. Kal. of March, and dwells therein unto the.xvj. Kalen. of
April.

And in the Month of March is.iij. perrillous days to take any sickness upon,
that is to say, the.xv.xvii. and the.xix.

April has a sign of the Bull, and is evil for to take purgation. And also
evil to let blood.

THe Moon being in Taurus, that is the sign of the Bull, the which sign
reigns in the neck and the throat it is then perrillous to be ventused in the
neck, or catch sickness in ye throt and much more perrilous in the beginning
than in the end, this sign is steadfast, Merydyonall that is of the South
party, he is cold and dry, earthly, and of feminine kind, and melancholy of
complexion, it is then good to sow seeds, to plant trees and vynes, for
they shall redily grow and it is good to build houses and to wed a wife, and
every thing to do that thou would have long to endure, and stably to abide.
It is evil to begin battle or to fight. For it causes the time to be cold
and dry and the wind to have his course nigh the earth, and the skies to fly
abroad by the earth.

The man that is borne under this sign, is by kind of complexion melancholy,
unstable and untrue, white lyuered and scarce of his purse. The sun enters in
the sign of Taurus the.xv. Kalen. of April, and dwells therein unto the.xvi.
Kalen. of May.

And in this month of April is two perrillous days to take any manner of
sickness on, that is to say, the.xvi. and the.xxi.

May has the sign of two twins and is indifferent to take purgacion, and is
evil to let blood.

WHen the Moon is in Gemini, that is the sign of two twins or two children
of one birth, the which Sign reigns in the arms, and the hands of a man.
This sign is double bodied and occidental, that is the West party, and is
Sanguine of complexion, hot, and moist, after the air. In that time beware of
cutting in the shoulders, arms and hands nor in that time upon no vain in
those places.

It is good that time to treat of friendship, and when the moon is in the
sign of Gemini, beware of letting of blood, for it is evil, and specially in
the blumes, for Gemini governs them, and if one take the sickness in a house
and dye, all the other be in great danger to die of the same. The man that is
borne while the moon is under the Lordship of this sign, he shall by way of
kind be very wise, privy and true, he shall have.iij. wives and he shall
travail mighty fast to purchase worshippes, the Sun enters the sign of
Gemini, the.xv. kalen. of May, and dwells therein till the.xvi. Kalen. of
June. And in the month of May is three dangerous days, that is for to say,
the.vij. the xv. and the.xx. June has the sign of the Creuis. And is good for
to take purgacion, and is indifferente to let blood.

Cancer is a sign moveable cold, moist; flumatick and watrye, and has of
man's body the breast and the stomach, the spleen and the ribs, when the moon
is in this sign, it is good to begin a way by water, and is meetely good to
take medycines, but beware to wed any maid when the sign is in Cancer. And if
any man takes sickness in any time while the Moon is in the sign of
Cancer, it is great fortune if he dye not. For it is perrilous both in the
beginning and in the end, this sign is septentryonall, that is of the north
party, also it is evil to build houses, or to set trees, or to begin any
thing that shall last long.

The man that is borne while that the Moon enters in this sign, he shall be
feminine of face, melancholyous, faint hearted and white of skin, and he shall
love a woman which shall grieve him, his destiny shall be hard in his youth, but
when he is past xxx. year, he shall have a maladye in the raynes, and he
escape he shall live by kind a hundred year.

The Sun enters in the sign of Cancer, the.xv. Kalen. of June, and dwells
therein to the.xvj. Kalen. of July.

And in this month of June, is two dangerous days to take sickness upon,
that is to say the.iiij. and the.vij.

July has the sign of the Lion, and is evil to take purgation, and very
evil to let blood.

FOr Leo is a sign steadfast, Oriental, hot, and dry, chollorick, nature of
Fire, Masculyne kind, and has of man's body the sides and the back sinowes,
bones and gristles, beware while the moon reigns there of ventosing or
cutting, or harm catching in those places, for it is full dangerous in ye end of
Leo, to take sickness, more then in the beginning, for then he may relieve by
good governance, and it is evil to give medycine to the heart or stomach, and
the veins touch with iron.

A man that is borne while the Moon enters in the sign of Leo, by kind he
shall be holden easy, he shall take a wife, a heady strong woman, he shall be
loved as the Lion among the beasts, and he shall have great power among strong
men. The sun enters in this sign, the.xv. Kalen. of July, and dwells
therein, till the.xvi. Kalen. of August.

And in this month of July is two dangerous days to take any sycknes upon,
that is to say, the fifteen and the twenty.

August has the sign of a Virgin and is evil to take purgation, and
indifferent to let blood.

VIrgo is a sign double bodyed, meridionall, that is of the South part, cold
and dry, Melancholy of complexion, nature of the earth and of Femine kind,
and has of man's body, the womb, middrife and guts, the liver, Gall and
mylt. But chiefelye in the lims beneath the middrife, then beware of breaking
or cutting in the belly of priuye places within.

Also it is perrillous for a man to take any sickness in the beginning
thereof, but not so perrillous in the end, but rather token of health, it is
not good to wed a maid, for she will be barrayne, but it is good to wed a
widow.

The man that is borne under this sign, he shall be well loved, and a man of
great pity, and wise, and live much in ease, his name shall be good among all
manner of men, he shall have worship in his age, he shall have a sign in the
head. The Sun enters in the sign of Virgo, the.xv. Kalen. of August, and
dwells therein unto the.xvi. Kalen. of September.

And in the month of August is two perrillous days to take any sickness on,
that is to say the.xix. and the.xx.

September has the sign of the Ballaunce, and is good to take purgacion, and
is very good to let blood.

LYbra is a sign moveable, hot and moist, Sanguinaryus, and has the over
part of a man, and the neither end of a woman, that is to say, the nauill, the
raynes, and the low parties of ye womb, and the share, when the Moon is in
Lybra, it is good to let blood, and is best to make medycines for the navel,
and to do al thing yt thou would have brought to end, and this sign is
Occidentall, Sanguine of complexion, and of masculine kind. And it is good to
begin that shall long last. And know well from the degree of Lybra, to the
degree of Scorpyo, it is evil to begin diverse things, for the moon is that
time in the worst.

The man that is borne under this sign, he shall be well beloved, and good shall
never fail him, he shall have a sign in the neck, or in the shoulder bone,
he shall be in great peril till that he be thyrty year old, and then shall he
come to great worship. The sun enters in the sign of Lybra, the.xv. Calendar
of September, and dwells therein till the.xvi. Calendar of October.

And in the month of September is two perrillous days to take any manner of
sickness on, that is to say, the sixth, and the seventh.

October has the sign of a Scorpion, and is good for to take purgacio^s, and
is indifferent to let blood.

SCorpio is a sign of a Serpente, cold and moist, flumaticke, nature of water,
Septentrional, that is of the North party, and has of a man's body the privy
members and the bladder, and when the Moon is in this sign, it is good to
give medicines to the members of man and woman, and to take laxatyues, and to
make all things that shall last long, and it is good to make a way by water.

The man that is borne under this shall love well the company of women, and have
other men's heritages, he shall be Melancholyus, his words, shall turn well,
in age he shall be in travail, and in the head he shall have a token, or in the
face, he may live by kind.xl. year. The sun enters in the sign of Scorpio,
the.xv. Kalen. of October, and dwells therein til the xvi. Kalen. of November.

And in the Month of October, is one perrillous day, that is to say, the sixte
day.

November has the sign of ye Archer, and it is good to take purgacion, and
also it is good to let blood.

I Do you to wit that Sagittarius is a sign of an Archer, and double bodyed,
hot and dry, nature of the fire and coloricke of complexion, and of masculyne
kind, Oriental, that is of the east party, and this sign reigns in the
thighs, and loddoges of man, and then beware of cutting of two places, and
then is good to let blood, and to treat of peace, and to wed a wife, and to
make all medycynes that is made with fire.

The man that is borne under this sign shall be hastye and bold to do folly,
and he shall have a sign in the cheek or in the shoulders, he shall be bitten
of a dog, he shall have tribulations, he shall have sickness in his eyes, he
shall have two wives, and the second shall beguyle him, and he shall wax sick
at.xl. winter, and he escape, he shall live by way of kind a. C year. The Sun
enters into his sign of Sagittaryus, the.xv. Kal. of November, and dwells
therein, til the xvi. Kalen. of December.

And in the month of November, is two perrillous days to take any manner of
sickness on, that is to say the.xv. and the.xix.

December has the sign of the Got, and is evil to take purgacion and is
evil to let blood.

CApricornus is a sign moveable, and unsteadfast, of the South party, endly
cold and dry, Mellancholly, nature of the earth, and of feminine kind, and
has of man's body the knees, when the moon is in this sign, it is good to make
medicines to the knees, but beware of cutting or hurting thereof, for dread of
touching of the senowes and veins, for it is perrillous while the moon
reigns there, and greater perrill in the end then in the beginning.

The man that is borne under this sign, shall be wise, fair, and hasty, and
he shall have a token in the head, or in the knee, he shall be Mellancholye, and
he shall live by kind a C. year, as Astronomers says, ye sun enters in the
sign of Capricornus the.xv. ka. of Dece^ber, and dwells therein till the xvi.
Kal. of the month of Ianuarye.

And in the Month of December, is six perrillous days to take sickness or
any disease on, that is the.iii.vi.vii.ix.xv. and.xvi.

January has the sign of a man sheding water, and is good to take purgation,
indifferent to let blood.

AQuarius is a sign steadfast, Occidental that is of the west party, hot and
moist, after the kind of the air, and sanguine of complexio^, and has of man's
body the shankes, unto the end of the ancles, and when the moon is in that
sign, it is good to set trees, and build, and to wed, and is evil to take
sycknesse in all times while the moon reigns there.

The man that is borne under this sign of Aquarius shall be worshipped, he shall
be good and true, and well beloved, and have often headache, he shall have a fall
from riches, but he shall be happy in the weast country, and he shall be in
perrill of water.

The Sun enters in the sign of Aquarius, the.xv. Kalen. of January and
dwells therein till the.xvi. Kalen. of February.

And in the Month of Ianuarye is eyghte perrillous days to take sickness, that
is to say, the first, the second, the.iiii.v.x.xv.xvii. and the.xix.

February has the sign of three Fyshes, and is good for to take purgacions,
and is indifferent to let blood.

PIsces is a sign common, double bodied, Septemtryonal, cold, and moist,
watery, flumatick of complexion, and of feminine kind, and has of man's body
the feet, than is it perrilous to let blood, or open any vain in that place,
and if a man take sickness in any time of that sign it is not right great
perrill, but it is good to go to counsel to accord and to make all thing that
may go by water, and to make a thing that shall last long.

The man that is borne under this sign of pisces, shall be a great leachour and
go far a pilgrimage, he shall have an evil hurt in his head, in his youth he
shall have many maladyes, he shall fall in water, and escape well, he may live by
kind a. C. year, and if he will have good, he must dwell in the North. The
sun enters in this sygn of pisces, the.xv. Kale^. of February, and dwells
therein, till the.xvi. kalen. of the month of March.

And in the month of February is iij. perrillous days to take any manner of
sickness on, that is to say, the eight, the tenth, and the.xvii.

Thus ends the natures and expositions of the.xii. signs, divided by
the.xii. months of the year, upon blood letting, with ye most dangerous
days for to do any thing touching Physic.

And hereafter follows the remedies for many diverse infyrmities, and diseases
that greeueth and hurts the body of man.

For the headache. Capitulo.vij.
TAke Hemlock and sees them, till they be soft as pappe, then lay them to
the head where the pain is, and let them lie all night, and on the morning lay
another hot plaster of the same, and do so two or three times, and he shall
be whole.

For aching of the head. Capitulo.viii.
Take and make lie of Veruayn or else of Betayne, of Wormwood, and therewith
wash thy head thrice in the week, and it shall do thee good and take away the
ach.

For to spourge the head Capitulo.ix.
Take the Seed Stauisacre, and beat it small to powder, and when it is beten
small, take a fine linen cloth, and put the powder therein, and make thereof a
little ball, the quantity of a great hasell Nutte, and put it to thy mouth,
and roll to and fro, betwixt thy teeth chawing, holding down thy head the
space of an hour, and it will spurge thy head and thy gums, and keep thy
teeth from aching.

Also for to spurge the head. Cap. x.
Take the rote of pelater of spain, and chew it betwixt thy teth, to and fro a
good while, and it will spurge well thy head, and also fasten thy teeth and
spurge thy gummes.

For the toothach. Cap. xi.
Take Betany and wild gordes, and seth them in wine, or else in Vyneger, and
then put it in thy mouth as hot as thou may suffer, and hold it a good
while in thy mouth, and it will take away thy pain.

For the ach of a hollow tooth. Capitulo. xii.
Take Assa fetida, and put it in thy toth that is hollow, and it will appease
and take away the ach.

Also for the toothach. Cap. xiii.
Take Henbane and bruise it, and hold it between thy teeth a good while, and
lay it also upon the tooth that aketh, and it will swage the pain anon.

Also for the toothach. Cap. xiiii.
Take the seed of Henbane, and cast it upon a Chafing dishe of Charcole fire,
and hold thy mouth over the fire, that the smoke may enter into thy mouth, and
then hold thy mouth over a Basen of fair clean water, and thou shalt see
upon the water as it were small worms that shall come dropping out of thy
mouth, also take the seed of Henbane and beat it to small powder and meddle
it with wax and make a little pellet that it may be full of powder without forth,
and put it in the hole of the hollow tooth that aketh, and it will lightly slay
the ache of the tooth.

Also for the Toothach. Cap. xv.
Take the rote of He^ban, and sees it in vinegar til the third part be soden
away, and with ye same wash thy mouth and hold thy mouth full a good while and
it will slay the tothach. Also take the rote of henban, and hold it between thy
aching toth, and it will do away the pain.

For the stench in the mouth. Cap. xvi.
Take the juice of Veruayn, and bruise it, and put it in thy mouth, and hold it
a good while close in thy mouth, and it will take away the stench.

For a stinking breath. Cap. xvii.
Take oil Doret, Turpentine, honey, oil Olive, Virgin wax, as much of one, as
of another, and boil them al together, and make an oynment thereof, and use it
every day in the patients nosethrils, and let it be put into the nose every day
in the morning with tents made of lynt, scraped of fine linen cloth, and he
shall be hole.

For ache and worms in the ears. Cap. xviii.
Take the juice of henbane and put it in to thine ears and it will take away
the ach and slay the worms in them.

A precious water for poison and specially against ye pestilence. ca. xix.
Take Turme^til, Scabious, Golds, betayne, and Pimpernel, of euerich alike
much, and distill thereof a water, and drink it fasting every day in the morning,
first next your heart, for it shall do much good.

For running eyes. Cap. xx.
Take black snayles, and sees them in fair water, the^ take the greece that is
on the water, and therewith anoint thy eien that be watery and runs.

For red bleared eyes. Cap. xxi.
Take the juice of Rue, and powder of commen, meddle them together, then take
coten and dip it well therein, and lay it thereto, and anoint the temples, and
the brows and the lids of the eyes therewith, and they shall be hole.

For eyes that been dasuned or dark. Capitulo. xxii.
Take the root of red Fenel in winter, and in so^mer the leaves, or else both
rotes and leaves, and stamp them and wring out the joyce, and temper the ioice
with fine clarified honey, and make thereof an ointment and anoint the eien
therewith, and it shall put away the darkness, and it shall clear thy sight.

A precious water for the sight of the eyes. Capitulo. xxiii.
Take Smalage, red Fenell, Iue, Veruain, Betain, Egrimony, Pimpernel, Enfrage,
Sauge, Sale^dine of euerich a like much in quantitye, and wash them well and
clean, and stamp them, and put them in a fair brazen pan, and take the
powder of fifteen peper Corns, fair sareid into a pynte of good white wine,
and put it into the herbs, with iii. sponeful of lively honey, and five
sponeful of the water of a manchylde that is an Infant, and meddle them
altogether, and boil them over the fire, and when it is soden, strain it
through a clean linen cloth, and put it in a glass and stop it well and
close, til you will occupye it, and when need is, do thereof into the sore eyes
with a fether, and if it be waxen dry, temper it with good white wine, for it
is very good for the sight of the eyes.

For a pin and a web in the eyes. Capitulo. xxiiii.
Take a curtesye of clean claryfyed honey, and as much of woman's mylk that
norisheth a maid child, and for the woman, the man child, and sees them
together, and when it is cold, put it in a Glass, and close it from the air,
and thus do two or three days.ii. or.iii. times every day and he shall be
hole.

For all the evils in the eyes. cap. xxv.
Take clean clarified honey one part, and more then of half the honey, and of
the gal of a Hare, meddle them together in a vessel over ye fire, but make it
but luke warm, and keep it in a glass but beware that you take not to much thereof
in thine eyes, for the quantity of a small pinnes head, is enough at once when
thou go to bed, and that is sufficient for.vii. years, if a man have a
pearl or a web in his eyes, and be it not dry, put thereto some deal more of
the gall, then of the honey.

For boiling in the eyes. Cap. xxvi.
Take May butter, and powder of comin, and stamp them together, and lay it on a
linen cloth to the eyes, and often times renew it when the boiling is swaged,
take safron, and woman's milk, and grynd them together, and drop thereof in the
sore eyes, and then thou shall be hole.

For a stinking breath. Cap. xxvii.
Take.ii. handful of powder of comin, and sees it in good white wine from a
quart till a pint, and drink this first and last always hot, and he shall be
hole within.ix days drinking.

For the stomach that is hot and swollen. Cap. xxviii.
For the stomach that is hot and swolen, take the rote of smalage and sta^p
it, or put it in sweet wine or in other good wine all a day and a night, and
then let it be passed through a a fair linen cloth, and put it in a clean
vessel, and use to drink a curtsy thereof every day fasting.viii. or.ix days,
and he shall be hole.

For the stomach that aketh, that comes of cold. cap. xxix.
For the stomach that aketh, that comes of cold, take an herb that is caled
Poleo and dry benes, an handful of singrin, and as much of this poleo, and put
it in a vessel with fair water, and let it sees there on the fire, till the
third part of the water be soden away, and put thereto sugar of Ston, and a
curtesy of honey, and drink it six days fasting, and he shall be hole.

For to force the stomach Cap. xxx.
To force the stomach, take Canell three poys, and one pois of Mastick, and one
poys of the paringes of Pomegarnades, and half a poys of Galingale, and stamp
all these together and temper it with honey that has been boiled of the fire,
and well scommed, and use of this as much as a Nut, every day during ten days
fasting, and he shall be whole.

For the stomach and the Bellye that aketh. Capitulo. xxxi.
For the stomach and the belly that aketh, take the flower of a herb that is
called Nemaham, that is like to Mynt, and it has a good sauoure, take four
poys of Cosmer, and seven poys of water, and sees altogether to the third
part, and with sugar drink this five days fasting in the morning, and he shall
be whole.

And if a man be sick at the stomach or in the belly, or at the heart or head,
or were bitten with any evil venomous beast, or poisoned. Cap. xxxii.
And a man were by the way trauayling, or in house, and he had all these
sicknesses, and he had with him a Lectuary yt is made of five things to eat
thereof, or drink thereof in water three poys or four, he should be hole, and
he use it fyfteene days fasting, and when he goes to bed least he should not
be hole of all the sickness in his body, and he drink every time two poys, and
these things they be, Scorlogio, Morre, Genciana, Gra^dorer, and Zataont, as
much of one as of another, and stamp them, and strain them, and meddle them
with honey that has bin well boiled on the fire and scummed fair and clean,
for this is called the lectuary of life.

A good medicine for risyng under the stomach. Cap. xxxiii.
Take pepper, long pepper, graynes, saffron, ginger, annyes, licoris, and
sugar, sees al these in good ale till it be thick, and give it the sick to
drink and he shall be whole.

Also a good plaster for the rising under the stomach. Cap. xxxiiii.
Take ye^ow, otherwise called milfoly, red Fenel, red Mints, Borage, Rue,
fetherfoy, clotes leaves, Peritorie, egrimony, of euerich a like much and the
greece of a barrow Hog for a man, and for a woman of a yelk Hog, that is of a
Sow kind, and seth the^ altogether in good ale, and make a plaster thereof,
and lay it to the stomach as hot as it may be suffered.ii. or three times, and
he shall be hole.

For to destroy the heat in the stomach. Cap. xxxv.
Take fair clear water, and boil it well, and scum it, and put therein shiuers
of brown bread, and let the^ lie therein an hour, till the water be almost
cold, and the^ drink thereof two or three days by diverse times, and he shall
amend in short time.

For bre^ning in the stomach. ca. xxxvi
Take and eat green percely, and galingale, without any other thing.

For to avoid flume out of thy stomach and the head. Cap. xxxvii.
Take powder of Pelatory of spayn, and powder of comin, powder of long peper,
powder of ginger, mustard, vinegar, and meddle them together, and chaufe them on
the fire til they wax thick, and then as hot as ye may suffer, put part
thereof in your mouth galking in your throat up and down, but let none enter to
your stomach, and do this diverse times spitting out by the space of an hour,
and this is gargarisme.

For all evils in ye stomach. ca. xxxviii.
Take ash seed, linne seed and Commin, of every a like much, and give it to
the sick body to drink with hot worte, or else with fair hot water.

For the disease at the heart. ca. xxxix.
Take ^^^uary, and sees it in stale ale, and when it is well soden, stamp it in
a mortar, and sees it again with the same lycour and then cleanse it through
a cloth and proporcion the ioice, put thereto three sponeful of clarifyed
honey, and boil it well together again, and put it in a box, and give it to
the pacient every day a.iij. sponefull fasting till he be hole, and this shall
do away the glut from his heart, and make him to savor his mete.

For weakness of the heart. Cap. xl.
Take Rose water, Pearls beaten small to powder, and meddle it with sugar, and
drink it two or three days.

For faintness of the heart. Cap. xli.
Take the fyling of Gold, and the powder of the bone of a Hearts heart, meddled
with the juice of Borage, and sugar, made in syrrope, for that is very good
forswoning.

For the breast that is incombred. Capitulo. xlii.
Take Isope and sees it in a pottle of wine till that it come to a quarre, and
let the sick use thereof, first in the morning, and last at even hot, and at
morrow cold, till he be hole.

For a man, woman, or child that is broken in the belly. ca. xliii.
Take in May the tender croppes of herb Osmonde, and dry them with the wind,
and not in the sun, and make powder thereof and sacre it, and keep it dry in
a bladder, and let the pacient drink of ye powder, with white wine even and
morrow, winter and so^mer, saving in May: in May drink of the te^dring of the
said Osmond, for this drink will make the broken belly green, as it were new
broken, and the Patient must be well and easilye trussed, that he or she may
go with it all day, and lie with it all night, till he be hole, and that will
be within fourteen days, if he be well ruled, for he must lie upright, as
much as he may, both day and night, and not strain his bellye, but as little
as he can. And he must keep him lax as long as he is sick, and lie in his bed
two hours in the morning after he has drunk this medicine, and must eat no
white meat till he be whole, nor walk but easilye for strayning.

The plaster to knit him. Capitulo. xliiii.
Take Polipodye that grows on an oak, the rotes thereof, and pare the clean,
and the rotes of Elenacampana, and pare them clean, and then beat them in a
mortar, as small as thou can, and temper it with Oil of Bay, and make it a
plaster thick, and lay it on a thick cloth a good quantity, and lay it
there the sick is grieved under the trusse, from the even till the morrow, and
on the morrow change it again, this is for all the year, save in May, then
the leaves be better.

For the plaster in May. Cap. xlv.
Take Polipone leaves, and the leaves of Elenacampana, and daysye leaves and beat
them small, and temper them with oil of bay as thou seem best, to make a
plaster, and lay it there the sore is, even and morrow, and he shall by the
grace of God be whole.

For to break wind in the bellye. Cap. xlvi.
Take Commin, Fenell seed and annis beaten in powder, then sees it in wine,
and drink it first and last.

For a swolen womb. Cap. xlvii.
Take the juice of Rue, and let the pacient drink it with wine or ale, and he
shall be hole on warrantise.

For aching of the womb. Cap. xlvii.
Take Tansye, Rue, Sothernwood, and eat them with salt, and he shall be hole.

For the heart brenning. Cap. xlix.
Take the crop of Fenel, and chew it in thy mouth, and suck the juice thereof
and spet out the other part, and he shall be hole.

For the sore sides within forth. Cap. l.
Take Alesanders, Persly, Louage, red fenell, Smalage, Burnet, and Gromell, and
sees them in white wine, till half be consumed, then strain it and let the
sick drynk it first, and last, at even hot, and at morrow cold.

Contra telamet masculam in oculo. Capitulo. li.
Take fenel, unset Goldes, Veruayne, and Betaine, Aum, and stamp them and
temper them with Ale, or white wine, and strayn it, and then stamp nine
lowpes, otherwise called Cheflocks, and put them in the said lycour and give it
to the Pacyent to drink, nine days followyng, and he shall be hole.

For a woman's Pappe that is sore. Cap. lii.
Take the root of Bryan, that is to say, wild Neppe, and make bare all the
over part of the said rote, and that is to say, the top of the rote, and make
an hole therein, and cover it with the tyle stone, and put it in the earth, and
lay earth upon it, and let it stand so four or five days, then open it, and
take the juice that ye find in the hole and keep it in a Glass, and therewith
anoint the breast and it shall be hole.

For the liver that is corrupt and wasted. Capitulo. liii.
Take a good quantity of Lyuer-worte, and bruise it a little, and then sees it
in good strong worte with a quantity of Rubard, and use this medicine, and
thou shalt be whole.

For the heat in the Liver. Cap. liiij.
Take the juice of four apples, and sweet apples, of each a pound or more, as
much as you think best, and two pound of sugar, and meddle these things
together, and let them boil on a simple fire, till it be thick as syrope, and
use a curtesy thereof every day fasting, with luke warm water.

For the heat in the liver of man, that his colloure is yellow. Cap. lv.
Take the water of Sicore, and water of Letuse, and water of the leaves, and
small branches of a wild morger tree, or else take the herbs and stamp al
these together, and as much one as of another, and take the juice of these
things, and as much as all this of Sugar, and boil all together till it be
as thick as a Syrope, and then put thereto a poys and a half of Rubard, and
use a quantity of this syrope and cold water every day fasting, and at night,
and he shall be hole.

For the breast that is incombred. Capitulo. lvi.
Take and drink this eight days or.x. of the Fumer that comes of sylke
worms every day a poys, in syrope of Isope, and if a man may not have this
drink, take the pure heart Daulignam also in syrope of Isope x. days and he
shall be hole.

For a man that has worms in his belly, and his body be lean. Cap. lvii.
Take the Gall of a Cow, and flower of lupious a curtesy, and meddle them
together, and make a plaster of wool, and lay it on his belly, where the grief
is, and do this four or five days, and he shall be hole.

For the breast and the lungues. Capitulo.lviij.
Take a quarte of claryfyed honye, and boil it, and when it is boiled, put
thereto half a pound of Pere wardens mynsed, and boil them well together, and
then put thereto an ounce of powder, made of the rotes of Elenacampana, and a
ounce of powder of lycores, and let them boil till it be somewhat stiff, then
take it from the fire, and when it is nigh cold, put thereto an ounce of
powder of Ginger, and stir it well together, use this first and last.

For to avoid and destroy flume. Capitulo.lix.
Take persly rotes, fenell rotes, Perytory, and Isop, and sees them in good
ale with licore, and a quantity of claryfyed Honye and use to drink it, and
thou shall behole.

For the sto^e. Cap. lx.
Take the rotes of Thornebacke, and dry them fair, and make powder thereof,
and then take thereof.i. pence weight, and put thereto two sponeful of water of
Ramsyns, and drink it every day and every night, and than thou shalt be
hole. And if it be a great stone, take a sponeful of water or sto^erop, two
sponefull of water of Ramsyns, and two penny weight of the aforesaid powder
meddled together, and use this medicine.iii. times, and thou shalt be helped,
be the stone never so great.

Also for the stone. Cap. lxi.
Take the blood of a male Kid, and dry it in an oven, and make powder of it,
then take gromelseede, ground Iue beries, stanmarch seed, the root or the
sede of Saxfrage, rotes of turme^till, and of Phylipen^ula by even portion, and
beat it all t^ small powder, then take as much^ of the powder of kiddes blood,
as of the seeds and roots abouesayd, and use this in powder wha^ ^^eede is,
in sauce or in Potage, a penny weight at once, and no more.

For the Colic stranguary, and the stone. Cap. lxii.
Take Careaway, Fenell seed, spicknarde, annes, Comin, Cynamon, and Galingale,
of euerich half an ounce, gromell seed, and lycores, of euerych of them an
ounce, sees weight of all them, and beat them al to powder; and put half a
sponefull of the same powder in ale luke warm, and drink it, and walk
thereafter an hour, or thou eat or drink any manner of thing.

For a man that is a Lepper, and it take in his legs and go upward. Cap.
lxiii.
For a man that is a Lepper and it take first in his legs and go upward into
his body, he may be soon hole, and if he will take Charobote, that is to say,
a Bettill and brenne it to ashes, and beat it all to powder small, and then
take barrowes greece and melt it well on the fire, and temper it together, and
as much as half that of Blanchet, and make Oyntmente thereof, and use it on
the sore, and upon the ointment, look that ye put a plate of lead full of
small holes in many places, and change it both in the morning and at night
the Oyntmente, but not the lead, and he shall be hole of that sickness.

For a derte in a man's flesh. Cap. lxiiii.
Take a worm that* is called Pieacher, that is as great as a been, and is
clean blewe or sender, and it has many small feet, and white under the belly.
And when a man touches it, he waxes round, as a Butten, take the worm, and
rub it well against the derte that it be all broken, and do this every day
three or four times, and at every time, rub three or four worms, and anon it
shall be hole.

For a sauce flume vysage. Ca. lxv.
Take Elenacampana, and sees it in a pot with Vinegar, till it be sodden in,
than stamp it small, and than put thereto quick silver and Brimstone, and
giltes greece, and bray it together, and make thereof a plaster, and lay it to
thy vysage all night, and on the morrow wash it often.

For him that may not hold his water. Cap. lxvi.
Take goats talow, and bren it, and make thereof powder, and put it into the
Patients Potage, and let him use this, and he shall piss measurablye enough.

Another for the same. Cap. lxvii.
Take Synshone and sheep talow and sees them well together, and as hot as
may be suffered, lay it to the member, and he shall make water anon.

For to destroy flume. Cap. lxviii.
Take Betayne and dry it, and make thereof powder, and keep it till thou have
need, and when thou will ocupye thereof, take a quantity of honye and of the
powder, and make thereof two or three pellets, and swallowe them down all
hole, last when thou go to bed, and that shall do thee much good.

For a womb that is hard. Cap. lxix.
Drink the juice of weybred with old wine, and he shall be hole.

Also another for the same.
Take Cinkfoyle, that is to say five leaued grass, and stamp it, and drink it
with hot milk, and he shall be eased.

For the blody manyson place. ca. lxx.
Take Mylfoyle, and Plantyne, of euerich a like much, stamp them well together
and keep it, and when thou will take thereof, and temper it with wine, and let
the pacient drink it, and he shall be hole.

For a man's stones that be swolen. Cap. lxxi.
Take an herb that is called Mare clee in french, and frye it well in oil
Olife, and lay it to the stones that is so swolen, as hot as it may be suffered
eyghte days, or more and need be, for this will heal the swelling.

For to make one slender. Cap. lxxii.
Take and sees fenell in water, and drink the water last at even, and first at
morrow, and it shall swage him or her shortly.

For him that lacks wind. Capitulo. lxxiii.
Take mallows Mercury, and Borage, and sees them together with a piece of
pork, and make thereof Potage and eat it, and drink the broth, with white
wine, or with whey that is made of milk.

For him that is costyfe. Cap. lxxiiii.
Take the juice of walwoorte and meddle it with honey, and give it to the pacient
to drink.

For a wicked blaste and wind in the vysage. Cap. lxxv.
Take a hen egg, and roast it hard, then take the white thereof, and an ounce
of coperas, and beat it together small in a brazen mortar, till it be like an
oyntmente, and therewith anoint thy face that is blasted, and when it is hole,
then anoynte it with Populyon, and that will souple the skyn, and make it whole.

For the Shingles. Cap. lxxvi.
Take Doves dongue, and Barlye meal, and stamp them together, and temper them
with aysell, and lay it thereto.

For the cough. Cap. lxxvii.
Take Nettles, and gather them between saint Mary days in Harvest, of them
that bears seed, and dry them in the sun, and rub out the seed, and
grynd it, and drink it withal, and thou shall be hole.

For him that has the perrillous cough. cap. lxxviii.
Take sage, rue, comin, and powder of peper, and sees them in honey, and make
thereof a lectuary, and use thereof a sponfull at even, and another in the
morning.

The cough that is called the Chicough. cap. lxxix.
Take the roots of Horsheele, and Camfyre, as much of one as of another, and
stamp them small in a mortar, and sees them in a fair water, till the half
be wasted, and then take the third part of honey boiled and scummed, and put
them together and make thereof a Lectuary, and do it in a box, and let the sick
use thereof five days, or vi. a good quantity at once, first and last, and he
shall be hole.

For the Ich. Capitulo.lxxx.
Take frankensence and bray it small, and meddle it with Oil of bay, and then
anoint whereas it itcheth.

For to draw a byle from one place to another. Capitulo.lxxxi.
Take a herb that is called Oculus christi, and veruain, and make a plaster
of it, and lay it from the byle two fingers broad, and when it has line a good
while, remove it, and do so still til it be there as thou would have it, and
there let it break.

For them that pisseth blood ca. lxxxii.
Take Persely, Ambrose, and Bursapastories, of euerich a like much, and stamp
them, and temper them with a quarte of gotes milk, and strain it, and let him
drink it iii. days, at even and at morrow; and this will staunch him shortly.

For him that has lost his mind. ca. lxxxiii.
Take the juice of golds, of sage; and of wormwood, of euirich of them a
sponefull* and take as much of white wine and put thereto, and let him drink it
at even* and as much at morrow cold, and serve him thus five days during,
and he shall be hole.

Another for the same. ca. lxxxiiii.
Take and sh^ue of the heir of the molde of his head, then take Archaungell,
and stamp it, and bind it to his head where it is shaven, and let him take a
sleep therewith, and when he waketh, he shall be right weak, and sober
enough. etc.

For him that has the frensye. Capitulo.lxxxv.
Take oil of roses, oil of vy^lets, and of euerich of them.xx. poys, and as
much of water of Concord, and put it in a new vessel of earth, and boil it
till all the water be failed, then put out that, and put in other in the same
vessel as much of that water, and boil it thus.vii. times, and then put
thereto half of the.iiii. part of the poys of ca^fere, and meddle it well
together, and use it on his head, when it is new shaven.

For a person that vomiteth to much. cap. lxxxvi.
Take Roses, and boil them well in good strong vinegar, make a plaster
thereof, and lay it to the persons stomach.

For a man that has a disease in his ears. cap. lxxxvii.
Take fair oil olyfe, and let it be blown out of a man's mouth that is clean
and fasting, into the ears of the sick man, and let this be done.iii. or.iiii.
times, and let that side of the head be turned downward, that the odure of the
head may run out, and use this viij. or ten days, and he shall amend.

For a man that his ears swones within. Cap. lxxxviii.
Take Almondes, and the Carnels of Peaches, and let them be clean pilled in
hot water, and make oil of them, and let that oil be put into the ears of
the sick body, with tents made of fine linen cloth, and use this.viii. or
ten days, and he shall be hole.

For synowes that shrink after that they have been hurt and healed. cap.
lxxxix.
Take ensence, calasome, mastik, hantit, turpentine, galbenon, visque, the mary
of an Ass, shepes suet, old swines greece, and butter, and of eueriche of them
half an ounce, than take an ounce and an half of wax, and an ounce of oil
Olife, and stamp them, and boil all these things together, and make it in
manner of an ointment hard, to make playsters, and then make thereof a plaster,
and lay it on the hurt senowes, and let this lie.xv. days or more, and they
shall stretch out.

For to staunch blood. Cap. xc.
Take an herb that is called, Lunenahaf, and stamp it, and lay it on the
wound, or take the grene leaves thereof and lay it on the wound, and it shall
staunch, and if a man may not have this herb, let him bren the feathers of a
Cocks neck, and take the ashes of them, and lay on the wound, and the blood
shall soon be staunched.

Also to staunch blood Cap. xci.
Take a piece of salt befe, that is well salted, or else a piece of salt beef
that hangs in the rofe, and cover it in hot embers till it be through hot,
and take as much as will stop the hole, and bind it fast to, as hot as the
patient may suffer it, and it shall staunch anon, but let the befe be fat and
lean together.

For an Empostume. cap. xcii.
Take barlie, and dry benes, and licores, and let boil the^ with fair water
altogether, of euerich a like much, and drink thereof with sugar, every day
fasting, and at night when he goes to bed, and use this.vi. days or more, and
he shall cast out that postume.

For spitting of blood. cap. xciii.
Take ache, mintes, rue, and betain, and sees them well in good milk, give it
him to drink first in the morning, and last at night, and he shall be hole.

For wild fire, that is called fire of Hell. cap. xciiii.
Take red worms of the earth, and the rote of Valerian, and stamp them
together, and lay it thereto, and take valerian the rote, and the leaves, and
stamp it, and temper it with water and give it him to drink, and he shall be hole.

For biting of a mad dog. ca. xcv.
Take the seed of Box and stamp it and temper it with holy water; and give it
him to drink.

For to do away a wen. Cap. xcvi.
Take and bind fast the Wenne, then take verdigrece, sulphur, Soap, oil of
eggs, alam, and honey, and temper them together, and lay it thereto, and it
shall do away the wenne, and heal it without doubt.

For to break a felon in the night. Cap. xcvii.
Take powder made of Cantarides, and temper it with sheep tallow, and make a
plaster thereof, and lay it thereto and it shall break.

For the Megrim. Cap. xcviii.
Take four handful of red rose flowers fresh in summer, and in winter welked,
and three handful of Camomill, and as much of Veruayne, and break them small
with thy hands and boil them in a pottle of white wine of Gascoyn, if it may
be had, or else in Rochell wine, till it come to a quart, and put them in three
bags broched flat like a plaster, and lay it where the ach is, as hot as the
sick may suffer, and change them hot and hot during a day and a night, and
longer if need be.

For the Morfew. Cap. xcix.
Take the water of elder, and drink it iii. sponeful in the morning ii. or three
times, and when ye receive it, walk after, and catch a good heat, and than
take a pynt of white vyneger, and.ix. oak apples and cut them, and lay the^
iii. days and three nights in the same vinegar, and after take a fair linen
cloth, and put the apples in the same cloth, and strain them, and with the
licour thereof anoint thy body four days, and it will do away the morfew.

For to stop the flyx. Cap. C.
Take an onyon, and roast it till it be tender, then bruise it and lap it in a
linen cloth, and put it betwixt the clift of the buttockes, even joining to
the foundament, and set him down thereon, as hot as he may suffer, a long
time, and take another onyon, and pluck out the core, and fill the hole full of
frankensence, and english saffron, and take the covering of ye onyon, and cover
the hole, and put in the embers, and let it boil till it be somewhat tender,
then put away the covering, and lay the onyon as hot as it may be suffered upon
his nauill hole and bind it fast that it fall not away, and he shall be hole.

For the Cancre, wyld fire, and Ignis sancti Antoni. ca. Ci.
Take and roste Sorell in a wet linen cloth, the space of an half hour under
the hot embers, and then stamp it with fine clarified honey, and lay that to
the sore, and without doubt it will do away the brenning blacknes and stinck,
and heal it perfectly.

For to make heir to grow. cap. Cii.
Take and sees malowes, rotes and al, and wash the place thereas the heir
lacks, and it shall grow.

For to do away heir. cap. Ciii.
Take horseleeches, and burn them to powder, and meddle with eysell, and touch
the place where the heir grows, and it shall grow no more there.

For a scald head. cap. Ciiij.
Take a penniworth of lamp oil, and half a pynte of fair water, and boil it
well together, and when it is cold put thereto half a peniworth of quick
silver, and temper it well together, and anoint thy head.

For the yellow Iaundes. Ca. Cv.
Take a quantity of Turmeryke, and as much of Iuery beaten to powder, and as
much of the inner bark of a berberye tree, and a quantity of english saffron
in powder, and meddle them all together, and drink it three or four days
fasting.

For the black Iaundes. Ca. cvi.
Take genciana, long pepper, Calamus, aromaticus, auencis, licores, resyns of
coraunce, white soap of spayn of euerich three.i. and.ii. sponefull of mustard,
boil all these in a quarte of wine till the third part be wasted, and let
the pacient drink it.

For worms and heat in the hands Capitulo. Cvii.
Take chickweed and bruise it a little, and then sees it in running water, till
the water be wasted half away, then take and wash the sore hands therein, as
hot as the paciente may suffer it, and do thus.iii. or.iiii. days, and he
shall be hole.

For the gowte. cap. Cviii.
Take red mintes, and cressons, and unset leekes, and let th^^e herbs sees well
together, and wash there as the sickness is, every day.ii. times a day, and
if he cannot have these herbs, let the sick body be washed with hot water,
and anoynte him before the fire, or in the Sun with this ointment and rub him
well therewith, take Virgin wax, turpentyne, Saffron, the yolke of an egg, oil
olyfe, oil of Almonds, may butter, oil of nuttes, oil doret, the greece of a
male hog, oil of camamil, and sheep suet, with good claryfyed honye, and
let all these be meddled together, and boiled fair and easily by the fire.

For sore knees that does swell and ache. Cap. Cix.
Take rue, louage, and stamp them together, and put thereto honey and make thereof
a plaster, and lay it to the sore knees, and that shall fetch away the
swelling, and the ach.

For the falling evil. Cap. Cx.
Take the blood of his little finger, that is sick, and write these three
verses following, and hang them about his neck.

Jasper fert Mirram, thus Melchi or Baltazarum.

Hec quicumque secum portat, tria nomina regum.

Soluitur a morbo, domini pietate Caduce.

For brenning and scalding. Cap. cxi.
Take fresh Geese dong, and frye it with fresh butter, and sheep suet, and
strain it through a cloth, and lay it on the sore, and it will heal it anon.

For brenning with fire. cap. Cxii.
Take the rynde of a clyne tree, and sees it half a day in fair water, and
let it keele, and gather of the thick that thou fyndeste upon the water, with
a feather, and every day anoint with the feather even and morrow.

For to heal hurtes and wounds. Capitulo.Cxiii.
Take mallows and sees them well and when they be well soden, take and stamp
them, and then take old Barowes greece, and clean Barley mele, and mingle the
juice, the meal, and the greece altogether, and make a salve thereof, for it is
a ready healer.

Also to make a salve to draw, and to heal. cap. cxiiii.
Take a quarter of a pound of Vyrgin wax, and.ii. ounces of sheep suet, and
melt them together a little, and then take them from the fire, and put thereto
an ounce of frankensence, and stere it well together and do it in a box and this
will both draw and heal.

For stinging of Adders and Snakes. Ca. Cxv.
Take dragons and drink it, also stamp Dragons, and lay it to the place
there the stinging is, and that shall suck out the venime, and ease the smarting.

For him that cannot sleep. Capitulo. Cxvi*
Take petimoral and stamp it, and wring out the juice, then take four
spooneful of the juice, and four sponeful of woman's milk, and a sponeful of
vinegar and hete it, and therewith anoint his temples and his forehead and as
it dries anoint it again, and the^ wete a cloth therein, and lay it upon his
forehed, and use this often times, and this shall make him sleep.

For the Palsye. Capitulo. Cxvii.
Take the Gall of an Ox, or of a bull of one color, if it may be gotten, and
iii. or.iiii. red onyons, and roast them till they be tender, and then stamp
them well in a bole dish, and mingle ye gall, and the^ together, and look
there be iiii. times as much of the gall as the ^nyons, and therewith anoynte
well the place that is greeue^, till it be broken, and then take a soft sheet
new washen, and warm it again the fire, and wrap the sick body therein, and
this must be used at night, to bedwarde, and within.ix. nights it will amend
and make the flesh grow, though it be much away, and if the skin be waxen
thick by vanishinge away of the flesh, take red netle rotes and rub well the
skin, and the oyntemente will better drink in, and this ointment is good for
all manner aches for every body.

A good drink for the pox. cap. cxviii.
Take salendine, and english saffron, the weight of a half penny, and a farthing
worth of grayns, a quartern of long pepper, a penny weighte of mare, and stale
ale, stamp your herb and powder your saffron, and meddle them all together, and
then drink it.

A salve for the Pox. cap. Cxix.
Take white lead.i. quarter of verdegrece.ii.d. ob. mastik.i.d. camfere.i.d
rasen.ii. ounces ^erious i.d* mercury, ob. turpentine, break al these in a
mortar, and meddle your turpe^tine with oil olyue, and then mingle them
altogether, and make thereof a salve.

For the gowte, and swelling of joints, and knobs that comes of ach of the
pox. Ca. cxx.
Take may butter, and half a pound of comin, and a quarter of a pound of black
soap, and a handful of rue* and a little of sheep suet, and stamp all these
in a mortar, then take the gall of an Ox, and and sponeful of bay salt, and
frye all these together in a fryingpan till it be thick, then lay it in a
woollen cloth, and lay it to the ach as hot as it may be suffered, during.iii.
weeks, and every weke a new plaster, and it shall take away the ach and the
swelling without doubt.

For the Crampe. ca. Cxxi.
Bero berto bert^ro, these (...) be said three times when the Crampe came upon
a man or a woman.

For the spots of the morfew. ca. cxxii.
^ost four (...), and put them broken all hot into a (...) with a (...) of
vinyger, and let it stand so three days and three nights well stopped, and then
cleanse it through a linen cloth, and wash the spots therewith, till they be
away.

For to put away the rot of the Morfewe. cap. Cxxiii.
Take (...) eight ha^dful, ^orage s^a^ious of each ^oure handful, and ^ray them
together in a small (...), and put thereto a pott^e of clean whaye, then strain
them together, and (...) it over an easy fire, til it have a heart of scum then
set it down and strain it clean, and set it over the fire again, and put
thereto clarified honey, and boil them together clean, that is to say, boil
the^ easily, as long as any scum will arise, or else ye may clarifye it with
eggs, who so clarifieth whay and take thereof viii. sponeful, or a good draught
or.ii. as ye think best or a good quantity, for it shall do much good.

For a Child that is iawfall, or moldfall, or rofefall. cap. cxxiiii.
Take a handful of chickweed, and lap it in a red cole lefe, or else in a
linen cloth, and roast it in hot embers, in the fire, and it shall be a grene
salve and then lay the said salve to the bone in the neck, as hot as it may
be suffered, and take sour leven of white bred and from it on the mold of the
Chyldes head as a plaster, and it shall raise up the bone or molde by the
grace of God, within nine hours.

For the mother. ca. Cxxv.
Take moderwort, called the mother of all herbs, that is to say, shortly
^^gworte, herb Simond, Sauery, and red Minte, and drink this juice wythred wine.

For all fever agues, and for young children sucking the breast. cap. Cxxvi.
Take powder of Christiall, and lay it to soke in wine, and give it to drink
to the nurse of the child, and the sucking child shall be hole, also take the
rote of inursus diaboli, with the herb, and hang it about the neck of the
child.

For to destroy poison. ca. Cxxvii.
Take a quantity of dragons, and a quantity of betaine, and a quantity of
plantayn, and make thereof worts and use them three days, and this shall
destroy poison and venim, but the most part must be dragons.

For the ague. cap. Cxxviii.
Take endive, sowthistle, dandelion, let use, sorell, of euerich a like much,
and still these altogether, and the water will be passing good for the ague.

For the hot ague, infected with pestilence take betimes. cap. Cxxix.
Take the juice of singrene, and the white of four eggs, and fair flower of
wheat, and meddle it well together and make thereof a fair plaster, and lay it
to the pacients sides, and than take the water of betaine, and the water of
pe^pe^nel, and the water of scabyous, and the water of turmentil, and water of
^adis of euerich alike much meddled together, and give the pacyent to drink.

For the gout. cap. Cxxx.
Take tansie, and wormwood, of each a like much, temperately enough of shepes
suet, acording to your herbs and frye them in a pan over the fire till it be
green, but beware it be not brent, and when ye will ocupy it, cast a sponeful
of linesede therein, and if it be the cold gowt, lay it to hot, and if it be
the hot gowt, lay it to cold winter and Summer.

To draw out ach. cap. Cxxxi.
Take Cantarides, and take of their heads, and stamp them four or v. hours in
good vinegar, and the^ lay them up on a plaster of diaculum, and above upon
them a fine linen cloth, or else fine double of lawne next the skin, and sow
in your (...) of a quilte, and lay it to the ache, and it will make it to
blister, then (...) it out with a needle, and the^ take this medicine
following, and it shall dry it,

For to dry the same. cap. Cxxxii.
Take ground Iuie a quantity and stamp it in a mortar, the^ take sheep suet,
and put them both in a pan, and fry them well together, til it be grene and
then ye shall strain it, and make of it a cake and when it is cold, make
thereof a plaster, brother then your Cantarides was, within four days after,
all shall be past and dry.

For the swelling in a man's knee, or leg that aketh. Cap. Cxxxiii.
Take a blew or a blanket woollen cloth, as much as will lap about the (...)
or leg, and then take the white of.ii. or.iii. hens eggs, and beat them well in
a dish, and spread it upon the cloth, so done, then take yolks and heat them
in a dish, and put thereto black soap, as much or more, and beat them well
together, and when they be well beten together, make thereof a fair salve, and
spread it thick upon the cloth on the white of the eggs merely thick, and
lap it about the sore knee or leg, and roll it, and let it lie three days,
and it will fetch away the swelling and the ache. ()

Finis.

