THE FIRST PART OF THE ELEMENTARIE WHICH ENTREATS CHEFELIE OF THE right
writing of our English tung, set forth by RICHARD MVLCASTER.



Imprinted at London by Thomas Vautroullier dwelling in the blak-friers by
Lud-gate 1582.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE MY VERY GOOD LORD, THE L. Robert Dudlie Earl of
Leicester Baron of Denbigh, knight of the most noble order of the garter and S.
Michaell, master of her majesty's horses, and one of her highness most
honorable privy counsel.
RIGHT honorable and my very good Lord, as the considerations, which enforced
me to offer her majesty the first fruits of my publik writing, were exceeding
great, so those reasons, which induce me now to present to your honor, this my
second labor, be not very small. Her majesty represents the personage of
the hole land, and therefore clameth a prerogative in dewtie, both for the
excellency of her place, wherewith she is honored, as our prince, and for the
greatness of her care, wherewith she is charged, as our parent. If honor be
the end of that, which is don, her place is to clame, if the common good, then
her charge is to challenge. Which both clame in honor, and challenge in charge,
did concur in one aspect, when I offered her my book. For mine own purpos was
to honor her place, with the first of my labor, and my book pretended to
benefit her charge with some general profit. Again being desirous both to
procure my book passage, thorough her majesty's dominions, and to lay some
ground for mine own credit, at the very fountain, how could I have obtained
either the first, without her sufferance, or the last, but with her
countenance? Whose considerate judgment if my book did not please, my credit
were in danger, whose gracious permission if it were denied, my success were
in despare. So that both my dewtie toward her majesty, as my souerain prince,
and my desire of furtherance by her majesty, as my surest protection,
compelled me of force to begin with her highness, by satisfying of my dewtie,
to com in hope of my desire, if the matter, which I offered should deserve
liking, as the course, which I took showed desire to please. Now my dewtie in
that behalf toward her majesty being so discharged, whom the presenting of my
book makes privy to my purpos, does not the very stream of dewtie, and the
force of de sert carry me straight from her highness unto your honor, whether
I have in eye your general good nesse toward all them, which be learned
themselves, or your particular favor toward my travel, which teach others to
learn? For in common judgment is not he to take place next after the prince in
the honor of learning, which all way by the prince most prefers learning?
wherein I do not se, that there is any one about her majesty (without offense
be it spoken, either to your honor, if you desire not to hear it, or to any
other person, which deserves well that way) which either justly can, or
unjustly will compare with your honor, either for the encouraging of students
to the attainme^t of learning, or for helping the learned to advancement of
living. Which two points, I take to be most evident proufs of general
patronage to all learning, to nurish it being grene, to cherish it being grown.
Of which your honors both first nurishing, and last cherishing of each kind of
learning, there is no one corner in all our cuntrie but it feleth the fruit,
and thriues by the effect. For how many singular men have been worthily
placed, how many needful places have been singularly appointed by your
either only or most honorable means? with this general consideration whereby
all men ar bound to your honor in dewtie, who either like of learning, or live
by learning, mine own particular does ioyn it self, with all officiousness,
and desire to do honor, where it has found favor. For I do find my self
excedinglie indetted unto your honor for your special goodness, and most
favorable countenance these many years. Whereby I am bound to declare the vow
of my service unto your honor not by the offering of a petie book alone, such
as this is, but by tendering whatsoever a thankful mind can devise in
extremity of power for so excellent a patron. And tho I begin the show of my
devotion with a very mean sacrifice, for so great a saint, (as what a simple
present is a part of an Elementarie, or an English ortografie to so great a
person, and so good a patron?) yet am I in very good hope, that your honor
will accept it, and measur my good will, not by the value of the present, but
by the wont of your goodness. For dewtie will break out, and an ishew it will
find, which tho it stream not great, where it springs first, yet is it as
pure, as where it spredeth most. Mo offerings, hereafter of the like sort, may
give it greater show, but none of any sort can show more good will. And so I
desire your honor to take it, in way of evidence to the world, that your
desert has bound me: in way of witness to your self, that I would return
dewtie. Mine own good will I know my self, of your good liking I nothing dout,
whose honorable and ordinary disposition is, to take things well, which taste
of goodwill. I offered to her majesty the prime of my pen, I offer to your
honor the prime of right penning, not handled thus before, as I can perceive by
any of my cuntrie, tho I se diverse, that have been tampering about it. And as
the difference of state between her majesty, and your honor made me of mere
force to begin with her, and to descend to you: so the matter of that book,
which I presented unto her, is the occasion of this, which I offer unto you. In
that book among other things, which the discourse enforced, as it enforced
many, (because it does meddle with all the needful accidents, which belong to
teaching.) I did promis an Elementarie, that is, the hole matter, which
childern ar to learn, and the hole manner how masters ar to teach them, from
their first beginning to go to any school, until theie pass to grammar, in
both the best if my opinion prove best. This point is of great moment in my
judgment, both for young learners to be entered with the best, and for the old
learned to be sound from the first. This Elementarie am I now to perform.
Whose particular branches being many in number, and the book thereby growing
to some bulk, I thought it good to de uide it into parts, upon sundry causes,
but chefelie for the printer, whose sale will be quik if the book be not big.
Of those several parts, this is the first, wherein I entreat (tho that be but
little) of certain general considerations, which concern the hole Elementarie,
but I handle specially in it the right writing of our English tung, a very
necessary point, and of force to be handled, ear the child be taught to read,
which reading is the first principle of the hole Elementarie. For can reading
be right before writing be righted, seeing we read nothing else, but what we se
written? or can writing seem right, being chale^ged for wrong, before it be
cleared? I account the print as a statarie writing, and therefore incident to
the same term. I have traveled in this point of our English writing, somewhat
more the^ ordinary. Wherein what my judgment is, your honor may perceive
even by this my thus writing, which is as the common, tho more certain then the
common, as my precepts will show: because I write nothing without cause why,
and most certain ground. For I have sou^ded the thing by the depth of our tung,
and planted my rules upon our ordinary custom, the more my frind, because it
is followed, nowhere my fo, because nowhere forced. Whereby I do perceive, why
we ought to write thus, as the common current is, without the alteration of
either custom, or charact, tho with some correction of certain wa^ts, and
general direction for the hole pen. I begin to teach this low, because I would
not leap, but rise by degrees entending to mount higher, as my argument grows
higher. Now this book being parcel of the Elementarie, severed upon this
cause, presents it self first, as a leader to the residew, unto your honor,
making publik show of my private dewtie, and pretending an argument very
pertinent to my profession, tho seming not so proper to your estate. And yet I
take it not alltogither improper, considering your honor both handle the pen
your self excedinglie well, and far above the common of most nobility not
only with us, but also elsewhere, and besides that you can judge of the very
best penning, with as great skill, as your self can use the pen excedinglie
well, which two singular properties do argew in mine opinion no great
improprietie in the offering such a present to such a personage, so rarely
qualifyed, tho of meruellous height above, either the matter, which is offered,
or the party which offers. And therefore I am in hope that your honor will
take this simple treatis concerning the right writing of your cuntrie speech,
with a very goodwill, as your daily travel is to work your cu^tries good,
with your hole endeavor. Further, I do not take it to be any disparageme^t to
your honorable conceit to seem to favor so mean a thing, as an ortografie is,
considering very great states and princes to, in the places, where theie
lived, did not think meanly of it, but were dealers therein, and writers
themselves, as M. MESSALA the grave counselor, M. CICERO the great orator, C.
CAESAR the famous conqueror, who dealt this way in the Latin tung, and thereby
did win, both credit to themselves, and countenance to their cuntrie. I will
use no mo examples, where there is no more need, neither prouf of other tungs,
where the Latin is enough. The profitablenesse of the thing may move your
honor to favor it, as a furniture to knowledge, the honorablenesse of such
personages may persuade you to further it, as a brood of nobility. As it
cannot but yield most honorable matter for history to work on to everlasting
memory, that her most excellent majesty amongst other her affairs,
vouchsafed to consider of the state of learning in her time, that it went in
right course, for the right maintaining of a peaceable government, which
peaceablenesse is the end of all government, as learning is the mean: so it
cannot but withal sound to your perpetual honor, if it shall please you to
move her majesty to so honorable a consideration, that all learning may
testify to posterity, that such a prince did it, such a counselor moved it.
Perfitnesse in learning which consists in right educatio^ of chosen wits, in
right method of best matter, in full time both to learn and digest, when it
coms to deal abroad, is the instrument of quietness, considerate in publishing
her own opinion, with warrant for truth, with wariness for peace: the
contrary corrupts, where it cannot gide: it works dissension, when it is not
resolved, and in imperfection, utters the first conceived heat, which
sufficiency in time, and digestion in study, would either not have uttered, or
have otherwise qualifyed. And tho afterward it reclame it self, upon better
advise, it cannot stay the quiksiluer, which at the first push it has poord
in peples heads, an enemy to concord, which learning pretends, as the Art
of peace, from the highest divine to the lowest infant. The most mighty, and
most merciful God preserve her most excellent majesty with long and happy
life, to work this and many such effects, to his honor, her own renoun, and
her peples good, and the same good God preserve your honor, as a counselor of
most trust, to a prince of most wisdom, to beawtify nobility, to auance
knowledge, to assist your cuntrie, in both true religion, and politik rule: and
amongst other things, not of least honor, to further our schools: that even the
young infant thorough this hole realm, may learn to know, how much he is bound
to your honorable furthera^ce for his good bringing up in the Elementarie
principles of all learning, before he do remove to any university: as all
those students, which are of the universities, do both praise and pray for your
honorable prosperity, for that great encouragement, which theie receive by
you, both while theie study there, and when theie serve abroad in publik
functions of the common weal.

Your honors most bound in all devvtifulnesse.

RICHARD MVLCASTER.

Autoris ipsius ad librum suum.
Naetu parue liber, non debes tristior ire,
Quod frontem decorent carmina nulla tuam:
Nec, quia nulla tuas exornant nomina valuas
Credere nulla ausis corda fauere tuis.
Conueniunt illis numerosa encomia libris,
De quorum certa commoditate liquet:
Quorum sensit egens solidos Respublica fructus,
Euentu verbis adijciente fidem.
Tu quia spe sola sitientia pectora lactas,
Sola decet vultum patria Musa tuum,
Quaefacilem dulci veniam pro laud precata
Lectori eliciat candida verba tuo.
Crescet ab euentu cum iam fiducia certo,
Totus amicorum carmine tectus eris.
Ambiguo, qua front potes vix liber ab herba
Alterius dubia mess ligare fidem?
Interea nullam laudem venare, triumphus
Sittibi lectoris gratia solatui.
Nam praestare nequis culpam, quia noster es, atqui
Nec potes ingentis criminis esse reus
Sunt adeo tenues, quas tu moliris habenas,
Nelapsicaedes Autumedontis erit
Nam quid habet magnipuerorum elementa refer,
Si species rebus corporis instar erit?
Ergo tibi fortunacaput si torua ferire
Caeperit, exigui vulnerisictus erit.
Nec laetalis erit, si collidare, ruina,
Qui toto pronus pectore serpis humi.
Quae docet aeterni feruens miracula patris,
Quae tractat multa condita iura fide
Quae grauium versat metuenda negotia regum,
Errores caveat prouida turba suos:
Nos faciles nostras quacunque retexere nugas,
Viso praesentes angue refer pedem.
Quisi corruimus, non vna corruit orbis,
Publica nec nostro vertitur axe salus.
Nec tam nostra nocent, quae chartis credimus. Illa
Ingenti torquent saucia cord malo,
Quae legum, regumque truces paritura ruinas
Caetera prosternunt omnia strage pari.
Tulento pueros buxum torquere flagello,
Primaque musarum claustra subire doces.
Nulla tibi grauior puerili in turbine turba
Si non hoc, alio Musa petenda modo,
In quo si quis erit male cepti tramitis error,
Non vitae, verumres erit illa viae.
Hijs ego me voueo, quia primi fontis ab vnda
Sic solet ingentes voluere flumen aquas
Quique minaturas caelo meditabitur arces,
Sollicita primum praeparat art solum.
Et mihi, si magni moles operosa laboris
Ad sua tardantes traxerit ora manus,
Non erit indecoris curae, vanique laboris,
Si verus veras audit Apollo preces,
Mollia cum tenero formare crepundia lacte,
Atque vel infanti iura tenenda dare.
Hincque vel Iliacos traducere carmen ad actus,
Vel quicquid rerum seria cura iubet.
Ergo meos siquis vocat ad maiora labores,
Ille mea, quaeso, me sinat ire via.
Et tu parue liber sic excusare parentem
Disce tuum, si quis, cur parit ista? roget.
Vtque tuis parcat clemens erroribus ora,
Si non hic, alibi sic habet ille suos,
Et tibi fortassis vel sponte pepercerit, vtqui
Dum te errare videt, se quoque posse videt.
Vna meos multum solatur causa labores,
Quos sibi deuotos Anglia nostra videt.
Cnra mihi commune bonum, miserebitur omnis,
Si quis speratifaenoris error erit:
Perge liber, fratremque tuum comitare, minores
In procinctu alij iam meditantur iter.
R. M.

The titles handled in this book.
Why I begin at the Eleme^tarie, and wherein it consists. pa. 1. That this
five bra^ched Eleme^tarie is warranted by general The opinion of the best
writers concerning the choice of That this Elementarie and the profitablenesse
thereof is confirmed That this Elementarie seasoneth the young minds with the
That this Elementarie makes the child most capable of That this Elementarie
resembles nature both in number of That this Eleme^tarie riddeth the course of
the after learning That this Elementarie by avoiding of ignorance auoideth all
That the entry to language and judgment thereof by gra^mer The general
platform and method of the hole Eleme^tarie. p. 52. The method which the
learned tungs used, in the finding out That the English tu^g has in it self
sufficient matter to work An answer to some pretended imperfections in the
writing of What right in writing is, and of what force consent is in voluntary
The seven means to find out, and ascertain the right writing Of general rule,
wherein the nature, and force of every particular Of proportion. 2. page 124.
Of composition. 3. page 140. Of deriuation. 4. page 144. Of distinction. 5.
148. Of enfranchisment. 6. page 152. Of prerogative. 7. page 157. The use of
the general table. page 162. The table. page 170 The conclusion of this
treatis concerning the right writing Of the nature of an Elementarie
institution. page 227. THE PERORATION. To my gentle readers, and good
cuntrimen, wherein many things ar handled concerning learning in general: the
nature of the English, and foren tungs besides some particularities concerning
the penning of this, and other books in English. page 229.
THE FIRST PART OF THE ELEMENTARIE.
Cap. I. Why I begin at the elementarie, and wherein it consists.
THere be two causes, which move me to the penning of this Elementarie, whereof
the one is mine own promis, the other is the argument it self. The argument it
self persuades me to the penning thereof, because it is so fit for the training
up of childern, as nothing can be fitter: and the stream of discourse in my
former book, which I name Positions, did carry me on to promis it, and binds me
to perform it. But for the better linkking of this book to that, seeing this is
nothing else, but the performing of one piece, which I promised in that, I must
needs shortly run over the main branches of that, ear I enter into this. The
matter of that book consists A short repeating of the for mer book entitled
Positions.
chefelie in two general points, the one proper, the other proceeding. I call
that argument proper, which is the natural subject of that same book, and
being once handled there desires no further speech in any other treatis. I call
that proceeding which being but named there as a thing most necessary to some
further end, requires more handling, then it has there, to be better fitted
for so profitable an end. Of the first sort, which is the proper inhabitant of
that same book, and to be enquired The proper argument of the Positions.
for there, all those discourses be, which concern the teacher, or the learners
person, which concern the place to teach or learn in, which concern the time,
both when to begin, and how long to continue, and such other circumstances,
which being once entreated of, discharge my pen from dealing with them further,
tho theie do not discharge the magistrates of my country, from heding of them
better. Because theie be very full of profit, tho somewhat hard of performance,
thorough those natural difficulties, which profess enimitie to all good
things, and would shoulder them out, for taking any place, either at their
first planting, when theie ar to be received, or upon default, when theie ar to
be redressed. Good things The cause why good things ar hardly planted at the
first
grow on very hardly at their first planting, because that profit, which
theie promis at their entry, has not yet been proved, and therefore wants
the commendation of trial, which is the very best mean to enforce persuasion:
and their pretense to be profitable, upon some probability in sequel, is a
great inducement in deed, but to those people, which can forese ear theie feel,
but of small importance to them, which ca^notse till theie feel. Good things
find hard footing, when Why reformation is hard lie won.
theie ar to be reformed after a corruption in use, because of that enormitie
which is in possession, and usurps on their place, which having strengthened
it self by all circumstances, that can move retaining, and with all
difficulties, that can dissuade alteration, fights sore for it self, and hard
against redress, thorough the general assiste^ce of a preiudicate opinion in
those men's heds, which might further the redress. Which prejudice in opinion
being grounded upon contentment with the acquainted evil, and loath to enter
danger for a change of some truble, so bewitcheth the reason of the parties
seduced, as drink does that fellow, which will rather ly in a ditch all night
and call for more clothes when he feleth more cold, and bid put out the candle,
when he seith the moon shine, then he will cither be persuaded, that he is
drunk at all, or else be entreated to get up and go home: Tho yet at the last
some of his wise frinds forseing the danger of some sickness like to follow, if
he ly there long, get him home perforce. Such a strength is error of being bakt
with long ease, which brings ignorance a sleep: and with security in
persuasion, which never bredes but ill. Howbeit for that book, and those
persuasions, I must pray my good cuntrimen, to think upon them well, even for
their own sakes. It is the general good that has enforced me to that
particular wish. Neither do I repent my self for the wishing thereof, tho the
speding be far of: as I am also most ready with all patience to digest all such
difficulties, all such thwartings, all such tungstings, as that kind of wish,
being frutelesse for the time, uses to bring with it, to chek and choke a
writer. For I fear not in the end, but that the extremity of some evil, tho
That reformation come once tho mostwhat late.
not the excellency of some good will enforce a reformation by them, which have
power and authority to redress. At which time my labor shall find fruit, tho
my self be not found: and my wish shall take effect, tho my self be no
partaker. The old man planteth with the one foot in his grave, whose honest
labor, tho it yield himself no fruit, saving the bare hope to profit his
posterity, yet God does so prosper, as the effect follows, tho he be not to
use it. And the nature of evils, not naturally evil, which will never be
better, but evil by abuse, which right use will better, is so loath to be
amended, and so long ear it harken to the voice of redress, as at the first
attempt to have some redress, the party attempter is more wondered at for the
wish, then esteemed of as wise. Homer the great Greek poet deuiseth a monster,
which he names Ate, and gives her for 10. Iiiad.
surname the Lady of harm, with whom he ioyns in fellowship three other stayed
matrones, which he calls Litae, and the Ladies of redress, after harms be
received. This Ate, says he, is so swift of wing, so strong of body, so
stirring to do il, as she flies far before, and harmeth where she lights. But
the three good Ladies, being halt and lame, old and crooked, not a step without
a staf, cannot foot it so fast, as their fellow can fly, whereupon it falls
out, that harms be soon caught, but healed at leisur, when the old creping
Ladies come to present a plaster, as theie will com at last, tho it be very
long first. This hope have we wishers, tho we wait long for it. And that good
God who made all these things, which we so mar, as he promises a renewing, so
is he able to perform it, whose patience in our The cause of this book grounded
upon the former.
misses we must follow in our mends. Thus much concerning those arguments,
which are proper to my book, that I name Positions. The other kind of matter,
which is begone in that book, tho not ended there, is such as lays open, what
things ar to be followed in the course of learning, and what I my self do
promis to do for the auancement thereof. Those things, which concern the course
and training up to learning, lay their first ground work in the young infants.
For whom it is there considered both how to frame their tender wits for the
matter of their learning, and how to train their weak bodies for the
maintenance of their health. For the preserving of their health, there be three
special things noted there, as most necessary thereunto, small diet, thin
apparel, 1. health. diet. apparel. exercise.
much exercise. Of the which three I recommend two, their apparel, and their
diet, to the parents care, as most proper to their charge, because theie
concern home most: the third, which is exercise, I handle there at full, both
because it is a several branch from the matter of learning; and therefore
requires a several treatise: and also because I would have that book to have
somewhat worth the seking, even for present necessity, besides those discourses
of the general accidents, that belong to learning, which is the very subject
of those Positions. 2. Learning. knowledge behavior.
For the matter of their learning, that is there divided into two parts, the
one whereof is knowledge, to increase understanding, the other is behavior to
enlarge vertew. As for behavior the precept and teaching thereof is reserved
to Behavior.
the master, whose profession smells of judgment, and gives ability to direct:
but the chief performance and practicing there of is committed unto parents, as
of nearest care and most certain authority over their own children. For the
moning child has very many ways to shift from his teacher, upon very many
small and very light occasions, God he knows: but he has no mean at all to
shake of his parents, without loss of his living. Wherefore as often change does
weaken authority in masters at will, so necessary obedience does strengthen
authority in parents perforce, and thereby charge them with their childerns
manners. And yet even that tiklish obedience, which masters have, which is
roming still, and never but removing discharges not them, so far forth, as
their commandment will reach. As for knowledge, whereby to increase the childs
understanding, Knowledge.
that is assigned to the teacher alone, as proper to his office without
participation of any parent, tho a wise and a learned parent be the very best
part of the very best teacher. Now both to help parents in their vertewous
performance, My promis.
and to assist teachers in their learned direction, that both delivery in the
one may proceed with order, and receipt in the other, may profit with delight,
I proffered my service in general to them all, but first of them all to the
elementarie teacher and his tall scholar, as whose labor does first call for
aid, to whom I promised this Elementarie institution, wherein I ente^d to
handle all those things which young children are to learn of right, and may
learn at ease, if their parents will be careful, a little more then ordinary.
The things be five in number, infinite in use, principles in place, and these
in name, reading, writing, drawing, singing, and playing. Why and wherefor The
Elementarie matter.
these five be so profitable and so fit for this place, it shall appear
hereafter, when their use shall com in question. In the mean while this is most
true, that in the right course of best education to learning and knowledge, all
these, and only these be Elementarie principles, and most necessary to be
dealt with all. Whatsoever else besides these is required in that age, either to
streng hen their bodies, or to quiken their wits, that is rather incident to
exercise for health, then to Elementarie for knowledge. Thus I have showed both
why I begin at the Elementarie, and wherein it consists.

Cap. II. That this fiuebranched Elementarie is warranted by general authority
of all the grauest writers, and all the best common weals.
IN persuading and admitting even the very best things, there be two other
points, besides the pretended goodness in the thing, which theie have still in
eye, that are to be persuaded. Whereof the one is, what cou^tenau^ce he carries,
which is the persuader, and what mean he uses to work his persuasion. For both
the thing, which is in question, must make show of some good, ear it will be
received: and the party that persuadeth, must be of good credit, if he think
to be believed: and the mean whereby his persuasion must take place, must be
strongly appointed with the best kind of proufs, both for authority in
persons, and probability in things. For who will allow, but where there is a
why? or who will hear him, which is, he knows not who? or what force can that
have to procure it self place, which neither wise man praises, nor wise reason
proves? That this five branched Elementarie, which The goodness of the thing.
I seek to persuade, is very profitable and good, there be many private
presumptions in our common experience, besides the general proufs, which shall
follow hereafter. First, because the most of these principles be in use with us
already, tho not with all persons, yet sure in all places, where the liking of
these things, and the ability to bear charge do concur in parents. Secondly,
because even those which have them not, yet do wish theie had them, when theie
fall in thinking of them, upon some either pleasant or profitable object, which
theie find wrought by them: tho upon some private respect either to sparing or
to precise, some kind of people either care not for getting them at first, or
for wishing them at last, least theie might seem to condemn their own selves,
if theie did wish for that, which theie would not once, as contemning that of
passion, which theie allow of in judgment. Besides these two, there be The
authority of the persuader.
a number mo, which our daily experience does bring forth, whereby the
goodness of this argument, is evidently confirmed. And may it not seem
likely to any reasonable censur, that I my self would not so force them on
publicly, if theie were not in deed excedinglie well warranted, with more the^
mine own authority? For who am I to persuade the liking of so full an
Elementarie, not allowed of the most, neither tried of the best? A simple
teacher. And yet that teaching name is not plane nothing, in a matter of
school. A mean companion. That is a great something, where the persuaders
countenance, is to carry away the thing. Nay a newfangle. That is very odious,
where the old current will not lightly be changed, and the opinion of right
has both the countenance of the best, and contentment of the most, whereupon
to make stay. To me it may be replied, you meddle in this matter alone, you do
but truble your self: you can not turn the course, which is ordinary and old,
and therefore very strong for you to strive against: this thing which you
commendis not every man's ware: it will not be compased: do you let it alone:
if you will needs write, turn your pen to other matters, which the state will
better like of: which this time will soon allow: which you may persuade with
credit, if theie be new, and suitable: or confirm with prase, if theie be old,
and need the file. If these and such objections were not allwaie ordinary even
to every one, in all attempts of turning, either from the ill to good, or from
the good to better, I would answer them with care, but now I need not, because
to win a resolute good, he that wishes to have it must think to wrestle for
it, both with words and writing, against corruption of time, against the
alonenesse of attempt, against the prejudice of parties, against the
difficulties of performance, and whatsoever else. Neither must he be
discouraged with any ordinary thwarting, which is a thing well known to well
traveled students, and of least account where it is best known, how fearful a
thing soever it seem to weak fantsies, by crossing of corruption to strive
against the stream. For both the stream will turn, when a stronger tide
returns, and if there be no tide, yet an untired travel will still on against
it, until he be above it. And more honorable it were for some one or some few to
hasard their own credit and estimation for the time in favor of such a thing,
as theie know to be of credit, tho not in account, then by to timorous a
conceit, to sore afraid of a popular opinion, not alwaie the soundest, tho most
of most swinge, to leave excellent arguments either destitute of defense, if
theie be pleaded against, or defeated of delivery, if theie fortun to be called
for. For may it not fall out, that such a thing, as this is, may be called for
hereafter, tho presently not cared for thorough some other occasion, which has
the rudder in hand? I had therefore rather that it were ready then, to help when
it were wished for, then for fear of misliking at the first setting forth, to
defraud the posterity of a thing so passing good. And what if the want of
convenient books, appropriate to persons, applied to things, apt for each
purpos, both has been, and be the hinderer of such helps, which would be
ventered on, if men had such volums? And in good sooth, I know not any book in
this Elementarie kind so thoroughlie fitted for such a purpos, as I hope this
shall prove. What there be in other kinds I will then show mine opinion, when
I com to their placing. But for this present, because there may be such
counterbufs, as I have said before, against my countenance in this persuasion,
notwithstanding the good, which is more then half confessed to be in the thing,
I have therefore by way of mean to work persuasion, fenced my hole The mean to
work persuasio^
choice in all these principles, with the best authority of most allowed
writers, who commend the use of them in one hole train, and with the greatest
weight of most apparent reasons, which may persuade us thoroughlie to
entertain them so, as their desert is worthy, and as their worthiness
deserves. Which two proufs, I think may very well persuade any reasonable
man, both to believe me, and to embrace them. But will ye hear the writers them
selves speak? theie shall not need to be many because the testimony of a few
is sufficient enough, where the truth of a thing is called in question, and
those few in that kind be held for most true, the kind it self being such as
concerns not religion, but only common policy, tho the policy be but
simple, where the religion is but small. Besides this all such writers as say
the same with them after their time, be but quils of that cundit, whereof theie
ar the head: or if theie were before them, theie are so confirmed by them, as
the second co^firmers be of more estimation then the very first founders, both
for their own value, for the credit of their countries, and the evidence of
their time. For when theie lived, there were so great broods of most learned
men, as would not have let them go uncontrolled, if theie had missed the
cussion. Therefore I must needs think, that theie did not miss, and so much
the rather, because theie name all the principles, which argeweth advise: and
show, for who^ theie fit, which proves a good forecast. Whereby theie direct
us also not only in the choice of matter to The best writers opinion
concerning these principles. Plato 2. and 3. Polit.
learn, but also in the choice of wits fit to learn. First of all Plato a man
in these arguments very well thought of among those that be learned examining
of purpos what things be needful for the first education of young children,
finds out gymnastik for the body and Musik for the mind, where he
constreweth Musik a great deall larger then we commonly do, comprising under
that name speech, and harmony: and therewithal implicatiuelie he
comprehends writing and reading for the benefit of speech, as singing and
plaing for the utterance of harmony. A thing not gathered in him by me in
nature of any consequence, but uttered by himself, in the way of his
discourse. In the same place freing poetry from fabulous and unseemly
arguments, and pictur from wanton and lascivious resemblances, which two be the
general branches of natural imitation, where he fineth both he refuses
neither: but as by clensing poetry he proves grammar to be but an Elementarie
principle, so by clearing pictur, he proves drawing to be another. Whereunto he
might be the sooner moved, because Pamphilus master to Apelles.
Pamphilus the Macedonian, master to the famous Apelles about the same time
procured throughout al Greece, that drawing should be held for the first degree
of liberal science in the training up of childern, and that no bondsman should
be admitted to use the pencill. Whereupon Pliny says, that he never red of,
neither yet ever saw any excellent piece of work painted Plin. lib. 35. Cap. 10.
by a bondsman, tho many by women. It should also seem that Aristotle's plane
speech concerning drawing did take hold of that act procured by Pamphilus, who
examining, as Plato Aristotle. 7. 8. Polit.
did, in what things childern were to be trained up, sets down all the five
principles by name and allegeth great reasons, why the mind is to be fashioned
by them for learning, as the body is by gymnastik for exercise. He spends
also the most part of the eight of his politiks to clear Music from blame, and
to prove it needful even for bettering of manners besides undoubted pleasur.
Quintilian also a Rhethorik master Institut. Or. 1.
among the Romans, and of no less account in his cuntrie then he was of
cunning, and so esteemed of among us, in the framing of his best orator, first
names writing and reading, and with some earnest challenge takes upon him the
protection of Musik, whose two arms singing and plaing be. And in the same
place using the same favor to Arithmetik and Geometry, which perfect the pen
and pencill in Apelles his opinion, as the pen and pencill be their principles
in common sense, he could not but allow the one, admitting the other, as Plato
did before him not refusing where he fined. I will rest content with the
assured credit of these three only, as principal among all, whether
philosofers, or other, whereof there is none, but he does allow of those
principles, which these three appoint, and I have chosen. Neither is there any
other of either value or account, which handles this argument of childrens
foretrain, whether in Greek or Latin, whether of purpos or by passage, whether
Christian or profane writer, but he joins with them and me herein, tho in
some after learning, and fear of some misuse, theie sometime dissent, and wish
rather that the principles were wanting then the perils should take place,
which unwise people seem to be subject unto, by dealing to far with them, a
false slander to good principles, tho a just reproach to ill people. The best
appointed common wealls also, in the best and most flourishing times for all
kind of learning embraced the same train, a thing as easy to be proved, by
all the best writers, in most plane terms, if I thought it needful, as it is
roundly said in these few words. For it is not my resolution to use many
names, tho I know the men, save in those cases, where I must have some company
of known note, to satisfy some humors, or else seem my self to be of either
none, or but of very small account. Neither is it any discredit for a
Christian writer in cases of learning and education, such as these be, where
Christianism may furnish the matter, tho prophanism yield the form, to follow
the president of profane common wealls, and to cite the testimony of old
philosophers, from whence we fet the most part of our learning. Neither can
any Christian state, or any relligious consideration tho never so precise,
but think very well of these Elementarie principles, which the panims do,
allow if theie be advisedly considered, and not he dilie renounced, by either
raptnesse in conceit, or rashness in judgment, before theie be well weied.
For the same principles of learning, and the same faculties being learned, did
arm the Christians to overthrow, which armd the infidels to assail, as the
learned divines know to be most true, by both the old greek writers, as Iustine
the martyr Eusebius the storier, and who not of that race? and by the old latin
autors to, as Lactantius and Austen, and who but of that crew? whose names I
would not spare, if that were best for speed. And why not Agar beloved in
obedience to her mistress, as banished for her stomak? seeing it pleased Philo
to make fre Sara the type of right religion, and bond Agar the type of other
leaning. For the ills which are pretended to come by them which be the chief,
naie the only causes why some honest but to credulous naturs do mislike some of
them: the common wealls which shall admit them and the parties which will learn
them for their profit sake, must take heed thereunto, least a more perilous
harm do chance to crepe in under the color of profit: seeing the falts
wherewith theie ar charged proceed not from the things as naturally evil, but
from the persons, as natural abusers, even of what so is best. Which point in
way of their justification shall be laid very plane in the particular
discourses of every principle. Well then, thus do all writers, thus do al
estates, thus do all relligions esteem of these principles for the number, and
goodness thereof, for where allowance of number is, the allowance of their
good is granted before hand.

Cap. III. The opinion of the best writers concerning the choice of wits fit
for learning.
I Said before that the best writers did not only agree upon the number of
principles, but also did appoint for what kind of wits it were most agreeable
to be trained up in the^. Of the principles I have spoken sufficiently: now
let us se, what their opinion is concerning the choice of wits. Which choice is
a The necessity of choice at this time.
thing to be very much thought on at all times, and in all places, but in
these our days, and this our cuntrie upon special causes to be narrowly
looked unto, as I have said more then once, and that in places mo then one. For
the consideration is weightier to whom ye commit learning, when ye have found
what to learn, then to find what to learn, before ye commit it. Because the
best instrument would all way be handled by the fittest person, and not by
every one, that has a fantsie to handle it. The want of this choice while
private liking, and not publik order gives learning her student; does cause more
mischefe, then the ground whereof is yet not found, tho the smart thereof be
felt. And to say the truth why is it a question, what wits be fittest to be
set to learning, if there be no choice made, when the question is decided. The
old writers declare the necessity of this choice to be exceeding great, eue^ in
that theie themselves be so curious care full to find out such wits, as ar to
be trained that way. Which their carefullnesse does seem as it were to say,
what can any thing, be it never so good auaill the estate, for the which it
should serve, if it be not committed unto such persons, as be fit to execute?
Which commission taking her beginning in the young child, for matters of
learning, ought not good choice to go before, where such an effect is to
follow? In ane unjust man does not the commission for justice wrong a number of
people? In a rash captain does not the charge over soldiers bring a number to
their end? And to Philosophy (which is a general name to all learning among
the old writers) can there possibly be any greater dishonor says Plato, the^
to be committed to bastard wits, and not of her own kind? Naie can there be
any greater plage to any common weall, then to have that mean, which is
naturally her best and of most profit, if the person, which shall use it, be
well appointed, to prove to be her worst, and her greatest hinderer, by either
the no choice, or else the very ill choice of that same person? Wherefor in
the choice of wits allied naturally to The end wherefor choice is made.
learning, theie first consider the end, wherefor theie ar to serve, when theie
ar once learned, and then their qualities, whereby theie ar proved to be fit
for learning. In the end theie consider, whether he, that is learned do live
priuatlie to him self, or publicly for others. For as those, which serve in
publik function do turn their learning to publik use, which is the natural use
of all The private end of study.
learning: so such as live to themselves either for pleasur in their study, or
to avoid foren truble do turn their learning to a private ease, which is the
private abuse of a publik good. For the common weall is the measur of every
man's being, which if any one respect not, he is not to live in it. If he be
able to serve and do not, his choice condemns him: if infirmity let his choice
his infirmity is his pardon: if he study tho priuatlie to a publik end, his
end is his warrant, tho his mean be mistaken. Wherein Tullies opinion seems to
be sounder then Platoes for the not leaving of philosophers to their private
study, if theie were fit to serve in any publik roum. But I do take it that
Plato meant the higher publik services, such as the chief magistrates and head
officers be, which places he still reserueth to his chief philosofers, and in
the Monarchy he saves even the very croun and principaltie for them. Which
so great a charge in any estate the philosofers did seek allwaie to avoid, as
being either to trublesom, or to much subject to the peples fury, chefelie in
a popular government, such as that of Athens was, where the most philosofers
were. In the choice of these wits for this private end, because theie could not
guess aforehand, what their end would be, theie used the same mean for their
first train, and fitting of their wit, which theie did use for the best, and
the most publik end. In those which learn to that end, that theie may be
profitable in publik, and prove so in the end, theie chefelie consider The
publik end of study.
the principal and subaltern magistrates. I call those magistates principal,
which are not subject to account of their government by any common order, tho
in conscience and religion both toward God and men theie be every one
subject, as stewards Magistrates principal and subaltern.
by commission, whether theie be Emperors, Kings, or whatsoever prince of
absolut soueraintie, not vassal to any higher. I call those subaltern which
ruling other yet ar subject to other, as in a Monarchy all the mean and
inferior magistrates, and generally as in any estate those officers be,
which be accou^tant for their doings. These magistrates be theie, whom all
their precepts tend unto, as the principal springs of most good or evil in
any estate. Because theie be the life and soul of their laws for reward and
punishment: the only president in all doings, to the common subject, whether
themselves be in principal roum, or but in subaltern. The principal
magistrate is a great president as most profitable in good, so most perilous
in ill: because his vertew, is the general allurement, to resemble the like
by, as his vice is the general covert, for impunitie to offenders. The
subaltern magistrates make a sta^e very lothsom by evil execution, as theie
make it very lightsom, by the contrary dealing. Their own obedience toward
their superiors is more then a lure to reclame the people, because their
obsequiousness to those that are above them enforces their under ones
officiouslie to obey, both the chief souerain, and also the^ themselves. And
therefore in the choice of their chief, where the chief is of choice, theie be
meruellous vigilant, and choose most what for time, and not for perpetuity, for
fear of ill success in a very good choice, where assurance of time bredes
security in time, and security no good. Likewise in these subaltern
magistrates theie be no less careful, because their places and functions
concern every particular sinew, every particular vein, every particular
artery, naie every small filet, and finest string or strip in the hole body
of any common weall. Here lies their choice of their learned wits, because
theie take learning to be a leading quality, and therefore beseming the place,
if it be fitted in person. These theie will have fed and cherished with best
matter, from the first time that theie be able to take any pains either for
bodily exercise, or for travel in learning, until theie be able to serve
that publik turn, whereunto theie at destinate, and wherefor theie were so
trained by publik foresight. In these theie consider the maintenance of the
state, and therefore in their choice their chief regard is, what wit is most fit
in every kind of state, because the like as it loves the like best, so
because of that love it prefers it most. Thus much concerning the The
qualities of the body and the mind which lead this choice.
end wherefor the choice is made. In the qualities which bewraie fitness for
learning, theie have regard to both the body and the mind. In the body theie
require, that it be able for strength, and health to abide exercise the
preserver of the^ both: that it be of good proportion and correspondent to the
mind for travel in study, and if it may be, to have it personable withal,
The choice in body.
because personablenesse is an allurement to obedience, a gracious deliverer of
any inward vertew, and sometime was esteemed a thing most worthy of the
principal seat. Was not Saul noted in his election to be king, to have been
taller and more personable, the^ the rest of the people? Did not Thalestris the
Amason Queen half contemn Alexander the great: when she saw his person to be of
no great show, whose name was so renoumed, as the report thereof did cause her
com to se him? Does not Euripides say and Phorphyrie upon his word, that a
body of presence is best worthy to rule? In the mind theie consider first
The choice in mind.
the means to conceive well, and to keep fast, and then those qualities, which
be fittest for performance, when the habit is had. In conceiving well, first
theie require a sharpness of wit to A quik conceiving.
perceive soon, without taint of dullness or difficulty by hard learning:
because wits shrink and recoill sooner, at a thing hard to learn thorough their
own dullness, then theie do at any labor in the greatest exercise. For in
learning the burden is the minds alone, in exercise the body bears part with
the mind. Secondly theie seek for an invincible and laborious courage to go
thorough with all pains. For without such a courage and that naturally had,
what wit could away with so much travel of body, so much toill of mind, so
much tiring of both in meditation and study? Theie regard also a desire to be
asking, and demanding of others, which be better learned, and a delight to
resemble the best, and therefore to be praised: never to be idle, but ever well
occupied, tho it be in play, so it be worthy praise. In the retaining of
that, which theie have conceived theie require A fast retaining.
a fast memory to keep well, and a good foresight to continue it well, and by
the same means, whereby theie first learned, with all those exercises which
confirm memory, and make way to further knowledge. In both these qualities,
to conceive soon, and to keep fast, theie use to consider certain other signs
which be ordinary companions to any toward wit, as to be naturally well
given, to be courteous in behavior, and such of that sort, as Quintilian bids
give him that boy, which will be quikned with praise, which will be aloft with
honor, which will weep at a foill. This boy says he must be fed with
braueries, him cherishing will encourage, in him I fear no loytering. Instead
of that weping at a foil Xenopho^ in the person of Cyrus, who^ he deuiseth
Cyrus in Xenophon.
so perfect, as the best boy for a pattern to bring up, and the best price for a
president to princes, seems rather to like of laughing himself at himself,
thereby neither to take laughter in the lookers on for any kind of mok:
neither to lease any courage, but furthwith to amend the thing, wherein he
missed. Whereas weping might bewraie a pusillanimitie, and a faint of stomak.
But Quintilia^ no dout meant, as if that weping ca^ of an inward grefe, not
que^ching but kindling the natural courage, to burst out to the better. So
Liuie says that the ha^ging of the head, and the looking The Roman soldiers
in Liuie.
down of the Roman soldiers, when theie returned homeward after their foill at
Caudium, where the gallous was their gate, tho theie went under it like gese,
was no argument of courage vanquished and oppressed by so shameful a despite,
but of a suppressed choler and a boiling grefe, which lo^ged for occasion,
whereby to work revenge, and was thoroughlie ashamed, till theie had changed ye
shame with their enemy for honor, and had died their swords in the deceivers
blood, their foill coming not thorough their own defalt, but by folly of their
leaders. As for Quintilianes cokking boy still perching, still aspiring: such a
pert conceit may be good for his orator, because he limits him no place, but
it is hard for a subject, whose humility is his honor. For the aspiring wit,
which will be still a mounting, gives some evident suspicion of a restless head,
in any kind of state, least fit for a Monarchy, and less profitable to it
self. Because desiring still to be the best, if he miss, he moills other, if he
hit, he harms himself, by insolence of thought, not content with a mediocritie,
as to far beneath him, nether able to get much, as not fit for his humor, where
the state is to distribut, as it thinks of the person, and not the person to
receive as he thinks of himself. In the general learner I like Pamphilus in
Terence.
that disposition best, which Terence does attribut to young Pamphilus in his
comedy called Andria: in whom I observe two several properties, the one for
learning, the other for behauior. For his learning he was neither to excellent
to be enuyed, neither to mean to be contemned, but as not above all in any
thing, so not beneath all in any: that much allowed mediocritie being the rule
of his learning. In behauior toward other he had acquainted himself to bear
with all companies in most variety of behauior, to yield himself to them in
honesty of delight, contrarying none, contemning none, never bragging of his
birth, never vanting of his wealth. For certainly in wits this moderate kind
is most contrary to the worst. If any one be to singular od, he is fit either
for value above all to be sent up to heaven, as to good for the earth; or for
vice beneath all to be wished somwhere else, as the earth to good for him, as
Plato dalieth with the like speech in the like case. But those men's chief
consideration in their choosing of wits is, what affection to learning the
child has by nature. Because it is hard to haill against the stream, as it is
wondrous easy to row down with it. Finally theie knit up all their choice
with this no fantsie, tho a fable of Platoes Protagoras, that Jupiter sent
Mercury down into the world, to distribut learning and vertew among those of
the world. In which his distributio^ he gave learning to people, according as
theie were inclined by nature: but he gave them vertew, which he divided into a
remorse to do ill, and a desire to do right, according to necessity, which was
to have few men learned, and as theie were inclined, but to have all me^
vertewous, as theie ought to be inclined. Because one learned man, as one
physician, will help a great number: but it is necessary for all men to be
ashamed to do ill, and to be ready to do good. And with all, there says
Jupiter to Mercury make this proclamation thoroughout the hole world, that
theie forth with kill him, as a disease in a state, who so ever is not capable
of shame to do wrong, and will to do right. Whereby theie do mean, that there
would not be to many brought up unto learning, where both nature restrains being
not fit in most, and our use does not need them, where some few will serve all.
Which two considerations nature in most, and need in all, be the chief grounds
of this choice for learning. But vertew and goodness be required in all, as
necessary for all in this our general need, and corruption of nature, whereby
most be evil, whereas all should be good. But I have said much allredie
concerning this choice in diverse places of my former book, which I call
Positions, and specially in that title, which handles the stripping of, of
too many bookmen. In the qualities that declare a wit The qualities in choice
for performance.
very likely to perform well afterward, when learning is obtained, theie
commonly consider the honest disposition, and the parties zeall toward moral
vertew, and civil society even for honesties sake without hope of any
profit. Then theie mark next the forsight of conceit, which must be neither
easy to be deceived, nor soon to be removed from a right opinion, by either
passion in themselves, or persuasion of others. And generally whatsoever
vertew is like to bewraie both a good man, and a good subject, that theie call
to council in making of their choice, to have their learner make show, both of
capabilitie, and Liberty and ability two great respects in choice.
keeping, in matters of learning, and of towardness and constancy, in matters
of living. In all these wits theie still respect liberty and not bondage,
ability and not poverty, to have learning liberal, where learners be no
slaves, and the execution vncorrupt, where need is not to festur. Yet theie do
not exclude need in excellent natural wits, but theie provide for their
ability, that theie be not subject to need. And tho slaves be sometimes
learned; yet learning is not slavish: neither when the parties demeanor does
procure his fredom, is learning manumised, which was never bond. Which two
reasons, for liberty, and need, the old wisdom, whereof I entreat now, must
needs confess, if ye look but to Aesop among slaves; and Plato among writers:
whereof Aesop fought still for fredom against seruilitie, and Plato for nature
against mutable fortun, measuring not even princes by their place, but by their
property, by natural power, and not by casual event. The cause why theie
think so much of ability is the respect of the people, which will obeie best,
where theie be over topt most: as the cause why theie think so much of fredom
is, for that slaves have no voice nor part in the state, being held but for
catle, tho reasonable withal: whereas learning has best voice in any estate,
and therefore requires the help of such an vtterer, as is part of the state,
and capable of best state. Thus much for both the number of the Elementarie
principles, and the choice of wits most fit for learning, according to the
judgment of the eldest, and best writers.

Cap. IIII. That this Elementarie and the profitablenesse thereof is confirmed
by great reason, and most evident proufs.
AS for the reasons, which confirm the choice of the Elementarie principles, I
find them to be both many, and well appointed, and such, as move me to think,
both that these five, and that not fewer then these five, neither any other
then these five do make a perfect Elementarie, and that a perfect Elementarie is
a most excellent thing, and so most excellent, as without the which, if it be
not either any at all, or not such as this is, there will great defects ensew
in years, which might be prevented in youth. For as the wise Cato being
demanded Cic. 2. de Off.
what was the chief point, that did belong to husba^drie, answered to feed
well, and dubled the point. And the eloquent Demosthenes being demanded, what
was the chief point that did belong Cic. de clar. Or.
to an orator, answered to gestur well, and dubled the point: so my self, tho
neither a Cato for wisdom, nor a Demosthenes for eloquence, yet am so resolved
in this matter, as if I were demanded what I thought to be of chief force in
the hole course, and matter oflearning, I durst boldly answer a good
Elementarie, and duble the point. Cato answered in that argument, wherewith he
was acquainted, being a great husband, Demosthenes in that, wherefor he was
esteemed, being a great orator. And why not I in that, which methink I know
being a long teacher? That Cato answered wisely, what better reason can you
require, then the effect thereof in the catle themselves, and the catlelike
creaturs, which being the husbandmans charge, and staruing without stouer,
defeat the ill feader of his conceived stok. That Demosthenes his action was
the soull of his orations, and assured the truth of his judicial answer, who
is better witness then even Aeschines his enemy? Who being banished
hiscuntrie, by the only mean of Demosthenes his tung, did confess in his
exile, that he was sorer wounded with the force of his action, which gave life
to his words, then with the strength of his words, that found work for his
action. That this my opinion concerning the infinite commodity of a good and
perfect Elementarie, is as true in the train to learning, as either Catoes was
in husbandry, or Demosthenes his in oratorie, there be six special and
principal causes, which by the greatness of their own good effects, do
vnfalliblie conclude, the excellent benefit thereof, even by cause each of the
principles is so excellent good. All which co^curring, and meting in the
general end of the hole Elementarie, must needs import a meruellous treasur,
to be in the hole, where every particular, which makes up that hole, does
prove to be so profitable. The six reasons which by their The six reasons that
prove the goodness of this eleme^tarie. 1 2
own private goodness confirm a general profit in the main Elementarie be
these. If the Elementarie do season the grene vessel with the swetest liquor,
and the untrained mind with the holsommest humor, is the goodness thereof
doutfull, where the substance is so precious? If it make the child most
capable of most commendable qualities, which without it he could not aspire
unto, deserves it not embracing, which makes so plane a way to so excellent a
thing? If it resemble nature in the multitude of her abilities, and proceed so
in teaching, as she 3
does in towarding, can the current be but good, which follows such a gide?
If in place of hardness, it plant facility, does it 4
not help students to saill with a forewind, without fear of shipwrak, where
all roks be removed, that theie need not to be feared, or so laid in sight, as
theie may easily be avoided? If where there is now very great misliking of
many good things, by 5
mean of ignorance, which cannot conceive them, it do cause allowa^ce by the
mean of knowledge, which of judgment will allow them, is not learning much
bound to it, for clearing her from blemish? Naie, if within the Elementarie
co^pas it co^prehe^d 6
also the entry to language, and the grammar travel, which is the keie to all
cunning, may it not then well be said to be perfect in all points, which
belong to ane Elementarie? seeing in course of study, where language does end,
there learning does begin? and all that goes before that, as in order it is a
principle, so in nature it is Elementarie? Now that it is of such efficacy, for
seasoning with the best, for conceiving of the most, for resembla^ce of nature,
for exile to hardness, for maim to misli king, for entry to speech, it shall be
proved very planelie, and withal so; as no other Elementarie ca^ possibly
compare with it. For as I am thoroughlie persuaded, that the first Elementarie,
being well perfited is the only furtherer to all kinds of learning: so am I
likewise resolved, that this Elementarie, not devised by me, tho revived by me,
is the perfection of the Elementarie, and so consequently the chief promoter
of the after learning, which the effect will show in prouf, as the reasons will
in proving. Which I therefore set down, as diligently as I ca^, that my good
readers perceiving thereby the profit of the thing, may the sooner procure the
effecting thereof, by subscribing to that, which theie se so well warranted.

Cap. V. That this Elementarie seasoneth the young minds with the very best,
and swetest liquor.
OF those six reasons, whereby I take the great use of this Elementarie to be
vnfalliblie confirmed, the first is, because it does season the tender, and
untrained mind with the best and swetest liquor. Which that it does, who will
deny, when he shall evidently se, nothing to be propounded therein, but that,
which is most pure and picked? Plato Aristotle and Quintilia^ tho not theie
alone, in those places of their fortrain, where theie Plato. 2. 3. Pol Arist.
7. 8. Pol. Quint. 1 Inst.
wish a child, that is to be brought up well, neither to hear, nor to read,
nor to se any thing at all in his teaching kind, and of set purpos, but
only that which is most agreeable in opinion with truth, in behavior with
vertew: by that their so saing declare unto us the quality of those things,
which are best for childern to deall withal at first. And our own relligio^,
which best knows of what importance it is, to have youth embrewed with the
best at the first, is meruellous careful, both to win them to it by precept,
and to work it in them by practis. For the necessity of beginning at the best,
in every argument, which has a beginning, and is to proceed by order, I shall
not need to say much either for the good which it brings, or for the ill
which it blemisheth. One Theodorus a plaier of Tragedies, belike such a one, as
Roscius was at Rome both excellent men in that kind of action, would never let
any mean or unskillful actor enter the stage before him, as Aristotle
reports, because he himself would work the first delight, even with the very
best, for that he knew the force of the first impressio^, which being laid with
pleasur in the beholders mind would cause them proceed on with co^tine wa^ce in
like pleasur, whereas so^ vnswetenesse at the first might cause harshnes
thoroughout. Wherein I note also (tho the first planting of best sciences be
our gardning here) that by his so doing, he either enforced his fellowplaiers
to be like to him, and so partakers of the praise: or else he alone bare away
all the praise, as deserving it alone. Could one Theodorus a Tragedy plaier
espy that in the stage, which was sometime allowed as tolerable, outlawed
sometime, as unlawful, and may not a scholar spy the like in the course of
learnig, which is still upon the stage, as most profitable still? When the
child shall have the matter of his Reading, which is his first principle
Reading.
so well proined and so pikked, as it shall catechize him in relligion trewlie,
frame him in opinion rightly, fashion him in behauior ciuillie, and withal
contain in some few leaves the greatest variety of most syllabs, the chief
difference of most words, the sundry pronouncing of all parts, and branches of
every period, does not Reading then which is the first principle seem to
season very sure? enriching the mind with so precious VVriting.
matter, and furnishing the tung with so perfect an utterance? When the argument
of the child's Copy, and the direction of his hand, whereby he learns to write
shall be answerable to his reading, for choice of good matter, and reverence to
young years, neither shall offer any thing to the eye, but that may
beawtifie the mind, and will deserve memory, will not writing season well,
which so uses the hand, as it helps Drawing.
to all good? When the pen and pencill shall be restrained to those draughts,
which serve for present semelinesse, and more cunning to com on, for the very
necessary uses of all our hole life, does not that same liquor, where with
theie draw so, deserve Musik.
very good liking, which will not draw at all but where vertew bids draw? When
Musik shall teach nothing, but honest for delight, and pleasant for note, comlie
for the place, and semelie for the person, suitable to the thing, and
serviceable to circumstance, can that humor corrupt, which bredeth such delight,
being so every where armd against just challenge, of either blame Grammar.
or misliking? For the principle of Grammar, I will not tuch it here, because I
entend not to deall with it here, but wheresoever I shall tuch it, I will tuch
it so, as it shall answer to the rest in all kinds of good. In the mean time
till the grammar principle do com to light, that Reading shall be so relligious,
Writing so wary, Drawing so dangerlesse, Singing so semelie, plaing so praise
worthy, the event shall give evidence, and the relice it The parents charge at
home.
self shall set surth the seasoning. But by the way, as the Eleme^tarie
professes it self in the course of learning, and in trade of school to be the
first and best seasoner of the untrained mind: so ought pare^t, also for their
own part both before and during all the Elementarie time, to provide so at
home, as there be no ill liquor inconsideratlie powered into the grene cask,
which may so corrupt it, as it will either quite refuse the good Elementarie
humor, or unwillingly receive it, and not to such a good, as it uses for to
work, where the cask is not corrupt. For if the young eyes be acquainted at
home with unseemly sights: if the tender ears be more then half trained to
vncomlie hearings, if the pliable mind be unwisely writhen to a disfigured
shape, if the hole conceit be unadvisedly stained with a contrary die, how can
that countenance be liked on in school, whose contrary favor is most honored
at home? Those parents therefore which will look for the best liquor in schools,
must not in any case use corrupt humor at home. For that is most true, which
is uttered by many, but most oraclelike by Plato, concerning the strength of
that juice, which the young wits at first seasoned withal. I will set down
Platoes words first in Greek, where theie be most pithie, and then in English,
where theie shall be as plane. (...) 2. Polit.
(...) 4. Polit.
(...). Which is to say in English, that the beginning of every thing is of
most moment, chefelie to him, that is young and tender, because the stamp is
then best fashioned, and enters deapest, where with ye mean to mark him, and
the sequel will be such, as the foretrain shall lead, whether soever you
march, because naturally the like still draws on the like. These words, as
theie ar wisely uttered by the grave philosopher, so ought theie to engraf
both in parents and masters a deep inpression to observe them as carefully, as
theie be spoken trewlie. This concordance between the parent at home, and the
teacher in school for the vertewous training up of their little young ones, is
in very deed, to bring them unto Christ, as we be bid in scriptur. For what
else is it, I pray you, for a child to com to Christ? or of what other force
is it to be a Christian child? Sure not to be baptized only in the name of
Christ, but both for truth in relligion, and matters of knowledge, both for
vertew in demeanor, and matters of living, to be brought up so, as he may
trewlie resemble him, whose name he bears, and faithfully serve him, whose
conusance he carries. Hereby it seems to me to be very plane, that a good
Elementarie thus appointed, as it seasoneth first, and continues longest, so
it does both best.

CAP. VI. That this Elementarie makes the child most capable of most
commendable qualities.
THose means make one capable of some further quality, by whose help that
party, which is to com by such a The helps to further capacity.
quality, both conceiueth it quiker, retains it faster, and executes it
better. Now those means be in us either naturally ingenerate, or artificially
emplanted, and that so, as theie show themselves, both in our bodies, and
minds. Concerning Natural helps to further capacity. The mind.
the natural helps, which by the very inclination be wraie a mind made
naturally fit, either to conceive, or to retain, or to execute any learned
quality well and therefore the better, because the more naturally, I have
spoken enough in the question of choice, where I wish by the authority of the
best writers, that such wits only were set to learning, as naturally bear
some favor that way. Concerning such natural properties, as will The body.
discry a body fit for any exercise, either to keep the body it self in
health in one, that is no student: or to assist the mind in all her executions,
in one that is a student, I have said enough in my book of Positions, where I
handle exercise. Neither is the question at this time of any natural
inclination, but of artificial helps, and those not for the body, which point
is for Gymnastik and exercise of the body, but only for the mind, tho
wrought by the body, which is for these principles, and the Elementarie
learning: I say therefore that these five principles, reading, writing,
drawing, singing, and playing, which make this Artificial helps to further
capacity.
hole Elementarie, besides exercise, which is Elementarie to, tho handled
elsewhere, be the only artificial means to make a mind capable of all the
best qualities, which are to be engraffed in the mind, tho to be executed by
the body: which best qualities be two, vertew for behauior, and knowledge for
cunning. Under the name of behauior I comprise all those qualities, The best
qualities of the mind. Vertew.
whose honor is in action, as under the name of knowledge I imply all those,
whose soueraintie is in skill, tho either of them both both know ear theie do,
and do as theie know. For vertew and the planting thereof, it has no cause to
complain of this Elementarie, which gives precepts unto children how to learn
to do well, and so preserves vertew, as much as direction can. What
furtherance else is to be had there unto by practicing that in deed, which is
commanded in word, that is reserved also, and most earnestly recommended even
by this Elementarie to all parents and teachers, according unto the distinction
of that authority, which theie have over childern. Does not this Elementarie
then make childern most capable of vertew in elder years, for whose growing it
is so careful in their tender age, both by precept and performance? As for
knowledge which tends Knowledge.
directly unto cunning these five principles serve directly thereunto. For by
them the mind is prepared and made fit to receive and understand all things,
which either nature does bequeath us, or labor prouides for us: By reading we
receive what antiquity has left us, by writing we deliver what posterity
craves of us: by both we find great ease in every occasion of our daily use:
By resembling with pencill what a spectable thing is there, and subject to the
eye, either brought forth by nature, or set forth by art, whose knowledge and
use we attain not unto? By the principle of musik besides the purchase of a
noble science, so certainly platted by Arithmeticall precept, as no one
better, so necessary a step to further knowledge, as no one more, such a
glass wherein to behold both the beawtie of concord, and the blots of
dissension even in a politik body, as no one surer: how many helps and how
great ease receives our natural infirmity either in care for comfort, or in
hope for courage. Not here to tuch the skillful handling of the rude voice, nor
the fine nimbling of the raw fingers, things not to be refused where theie may
be well had, and naturally required, where imperfection is to be perfited by
them. Again does not all our learning conceived by the eye, and uttered by the
tung confess the great benefit which it receives by reading? Does not all our
delivery brought forth by the mind, and set forth by the pen acknowledge a
dewtie to the principle of writing? Does not all our descriptions, which figur
in the thought, and pictur to the sense both preach and praise the pencill,
which causes them be seen? Does not all our delight in times not bisied (as all
our labor is for rest, all our travel for ease, all our care to avoid care)
protest in plane terms, that it is wonderfully endetted to either part of
Musik, both by instrument and voice? the natural sweter of our sour life in
any man's judgment, that is not to sour? Now what learned quality is there of
any commendation, but it falls within this number, and is furthered by these
principles, whether it be chief profession of greater note, or meaner faculty
of less account, or necessary trade of vnforbearable use? And not to leave
exercise quite Exercise the cause of capacity in the body.
vntuched, seeing it is mere Elementarie, and alwaie to ioyn with each ascent in
learning, as the body growing in strength or in years requires more or less
stirring: by the artificial benefit thereof the fete excel in swiftness, if
nature be according, the arms in strength, the hole body in each part, for all
gifts in each part, which either concern health or cause actiuitie. And as so
many principles appointed for the mind being cunningly applied thereunto, do
make it most able both to conceive with the soonest, and to deliver with the
fairest: even so the one principle of exercise being skilfullie applied
according to right circunstance makes the body most active in all parts, to
execute all functions both of necessity and praise with a meruellous
nimblenesse. All qualities therefore whether belonging to the body, because
their excutio^ is by it, or partaining to the mind, because their seat is in
it, must needs confess themselves to be so auanced by this Elementarie, as in
deed theie were nothing, if it were not. Take exercise away, what then is the
body, but an vnweildie lump? what use of it has either cu^trie in defense, or
it self in delight? Remove precept and practis, and where then is vertew, which
neither knows, what to do, if it be not directed, neither does when it
knows, if it faill of practis? Set these five principles apart, what can the
unlearned eye judge of? the untrained hand deall with? the vnframed voice
please with? If all the principles want, then all the qualities faill, if some
certain want, then so many faill, as proceed from them that want. If all the
principles be had, then all the qualities will follow. Wherefor I conclude,
that if all commendable qualities do fall within this compass, if these
principles auance them all, if want in the one cause defect in the other, that
then this Elementarie must needs cause the child being so well trained, to be
most capable of most commendable qualities, and that the defect in these must
of mere necessity cause defect in those. Whereof theie can best judge, which
when theie grow in years, then perceive their own lak, which comes for want
of such a foretraine. At which time one of these things straight way enseweth.
Either theie condemn that, which theie know not, thorough ignorance: or theie
contemn that, which theie dispare of, thorough insolence: or theie moan that,
which theie miss of, thorough negligence, most comonlie offrinds, which
regarding little else, but the way to wealth, desire rather a compendious path
to compass that, then a longer circuit to com by a better, tho in the end theie
perceive, that at the first theie might well have obtained both, with very
small ado. Wherefor the Elementarie being so absolut, and yiedling so great a
capablenesse to further qualities, it were to great an oversight in those
parents, which have opportunity at will, to neglect it in their childern, and
instead of knowledge in all, to leave them ignorant in some, and cause them in
years to mislike, where theie cannot judge, contemn where theie cannot compass,
bewaill where theie feel want, chefelie considering, that as it will make
childern capable of the most, so it self is compassable, well nigh by the
meanest.

Cap. VII. That this Elementarie resembles nature, both in number of abilities
and in manner of proceeding.
THe third prouf of a good Elementarie was to resemble nature in multitude of
abilities, and to proceed so in teaching, as she does in towarding. For as she
is vnfrindlie, wheresoever she is forced, so is she the best gide, that any
man can follow, wheresoever she favors. Wherefor if nature make a child most
fit to excel in many singularities, so theie be furthered and auanced by
Elementarie train in the younger years, is not that education much to be
blamed, by whom the falt coms, and the infant is defeated of that same
excellency, which nature voweth, and negligence voideth?

Again, when there is nothing meant us by nature, but train will help it forward,
is not train it self to be thought most perfect, and the mean of the train to be
held most absolut, which spredes with nature, where she splaieth most, as
manifold in preferring, as she is in profering.

When I use the name of nature, I mean that power, which God What is meant by
the name of nature.
has emplanted in these his creaturs both to co^tinew their own kind, that it
do not decaie, and to answer that end, wherefor these were made. The
continewance of their kind is the prouf of their being, but the answering of
their end, is the fruit of their being. This latter part is that point, where
unto education has a special eye (tho it contemn not the other) that the
young fry may be brought up so, as theie may prove good in the end, and serve
well in that place, whereunto theie shall be loted, for the benefit of their
country, when theie com to years, and full state of prouf. For the performance
whereof that theie may prove such in deed, I take it, that this Eleme^tarie in
his kind is most sufficient, as being the best mean to perfect all those
abilities, which nature endoweth our kind withal, by those same principles,
which art and consideration appoints it withal: and by using such policy
in the way and passage to artificial perfection, as nature her self does use
in her ascending to her natural height. Because the end of education, and
train is to help nature unto her perfection, which is, when all her abilities be
perfited in their habit, whereunto right Elements be right great helps.

This is that resemblance of nature, which I do mean, not to counterfeat her in
some other work, as fondly comparing, or What it is to resemble nature in train.
frowardlie bragging with the effects of nature, like some Apelles in purtrait,
or some Archimedes in motion, but when consideration and judgment wisely
marking, whereunto nature is either euide^tlie given, or secretly affectionat,
does frame an education consonant thereunto, to bring all those things to
perfection by art, which nature wishes perfect, by franknesse of her offer. If
nature do offer a towardness to write, and no impediment let, but it may be
well applied, is not consideration untoward, if that ability want forwarding?
If with some small help a childs voice may be made sweet, tunable and cunning,
is not education lame, if it continue harsh, unpleasant, and rude? If by
benefit of nature, we be made fit for mo qualities, then ordinary education
does help us unto, do we not blame them, who having government over us, leave
us ignorant in that, which in ripeness of years we want in our selves, and
wonder at in others? whose train being better then ours, tho perhaps neither
wit quikker, nor body nimbler, does serve for a prouf, that courteous nature is
oftimes very frank, where unkind fortun shows very small frindship: naie
that either negligence or folly inconsideratlie cutteth of, that natural
ability, most liberally bestowed. Whereupon I ground my argument that this
must needs be a very good Elementarie, because it prefers all things which
nature offers to a commendable end, and shows it self as considerat a
teacher, as nature does her self an excellent towarder.

But for the better understanding of my conclusion, and this The general
division of this title for natural abilities and artificial principles.
great concordance, which I note to be between nature in framing, and art in
training, both for number of abilities, and for manner of proceeding, I will
first examine the natural abilities, which are to be perfited, and how nature
hirself does forward the perfection: the^ I will show, how those principles,
which art has devised for the furtherance of nature, do answer unto those
abilities of nature, both for sufficiency in number, and fitness to
perfection. For where there be very many effects, which are to be wrought,
there must needs be many, means, to bring the effect about. Where nature her
self offers very good hold, there art must be at hand and ready to take it:
where nature is fruitful, and plaieth the good mother, there art must be
careful and prove a good nurse. For it is most true, that most excellent
gifts, and endowments of nature, be very oftimes spoiled by the only mean of
negligent nurtur.

I call those natural abilities, which nature planteth in our minds and
bodies, prepared by her self for us to use, but to be What natvrall abilities
ar.
perfited by our selves, to our own best use, whereunto that power of our
mind, or that part of our body does specially serve, in which that ability
is naturally placed: As for example, nature planteth in the hand an ability to
catch and hold, which that it may do to the best effect, and to that use for
the which we have our hand, our own policy and practis must be our best mean.
Nature pla^teth in our mind an ability to forese such things, as be to com,
which that it may do to our greatest profit, our own wisdom, and our own
consideration, must be our best mean. Whereby it will fall out, that we our own
selves do cause our own want, if we do not our endeavor, to further those helps,
which the goodness of nature, naie, which the goodness of God, the Lord and
prince of nature, of his own mere gift does so bestow upon us, as we may frelie
have them, if we list to apply them. If the case were such, as we our selves
were willing to use them, if we had them, and had them not, the complaint might
tuch nature, for not answering our will, but now that we have them, if we do not
use them, the blame will tuch our selves, for not answering her goodness.

I call those Artificial principles, which man's wisdom having What
artificial principles be.
considered the entendment of nature does devise for himself, so many in
number, and so fit in quality, as these may take sure hold of all natural
inclinations and abilities, and bring them to perfection by the like mean, and
the like ascent, in training them to that end, which policy does shout at, as
nature shows her self to be very well willing to follow the hand of any such
a trainer, by such a mean as is devised, to such an end, as she desires: As in
the former examples of the hand to hold fure, and the mind to forese, which be
natural abilities, artificial principle is to use such exercises, and so
co^siderate experiments, and with such preciseness in the use of them both, as
the hand may hold best, and surest with all the mind forese most, and
furthest withal. Where nature grounded only bare holding, and simple
foresight, direction intended the best in them both, as nature did not seem to
be very froward in either, whose perfection lies in both.

By these discriptions it appears, that of these natural qualities some
concern the body and some the soull, and that both The general division of
abilities, by the soull and body, by our being only and our being well
theie help either to our mere being only, or to our well being withal: and
also that the mean both to work our being in the one kind best, and our
welbeing in the other kind as well, must be so applied, as nature her self
shall seem to be most pliant, which pliablenesse of nature will show it self,
both by ease in the working, and by use in the work.

But for so much as the handling of all these qualities, first of the body, and
then of the mind, next of our being, and then of our well being, whether
imperfit in nature, or perfect in train, will be somewhat tedious to deal withal
severally, and the things themselves may be well enough understood being
handled together, seeing in all our executio^s both the body and mind do
alwaie concur, tho either more or less, as the thing that is don, proceeds in
proportion from either of their parts: I will therefore handle them jointly in
one treatis, as theie themselves do ioyn allwaie in one practis, and that
chefelie in respect of our being, first mere, and then well. Whereof the first,
which concern our mere being, be altogether natural, tho principles to the
last, by mean of education the latter which concern our well being, be mere
artificial but bilding upon nature by way of fundation, and prove so much the
finer, where theie have her favor, as either nothing at all, or but of small
account, where she seems to froun.

Those abilities therefore belong to men's being, without the Which be the
abilities of our being, and which of our well being.
which theie could not once so much as live, or bear the name of men in the
natural sense of their first humanity: Those belong to their well being,
without the which tho theie may live and continue men, yet ar there extreme
rude, and in deed no body, in the principal sense of their best humanity.
Without the ability to receive sustenance, and to have it tendered, when nature
does command it, a man cannot live. Wherefor that ability and such other like,
co^cern his mere being, tho by his so being he be but half a beast, which
fedes, as well as he does, tho not with like change. Whithout the ability to
conceive and understand, what is most semelie in every circumstance, and to
have it fined, to the most civil use, a man may live tho exceeding rude, and
therefore that ability, and such other like concern his well being, whereby he
is likest him, of whom he has his being, and most sociable with them, among
whom his being is.

Now as I find in nature both by the effects, which these abilities work, and
by the places, wherein their ar bestowed, that she means us very much, and
very manifold good: so for the That this Elementarie answers every
particular ability in nature.
auancing of every of them to the same effects, which nature entendeth, I find
also in this Elementarie, that it has several branches, wherewith to supply
their several turns, as it shall be proved first in the abilities of our mere
being, and then in those, which concern our best being. Whereby it shall also
appear, that neither nature, nor we have any cause to complain: Nature, that she
is but sklenderlie furthered, where she means great matters: we, as missing
of that by insufficiency of train, which nature meant us by variety of gifts.
And that therefore this Elementarie being so well appointed by so wise men, as
the first deuisers thereof were, deserves the embracing, which so answers
naturs liberality in endoument, by sufficient variety in artificial
principle.

For the being of man, to maintain and increase his body in every part and
parcel thereof, and so afterward to sprede the The first and primitive
natural powers in our body.
like to it self, in every kind thoroughout, nature has planted in our
bodies, which is her first subject, a liver, the first and foremost part of her
frame, and our main, which liver receiving an eager humor from the milt,
wherewith our appetite to meat is stirred, fetches the same meat down from the
mouth thorough the throat into the stomak, wherein it retains it, until
thorough heat and humor, it be well digested, and perfitlie distributed by the
veins thoroughout the hole body, the superfluity thereof being expelled, and
the purest being reserved, to feed the body for fainting, to enlarge it for
increase: to make matter for succession and continuance of the kind.

Again besides the preserving of our bodies by that norishing mean we have also
a perceiving by outward sense to feel, 2
to hear, to se, to smell, to taste all sensible things, which qualities of the
outward, being received in by the common sense, and examined by fantsie, ar
delivered to remembrance and afterward prove our great and only grounds unto
further knowledge. Moreover we have also a certain force to move and stir
either by commandment of passion, or by enticement of desire, either by the
way of prosecuting for the use of life, by pulse and breathing, or by way of
proceeding to do somewhat else, by going, running, leaping and such like actions.
To serve the turn of these two both sense and motion, nature has planted in our
body a brain the prince of all our parts, which by spreding sinews of all
sorts, thoroughout all our parts, does work all those effects, which either
sense is seen in, or moving perceived by.

Furthermore our soull has in it a desire to obtain that, which 3
it holds for good, and to avoid that, which it estemeth for evil: which
desire works, either by quiet alluring, or by insole^t inflaming, and when
the first motion thereof is once set on foot, either by calm persuasion, or by
vehement heat, it has a further stirring to attain unto that in effect, which
it conceiueth in desire. To satisfy this use, nature has placed in our body,
as a liver to tikle desire, so an heart to kindle heat: and as the sense is
moved by the quality of his object, and that motion served by mean of sinews:
so appetite being stirred by his good or ill ob iect, has both his prosecuting
and refusing supplied by sinews.

Last of all our soull has in it an imperial prerogative of understanding
beyond sense, of judging by reason, of directing 4
by both, for deutie toward God for society toward men, for conquest in
affection, for purchase in knowledge, and such other things, whereby it
furnishes out all manner of uses in this our mortal life, and bewraieth in it
self a more excellent being, then to continue still in this roming pilgrimage.
To serve this so honorable a turn of understanding, and reason, nature tho she
have no place worthy enough within this our base and simple body, wherein to
bestow so great and so stately gests with their hole retinew, yet she does
what she ca^, and being her binger hirself assigns them for lodging her
principal chamber, the very closet of the brain, wherein she bestows every
one of reasons understanding friends, severally each one according unto their
several degrees, and singular dignities. All those abilities in their first
natural kind concern but the being of a rude man, but when there are fashioned
to their best by good education, theie procure the being of a perfect and an
excellent man. For, to live, to feed, to multiply, to have sense, to desire,
to have the use of natural and unrefined reason. The perfection of these
qualities for our best being.
What great thing is it, tho it be somewhat more then brute beasts have, if the
other divine qualities, which bild upon these be not diligently followed?
Which as theie rise out of these at the first, so theie honor them in the end,
as much as the best fruit can honor his first blossom, or as the cunningest
work can grace the first ground, whereupon it is wrought.

Besides that, theie show themselves to be those most excellent ends, which
nature meant first, tho she hirself made but a weak show, and yet very pliable
for man's industry to work on for his own commodity. He that lives not at
all, cannot live well, he that fedeth not at all, cannot feed moderately, he
that multiplieth not, cannot multiply continentlie, he that has no sense,
cannot use it soberlie: he that desires not, cannot desire consideratlie: he
that uses no reason cannot use it advisedly. But he that lives, fedeth,
multiplieth, has sense, has desire, has reason, he has withal, all those
abilities, which nature can afford him, to use them all well, food with
moderation, increase with continence, sense with soberness, desire with
consideration, reason with advise, and so will he use them, if judgment may
rule the last, to have them well, as necessity will the first, simply to have
them. For as the first abilities work their natural feats by commandment of
necessity, so the latter abilities work their laudable feats by direction of
reason, which reason as it is our difference in comparison with beasts, tho we
use it but meanly: so is it our excelle^ce in comparison with men, if we use
it to the best.

The abilities therefore of that reasonable and understanding How educatio and
train work in the particular abilities.
part in man being handled workmanlike, and applied to their best by such
devises and means, as ar thought fittest to work such an effect, do order and
direct the diet for food, and the delight for increase, to the health of those
parts which are appointed for them, and the help of the hole body, which is
compound of those parts. Theie fine the senses, and the instruments thereof to
their best perfection, and their longest endura^ce. Theie restrain desire to
the rule of reason, and the advice of foresight Theie so enrich the mind and
the soull it self, as theie lay up in the treasurre of remembrance, all arts,
all forecast, all knowledge, all wisdom, all understanding, whereby either God
is to be honored, or the world to be served in honest and wise sort, which so
heaue^lie a benefit is bego^ by education, confirmed by use, perfited with
co^tinewance, which crouneth the hole work.

Now all these abilities, whether of the first, and in most of most natural
sort for our being only, or of the second and The applying of the artificial
principles to the natural abilities.
in most of most judicial sort, for our being well, I think to be perfitlie
furthered by this same Elementarie, in the nature of inducement to further
increase: and that for every ability in nature to have us to be such, there is
some principle in this Elementarie to make us to be such.

For those points, which most concern the body, and the health thereof, whether
motiuelie in managing it: or morallie in manering it, what is ouerlept either
in exercise, for practis: or in precept, for behauior? Whereby whatsouer
ability there is in the body, it is stirred and quikned to the very best use.

As for the mind and the abilities thereof, which are afterward to be brought
to some perfection of habit, there is none so blind, but he planelie seith the
ground to be laid to all professions, and all matters of judgment, all the
parts and powers of the soull to be made most fit for most exquisit perfection,
when those principles be obtained, which this Elementarie does set down, the
things themselves tending to the auancement of cunning, and the matter of
cunning to the furtherance of vertew.

But who shall judge of this, that this Elementarie lays hold upon all those
natural abilities? he shall be able to say exceeding much to it, which being
but brought up well in the ordinary train shall but consider this book
advisedly in every branch thereof. But he shall judge best of it, who has
been brought up by it, and by his own sufficiency shall both be able to
pronounce himself, and to cause others pronounce, by seeing him so sufficient,
that there is no point for either actiuitie in body, or capacity in mind,
whereto nature makes him toward, but that nurtur sets him foreward.

Is the body made by nature nimble to run, to ride, to swim, to fense, to do
any thing else, which bears praise in that kind for either profit or
pleasur? And does not the Elementarie help them all forward by precept and
train? The hand, the ear, the eye be the greatest instruments, whereby the
receiving and delivery of our learning, is chefelie executed. And does not
this Elementarie instruct the hand, to write, to draw, to play? The eye to
read by letters, to discern by line, to judge by both. The ear to call for
voice, and sound with proporcion for pleasur, with reason for wit? and
generally whatsoever gift nature has bestowed upon the body, to be brought
forth or bettered by the mean of train, for any profitable use in our hole
life, does not this Elementarie both find it, and forese it? As for the
qualities of the mind, whether theie tuch vertewousnesse in living, or
skilfulnesse in learning, as arts, sciences, professions, or whatsoever else,
by whatsoever term or title else, do theie not every one most apparentlie
proceed from reading and writing, as from their natural principles, the one
for delivery, the other for receipt? whether theie travel in language for it
self, wherein grammar, rhetorik logik, and their deriuatiues clame interest, or
show knowledge by language in any other faculty. Where under be contained in
general terms, all the parts of philosophy both moral and natural, the three
professions divinity, law, physik, all the branches of them all, all the
ofsprings of each, whose instrument speech is. If the mathematiks be the end, or
any particular else, which clameth kindred of them, whose natural end is to
direct manuarie science, tho their translate use be to whet a learned mind,
can theie lak any footing, where number, figur, motion and sound be practiced
in principle? where the mathematiks and their frinds be thus induced, whose
necessary reason does force their own place, can any other faculty, whose
but probable appare^ce does entreat for a roum, but find how to enter?
Whatsoever else concerns either delight to comfort our weakness, or
delitefull use to serve our necessity, with cunning of praise, or handling of
art, all that is foresene either by drawing for the eye, or by musik for the
ear. So that in my opinion, the fathers and founders of this Elementarie,
whereof I am but collector, tho as favorable a collector, as so good a thing
deserves, have used great foresight to lay such foundations therein, as may
both nusle up all natural abilities, while theie ar sprooting in train, and
perfect them at full, when theie ar ripe for the reaping.

For the multitude and variety of those principles, which I appoint
Themultitude of principles.
the young scholars to deall with, that is confirmed even by nature hirself,
which making her own abilities to be so many, requires as many principles to
bring them to perfection, every one helping forward his cosen and frind. And
those wise me^ also, which did both devise them, and execute them in such a
number, and of such variety, bycaus theie would not have young wits to be
ouerburdened with multitude unwisely applied, did help them in train thorough
distinction in time: as the learned Quintilia^ does show in a particular
discourse, where he examineth this question, whether young childern be to learn
diverse things at one time or no. Where he concludes that theie may, as a
thing of no truble, if it be well divided, because the younger the wits be, the
better theie be fed with variety: and if theie be trubled sometime, or fail in
something, yet it is with their minds, as it is with their bodies, soon down
and soon up again, and lightly without harm, if their nurses and trainers be
ready at their hand. For the childern, which when theie be from their overseers
must deall of themselves, ar by little and little to be committed to themselves
to learn to do that betimes, which theie must deall with ever after, yet while
theie ar young, and hollie under charge, their falts com rather by negligence
of such, as have charge over them, then of their own selves, which cannot rule
themselves.

If nature in some childern be not so pregna^t, as theie may take the full
benefit of this hole train, yet by applying it wisely, there may be some good
don, even in the heauiest wits, and most unapt bodies, tho nothing so much as
in the very quikkest. If any pare^t again finding the natural defect in his
child do forbear his pains, and spare his purse, where he hopes for small
profit, he has nature to warrant him, which seems eue^ as it were direct lie
to warn him, not to lose his labor, where she list not to favor.

Again if any one wanting opportunity cannot compass all, or having opportunity
will not meddle withal, which education and nature seem jointly to promis, he
has no cause to blame either of them, whereof the one offered that, which he
would not use, the other that, which he would not take. But to knot up this
argument, me think it is plane, that seeing nature offreth variety of gifts,
industry ought to use both her hands to take that, which is offered. Which
diligence in taking seeing this Eleme^tarie professes, as it lets nothing
fall, which nature holds up: so I take it therefore to be most absolut, in that
it does answer so frind lie a mother as nature is, and ioyns with her in working.

Cap. VIII. That this Elementarie riddeth the course of the after learning from
all difficulty and hardness.
THe fourth prouf of a good Elementarie was, in place of hardness to plant
facility, and to lighten the course of study by making of it plane. For what
thing is it but hardness alone which most appalleth young men's courages, and
abateth their diligence, in a manner fraing them to go any That hardness is a
chief hindrer of learning.
further, when theie are very well minded, toward the obtaining of sound, and
substanciall knowledge? And what but hardness is the chief and original
cause, why so many rest content with simple and superficial skill, being
unwilling to toill themselves with the difficulties of study, and that ear
theie com to feel, that small learning will serve well enough to com by a great
living? which might have been alleged for a very great impediment to greater
learning, if it had gone before the feling of hardness: but the course is
this. Young men desire to get learning to live by, and while theie are in place
of learning, as in universities, by cause there theie se learning in best
credit, theie ar in deed desirous to be noted for learning, which when theie
cannot com by, being chekt thorough hardness, in the matter of study, as
theie think, but in deed thorough weakness in their first train, as I know,
then theie devise, how to turn that little, which theie have, to the best
commodity that theie can, and so in seking of preferment, theie ioyn great
practices with some simple learning, as their best mean to obtain greater
living. Whereas in very deed if difficulty had not crossed them, theie would
have joined worthiness in themselves, with admiration in others, and so have
been called by others, and not have craved themselves. This hardness
certainly comes by cause such students have not been brought up in the
knowledge of these Elements, which being well laid while children ar yet under
the rod, and learn as it were more by rote then by reason, without feeling
themselves, either much pains or any profit, will cause an easy and a
pleasant course in the further learning, when theie can judge what theie do,
tho theie did it not in doing.

For childern as theie be still in doing, so theie know not In what manner and
how this Elementarie expels ignorance.
what theie do, much less wherefor theie do, till reason do grow unto some
ripeness in them. And therefore the matter of their train is such, as theie
profit more by practis, then by knowing why, till theie feel the use of reason,
which teaches them to know considerations and causes. The foresight for their
well doing in the mean time remains in their parents, teachers, and frinds, who
provide so for them in youth, as theie may praise them again, and pray for
them in age. But when theie themselves do grow to judgment, having been so
brought up, then theie do find what a great deall of good theie have allredie
don, and how beneficial their frinds have been unto them, for helping them so
much. Then theie se, where other not so trained do prove stark blind. Then make
theie no bones, where every little let, is a very great log to any of the
other: then march theie one at pleasur, like soldiers of courage, whose way is
made plane by pioners sent before, where the other, which are not so well
provided for, will rather cast away their armor, then wrestle with the
difficulties of unknown and uneasy passages.

I cannot compare the foredeall by which childern ar at, their first education
to any thing better, then to the pictur of Timotheus The description of
Timotheus the Athenians victo ries applied unto childern.
son to Conon the Athenian captain, and his victories, as some his ill willers
did cause them, and him to be painted out, as Plutarch reports. For theie
made Timotheus himself lying fast a sleep, and fortun bringing cuntries, towns,
and victories unto him in a net, meaning thereby; that he became such a
conqueror; more by hap then by cunning, more by his enemies want, then by his
own wit. Childern which be well trained in their youth be like to sleping
Timotheus, preferred by their frinds, ear themselves can perceive it: and their
frinds like to fortun, which furnish them so well, ear themselves can discern,
what good is don unto them. But when theie com to years, and ar once awaked,
then with open eyes theie behold, their frinds care, their own conquest, and
fortun fishing for them, naie Gods providence very careful for them, by the
ministry of parents, masters, and frinds, while theie were fast a sleep, and
could not themselves, either help themselves, or judge right of their helpers.
If this Elementarie then be the great benefit of foreseing frinds, the great
conquest of frindlie fortun, naie the great munificence of a loving God, who
would have his little ones go thorough stitch where ignorance makes hirs stik, is
the thing of small regard, which has so great patrons? is it of small
importance, which foileth such a fo, as ignorance is?

But to go more particuiarlie, is the compassing of tungs hard? sure so it is,
to one of no foretrain, that never learned grammar, that never red writer, that
never proved his style, that never used the tung. Be the mathematiks hard? sure
so there be to one not prepared, that never did number, that never drew line,
that never knew note, that never marked motion. Be the abilities of the body
laborious and hard? sure that theie be, where no exercise goes before, where
the joints be stif, where it is painful to prove, what the body can do, being
never put to it. But where foretrain is, there case will follow, where the
body is prepared, the purgation works: where exercise leads, actiuitie
will follow, both in those and the rest. Theie that have these helps well
grounded in their youth, as I said before, may go forward with ease, and stand
very fast, where other must needs stumble, which have no such help. Which
stumblers, tho by their own exceeding great, and therefore exceeding commendable
travel, theie oftimes in the end excel those, which were better brought up
then theie were, yet the train was well appointed, whatsoever negligence
disappointed the effect in those, which having wings to fly vouchsafed scant to
flutter: and the blame rests in them, which might have don well and would not,
the praise in them, which did so well, tho theie wrastled sore for it.

Therefore the tender mind of the young infant being first embrewed with these
principles as the best, for the first liquor: and then furnished with their
store, as the most, for all helps, facility must needs follow in all that does
succeed.

The opinion mentioned in Platoes Phaedon, that all our learning is but a
calling to remembrance of fore acquainted The force of Platoes note, that all
learning seems to be of some fore acquaintance to us.
skill, the soull having in it naturally, and from her first being all manner
of learning, tho never uttering it, but when it is moved by foren occasion,
confirms this opinion of facility in learning, after these principles be
once laid. For if the general conceit in nature by way of principle do make
all knowledge to seem of old acquaintance, and the things thimselues to be no
sooner named, the^ straight way perceived, as of no new familiarity, no
sooner hard but straight called to remembrance, as the known inhabitants of
natural memory (which kind of perceiving Aristotle calls a knowledge
within us a forehand, which knowledge leads the strongest and the best
demonstration (...).
) sure when difficulty is past in the first planting, which is rightly termed
the better half of the hole, facility must needs follow in all the residew,
which seem to the principles, as of their acquaintance, theie follow so
frindlie. So sharp an eye has he to se further, whose sight is made steddie by
such a preparatiue. He that in his Elementarie train can read and write well,
he that handling the pen or pencill can use them both well by nunber, and with
line: and dealing with musik can judge well of sounds, and handle instruments
right, what can he think hard in his after study, if study be his choice?
Naie what shall he find hard, tho handicraft be his end? for he may well have
all these principles, yea and the mathematiks to, and yet aspire no higher,
then the plane workman: because those helps be peculiar to such people, tho for
some quiknesse to wit, and constantnesse in prouf, theie be used for book
learning. Now if he be entered into language, so far as grammar goes, which is
the tip of the Elementarie, will there be question of difficulty? Then all
hardness being removed in the Elementarie, before the learner can discern,
what a foredeall he is at, and facility being won, where the student might
have stumbled, if his way had not been planed, what a pleasant field has
study to ra^ge in, where nothing can hinder, if loytring do no harm? Which
loytring and negligence is allwaie excepted, as a thing that thwarteth even the
best devises, and commonly cuts of all good success, in even the fairest
attempts, tho it fre the thing from blame, whose furtherance it stops, and
cast the falt on him, whose hinderance it helps. For the thing remains one,
tho the party have it not, the party is the worse, because he has not the
thing, and so much the worse, because he is worse then him self, thorough his
own negligence, which might have passed himself, thorough his own diligence.
What a toill good students ar driven unto for want of their first train


I do oftimes se, and as oftimes pity a great number of very good students,
which be more then half discouraged from their further proceeding, when either
theie find their own want, not having this foretrain: or being desirous to go
forward ar enforced to travel in these Elementarie minutes, sometimes with
effect tho extreme painful, oftimes with dispare and loss of all their
labor. And tho theie do learn them, yet that their learning is nothing so
sound, as under a teacher, because no one man's labor, in any argument
whatsoever, much less in these Elementarie principles, is comparable to the
help that coms by a teacher, or a cunning reader. For is it not an incredible
benefit, to have the very flour and pith of another man's study, naie of all
the best writers, concerning that matter wherein your travel lies, to be
uttered unto you in order, by one that has digested it in time, beside his
painfulnesse in study, to gather it from the best, and most allowed writers? I
will dwell no longer upon this point, because I have handled it in my book of
Positions, where I show what benefit an university receives by excellent
readers. To my present purpose therefore. While either tediousness by the way
does terrify good students, or unskillfulness in the end gives idleness a
fair color, to co^temn where it knows not, the most of our best learning
which we ought to have (tho some fresh heads do think themselves to know enough
and enough, when theie can say more then enough, how small enough so ever
theie have) is either suppressed by difficulty or oppressed by ignorance. I do
not here tuch the want of reward, as being a foren tho a forcible let, to the
furtherance of learning, but only such stops, as be within the parties, and
students themselves, which were in good way to prove excellently sufficient,
if such lets were removed, and themselves in love with learning even for
learnings sake, tho theie looked for no dowry. Now difficulty is a fair
pretense to divert one from knowledge, whom either much travel will toill
sore, or very little will soon tire: and ignorance will be bold to set light by
such things, as it does not se, because it is stark blind.

Wherefor I must needs commend this Elementarie, as most profitable for
readiness without difficulty in the rest of our studies, and the only mean
to make a pleasant passage, where such students, as be not acquainted
therewith, ar either miserably tormented ear that theie can pass at all, or
quite discomfited without hope to pass.

For the trial hereof I do appeall to the judgment of two sorts of men,
whereof either has good feling in this matter. The one is such, as have been
very well and perfithe brought Who can best judge of this question concerning
the difficulty in process of study.
up in either all, or in most of all those things which I do require: Of whom I
ask whether theie find not in themselves a comfortable encouragement to go
forward in learning, thorough the help of their foretrain, and whether theie be
not able, if theie will use their ability, to go forward with great ease? The
other sort is such, as have been brought up either in none of these, or not in
all, or but very vnperfitlie in whatsoever, and be themselves very willing to
learn: Of whom I ask whether theie find not themselves either quite discouraged
in their honest desire, if theie have had no train at all or not more then half
lame, iftheie have had it but by halues: or not both lame and discouraged to,
being vnperfitlie, and therefore ill trained: and whether theie do not strive
miserably against the stream, when theie seek to go forward without these
helps.

Dionysius the Siracusian tyran being at Lacedaemon and exercising Dionysius
and his cook.
himself by the river of Eurotas, as other people did, found his appetite still
exceeding good, and the relice of his meat exceeding pleasant. Whereupon when he
was to return to Syracusae imputing the goodness of his stomak and the
sauorinesse of his meat, to a wrong cause, as if theie had com of his cooks
handling, and not of his own stirring, he took with him a Lacedaemonian cook as
liking of their diet, and allowing of their cook tie. But when he came home he
took himself to ease, and used no more exercise, whereupon finding neither in
his stomak such an appetite, nor in his meat such a relice, as he did at
Lacedaemon, he fell out with his cook, as if the falt had been in him, not
dressing the meat so, as he did at Lacedaemon. But the cook who wittily espied
the cause of this change, told him that the falt was in himself, who neither
using the exercise, which he did at Lacedaemon, neither bathing himself, as he
did in Eurotas, could not have that stomak which he had doing both. So must I
say by the difficulty in learning, that it will seem very harsh and very
unsavory, to proceed in deep study, where this Elementarie help is not at all
had; but exceeding easy and very delitefull, wheresoever it is. And tho some
people think that, there is no such need of any such train, by cause all roums
be ser ued sufficie^tlie without it: I must confess the service, tho I cannot
the sufficiency, which is but sufficient, in comparison of the less but mere
infirmity, where it might be full, and perfitlie performed, ear the pains can
be felt by train in young years. Thus much concerning the facility which this
Elementarie promises to the course of study, and therewithal increases
commendation to it self.

CAP IX. That this Elementarie by avoiding of ignorance auoideth all misliking
THe fist praise of this Eleme^tarie was, because it is the best mean to avoid
general ignorance, the mother to misliking, and to com by general knowledge,
which is the cause of allowance. A circumstance of great moment in the province
of learning, as it is generally also in all other dealings. For that which is
misliked, is still under foot, and that which is allowed is allwaie aloft. Now
all misliking comes either Misliking rises either up on desert, or upon
opinion miscarried.
upon desert, when the thing is such, as for very naughtiness it is to be
misliked, or upon opinion, when error in the party misliketh that thing, which
is of it self well worthy the liking.

Opinion falls in error either thorough mere ignorance, when he that misliketh,
knows not what the thing is, which he does mislike, or else thorough
prejudice, when he that misliketh does know the thing well, but is so wedded
unto, naie rather so bewitched with his own fantsie, which it self is seduced
by some foren allurement, as he will rather mislike against knowledge, then
withstand against fantsie. That the matter of learning is not to be misliked
upon desert.


As for the matter of learning, wherein our study consists, and whereunto
these principles make a ready entrance, our necessary use both bred it at the
first, and contineweth it still, in very good credit. And what man is so
simple, but he knows it to be such, as deserves good liking: both for the
service that it does us, which is the natural end of it, and for the
propriety in handling, which is an artificial mean to it? Wherefore if with
out cause it be otherwise charged by any color of blame either in all or in
part, opinion is the charger, which opinion in so doing is either blinded by
ignorance, or corrupted by fantsie, the very worst branch of any kind of
error, not minding to amend and still waxing worse, as both the two be very
great enemies to all right judgment. If any kind of writer for vaunt, not
for want of wit, or upon some particular cause else, do practis his pen or whet
his tung against the good in learning, as Lucian does in most places of hole
works, as Agrippa does in his vane book of vanities in science, theie cannot
wound learning, tho theie strike at the wants, which be in some professors.
Because tho the two qualities, one of good note, and to be well used, as
learning and knowledge, the other of ill note, and never but naught, as vice
and misdemeanor, be in one and the same party, yet as the good quality cannot
transubstantiate the evil, so can not the evil change the others substance,
tho it foullie disfigur the form thereof, which is so much the worse, because
of such a companion, whom the qualified party, as subject unto both has
matched so together, being in nature most different, thovnited in the person, as
a common harbor to two great enemies, whereof the one seeks the subversion of
the other.

Syphax the king of Barbary, as Liuie reports, lodged both Scipio and
Hasdrubal in one palace, being two mortal enemies, and even at that time in
most cruel war, Scipio for Rome, Hasdrubal for Carthage. But what came of it?
the king being persuaded by Scipioes presence, and his grave speech, began to
falter in his amity with his old frinds, the people of Carthage, and proceeding
so forward in that his mutabilitie, at the last chused the worst. For being the
first mouer to have the Romans army pass over into Asrik, he wrought the
overthrow to Carthage and reuolting again from the Romans frindship to the
people of Carthage he overthrew himself, and lost kingdom and all. Such a thing
it is to harbor two enemies, and to give ear to both, where the infirmity of
our nature, either cannot well judge of them, or if it can, yet is lightly
conquered by the worst of the two, howsoever it promis the more honorable gest,
to ioyn with the better. If learning and vice do lodge in one room, the
allurement of vice will lightly preuaill against the allegation of learning,
and enforce the learned to do against his knowledge, and yet learning is still
good, tho the professor go awrie, and tho cauilling wits do translate crimes
from the offender to the innocent. But such fellows bewraie their own folly,
even in jest to turn their heles against their own helps, and by their fond
doing to stir some fond heads, to mislike that in earnest, which theie meant but
in jest. This doing of both Lucian and Agrippa, and any such else, which
jest so with good things, to the shaking of their credit, so much as lies in
them, may be justly comprised under error in opinion not erroniouslie but
wantonlie seduced. But what if that wanton seduction be the worst of all other,
and worthy to be punished? whereas of the other two, the one is moned in
ignorance, the other but bla med in error.

But to return to my former argument, what greater enemies Ignorance and
prejudice the greatest enemies and mislikers of sound learning.
has learning even in nature, then prejudice and ignorance? whence is there
more open show of implacable hostility to knowledge, then from prejudice and
ignorance? Ignorance knows nothing, and therefore is no friend to ane unknown
good: prejudice knows and will not, and therefore is a great fo to a not
favored good. Ignorance yet in part deserves some excuse for all her
disfrindship, because infirmity is her falt, not bolstered with ill will, and
the worst is her own, ane ordinary case, where even enimitie pityeth. But
prejudice is a poison to any common weall, so far as it stretches, which
being at the first infected with the incurable disease of a cankred and a
corrupt opinion gathered by confluence of sundry ill humors will neither it
self yield to a right judgment, nor will suffer any other, where her
persuasion can take place. For by yiedling her self she fears the emparing of
her misconceiued estimation, and by suffering other to yield, she fears the
increase of knowledges frinds; whereby her self shall com in danger to be
oppressed, both with truth of matter, and number of patrons. Wherefor she
opposes her self, she bends all her eloquence, she mureth up all passages,
so much as she may, both by persuasion and entreatie, that none shall judge
right, which will hear her speak, and regard her authority, but shall take that
musik to sound the swetest, which comes from her, tho she be but a mearmaid,
which by offering of delight endeuoreth to destroy.

Ignorance is violent and like unto a lion, when it encountreth Ignorance and
her grounds.
with knowledge, still in fury without feling, in rage without reason, and
rises of two causes, either infirmity in nature, or negligence in labor.
Whereof the one could not, the other would Negligence.
not conceive at the first, when knowledge was in dealing. Both enemies to
knowledge, but negligence the greater, which either fearing disdain for her
first refusal, or envying him which loves where she left, will not seem to
favor, where she once forsook, and stomaketh him, which embraces her leauings,
awraking her malice in show upon knowledge, in deed upon folly. Which folly
being lodged within her own breast, beside that negligent ignorance, uses to
call in a dangerous opinion, the contempt of that good, which she ought to
commend, rather then she will by change of opinion and altring her hew bewraie
her own error, which all men se saving she that should: being at defiance with
knowledge, not by simplicity of nature, which offered, but by naughtiness of
choice, which refused the attaining thereof. Infirmity.


Now natural infirmity the other and more gentle mean of ignorance would
perhaps, naie would in deed change her blind opinion, if she could once change
her ingenerate heaviness: she would reverence learning, if she might se her
beawtie, where with to be ravished, being enemy unto her, not of malice but of
weakness.

That which I speak of infirmity in nature, and negligence in choice is to be
intended by such of both sorts, as continue in their worst without remorse of
evil, or recourse to good. For if any man whether naturally dull or
negligentlie rude in riper years upon better advise do change his current: the
natural weak to love that in others, which he has not himself: the
negligentlie rude to wish that in himself, which he seith to be in others, he
then becoms frind to judgment, and will rather continue in suspense, then
pronounce rashly, till he be thoroughlie informed. Prejudice and her grounds.


But that same perverse prejudice is a sutle fo to knowledge like a manieheaded
hydra, and as the venim of his authority is gathered of diverse grounds, so the
sting of his poison infecteth diverse ways. The person himself which is thus
carried away by a peuish opinion is commonly no heavy head, but either
superficially learned, and yet loath to seem so: or enuiouslie affected and
still carping at his better: or ambitiouslie given and presumes upon
countenance: or he measures knowledge by gain, and sets naught by ante
more, that himself shall need, to compass that he coueteth, where a little
cunning will compass much more then reason thinks enough in corruption of
minds. All which four causes mean learning glad to make great show, envious
affection glancing at good things: vane presumption plaing the peicok: covetous
desire careless of great cunning, as theie corrupt the judgment, so theie
maintain prejudice, while the party so corrupted will seek by all means to
continue his credit: so much the more a deadly enemy to knowledge, because
prejudice must give place, if knowledge com in place, and therefore that it may
not com, he emploieth all his forces, by all cunning, and all well colored
shifts to shoulder it out: a professed so, and so much the shrewder, because he
supplanteth knowledge under the opinion of knowledge.

Now considering these so fiery and so furious enemies to knowledge, ignorance
and prejudice with their hole families How this Elementarie presents
misliking by planting of knowledge.
be the causes why, that the best things and matters of most cunning be oftimes
misliked, where theie be unknown; either simply or shrewdly, does not this
Elementarie a great pleasure to knowledge, by planting skill in all, to avoid
misliking in any? that every part of knowledge may be so esteemed of, as it
justly deserves? and each of these mislikers may be so entreated, as o become
frinds of foes?

Misliking was said to com either of deserving ill, whereof learning is clear,
because it deserves well, or else by error, from which kind of misliking any
sound knowledge will very hard lie escape. For ignorance supported by
infirmity in nature, and negligence in labor, and prejudice maintained by four
crafty companions, superficial learning, envious affection, vainglorious
conceit, and covetous desire will still have a fling at her. How be it if
natural infirmity be helped by diligent education, it will either prove a
frind or no bitter fo, for that good which it has gotten. If negligence it self
be so entreated in the training, as it will be content to take pains to learn,
it will favor at the last, tho it frown at the first. If prejudice in general
may compass and keep that credit, with sound and substantial knowledge, which
it aspireth unto by superficial show and sinister means, were not he worse
then mad, that would hang upon the shadow, where he might have the body, being
still in danger to have his unskillfulness discovered at every encounter with
a learneder man? at every dealing with any such matter, as will bewraie a
smatterer? By help of this Elementarie will this substance be gotten, that the
show shall not need. For this kind of training up in youth does crepe on to
knowledge, ear the feling of labor can take any place, and encrocheth so sore
upon blind ignorance, as it cannot be painful, no not to negligent heads,
being so well set forward, to pass quite thorough without either difficulty
or danger, if he set no man to work but good will alone. Which being don will
not misliking be ba nished, and liking be called home? will not ignorance stowp
when knowledge is in state? when the end is well wrought, and by right means,
which was sought for before by a very wrong way? I shall not need to repeat
here again, to what kind of knowledge every principle helps. For in that
theie expel ignorance every where, that serves for this purpos, as, that
theie help knowledge every where, it is a thing proved all ready. Both which,
the help to knowledge, and exile to ignorance, sound much to the praise of
these five principles; wherewith theie procure liking to learning, and valur to
vertew.

CAP. X. That the entry to language and the judgment thereof by gra^mer is
the end of the Elementarie.
THe sixth and last prouf of perfitnesse in this elementarie was, because the
entrance of language, and the judgment thereof, which is wrought by gra^mer,
is the conclusion and height thereof. Which how profitable a thing it is, the
effects themselves will evidently declare. For by course of nature and use of
antiquity, grammar trauelleth first to have the natural tung of each cuntrie
fined to that best, and most certain direction, which the ordinary custom of
that cuntrie which uses the tung, can lead her unto: As how to reduce our
English tung to some certain rule, for writing and reading, for words and
speaking, for sentence and ornament, that men may The duble use of grammar.
know, when theie write or speak right. Which direction was both the first, and
the most ancient use of the original grammar. Whose professors because of
their judgment were called Critici, as Aristarchus among the greeks, Palaemon
among the Romans. Secondly grammar, as it has been used sense, seeks to
help us to the knowledge of foren language, as the 2.
Latin, the Italian, and such other tungs, which at this day is the principal
use thereof. Whereit serves in the nature of an anatomy, for the resolving of
the written speech: in the nature of an interpreter, for turning the foren into
the natural: in the nature of an artificer, for making up the habit of a foren
tung in the studious learner, by writing and speaking. Now in either of these
kinds, whether to fine our own tung, or to learn a foren, we are much bound to
grammar, even for it self alone, but a great deall more in respect of her
professor, which must perform the three things, that I named before of his own
ability. For grammar of itself is but the bare rule, and a very naked thing,
but the professor must have somewhat more then his rule.

And (not to meddle here at this time with any fore^ tu^g, for either the one
or the other part of gra^mer) does it not I pray you, That grammar pleasureth
us even for the fining of our own spech alone.
show us Englismen a very great pleasur, if it help to the fining of our own
English tung, and thereby to make it to be of such ac count, as other tungs be,
which be therefore of best account, because theie be so fined? whereby we our
selves also shall seem not to be barbarous, eue^ by mean of our tung, seeing
fair speech is some parcel of praise, and a great argument of a well ciuilled
people. But it pleasureth us a great deall more, as the course of our study now
lies, for helping of us to foren language, by such good helps, as it joins
to it self, bysides the bare Anatomy of a plane rule. For a mere grammarian is
but a poor mean to do any thing well, even where he professes most: as
Quintilian saw very well, which for the latin tung, and the grammarian therein
said, that it is was one thing to speak like a grammarian, and another thing to
speak like a latinist, as if grammar latin were but latin by dispensation: and
he only hit the right in every tung, which could both way the rules, and
pease the force of speech according to that grace, which every tung has. But
forasmuch as grammar is used for one degree in help to fore^ language, it
furthereth us very much that way, because all our learning being fet from the
foren, as regestred in their tungs, if we want the knowledge of the one, we
want the hope of the other.

When learning, and knowledge came first to light, those men, which were the
autors thereof, uttered their minds in that same speech, which theie then
used, when theie bred the things. And as theie neded no foren tung for the
matter bred at home, so had theie no other use of any grammar, but only
that, which endeavored to fine their natural speech at home. But after that
the same their devises, being first set out in their own tungs, were afterward
sought for by foren students, to increase their learning, and to enrich their
cuntrie with foren wares, the foren students were then driven to use the
assistence of grammar in the second kind, because theie could not understand
those things, which were written in a foren tung, without the knowledge of the
tung it self.

In the primitive grammar children being framed so, as I require now; went
straight way from the Elementarie to matter of learning, and the mathematical
sciences, which are so termed, because in deed the whole scholars learning
(which scholars in greek ar called (...)) consisted in them, as in the first
degree of right study. For whatsoever goes before them in right study, is
nothing else at all, but mere Elementatie: and whatsoever goes before them in
wrong study, as it is wrested in nature, so it works no great wonder. But in
the second use of grammar, we are enforced of necessity, after the Elementarie
howsoever hudled up, and how simple soever, to deall with the tungs, ear we
pass to any matter, which help of tungs, tho it be most necessary for the
thing, as our study is now platted, yet it hinders us in time a thing of
great price, naie it hinders us in knowledge a thing of more price. For by the
lingering about language, we are removed and kept bak one degree further from
sound knowledge, which is so great a degree, being in our best learning time,
while we be under masters and readers, of whom we may learn far better, then
of our selves, if that regard be had to the^ in choice, which elsewhere I have
wish ed were caresullie had. But I will not deall any further with gra^mer in
this place, considering that hole argument will follow this Elementaric, and
has so many branches, as we deall with tu^gs: neither yet will I proceed with
this discourse, which offers it self here concerning the let of study, by
the study of tu^gs, which tungs seem to be the only mean to all our study,
as we use it at this day, because I have handled that argument already in the
preface to my learned and courteous reader, besides that I have tuched it in my
book of Positions. For this time this may suffice, that this our Elementarie
is very beneficial unto us, by the mean of grammar also, which is the honor
and perfection of the Elementarie in both her naturs, but chefelie in the
course of our learning now, whereby we are entered into language, and withal
into knowledge, while our own tung remains but poor, and is kept very low
thorough some reasonable superstition, not to have learning in it.

But here to conclude the general use of this present Eleme^tarie, which has
been thus far my particular argument, I must needs continue my first opinion,
which was and is this, that in the matter of learning, a good Elementarie is
more then the half, because it is the first: and that in the first it is mere
the best, because the wisest men, the greatest reasons, the best governed
common wealls did so pronounce of it, the one by their pen, the other by their
practis.

Cap. XI. The general platform and method of the hole Elementarie.
I Will set down the purtrait of the hole Elementarie, and how I purpos to
deall therein, before I meddle with any particular principle, that my reader
seeing my hole plat in so small a form, and no parcel thereof but within his
compass, may the sooner perceive the drift of my labor, and accordingly frame
his hope of the thing, and the good like to com by it, and stay his memory
the better, by the method and order which I promis to keep in it. I divide the
consideration of the hole Elementarie into two parts, whereof the first
concerns the matter and substance thereof, and how I entend to deall therein:
the second concerns the manner and form of teaching it, and how I wish that
every circumstance were handled, that both the teacher may deliver planelie
with order, and the learner receive quiklie with profit. Wherefor the first
part of this my The matter of the Elementarie and the manner of teaching it.
general plat shall show the matter of the Elementarie, and the handling
thereof: the second shall show the manner of teaching, and the circumstances
therein.

The matter of the hole Elementarie consisting in five points: reading,
writing, drawing, singing, and plaing, I will so handle them The matter of the
Elementarie.
in rue, as, I marshall them in order, and begin first at reading.

But by cause I take upon me in this Elementarie, besides some frindship to
secretaries for the pen, and to correctors for the print, to direct such people,
as teach childern to read and write English, and the reading must needs be
such, as the writing leads unto, thererfor, before I meddle with any particular
precept, to direct the Reader, I will thoroughlie rip up the hole The plat and
method of the English ortografie.
certainty of our English writing, so far forth and with such assurance, as
probability can make me, because it is a thing both proper to my argument, and
profitable to my cuntrie. For our natural tung being as beneficial unto us
for our nedesull delivery, as any other is to the people which use it: and
having as pretty, and as fair observations in it, as any other has: and being
as ready to yield to any rule of Art, as any other is: why should I not take
some pains, to find out the right writing of ours, as other cuntrimen have don,
to find the like in theirs? and so much the rather, because it is pretended,
that the writing thereof is meruellous uncertain, and scant to be recovered
from extreme confusion, without some change of as great extremity? I mean
therefore so to deall in it, as I may wipe away that opinion of either
uncertainty for confusion, or impossibility for direction, that both the
natural English may have wherein to rest, and the desirous stanger may have
whereby to learn. For the performance whereof, and mine own better direction, I
will first examine those means, whereby other tungs of most sacred antiquity
have been brought to Art and form of discipline for their right writing, to the
end that by following their way, I may hit upon their right, and at the least
by their president devise the like to theirs, where the use of our tung, and
the property of our dialect will not yield flat to theirs. That don I will set
all the variety of our now writing, and the uncertain force of all our
letters in as much certainty, as any writing ca^ be, by these seven precepts,
Ge nerall rule, which concerns the property and use of each letter: 1.
Proportion, which reduces all words of one sound to the same wri 2.
ting: Composition, which teaches how to write one word made 3.
of mo: Deriuation, which examineth the offspring of every original:
Distinction which bewraieth the difference of sound, and 4.
force in letters by some written figure or accent: Enfranchisment, 5.
which directs the right writing of all incorporat foren words: 6.
Prerogative, which declares a reservation, wherein common use will continue
her precedence in our Enlish writing, as she 7.
has don every where else, both for the form of the letter, in some places,
which likes the pen better: and for the difference in writing, where some
particular caveat will chek a common rule. In all these seven I will so examine
the particularities of our tung, as either nothing shall seem strange at all,
or if any thing do seem, yet it shall not seem so strange, but that either the
self same, or the very like unto it, or the more strange then it is shall
appear to be in those things, which are more familiar unto us for extraordinary
learning, then required of us for our ordinary use. And forasmuch as the eye
will help many to write right by a seen president, which either cannot
understand, or cannot entend to understand the reason of a rule, therefore in
the end of this treatis for right writing, I purpos to set down a general
table of most English words, by way of president, to help such plane people, as
cannot entend the understanding of a rule, which requires both time and
conceit in perceiving; but can easily run to a general table, which is
readier to their hand. By the which table I shall also confirm the right of my
rules, that theie hold thoroughout, and by multitude of examples help some maim
in precepts. Thus much for the right writing of our English tung, which may
seem for a preface to the principle of Reading, as the matter of the one is the
maker of the The plat and method of the principle of reading.
other.

In reading I will keep this order, because the treatis of right writing does
pretend some help to the right in reading, I will first give certain rules, to
be observed in reading and spelling, according to those precepts, which I gave
in writing. And for so much as the goodness and vertew of matter is most fit for
the young child in the first seasoning of his tender mind: and the matter it
self is spread into two branches, consonant unto the main distinction of the ten
commandments, either for religion toward God, and right opinion in faith: or
for civility toward men, and right judgment in behauior: I will therefore
cast the matter of reading so, as it shall answer at full both to religion in
faith, and to civility in frindship. Wherefor to lay the first ground of
learning, which is to learn to read, in religion toward God, and in religion
it self to observe the law and ordinances of my cuntrie, I will after the A b
c, set down the ordinary catechism set forth by my prince, and the state of my
cuntrie, with all such appendants for graces, and other prayers, as shall se me
most pertinent to the Elementarie traning of a christian child. Thereunto I
will ioyn some other pretty short treatis concerning the same religious argument
being of good importance for those years to understand: and as warily
appointed, as God shall appoint me. Then will I set down some other well pikt
discourse, which shall concern moral behauior, and right opinions that way.
In all which I will have both a special, and a continual regard to these four
points in the child, his memory, his delight, his capacity, and his
forwarding.

For his memory I will forese, that as he must practis it even 1.
from the first, so he may also practis it even upon the best, both for
pleasur in learning, and for profit after learning.

For his delight, which is no mean allurement to his learning 2.
well, I will be as careful that the matter which he shall read, may be so
fit for his years, and so plane to his wit, as when he is at schooll, he may
desire to go forward in so comfortable an argument, and when he comes home,
he may take great pleasur to be telling of his parents, what pretty petie
things he does find in his book, and that the parents also may have no less
delight to hear their little one speak: In so much as either of them shall rather
seek to prevent the other, the child to be telling somewhat, and the parent to
be asking somewhat, then to be so slow, as to tarry for the moving.

For his capacity I will so provide, that the matter which he shall learn,
may be so easy to understand, and the phrase which 3.
I will use, so evident to perceive, as both the one and the other shall cause
nothing but courage.

For his forwarding I mean to be somewhat curious, that there be such
consideration and choice for syllabs words and sentences, 4.
and for all their accidentarie notes, as there shall want nothing, which may
seem worth the wishing, for the full help of either spelling true, or reading
sure: that what child soever can read them well, may read any thing else
well, if the reading master will keep that order in his teaching, which I
entend to give him in my precept, and do his infant no harm by hasting him on
to fast, and by measuring his forwardness not by his own knowledge, but by
fantsie of his frinds. If opportunity serve me and cause require that labor, I
will pen the same things in the latin tung also, to satisfy some people, which
will be best pleased so, as in very deed saving for the ortografie, which is
proper to our tung, there is nothing in the Elementarie, but it may well be
communicated with any foren nation, which must likewise provide for their
peculiar ortografie, as I do for ours, if theie mean to use the like
Elementarie to this.

The treatis of reading being thus ended, then will I on to the The plat and
method of the principle for writing.
principle of writing, wherein I shall need neither tobe curious, ne yet long,
by cause the hole ortografie, which concerns the right writing of our tung,
will both help the writing master, and ease my labor in that behalf. Howbeit
whatsoever shall be need full to that end besides the rules, which are given in
the ortografie (as there be many pretty notes, for the writers profession,
both to frame the childs hand right, to form and ioyn letters well, and to fit
those instruments, which he must needs use in the managing thereof) all that I
will set forth most planelie, and as shortly, for both the English and the
latin letter. I ioyn the latin letter with the English, by cause the time to
learn the latin tung is next in order after the Elementarie, and the childs
hand is the^ to be acquainted with the latin charact, which is nothing so
combersom as the English charact is, if it be not far more easy. And tho we
use to learn some other tungs afterward, as well as latin, which have their
peculiar characts, as the greek and hebrew, yet he that can write English and
latin well, will learn those hands both soon, and of himself. So that the
Elementarie writing shall not need to truble it self any further in the
Elementarie time of learning, then with those two tungs, the English and the
latin. If other ordinary trades do require mo hands, as for the use of some
court, and such other like, the writing master may help him self, with the
particular form of the had, that is sought for, as I will help him with rules
in any writing at all, of whatsoever form, tho I make choice but of two
only. But here methink I find honest men's diligence very sore mismatched,
with an intricate way and most wearisom to themselves. For theie spend their
hole time about setting of copies, whereas fewer copies, and more loking to his
hand would help the child more, as the number of copies occupying the hole
time, is mere enemy to amendment, and direction of the hand. I will therefore,
because I like that best, set down two tables of the English and the latin
tung, with the letters ioynings, and what so else shall be necessary for one
perpetual copy. The argument whereof shall be such for choice, as it shall
deserve the remembering, which the often writing will easily procure, and the
wariness shall be such for certainty of letter, for variety of form, for all
kinds of joining, as he, that ca^ write and resemble those two copies well,
shall think nothing strange, that does concern writing. So Much diligence shall be
used in the choice of a few lines, which must pla^t an habit. Further because
it shall be good for the writing master, to have tables in store, tho he occupy
them not allwaie, I will set him down two other tables, of the like choice for
the greek and hebrew. And if I shall think it convenient to translate my
English reading arguments into latin, I will also help the Elementarie latin
master, with all such notes, as may teach to read latin, that in great
ignorance of the tung, yet he shall not lightly fail, either in tuning or
timing even of unknown words. Why I do like these tables better, the^ the
multitude of copies, I will show more at large in the particular handling of
the writing principle, because in that point I am somewhat contrary to many of
those, which teach children to write, whose commodity I hinder not, tho I help
their scholars more, whose labor I lessen not, tho I releace it from copies.
This don I must teach The plat, and method for the principle of drawing.
how to draw. Which drawing bycauseit is not so euide^tlie profitable, nor so
generally received, as writing and reading be, I will therefore prove in a
pretty short discourse both how profitable it is, and how it deserves the
learning, eue^ for profit sake, besides many petie plesurs. Then because
drawing uses both number and figur, wherewithal to work, I will cull out so
much nu^bring from out of Arithmetik the mistress of numbers, and so much
figuring out of Geometry the lady of figurs, as shall serve fit for an
Elementarie principle to the childs drawing, without either hardness to fraie
him, or length to tire him. Whatsoever shall belong to coloring, to shadowing,
and such more workmanlie points, by cause theie ar nearer to the painter, the^
to the drawing learner, I will reserve the^ to the after habit, and to the
stude^ts choice, when he is to divert, and to betake himself to some one trade
of life. At which time, if he chance to choose the pen and pe^cil to live by,
this introduction then will prove his great frind, as he himself shall find,
when he feles it in prouf. Last of all for so much as drawing is a thing, whose
thorough help many good workmen do use, which live honestly thereby, and in
good degree of estimation and wealth, as architectur, pictur, embroderie,
engrauing, statuarie all modelling all platforming, and many the like: besides
the learned use thereof, for Astronomy, Geometry, Chorographie, Topographie
and some other such, I will therefore pik out some certain figures proper to so
many of the foresaid faculties, as shall seem most fit to teach a child to
draw, and withal I will show how theie be to be dealt with even from their
first point, to their last perfection, seeing it is out of all controversy,
that, if drawing be thought needful, as it shall be proved to be, it is now to
be dealt with, while the finger is tender, and the writing yet in hand, that
both the pen and pe^cill, both the rule and co^pas, may go forward together.

As for Musik, which I have divided into voice and instrument, The plat and
method for the principles of Musik. 1. 2. 3.
I will keep this current. The training up in musik as in all other faculties,
has a special eye to these three points: The child himself, that is to learn:
the matter it self, which he is to learn: and the instument it self, whereon he
is to learn. Wherein I will deall so for the first and last, that is for the
child and the instrument, as neither of them shall lak, whatsoever is
needful; either for framing of the childs voice, or for the righting of his
finger, or for the prikking of his lessons, or for the the tuning of his
instrument. For in the voice there is a right pitch, that it be neither over
nor under strained, but delicatelie brought to her best ground, both to keep
out long and to rise or fall within dew compass, and so to become tunable, with
regard to health, and pleasant to hear. And in the fingring also, there is a
regard to be had, both that the child strike so, as he do not shufle, neither
spoill any sound, and that his finger run so both sure and sightiie, as it
cumber not it self with enta^gled delivery. Where of the first commo^lie
falls out by to much have, in the young learner, who is ever longing until
be a leaving: the second falt coms of the master himself, who does not consider
the natural dexterity, and sequel in the joints, which being used right, and
in a natural consequence, procures the finger a nimblenesse with ease, and
helps the delivery to readiness without pain, as the untoward fingring must
needs bring in corruption, tho corrupt use do not use to co^plain. For the
matter of musik, which the child is to learn, I will set it down how, and by
what degres and in what lessons, a boy that is to be brought up to sing, may
and ought to proceed by ordinary asce^t, from the first term of Art, and the
first note in sound, until he shall be able without any often or any great
missing, to sing his part in prikso^g, either himself alone, which is his first
in rudeness, or with some company, which is his best in practis. For I take so
much to be enough for an Eleme^ tarry institution, which saluteth but the
faculty, tho it perfect the princple, and I refer the residew for setting and
disca^t to enciease of cunning, which daily will grow on, and to further
years, when the hole body of musik will com, and crave place. And yet because
the child must still mount somewhat that way, I will set him down so^ rules of
setting and disca^t, which will make him better able to judge of singing being
a setter himself, as in the tung, he that uses to write, shall best judge of a
writer. Concerning the virginalls and the lute, which two instruments, I have
therefore chosen, because of the full musik which is uttered by the^ and the
variety of The virginals and lute.
fingring, which is showed upon the^, I will also set down so many chosen
lessons for either of them, as shall bring the young learner to play
reasonable well on them both, tho not at the first sight, whether by the ear,
or by the book, allwaie provided that priksong go before plaing. All which
lessons both for instume^t and voice, I will not only name, and set the
learner over to get them, where he can, in the written song books set forth by
musik masters, but I will cause them all to be prikt and printed in the same
principle of musik, that both the reader may judge of them, and the scholar
learn by them. Which thing as well as all the rest, that I have undertaken to
perform in this Elementarie, I hope by Gods help to bring to such effect
thorough conference with the best practicioners in our time, and the counsel
of the best learned writers in any time, in every of the principles, besides
mine own travel, and some not negligent experience, as I shall discharge my
promis, and content my good cuntrimen. What thing soever else besides this that
I have named, shall seem to be needful for the better opening of any
particular point, I will se to it there, tho I say nothing of it here. This is
the so^ of my Eleme^tarie platform for the matter thereof.

For the manner of teaching and consideration of circumstance in executing
thereof, which was the second part of my The plat, and method for the manner of
teaching and training, accor ding to this Elementarie.
general plat in my first division, and has the same place, if not a greater
in the particular performance of any execution (for what avails precept, if
it be not performed? or what performance is it, that proceeds not in order?) I
entend to do thus. Because all these things tho never so good of themselves,
tho never so commended by writers, tho never so well liked of parents, yet may
miscarie in the handling, if theie be not well followed with all dew
circumstances, I will therefore set down a particular direction for every
principle, when to begin, and in what degree of ripeness to ioyn with another,
and that so as neither to soon mar, nor to much confound: how to handle the
young wit: how to ioyn exercise of the body with these principles for the
mind: what method in teaching them may seem to be best: what pretty devises
must be used to cause the child of himself show what he can do, and what metle
there is in him, with all such considerations as be naturally incident to such
an execution, that the young learner may both thank me for his health, and
think well of me for his learning, as a willing instrument to do him some good,
if it shall please God, the giver of good, to bless mine endeavor. Thus much
for my general plat. In the performance whereof, tho I do sometimes enterlace
discourses, that be not for children, either to conceive or cun, yet theie be
not impertinent to the matter, neither improper to me, sometime to open some
further point necessary to my purpos: sometime to enstruct the masters, which
might either misconceiue me, or misorder the teaching: sometimes even to se how
our English tung will play with these arguments, which are thought so uncouth,
and not expressible in our tung. But what so ever shall be necessary for the
childs travel alone, I will so appoint that, as it shall stand alone, and
may be printed alone, the larger discourses serving for more years, and such
as will use them. For that I take to be the best method in penning any thing,
whereof the student is to commit part to memory, and to study the other part,
to make the remembering part, pithie, short, and apart, and in the other to
handle the rest at large, and yet no more then needful. Which two points of
largeness, without to much for more years, and shortness without to little for
less years, ar in this Elementarie to be specially considered. Because the
Eleme^tarie master is not commonly the cunningest, and the Elementarie scholar
is under twelve years. For a child thus trained, shall learn the tung sooner,
and do more between twelve and sixtene, then from seven to seuentene if he
begin without this train. But the ortografie calls for me.

CAP. XII. The method which the learned tungs used in the finding out of their
own right writing.
I Begin the Elementarie at the argument of right writing, Why I do begin at
the right writing of English.
because reading, which is the first Elementarie principle, must be directed
both in precept and practis, thereafter as the thing, which is to be red, is
written or printed. And considering the right writing of our tung is yet in
question: some, but those to forward, esteming it quite improper: some, but those
to bakward, thinking it perfect enough: some, and those the soundest judging it
to be in most well appointed, tho in particulars to be helped: is it not a very
necessary labor to set the writing certain, that the reading may be sure? Now
in examining the right of our writing, I begin at that method, which the
learned tungs used, Why in ortografie I begin at this method
to find out the like right in their own writing, when it was in like question,
that ours now is, for these two reasons. First by following their president,
and marking that course, which was 1
used in them, I shall both have good warrant against any such, as shall
mislike of my current, and dream of new devises: and withal, I shall be abler
to work the like in English, by using the like precept, in the like
observation. For all tungs keep one, and the same rule for their main, tho
every one have his property in part, which particular property, as it is
noted in the best tungs, (which are so termed, because they are so esteemed, for
the prerogative of that use, which we find to be in them) so it is warranted in
ours, even by president from them. So that hereby I shall not seem, I hope, to
any advised reader, but to have used a very good mean, for the finding out of
that, which is to be decided in the right of our writing: and if any other,
either of peevishness, or of ignorance, shall mislike my proceeding, the honor
of my president, being rightly followed, (which I hope to perform) will both
defend me, and condemn them, if it cannot content them. The second cause, that
moved me to begin at this method, is, thereby to answer all those 2
objections, which charge our writing with either insufficiency, or confusion:
and also to examine by it, as by a sure tuchstone, all the other supplements,
which have been devised heretofore, to help our writing, by either altering of
the old characts, or devising of some new, or increasing of their number. For if
the other so esteemed tungs, when theie were subject to, and charged with these
same supposed wants, wherewith our writing is now burdened, did deliver them
selves by other means, then either by altering, or by innouating, or by
increasing their characts, and made the stuf of their own custom, to be stear
of their direction, as this method will show, why should we desire to seek
foren means, and impertinent to our tung, by devise of new forge, having such a
pattern to perfect our writing, by a so well warranted president? That the That
the first tungs were once rude.
finest tung, was once in filth, the very course of nature proceeding from
weakness, to strength from imperfection to perfitnesse, from a mean degree, to
a main dignity, does give us to behold, yea tho neither Marcus Uarro, nor yet
Quintilian, nor any such as Priscian did show the like in the Latin, and by
example in that one, confirmed the like in all: which I will not rip up, as a
thing of more vaunt for reading, then of help to writing, where one general
reason, proved by one particular, of perpetual sequel, like a geometrical
demonstration, will serve well enough.

Well then, what means did those languages use, which have won the opinion,
that theie be right written, to com The original and secondarie fining of tungs
by that right, which wrought that opinion? There be two considerations in
speech, concerning the way, which has been used in the fining thereof. For if
we look into the first degree of fining, before which, no tung at all had any
beawtie in the pen, we are to consider, how the very first tung did proceed
from her first rudeness, to her best perfection: Again if we look into the
next degree, wherein the like finenesse ensewed in other tungs, by following the
like course to that which the first refiners took, then we are to consider, how
other secondarie languages have proined and pikt them selves, by following that
method, which the primitive did use.

But by cause I desire to be warranted by them both, that is, both following
the first finers, and the second presidentiaries, in this my course, (which no
man has yet kept in this argument, as I can perceice, tho diverse write
ortografies,) and my opinion is, that it best besemes a scholar, to proceed by
Art in any recovery, from the claws of ignorance: Therefore I will rip up,
even from the very root, how and by what degrees, the very first tung, does
seem to com by that her perfection in writing, and what order was taken to
continue that perfection, ever sense the time that any tung is perfited.
Allwaies reserving so much to his consideration, which entendeth the fining of
any speech, as concerns the property of any particular tung, which
particularitie will not be comprised under general precept with any other
tung, but must be directed by private observation, and particular exception
against the common rule. And yet even this so particular a circumstance is not
omitted in the general method of the first fining, and thereby it is commended
unto us by way of translation, which com in the third degree, and fine after
the first, by following of the middle. Now in this long way from the first
soilth of extreme rudeness, to the last neatness of most cunning, I The 3.
several governments over writing.
will apoint three rests, every one naturally succeding the other, where the
readers conceit may light and go on foot, if it be wearied with riding, I do
not say with reading. The first is, while 1.
the sound alone bare the swaie in writing. The second is, while consent 2.
in use did transport the authority, from sound alone, to reason, custom, and
sound jointly. The third, which presently reigns, is, while that reason and
custom, do assure their own joint 3
government with sound, by the mean of Art. For sound like a restrained not
banished Tarquinius desiring to be restored to his first and sole monarchy,
and finding some, but no more then sounding favorers, did seek to make a tumult
in the scriueners province, ever after that, reason and custom were joined with
him in commission.

I will therefore first deal with that regiment in writing, which The government
of right writing under the authority of found alone
was under sound, when every thing was written according to the sound, tho that
kind of government be long ago worn out.

I should begin to high in seking out the ground of right writing, (as he that
fetched the batle of Troie from Ledaes two eggs, or as she that was angry with
felling the first tree, because she took unkindness with him that came by ship,
to that place where she did dwell) If I should make inquiry either who devised
That it is an idle inquiry to seek either who wrote first, or who devised
letters first.
letters first, or who wrote first, a thing as uncertain to be known, as
fruteles if it were known. For Herodotus in his Muses, Diodorus, in his
library, Eusebius in his preparatiue, Pliny in his history, Flauius Josephus
in his antiquities of Jury, Dionysius Halicarnasseus in his antiquities of
Rome, Coelius Rhodiginus, in his antiquity of reading, Polydorus Uirgilius in
his inuentors of things, and many several writers mo, in as many several
places mo, seking to learn out either the first fou^der of the general
charact, or the first deuisor of the particular, for par ticular nations, ar as
new to seek, when they have sought all, as theie were at first, before theie
sought any. For what certainty can there be had of so old a thing? or what
profit can rise by some one man's name, if one were the founder, as it cannot be.
Who tho he be honored for the fruit of his invention, yet does his authority
small good, where the matter in question is to be confirmed, not by the
inuentors credit, who dwells we know not where, but by the users profit, which
every one feles. And therefore as theie, whosoever devised the thing first (for
it was no one man's invention, nor of any one age) did a marvelous good turn
to all their posterity: so we, which be their posterity, ar to think well of
the inuentors, and to judge thus of their inventions: that very necessity was
the foundresse of letters, and of all writing, as it has been only the
general breder of all such things, as our life is better by, when need and
want enforced men's wits, to seek for such helps. For the tung conueying speech
no further the^ to those, which were within hearing, and the necessity of
conueiance oftimes falling out between some persons that were further of: a
device was made to serve the eye a far of, by the mean of letters, as nature did
satisfy the ear at hand by benefit of speech. For the delivery of learning by
the pen to posterity, was not the first cause that found out letters, but an
excellent use perceived to be in them to serve for perpetuity, a great while
after theie had been found by necessity. The letters being thus found out, to
serve a needful turn took the force of expressing every distinct sound in
voice, The sound and force of letters by nature volunntarie.
not by them selves or any vertew in their form (for what likeness or what
affinity has the form of any letter in his own nature, to answer the force or
sound in man's voice?) but only by consent of those men, which first invented
them, and the pretty use thereof perceived by those, which first did receive
them. Whereby the people that used them first, agreed with those, that found
them first, that such a sound in the voice should be resembled by such a sign
to the eye: and that such a sign in the eye should be so returned to the ear,
as the aspectable figur of such an audible sound: whereunto these subscribed
their names, and set to their seals the day and year, when their consent past.

Hereupon in the first writing, the sound alone did lead the Why the sound led
the pen at first.
pen, and every word was written with those letters, which the sound did
command, because the letters were invented, to express sounds. Then for the
right in writing, who was souerain and judge, but sound alone? who gave
sentence of pen, ink, and paper, but sound alone? then what was sound in the
setting down, but that which was awarded by sound alone? Then Sounds height
every one of the people, the^ every one tho most unskillful, was partaker in
authority, and sound fellows in that sound government. And good reason why,
that sound should rule alone, and all those have a stroke, in the government of
found, whosoever were able but even to make a sound. You devised all this to
express me, why should not I then judge, when I were expressed, seeing, you
your self told me, that such a little note in sight, was to resemble such a
thing in sound? In those days, all those arguments, which cleave so sore unto
the prerogative of sound, and plead so for his interest, in setting down of
letters, were most esteemed of, as most agreeable to the time, and most officious
to the state. But afterward when sound upon great cause, was deposed from his
monarchy, as no fit person to rule the pen alone, and had others joined with
him in the same commission, of as good countenance as he, tho not to deall
without him, then their credit was nothing so absolut, tho reasonable good
still, as any of sou^ds ad uised favorers, may both well perceive, and be
well content with, if he will but mark the restraint of sounds authority, and
the causes why, and withal consider, that all opinions which co^cern his sole
authority, and tend to that end, as theie were of most account, while he was in
that ruf, ar now but very weak, when he is in the wain, and ar to be
qualified, according to that state, where sound is now ranged. For great
inconveniences following, and Sounds fall.
the writing it self, prouin mgore false then true, while the pen set down that
form, which the ear did assure, to answer such a sound, and the sound it self
being to imperious, without any either mercy or pity, but death for
disobedience, no pardon, no forgiveness, no misericordia, what equity soever
the contrary side had: men of good wit, and great understanding, who perceived
and misliked this imperiousness of sound, which yet was maintained, with great
uncertainty, naie rather with confusion, then ao nie assurance of right,
assembled them selves together to common upon so common a good, and in the end
after resolut and ripe deliberation theie presented them selves before sound,
using these, rather persuasions, then compulsions, to qualify his humor.

That it would please him, to take their speech in good part, The reasons and
grounds why sound was displaced of his sole government.
considering it tuched not their private, but the general good of the hole
province of writing. That he would call those reasons to his remembrance, which
moved them at the first, to give him alone the authority over the pen, as one
whom theie then thought, to be most fit for such a government, naie only most
fit to govern alone. That theie now perceived, not any defect in him, who used
that like a prince, which was his peculiar, by their own commission: but an
oversight in them selves, who unadvisedly ouercharged him, with such an
estate, as he could not weild alone, without his great dishonor, whereof theie
were as tender, as of their own souls. That their request therefore unto him,
was; to pray and beseech him, not to esteem more of his own private honor, then
of the hole provinces good. That theie might with his good leave, amend their
own error, which tho it concerned his person, yet should it not tuch his
credit, the falt being theirs in their first choice.

Theie paused a little while, before theie uttered the very main cause of this
their motion, for that theie spyed sound to begin to change colors, and half
ready to swond. For the fellow is passionat, in authority tyrannous, in aw
timorous.

Howbeit seeing the common good did urge them to speech, theie went on, and told
him in plane terms, that he must be content to refer himself to order, and so
much the rather, because their meaning was not to seek either his deprivation,
or his resignation, but that it would please him to qualify his government, and
to use the assistence of a further council, which theie meant to ioyn with him,
a thing of great fruit, and of good example in many such cases, where even
great potentates, acd considerat princes, for the general weall of their
natural states, (his being but voluntary, and of their election) were very
well content, upon humble suit made to them, to admit such a council, and to
use them in affairs. That the reasons which moved them to make this suit, and
might also move him, to admit the same were of great importance: That because
letters were first found only to express him, therefore theie had given him
only and alone, the whole government therein, and were well contented
therewith, until such time, as theie had espied, not his misgouernment, but
their own mischoice: that the bare and primitive inventions, being but rude,
and accordingly ruled, and experience now in time, growing to more finesse,
why should theie not yield to that in finesse, upon better cause, whereunto
theie did yield in rudeness upon mere need? That no man having any sense in
the right of writing, which experience had commended, would yield the direction
to sound alone, which alters still, and is never like to it self, as either
the party pronouncer is of ignorance or knowledge: or the parties that
pronounce, be of clear or stop delivery: or as the ear it self is of judgment
to discern. That considering these defects, which pray for reformance, and the
letter it self, which desires some assurance of her own use, it might stand
with his good pleasur, to admit to his counsel, two grave and great
personages, which theie had long thought on, thorough whose assistence he might
the better govern the pen province.

Because theie praised the parties so much, he desired their names. Theie
answered Reason, to consider what will be most agreeable upon cause, and Custom to
confirm that by experience and prouf, which reason should like best, and yet
neither to do any thing, without conference with sound.

The personages pleased him for their own worthiness, but the self same thing,
which recommended them to him for their own valur, did fraie him to like them,
for his own danger. For is not either reason or custom, if it please them to
aspire, more like to rule the pen, then sound, said he to him self? Howbeit
after that theie had charged his conscience, with all those reasons in one
throng, which theie had used particularly before, that it were no dishonor to
yield a little unto them, which had given him his hole rule: that it were no
reason, but theie might have leave, to amend their own error, in ouercharging
him, being their falt and his ease: That tho theie seemed to empare his estate,
yet theie did not seek to defraud him of his own: That the wrongs don to
writing, which theie presented unto him were matters worth redress: That the
counselors, which theie appointed were honorable, and honest: that the common
benefit of the hole writing province did earnestly sew for it, whereunto theie
were very well assured, that so good a father, as he was, to that poor estate,
would never be unwilling but rather voluntarily condescend, without any
request, as being half dishonored, in that he tarried the request, but that he
knew not of the greiues. After that theie had pressed him so near, tho he were
very loath, being once a sole monarch, to become half private by admitting of
controullers, as he thought, rather then counselors, as theie meant, yet
perceiving that their power was such, as theie might enforce him to that, which
theie prayed him to grant, if he should stand in terms with them, he was
content to yield, tho with some show ofmiscontentment in his very countenance,
and to allow of Reason and Custom as his fellow gouerners in the right of
writing.

For in very deed concerning the authority of these mouers, wise and learned
people, what so ever theie lend ignorance to play with for a time, theie
reserve to themselves both judgment and authority, wherewith to controull,
when theie se want of skill play the fooll to much, as in this same quarrel for
the alteration of sounds to presumptuous rule, theie had very great reason.
For as in faces, tho every man naturally have two eyes, two ears, one nose,
one mouth, and so forth, yet there is all way such diversity in countenances,
as any two men may easily be discerned, tho theie be as like as the
Lacedaemonian princes, and brethern were, of whom Tullie speaks: so likewise
in the voice, tho in every one it pass thorough, by one mouth, one throat,
one tung, one fense of tethe, and so forth, yet is it as different in every
one, even for giving the sound, by reason of some diversity in the vocal
instruments, as the faces be different in resembling like form, by some evident
distinction, in the natural purtrait. Which diversity tho it hinder not the
delivery of every man's mind, yet is it to uncertain to rule every man's pen
in setting down of letters.

And again, what reason had it to follow every man's ear, as a master
scriuener, and to leave every man's pen to his own sound, where such difference
was, as theie could not agree, when where the right was, every one laing clame
to it? and why not my ear best? Again why should ignorance in any respect be
taken for a gide in a case of knowledge? because of their voices? that were to
popular, where the argument is singular. Because of their wills? that were to
wilful, where wisdom should warrant. And therefore if any multitude, tho of
never so few, deserve to be followed, theie only were, which could both speak
best, and give best reason why. But that kind of people were to few at the
first, to find any place against a popular government, where the ear led the
ear, and why shall sound give over his interest, seeing letters were devised to
express sound in every one of us, and not the conceit of these, and those few
goodly wise fellows? And yet when corn was once in prouf, acorns grew out of
place, tho a iollie mastie meat in a hoggish world. For naturally the first
serves the turn, till the finer and better do com in presence. And as something
gat place worthily of no thing, so must that something again, give place to his
better: As sound did something to expel rudeness, tho it may not bend it
self, to keep out finesse.

Hereupon wise men would stand no longer to that diversity in writing, which
necessarily did follow, when every one did spell so, as the instruments of
his voice did fashion his sound, or as his cunning gave him, or as his ear
could discern. All which means be full of variety, and never one in all, as it
does appear by hole nations, which cannot sound some letters, that some other
can, as the Ephramite in scriptur, which could not sound the first letter in
Shibboleth being in hebrew the same chract with the first in Sibboleth: or as
the witness in Tullie, which by property of his cuntrie, could not sound the
first letter in Fundanius, against whom he came.

Upon these miscontentme^ts, and by consent of those, which could judge, and
utter best, theie grew to a certain, and a reasonable custom, or else to say
truth, to a customarie reason, which theie held for a law, not vnaduisedle hit
on, by error and time, but advisedly resolved on, by judgment and skill.
Neither yet, (which had been contrary to their promis) deprived theie sound of
all his rialtie, which was dictatorlike, before, but theie joined reason with
him, and custom to, to begin then in right, and not in corruption after, as a
Caesar and a Pompeie, to be his colleges in a triumuirate. From that time
forward sound could do much, but nothing so much, as he could do before, being
very many times, very justly ouerruled by his considerat companions, and
fellows in office. Thus ended the monarchy of sound alone.

We are now com to that regiment in writing, which was under The government of
right writing under the authority of, sound, reason, and custo^.
sound, reason and custom jointly together, and proceeded in this sort. Reason
as he is in reason the principal director, of all best doings, and not writing
alone, so he began to play the master, but wisely withal, and with great
modesty. For considering the disposition of his two companions, first of
sound, which the letters were to express of dewtie, as therefore devised: then
of custom, which was to confirm, and make the way to general allowa^ce, he
established this for a general law in the pro uince of writing. That as the
first founders, and deuisers of the letters, used their own liberty, in the
assigning of such a charact in the eye, to such a sound in the voice, which
assignation was mere voluntary, and of the fou^ders choice: so it should be
lawful for the said founders, and their posterity, according as the neces
sitie of their use, and the dispatch in their pen did seem to require it,
either to increase the number of letters, if the insufficiency in them did
seem not to answer the variety in sound, or to apply one and the same letter
to diverse uses, if it might be don with some pretty distinction, to avoid
multitude of characts, as we apply words which be within number, to things
which be without: and generally like natural and chief lords in a tenancie at
mere will, to make their own need the level of all letters, of all writing, of
all speaking, to chop, to change, to alter, to transport, to enlarge, to
lessen, to make, to mar, to begin, to end, to give authority to this, to take
it from that, as themselves should think good. This decre being penned by
reason, both sound and custom did presently allow: sound because there was no
remedy, tho his heart longed still for his former Monarchy, which was now
inth'Eclipse: Custom, because that did serve his turn best. For if necessary
use, and dispatch in the pen, might have authority, which was given them in
law, by consent of those men, which were successors to them, who first founded
the letter, which men were of the learneddest and wisest sort, then were Custom
in deed, having reason to frind, and sound no fo, a very great prince in the
hole province of both writing and speaking. And good reason why. For Custom is
not that which men do or speak commonly or most, upon whatsoever What custom
is naturally.
occasion, but only that, which is grounded at the first, upon the best and
fittest reason, and is therefore to be used, because it is the fittest. Which if
it take place according to the first appointment, then is custom in his right,
if not, then abuse in deed does seem to vsurp upon custom in name. For in
Lordships and manners is that custom, which the tenants do use upon their own
surmise, or but that only, which the first Lord granted, upon some special
cause, and his posterity confirms, upon the like respect, either to their
auncetor or to the thing? So that I take custom to bild upon the cause, and not
to make the cause.

After that reason had brought both sound to this order, and custom to this
authority, then was there nothing admitted in writing, but that only, which
was subsigned by all their three hands. If the sound alone did serve, yet
reason and custom must needs confirm sound: if reason must take place, both
sound and custom must needs approve reason: if custom would be credited, he
might not pass, onelesse both sound did sooth him, and reason did ratify him.

For the better continuance of this wise triumuirate, each of the The retinew
belonging to the triumuirate in their government of the pen. Sounds retinew.
three entertained such people, as were fittest for their families. Sound,
because he presumed only upon his old authority not extinguished, tho
restrained, and neded no great train now in that his restraint, he therefore
contented himself with such of his old retinew, as knew his first commission,
which was granted unto him, when the devise of letters came first to light. Who
still had an eye to sound, and set down that letter, which was appointed
thereunto, onelesse reason and custom had put in a caveat, that in such a case
the commission must be altered.

Reason again took into his service, observation and comparison: Resons retinew.
Observation to mark what were fairest in sense, what were readiest in pen,
what where currantest in use: Comparison to confer that, which he allowed in
one, with that proportion, which he found in another, that the hole might be
suitable.

Custom besides that he made very much of both sound and Customs retinew.
reasons retinew, as his very good frinds, whereby he was come^ded to general
practis, of himself and for himself, he entertained wariness, to be still like
himself, and tho he altered upon cause, as reason should enform him, yet to
behave himself so, as he might easily be discerned from corruption in use,
which was his natural enemy, and was alwaie bakt by the ignorant multitude,
as custom it self was by those, that were of skill, both at his first planting,
and thoroughout his performance. So had right sound, missounding to fo, so had
right reason, a slight show of appearance to adversary, which still carried the
weaker branes, but could never move, either judgment or cunning.

During this compound government of these three, the matter The effect of this
triu^uirat.
of all our precepts, that belong to writing, did first grow to strength, then
were rules grounded, then were exceptions laid, when reason and custom
perceived cause why. But none of all these were yet commended to Art, and set
down in writing, but fleting in the memory, and observation of writers, having
sufficient matter to furnish an institution, and the body of an Art, tho not
yet in method, which came next in place, and joined it self with the other three
upon this occasion:

All this time, while reason and custom governed the pen, as The occasion why
Art was called to aid.
well as sound, sounds malcontented frinds did never rest, but allwaie sought
means to supplant the two other, ever bussing into the ignorant ears that of
sounds authority, and his right to his own delivery: and the same errors,
which troubled the pen, while sound alone was the setter down, began to crepe
in again, and cause a new truble, in so much as all the ignoranter sort were
clear of opinion that the very sternesse of sound was only to be accepted
without all exception, tho those of learning and wisdom, which had both first
set up reason and custom, as companions to sound, and still continewed in the
same mind, could very well discern usurpation from enheritance, and right
from wrong.

Wherefor reason finding by this creping error both himself to be iniuried by
senseless time, and his good custom to be sore assailed by counterfeat
corruption, perceived the falt to be for want of a good notarie, and a strong
obligation, wherewith to set that in everlasting authority, by right rule and
true writing, which he and custom both, by the consent of sound, had continewed
in use, tho not put down in writing, which would ever be in danger of continual
revolt, from the best to the worst, by the uncertainty of time, and the
eluishnesse of error, oneless it were set in writing, and the conditions
subscribed by all their consents, for a perpetual evidence against the
repiner. For that is the difference, between a reasonable custom and an
artificial method, that the first does the thing for the second to assure, and
the second assures, by observing of the first.

While nothing was set down in writing, sound and his accomplices were in hope of
some recovery, which hope was cut of, when the writings were made, and the
conditions set certain. The notarie to cut of all these controversies, and to
bread a perpetual quietness in writing, was Art, which gathering al those
roming rules, that custom had beaten out, into one body, disposed them so in
writing, as every one knew his own limits, reason his, custom his, sound his.
Now when reason, custom and sound were brought into order, and driven to
certainty by the mean of Art, and artificial method, then began the third the
last and the best assurance in writing.

Art being hirself in place perceived the direction of any hole tung to be
very infinite and hard, naie to be scant possible in The government of right
writing under Art.
general, considering the diverse properties that the three rulers, reason,
custom, and sound have, which alter still with time. For what people can be sure
of his own tung any long while? does not speech alter sometime to the finer, if
the state where it is used, continue it self, and grow to better countenance,
for either great learning, or other dealing, which use to proin a tung? And
does it not sometime change to the more corrupt, if the state where it is used,
do chance to be ouerthrown, and a master tung coming in as conqueror, command
both the people, and the peples speech to? Upon this consideration, what an
infinite thing it were to choose out such a subject, as is so uncertain, Art took
hirself to some one period in the tung, of most and best account, and therefore
fittest to be made a pattern for others to follow, and pleasantest for her self
to travel and toill in. Upon which period she did bestow all those notes,
which she did perceive by observation (which is secretary to reason) to be in
the common use of speech, and pen, either clear with sound, or suitable to
reason, or liked in custom, but still bakt by them all.

Such a period in the Greek tung was that time, when Demosthenes lived, and
that learned race of the father philosophers: such a period in the Latin tung,
was that time, when Tullie lived, and those of that age: Such a period in the
English tung I take this to be in our days, for both the pen and the speech.

Art choosing such a period in the primative tung, and having all the stuf
gathered into notes, wherewith to set up her hole frame, and bilding of method,
distributed them so, as there was not any one thing necessary for right
writing, but she had it in writing, saving some particulars, which will be still
unruly, and make fresh matter for an other period in speech: tho that, which
is now made so artificial and sure, com never in danger of any alteration,
but be still held for a president to others, as most perfect in it self. For a
tung once enrolled by the benefit of Art, and grown to good credit, is thereby
first settled it self in such assurance, as the right thereof cannot be denied,
the contrary to right would be soon espied, howsoever it wrangle: then is it
made a common example to other languages, which have stuf for such a method,
and desire to be fined, whereby to fine them.

This course kept the first tung that ever was fined, from the first invention
of any letter, which was least in act, but greatest in power, until
corruption slilie gotten in, but wisely perceived did cause a reformation.
Which reformation grew again to corruption in nature of a relapse, because tho
it were soundly made, yet was it not well armed with sufficient surety
against the festuring evil of error and corruption. Wherefor when it felt the
want of such an assurance, it prayed aid of Art, which like a beaten lawyer,
handled the matter so, and with such a forecast in the penning of his books, as
every of them, which had any interest were taught to know what was their own.
Other tungs beside the first refined, marking this current applied the same to
their own several writing, and were very glad with great thanks, to use the
benefit of those men's labor, which wrastled with the difficulties, of sound,
error, corruption, and the residew of that ill humored people.

This original president in the first, and translated pattern in the rest, I
mean to follow in the finding out of our right English writing, which whether
it will prove to be fashioned accordingly, and framed like the pattern, it
shall then appear when the thing it self, shall com forth in her own natural
hew, tho in artificial habit.

I have not used any autors name in this discourse either to confirm, or to
confute by credit of authority. For any man almost of any mean learning,
may quiklie espy, that these matters Why I use no authority to prove this
method.
are not without autors. For can reason, custo^, art, sound, error, corruption,
and such other qualities, as play their parts in this so ordinate a plat, lak
testimony of writers being so much written of? But I did only seek to
satisfy need and to polish no further. To conclude and knit up the argument,
this method and this order used the first tung, that ever was brought to any
right in writing, by the help whereof under the direction of Art, all those
tungs which we now call learned, ar com to that certainty, which we se them
now in, thorough precept and rule. The same help will I use in my particular
method.

Which before I deall with, I must examine two principal points in our tung
whereof one is, whether our tung have Of the artificial stuf in our tung. Of
the imperperfections laid unto our tung.
stuf in it for art to bild on, because I said, that Art dealt where she found
matter, sufficient for her travel: The other is, whether our writing be
justly challenged for those infirmities wherewith it is charged in this our
time, because I said that this period in our time, seems to be the perfitest
period in our English tu^g, and that our custom has alredie beaten out his own
rules ready for the method, and frame of Art. Which two points ar necessarily
to be considered. For if there be either no matter for Art in extreme
confusion: or if our custo^ be not yet ripe to be reduced unto rule, then that
perfect period in our tung is not yet com, and I have set upon this argument,
while it is yet to grene. Howbeit, I hope it will not prove to timely, and
therefore I will first show, that there is in our tung, great and sufficient
stuf for Art: then that there is no such infirmity in our writing, as is
pretended, but that our custom is grown fit to receive this artificial frame,
and that by this method, which I have laid down, without any foren help, and
with those rules only, which are, and may be gathered out of our own
ordinary writing.

CAP. XIII. That the English tung has in it self sufficient matter to work her
own artificial direction, for the right writing thereof.
IT must needs be that our English tung has matter enough in her own writing,
which may direct her own right, if it be reduced to certain precept, and rule
of Art, tho it have not as yet been thoroughlie perceived.

The causes why it has not as yet been thoroughlie perceived, The causes why
our right writing is not yet certain.
ar, the hope and despare of such, as have either thought upon it, and not
dealt in it, or that have dealt in it, but not rightly thought upon it.

For some considering the great difficulty, which theie found to be in the
writing thereof, every letter almost being deputed to many, and several,
naie to many and wellnigh contrary sounds and uses, every word almost either
wanting letters, for his necessary sound, or having some more then necessity
1 Despare.
requires, began to despare in the midst of such a confusio, ever to find out
any sure direction, whereon to ground Art, and to set it certain. And what if
either theie did not seek, or did not know how to seek, in right form of Art,
and the composing method? But whether difficulty in the thing, or infirmity
in the searchers, gave cause thereunto, the parties them selves gave over the
thing, as in a desperate case, and by not meddling thorough despare, theie helped
not the right. 2 Hope.


Again some others bearing a good affection to their natural tung, and resolved
to burst thorough the midst of all these difficulties, which offered such
resiste^ce, as theie misliked the confusion, wherewith the other were afraid,
so theie devised a new mean, wherein theie laid their hope, to bring the thing
about. Whereupon some of them being of great place and good learning, set forth
in print particular treatises of that argument, with these their new conceived
means, how we ought to write, and so to write right. But their good hope by
reason of their strange mean, had the same event, that the others despare had,
by their either misconceauing the thing at first, or their diffidence at the
last. Wherein the parties them selves no dout deserve some praise, and thanks
to, of us and our cuntrie in both these extremities of hope and despare, tho
theie helped not the thing, which theie went about, but in common appearance,
did some what hinder it rather. For both he, that despared in the end, took
great pains, before diffidence caused him give over to despare: and he that did
hope by his own devise to supply the general want, was not very idle both in
brain, to devise, and in hand to deliver the thing, which he devised. Which
their travel in the thing, and desire to do good, deserve great thanks, tho
that way which theie took, did not take effect.

The causes why theie took not effect, and thereby in part The causes why some
devised ortografies took no place.
did hinder the thing, by making of many think the case more desperate then it
was in deed, because such fellows did so faill, were these. Their despare,
which thought, that the tung was incapable of any direction, came of a wrong
cause, the falt rising in deed not of the thing, which theie did co^demn, as
altogether rude and unruly, but of the parties them selves, who mistook their
way. For the thing it self will soon be ordered (our custom is grown so
orderable) tho it require some diligence, and good consideration, in him that
must find it out. But when a writer takes a wrong principle, quite contrary
to common practis, where trial must be tuch, and practis must confirm the
mean, which he conceaueth, is it any marvel if the use of a tung overthwart
such a mean, which is not conformable unto it? Hereupon proceeded the despare to
hit right, because theie missed of their mind, whereas in deed theie should
have changed their mind, to have hit upon that right, which as it is in the
thing, so will it soon be found out, if it be rightly sought for.

Again the others hope deceived them to as much. For theie considered not, that
whereas common reason, and common custom have been long dealers in seking out
of their own current, themselves will be councellers and will never yield to any
private conceit, which shall seem evidently either to force them or to cross
them, as theie themselves do, never giving any precept, how to write right,
till theie have rated at custom, as a most pernicious enemy to truth and
right, even in that thing, where custom has most right, if it have right in
any. Wherefor when theie proceeded on in a customarie argument, with the
enemitie of him, which is Lord of the soill, was it any wonder if theie failed
of their purpos, and hindered the finding out of our right writing, which must
needs be compased by customs consent, and reasons frindship? So in the mean
time, while despare deceiues the one, and hope begiles the other, the one
missing his way, the other making a fo, and both going astraie, theie both
lease their labor, and let the finding out of our right in writing, by their
ill led, and worse laid labor, because the artificial course, in finding out
such a thing, has another current, as I have showed before in the last title.

Yet notwithstanding all this, it is very manifest, that the tung it self has
matter enough in it self, to furnish out an art, and that That our tung has in
it self matter enough for Art.
the same mean, which has been used in the reducing of other tungs to their
right, will serve this of ours, both for generality of precept, and certainty
of ground, as may be easile proved by these four arguments, the antiquity of
our tung, the peples wit, their learning, and their experience. For how can it
be, but that a tung, which has continewed many hundred years, not only a
tung, but one of good account, both in speech, and pen, has grown in all that
time to some finesse, and assurance of it self, by so long and so general an
use, tho it be not as yet sounded, the people that have used it, being none of
the dullest, and traveling continually in all exercises that concern
learning, in all practices that procure experience, either in peace or war,
either in public, or private, either at home or abroad?

As for the antiquity of our speech, whether it be measured by the ancient
Almane, whence it cummeth originallie, or eue^ The a^tiquitie of the English
tung.
but by the latest terms which it boroweth daielie from foren tungs, either of
pure necessity in new matters, or of mere bravery, to garnish it self
withal, it cannot be young. Onelesse the Germane himself be young, which
claims a prerogative for the age of his speech, of an infinite prescription:
Onelesse the Latin and Greek be young, whose words we enfranchise to our own
use, tho not allwaie immediately from them selves, but mostwhat thorough the
Italian, French, and Spanish: Onelesse other tungs, which be neither Greek nor
Latin, nor any of the forenamed, from whom we have somewhat, as theie have from
ours, will for company sake be content to be young, that ours may not be old.
But I am well assured, that every one of these, will strive for antiquity,
and rather grant it to us, then forgo it themselves. So that if the very
newest words, which we use do savor of great antiquity, and the ground of our
speech be most ancient, it must needs then follow, that our hole tung was weined
long ago, as having all her tethe.

For the account of our tung, both in pen and speech, no man will dout thereof,
who is able to judge what those things be, The account of the English tung.
which make any tung to be of account, which things I take to be three, the
authority of the people which speak it, the matter and argument, wherein the
speech deals, the manifold use, for which the speech serves. For all which
three, our tung needs not to give place, to any of her peers.

First to say somewhat for the people, that use the tung, the English nation
has allwaie been of good credit, and great estimation, The English people.
ever since credit and estimation by history came on this side the Alps, which
appears to be true, even by foren cronicles (not to use our own in a case of
our own) which would never have said so much of the people, if it had been
obscure, and not for an history, or not but well worthy of a perpetual
history.

Next, for the argument, wherein it deals, whether private The matter of our
speech.
or publik, it may compare with some other, that think very well of their own
selves. For not to tuch ordinary affairs in common life, will matters of
learning in any kind of argument, make a tung of account? Our nation then, I
think, will hardly be proved to have been unlearned at any time, in any
kind of learning, The English learning.
not to use any bigger speech. Wherefor having learning by confession of all
men, and uttering that learning in their own tung, for their own use, of very
pure necessity (because we learn to use, and the use is in our own) theie
could not but enrich the tung, and purchase it account.

Will matters of war, whether civil or foren, make a tung The English
chivalry.
of account? Our neighbor nations will not deny our people to be very warrious,
and our own cuntrie will confess it, tho loath to feel it, both by remembering
the smart, and comparing with some other, neither to vaunt our selves, nor to
gall our frinds, with any mo words.

Now in offering matter to speech, war is such a breder, as What a furnitur to
speech war is.
tho it be opposite to learning, because it is enemy to the Muses, yet it dare
compare with any point in learning, for multitude of discourses, tho not
commonly so certain, ne yet of so good use, as learned arguments be. For war
(besides all grave and sad considerations about it, which be many and wise) as
sometime it sends us true reports, either privately in proiects and devises,
that be intended, or publikelie in events, which be blased abroad, because
theie be don, so mostwhat it gives out infinite and extreme, I dare not say
lies, but very incredible news, because it may hatch them at will, being in
no danger of controllment, and comonlie in such practices and places, as have
not many witnesses, while every man seeks as well to save him self, as to
harm his enemy, besides some courteous entertainment, which a devising
refere^darie has even by telling that, which is not true, to such as love to
hear, and either like or will like. All which occasions, and infinite mo, about
stratagemes and engines, give matter to speech, and cause of new words, and by
making it so ready, do make it of renoun.

Will all kinds of trade, and all sorts of traffik, make a tung of account? If
the spreading sea, and the spacious land could The English traffik.
use any speech, theie would both show you, where, and in how many strange
places, theie have seen our people, and also give you to wit, that theie deall
in as much, and as great variety of matters, as any other people do, whether
at home or abroad. Which is the reason why our tung does serve to so many
uses, because it is conversant with so many people, and so well acquainted with
so many matters, in so sundry kinds of dealing. Now all this variety of
matter, and diversity of trade, make both matter for our speech, and mean to
enlarge it. For he that is so practiced, will utter that, which he practices
in his natural tung, and if the strangeness of the matter do so require, he
that is to utter, rather then he will stik in his utterance, will use the foren
term, by way of premunition, that the cuntrie people do call it so, and by that
mean make a foren word, an English denison.

All which reasons concerning but the tung, and the account thereof, being put
together, as of themselves, theie prove the nations exercise in learning, and
their practis in other dealings: so theie seem to infer no base witted people,
not to amplify it with more, because it is not for foulls to be so well
learned, to be so warrious, to be so well practiced. I shall not need to prove
any of these my positions, either by foren or home history: seeing my reader
stranger, will not strive with me for them, and mine own nation, will not
gainsaie me in them, I think, which knows them to be true, and may use them
for their honor.

Wherefor I may well conclude my first position: that if use and custom having
the help of so long time, and continuance, wherein to fine our tung: of so
great learning and experience, which furnish matter for the fining: offo good
wits and judgments, which can tell how to fine, have griped at nothing in all
that time with all that cunning, by all those wits, which theie will not let
go, but hold for most certain, in the right of our writing: that then our tung
has no certainty to trust to, but writes all at randon. But the antecedent
in my opinion, is altogether impossible, wherefor the consequent, is a great
deall more then probable, which is, that our tung has in her own possession,
and writing very good evidence to prove her own right writing: Which tho no
man as yet, by any publik writing of his, seems to have seen, yet the tung it
self is ready to show them, to any whosoever, which is able to read them, and
withal to judge, what evidence is right in the right of writing. Wherefor
seeing I have proved sufficiently in mine own opinion, that there is great
cause, why our tung should have some good right, in her own writing, and take my
self to have had the sight of that evidence, whereby that same right appears
most justifiable, and am not alltogither ignorant, how to give sentence
thereof, I will do my best, according to that course, which I said was kept in
the first, and general fining of any speech, which also has been translated
to every secondarie, and particular tung, to set forth some certainty for the
English writing, by those notes, which I have observed in the tung it self, the
pure best and finest therein, offering mean by comparison with them selves,
both to correct, and to direct the worse and more gross, without either
innouating any thing, as theie do, which set forth new devises, or by
mistaking my way, as theie do, which despare, that our tung can be brought to
any certainty, without some marvelous foren help. Thus much for the
artificial stuf in our tung, now to the objections which charge it with
infirmities.

CAP. XIIII. An answer to some pretended imperfections in the writing of our
tung.
THis title tho it seem by the inscription to pretend some offense, yet is it
nothing moodie at all, because it entendeth no defense, as against an enemy,
but a conference, as with a frind. For those men, with who^ I have to deall
therein, do wish their natural tung, as well as I do, theie desire to se it
right written, no less then I do. Theie have as good show of just enemitie to
error, and corruption, as I have assurance of right direction. And therefore I
will rather endeavor my self to persuade them as frinds, then to confute them as
foes, rather to ioyn with them in some points, then to defy them in all. The
matter of this title, against and for custom, multitude of letters sound, and
innovation.


In the hole matter of this conference with them, theie either blame certain
errors, which theie pretend to be in our writing: or else theie will seem to
seek the reforming thereof. In the blame of errors, theie rate at custom as a
vile corrupter, and complain of our letters, as to miserable few. In their
desire ofredresse, theie appeall to sound, as the only souerain, and surest
leader in the government of writing: and fly to innovation, as the only mean,
to reform all errors, that be in our writing. Which their particular branching,
I will follow in my reply, and yet in no reply, but excuse, for the innocence
of our pen, where it is without falt, tho it be not without blame and in my
plain confession of some manifest error, where there is cause why.

In their quarrel to custom theie seek first to bring it into general The
assailing of custom.
hatred, as a common corrupter of all good things, and that naturally, without
any exception, and therefore no marvel if it abuse speech, which as it passes
thorough every man's mouth, and is resembled by every man's pen, so must it
needs gather much corruption by the way, because many and ill be all one in
deed, tho divided in term, as good and few, tho different in name, yet be the
same in pith: And common corruption, which theie term Custom, is an ill
director to find out a right. Hereupon theie conclude, that as it seems most
probable, so it is most true, that the chief errors, which are crept into our
pen, do take their beginning at the only infection of a naughty custom.
Which because it is naught, therefore ought it not so much as once to be named,
in the direction to a right, in either pen or speech, being so manifest a
falsarie, notwithstanding whatsoever any either old or new writers can pretend
to the contrary, for either defense or excuse thereof. Then theie descend two
particularities, wherein theie prove that customarilie, we do sometime burden
our words to much, with to many letters, sometimes we pinch them to near with
to few, sometimes we misshape them with wrong sounding, sometime we misorder
them, with wrong placing. And be not these marvelous great causes of
miscontentment with Custom, which is the breder of them? Besides all these
which are but points of penning only, to aggrauate the discredit wherewith
theie charge custom, theie seek to make it odious, as an enemy to vertew, even
abusing what is best. And will there any that favors vertew, protect Custom,
being such a venim to all vertewes, and such a poison to all vertewous effects?
Or can there any that frindeth his cuntrie conceive well of that, which
corrupts her pen, and poisoneth her speech? Sure not I. For neither would I
have vertew to hold mefor her enemy, by defending of her fo, nor yet my
cuntrie to froun at me for favoring her corrupters. Certainly that custom is
most vile, which does but speak ill of good things: but to seek their
corruption is a most villainous part. And to abuse speech in any her delivery
whether by tung or pen, the good benefit whereof, does serve most of our needs,
as vertew does the best, is extreme beastly. And therefore assuredly, as those
my good cuntrimen, have most just cause to be angry with these corruptions: so
might theie as justly turn their anger upon me, if I should any way but so
much as seem to excuse or but to extenuate so pernicious a fact. Neither can
any writer, new or old, but hasard his own credit, if he do but seem to show
any incling of favor that way.

And yet if good writers seem to favor custom, then the case For custom.
is not so clear, as you take it to be, that there is nothing in custo^, but an
hell of most vile, and filthy corruptions: that it alone infecteth all good
things: that it alone corrupts right writing. For if it were in deed and
only so, theie would not warrant it, as (now I remember my self) theie praise
it very often, and give it great credit. Is there then not some error in the
name, and may not custom be misconstrewed? for sure the writers, when theie
speak of custom, theie mean that rule in doing, and vertewous life, wherein
good men agree and their consent is that, which these men term custom therein:
as theie call that rule in speaking and writing the custom thereof, wherein the
skillful and best learned do agree. And is it likely that either the honest in
deed will mislead vertew in living, or the learned in deed will mislike right
in writing? And again, those honest men, which allow of custom in matters of
life, complain very much of corruption in manners, and naughty behauior: and
the learned men, which allow of custom in matters of speech and pen, do
complain very much of error in writing, and corruption in speech: and both the
two, accuse the most people as the leaders to error, and the common abuse, as
the fruit of a multitude. And therefore it cannot otherwise be, but that the
duble name is that, which deceiues. For theie, which accuse custo^ do mean
false error, which counterfeateth custom, and is a great captain among the
impudent for naughtiness, and the ignorant for rashness, and yet directs
all the most. And theie that praise custom do mean plain truth, which cannot
dissemble, which is companion with the honest in vertew, and with the learned
in cunning, and directs all the best. And will ye se? This mistermed custom
in the pen, is that counterfeat abuse, which was the only cause, why sounds
monarchy, whereof I spoke before, was so dissolved, and was it self condemned,
by those wise people, which joined reason with sound: and the right custom which
writers commend so, is that companion of reason, which succeeded in place, when
the counterfeat was cast out. Now ye se the error. So neither writers do allow
of such a corruption, neither is custom your contrary, but both writers, and
custom, both you, and I will scratch out the eyes of common error, for misusing
of good things, and belying of custom. If good things be abused it is by ill
people, whose misnamed custom is right named error, and well blamed lewdness.
If words be ouercharged with number of letters, that coms either by
covetousness in such, as sell them by lines, or by ignorance in such, as
besides the pestering them with to many, do both weaken them with to few, and
wrong them with the change, both of force and place, whose error as I moan, so
I will'seke to amend it, and while I amend it, I will confute by correcting,
and heall by com paring, that every one beholding the redress, where he finds
the falt, may be able to judge both of right, and wrong, by conferring of
contraries. Thus I take it my good cuntrimen, that you be deceived in the name,
and blame one for another. For custom certainly in a matter of speech, is a
great and a natural governor, tho in other things it may sometimes seem to be
a sore usurper. And yet good autors will hardly grant that, which still fre
custom from all offensive note, both in words and deeds, because theie ground
custom not upon error in deprauation at the last: but upon judgment, in
direction from the first. And theie which entreat custom so hardly, entertain
it so, under an improper name, as unworthy to be heard speak in the right of
writing, seeing it semes to be the only occasion of all corruption therein, as
theie surmise, taking custom to be grounded upon the common confusion in
practis of the most, and least judicial people, which is mother to all wrong
opinions, concerning any judgment of right. Wherein theie neither mark that
the ignorant multitude is not held for mistress, of that right and reasonable
custom, which is the natural custom, and which theie of the contrary side do
follow, as the best gide in right writing: neither yet consider theie, that
their adversaries, whom theie oppugn so, do confess some errors in the
ordinary penning, proceeding of that corruption, which theie wrongfullie term
custom, which errors theie also seek to have cut of, as the idle clogging of
words with nedelesse letters, and such other ordinary errors, which rise most
of to much, by not knowing, what is right. Which errors I will handle there,
where I amend them straight, as I will tuch custom somewhat more, when I com to
that place, where theie appeal unto sound from both reason and custom.

When theie have dealt thus with custom, and their contraries Against the in
sufficiency of our letters both for use and for number.
(which theie make contraries, by mistaking, being their frinds in deed)
without marking their reasons, or by whose authority custom is established,
which theie so impugn by suggestion of a counterfeat, then theie begin to
complain sore of the insufficiency, and poverty of our letters, which letters
tho theie be as many in number, as other tungs have, yet theie suffice not,
say theie, for the full and right expressing of our sounds, tho theie express
them after a sort, but enforce us to use a number of them like the Delphik
sword, where of Aristotle speaks, to many sounds and services contrary to
the nature of such an instrument, which was made at the first, this letter for
that sound. Whereby it comes to pass, that we both write improperly, not
answering the sound of that, which we say, and ar never like our selves, in
any our writing, but still vary according unto the writers humor, without
any certain direction. Whereupon forenners and strangers do wonder at us, both
for the uncertainty in our writing, and the inconstancy in our letters. And
is it not a great shame that so cunning a nation as the English is, being of
very good note so many years, either should espy, or would not amend in all
this time, the poverty of their pen, and the confusion in their letter? but
both to let their writing run thus still at riot, and them selves to be mokt at
of foren people?

If foren people do marvel at us, we may requite them with For the
sufficiency of our letters.
as much, and return their wonder home, considering theie themselves be subject
to the very same difficulties, which theie wonder at in us, and have no mo
letters then we have, and yet both write still, and be understood still, in the
midst and in the spite of all these insufficiencies: as we also both write and
be understood, in this our insufficiency, even by their confession, which will
needs be offended, because of insufficiency. But the common use of writing
among those strangers, which agrees so with ours in our most uncertainty,
gives me to think, that this complaining of insufficiency is not general to
all neither with them nor with us, but proper to some few, and particular among
both, who misliking that theie know not, and not marking that theie cannot,
therefore blame that theie should not. For if their blaming upon cause, and
marking upon judgment did concur with their number, tho not so great, I should
be afraid least theie had the better, because the fewer: but both the fewer and
the weaker to, carry no great force, to condemn in judgment. As other folks
also, which se somewhat to, as well as theie, do not quite mislike of all their
misliking, but desire some redress, where there is cause in deed, tho theie
agree not in the mean, how to perform the redress, nor yet in the quantity,
that the error is so great, as these insufficienciaries pretend it to be. For
we do confess that this multiplicitie, and manifold use in the force and
service of our letters, would have some distinction, whereby to be known, if
general acquaintance with our own writing be not sufficient enough, to
perceive that in use, which we put down by use: but withal we defend and
maintain the multiplicitie it self, as a thing much used even in the best
tungs, and therefore not unlawful, tho there were no distinction.

And again, we do not think, that every our custom is a plain corruption,
wherein general use, even of those same persons, which cannot be suspected,
but to write with good judgment, lay the ground to precept, as the leader to
some art, and assurance to the pen. And we rest content with the number of our
letters. Which number, while some kind of people do study to increase, theie do
but cumber our tung, both with strange characts, and with nedelesse dipthongs,
enforcing us from that, which general rule has won, and rests content with,
in all the world. And why not but these letters? or why not to many uses? This
Why mo letters?
paucitie and poverty of letters, has contented and discharged the best, and
brauest tungs, that either be, have been, shall be, or ca^ be, and has delivered
by the^* both in speech and pen, as great vary tie, and as much difficulty in
all arguments, and as well perceived of all posterity thorough their means, as
possibly can, either be delivered, or be understood, by the English tung, or
yet be devised by any English wit. The people that now use the^, and theie that
have used them, have naturally the same instruments of voice, and the same
delivery in sound, for all their speaking, that we English men have, by cause
theie be men, as we En glish folk be: and theie sent the use of the pen to us,
and not we to them. And finding in their own use this necessity, which you do
note, theie fled to that help which you think naught, and were bold with their
letters, to make them serve diverse turns, sometime with none, sometime with some
pretty small note of evident distinction. Which kind of distinguishing theie
know to be very true, whosoever be acquainted with the foren letters, and with
those writers which entreat of them, as I my self will show, when I both mark,
and amend at once, tho I deall no further in this place, to avoid repetition,
both here and there. Neither is there any difficulty, which theie are not
subject unto, either in the same, or in the very like things, as well as we: as
I will prove elsewhere, even by comparing the particulars, so far and so many,
as need shall require. And will strangers wonder at us? or do not our own people
that be learned perceive these things? For in the ignorant I require no such
discretion. Surely I think that all people having the same natural instruments
to speak by, tho upon private use some harp more of some sounds then others, and
some lean more upon some one instrument of speech, then other do, as some the
throat, some the tethe, and so forth, which variety is popular even to hole
nations, that yet naturally all be made able, to sound all speches and all
letters, if theie be accustomed unto them, in that age and with those means,
when and whereby theie be best to be learned: And that it is only education,
and custom which makes the difference, and therefore rules either all or most
in speech, wherein if there be any reason, it is not natural and simple, as
in things, but artificial and compound as in speech, upon such and such a
cause in custom and consent. And tho the Hebrew grammarians only, do divide
their letters, according to that vocal instrument whereupon theie lean most,
as some upon the throat, some upon the rouf of the mouth, some upon the tung, some
upon the lips, some upon the tethe: yet the Hebrews alone have not that
distinction in nature, but every people also which have throat, tethe, rouf,
tung, lips, and with those instruments use the utterance of sounds. Which is an
argument to me, both that use is the mistress herein, and that he, which
sounds upon any one by cuntrie use, may be smoothed to some other by the
contrary use, and that therefore the same letters will serve all people, if
theie list to frame themselves accordingly. For otherwise why do we persuade
our people to sound Latin thus, Greek thus, Hebrew thus, Italian thus, if it be
not a thing to be made of acquaintance, by customarie use? And being so, and in
all nations so, what need we mo letters to utter our mind? seeing the uttering
instruments be all one, and nothing can be uttered either for variety more
diverse, or for difficulty more hard, then theie have uttered, from whom we
have those letters which we have? neither is it any discredit to our people to
rest content with those letters, and with that number, which antiquity has
allowed, and held for sufficient. Is nature therefore baren in us, which was
fruitful in them, because we may not invent, and put somewhat to theirs? No
forsooth. But all mankind is but one, without any respect of either this age,
or that age, both to nature her self, and to the God and Lord of nature, and
therefore what is given to one man, or delivered in one age of common service,
that is meant to all men, and to all ages of me^, without further regard to
whom, or for whom, but still to their benefit: neither is either God himself or
nature his minister tied to any time, for delivery of their gifts, but
whenever man's necessity compells him to seek, then theie help him to find.
Whereupon we understand, that as no one age brings forth every thing, so no
one age can but confess, that it has some one or other particular invention,
tho not the self same, because it is enough to have received it once to use
ever after. As in this case of letters, which perfited once, is never to be
shaken, onelesse a better mean be found to utter our speech, which I shall not
se, neither can I forese by any secret prophecy. In these inventions, tho the
first receiver have the prerogative in taking, yet the hole posterity has the
benefit in using, and generally with greater perfection, because time and
continewance do increase and proin, which when it is full, it is a falt to seek
further, as I take it to be in the course of penning. Neither is the restraint,
for either innouating, altering, or adding to things allredie perfited, any
discourtisie in reason, or any discountenance in nature, but a bare delivery
of a perfect thing to our elder brethern, to be conveyed unto us: as we in like
case, as the transporters to our posterity, of such things as it pleases God
to continue by our means, whether received of our elders, or devised by our
selves.

But why may we not use all our four and twenty letters, even Why not every
letter to many uses?
to four and twenty uses every of them, if occasion serve, seeing the characts
being known be more familiar, and easier to be discerned, then any new devise,
yea tho the old resemble mo, and the new do note but one? It has been
sufficiently declared allreadie, that those men, which first devised letters,
reserved the authority over them and their use to them selves for life, and
their successors, for ever, so to qualify and to use them, as it should please
them best upon consent among themselves, and cause to content need. And why not
so, where both the invention is their own, and the right use thereof, as theie
shall use it, which made it for their use? This general reservation is enrold
allredie in all reason and antiquity, and the particular consent for this
writing of ours is proined allredie, by our general use, and will be regestred
also in very good record, I hope, and that shortelie. And will you make that
souerain, which is but subaltern? or will you take that, as not remoueable,
like a steddie rok, which is roming by nature, and to serve the finder? There is
no such assurance in sound for the stablishing of a right, as you do conceive,
neither such necessity in letters, to be constant in one use, as you seek to
enforce.

The philosopher says, that nature makes one thing to one use, 1.
and that every use has his particular instrument naturally, but that our
own inventions, naie that even the most natural means in our application do,
and may serve to sundry ends and uses. And will letters stand so upon their
reputation, as not to seem to stand to our applying of the^, for our own
purposes, being both our creaturs, and by creation our bondme^? both to sound
and serve, as we shall think it good, and so many ways, as we shall will them
to serve? No surely, theie do not think so, but theie ar most ready to serve
at our appointment, both by creation, and by covenant. The letters yield
redilie, but some letters seek to hinder that their dewtifull obedience,
threaping still upon the^, that their substance is diamantish, and not born to
yield so.

With the same pen we make letters, and with the same we mar them: with the
same we direct, and with the same we dash: 3.
which be contrary uses, tho to compass one right, and will letters seem to
serve but for one use, being pewnies to the pen, naie being but elues and brats
of the pens breding? Theie will not so, but prove their own dewtifulnesse, to
the pen their parent, by following his direction in very many points, as
theie yield to reason and reasonable custom in many of their forces, whereby
theie seem to pray some body not to contend, where themselves be content.

The number of things, whereof we write and speak is infinite, 2.
the words wherewith we write and speak, be definite and within number.
Whereupon we are driven to use one, and the same word in very many, naie
sometime in very contrary senses, and that in all the very best la^guages, as
well as in English, where a number of our words be of very sundry powers, as,
letters, wherewith we write, and letters which hinder: A bird flies light,
wheresoever she does light: and to many to stand on here. And will letters
keep a countenance and stand so alouf, as to sound still but one, and to serve
still but one, where their great grandfathers even the words themselves, ar
forced to be manifold? naie ar very well content so to be, because of their
founders statute? which is to be pliable, and at voluntary commandment, of
wisdom and learning? letters stand not alouf, but allow of the service,
whereunto you allot the^, be it never so manifold, seeing without either
co^fusio^ or darkness, customarie acquaintance will work the distinction in
them, and their manifoldnesse: as a beaten disputer will sift out the
difference of manifold words, that the variety of their sense, make no quarrel
in the question.

If we write not allwaie one, thorough want of skill, and mere ignorance, then
knowledge is the helper, and he that will use right, must have desire to learn
right.

If there want distinction, then accent must be mean to avoid confusion, or some
such devise, which may distinguish with praise, and not pester the writing,
with any to od strangeness. For it is most certain, that we may use our
letters so, as we may all other things else, whose end is in use, and man is
the measur. Neither is it any abuse, when theie which use, can give a reason
why, sufficient to the wise, and not contrary to good custom. And tho some
reply, as not so persuaded, yet when the act is past by division of the house,
it is law by parliament. Then the repliers must relent, and follow, tho theie
favor not. Then must theie make the best of that, which theie thought worst,
when as lawful authority has restrained their will. A thing fre before order
being once limited by order has cast of that fredom, and must then keep that
current, whereunto it is limited, by orderly mean, it self being such, as is
subject unto man, and to be his at use.

Our letters be limited, their usage is certain in their most uncertainty, and
therefore I take it, that we may rest content both with their number and their
use. Thus much concerning that complaint of our poverty in letters, and
confusion in their powers, which I wonder not at, because I se it so in all
tungs, and ever: and I se no cause why, but it may be so in our own inuentio^s
and devises, where we are to take knowledge of nothing else, but of our own
consent, both by best iudgemets of the wisest men, and the right resemblance of
least corrupt nature. For the authority of sound


When theie have thus uttered their stomak against poor niknamed custom, which
is sore abused, both by them for blaming it undeservedly, and by corruption
to, for counterfaiting it shamefullie: when theie have moned our writing for
much insufficiency and bewailed our speaking for poverty of letters, then
like good physicians, and tender hearted cuntriemen, theie seek both to satisfy
justice in dewtie, and Art in help. As theie find a wrong, so theie seek to
right it, as theie mark a sore, so theie mean to salve it. But who shall be the
iusticiarie like some one Rhadamanthus, to pronounce sentence in this right? or
who the physician like some grave Hippocrates, to ouerse this cure? forsooth
sound, for whose use letters were devised first, when there were yet none, and
by whose ear theie ar now to be reclamed, being corrupt and naught. And why
not? Or if these that we have will not serve sounds turn, why may we not
invent or devise mo, considering our want is no wonder? For we came but lately
to use letters, in comparison of the old people in other nations of the main
continent, and felt not our want at the first wearing: but now that we feel it,
why may we not help our selves, with the devise of some new letters, as other
people did in the like cases by some Esdras, some Palamedes, some Cadmus, some
Euander, some Carmenta, and such other? Custom is condemned allredie, as a false
corrupter, and sound semes to be the surest, and the best gide even by natural
direction, and the primitive letter. And not so much as but even Quintilian
that great writing, and speaking master wishes sound to be observed, as the
surest teacher to write right, and not custom. And what a monstrous injury
were it, to renounce the natural Lord, and to become subject to a vile usurper?
To leave sound the right master, and to cleave to custom the right marrer? Sure
the very name of a natural Lord is honorable, and the bare sound of
usurpation is extreme odious to any honest ear: And right sound, as a right
souerain were to be obeyed, and corrupt custom, as an unjust intruder were to
be expelled.

But does Quintilian plead for sound against custom I pray Against the
authority of sound. Inst. 1.
you? Sure either you be merry men, or my memory faills me much. For
Quintilian defines custom very solemnlie, and upon great deliberation, as I
remember, to be in writing and speaking, the consent of the skillful, as in
virtuous life, the consent of the honest. Of the which two kinds of people, as
neither be corrupters in deed: so either would be angry to be accounted so in
speech. Theie do both condemn all error and corruption. And Quintilian speaking
of sound, says expresslie, and in plain terms, that every thing is to be
written, not as the sound gives, but as custom has won (which custom directs
not sound, but the expressing of sounds) and he brings in for example, Caius
Caesar, Cneius Pompeius, in whose forenames the eye beholds C, but the ear
hears G. which the Greeks using those names translate still by G. and the
same he proves also by many mo the like. As why not so? To win Quintilian,
naie to wring Quintilian to stand for sound against custom, by falsifying of
evidence and corruption of print, where both his examples trewlie printed, and
his hole meaning planelie printed, and his general circumstances never but
right printed bewraie his right opinion, argeweth some infirmity in the
alledger, who will not se what is meant every where about him, or cannot se at
all how to chek a false print, either by council of cunning, if he have it him
self, or by comparing of prints, where the trewer may be had. Naie saithnot
Quintilian Quintil. lib. 1. cap. 7.
thus of ortografie in general, that it is servant to custom, and therefore is
so often changed?

As for the authority, which sound alone had in the province of writing, and
the use of the letter, the date thereof is out long ago. Reason and right
custom be joined unto him in the same commission. Besides that, Art has
limited and bounded his regiment sense that time. Much he can do still, but not
so much, as all, neither any thing so much, as he could once have done. But
this argument, concerning the dissolution of sounds government, has been
allredie handled in the 12. title of this book.

Quintilians custom is no corrupter, neither yet is sound but a natural Lord,
tho nothing so absolut, ne yet so imperial, as you conceive of him, and tho
the letters were first devised for him, yet both the letters, and even sound
himself, must be ruled by them, which both sound letters, and utter sounds.

If need be, the increase of our number is not denied us as not to other people,
but the need is denied, because we entered upon other peples most perfect
inventions, and tho later in time, yet so much the surer, because all things
necessary were devised to our hands: and because our need can be no new need.
Whatsoever we need to write, we are able to write it, and when we have writ it,
we are able to read it. If there be any falt, the remedy must be, not to seek
that, which we have not, but to mark that, which we have, seeing we have all
sufficient.

The credit of sound being well established in their opinion, The mean to
redress all these defects in some men's opinion.
as the natural lord, and the leader to all our letters, and custom being
condemned, as a cankard traitor, intruding against all right, upon the
territory of sound, then theie turn to the cure of this diseased corruption,
and pray Hipoorates to be judge. To amend that which is amiss in the writing
of our tu^g, their ground work being laid in the shaken monarchy of the
deposed sound, theie proceed on in a full course of general innovation, tho
some more, some less. First theie increase the number of our letters and
diphthongs, as if it were not possible either heretofore to have written, or at
this day to write any word right, for want of some increase in the number of
our letters. For as the ouercharging of our words with to many letters cummeth
by using those to much, which we have allredie: so the difficulty thereof by
using them so diversely proceeds of mere want, not having wherewith to answer
each particular.

Then theie change the form of our letters, and bring us in new faces, of very
strange lineaments, how well favored to behold, I am sure I know: how vnredie
for a penma^, wherewith to run, methink I forese. Which readiness in the
charact, that it follow the hand roundly, is a special service belonging to
the pen. Neither do I my self in these observations, so much regard, what the
print will stamp well, which will express any thing well, whose form is
reseblable, as what the pen will write well, and that with good dispatch,
because printing is but a peculiar, and a benefit impropriate: writing is our
general, and in every man's finger. A form that is fair to the eye in print,
and cumbersom to the hand in penning, is not to pass in writing. For what but
that causes our English pen to use z. so seldom, which we hear fo often?
Bussing, hussie, dissie, go roundly to the pen with the duble ss, but very
vnredilie with the duble z, Buzzing, huzzie, dizzie. Use has won ss. and the
pens readiness, is the prouf to persuade it. To conclude, this say theie is
the only help to amend all misses: for defect, to enlarge: for old and
corrupt, to bring in new and correct: need enforces redress, and dewtie the^.

Sure a good care, and a cuntriemanlike affection, but methink Hippocrates,
which was ouerseer, allows not the receipt. That this their mean is not the
best.
For what? must we then alter all our writings a new? or from what day is this
act of reformation to take full place? It is a strange point of physik, when
the remedy it self is more dangerous then the disease. Besides that: I take
this alteration in this sort, to be neither necessary, where no such
insufficiency is, neither yet commodious, where such inconveniences follow.
For speech being an instrument, and a mean to utter that, which the mind
co^ceiueth, if by the delivery of the mouth, the mind be understood, the
speech is sufficient, which so fully answers so needful a purpos. If
writing, where under I comprehend both the print and pen, do so fully express
the pith of the voice, as the reader may, and does understand the writers
meaning at full thereby, I may not persuade him, that the letters which he
reads be not sufficient to express the writers meaning, which he is ready to
confute by present trial, that both he understands them, and withal most
sufficiently.

But these insufficienciaries will say, that this understanding cums not by
the right of the writing, but by the intelligent reader, which vndersta^ds that
right, by the so usual, tho so corrupt writing, which is vnperfitlie, and
improperly written: and that the propriety in penning is ill refused, which
may be had easily with very small straning.

I like the reason well, as I consesse some imperfection. But neither is the
imperfection so great, as theie conceive of it, neither is their reason so nere
to redress, as theie think it is. As for the imperfection, how it cummeth, and
which way to help it, my hole labor will prove that in event. For their reason
I cannot se that, which theie call a small straning because theie alter quite,
or at the least, theie change the surface quite, which in this case, where the
propriety in writing is the possession of custom being so grounded as I have
allredie declared, is to great a straning, chefelie, where custom being so sure
and sound, will not be content to be ouerruled in his own: or that any
reformation shall e^ter clame, where he is proprietarie, howsoever private men's
conceits, upon never so probable apparences, framed in their own opinion, shall
offer assistence to the contrary side.

The use and custom of our cuntrie, has allredie chosen a kind of penning,
wherein she has set down her relligion, her laws, her private and publik
dealings: Every private man according to the allowance of his cuntrie in
general, has so drawn his private writings, his evidence, his letters, as the
thing seems impossible to be removed by any so strange an alteration, tho it
be most willing to receive some reasonable proining, so that the substance may
remain, and the change take place in such points only, as may please without
novelty, and profit without forcing For were it not in good sooth, to violent
a force, to offer to overthrow a custom, so generally received, so
particularly settled, naie grounded so soundly, and sure, as it shall appear
shortly, with altering either all, or most of our letters? Were it not an
argument of a very simple orator, to think that he could persuade custom, by
so strange an innovation, to divorce himself from so long, and so lawful a
match? Naie were it not a wonderful wish, even but to wish that all our
English scriptur and divinity, all our laws and policy, all our evidence
and writings, were pe^d anew, because we have not that set down in writing,
which our elders did wish us, but either more, which theie meant not, or less,
which we would not, or not so as both theie me^t, and we would? all this cu^ming
of the insufficie^cie of our writing, which is not able, to set that
faithfully and fully down, which the mind co^ceiueth, but either with the
more, or the less, or disagreing in the manner? But theie willsaie that theie
mean not any so main a change. But theie must needs mean it, because it must
either presently follow upon the admitting of this new alteration, which is to
main in sense, or within some years, which is to main in thought. For a new
writing cu^ming in under hand, and the old charact growing outof knowledge, all
that evidence in whatsoever English kind, must needs either com over to the new
fashion, or be subject to the fru^p, and remain wormeate^ like an old relik,
and so to be red, as the Romain religion, written under Numa Po^pilius was by
the^ of Tullies time, when every word was so uncouth and strange, as if it had
cum from some other world, then where it was pe^ned. But am I not in hand with a
nedlesse travel, not allowing that, which I need not fear, because there is no
danger in it, the very use of our cu^trie refusing it allredie? I grant I am.
But yet I must say somewhat, not to seem to contemn: as if I say nothing, the
contrary then may seem to have said some thing. But sure I take the thing to
be to to combersom, and inconvenient, tho it were like to be profitable, but
where no like liehood of any profit at all does appear in sight, and the
change it self seems, neither necessary as to the better, neither voluntary,
as to the readier, which be two principal respects in writing, I allow not the
mean, tho I mislike not the men, which deserve great thanks for their great
good will, tho their works take no place. For their labor is very profitable
to help some redress forward, tho themselves hit it not. For while diverse men
attempt to lay the thing in certain, some one or other will hit it at the last,
whereas to the contrary, the case were desperate, if it were never dealt in. But
this amendment of theirs is to far fet, and without the help thereof we
understand our print and pen, our evidence and other writing, in what kind
soever. And tho we grant some imperfection, as in a tung not yet rakt from her
trubled lees, yet we do not confess, that it is to be perfited either by
altering the form, or by e^creasing the number of our acquainted letters, but
only by observing, where the tu^g of her self, and her ordinary custom does
yield to the fining, as the old, and therefore the best method does lead us. For
it is no argument, when falts be found, to say this is the help and only
this, because none other is in sight. But whensoever the right is found by
orderly seking, the^ the argument is true, that it was not thoroughlie sought,
when it was denied to be. And to speak indiffere^tlie be twen the letter and
the sound, of the one side, and custo^ and the letter, of the other side:
letters ca^ express sou^ds withal their joints and properties, no fuller then
the pe^cill ca^ the form and lineame^ts of the face, whose praise is not life
but likeness: as the letters yield not alwaie the same, which sound exactlie
requires, but allwaie the nearest, wherewith custom is content. And therefore if
a letter sound not iu^p as ye wish, yet hold it as the next, least if you
change you cum not so near. And tho one letter be used in diverse naie, in
contrary sounds: or soundish effects, ye cannot avoid it by any change that
will be liked, seeing no one else has been liked hitherto, but this which we use,
which custom does allow in ours by continuance, and consent in other tungs
confirms by allowance. Certainly by so much as I have observed, I think we are as well appointed for our necessities that way, and as much bound to our
general custom, for the artificial notes of our natural tung, as any other
people is, to any other language, whether ancient in books, or modern in
speech. And whatsoever insufficiency seems to be in the writing thereof, it
will excuse it self, and lay the hole falt upon the insufficient obseruer, for
not seking the right in it, by a right way, which will appear to be true, when
it shall be seen, that by sufficient observation it may be set clear, and pure,
without any foren help, of either altering the form, or increasing the number
of our ordinary letters, but only by bare notes of her own breding, which
being allredie in use desire nothing else, but some direction by Art, which I am
in good hope to perform, according to the plat of the best refiners, in the
most refined tungs, with such consideration, as either bredeth any general
rules, or else must bear with particular exceptions. I will mark what our
customarie writing will yield unto us by way of note, without dreaming of
change, which change is a thing not possible to pass against so violent a
fall, as custom runs with, tho that violence it self offer no kind of wrong to
any other thing, being altogether full of her own stream. I will therefore do
my best to confirm our custom in his own right, which will be easily obtained,
where men be acquainted with the matter allredie, and would be very glad to se
wherein the right of their writing stands, and a great deall more glad to
find it so near, when theie sought it, and thought it to be further of. Thus
have I run thorough these pretended infirmities in our tung, whose physiking I
like not this way, and therefore I will ioyn close with mine own observation,
to se if that will help.

CAP. XV. What right in writing is, and of what force consent is in voluntary
inventions.
BY cause I pretend the finding out of a right in writing, and withal confess
that that right must bild upon consent, I will therefore show first, what a
thing that is, which we call right both in speech and pen: then what force
consent is of, to establish any thing, where many voices ar needful. Theodor
Gaza, a great learned Grecia^ defines that to be right in speech, (...).
for every part and accident thereof, which is commonly used in that kind,
and ever lightly so, naie never lightly but so, and allwaie the surest, and
of the best warrant, notwithstanding particular exceptions, and private notes.
For speech being our instrument at will, for our common dealings, why should
not that be the right therein, which is of commonest note, and best understood?
which kind of common notice, who so ever he be, that shall follow in the right
of his writing, besides the truth of the thing, confirmed by custom, and the
authority of custom confirmed by consent, he makes for him self a great
party, and by writing as the generality does, he gains the generality to
be of his side, which is ready to allow of their own choice, and usually love,
where theie find them felues liked, having authority to establish both their
own assurance, and the writers direction. Opposition to the common upon favor
to the private, as The force of common use
preferring private fantfie before general use, or as if you alone had espied,
where all else be deceived, assures you of two things, the one, to be
generally misliked for our particular choice, where the generality is chief:
the other, never to be followed for bewraing such a fantsie, which is alredie
and altogether out of grace with the common. For why? when the custom of your
cuntrie allows this as best, and therefore fittest for her perpetual service,
does she not then tell you, by seuering her own general, that she saw your
special? For how could choice have taken place, if both the extremities had
not been in sight? Therefore he calls his own credit into some question, which
takes his cu^trie to be blind, where both the matter of her choice, and the
manner of her speech declaring her choice most evidently show, that she seith
what she says.

I know some men which have contraried all our latin grammar rules, as not so
generally true that way, which theie ar used, but even as true of the
contrary side, by cause theie have some examples in the tung, repugnant as
theie think to the rules, which be given. Whose error is in that theie do not
consider, that our commonly so, and not their allwaie so, is right in such
cases: and that such wise men, as gathered the rules, when theie pikt the
finenest did lay out a dross, and that he which rests upon the most and
best, by comparison confesses a less and a worse. Such people dream that other
men se not when themselves be aslepe, and by not comparing themselves with
other, ouerwene their own abilities. But upon this right most commonly so,
where choice has found reason to ioyn withal in company, must both speech be
grounded, and their interest examined, which will ouerrule speech by their to
much private reason. For he that pretends a falt against any tung, and
ame^deth not that falt, but deuiseth a new right, of his own conceiving,
helps not the old falt, but by tendering a new mean, offers more matter to
the finding of new falts, while men will rather be content to embrase their
old, with all known falts, then to ventur upon a new, theie know not how good.

I shall not need to use any learned ma^s testimony or name more the^ Gaza
alone, to prove that this most commonly so, is the only right in writing and
speaking, and what a great comma^der custom is in it, by cause every where
theie write nothing else concerning custom, when theie deall with him in this
kind, but of that his dominion over speech, and pen. And theie that be learned
know, that all such, as deall in speech, whether pithilie with logik, or
plausiblie with rhethorik, or purelie with gra^mer, do lay it down in plain
terms of use and custom, that for speech and pen, the rule and resolution
thereof goes still so, as use best allows, and as custom most commands,
whose choice lies in that which is commonly so, upon best show and sharpest
cause. The unlearned also in their daily experience, may well perceive, that
the thing is so by the liking and misliking, by the rising and decaing of
sundry words, and phrases of speech, in their ordinary dealings, as either
youth, and fresh cause pre ferreth the new, and as age and ouerwearing
displaceth the old. So that who so will enforce the contrary to that, which
custom and use do take to protection, as practiced by the most, and not
disproued by the best, which is the reason of my plat in fining of speech even
from the very first, shall not possibile preuail, as may be well perceived by
many fair attempts, which can find no entry, where theie have attempted all.

As for consent this I have to say, that it did both beget letters Consent.
and gave them their forces, at the very first, to express the sound of the
articulate voice, and that from time to time it has so altered, and used them
upon needful cause, by lawful authority of it self, confirming it self, as
theie have followed that course, which consent has commanded, and good reason
why? For men's need being the only cause, why theie fly to new devises,
whereby to supply that need: if theie themselves do confess their own need to
be supplied by such a mean, as theie have found out, will you seek further
prouf thereof, then their own confession, which both found the want, and feel
the help? And if upon some longer, and therefore better travel, theie do find
that the thing, which theie liked on at the first excedinglie well, while the
misliking of their want persuaded the well liking of any thing at all, which
served for supply, must afterward be qualifyed much otherwise, then it was at
the first, to be so made proper to all performances, which their need
requires, will ye not believe them in that, which theie both find and feel?
whether you do or no, the truth will, and pronounces peremptorily that custom
does, and must rule in all such cases, where many ar to practis a thing, of
their own procurement, but most of all there, where theie have practiced
allredie, and ar most willing to continue in that, the which theie have
practiced, as in this our writing. Wherefor it shall please my good cuntrimen
to give their consent, that this is their right in writing, without further
parlementing, it will prove so in deed. And why it should be so I will allege
very fair, and yet nothing else, but that, which even theie themselves use in
their daily writing: wherein as theie may be judges of the matter upon
familiarity with it: so will I frame the mean to ascertain the matter,
according unto the president of all the best tungs.

Cap. XVI. The seven means to find out, and ascertain the right writing of
English.
IT has been not only said, but also proved allredie, and Cap. 12.
that in every particular branch thereof, how the first mean, which was used
for the fining of the first tung, and was afterward transported to the fining
of other, to work the same effect in them by following the same president, did
proceed in working by these degres. First the sound alone did rule the pen,
because 1. Sound.
the letters were first devised, only to resemble, and express the sound by
their aspectable figur. But very many inconveniences did follow while that
sound alone did command the pen, because of the difference in the instruments
of our voice, wherewith we sound: because of the finenesse or grossness of
the ear, wherewith we receive sounds: because of the judgment The
inconveniences of ruling the pen by the sound alone.
or ignorance in the party, which is to pronounce, of the right or wrong
expressing of the sound. For the avoiding whereof, the people, which found these
inconuenie^ces, and the causes why, to be in the imperfection of their gide,
while sound alone was the 2. Reason, Custo^, Sound. Reasons office in the pen.
Customs office in the pen. How alterable any unwritten truth is, carried only
in the heads of ordinary and common use.
leader in writing, joined reason and custom in commission with sound: Reason
to observe where the sternnesse of sound were to be followed, and where to be
qualified, because letters resemble the joints in sound, but are not the same
with the things resembled: Custom to confirm that by experience in the pen,
which reason does observe, and note in the sound. But all these three the
propriety of sound, the qualifying of reason, the experimenting of custom,
consisting as yet in the bare vnrecorded, and unwritten use, wherein every man's
brain was every ma^s book, and every private conceit a particular print,
diverse and great corruptions began to encroche again, against both reason and
3. Art the establisher of reason, custom, and sound in speech
custom, to restore sound to his first monarchy, and to force custom against
the common current. Which attempts of error and misuse (for these two be sounds
principal frinds, in the maintenance of his unlawful authority) reason and
custom upon great causes did mightily withstand, and prayed help of Art, as an
autorised notarie, to write all those things down in precept and method,
wherein sound, reason, and custom all three had consented and agreid, and were
not to be shaken by any insolence of corruption, if the bands of their consent
and agreement were once made, subscribed, sealed and delivered, as all their
three deeds. Which being don all quarells were ended, and the rule of right
writing was so enrold before such officers of state, as it was but vain for
sound, or for any of his favorers, ever to strive the^cefurth for any
monarchy alone, tho he co^tinew still in very great authority.

This course took the first finers to bring their pen to an artificial right:
this the rest followed, and this course will I take, by the grace of God, to
bring my cuntrie writing to precept and method, by the help of Art, registring
the argument of reason, custom, and sound in the writing thereof, with as good
deliberation and faith, as my cunning can compass, and as the nature of such an
argument will admit assurance. Wherein I will lean unto all the three, for the
matter, as to Art alone for the manner.

The right writing of our English therefore by way of discriptio^ What it is
to write English right.
is, a certain reasonable course, to direct the pe^ by such rules, as ar most
conformable, to the propriety of sound, the consideration of reason, and the
smoothing of custom jointly, specially in those points of our writing where
there is some difficulty and disagrement both in opinion of the writers, and in
nature of the letters, concerning to much, to little, or to diverse. To much, as
the To much.
dubling of consona^ts in the end of a word, as putt, grubb, ledd, for put,
grub, led, and a thousand such ignorant superfluities. Whereas the rule is,
that no consonant must be dubled in any word at all, or in any place of the
word at all, but only where either consona^t belongs to several syllabs,
as in syl-lab. witting, saving ss, and ll, in the end upon great occasions,
which shall be noted hereafter. To little, as fech, scrach, herafter, singlie for
fetch, scratch, hereafter, singlelie: where for the first two the To little.
rule is, that, t, is to be written before ch, in such deriuatiues, as have t,
in the primitive, as set, scrat, which is so much used as it makes a rule of
it self almost, and causes t, be commonly written, even where either there is
no primitive at all with t, or not any in such a sense, as the deriuatiue
semes to be of. For the last, the rule is, that our English compounds ar
lightly made of the hole simples, without leasing one letter: and that if any
be left out, it is figuratiuelie by either contraction, as single for
singlelie, or for readiness in writing without further reason, which is most
seen in the silent e, whereof I will speak hereafter. As in therein, loftiness,
for therein, loftienesse. To diverse, as in choice To diverse.
anoint, bought, bought, some, home, use, use of of, if, if, give give, love
love, mother, mother, record, record, and a number mo such, which be the chief
causes why our writing is so charged with so great confusion. And yet all this
great confusion is easily to be certained, without any more ado, the^ the
mere follow ing of reason, custom, and sound, in our own tung, as shall be
plainly proved. And if there need any difference, or distinction to the eye,
for directing either the English infant, which must learn, or the infantish
stranger, which desires to learn, some little note of distinction, or some known
accent over the less usual will avoid that confusion, which is so much
pretended, and confirm it self by following the first tungs, in that kind of
distinguishing. The two points of to much and to little will be soon redressed, as
most what proceeding from the ignorant writer, which will reform himself, when
he shall se cause why, and a corrected president, the which he may follow. The
last for diversity is a matter of mere cumber, and yet shall be so handled, as I
do not fear, but to win both consent and allowance. For the helping of these
unruly fellows, and the certaining of our pen, I do follow these seven
precepts, General Rule, Proportion, Composition, Deriuation, Enfranchisment,
distinction, and Prerogative. The causes why I have reduced all the
obseruatio^s of our right writing, to these seven heads be these. The first
thing, that is considered in any compound matter, is the simples whereon the
compound is made, which in this argument is the nature of each letter. Whose
general examining, and ascertaining I have recommended to the first of my
seven precepts, which I call general 1. Rule.
rule. The next thing that is considered in a compound is the use and handling
of the simples, which make the composition, being put to their prouf in the
thing compounded. Which prouf in this argument consists in words, because
letters do serve for the delivery of words. Now all words be either mere
English, or in corporate strangers, which either follow one suitable sound in
speech, and the like resemblance in pe^, or agreing in the one, disagre in the
other. For the certaining of this uncertainty, I appoint two precepts of the
seven, Proportion, 2. Proportion.
and Enfranchisement. 3. Enfranchisment.


Again, all words whether natural or denisons, be either simple or compound,
either primatiues or deriuatiues. For the directing 4. Composition.
whereof two other precepts serve, Composition and Deriuation. 5. Deriuation.


Again, because the time and quantity of syllabs, and the 6. Distinction.
tune and quality thereof do cause sometime much controversy and difference in
the right use of writing, I have therefore joined the rule of distinction unto
these five. Wherein I handle the use of all those characts, which the eye does
behold, either in pen or print besides the letters: because those characts, do
help and qualify the expressing, and utterance of words and sentences, as the
letters alone do express and utter them.

Again, because both sound and custom will show some one trik of their private
authority, in the most pride of Art, which depends altogether of reason, I
have therefore knit up all the seven with the rule of prerogative, where the
general direction of any of the other is sometime thwarted by nature of
exception, occasioned 7. Prerogative.
sometime by the sound, sometime by custom, both being desirous to show their own
efficacy. All which my rules I refer to the writing, more the^ to the print.
For in the print the difficul tie is not so soon spyed, as it is in writing:
because the printing charact being once cast in metle, what difficulty is
there afterward? In the pen which is still to stamp, and to make new characts
every foot, tho of the same form, the commodity of the That these rules ar to
the pen rather then to the print.
hand is most to be considered, that the charact be fair to the eye, commodious
to the joint, and swift to dispatch. And therefore he that will judge of my
opinion in this argument, wherein my special regard is, to the facility and
right in writing, rather the^ in printing tho the one help the other, when it
is well settled, must not mark what the print sets down in the general
sta^ping, where the printers, setters, and correcters oversight sometimes
plaieth a part, and lets many errors abide in their work: but what I my
self do bind my self unto by mine own precept. For that I will warrant, the
other I cannot, tho I do what I can. The writing is my chief care, which will
be my chief credit herein, if it prove to be current, and active.

Cap XVII. General rule, wherein the nature, and force of every particular
letter is examined.
I Call the first of those means, whereby the right writing of our English tung
is to be assured, according to that certainty, which our common use does seem
to have chosen General rule, whose peculiar dewtie is, to ascertain our right
writing, either by main grounds, reaching thoroughout the hole tung, What
general rule is, and how it is divided.
or by limiting the force of every particular charact, whether it be
distinction to help our pronouncing, or else letter, whereby we pronounce. By
this description it appears, that the rules which belong to right writing in
this kind, be either general to the tung, or particular to the charact. The
former sort of the two do bak the latter, like the general notio^s in
Geometry. The latter ground the general truth of their main reason, upon the
former, and the particular credit of their own argument upon themselves. And
yet theie both have but that assurance in nature, which reason, custom, and
sound have agreid upon by consent, and willed Art to set it down, as a covenant
of theirs. The general rules, which be the main grounds of the hole tu^g, be
either known The general and main grounds.
conclusions, allredie handled and won, or such consequents as follow them of
necessity, as these be.

1 That the body of each letter and distinction is creatur to devise, and the
use thereof to our consent.

2 That reason, sound, and custo direct right writing jointly, and are not to
be severed, in giving the cause, why words be so written.

3 That the right in writing is a thing to be found out in our use, as of
acquaintance, and not to be forced in upon our use, as a stranger.

4 That in reforming things of common practis the clearing of the old, which is
abused, and not the breding of a new, which is untried, is the natural
amendment.

5 That in common executions, the common favor is the common furtherer.

6 That even by reasons leave the very pen and dispatch in writing, will have
one ore in the right of writing, and serve it self with some private trik.

7 That to have the most well, you must yield to some particularities not of
best reason.

8 That no rule of Art can deall so, but it must leave many particularities to
daily practis, to be learned by often using, and such like observations, which
be common stays both for Art to direct Particular rule.
by, and the pen to write by. The particular rule exami neth the force of all
such characts, as we use in writing, whereof there be two kinds: the one
signifying and sounding: the other signifying, but not sounding. Those characts
which signify Characts either sounding. or not.
but sound not, ar certain notes, which we use in the writing of our English
tu^g for the qualifying of our words, and sentences in their pronouncing, by
that which is seen in the form of our writing, Characts which sound not.
which be in number thirtene, in name and form these: Coma, Colon: Period.
Parenthesis (.) interrogation? the longtime the short time the sharp accent the
flat acce^t the straight acce^t the seuerer the uniter - the breaker = I use
the fore^ and original names in most of these, because both the notes
themselves be of a foren bread, and theie be commonly best known by their own
cuntrie names: I might darken more if I should devise new names, then by
enfranchising of the foren, a thing common to all speches, which use the
translate terms of any Art. Here it shall be sufficient only to show their
number, names and form, I will handle their force and use in the title of
distinction, whereunto theie belong naturally. Those characts which both
signify Characts with sound.
and sound be called letters, and concern both the substance and the delivery
of our sounds, and are considered either alone, as a. b. c. or in combination,
as the diphthongs, ai. aw. ou. the copleme^ts with h. chapter th. gh. the
abbreuiations, wc. yt. with. of all these I will note somewhat in particular, and
first of the single letters, whose names be familiar in our daielie use, their
number 24. their form either great or small. great. A. B. C. D. E. F. The name,
number, form, and place of our letters both great and small.
G. H. I. K. L. M. N. O. P. Q R. S. T. V. W. X. Y. Z. small, a. b. c. d. e. f.
g. h. i. k. l. m. n. o. p. q. r. s. s. e. t. v. u. w. x. y. z. In these letters
there are to be considered, their place, and their form. As for their place,
the great letters ar to begin full sentences, as. The kingdom of heaven is
ready for the repentant. And proper names, as. The cursed Cain killed the good
Abell: And to write numbers with, where the letters be used in numbering, as, C.
for an hundred. L. for fifty, The small letters place is every where else,
besides these three, where the great ar to be written. Some of the small letters,
as s. and v. be of mo forms then one, and somewhat different therefore in place.
The long s. serves in all places, which be capable of the less form, saving
the very last. The other two little ones. s and ^ which is but convert to the
small written s, and no abbreuiatio^ indede, com only in the end of a word,
and that upon such cause, as shall be noted hereafter. V. begins the word or
syllab, and is allwaie used v. u.
co^sonantlike, as u. expresses the vowell, and in the middle or ending syllabs
it is used for the other form of v. mostwhat for the dispatch in writing. This
is enough for the number, name, form and place of both the great and small
letters. Their force is to The force of our letters.
be considerred either generally by division, or particularly by enumeration
of every single letter. For their division all the 24. letters be either
vowels, as. a. e. i. o. u. or consonants, as. b. c. d. f. g. k. l. m. n. p. q.
r. s. t. x. z. or in some uses both consonants and vowells, as i. v. w. y.
besides that h. is an aspiration only in power, tho a letter in form, and a
consonant in The division of our letters.
some combination, as in the weak chapter chat, chip, change. For in the strong chapter
as charact, archangell, Christian, it is but the aspirat. The consonants be
either mutes and close the sound, as, b. c. d. g. k. p. q. t. or half vowellish
as, f. l. m. n: r. s. x. z. which having the help of a vowell to begin their
force continue it themselves a great while after. This is enough for the
general division of the letters at this time. Their enumeration shows the
force and use of every particular letter in order, as I will The enumeration
of every particular letters force.
deall with them, first with the vowells, and then with the consonants, and
either of their combinations, diphthongs, coplements, and abbreuiations. The
vowells generally sound either long as, comparing, reue^nged, endi^ting,
enclosure, presuming: The force and use of the vovells.
or short as ransaking, reulling, penitent, omnipotent, fortunat: either sharp,
as mate, mete, ripe, hope, duke. or flat as: mat, met, rip, hop, duk. Which
diversity in sound where occasion does require it, is noted with the
distinctions of time and tune, tho generally it need not, considering our
daielie custom, which is both our best, and our commonest gide in such cases,
is our ordinary leader, as in the title of distinction it shall be handled at
large.

A
A Besides this general note for the time and tune, has no particular thing
worth the observation in this place, as a letter, but it has afterward in
proportion, as a syllab. All the other vowells have many pretty notes.

E
E Besides the common difference of time and tune, is a letter of marvelous
use in the writing of our tung, and therefore it seems to be recommended unto
us specially above any other letter, as a chief governor in the right of our
writing. Which e, tho it be sometime idlelie written, either of ignorance, if the
writer be unlearned, and know not how to write, or of negligence, if he be
learned, and mark not his hand, yet most times it is written to great purpos,
even where it seems idle, before the force of it be considered, and has a
very great saying in each of the seven precepts, as shall be declared in every
of them particularly. E in the former or the last syllab.


And first for rule, the first of the seven precepts, this is to be noted of E,
that it either sounds or is silent, and that either in the former or in the
last syllabs. But first of the last, where it either ends the syllab it self,
or with some other consonant, or consonants after. Whenever E, is the last
letter, and sounds, it sounds sharp, as, me, se, we, agree. saving in the,
the E sounding in the end.
article, ye the pronown, and in Latin words, or of a Latin form, when theie be
used English like, as, certiorare quandare, where e, sounds full and broad
after the original Latin.

Whenever e, is the last, and sounds not, it either qualifieth E in the end
and not sounding.
some letter going before, or it is mere silent, and yet in neither kind
increases it the number of syllabs. I call that E, qualifying, whose absence
or presence, sometime alters the The qualifying E.
vowell, sometime the consonant going next before it. It alters the sound of
all the vowells, even quite thorough one or mo consonants as, made, steme,
each, kind, stripe, ore, cure, toste sound sharp with the qualifying E in
their end: whereas, mad, stem, each, frind, strip, or, cur, tossed, contract of
tossed sound flat without the same E, And therefore the same loud and sharp
sound in the word, calls still for the qualifying e, in the end, as the flat
and short needs it not. It qualifyeth no ending vowell, because it follows
none in the 2
end, saving i. as in day, may, say, trewlie, safety, where it makes i,
either not to be heard, or very gently to be heard, which otherwise would
sound loud and sharp, and must be expressed by y. as, deny, aby, ally. Which
kind of writing shall be noted hereafter. It alters also the force of, c, g,
s, tho it sound not after them, as in hence, for that, which might 3
sound henk, if any word ended in c. in swinge differing from swing, in use
differing from us. I call that e, mere silent, which tho it neither sound, nor
qualify any letter, yet may it not be The mere silente.
spared from the ends of five kinds of words. First of foren denisons, which are derived from originalls ending in s, tho being 1
not the last letter of their ending syllab, as, case, cause, verse, diverse,
repose, nose. Secondly of those words, which end in* sounding like a z. and
have a vowell next before the s, as the 2
silent e, after, as cruse, excuse, abuse, snese, wise, amase. Thirdly of
words ending in v, the co^sonant, as. crave, deceive, glove, 3
love, throue, move, shroue. Fourthlie after l, in combination with any
consonant, as whistle, gristle, wrestle, wrangle, frisle, 4
britle, trikle. saving where v, the consonant cummeth before l, in the same
proportion of sound like to these, where the e, is passant (whereof I will say
somewhat straight way) and therefore is written before the l. tho it show the
very like fore, to the mere silent, e, after the l, as. devil, riuel, rauel,
shouel. In which words, both the ending l, is single, as not bearing the fall
of e. like to well, knell, swell: and the proportion is like to rifle, wifle,
snafle, snufle, shuffle. The consonant before l, is not to be dubled, for
making two sillabs of one, because the e, sounds not, which it should do of
necessity, if it made a syllab. But why may not these also be written, riule,
driule, diule etc. letting the consonant v, answer her cousin f. in wifle,
trifle, rifle, the kindred between them being still so great, as it appears in
wife, wiue, thrift, thrive, drift, drive, and a number such. Fiftlie, after the
duble ss, in the end, which why it is dubled, 5
it shall be noted hereafter, as witness, worthiness, redress. For wheresoever
the long s, ends the word, the siler e, will follow, like to a silent Hebrew
Scheua in the ending K, which theie call Caph. Now the form of s, in this
dubling must needs be long, because it must answer the first, which is long,
and therefore must needs have the silent e. Some use the same silent e, after r,
in the end, as lettre, cedre, children, and such, where methink it were better
to be the flat e, before r, as letter, ceder, childer. and so childern rather
then children, onelesse ye will form of child, childer, childeren, and so by
contraction children, cutting away the former e: or childern, cutting away
the latter.

E. when it ends the last sillab, with one or mo consonants E passant.
cumming after it, either sounds flat and full, and makes a syllab, as in
rest, wretch, descent. or it is passant and sounds quik like the fine gentle
i, mostwhat not increasing the number of syllabs as written, gotten, says. This
e, passant and the gentle i, be of such affinity, as theie do oftimes
enterchange places, as indite, induce, intent, or endite, enduce, intent.
Generally words that end in the qualifying or silent e, when theie put s, unto
them in their deriuatiues, theie make the e, passant, as time times, wife,
wives, pipe, pipes. without increase of syllabs, and ar therefore to be speld
together.

E, ending any former syllab sounds of it selfbrode, E in former syllabs.
and longish, as, reprehend, delegate. onelesse it be a deriuatiue or compou^d
of some sharp ending e, which answers the primative or simple in the first
sound, as agreing, of agree, foreseeth, of forese. If it end the syllab with
any consonant after, it is flat, as entending, repentant.

It is never sile^t in any former syllab, but in composition, where the hole
simple word is to be written, as in wherefor, hereupon, E silent in compounds.
hencefurth, in the two former, the prerogative of custom using e, in the end,
where, here, contrary to the proportion, in hear, wear, ear: in the last the
qualifying e, accompanying her simple hence. In the titles of distinction and
deriuation there shall be more said of the silent and qualifying e, both where
theie be to be used, and where not in the respect of the timing and tuning of
words.

I
I, besides the time and tune thereof noted before, has a I in his vowellish
nature.
form sometime vowellish, sometime consonantish. In the vowellish sound either it
ends a former syllab or the very last. When it ends the last, and is it
self the last letter, if it sound gently, it is qualified by the e, as many,
merry, tarry, carry, where the very pen, will rather end in the e, then in the
naked i.

If it sound sharp and loud, it is to be written with y, having 1
no, e, after it, as neding no qualification, deny, cry, defy.

If it end the last syllab, with one or mo consonants after it, 2
it is shrill when the qualifying e, follows, and if it be shrill, the
qualifying e, must follow, as, repine, unwise, mind, kind, fiste. If it be
flat and quik, the qualisying e, must not follow, as, examine, behind, mist,
fist. If it end a former syllab, 3
it sounds lightly sharp in spelling, and is so to, onelesse it be in a word
of many syllabs, where the middle time may easily be descried by the use of
speech, as in pacient, penitent, evident, whining, devising. These words of
many syllabs be lightly strangers, because our natural English be most what
but of one syllab. How it will fall out in the former of a word of two syllabs,
or of some monosyllabs, which seem to be of two, as, crible, pible, trible,
title, title, bible, bible, the precept of Analogy or proportion will show
hereafter. If there 4
seem another i, to follow next, the former of the two must be a y, as crying,
denying, yea tho the primitive end in the qualifyed i, as, carry, marie,
hurrie, currie, carrying, tarying, hurrying, currying. where it is to be noted,
that tho the primitive word do end in y, yet the same y, in the former syllabs
of the same words race in deriuation may be the shrill i, onelesse another i,
follow straight, as in supply, supplying, and yet supplied, denied be
tolerable, tho the primitive y, would do well enough. If i, end a middle syllab,
with a consonant 5
or mo after, it follows the flat ending sound, as coincident, imprinting. If
it be a deriuatiue of a sharp primitive, it sounds 6
sharp, and casts his primitine consonant over to the next syllab. as,
repine, requite, enquire, repineth, requiting, enquired, because a consonant
cumming between two vowells in any simple word must be spelled with the
latter. Sometime the qualified consonant must keep his own e, if the addition
begin with a consonant, as entice, endite, enticement, enditement, which in
enticing, enditing, leaseth the e. because the addition begins with i. I, in
the same proportion 7
sounds now sharp, as give, thrive, alive, vviue, title, bible, now quik. as,
give, live, sieve, title, bible, which sounds ar to be distinguished by accent,
if acquaintance will not seem in much reading: But this is a point, that the
title of distinction has taken to charge. The quik i, and the gentle passant
e, 8
ar so near of kin, as theie enterchange places with pardon, as in descryed, or
descryid, finds, or findith, her, or her, the error is no heresy.

I is used consonantlike, when it leads a vowell in the same syllab, as Iak,
James, iolie, iump, joy. Where note, tho the qualified, I in his consonantish
force.
ge. as huge, rage, college, and this consonantish ie, be of some affinity,
that yet the i, tho with the e, after it, cannot com in place of that ge,
because that ge, ever follows a vowell in the same syllab, as page, drudge,
grudge, whereas the consonantish, i, still leads the sounding vowell, and
begins the syllab. Again e, after g, only qualifieth and never sounds,
as in revenge, grange, bridge, trudge, and is the last letter of the word. E
after i, the consonant, sounds still, and is never the last, as, iet, jest.
because ie, in cherie, merry, carry, tarry, and such like, is i, the vowell
qualifyed and quik.

O
O is a letter of as great uncertainty in our tung, as e, is of direction both
alone in vowell, and combined in diphthong. The cause is, for that in vowell it
sounds as much upon the u, which is his cousin, as upon the o, which is his
natural, as in cosen, dosen, mother, which o, is still naturally short, and,
hosen, frosen, mother, which o, is naturally long. In the diphtho^g it
sounds more upon the, u, then upon the, o, as in found, wound, cow, sow, bow,
how, now, and bow, sow, wrought, ought, mow, trough. Notwithstanding this
variety, yet our custom is so acquainted with the use thereof, as it will be
more difficulty to alter a known confusion, then profitable to bring in an
unknown reformation, in such an argument, where acquaintance makes justice, and
use does no man wrong. And yet where difference by note shall seem to be
necessary the titles of proportion and distinction will not omit the help. In
the mean time thus much is to be noted of o: besides his time long and short,
besides his tune with or without the qualifying e, sharp or flat, that when it
is the last letter in the word, it sounds sharp and loud, as ago, to, so, no.
save in to the preposition, two the numerall, do the verb: his compounds as.
undo, his deriuatiues as doing. In the middle syllabs, for tune, it is sharp, as
here, or flat if a consonant end the syllab after o. For time the polysyllab
will bewraie it self in our daily pronouncing: considering tho children and
learners be ignorant, yet he is a very simple teacher, that knows not the
tuning of our ordinary words, yea, tho theie be enfranchised, as ignorant,
impudent, impotent. O varieth the sound in the same proportion, naie oftimes in
the same letters, as love, glove, dove, shoue, remove, and love, grove, shroue,
noue. This duble sound of o, in the vowell is Latinish, where o, and u, be
great cosens, as in voltus, voltis, colo. And vultus, vultis, occulo: in the
diphthong it is Grekish, for theie sound their (...), still upon the u, tho it
be contract of oo, or (...), wherein as their president is our warrant against
objection in these, so must acquaintance be the mean to discern the duble force
of this letter, where we find it, and he that will learn our tung, must learn
the writing of it to, being no more strange then other tungs be even in the
writing.

V
V besides the notes of his form, besides his time and tune, is to be noted
also not to end any English word, which if it did V vowellish.
it should sound sharp, as nu, true, virtue. But to avoid the nakedness of the
small u, in the end we use to write those terminations with ew the diphtho^g,
as new, true, vertew. It is used co^so nantlike also as well as i, when it
leads a sounding vowell in the same syllab, as vantage, revive, deliver. or
the silent e, in the v, consona^tish
end, as believe, reprove. This duble force of both i, and v, is set from the
latin, and therefore it is neither the uncertainty of our writing, nor the
unsteadfastness of our tung, for to use any letter to a duble use.

W.
The duble w, is a letter that has accompanied our tung from VV.
the original Germane, and is used sometime as a vowell, sometime as a
consonant. It is never vowell but in the diphthongs as, VV, the vowell
draw, knew, throw, neither is it to enter the middle syllab of any word,
saving in three cases. The first whereof is, with the deriuatiues of those
final dighthongs, as of know, knowing, knowledge, 1.
unknown. The second is, when custom will frame another primitive 2.
after the proportion of one of these, as own, like unknown The third is some
manifest difference, where the single u, 3.
might easily be mistaken, and joined to the vowell following, as in vouell,
couard, like houell, covert, and therefore, theie be to be written vowell,
coward, with the duble w. W. is consonantish, VV, the consonant.
when it leads a vowell in the same syllab, with either a consonant before it
self, as in swine, swim, between, or it self the first as want, winter, what,
wrong, It is also consonantish in abbreuiations 1.
upon like reason, as wc, with. When it follows a consonant, the latin
enfranchisement uses oftentimes the single u, 2.
as persuade, language, because the latins use no double w: the English words
keep their natural w, as twinge, swinge. Generally 3.
4.
the ending u, would ever be the duble, as both the natural form thereof, and
the right use thereof in the diphthongs do let us understand.

Y.
Y, likewise is sometime consonantish, sometime vowellish. Consonantish, when it
leads a vowell, as, yonder, young Y. Y, the consonant.
yonker, beyond, that your, yard, both in abbreuiation and without.

Vowellish either to express Greek enfranchisments, as syllabs, polysyllabs,
tyran: or English naturalls, which is in three places. Y, the vowell.
First when onei, follows another immediately in the middle of a word, the
former is to be expressed by a y, as replying, 1
multiplying, denying, bying. Secondly the shrill ending i, ought to be a y,
as deny, aby, defy. which y may pass with them in 2
their deriuation, as denies abying, defyance, tho where another i, follows
not, the shrill i, of it self may suffice, as, denied, defiance. Thirdly, oi,
the diphthong sounding upon the o, for difference sake, from the other, which
sounds upon the u, 3
would be written with a y, as, joy, anoy, toy, boy, whereas anoint, appoint,
foil, and such seem to have an u. And yet when, i, goes before the diphthong,
tho it sound upon the u, it were better oy, then oi, as joint, ioyn, which
theie shall soon perceive, when theie mark the speed of their pen: likewise if
oi with i, sound upon the o, it may be noted for difference from the other
sound, with the straight accent, as, boie, enioie. Hereby we find that y, in
the nature of a consonant is mere English in the nature of a vowell a mungrell,
half Greek, half English, to express those enfranchisments, which we borow of
the Greeks, when we leave some sign of their originiall writing.

Diphthongs.
I called the diphthong a combination of vowells, whereof there be only
twelve, and no mo needful for our English Diphthongs.
writing.

ai, decaie, ea, meat, oo, good, ou, about, au, audience, ei, slight, oi,
anoint, ow, allow, aw, withdraw, ew, vertew, oy, enjoy, uy, buy, juice.

For the right use of these twelve diphthongs there be three special notes to
be observed. The first is, that those diphthongs, which are written with the
single u, serve properly 1.
for the former rooms, as, auditor, rebounding, and those, which have the
duble w, be peculiarly to be used in the end, as, law, drew, auow. Which
continue also with their compounds, and deriuatiues in the former syllabs, as,
withdrawing, endewed, endowing, auoweth. If the duble w, in her vowelish nature
be found in any former syllab, but upon one of three causes, which I noted in
the duble w, it is a corruption, for all it be used. The second is, that of oi
and oy, allredie noted in y. The 2.
third is, that of ou, and ow, alredie noted in o. If there be cause 3.
of distinction, that title shall dispatch that need: if the consideration ly
in the writing, proportion will lay that certain.

I se no cause why we should need any mo diphthongs or That there need no mo
diphthnogs then twelve.
complexions of vowells, by whatsoever name, then these twelve. For oa, and ee,
be helped in our ordinary writing by the qualifying e, as, moan, bone, cote,
lote, bote, queen, seen, wene, between. Neither is there any duble e, to be
used in our tung save in the deriuatiues of those words, which end in the sharp
e, as, tree, trees, agree, agrees, se, sees, of which second e, we shall say
more in the title of deriuatio^, eo, is used in yeome^, people ieopard, eo.
and why not yemen, people, iepard, as women, steple, Ienkin, of the like
analogy? Ai, is the man's dipthong, and sounds full: ei, the woman's, and
sounds finish in the same both sense, and use, ai. ei.
a woman is deintie, and feinteth soon, the man faints not because he is
nothing dainty. This is enough to show the force of the vowells and
diphthongs, the titles that follow will show their places and use, as
particular cause shall offer occasion.

Of the consonants.
This is a general note to be observed in writng of all the co^ No consona^ts
dubled but for two syllabs.
sonants, that none of them is to be dubled, but where theie ar referred to
diverse syllabs, the former ending the former syllab, and the latter beginning
the next, asin bud-ding, strip-ped, buf-fetting, begin-ning, etc. Whereby it
appears, that no consonant can be dubled in the end of a word, because there
is no syllab to follow: and that therefore the dubling of the last syllab is
mere oversight. For if ye write putt with a duble, t, is not the syllab ended
in the first put? and wherefor then serves the latter, t? Some when theie have
dubled the consona^t, will put an e to it, which is to make two syllabs, where
theie mean but one, as put: because of the rule, that the dubled consonants
ar referred to diverse syllabs. Why ll, and ss, be dubled in the end contrary
to this rule, it shall be showed in the ha^dling of those letters.

Where, by the way it is to be noted, that the e passant after a duble ss, as
in lessen, to make less, or a duble ll, as fallen, and such like, increases
no syllabs, and that therefore the duble ss, is not divided, tho a vowell follow.

B, is allwaie one in whatsoever place, as brabling, lubber, crab B.


C, is strong like to k, before a, o, u, either simple vowells, or C.
combined in dighthongs, as cankard, cautele, concord, coward, C, strong.
cunning, or when it ends a foresyllab before any other consonant as c. q.
k. t. as in succeed, acquaint, acknowledge, expecting. C, is C weak.
weak like, s, before e, and, i, either alone or in diphthong, as cease,
deceit, surcingle, or before the qualifying silent e, in the end, as
acceptance, whence, once.

F, has two forces, whereof the first is general for the Greek F.
ph, in whose place, we may use our f, still, if we will measur our 1
writing by an English ear, as the Italians do in their writing, commonly
setting down, filosofie, ortografie, and such like with the latin f, as why
not? For thereby we deliver our people, which know no foren learning, from
seking of enfranchisments and yet we leave the learned, which know them, to the
liberty of that, which theie know. The second force off, is like to v, the
consonant, 2
which I use to call cosens, by cause of their corresponde^ce in change, as,
bereue, bereft, leave lest, cleave cleft. In if, and of, tho we se f, we here
u, iue, oue, yet the aduerb of distance uses the f, still, like ph, as I speak
of him, which comes a far of.

G, is all way strong before a. o. u. whether single vowells or in G. G, strong,
diphthongs as, gaie, gant, god, good, gout, gut, gulling. Likewise before r,
or l, as grave, grant, glance, glue. And in the end of any syllab, where the
qualifying e follows not, as in long, tung, onelesse the qualifying e, be
left out, for some addition, which begins of a vowell, as, range, ranging,
swinge, swinging, for in that place g, is weak. As it is also and all way
before the qualifying e, as, cage, huge, drudge, snudge, hedge, dodge. It is G,
weak.
sometime strong, sometime weak before i, and e, contrary to G, of duble force
before i, and e.
the latin, where it is all way weak before the same vowells, tho not
contrary to the Greek and Hebrew. This variety of force before these two
letters seems to give some matter to confusion in our writing. For as it is
weak in these, gentle, ginger, gin, germain, and such: so is it strong in
these, geld, guess, gilt, begin, gig, get and such, and therefore no marvel if
we write, college of collegium, and college of collega, with the same letters,
seeing our g is capable of both the forces before the same e. The necessary
distinction here of shall appear in the title of Whether u, be to be written
after the strong g.
distinction. But why do some use to put an u, after the strong g, in some
places, as in guise, guide, guest, beguile, and not write them all without the
u, and with the g only, as, girde, girth, girdle, getting? And why may not
these words be written, gise gest, gide, begile, as well as begin, beget, seeing
both our g, is strong before these vowells, and the difference noted, and g,
with the u after is of another property in use, as language, guise,
Guichiardine, Guin, guerdon? I se no cause why, but that the u, may well
enough be left out.

H, is an aspiration, whose force before all vowells and diphthougs H.
is easy to be perceived, as, Henry, hunter, have, him, home, hauthorn, how,
hew, holdaie. Sometime it is written, without any force in utterance, as in
many enfranchised words, as, honest, humble, host, hostice. Where the vowell
after h, is heard, as if there went no aspiration before. What force the h, is
of after consonants in combination, I will show straight way.

K, serves for the strong c, before e, and i, as in Kent, kitchen, K.
kin, King. It goes before no consonants but n, as knave, knop, and l, with
the e silent after, as pekle, pikle, trikle, cakle. Which are to be written with
k, before the l, because the simples be pek, pik, trik. Whereby it appears
that the Greek ch, must of force be used in Christ, Christian, christen, etc.
because k leads no mo consonants, but n, and l, with the silent, e. K
follows s, where c, would be weak, as in skirmish, skirt, skrap, otherwise c,
as escape, scope, scour, sculler. Where the same force is dubled, the former
also must be k, if the simple end in k, quikker, thikker, thwakker, of, quik,
thik, thwak, otherwise c, may serve and supply the room.

L, is still of one force in it self, as laudable, willing. Howbeit in respect
of a, and o, going before it, and sounding like diphthongs L.
it is dubled in the end of such words, as small, call, brall, boll, roll,
troll. But when any other consonant follows l, the a, and o sound still like
diphthongs, and yet the l, is but single, as in false, salt, malt, halt, cold,
old, colt, dolt, rolf, bold, bolt. Hereupon, all, in composition before a
natural consonant, has but a single l, as albeit, also, almost, otherwise a
duble, as in allwaie, allhail, allone. Where it may be dowted whether the
president of these two, all, and oll, may not induce the dubling of all other
terminations in l, as well, bell, shrill, still, full, scull, which dubling of
the last ll, seems most agreeable both to reason and use, where the vowells
sound hard upon the l, as it does in these. But if the vowell sit not so hard,
as in diphthongs, where the length of the vowells sound breaks the force,
that should light upon the l, as in mail, fail, hail, recoil, foil, and such
as, devil, evil, riuel, why should the l, be dubled? It is the swiftness of
the pen sure, which can hardly stay upon the single ending l, that causes
this dubling.

M, and n, of themselves continue in the same force still, howbeit some
negligence in writing gives occasion of this note. M, n, p.
That whereas both m, and n, be sometime signified by a title, that title*
answers the m, and n, only, which ends the syllab, and not the other,
which begins, as in begin-ni^g, benu^-med, so^-mo-ni^g. And therefore that
title, which will represent m, or n, aforegoing is mere false, and ill abused.
P, is ever one, ph, shall be straight spoken of.

Q. serves only in the nature of k, or the strong c, to go before the single
or duble w, both cosonantlike in force, and indifferent Q.
in place, as quill, quail, acquaint, quince, squint, squall squat, squese, or
with the duble w, qwail acqwaint, qwik, qwince, save where the enfranchisment
requires the single u, as in quality, quantity, require, quintessence.

S, besides the variety noted to be in his form, sometimes forces full like
the weak, c, as in all beginnings of any syllab, S.
either before vowell, diphthong, or consonant, say, seek, sift, soft,
substance, sow, small, shrike, shrimp, sometime it yeildeth weaklie to the z,
and that either between two vowells, as in wise, nose, amase, use, excuse, or
after one of the half vowells, l, m, n, r, wells, trims, hens, hirs, or after
the e passant, as, times, rimes, games, names. Which sounds where theie com,
proportion and deriuation will bewraie: how theie ar to be distinguished in
places of cause, the title of Distinction shall not forget. When the vowell
sits hard upon the s, in the end, s, is dubled frenchlike, as in pass,
grass, finesse, nedelesse, disinesse, bliss, gross, cross, discuss, if
not, it is single, as in fines, nedles, promis, treatis, purpos, compass and
such. Where custom upon good reason, not improper to the sound, causes the
dubling.

T, keeps one force still saving where a vowell follows after, i, as in
action, discretion, consumption, where as, t, sounds T
like the full s, or strong c, so the words where it is so used, be altogether
strangers.

X, begins no English words, but ends many, as wax vex, yex, and goes
into the middle of their deriuatiues, as waxing, X.
vexes, yexing, and with the qualifying e, iaxe, without, ax, pax, wax. Which
words be severed from those that end in ks, because ks, ends plural numbers
as pak, paks, rak, raks, whereas the singulars, or primitiues, have in the
plural number and deriuatiues, es, or en, as fox, foxes, fixen, vexes, yexes,
oxen iaxes.

Z, is a consonant much heard amongst us, and seldom senc. Z.
I think by reason it is not so ready to the pen as s, is, which is become
lieutenant general to z; as gasse, amase, rasur, where z, is heard, but, s,
seen. It is not lightly expressed in English, saving in foren enfranchisments,
as azur, treasur. In the same proportion is s. and as, is as strangely used.

The combination of consonants, which I called coplements Coplements.
be of two sorts, either consonants copled to them selves, as thw, in thwak,
shr, in shrink stl, in whistle, and such, which never change their force: or
consonants with, h, the aspiration, as ch, gh, ph, ch sh, th, wh. Whereof, gh,
ph, ch, sh, wh, never change their force but continue still one, as cough,
rough, philip, diphthong, rhetorik, shame, shrewed, whence, which. Whereof ph,
and th be Grecians, the rest English.

Ch, forces sometime strong like k, as in Christ, chrism, christian, Chapter
charact, archangell, monarch, stomach, sometime weak, as in archdeacon, wretch,
chirch, which seems originallie to be of a duble k, kirk. Our English ch,
comes from the latin c, as, chaplain, chancellor, chaste, of capellanus,
cancellarius, casta. like the Italian force of c.

Likewise, th, holds sometime strongly, upon the aspiration, Th.
as in thin, thik, sometime it yeildeth like a temporiser to a meaner weakness,
as thine, thither. Neither, ch, nor th, has any e, after them, but when the
vowell before is to be qualified in sound, as each, beseech, beche, breche,
ache, leche, speech, bathe, scathe, sith, otherwise flat, without e, as, since,
each, bath. What prerogative in custom will ouerrule in these points, it shall be
noted in the titles of prerogative and proportion.

Abbreuiations.
W. and y, in their consonantish nature lead the most of our abbreuiations, with,
wc, yt, you, ye, besides these and their fellows the residew be but very few,
as proronounce, pererpetuitie, and some other few with the, m, or, n, titles.

Thus much of rule both general for the hole tung, and particular for the
force of every letter, and charact, whether for The diverse force of, i, o,
oi, oy, ou, ow, c, g, s, ch, th, is the difficulty of our writing.
the quality, or for the sound of our voice. Whereby methink that the greatest
difficulty in our writing rises about the uncertain force of, i, and, o, the
vowells, oi, oy, ou, ow, the diphthongs, c, g, s, the consonants, ch, and th,
the coplements, all which shall be directed sufficiently, in the title of
distinction.

Cap XVIII. Of proportion.
I Call that proportion, when a number of words oflike sound ar written with
like letters, or if the like sound have not the What proportion is
like letters, the cause why is showed, as in hear, fear, dear, gear, wear, the
like proportion is kept: in where, here, there it fails by prerogative,
because our custom, has won that writing in such aduerbs of place: in mere it
fails by enfranchisement, because it comes of the latin merus, ra, rum. And
therefore proportion, as all other rules, consists upon general precept and
private exception.

This rule of proportion, has allwaie been of great account, The use of
proportion.
for directing of speech and pen, as theie that be learned in the matter of
speech, and the writers of that argument, do know of themselves, without my
alleging of any Analogiarie autors of any foren tung, Latin or other. And in
the ordering of our tung, it serves us, as it were for another general table.
For as in the general table, where every particular word is set down by order
of the alphabete, we have regard to the first letter, and thereby serve our own
necessity in case and cause of search: so in the rule of proportion, where we
set down all words of one sound, under one form of writing, with particular
note when the proportion fails, we regard that syllab which leads the
proportion, and the vowell or dighthong in it, which gives the life and sound
to the syllab, and respect some multitude of words of one sort and sound, as in
the alphabete we regard every particular, without eieing any mo, then that,
which we seek. All the words in our English tung com within the compass of
proportion, upon some occasion or other: either because there is none but it
has mo of the same sound, or but it may have mo in time, seeing new occasions
bread new words. Again, all the words which we use in our tung, be either
monosyllabs, that is but of one syllab, which be the most of our natural
English: or words monosyll. Byssyll. polysyll.


bissyllabs of two, whereof there be some certain English, and as many
strangers: or polysyllabs, of mo then two, which be altogether enfrauchised,
saving some certain English deriuatiues or compounds, which fall not within this
rule, because theie have titles of their own.

Wherefor considering our mere English words be mostwhat monosyllabs, I will
deall with them first, then with the bissyllabs, last of al, with the
polysyllabs, by order of the vowell or diphthong, which leads the syllab, and
therefore the proportion. I call that a syllab, which has one sounding vowell
in it, how What a syllab is.
many consonants soever either go before or com after it, as, no, one, able,
whistle, driven, raken, thoughts, thrice, frok, shritch, strength, staruedst,
frumpst. For the qualifying and silent e, increase no syllabs, as neither the
passant in most places, which shall be noted hereafter. All which letters
children would be taught to spell together, holding such a filling, e, as no
soun der, to make a new syllab thereby, as har-den, wri-ten, for har den,
written, two syllabs by misspelling for, two monosyllabs in nature.

Here by the way the reader shall understand that in this rule of proportion I
will not meddle with any deriuatiue which coms of other, whether contract, as
scratcht, of scratched, or plural numbers, as matches of match, or any such
else, where the putting to of one letter or mo, does cause the difference:
saving only where the deriuatiue in sense, seems a primative in form, as the
pluralls of man, mous, house, foot, cow, be, men, mice, lice, fete, kine. which
form seems rather to be original, then derived of any other.

A
No English word e^deth in, a, but in aie, as decaie, assaie, which Of
monosyllabs and their proportion.
writing and sound our use has won. A, alone is the English article, which
comes generally next before substa^tiues, as a mane, a man, onelesse some
adjective part them, as, a tall man, a long mane. This a joining with
substantives by way of composition, so alters their force, as theie signify
in deed, quite another thing. For when we say, he cums apase, he goes aside,
he looks aloft, he went along, we mean not the same, that we do in these
speches a swift pase, a sore side, a windy loft, a long way. The president of
this co^pound a, causes us oftimes to write fore^ words, with single
consonants, which duble the same in their own tung as abbaie, abbandon, abbase,
abbate: with one b, abaie, abandon, abase, abate, because of their analogy and
proportion with a baie a ba^die, a base, a bate, which be known English terms,
and being uttered quik bring forth the same sou^ds. Neither is it any wonder
that our tung uses a single consonant, where the original dubleth, as base,
of bassus, pase, of passus. This, a, before vowells, diphthongs, and the
aspiration h, is an, as an epistle, an auditour, an honest man. Where the
question is, whether e, in ane be needful, considering in our speaking the, n,
seems to ioyn with the vowell that follows, according to that rule which
teaches us, that a consonant cumming between two vowells must be spelled with
the latter, as be-ne-fi-ci-all onelesse the words be compound, as an-o-ther,
ab-o-lish. because then the simple syllab keeps her own combination still, as
in the examples before. And because it seems to be so in these words,
an-other, an-hell, an-honest man, as if theie were but one word compounded of
two, the qualifying e, does seem nedelesse, as it is in those words, which be
derived from the qualified terminations, and begin their addition with some
vowell, as pray, praing, amase, amasing, repute, reputing, deprave, depraueth,
where the qualifying e, is left out, and the consonant before it is put to the
next syllab. And seems it not to be so in all those words, which end in the
qualifying e, before another word beginning with a vowell, as mine own? Blab,
drab, grab, hab, nab. and with the qualifying e, babe. Ab. Able.

Babble, rabble, brable, dable: and ba^ble, sta^ble, a^ble, sa^ble,
where I make the difference by the notes of the long and short time, not
daring to duble the b, for making of two syllabs, by dubling the b, which may
not be here, the silent e, sounding not, and the words therefore being
monosyllabs, because there be not two sounding vowells or diphthongs, which are
required in the making of two syllabs. Ace.


C, alone ends no syllab but with the qualifying e, after it, as ace, trace,
race, face, which termination by ce, I take to be most natural for this sound
in our tung, both because many enfranchised words have the same end, as face,
grace, space, and ase, with the s, and it is lightly the termination of
enfranchised words, case, pase, base, so it turns very much to the, z, as
amase, raze, crase, whereas ace with the, c, sounds still one like the
natural full, s.

Monosyllabs, that is natural English words of one syllab, Acle.
seem to be written with c, as the enfranchised polysyllabs be, tabernacle,
barnacle, triacle, spectacle, but theie ar indede written with, k, as hakle,
cakle, takle, shakle, both because of their primitive, hak, take, shake, and
also because k, goes before l, after a vowell, but not before, as in clamp,
cling, clout. where c, leads and not k.

Act, fact, contract. and such com from the Latin, and be Act. Akt. Akte.
therefore written with ct. but bakt, pakt, thwakt, rakt, crakt, and such be
English words contract bakt of bakked, pakt of pakked etc. and be therefore
written with k, after their primitive, having their a, short and quik, whereas
na^kte, ba^kte, ra^kte, cumming of rake, nake, bake, ar to be written with the
qualifying e which keeps the original a, sharp. Some write backed etc. with c,
before the k, but wrong, because c, cummeth not before k but when theie be to
be referred to diverse syllabs, as ac-knowledge, like accompany, where the same
consonant being dubled emporteth two syllabs. Ach, Ache.


Ache, brache, with the qualifying e, for without the e, t, goes before chapter as
patch, snatch, catch, smatch, watch. The strong chapter is mere foren, and therefore
ends no word with us, but is turned into k, as stomak, monark (whose
originalls be stomach, Ad. Adle.
monarch with chapter in the Greek.) Bad, swad, glad, and with e, glade, made,
shade. Adle, cra^dle, la^dle, sta^dle with a^ long: swadle, sadle, fadle, with
a short, the single syllab admitting the distinction by time, and not by
dubling the letter, for dubling the Adge.
syllab withal. Badge, madge, fadge, where d, is necessary because otherwise,
a^, would sound long and sharp, as in page, age, rage, assuage. If, e, followed
not the, g, the, a, were flat, and the, g, strong, as nag, bag, swag. In words
of two or mo syllabs the, d, before, g, is not allwaie so needful, because the
tung staieth not so sore upon their last syllabs, as it does upon the
monosyllab. Chaf, staf, graf, draf, and with, e, chafe, safe, rafe. Af. Afe.
Aft. Afle. Ag. Age. Agle, Agh. Ak. Akle. Ale. Acle.
Craft, shaft, graft, waft. Snafle, with a single, f, being but one syllab.
Drag, brag, lag, and with, e, cage, wage, sage, age. pa^gle with a^ long,
dragle with, a, short. Armagh, slagh, bagh, is a foren termination. Smak, pak,
trak, crak, and with, e, take, rake, wake. akle was tuched before in acle. Ale,
male, pale, dale, with the qualifying, e, is an ordinary and a common
termination, with us. But where, a, in the end before a fingle, l, sounds
plane, al, I find none but certain childish terms, as Mal for Marie, Lal, Dal,
and some such. Because, a, in the end has common lie a duble, ll, after it, and
sounds on the diphthong, as thrall, crall, wall, which it does also before a
single, l, when a consonant follows next, as thraldom, walking. Shall, our
common term foundeth not upon the diphthong, and yet for company sake will
have a duble, ll, whose force, that it is not diphthonglike, it appears in
the deriuatiue, l, cumming before, t, and not sounding in shall, as in malt,
halt. Alb. which in our ordinary Alb.
speech we sound, aub, turning the, l, into, u, and so we entertain, l,
generally before most of our consonants. For tho we write calm, balm, talk,
walk, chalk, calf, calves, salues: yet we pronounce them so as if theie had no,
l, but only the duble, w or single, cawm, bawm, taulk, waulk, chauk, caulf,
cawues sawues Ald. is the common termination of participles contract, as called,
for called, apald, for apalled, gald, for galled. Yet some few there Ald.
be of that ending, which are mere originalls, as scald, bald, ald. Calf, half,
walk, talk, calm, shalm, palm, fallen, a contract for fallen. yalp, scalp, false,
halse, with the silent, e, which is familiar to Alf. alk. alm. Aln. Alp. Alt.
Alte.
the enfranchised words and their followers. Malt, salt, falt, salve, salues,
calf, calves, the, f, still bewraying his kindred with v, the consonant. Dram,
cram, dam, and with, e dame, name, Am. Amble. Amp.
shame, blame. Amble, shamble, scramble, scamble. Cramp, stamp lamp. Ample,
strample. Lamb. And why not lam, as Lammasse, day? and not lambmasse, with the
b? Chams, champs, lamps, detiues, Ample. Amb. Ami. Amps.
Man, can, bran. And with the qualifying, e, mane, cane, An. Ance.
brane. Glance, france, chance. Where, a, before the, n, sounds like a
diphthong, tho, u, be not to be written. Ancle, rancle, and why not ankle,
rankle, seeing rank is a simple? Ancle. Anch. Ang. Andle. And
Hanch, stanch, panch. Brand, hand, sand. Handle, dandle, candle, rang, bang,
swang, and with the qualifying, e, range, grange, strange, wrangle, strangle,
angle, frank, crank, rank, bank, scant, Angle. Ank Ant. Antle.
pant. Scantle, scantling. I use no example of any combination with, re,
because I take it better to end in er, as falter, rather the^ faltre etc.
Scrap, lap, hap, clap, rap, and with, e, ape, rape, escape, Ap. Ape. Aple. Apt.
tape. Ma^ple, sta^ple, with the a long, aple, grable, with the a, short. apt
is a^ original stranger, our words in apt be deriuatiues, as hapt trapt, capt,
flapt, for happed, trapped, capped, flapped. Jacques for Aq.
Iakes the, e, passant falling upon the, s, is an enfranchised word. We use
not, q, in the end, but still in the beginning of a syllab, because, u,
follows him of necessity, as quagmire, quilt, require, squint. War, far,
car. and with the qualifying e, ware, Ar. Arble. Arkle. Arce.
fare, care. Marble, garble, warble. Sparcle, and why not sparkle because of
spark? Sarce, parce, with the shrill and long a^ farse, arse, with the short
and flat a, e, cumming in, not as a qualifier, but as incident to the long, s.
by nature of enfranchisement. Arch. Ard. Ardle. Arge. Argle. Arf. Ark. Arle.
Arus. Arn. Arp. Art.
Arch, parch, starch. Hard, mard. Scarde, larde, guard, ward, with the
qualifying, e, to lengthen the, a. Hardle, fardle. Barge large, targe, charge,
without d, before g, gargle. wharf, scarf, dwarf. Bark, park, mark, cark,
chark. Marle, carle. Warm, harm charm, farm, barm. Barn, warn, and with the
qualifying, e, barn, yarne, scarne. Scarp, harp, sharp, warp. Art, smart,
cart, wart, thwart, and with the qualifying e, tarte, part, darte. Startle,
starve, swerve, carue. As and was sound as often upon Artle. Arue. As. Ass.
the, z, as upon the strong, s, and therefore the duble ss, with the silent e,
is used in our tung to express the vowell which sits hard upon the, s, as
pass, glass, grass. Whose dubling, as that also of ll, may be found out by
the deriuation, as in pass, passing, miss, missing. grass, grassie etc. in
promis, promising, purpos, purposing. Otherwise the qualifying e, helps to
reduce the single s. as case, casing, wise, wiser, repo^se, reposing, blase,
raze, amase. Ask cask, flask, mask. Ha^sle, ta^sle, da^sle. Swash, slash, Ase.
Ask. Asle. Ash.
dash, pash, Spasm, enfranchised Greek. Clasp, hasp, wasp, grasp, past, last,
fast, and with the qualifying e, paste, taste, waste, Ast. Astle. At.
wrestle, castle, pastle. Squat, scrat, plat and with the qualifying e, strate,
late, plate, prate, pratle, tatle, ratle, satle. Wax, axle. Wave, slave. Bath,
path, wath, and with e, bathe, scathe, and has Atle. Ax.
of the same sound without e, an ordinary word won by prerogative. Where this
is to be noted in general of, th, that nounes ending in th. sound strong, as
bath, south, mouth, touth, breath: Th. Ath.
but verbs weak, as bath, south, touth, mouth, breath.

E
What e, sounds in the end, when there be no mo vowells in the syllab, then
it self, and that it is sometime sile^t, but to good purpos, sometime passant,
scarce perceptible, and the^ like the quik i, it has been tuched allredie.
Web, neb, eb. Keble, treble. Greece, piece, flece the right English termination.
For, ese with s, alters, Eb. Ece.
as these, and exception from ease, seas, cease, where the ods of our writing,
tho it seem very hard, is easily made even. for ease is the natural
termination, as please, disease: seas is the natural plural number of sea:
cease is the natural enfranchiseme^t of cesso the latin. Speech, beseech,
each, breche, leche, with the Each.
qualifying e, all the other that be written without, e, have a, t, as fetch,
stretch, retch, save each the common distributive. Ecle, better with k, as
spekle, frekle, because of the primiue frek, spek. Ecle. Ect.
Detect, elect, and such be Latin enfranchisements. pekt, chekt, nekt, be
English contracts, of pek, pekked, chek, chekked. Tred shred, sled, and with
the qualifying e, bread, led, need, speed. Ed. Edge.
Hedge, sedge, ledge, the polysyllabs enfranchised keep their original, as
privilege, college, neither does the last syllab pitch so hard in any word of
two or mo syllabs, as it does in a monosyllab, and therefore no marvel if the
pitching letter be left out. Meddle, nedle. what difference in proportion? as in
nedles, the Edle.
plural of nedle, and nedelesse the adjective? Breadth of broad. All the
primitiues whose e^ding diphthong is, ea, as bread, tread, Edth.
weal, heal, steal, in their deriuatiues form lightly upon the bare e, as
breadth, tredth, wealth, health, stelth. Thief, lefe, chief, befe. Theft, cleft,
reft, of cleue, theue, reave. Where besides other notes Of. Eft. Eg. Ege.
the kindred between, f, and u. appears still, Eg, leg, peg, meg, and with the
qualifying e. lege, sege. Nek, brek, chek, pek, and with the qualifying, e,
meke, cheke, leke, shreke, weke, pekle kekle. Ege. Ek. Ekle. El.
E. falls sometime hard upon the l, and then the ll, is dubled, as shell,
spell, knell, fell, sometime sharp, as feel, rele, knele, with the qualifying e,
sometime light with the, e, passant before, l, as driuel, riuel, sniuel, rauel,
which in the like proportion, is the silent e, after l, as wifle, snafle etc.
in which words the e, is so quik as I dare not hold them for bissyllabs. Belch.
Held, keld. Elch, Eld. Elf. Elk.
Elf, shelf, pelf, self. Yelk. Kelk. Elm. VVhelm. Teln, feln. be out worn
English words for tell, fell. Else, as bells, fells, nells be deriuatiues.
Felt, swelt, smelt. Where se the propriety of our tung, in Else. Else.
the duble sense of smelt, the primitive of the fish, and the contract smelt
for smelled of smell. Wealth, stelth noted before. Delue, Elth. Elue. Em. Emble.
Emp. En.
shelue. Stem, kem, nem, wem. and with the qualifying, e, steme, seem, deem,
eme. Tremble. Hemp. Kemp. te^pt. Tems. E, falls upon the, n, sometime full, as
Then, ten, when, men, ken, sometime shrill with the qualifying e. as Queen,
kene, seen, grene, sometime passant, where it increases no syllab, in my
opinion, as written, driven, shriuen, gote^, shoten, threaten. And why may not
so many letters be spelled together for one syllab, as well as in thwakst?
Whence, hence, sense for since. Ense with s. is enfranchised, as Ence Euse.
End. Enge.
sense, fense, spense. End, mend, lend, send. Tench, wench, quench bench,
wrench. Henge, revenge. I find no termination in eng, without e, if any
hereafter fall out, ing, will be the leader in proportion, as wing, thing. Pence
the plural number of penie. Ence. ent. Ep,
Pens the plural number of pen. Shent, pent, meant. Gentle. Step, skep, and
with, e, stepe, keep, crepe, weep, deep. Threap, thrept. Steple, people. Kept,
precept. Er, is commonly the end of such words, as have mo syllabs then one,
where it sounds quik, as thither, hither. Aker, taker. Falsifyer, cunninger,
anger. Er, to go astraie: and with the qualifying e, bear, mere, where, there,
here, which be Er.
exceptio^s from the terminatio^ in ear, the diphthong. Her the feminine and
her, be so enterchangeable frinds, as theie may be used indiffere^tlie. This
word entercha^geable gives me to make this note, that, g, in her weak nature
with the qualifying, e, after, in co^positio^ or deriuation, keeps, e, still,
onelesse the addition fol lowing begin either with e, or i, with the which
vowells, g, is gentle, as with a. o. u. it is not. Herb with the h. not herd,
ferce, search, perch: Berd, ferd, herd, serge. without a. Term, ferm, and Erb.
Erce. Erb. Erd.
why not lern without a? seeing ea, in the deriuatiues favors e, so much, as
threap, thrept, lear, lerning? verse, rehearse. the prouf by rehersall, perse,
hearse

Pert, desert, the most of these sorts be bissyllabs or above: Erse.
besides that, a, deals very much before the r. By deserve, preserve,
conserve, it should appear that either we strain the Latin Ert.
s, to our sound, or that theie had some sound of the z, expressed by s, as well
as we. Which is true, and appears in their deriuatiues from the Greek es.
Finesse, contract for finenesse, because nesse is the addition, as in
holiness, sumptuousness, gladness, with the duble ss. because the e. sits
hard upon the ss. Esse.
Besides that we borow the form of the french, tho in the sound of the silent
e, we differ from them. Frese, chese, gese. Desk, fresh, flesh. Breast, nest,
chest. Nestle, pestle, tresle. Fet, net, let, Ese. Esk. Esh. Est. Estle. Et.
Etch. Etle.
whet, and with the qualifying e, fete, street, let, nete, mete. Fetch,
stretch. Netle, setle, ketle, betle, bedle. Sleue, reave, grieve, yex, vex, next,
text, tethe, sethe.

I
I said before that i, ending the last syllab, and sounding loud was expressed
by y. as qualify, exemplify, for many good causes, considering we have
admitted y, for a vowell: And that the quik ending i, is allwaie qualified by
e, as verily, trewlie. In which kind of coplement ie, is ever vowellish, and
never consonant, like the weak ge: tho in the beginning of syllabs as ienking
and such, ie, and ge, be all one, as in Latin peiero, and egero. Before
consona^ts in the last syllab i. sou^deth thus. Squib, rib, crib, and with the
qualifying e, bribe, scribe, gibe. Crible, pible, trible, bi^ble, bible. Ice,
mice, slice, nice, vice, spice. (which word Ib. Ibe. Ible. Ice.
is used much with us for spece, as a spice of an agew, for a kind of an agew,
species) In wise and such, the s. is e^forced by very deriuatio^ and
co^positio^, besides the zeddish sound, as wisdom, where, c, before the, d,
would have sounded upon the, k. I find none of this Ich.
sort, but which, rich, and shriche, with, e. The rest have, t, before ch as
stitch, pitch, fitch, witch, Strict, convict, and such be latin
enfranchisments. Ict
Pikt, likt, kikt, be English contracts, of pik, lik, kik, likked, kikked: as
likte, slikte, of like slike, with the qualifying, e, in both: Icle, as pikle
rather with k, upon cause alleged in akle, and Ikle. Id. Idge. idle. Iden. if.
Ift. ifle. Ig, igh. ight. Igle. Ike. Ikle. Il. Ilk. Ilt. im. Mible. ni.
ekle. Bid, kid, hid, and with the qualifying, e, wide, ride, stride. Fridge,
bridge, ridge. Ridle, fidle, with, i, short, iadle bri^dle, with i, long,
biden, riden, hiden. Stif, if, skif, and with the qualifying e, wife strife.
Shift, lift, clift, shrift. Trifle rifle, and with the i, short, misle whistle.
Twig, swig, prig, gig, gig, nigh, high. Night, might, right, slight, lighten,
gigle, giglet, prik, tik, stik, and with the qualifying e, like, tike, prikle,
sikle; sicle, enfranchised. Thiken, chiken, quiken. I, lighting full upon the,
l, dubleth it, as shrill, spill, will. The single, l, with the qualifying e,
after, while, begile, bile, filch, milk, silk. Quilt, tilt, spilt, hilt, filth.
Swim, grim, brim, and with the qualifying, e, grime, slime, time, lime.
Thimble, nimble. Simple, pimple, Ince. inch. Inkle. Ind. Incle. ing. Ingle.
ink. Int. Iple. Ir.
Shrimp, imp. Win, twin, pin, chin, and with the qualifying, e, wine, twine,
pine, chine, quince, ince, rince, wrinch, winch, stinch, clinch, not, cumming
between ch, and the consonant before. Twinkle, inkle, pinkle, pinkt, winkt,
deriuatiues contract. Wind, frind, bind, and with the qualifying e, kind,
find, mind, hind, trindle, kindle, spindle. Thing, swing, wring, and with
the e, twinge, singe, swinge, cringe. Swingle, ringle, single, surcingle,
tingle. Drink, ink, shrink. Squint, flint, stint, and with e, pint, lintle.
Strip Irch. irk. Ird. Irle.
whip, slip, and with the qualifying e, stripe, wipe, ripe. Triple, criple.
Whipped, stripped, hipt, wipte, stripte, with the original e. Stir, fir, sir, and
with e, Sire, fire, tire, mire, desire, require, hire, wire. Irst. Iss. is. Ise.
Circle enfranchised. Chirch, of kirk, birch. Yirk, girk, irk. Bird, gird,
girdle, girl. Whirle, firm, chirm, girn, chirp, Birt, flirt, squirt myrtle,
kirtle. Birth, mirth, girth, first, thirst. I, lighting hard upon the s,
dubleth it ss, as, hiss, miss, kiss, saving, is, this, y^is. With e after s,
it sounds most what upon the z, as wise, sise, yet in the same form we write
thrice, of another sound, but why not thrice, which termination never
acquainteth it self with z? The e, passant and this gentle i, before s, have
oftimes great alliance together. If it light some what quiklie upon the s, then
the s is single, as promis tretis, amiss, aduertis, enfranchis, misle, fisle,
Isle. istm. Isp. Istle. ish. is it. It. i will. Iue.
drisle, pisle. Chrism, baptism. Wisp, crisp, whistle, gristle, fish, wish,
dish, mist, twist, fiste, with e. Whit, fit, hit, and with e, white, mite,
delight, spite, Ti^tle, title whitle, britle, witch, stitch, pitch, quitch;
itch, with, since, kith, and with the qualifying e, writhe, sith. Strive, wiue,
thrive, and live, give, sieve, Flux, pix.

O
O, in the end is said to sound loud, as go, shro, fro, saving, to, do, two,
etc. Hob, cob, bob, rob, and with the qualifying e, robe, Ob^och.
noble, roche, cocle, and why not cokle? God, od, plod, rod, and with e, rode,
good, bode. Nodle, trodden. Dodge, hodge, podge. Of, cof, with Od. Of. Og. oge.
Ok.
e, lose. Often, soft, croft. Hog, dog, frog, log, clog, roge, voge, seeing our,
g, is strong and our accent will help. Ogle. Smok, sok knok, and with the
qualifying e, smoke, oak, soke, yoke, poke, goge an interiection of wondering,
Nol, gol and with the qualifying, e, hole, (...), the Greek adjective in the
same sense, gole, fool, stole, stolen. O, before, l, sounding like a dipthong
causes the ll, be dubled, as troll. And if a consonant follow, l, o, commonly
has the Ol. om.
same force, tho the l, be but single, told, cold, bold, colt, dolt, colf,
rolf, bolt, holm, scold, dissolve. O, before m, in the beginning, or middle of a
word, leading the syllabs sounds flat upon the o, as omnipotent, commend, but
in the end it sounds still upon, the u, as some, com, dom, and therefore in
their deriuatiues, and compou^ds as welcome, trublesom, newcom, cumbersom,
kingdom. With e, after the m, as home, mome, rome, and yet whom, from, have no,
e, by prerogative of use, tho theie have it in sound and seming. But were it
not better, that all such exceptions were reduced to their Analogy? Ome.
If every tung had not the like exceptio^s, I might happily think, that that
were the best. On, likewise in beginnings and midles sounds upon the o, in
the ends, chefelie of enfranchisme^ts upon the u, as disposition,
circumspection, action. In some few words On.
of one or two syllabs, it sounds upon the o, as on, anon, upon, and with the
qualifying, e, gone, moan, alone, throne, one: on, in some words answereih the
proportion of the, e, passant, without increasing One. Once.
of syllabs, as capon, weapon, answer to cheape^, threapen. Once nonce, nonst.
Bond, beyond, fond. Top, stop, crop, knop, and with the qualifying e, rope,
cope, grope, soap. Tople, throple, pople. Hops, tops, be plural numbers. Or is
a termination of some truble, when a con sonant follows, because it sounds
so much upon the u, as worm, form, sword, word, and yet the qualifying e, after
will bewraie an o, as the absence thereof will bewraie an u, storm, o, worm, u,
lord, o, hord, u. Or, for nor, and with the qualifying e more, gore bore,
pore, sore, fore. Where note that for, and his compounds signify the cause,
fore and his, the time, as Before, before. Wherefor, therefore. Forthink, forfet,
forethink forestall, foresaid, forese. Force, horce, scorce, the natural
english. Corse, French of corpse. Proch, torch, Scorch, without t, before, as
Arch, search, burch, lurch. Cord lord, accord, with the e. Word, sword,
aford, without. In former Orch. Ord. Ordle. ork.
syllabs, where or is of it self, it sou^deth upon the o, still, as organes,
ordure, order. Worldle, gorge, George. Porke, York, with the e, Stork, cork
without the e. Worm form, without e, upon (...) u. Form Orm. Orn. Ort. Oss.
storm, with e, upon the o. Corn, horn, torn, forlorn. Thorp, horse corse,
remorse. Dort, and with e, forte, port, O, sitting hard upon the s, dubleth
it, as Cross, loss. moss, if not single as purpos. With the qualifying e,
Nose, repose, close: and close, the nown upon the s, the verb, upon the z,
which is lightly general in the like cases, Os.
of the duble sound of s. Post, host, toste, roste, cost, with e, and
without e, Lost, tossed, contract for tossed. Most by prerogative Ost. Sh. otch.
Ot.
sounds upon the e, and yet sets it not down. Losh, cosh, posh. Hotch,
potch, notch. Potle, botle, throtle. Pot, sot, not. and with the qualifying e,
cote, note, throat. Oath, loathe, wroth, Oath.
and without the e, broth, moth. We sound both like the first, and write it
like the last. Roten, frosen, rosen, dosen, where en, is Oten. Oue. Ox.
passant, and the words monosyllabs. Grove, throue, love and love, move, above.
Ox, box.

V.
V, and o, be so great cosens even in cosinage, as the one entermedleth with
the others sound very much. V, ends no English word, but ew, as true. And
tho truth be the substa^tiue, yet that is no more marvel, then that we, set
constrew, and construction, from diverse grounds, congrew, congruitie, abound,
abundance, pronounce, pronunciation. Club, rub, grub, and with the e, Cube
Duble, puble, buble, ruble. Sluice, nuce, the natural English termination. Vb.
vble. Ounce. Vkle. Vtch. vd. Us. Vng. Vnk. Vll.
Use, excuse, refuse, and such enfranchised latin. Pukle, bukle, hukle, sukle,
with k. Hutch. Much, and such seem to be exceptions. Mud, bud, cud, rud, and
with the qualifying, e, Delude, rude. Hudle, pudle, crudle. Ruf, stuf, snuf,
rufle, shufle, Shrug, rug, hug, and with e, huge, deluge, refuge. Iugle, tugle,
hugle, bugle. Duk, muk, luk, and with e, duke, puke, luke, fluke, huke. Full,
dull, scull, trull, and single l, with the qualifying e, rule, crule, pule,
tule, vlp, gulp, gulf, wulf. Hulk, pulse, enfranchised, gulch. Thrum, drum,
crum, broum, loum. Noun, croun, cloun, down. Own, grown, upon the Oun. Oup.
ounce. Ound. Our.
deriuatiue. Stoup, loup, droup, coup. Sound, ground, found. Our domonlie
abreuationlike as our, the termination for enfranchisme^ts, as autour, procur
atour, as, er is for our our, as suter, writer: Bour, lour, flour, four, alone
upon the, (...) Mourn, adiourn. House, lowse, mowse, the verbes and deriuatiues
upon the, z, as House, louse, mouse, the nounes upon the, s, Ous, our English
cadence for Ous.
Latin words in osus, as notorious, famous, populous, riotous, gorgeous, being
as it were the uniting of the chief letters in the two syllabs, o, and, u,
osus. Clout, lout, dout. Buy, juice, If I have either Out. uy.
forgoten, or not remembered any termination, or if there be no mo yet extant
in the use of our tung: yet the president of these will bytheir proportion
fashion all the like. I have been thus careful and curious to run thorough all
these monosyllab terminations, because I find the like don in other tungs,
which use to rip up all, thereby to find assurance, wherewith to rule all. This
being thus ended concerning the monosyllabs, I must say somewhat also of the
bisyllabs and polysyllabs.

The proportion of bissyllabs.
I call that a bissyllab, wherein there be two several sou^ding vowells, as
Asur, rasur, masur, and why not lasur? farow, borough, thorough. Writing,
biting. The proportion in this kind also is very commodious, because when ye
have found out one certain head all of the like sound may be easily reduced
thereunto, onelesse some prerogative of private custom, or some respect to the
original stranger do interrupt the rank. If there be but one word in any
kind, that one will serve for a gide, when any mo afterward shall crave the
help of the like conduct, as Whisper, bussard. If there be no president of the
same sound, yet the like proportion in some other vowell, will lead his cosen
sound, as if there were no such word as badger, yet hedger, would lead us to the
like writing. Wherein I have regard still to the English ear, reserving the
writing of enfranchised words in their own colors, to such as be skillful. I
will write for the common man, Aumner, aumrie, naie even filosofie, and
ortografie, and leave Almoner, almonarie, naie Eleemosyner, and Eleemosynarie,
philosophy and ortographie, to the discretion, of such, as be learned, to use
or refuse as theie list. Wherein I follow the authority of a great master in
speech, even Tullie him self, who reserving the mystery of speech and pen to
himself, and his peers, did lend the people, the use and customarie thereof. Now
these bissyllabs be either natural English as, bauin, Bissyllabs. English.
Foren.


crauin, rauin, or enfranchised foren, as Pallet, mallet, ballet. And again in
both the kinds theie be either simple, as canell, panell, channel, or
compound, as waieward, toward, froward, Bissyllabs. Simple. co^pound


aside, asquint, astraie, except, reject, conceive, detain. As for the
compounds and enfianchisments theie have the help of particular titles to
direct them: for the simples and natural English I am to deall in this place.
Whereof I will set down but certain general notes, because the table which
follows, shall contein so many of each sort, as I can well remember, and
every one of them so proportioned to my note in rule, as theie shall one
answer another thoroughlie, as Cancel, chancell, hancell. Chalice, malice,
Calice, amice, office. Lauer, fauer, sauer. Iaueling, graueling, shaueling,
raueling. Nature, statur, Measur, treasur. But I shall not need to use any
further enumeration, seeing the endings be all one, and the former syllab is
that which moves matter of question in this place, which has very many
helps hereafter, whereby it may be thoroughly understood deriuatio^ sometime
breading bissyllabs, as of time, timely, witie, of wit, writer, of write,
composition sometime, as breakfast, thraldom, vauntgard, lastage, pondage,
enfranchisment sometime, as Excuse, abuse, abase, reject: distinction sometime
noting, them, as Amiss, and amiss, ascent, assent, desert, and desert, and what
not? Therefore the bissyllabs for this place shall content themselves with these
few notes. First that the silent, e, after, l, increases not the number of
syllabs, and that therefore Brable, sora^ble, 1
strample, wrangle, circle, whistle, gogle, trouble, and a number such be but
monosyllabs. Barnacle, triacle, chronicle, tunicle, and many such be but
bissyllabs, Agreeable, auailable, penetrable and a number, such be but of three
syllabs. Again, that the, e, passant in such words, as haste^, written, bide^,
threate^, frosen, cosen and such increases 2.
not the syllabs, and that therefore these, which I have rehearsed and such other
be but mere monosyllabs. Abiden, forgoten, unwritten, and such but bissyllabs.
Again, that the English tu^g is not lengthned 3.
eueriewhere for position, and co^course of two or mo consonants, and that
therefore, the quikker time mostwhat dubleth the consonant in bissyllabs, as
Fallow, sallow, yallow, tallow, swallow. Matter, platter, batter. Marie, tarry,
carry, quarie, with the short time. Marie, charie, farie, with the long time,
tho in neither the consonant be dubled. That both in bissylabs, 4.
and polysyllabs tho the same writing be in the end which is in the monosyllab,
yet the sound is far quikker, as in either of them the ending, ow, runs but
like a single, u, where as in the monosyllab, it will be heard full, as in Low,
know, and bellow, mellow, yallow, the difference is seen. As concerning
polysyllabs, theie be either English compounds or foren Enfranchisments, which
will bewraie themselves in their own places, the simple words bringing their
hole furniture in composition, as, ouerseing, undoing, whereupon, eueriewhere.
And the foreners ever appealing Of polysyllabs
to their original grounds, even when theie be most fashioned to the English
ear, as original, to originalis, enfranchisment, chastisment to their own
cuntries. And therefore I do not entend to say much of them in this place,
otherwise then by genenerall note, because both the common table, and all the
titles that follow concern bissyllabs, and polysyllabs most: as the general
rule, and the first part of proportion do most concern monosyllabs. In which
monosyllabs the natural force of every letter is best perceived, because the
sound and strength thereof appears there fullest, where there is none to
participat with them in sound; but themselves, which cannot be seen so well in
words of mo syllabs, because theie hudle on every sound with more quiknesse,
save where the time or tune will command very roundly. The polysyllab
therefore for the chief girk of his sound rises upon the third syllab from the
end, as the bissyllab does of the second. And because the large does alwaie
comprise the less within it, therefore the rules of the first and second
syllabs, hold in the polysyllabs, where the company of 1.
mo syllabs causes any one to be the lest noted: onelesse some special
occasion for difference sake make the very last, or the last save one to be
thought on and noted, as in concordance, surfitting, grassehopper and such, the
second syllab short is a property of our tung contrary to the common rule of
time, tho not to the rule of tune. (For the Greeks do so in the like positions)
and therefore causes the last syllabs save one in these words and in the like
to be better noted. Again, in abiuring, adiuring, coniuring, 2.
perjury, the ods in the middle time makes the deriuatiues of the same
primitiues to be marked for that syllab. And again, on, 3.
in the simple monosyllab, naie even in the bisyllab sounds upon the, o,
most, in the polysyllab upon the, u, because the enfranchising of such words,
as circumscription, division, partition, comparison, declineson, keeps the
natural, o, but gives it the enfranchisers, die, in, u.

But to knit up this title of proportion, (which is the great master leader to
all our whole tung, as Rule is the great Anatomist 4.
of all the sounds and forces of our letters) when we have don all that either
sound may require, or reason can enjoy n, custom will have a great stroke, and
must make up the trinity in direction of speech. For what but custom has won,
in nation, deriuation, deliberation, inclination, to keep a, still, and to go
so near the original: and in declinson, comparison, ^duowson, and such to go
so much astraie from the original, declination, comparation, aduocation?
Wherefor as sound has somewhat to say in our ortographie, and reason not
nothing, so the custom of our cuntrie will try mastries for her interest, which
she must have at his hand who so entendeth to handle this argument with liking,
as who so douteth to write a word in English, must seek out the like sound in
proportion.

Cap. XIX. Of composition.
THe force of every letter being opened by Rule, and the place of every one
being limited by proportion, the next point in natural method is to examine,
whether the words, whose force is this, and roum is thus, be simple but for
pure syllabs, or compound of mo words. For the bare word, which is handled in
proportion, is sometime set down by it self Proportion.
without further addition of any either significant word, or not significa^t
particle, as after, doom, kin. Sometime it has one or mo Composition.
significant words joined unto it, which yet in deed make but one word, when
theie ar so linked, howsoever theie signify in their several uses, as
Afterdeal, whereabout, howsoever, doomsdaie, kinsma^, sometime it has some more
put to it, tho that, which Deriuation. 3
is put to, being set alone signify nothing, and yet in the addition alter the
signification of the original word, as Finenesse, thraldo^, firerie, desirous,
kings; woes, agreith, sees, witches. Of these three kinds the first is
dispatched in proportion, the last has a proper title of deriuation, the middle
and compound is to be handled in this place.

Therefore that word is called compound, which is made of What a compound word
is.
two or mo simple words, whereof every one signifies somewhat agreeable to the
composition, even when theie arvsed alone, if theie be ever used all alone.
For, as catchpoll, chirchyard, out law, signify by their particular words used
alone, so beched, gainstand, awry, unbind, be made of two words, whereof the
former three be, gain, a, be never used alone in any such such sense, as there
imply in their composition, the last, un, is never used at all alone and
answers the Latin privation, in as indoctus.

Now these compound words be either mere English, or clear strangers: mere
English as when theie and their parcells be altogether English words, as
comecase, headstall, beadman, cupbord. Compounds. Enlish. Enfranc. Mu^grell.


Clear strangers, when their substance is mere foren, tho their liuerie be
English for some manner of their writing and utterance, squared to our sou^ds in
the like proportion, as presuppose, infringe, circunstance, ortografie,
filosofie. Ye shall sometime have a word mungrell compound, halfforen, half
English, Headlong, wharfage, princelike. The knowledge of composition is very
necessary for the right writing of our tung many ways.

First because the compound lightie brings in his single parts with all
their letters, as fearful, neuerehetesse, harebraine, The use of composition
in our writieg. Four causes which alter the form of composition.
careful, carfull. Save where some necessary cause either puts in some
letter, or puts out some, or changes some, or misplaceth some, as in kinsman,
kingsland, s, is added to bewraie some quality possessionlike. In wilful,
husband, partaker, pastime. The single, l, and, s, in will, and pass, do serve
before a consonant in composition and sound, as strong as the duble does in the
simple word. Again in husband, the very smooth nesse of the word, puts out,
o, in ow, and the, e, after, s, and cha^geth the duble, w, into the single* In
partaker, one, t, is common to both the simples in composition, part, and
taker, and is spelled with the latter, a point of great use in our right
writing, for not dubling common letters. Generally here is to be noted, that
there is no figur lakking in our words, which is received in the learned tungs,
and ar by them called metaplasms, or alterations of the words form and favor.
Because the finer English people use to pronounce their words with a delicacie
even comparable to the gallant speches, which delicacie being set down in
writing, shows the use of those metaplasms, to be no less in ours, then it
was in theirs.

Secondly we are oftimes enforced to break our words in the 2.
latter end of out lines, and to write out that in the beginning of the next
line, which we left unwritten in the former. For tho it be said of Augustus
Caesar, that he used to write the remnant of his word in the end, under the
same line with a crooked stroke about it, yet it is handsomer to write it in the
next line, because we use not Augustus Caesar, for an example in learning tho
we do it in government. Wherefor it is good to know not only how many
letters go to a syllab in every simple and vncompound word, but also which be
the full parts of every compound, that the hole words in composition may be
divided together, as all the letters of one syllab ar to go together, as in
cramp-ring, not cram-pring, in dis-honest, not dish-onest, like dish-clout, in
as-well, not a-swell, in as-much, not a-smuch, Which consideration tucheth not
only such as write, but also such as spell out of writing, because those
letters ar to be spelled together which are to be written together.

Thirdly the knowledge of composition is good to discern the 3.
difference of meaning, which is to be expressed in writing. For when the same
words be so placed, as theie may be co^strewed simply or jointly theie bread
the fallax, which is called the error by dividing those words, which are to be
united, or by uniting those which are to be divided, as a-wry, a-waie, be-long,
begin, and such other, have great diversity in their force being compound from
that which theie have when theie be single. Fourthlie the composition very
oftentimes alters the quantity and tuning 4.
of the words as showmaker, and partaker, be not of the same tuning and yet
maker, and taker be. Likewise soothsaier, nevertheless, forasmuch. Wherefor so
necessary a point deserves the knowledge.

Fiftlie composition must be well considered for two other special points,
both in writing and spelling, besides these, because 5.
it shakes two general rules in spelling and so conseque^tlie in breaking of
the syllabs. Whereof the first is, that if a 1
co^sonant com between two vowells, it is to be spelled with the latter, as in
me-mo-rie, se-di-ti-ous. The second is, that those 2.
consonants must be spelled together, which may begin a word in the same
combination, as be-smear, because we say smart, smatch. Now composition,
breaks both these rules, for against the first it will say, red-olent,
ab-olish. And against the second it will say. Trans-pose, not tran-spose, tho
we say spent, spoun, because in distribution, which spelling does imply,
every parcel must have his own letter.

Now as the knowledge of composition, is very necessary for the right writing
of our tung, upon these and such other considerations, so it is no hard thing
to com by, because neither the natural English compounds, nor yet the
enfranchised stranger do offer any difficulty in their knowing. For the
general table which follows containing all our simple words either there
named, or by their proportion to be easily reclamed to the same cadence,
whenever two or mo of those simples go into one, it will say itself, that
this word is a compound, which may easily be proved by comparing the compound
with the simples, if any be so simple, that he cannot discern a compound which
brings all his simples with their own letters, without the help of a table.
Farewell, warfare, waiward, toward, be compounds, whose simples be, fare, war,
well, way, or away, ward, to, and ar to be found in the table.

As for the foren compositions theie be enfranchised hole, and be also most of
them in the table, tho with some English hew, yet so as their strangership may
appear. And such as be compounded with the latin prepositions, have them also
clear most what. Which latin prepositions when we use before our words, we
fashion them to clasp with our letters following, as the Latins do in the like
cause, as displease, disease, disworship, complain, contein. Affairs, afford.
Incom. Howbeit we use their pewfellowes, The English proposition, commonly set
after the words. English prepo sitions only in composition.
which answer to them in our tung commonly after the words: As go before, com
behind, sit beneath, speak of, run from, stand between. The foren prepositions
be generally known to every child in every Accidence. Our chief
prepositions, and those not significant, but in composition be these, A. as,
ago, agree, ado, abide, aswash. Be, as besmutched, bespit, bethump, behead,
betake. For, as forthink, forfet, forshow, forsake. Fore, as forecast,
forestall, foretell. Gain, as gainsaie, gainstand. Mis, as misdemeanor, misuse,
mishap. Un, as unkind, vnfrind, untrue, unpleasant, unthrift. Thus much
concerning composition, which I take to be a very necessary instrument for us
to use, in the finding out of our right writing, because it brings in the
simple English words hole, without any either loss or increase, or other
metamorphosis, then upon such allowable causes, as I have alleged: and as for
strangers enfranchised, it brings them in so hole, as the original is soon
bewraied, tho theie lean some what to the English shore for their demsonship.

Cap. XX. Of Deriuation.
Deriuation naturally succedeth composition. For as compositio^ handles the
coplements of several hole words which by their uniting make a new one: so
deriuation handles the coplements of one hole word, and some addition put to
it, which addition of it self signifies nothing alone, but bing put to the
hole word qualifyeth it to some other use, then the primitive was put to, as
frind, being a primitive receives many additions, which yet signify nothing
in the sense of their addition, tho theie change the force of frind, as
frindship, frindlie frindlinesse, frinds, frindeth, frinded, frinding,
frindedst, etc. For I do not entend to deall with any point of deriuation in
this place, but where the right writing may com in question, which is in
addition only, either direct, or contract, which contraction shortenerh the
word upon cause, that is to be resolved to 1. Contracts.
the original, as monthly, for monethlie, cifring, for cifering, learnd, for
learned, children, for childeren, past, for passed. A figur of great and common
use in our tung, even where it is not perceived but to the very curious
obseruer.

The diminutiues with us enlarg not, but as in sense theie lessen 2.
Diminutiues.
the thing, so in speech theie shorten the word, and cut of the primitive
length, and therefore I hold them among primitiues for their first term, tho for
some accidentarie points, which shall be noted hereafter, theie fall within
compass of this title, as by diminution we call John, Iak, Richard, Dic, Ione,
Iug, Barptholomew, Bat, Christofer, Kit, Elisabeth, Besse, Catherin, Cate.
Which deriuations in respect of some plural numbers and possessiues, ar subject
to the rule of such words, as be of like cadence. Pak, pik, dug, rat, fit,
chesse, pate, but of themselves theie be proportion ate originalls.

Wherefor I define that word to be a deriuatiue in this place which alters
from the primitive or first head, by some addition, What a deriuatiue is.
which addition of it self signifies nothing alone, tho in addition it qualify
the primitive, to some other use, then it is of it self, as God, godly,
godhead, good, goodly, goodness, wasp, waspish, fellow, fellowship, fine,
finenesse, win, winning, pine, pineth, etc. All Deri. English. Foren.


deriuatiues be either English, as heaviness, woddish, wisest, witty: or
theie be strangers enfranchised, as temperance, continency, argument,
admonition. As for the stranger enfranchised deriuatiues, the title of
enfranchisment will examine them, besides that the general table will set them
forth plane, because theie be transported unto us holelie, tho with some English
habit, as the conusance of their enfranchising.

The English deriuatiues be either perfect, when the vowell of the primitive is
not clipped away by the addition, as in holelie, worthienesse, Deri. Perfect.
Imperfect.


cosinage, singlelie, simplelie: or imperfect, when it is, as in fine, fining,
dare, daring, carry, carrying. Again, all our English Deri. Sustanti. Accide^t.


deriuatiues be either substantiarie, or accidentarie. I call those deriuatiues
sustantiarie, which tho theie do com of some other, yet theie themselves serve
again for heads to other, such as the gra^marians in our learned tungs call
possessiues, localls, materials, aduerbialls, etc. As tree, treen, vpland,
vplandish, war, warrious, warlike, martial, martialist, vertew, vertewous,
vertewouslie, England, English, etc. I call those accidentarie deriuatiues,
which concern numbers tenses, persons, and such properties as we call accidents
in the learned handling of such words, as woe, woes, cry cries, word, words,
fish, fishes, tree, trees, agree, agrees, write, written, wrate, wrote, writes,
wrotest, writest, scrible, scriblest, contract for scribledest, had, contract
for haueddest.

I shall not need to stand much upon prouf, that deriuation is a very needful
instrument, for the furtherance of our right writing, considering the thing it
self, being set down does infer Of the use of deriuation in ortogrofie.
the profit therewithal, even to every man's sense, which is willing to se it.
Wherefor leaving the profitablenesse thereof to their judgment, which shall
prove it, I will first handle the Sustantiarie, and then the accidentarie
deriuations, which both ar much bound to the rule of proportion, because their
deriuatiue addition claspeth with the cadence and end of the pure original.
For the better performance whereof this is to be noted that every deriuable
word ends either in a vowell or in a consonant. As for the consonant ending,
the addition to it is allwaie one. In the vowellish ending, there is more
variety, because the end thereof is sometime in a single vowell, sometime in a
diphthong, and the single vowell is sometime silent, sometime sounding, all which
give cause of observation in the putting to of the additions, as shall appear
when the addi tions be known, which sometime bring forth adjectives, sometime
substantives, sometime different numbers, sometime different persons. The
deriuate substantive terminations be commonly Substantive terminations.
these, nesse, as madness, ship, as workmanship, age, as cosinage, dom, as
fredom, kingdom, th, as length, strength, wealth, health, truth, let, as chaplet,
hood, as womanhood, rye as knauerie, all, as refusal, denial, ance, as
defiance, in g, as chambring, tie, as frailty, onelesse that com of the
enfranchised substantives, meant, as punishment, yer, as lawyer, er, as writer,
our, as demeanor. The deriuate adjective terminations be commo^lie Adjective
ter minations.
these, lie, as fatherly, monthly, wisely, an, as Italian, Grecian, Roman,
ish, as Scottish, campish, kentish, where the single consonant serves both the
syllabs, without dubling, ie, as witie, baudie, sandy, without dubling the
consonant, also the simple possessiue, s, as Kings, Queen's, mothers. Neither do
I se any cause where tovse his, saving after words which end in s, as Socrates
his council was this, Platoes that, Aristotels this, er, as wiser, est, as
wisest, ing, as loving, ed, as loved, ght, as taught, thought, en, as written,
threaten, slain, contract for slaien, ashen, oken, birchen, the first
participialls, the second materials, ous, as vertewous. The deriuatiue number
terminations, es, s, n, as muses, wives, words, tops, oxen, howsen. The
deriuatiue person terminations, Number terminations. Person terminations.
est, as love, eth, as loves, ith, as seith. Which is when the simple ends
in the sharp, e, which may not be exstinguished, as the silent is in thrive,
wiue, thriueth wiueth, edst, as louedst. Now all these additions ar to be
measured according to the ending of those words whereunto theie clasp, and be
allwaie one, but where contraction shortneth them, and allwaie hole but for the
silent, e, which is sometime drouned, when the addition begins with a vowell.
The sustantiue and adjective terminations serve for those deriuations, which I
call substantiarie, the number and person, terminations for the accidentarie.
In both which these notes take place, first if it may be that the primitive 1
be written hole, and then the addition put to it, nothing being like to let it,
save contraction which shortneth, and the beginning vowell in the addition
defacing the ending, e, silent in the simple. Second, that where the addition
is but a simple, s, after 2.
consonants, we may use either of the final esses, s, or, e, as the pen shall
require, wrings, or wringe, trips, or tripe. Thirdly 3.
that vowels, diphthongs, and the ending, h, or, s, have es in their
deriuatiues, as days, sees, pyes, varies, does, foes, trewes, news, bows,
dawes, dishes, fetches, matches, howses, horses. Fourth, 4.
that such plural numbers as bear no additions, be no natural deriuatiues, as
lice, mice, fete, men, of lowse, mouse, foot man. That 5.
foren deriuations have respect allwaie to their own originalls, as
co^struction, persecution, argument, abundance, com not of constrew, persew,
argew, abound, but of their own latin primitiues. That 6.
the plural, e, encrcaseth no syllabs, but in the qualifyed, s, c, g, and sh,
as uses, cases, causes, graces, spaces, spices, scurges, surges, wishes,
rishes, aches. Where the passant, e, still resembles the quik, i. That for the
right taking of our termination in shon, we are to mark the natural foren
deriuation very carfullie, as action, 7.
passion, reflection, pronuntiation, all which sound like to our shon. The
deriuatiues of words ending in the qualifying, e, keep their forevowells sound,
as bake, baking, take, taking. A number of such notes ar there in our tung,
which I cannot intend to dwell on, because, I show but the way herein to
others, if theie list to beat the path, my self minding a further labor. In
these and such like considerations does deriuation show it self very
serviceable for the right writing of our English tu^g, which will appear more
particularly in the general table.

Cap. XXI. Of Distinction.
THis title of distinction reaches very far, because it contains all those
characts, and their uses, which I called before signifying, but not sounding,
which help very much, naie all in all to the right and tunable uttering of our
words and sentences, by help of those characts, which we set down, and se in
writing. The number of them be thirtene, and their names be Comma, Colon,
Period, Parenthesis, Interogatio^, long time, short time, sharp accent, flat
accent, straight acce^t, the seuerer, the uniter, the breaker. Whose forces,
and uses I will run through in order as theie ar named. Co^ma, is a small
crooked point, Comma.
which in writing follows some small branch of the sentence, and in reading
warns us to rest there, and to help our breath a little, as Who so shall spare
the rod, shall spill the child. Colon is noted Colon.
by two round points one above another, which in writing follows some full
branch, or half the sentence, as Tho the day be long: yet at the last comes
euensong. Period is a small round Period.
point, which in writing follows a perfect sentence, and in reading warns us
to rest there, and to help our breath at full, as The fear of God is the
beginning of wisdom. Parenthesis is expressed Parenthesis.
by two half circles, which in writing enclose some perfect branch, as not mere
impertinent, so not fully concident to the sentence, which it breaks, and in
reading warns us, that the words enclosed by them, ar to be pronounced with a
lower and quikker voice, then the words either before or after them, as Because
we are not able to withstand the assalt of tentation (such is the frailty of
our nature) therefore we pray God, that our infirmity be not put to the hasard
of that trial. Interogation is expressed by two points one above another,
whereof the upper is sometimes Interogation.
crooked which both in writing and reading teaches us, that a question is asked
there, where it is set, as Who taught the popiniaye to speak? the belly: These
five characts, that I have allredie named, ar helps to our breathing, and the
distinct utterance of our speech, not ruling within the word, as al those do
which follow, but by the word, and therefore com here in note, by cause theie ar
creaturs to the pen, and distinctions to pronou^c by, and therefore, as theie ar
to be set down with judgment in writing, so theie ar to be used with diligence
in the right framing of the tender childs mouth. The two next concern the
time, that is, the long or Time.
short pronouncing of syllabs, and are not allwaie to be marked over that
syllab, whereon theie show their force, but with discretion and upon great
cause for some manifest distinction, which rule we have of the Latins, who use
their accents in that sort, and truble not their writing therewith, so much as
the Greeks do, much less so much as the Hebrews. The long time, is expressed
Long time.
by a straight outright line, which being set over any vowell or diphthong,
tells us, that the same vowell or diphthong, must be pronounced long, as
repining, perusing, repe^nting. The Short time.
short time, is expressed by an half circle opening upward, which standing
above any vowell or consonant, signifies that the same is to be pronounced
short and quik, as perfiting, natural, perjury, tormnter, carpnter. In the
other five I gave no further note then that theie were to be well marked, even
for that theie were written to such an end, by cause the matter of their periods
and branching, whereof many learned men have written hole treatises, belongs
not to this place, but only their form to the eye, and their use to the ear,
which tends to the qualifying of our voice. For these two distinctions of
time, which show their force in words of two or mo syllabs, as the acce^ts do
in monosyl labs, I have at this time to give only some certain rules gathered
upon the dubling of our consonants, and the qualifying, e, which qualifying, e,
is a great leader in the certaining of our tung, for many uses, but chefelie
for the time: My first rule is, that a number 1.
of our deriuatiues ar short in their last syllab save one, even where the
vowell cummeth before two consonants whether the same or other, as perfitnesse,
traulling, peevishness, which argweeth that their simples be such in nature as
we call trochees, having the first syllab long and the latter short, or rather
pirrichies having both short, perfect, peuish, traull, record, which differs
much from recording, and recorder, of record, the sponde. Again 2.
those primitiues which end in a quik diphthong do shorten the same dipthong in
their deriuatiues as fllow, follow, hallow, fellowship, follower, hallowed,
whereas allow, endow, delaie, enjoy, bring forth, endewed, allowance, anoyance.
Again if the primitive 3.
simple word have the qualifying, e, in the end, as the vowell before it is
sharp and long, so is it in the deriuatiue, as prescribe, prescribing, endure
enduring. If the primitive or simple word have not, e, in the end, the vowell
before the last consonant is short and quik in both the primitive and the
deriuatiue, as perfect, perfiting, fortun, fortunat, nature, natural, onelesse
the primitiues single ending consonant be dubled in the deriuatiue, as concur,
concurring. In which case either of dubling the same consonant, or of position
by diverse, the syllab is sometime long, as forbid, forbidding, transport,
transporting, sometime short, as gospel, gospller, comfort, co^forting. This
shortness or length of time in the deriuatiues is a great leader, where to
write or not to write the qualifying, e, in the end of simple words. For who
will write, nature, perfect, measur, treasur, with an, e, in the end knowing
their deriuatiues to be short, natural, perfitlie, measured, treasurer? and
who will not write, procure, endure, allure, endite, requite, The qualifying. e.
with an, e, finding their deriuatiues, procurer, endurance, allurement,
endi^ting, requi^tall, to have the last save one long? whereby the use of the
qualifying, e, is more then most evident. Whence also this general rule for
the writing thereof is to be gathered, that if ye desire to know whether the
qualifying, e, be to be written in the end of any word or no, ye must use the
help of some deriuatiue, whether of two or of mo syllabs, whereby the time and
tune of the deriuatiue, the, e, or not, e, in the original is perceived. For
if the deriuatiue be long and shrill, the primitue has, e, as presuppose,
conclude, remove, prepare must be written with, e, because the last syllab save
one in presupposing concluding, removing, prepared, is long. And again, fortun
profit, comfort, must have no, e, because fortunat, profiting, comforter, have
the last save one short. So likewise in bissyllabs pine, pining, pin, pinning,
mate, mating, mat, matting. The like rule by conversion 4.
will serve for time, that where the last save one in the deriuatiue is short,
the last in the primitive is also short, as comforting, ransaking, comfort,
ransak, and the contraries long. The other syllabs besides these for both time
and time in nature, follow the direction of the last syllab, as theie do also
for the force of every vowell, diphthong, consonant or combination. Thus much
concerning time at this time. The sharp accent is a straight line rising toward
the right hand, which shows that the vowell or Accents, sharp.
diphthong, over which it is, must be sounded sharp and high, as rage, crepe,
mine, home, pure.

The flat accent, is a straight line rising toward the left hand, Flat.
which shows that the vowell or diphthong over which it is must be sounded
flat and quik, as rag, step, thin, for, stur. The straight accent, is an
upright perpendicular line falling upon Sreight.
some letter of duble force to show in whether kind it is to be used, as
charact, thin, give. For every of these three accents, these rules ar to be
observed. That for cumbring of the lines and 1.
show of difficulty, no accent is to be used but where need is, and therefore
where the accent is seen, the place is to be noted. That the sharp and flat
accents ar only to be set upon the last syllab, 2.
where the sharp has many causes to present it self: the flat only upon some
rare difference, as refuse, refuse, present, present, record, record, differ,
differ, sever, severe, and certain other of that sort, which are noted in the
general table. The straight perpendicular accent, serves only for those
letters, diphthongs and coplements 3.
which be of duble forces, and is set upon them in their less usual force:
because their common and usual is more the^ their half natural, and therefore
not to be distinguished with any accent.

The duble forced letters be these, i, o, ou, ow, c, f, g, s, ch, th. Whereof
c, f, and t, shall not need any express accent at The dubled forced leters.
etc. C.
all, because c, in her weak force either goes befoer i, or, e, or has the
qualifying, e, following her, as hence, auance, once, pronounce, which will be
sufficient notes for, c. F, sounds upon F.
the consonantish u, only in, if, the abuerb conditional, and of, the
preposition. T, is cosen to, c, only in enfranchised words, T.
where a vowell follows after, t, as condition, faction, molestation. Neither
is, s, to be noted with any accent, after, l, m, n, r, or the silent, e, tho
after them it sound still upon the z, as hills, brims, guns, cars, times,
lines. The chief pla ces of needful accents. I. O.


Therefore the chief residence of the straight accent is over, i, in
terminations in iue, as give, alive, thrive. Where the contrary sound cheks,
as give, live, sieve, shriuen. Over, o, in terminations in oue, where, o,
sounds strong, as love, grove, throue, where the contrary sound cheks, as
love, houe, above, move. If, o, com in any place not allredie noted for, u,
and of any difficulty for distinction, the straight accent is to be set over
it, as mother for a girl in difference from mother. Ou, and ow, sound most
commonly Ou. ow.
upon the, u, and therefore if the straight accent be put upon the, o, as in
doutfull cases it would be, it is to be sounded full upon the, o, and not, u. G,
before, a, o, u, is out of controversy G.
strong, and therefore the difference is, when, g, cumming before, i, or, e,
sounds strong, which is contrary to the natural, or rather the Roman use
thereof, as in gig, begin, give, geld, gird, gek, gilt and such other, where g,
is somewhat mannish, and therefore is to be noted with the strong accent, and
thereby expels the, u, which is made for her strong supplement, in guy,
guide, and yet has another note of her own, which must have some acce^t, if
this be used. For languish, anguish language, and such differ from guy, and
guess. But he that is acquainted with the Hebrew tung, will not meruell that a
silly point makes a great distinction in the force of the same letters. S,
between two vowells, is a marvelous deputy for, z, and S.
therefore would have some handsome note, which will fall somewhat vnhandsomlie,
the, s, being such a gangrell, onelesse the straight accent may be
conveniently set within the upper bought, whereof, f, has the like, through
his very heart. For in notes of distinction the most commodious charact is best
current. For ch, where it is strong the number is not many, and Chapter
therefore it may well abide the perpendicular accent over the coplement, as
charact, archangell. Th, is marvelous general, Th.
and therefore in such general words, as the, this, that, therefore, thence, and
mo of that race, it needs not any sensible distinction, where common use will
straight way be the teacher. Howbeit in many places it will prove needful to
note the weak, th, with this straight accent, tho some general rules may
oftimes case it. As that when any word, which is both a noun and a verb ends
in th, the noun sounds strong, as breath, mouth, and the verb weak, as sooth,
breath, mouth. And again o, before, th, with, e, following next, sounds upon
the weak side, as mother, other, brother. Therefore the perpendicular accent
sits upon the weak, s, and, th, upon the strong, i, o, ou, ow, g, ch, where
need does requite. If any would have two co^tinent letters both to be noted
with the straight accent, as give, one between them both may serve the turn by
learned presidents in the like case. This rule of distinction must be some what
curiously kept in the general table, as the common master, and in the
eleme^tarie reading, as the common introductorie. Thus much for the three
accents. The seuering note is expressed by two points, the one following the
other, which being set over The seuerer.
two vowells or the latter vowell in a diphthong declare that theie be to be
referred to diverse syllabs, whereas otherwise theie might belong to one, as
going, variety, allied, vowell following. The uniting line is expressed by a
long stroke between two syllabs, whereby it is meant that those two syllabs ar
par cells of The uniter.
one word, being severed so either by chance thorough the writers oversight, or
upon some particular consideration, as for-think, fore-think. The breaker is
expressed by two outright strokes one The breaker.
under another in the end of a line, and gives us to wit, that the word which
it so breaks is parted by full syllabs, whereof some be written in the line
before: some in that which follows, as con-tr-rie, ma-gi-strate. Here is the
rule of composition and right spelling to be considered. These points be theie,
which I think most worthy the consideration in the matter of distinction, tho
the particular argument may sprede further.

Cap. XXII. Of Enfranchisment
ALL the words which we do use in our tung be either natural English, and most
of one syllab, or borrowed of the foren, and most of many syllabs. Whereby our
tung seems to have two heds, the one homeborn, the other a stranger where of
either has a great train following it. The causes of either be these. While
the inhabitants of our cuntrie neither encu^bred The cause why our words be so
much borrowed of the stranger.
their brains with much study, neither bissied their heds with great trafik,
neither pleased their fantsies with far travel, theie used no other terms,
the^ such as their own need enforced them unto, which being all way fed with
home occasions desired no help of fore^ tungs, to utter those things with their
words which were devised without their wits. But after that the desire of
learning enflamed study, the longing for gain brought in great traffik, the
delight to range, did cause men travel, new occasions brought forth new words,
as either more cunning made way to more terms, or as strange devises did seek
strange deliueries. For when the mind is fraught with matter to deliver, it is
still in pain until it have delivered, and therefore to have the delivery
such, as may discharge the thing well, and content all parties, both by whom
and to whom the matter is delivered, it seeks both home helps, where theie be
sufficient, and significant, and where the own home yeildeth nothing at all, or
not pithie enough, it craves help of that tung, from whence it received the
matter of delivery. Hence comes it that we have our tung commonly both
stored and enlarged with our neighbors speches, and the old learned tungs. A
thing not proper to us alone, but common to all those, which use any speech in
matters more then ordinary, naie in matters above the brutish. The necessity
of these foren words must needs be very great because the number of them is so
very many, as it does appear most plainly by the general table, where hole
ranks of enfranchised terms do match together in one front. To whom we are much
beholden, for that theie vouchsafe to be com English to serve our need, as
their people ar to thank our tung, for returning the like help, in cases of like
need, tho their occasions to use ours be nothing so often, as ours to use
theirs.

This benefit of the foren tung, which we use in making What enfra^chisment is.
their terms to become ours, with some alteration in form, according to the
frame of our speech, tho with the continewing in substance of those words,
which are so used, that it may appear both whence theie com, and to whom theie
com, I call enfranchisment, by which very name the words that are so
enfranchised, become bond to the rules of our writing, which I have named
before, as the stanger denisons be to the laws of our cuntrie. And tho the
learned enfranchiser may sometime yield to much to the fore^, either for show
of learning, or by persuasion, that it is best so, yet he does not well,
considering that the very nature of enfranchisment does enforce obedience to
the enfranchisers laws, not to be measured by his bare person, but by the
custom, reason and sound, of his cuntries speech. That foren words enfranchised
ar to yield to our writing.
And as unadvised cunning, or not sufficie^tlie advised, does play to much
upon the foren string, being very loath to leave out any one letter, as
eleemosinarie, for amner, hospital and victual for spitle vitle and such
other. So mere ignorance and not willing to learn, but presuming upon it self
writes so vnwarilie, as as whole, for hole, which is manifest greek, and to
begin with h, etc. And as it is very good for our English man to know the
force of his own natural words, so it cannot be but good to know the foren, if
the right in writing, be any right worth waing, signet, for a little sign, or
seall, and cygnet, for a young swan, ar descried that way, In sign, g,
soundes not, in signify it does. Wherefor I think it best for the strange words
to yield to our laws, because we arboth their vsuaries and fructuaries, both
to enjoy their fruits, and to use themselves, and that as near as we can, we
make them mere English, as Iustinia^ did make the incorporate people, mere
Romans, and banished the terms, of both latins and yeildlings.

The use of this enfranchisement is as large in our tung, as our need is in
delivery, which being capable of all arguments, makes us subject to all words.
I know no other division of enfranchised, That it is best to write foren words,
with the English letters after the English sound.
words, then after the tungs fom whence we borow them, as Latin, Greek, Hebrew,
Italian, French, Spanish, Dutch, Scottish, etc. Which are freid amongst us, as
the present need of either them with us, or us with them, does sew to be
incorporate.

Which we have from which, it is not here so needful to declare, where the
question is not of the substance and sense of the word, but of the right
writing. And yet the general table will Rules to be ob served in enfranchising
of foren words.
show that I have not been very negligent that way. But concer ning the
writing, me think the common me^ ought to yield therein to the use of those
that be learned, least if theie will not, theie miss as foullie in the writing
of them, as theie use them madlie, in mistaking their meaning. And again the
learned in their enfranchising them must needs have their eye, upon our
proportion our accent, our deriuation and such other, according to the reason,
custom, and sound of our speech, reserving that to the stranger which our tung
cannot rule, as if ye once pass the third syllab, our tung is hushed. To prove
any of these things by examples, which be every where so common, it shall not
need. In this very chapter of enfranchisment, tho I do not affect any
extraordinary forenism, yet how many foreners am I constraned to use? Uerie,
chapter, enfranchisment, affect, extraordinary, foren, forenism, constrained,
use, in this last sentence do easily prove, that it were to foren from the
matter, to seek examples offoren words. Wherefor to knit up this note of
enfranchisment in few words, the English rule for writing, must be the right
thereof, tho it keep still many signs of a stranger, tho yet incorporat with
us, which rule the Italia^ seems to observe both wisely and well. If ye write
philosophy, ye write to much upon the foren, if filosohie, not to much upon
the English. If ye will nedelie keep the clear foren, it were good to use the
ordinary premunition, (that it is so written in the primitive tung.) And
whereas the learnedder sort, as Tullie him self, allow not the enterlacing of
Greek words in Latin, the meaning of that their saing tends to this my
conclusion. For if we have of our own, as significant and as proper, what need
a rich man to be a thief? If we have either none or not so toward, why in our
own need, shall we not enfranchis forenners? If we mean to use them but for a
time, or to some end the premunition will be our warrant. If we mean to make
them ours, then let them take an oath to be true to our tung, and the
ordinances thereof. If this point be not agreid on, great inconveniences will
follow, and all the rules, which be kept in our tung, must take exception
against the foren, or the foren against them, when theie com to the writing.

Wherefor it will prove best for all parts, that our tung, and the rules of her
right writing be made the general right. For the natural words, the property
is her own, for the foren the use is hirs, and therefore the handling of them to
her own best.

Neither must any learned man think it strange to write foren Englished terms
after an English ear, tho it be contrary to his acquaintance, seeing it is not
contrary to the custom of his cuntrie. Neither is it any embasing to
learning, to lend the common man the use of his learning, tho he keep the
substance: neither yet both to se, and suffer the learneddest terms that he
has, to com under an English hand, seeing there is no dishonor meant them, where
there be made peers to our own. Thus much at this time concerning the right
writing of foren words, when theie become ours to use, and attire themselves to
the English complexion, which we ourselves think reasonable well of, and I as
well as any, what account soever my thinking may be of, in such an argument,
as I have thought thus much of.

Cap. XXIII. Of Prerogative
I Said before, that those men, which will give any certain direction for the
writing of any tung, or for any thing else, which concerns any tung, must
take some period in the tung, or else their rules will prove unruly. For every
tung has a certain ascent from the meanest to the height, and a descent again
from the height to the meanest, the one in the removing kind, as the other was
in mounting. And as in the ascent it is not yet com to the assurance of note,
because it is not thorouglie artificial, so in the descent it grows not worth
the noting, because it becoms rude again, and in a manner withered. Hence
comes it, that Demosthenes his age is the prince of Greece, Tullies age the
flour of Rome, whose tungs if learned writing had not commended to the tuition
of books, theie had been of small worth, naie of no remembrance, long before
this day: as the spoken tungs of the same soils beginning in their days to
change, be now quite altered, or at the least nothing like that, where the
carnation grew, tho full of good flowers in an other kind. So that kooks give
life where bodies bring but death. Mark the Greek or Latin writers before, and
after those men's ages, and by comparing them with these, ye shall se the ods
that I speak of, and the one to rude to be ruled, the other departing from
their rule, and yiedling to a change. This period of mine, and these risings to
mount, as the dismounting again, till decaie ensew, do give us to wit, that as
all things else, which belong to man be subject to change, so the tung also is,
which changes with the most, and yet contineweth with the best. Whereupon it
must needs be that there is some soulish substance in every spoken tung, which
fedeth this change, even with perceptible means, that pretend alteration. For
if any tung be absolute, and fre from motion, is is shrined up in books; and
not ordinary in use, but made immortal by the register of memory.

This secret mystery, or rather quikning spirit in every spoken What
prerogative is.
tung, and therefore in ours, call I prerogative, because when sound has don
his best, when reason has said his best, when custom has effected, what is
best in both, this prerogative will except against any of them all, and all
their rules, be theie never so general, be theie never so certain. Whereby it
makes a way to a new change that will follow in some degree of the tu^g, if the
writers period be chosen at the best. I cannot compare this customarie
prerogative in speech to any thing better, then unto those, which devise new
garments, and by law ar left to the liberty of devise. Hence cummeth it in
apparel, that we be not like ourselves any long time, tho the best and most
semelie (like an artificial rule) do best please the wisest people. But by the
way is it not a marvel, that the period of a tung, being so quik an
instrument, shall continue longer, then the fashion of apparel, being a thing
so thought on, and sadly misformd? Upon the like liberty in speech, to be her
own caruer, com our exceptions against our general rules. Hence coms the
writing of com, the simple with, o, the compound with, u, cumfort cumpasse.
Hence, whom, and most sound lik, rome and roste, tho not qualifyed with, e.
Hence comes it that, enough, bough, tough and such other primitiues be so
stra^glie written, and more strangely sounded. Whereby prerogative seems to be
a quiksiluer in custom, ever stirring, and never stayed tho the general
custom, as a thing of good stay do still offer it self to be ordered by rule,
as a nere frind to reason. This stirring quintessence the leader to change in a
thing that is naturally changeable, and yet not blamed for the change, some not
very well advised people, esteem as an error, and a private misuse contrary to
custom, because it semes to be a very imperious controller, but theie ar
deceived. For in deed this prerogative, tho it chek general conclusions,
thorough private oppositions, yet that opposition came not of private men, but it
is a private thing it self, and the very life blood, which preserves tungs in
their natural best from the first time that theie grew to account, till theie
com to decaie, and a new period grown, different from the old, tho excellent
in the altered kind, and yet it self to depart, and make roum for another,
when the circular turn shall have ripened alteration.

I take this present period of our English tung to be the very height thereof,
because I find it so excellently well fined, both for the body of the tung it
self, and for the customarie writing thereof, as either foren workmanship can
give it gloss, or as homewrought hanling can give it grace. When the age of
our people, which now use the tung so well, is dead and departed there will
another succeed, and with the people the tung will alter and change. Which
change in the full harvest thereof may prove comparable to this, but sure for
this which we now use, it seems even now to be at the best for substance, and
the brauest for circumstance, and whatsoever shall become of the English state,
the English tung cannot prove fairer, then it is at this day, if it may
please our learned sort to esteem so of it, and to bestow their travel upon
such a subject, so capable of ornament, so proper to themselves, and the more
to be honored, because it is their own. The force of prerogative is such as
may not be disobeied tho it seem to disorder some well ordered rule, and cause
some people wonder which weie not the cause.

Wherefor when any note shall com in place quite contrary to the common not
custom, but precept, then must we needs think of prerogatives power, a great
princess in process, and a parent to corruption, but withal intending to raze
another Phoenix from the formet ashes. Which prerogative, who soever he be, that
will not grant to any tung, denies it to have life, onelesse his meaning be,
by registriug some period in it of most excellent note to restrain prerogative,
and to preserve the tu^g, which he enrolleth by writing from the peples
profaning, by making of it learned, and exempting it from corruption, as our
book la^guages be, whose rule is so certain, as theie dream of no change. This
prerogative and liberty, which the people has to use both speech and pen at
will, is the cause, and yet not blamed therefore, why the English writers be now
finer, then theie were some hundredth years ago, tho some antiquarie, will take
the old writing to be finer. But the question is wherein finenesse stands. So
was Salust deceived among the Romans, living with eloquent Tullie, and writing
like ancient Cato.

But in one general word to tuch both this prerogative, and That the
learneddest tungs agree with us in this kind of precept.
my other six rules, with the very general method, where with I have traced
the right of our writing, I do take them all to be very well grounded, neither
is there any thing at all, set down by me in way of observation concerning
the tung, be it never so strange, or rather seem it never so strange, but it is
as artificial, and of as sure note, as the best language is. Which I shall not
need in this so petie a principle to prove by particulars, neither to raise up
again a sort of horieheded writers, both grammarians and greater in the very
best speches, from out of their graves to subscribe to my rules. It is enough
for me that the learned find this true in their own travel, and that the
unlearned be content to believe the learned, that I utter a truth, tho I bring
not in a Priscian, or any Priscianlike ortografer or any of the twelve old
grammarians likned to the nine muses and the three graces in the Latin tung.
Which tung I rest still on, as commonly best known to our bookish people. That
my cuntrie custom does fight stoutly for me, that even sound it self is sound
of my side, and that the best reason, is my greatest frind, naie my very good
Lady, no man I hope will deny me, being so ready to content him, but more
ready to proceed, and perform mine enterprise.

In this writing prerogative, the very pen it self is a great doer That the
pen will have a stroke in both fashoning and using the letters.
and of marvelous authority, which because it is the secretary alone, and
executes all, that the wit ca^ deliver, presumes therefore much, and will
venture as far, as any counselor else, of what soever calling, tho never
against reason, whose instrument it is to satisfy the sight, as the tung does
the ear. Custom, (whose charge prerogative is, as the pen is his conueier)
favors the pen excedinglie much, and will not stik to stand to it, that a
dash with a pen may hold for a warrant, where both dispatch for speed, and
grace for fair letter bid the pen be bold. Hence cummeth it that so many zeds
in our tung ar herd, and so few seen, for dexterity and speed in the
currantnesse of writing And as the pe^ can do this, so I do take it that our
very tung upon prerogative for smoothness, uses the z, so much for, s, and
the weak, th, the vwish, o, and such others of the duble sounds.

But it may be said that all our exceptions of most reasonable prerogative,
may be well reduced to the general form, as why not whom, most, whear,
thear, hear, and a number such, as well as, home, cost, fear, and such, which
I contrary not at all, tho I se some difficulty in altering that, which our
custom has so grasped. And it were to much almost to require that of any wise
and learned man, so to arrest exceptions, chefelie in such a thing, as will not
prove a standard, tho he that wishes this, seem to conceive such a thing,
which tho it were granted, yet would it break out again forth with some other
way, and cause a greater gap. Because no banks can keep it in so strait,
because no strength can withstand such a stream, because no vessel can hold
such a liquor, but only those banks which in flowing ar content to be
sometimes ouerrun, only those stays which in fury of water will bend like a
bulrush, only that vessel which in holding of the humor, will receive some it
self, as allowing of the relice. If any ignorant pen, either ignorantly, or
upon ignorant ground, tho pretending knowledge and good resolution, do offend
against reason, and intrude upon prerogative, that is no right quill, neither
auowed by me, as neither that current is to be called custom, which holds by
usurpation, neither that cause to be counted reason, which has other
beginning, then right knowledge, or other ending, then the nature of that thing,
will seem to admit, for whom that reason speaks. And certainly when I
consider the thing deeply, as my thoughts in this case have not been slight,
neither mere superficial, I cannot se, when these imperfections be removed,
which still company perfection, and by easy notes may easlie be removed,
with co^tentme^t of the wise, tho with the wonder of some, which are blinded with
their own, but that our tungs prerogative may full well take place, and the
pen also his, considering our custom is become so orderly, as it may well be
ruled, without either chopping or changing of any letter at all, or otherwise
praing aid of any fore^ invention, more the^ I have set down, and said enough
of.

These be the notes which I promised to give for the ordering of our tung, and
the right writing thereof, wherein if I have hit right, the right will be my
warrant, yea tho it seem not right to some, wherein I comfort my self tho I
content not all. Aristides once made an oration to the people of Athens, and was
wonderfully well liked, eue^ with some clapping of hands, or some popular shout,
which general liking he so misliked, as he asked some frind, who stood next
unto him, what ill he had spoken, because it was so liked, as if it were not
possible for any good thing to win general liking, tho the right be rightly
honored of her own children, as our greatest and best orator in scriptur
speaks. But as it shall please God, so shall my travel take place if it
please, I will be glad, if it please not I will not fear, so the displeased
party be no principal best. I would neither be an Herod to be eaten with lice
for the puf of great allowance, neither yet a Cicero to shrink in Miloes right,
for either crashing of armor, or craking of speech, my argument being such, as
will bear it self out, and my patience such, as can abide time till either other
me^ se me and allow if I deserve, or my self se my self, and amend mine own
miss. It is an easy thing to find falt, and therefore much used, it is hard to
judge right, and therefore not ordinary. If learned secretaries will head their
pe^, and skillfull correctors be charie of their print, neither will these
things seem strange, neither prerogative be pointed at, but every right in
writing be mesured by right in judgment. And in very deed as I said before,
all my notes do more concern the pen, and the dispatch there, then the print
and his statarie form. Now will I set down the general table, which will
supply all that by particular words, whatsoever is wanting in my general
precept.

Cap. XXIIII. The use of the general table.
AS I promised before, so now I will knit up this argument of right writing
with a general table, wherein I have gathered the most of those words, which
we commonly Six causes to prove the use of the table.
use ^ our hole speech. Which table I take to be very proper to this purpos,
and upon sundry causes. First for the confirming of my rules, with multitude
of examples, which I proved 1. Multitude of examples.
with some few naie often with some one, when I set them first down: a thing both
plane, to enstruct a reader, and also pithie, to enforce a rule by vertew of
number.

Secondly, for the perfiting of proportion, a great officer in directing 2.
Perfiting of proportion.
the pen, as being chief marshall to set words in araie, according to their
sounds. Which sounds bewraing themselves best in the last syllabs, as being
therefore best hard, because theie ar last said, recomme^d themselves therein to
the rule of proportion, tho not without both need, and hope of further help,
for the first and middle syllabs, to have their proportion thereby full and
suitable in all. Which help this table promises, as preciselie examining the
beginning of words by order of the letter, as proportion sought out the ending
thereof, by likeness in sound. Which two syllabs, the first and last being
certainly known, if there be no mo, then all be known. But if there be mo,
where the extremities be certain, the middle may be seen.

Thirdly the enfranchised words, which we borow of the foren, being a great
parcel of our ordinary speech, because we 3. A catalog for enfranchisme^t
deal so much with such matters, as enforce us thereunto, while we utter that
which we learn, as theie do of whom we learn, not having of our selves to
express that in speech, which we have but of others to execute in deed: such a
general table is a convenient gide to deliver them to our eyes. Wherewith to
cloie the rule of enfranchisment, where some few may serve by way of example,
were either to duble them, if theie be in both, or to lame the table if theie
be but in the rule: both great ouersights. Wherefor contenting the rule with
sufficient number, to make it plane, I have used the table for a common
treasury where to lay up all.

Fourthlie the affinity between the rule, which examineth the 4. A supply to
many wants.
general direction by particular proufs and the particular poufs, which range
themselves in order, by general direction, is so near and so great, as it
cannot otherwise be, but that many things will fall out in examining the
table, which proves by particular, whereby the rules shall be helped: besides
their confirming in nature of example: as the rules themselves, which direct in
general do offer that assurance, whereby the table shall be stayed, besides the
sorting of particular words, into proportionat ranks.

Fiftlie and last, the general table is a mean to help ignorance, and a way
to ease cunning. For the ignorant man, which cannot 5. An help for ignorance
and an ease for knowledge.
judge of sounds by finenesse of his ear, will soon discern forms by sharpness
of his eye, and quickly find out the use of a table, tho he seldom feel the
sense of a rule. And the skillful man also, which can judge of a rule, if he
have time to read it, in want of leisure to read, may have recourse to his
table, and so satisfy the sudain, till convenient time will give him leave to
study. The table therefore being a thing of such commodity, to confirm rules,
to perfect proportion, to discover enfranchisments, to supply all wants, to help
ignorance, and to ease knowledge: I have so framed it, I hope, both for store
of words, and choice of notes, as it shall perform all this, whereunto it is
said to be so profitable.

For the words, which concern the substance thereof: I have gathered together
so many of them both enfranchised and natural, Of words in the table.
as may easily direct our general writing, either because theie be the very
most of those words which we commonly use, or because all other, whether not
here expressed or not yet invented, will conform themselves, to the presidencie
of these. If my leisur would have served, I would have sought out mo, but these
may seem enough, which both serve the thing, and discharge me. Who entending
at the first to deal no lower, then the entry to speech, upon great occasion
have been forced further to devise an Elementarie, a thing as different from my
first purpos, as it is very pertinent to the common profit.

For the notes, besides the beginning letter, which I have curiously Of notes
in the table.
observed, both to find out most words by that kind of method, and withal to
perform that, which is required in a table, to direct him that sekes by order
of the letter, I have had special regard to mine own rules, that both table
and rule agreing in one, my labor thereby may sooner win allowance. Therefore
when soever any great cause of note does offer it self, either in accent for
distinction, or in change for proportion, or in strangeness for deriuation, or
in writing for enfranchisment, or in property for custom, either in penning or
pronouncing, because it reigns in both: the accents ar set over the
consonants or vowells, which require distinction: the changing of proportion,
the strangeness of deriuation, the property of custom is presently noted:
and the enfranchised words be first set down in their naked and natural
colors, and after written so as our cuntrie does clothe them, and our custom
does allow them.

This have I don, and thus, which whether it be the right way, That this is
the right way to certain the true writing of our English tung.
to direct our writing or no: that I leave to other men's judgment, contenting
my self with these two reasons. First because I se those writers, which have
traveled in other tungs, for the right writing thereof, whose labor also has
taken good effect, and even at this day does gide all our studies, because 1.
The president of best writers.
their success proves the rightnesse of their way, to have cut this same
course, and by examining each syllab to have certained all, not by rasing new
characts, but by ruling old custom.

Second, because he which quite alters the nature of such 2. The amendment
ought not to alter substance quite.
a thing, as is said to be corrupted, does not amend the old falt but tendereth
us a new substance, as subject to blame, as the former was, naie oftimes more,
the deformity thereof appearing in the face, and the infirmity thereof not
able to bear age, as the other did, in whose roum it cummeth. Whereas in deed
in such a case, where the substance may remain, tho some error be stripped, a
good director will first sift the certain right from the supposed wrong, and in
ruling them both call custom to counsel, from whom the right came, as all men
know, and by whom the wrong must be helped, as theie that mark, may se.

But not to tarry long in a matter so plane, and so examined before, this is
most true, that long and waking custom, in the matter of speech, wherein she
commands without usurpation, wherein she has property without intrusion,
and wherein she deals not without consideration, of force must have her
imperial voice, when the question is, what current were best, for directing of
the pe^. For that is no correction which wastes the substance, but that
washes the accidents, and that in such sort, as the cuntrie custom will best
admit, upon former acquaintance.

Thus much have I don for the right writing of our English tung, desiring my
cuntriemen to think well of my labor, and themselves to travel in furnishing
out the rest, which I cannot deal with, if theie like of that which I have
hitherto don: if not, I would be glad to be directed my self by some president of
another, which shall taste of judgment.

Mine own course does carry me quite another way, from meddling with such
things, as this argument is: and yet not altogether so, but that where good
cause shall offer occasion, and fit circumstance shall be answerable to such
cause, I will be very ready to pleasur mine own cuntrie, to the utmost of my
power, yea even in the midst of any foren learning: Tho my drift be such, as
I may sooner minister occasion of much matter to such as will dwell upon
particular discourse, then my self digress from that plat, which is alredie
laid, being more then enough, to occupy any one.

It were a thing very praiseworthie in my opinion, and A perfect English
dictionarie wished for.
no less profitable then praise worthy, if some one well learned and as
laborious a man, would gather all the words which we use in our English tung,
whether natural or incorporate, out of all professions, as well learned as
not, into one dictionarie, and besides the right writing, which is incident to
the Alphabete, would open unto us therein, both their natural force, and their
proper use: that by his honest travel we might be as able to judge of our own
tung, which we have by rote, as we are of others, which we learn by rule. The
want whereof, is the only cause why, that very many men, being excellently
well learned in foren speech, can hardly discern what theie have at home,
still shooting fair, but often missing far, hard censors over other, ill
executors themselves. For easy obtaining is enemy to judgment, not only in
words, and natural speech, but in greater matters, and very important.
Advised and considerat cumming by, as it proves by those tungs, which we learn
by Art, where time and travel be the compassing means, emplanteth in wits,
both certainty to rest on, and assurance to rise by. Our natural tung cummeth
on us by hudle, and therefore hedelesse, foren language is labored, and therefore
learned, the one still in use and never will known, the other well known and
very seldom used. And yet contine wall use should enfer know ledge, in a thing
of such use, as the natural delivery of our mind and meaning is. And to say
the truth what reason is it, to be acquainted abroad, and a stranger at home?
to know foren tungs by rule, and our own but by rote? If all other men had been
so affected, to make much of the foren, and set light by their own, as we seem
to do, we had never had these things, which we like of so much, we should never
by comparing have discerned the better. Theie proined their own speech, both to
please themselves, and to set us on edge: and why may not we by following of
their presidents be partakers of their praise? considering the thing which we are to deal in, of it self is so good, and the presidents, which to follow, to
be so many and so plane: as we can neither allege any want for direction, ne
yet baseness of argument, to diliuer us from travel. For the matter of speech
That the mat ter of speech is worth the handling. The pen and voice.
is a thing well thought of, whether ye way the words and the forces which
theie have, or the uttering thereof by pe^ and voice. Natural need upon mere
use, commends the voice, delight in mere use commends fair speaking. And
voluntary need upon more use commends the pen, delight in more use comme^deth
fair writing. Which both ar so well esteemed of, as there be particular Arts,
very cunningly devised to beautify them both. We need not toproue by Platoes
Cratylus, or Aristotle's proposition as by best autorities, (tho men be
sufficient to prove The property of words.
their own inventions) that words be voluntary, and appointed upon cause,
seeing we have better warrant. For even God himself, who brought the creatures,
which he had made, unto that first man, whom he had also made, that he might
name them, according to their properties, does planelie declare by his so
doing, what a cunning thing it is to give right names, and how necessary it
is, to know their forces, which be allredie given, because the word being
known, which implies the property the thing is half known, whose property
is emplyed. Therefore the argument of words, speech, and pen being so
necessary, and the traveling in them being no less comendable, he that will
deal in that which I have said, shall both help need in others, and heap praise
to himself, and yet do nothing without manifold president. For among the
Hebrews, Jonas, Judas, Kimchi, among 3. The presidencie of like dealing.
the Greeks, Eustathius, Fauorine, Pollux, among the Latins, Marcus Varro,
Nonius Marcellus, Festus Pompeius, tho not these alone, nor in these tungs
alone, endeavored themselves to do that in their tungs, which I wish for in
ours, expounding their own words by their own language. The Italian, the
French, the Spanish, at this day use the like naie theie go further, and make
particular dictionaries even to particular books, as John Boccace alone has a
dictionarie for himself in the Italian tung. Now if such like English wits, in
whom both learning and labor do concur, would do so much for our tung, as these
and the like have don for theirs, naie as even learners have don, for those
same tungs, which theie have gained by labor, as Stephanus, Perot, Calepine,
for the latin and others for other: we should then know what we both write and
speak: we should then discern the depth of their conceits, which either coined
our own words, or incorporated the foren. Whereas at this day: we be skillfull
abode and ignorant at home, wondering at others not waing our own. Thus much at
this time concerning these things, now must I to my table.

THE GENERAL TABLE. CAP. XXV.
A.
Abaie. abandon. abase. abash. abashment. abate. abatement. abbacie. abbess.
abbie. abbot. abbreuiate. abbreuiation. abridge. abbridgement. abllridgest.
abbridgst. Contr. abbridgeddest. abbridgdst. Con. abbridged. abbridgd. Contr.
The g^in contraction continevving vveak, from the qualifying. c. abbut.
abbuttting. abce. abecedarie. abet. abettor. abdicate. abhor. abhorrest.
abhorst. Contract. abhorreddest. abhordst. Contr. abhors. abhorring. abide.
abidst. Contract. abid. abidst. Contract. abiden. abject. ability. abjure.
abiuration. able. ableness. abode. abodest. abodst. Contr. The original sound
continevving in the contract. abolish. abolished. abolisht. Contr. abolishment.
abominable. Enfr. Of omen without, h. abomination. about. abound. above.
abricot. abroad. abrogate. abrogatest. abrogatst. Contr. absence. absents.
absent. Distinct. absent. absolve. absolute. absolution. absolutely.
absoluteness. abstain. abstinence. abstinent. abstinencie. abstract. absurd.
absurdity. absurdnesse. abundant. abundantly. abundance. abuse. Contract.
abuse. abused. abusd. Contract. aby. abying. Accent. accenting. accept.
accepting. acceptable. acceptance. acceptance. acception. access. accessarie.
accessorie. accessible. accession. accidence. accidences. accidentarie.
accident. accidents. accommodat accompany. accompanying. accomplish.
accomplishment. accomplished. Cont. for. accomplished. account. accountant.
accountable. accord. according. accordingly. akecorn. Of an ache, or an oak.
accrue. Enfran. accurse. accursed. accuse. accusation. accusative. accusatorie.
accustom. accustomable. ace. ache. achiue. acknowledge. acquaint. acquaintance.
acquit. acquit. acquittance. act. action. active. actiuitie. actual.
actuarie. Ad. adamant. added. adder. addict. addis. address. adjacent.
adiectine. adjure. adiurement. adiurd. Contrac. adiourn. Enfran. adiournment.
adiournth. Con adle. admeasurment. administer. administration. administrator.
admire. admiration. admiral. admiraltie. admissarie. admission. admit.
admittance. admixtion. admonish. admonition. adnihilate. ado. Distinct. a-do.
adieu. Enfranchis. adieu. adopt. adoption. adore. adoration. adorn. adorned.
advance. advancement. advantage. aduantagious. aduentur. aduenturous. aduerb.
aduerbiall. adverse. adversary. adversity. aduertis. auertis-ment. D^.
advise. Distinct. advise. advised. advisedly. adulation. adultery. Enfr.
adulteror. aduoutrer. aduoutrie. adulterate. advocate. aduocatio^. Enfr.
aduouson. aduow. Afaire. Enfranc. affairs. aferd. affable. affability.
affect. affection. affectate. affectation. affinity. affirm. affirmation.
affirmative. affirmance. afflict. affliction. afford. affy. affyance.
affyanced. afraie. afraid. Contr. afraied. afresh. after. afterdeal. afterward.
afterwit. afterwise. Again. against. agar. aghast. age. aged. agent. agew.
agewish. aggrauate. aggrauation. aght. agilitie. aglet. agnail. ago. agony.
agreat. agree. agreeable. agreement. agrees. agreued. Ah. Aid. ail. ails. ailwood.
aimount. air. Ache. aker. aching. Comp^. a-king. aketh. Comp. i^ quik. a-kith.
akin. Alabaster. alate. alacrity. al-arm. Enfran. Helas. Enfran. alas. alb.
albeit. aldertre. alderman. aldermanbe^rie. ale. alehouse. alepot. alepoll.
alestake. aleworm. alength. alegant. alien. alienation. aliened. aliend.
Contract. alienate. alice. alce. Contract. alike. alive. all. allin although.
alwaie. almost. alnage. alnager. aln. aun. alhail. alphabet. allege.
allegory. allegorical. allegiance. allegation. allie. allote. allotement.
allow. allowance. allure. allurement. ally. alliance. almanak. almarie. Enfran.
aumrie. alms. Enfran. aums. almoner. Enfran. amner. aloft. alom. alone.
alonesse. along. aloud. alouf. alter. alteration. altercation. Am. ame. amase.
amassed. amber. ambergreace. ambition. ambitious. ambiguitie. ambiguous. amble.
amen. amend. amends. amendment. amerce. amercement. amiable. amiabilitie.
a^mis. amiss. Distinct. amity. among. amongst. amorous. ample. amplify.
amplification. An. ane. anatomy. anatomicall. anchoue. ancient. ancientie.
ancle. ancom. and. andiron. aneal. anger. angel. angine. angle. angler.
angerlie. angry. angrilike. anguish. anchor. Enfranch. anchor. ane. annis sede.
animate. anniuersarie. annuitie. annual. anoie. anoiance. anoint. anon another
answer answerable. antem antichriste. antidote. antedate. antique Enfranc.
antik antiquity antiquarie anuile Ape. apase apaid apart apish. a^ple apostat
apostacy aposteme. apostemation apostle apostleship. apostlelike Compo^.
apostolik Deriuat. apothecarie appall appald Contatct. appalled apparel appare
apparent appearance appeach appeal appear appearance appertain appertinence
appertinents E^. appurtnance appetite apply application* appoint appointment
appose apposour Enfran. apposer apposition approbation approach appropriation
approve approuements apt aptness apern Arbor arbiter arbiterment arbitrarie
arche ar'changel Enfr. arkangel archbishop archbishoprik archduk archer
archerie archpirate argent argew argument argumenting arise arithmetik
arithmeticall arc arling arm The qualifying e, arm armd Contract. armed
armehole armepit armor armorer armarie Enfranc, armorie arraie arraign arras
Enfran. arrasse arrerage arrest arrive arrow arrival ars arssmart Com.
arsieuersie arseter art A noun. art A verb. artichok artificer artificial
article articulate artillery As soon as Distin s, z, ascend ascension ascent
Distinct. assent ascertain ash ashen ashes ashd Contra. ashamed asked axt
Contract. askew a-skew Comp. aside a-squint asquare aslepe as much a-smuch Comp.
asp aspen aspire aspiration aspirat aspirt asunder assure assail assalt ass
assehead Comp. assemble assembly assents assentation assets Enfran. assiduous
assiduitie assign assignation assignement asseidge assise assistence
assistants assuage associate association assomon as soon assouth assure
assurance astonish astond Contract. astonished astraie astrolabe astronomy
astronomicall At at-once Comp. atonement attach. attachement attainder attaint
attempt attend attendance attendant attendants atte^ntiue attire atturnie
atturnment attribute attrap Auail. auailable. auance. auant. auantage. avarice.
auburn. audience. auditor. audit. auditorie. audible. avenge. auengement.
auentur. The qualifying, e. vvanting. auentured. aver. Enfra. auerme^t.
augment. augmentation. aunt. avoid. auoydance. auow. avouch. auowrie. author.
authority. autentik. Ensranth aute^ticall Aw. away. await. awake. awares.
award. a-wry Ax. axt. Contract. axletre. Azure. Enfran. azure.
B
Baie. bab. babe. babie. babble. Distinct. ba^ble. bablatiue. bablest. babledst.
Contract. bach. bachiler. bacon. baken. bad. b^dst. Contract. baddest. badge.
badger. bag. bagd. Contract. baggage. bagpipe. baiard. bail. bailif. bale.
bain. bat. bate. bak. bake. baker. bakbite. bakfrind. bakster. bakt. Contr.
bakward. balace. balad. bald. balk. balm. ball. ballet. balance. baldpate.
bamberie. ban. bane. band. banddog. bandog. bandie. bang. bandgdst. Contract.
bank. banquet. bankrupt. Enfran bankrout. banner. bannish. bannishment. baptism.
Eufranch. baptim. baptize. baptist. bar. bare. barb. barbary. barbarism.
barbarous. barbell. barber. barbd. Contract. bard. bardge. bardgemen.
bareness. bargin. bark. barker. barking. barlie. barelie. baron. barn.
barnacle. barrel. barren. barriers. barrister. barretter. barrow. barter.
basse. base. bashful. bashfulnesse. basil. basilisk. ba^sin. basket. bastard.
bastardie. baste. bastid. basting. bat. batting. bate. bating. battable.
batable. battle. batle. batlemente. batter. battered. batterd. Contr. as.
children battred. battring. battrie. bath. bathe. batfoul. batsoulling. Did.
batfoulling. bauin. baube. baud. baudie. baudrie. baudkin. baudrik. baw. baw,
waw^. baum. bauk. Be. bees. beach. beads. beadle. beagle. beak. beaken. beam.
bean. bear. bearbreche. beard. bearfoot. beast. beastly. beat. beaten.
beautify. beautiful. became. beche. bechap. bechapt. bechid. bechide. bed.
bedding. bedred. bedlem. Did. bedlame. bethlem. befe. befall. befell.
befallen. befaln. Contr. befile. befilth. before. beg. begd. began. beget.
begile. beggar. beggerie. begone. begummed. behalf. behave. behauior. behead.
beheaded. behilt. behind. behold. behap. behoof. behoue. being. bek. bell.
bellweather. belch. beldame. belefe. believe. belly. belly. bellous. bellow.
belong. he-long. below. bells. belt. beloved bench. bencher bend. beneath.
benet. benefice. beneficial. beneficiarie. benefit. benjamin. benign.
benignity. bent. bequeath. bequean. bequiken. berate. bear. bereue. bereft.
brie. beriall. beuerwik. berwik. ^tract bereued. berent. beseech. beseme.
beset. beseidge. beside. besides. beshrew. besmear. besom. besought. bespit.
bespew. bespoild. best. bestad. bested. bestow. bet. beat. betanie. betake.
bethink. betoken. betook. betle. betroth betrothed betraie better between beuie
beware bewail bewitch Deriuat bewraie bewrap beyond Biace bib bi^ble Distinct.
bible bich bichrie bid bide biden big bigamie Enfran bigger biggin bigness
bikker bikkering bikring Contract. bill bile billet billement Enfran billing
bin bind bindding bing birch bird birder birdli^e birt birth bissie biscot
Enfran. biscuit bishop bit bite bitter bitterly bitterness bittor Blab
blabberlip blade bladder blake blak blakkish blame blame whorthie blane blanch
blank blanket blase blasing blaspheme Enfr. blasfeam. blasphemy blast blasted
bleath bleacht Con^ract. bleaching bleak blear bleareje bleat bled blede blek
bleke blemish blend blew blind blindness blindfild blink blinks blirt bliss
blissing blister blok blokkish blood, bloody blossom blot blote blow bloun
blubber blunt blur blush bluster blustering blustering Co^ Bob bobbins bode
body bodkin boisterous bold bolt bolster bolstered bone bonet bond bondage
book boot booty bore borne borrow bo bosom bosse boste e, Orignal bosting bot
bote both botes boteman botche botcher. botle bottom bottomless bounty
bountiful boun boult bourd bourder bour bouth bought Distinct. bought bow
Distinct. bow bows Distinct. bows boll boul bowels bowlls bowcase bowling
bounsing box boxtre boy boyrie boyer Brable brabler brace bracer bracelet
brache brag bragget braid braie brain brainsik brak brake brakkish bramble
bramlin bran brancb brand brandish brankursine brazen brasier brasill brass
brast brat brave bravery brall braun breach bread break breakfast breast
breastplate breath bream brear breche brechelesse bred breadth bread brefe brend
brent breath brevity brew brewer brewhouse brewis bribe briberie brible brable
bride bridegroom bridemaid bridge bridgehouse bri^dle brigandine bright
brightness brik briklaier brikle briklenesse britle britlenesse brim brimstone
brine bring brink brionie bristle broche broad broderie broil brok broke broker
broken brokket brooch brood brook broth Distinct. brothell brother brought brow
broun brouse bruise bruised brush brust brusten brute brutish Buble bucle k.
bucler bucled bud budge budget buf buffet bufle bug buggerie bugle buglosse buk
bukket bukstall bull bullace bulbating bulfinch bullion bulls bullok bulrush
bulwark bum bums bumbase bumbaste bumbacie bun bunch bundle bungle bungler
bungerlie bunting bur burden burgen burgess burn burnd burnt burnell burnet
burnish burrage borough burst bursten bush bushel buskin busse bussard
bustard but buts butcher butler butter butterie butterfly buttresse buttok
button butwin buz By byer bypath bywaie byword
C
Cabin cabinet cabbish cable cade cadence Enfran. caf caffaie cage cagebird
cake cak call calamity caldron calender calf calm came came cambell camel
camfear camomile camp campish campion can cane canell cancel canker cankerd
Contra. cankered candle candlestik canon canonise canopie Enfran. conopie
canuasse Contract. canuast can Contract. cape cap capemerchant capable
capabilitie capacity capers caper capparison capper capering Contract. capring
capital capitulate capon O, passant caponise capitane Contract captan captious
captive captivity captiuate cappid Contract. capt capricorn car care
carbonarie Enfr^ carbuncle carcass card Contract card Deri. carding cardinal
careful carfull carfulness carell carn caret cark carkenet carry carier
carriage carle carmelite carnage carnal carnalitie carnation carawaie carowaie
carp carpet carpetknight Com carpenter carpentarie cart cart carting carter
carterlike carterlie carue caruer caxton case cased cast Contact. cast cash
casht cask casket cassok castrel keistrell castle casual casualitie Contra.
casualtie cat cate catch catchpoll cater caterpiller caterwalling catle caudron
cave cauetie cavil cauillation cauiller caucob caudle Enfran. chaudale cause
causer causie cautele cautelous caution Cease ceder cell cellar cellarage
celestial celebrate celebration celebritie celeritie celibate censure censor
censer center centrie centurion ceremony ceremonial ceremonialitie certain
certained certify certifying certificat certification certiorare Enfra cesment
Of census Enfran. cestern Enfran. chaf chafe chafer chafing dish chafering
house chain chalice challenge chalenger chalk chalk pit. cham chamber chamber
lane chamlet. champ champertie champion chamfering chandler change channel
chanon chance chancell chancemedlie chancellor chaw chauntrie chaunter chaunt
chap chape chapel capellan Estfran chaplane chaplet chapman chaps chapter
Contract. chapter chair charact charcole chard Enfr. chard charity charitable
charge charger chark charie chariot charet charetter Contra. charter charm
charter charterhouse charterpatent charnell chaste Contr. chaste chastity
chastis chastisment chat chatter chaufinch chaldron cheap cheapen cheer
cheerful cheerfulness chearie cheat cheat bread chief chefetain Enfran. chek
cheke chekker chekmate cherie cherish cherubin cheripin Enfran. chese chesse
chestnut Enfran. chestane chest chested cheuen cheuorn chew chewed Contract.
chewd chewet chibboll chichlie chid chide chiden chik chiken chiks chikens
chikwede chill child childish childer childeren Contra. children childern
chiltern chiluer chime chimer chimere Enfran. chin chine chincowgh chink chip
chipt Contr. chipax Conf. chirch chirchyard chirchwarden chirching chirograph
Enfran. chirp chirn chit chitterling. chittie wren chok choke choler cholerik
cholericall chough chop chose choice choks choplotche choplogik. chomlie chrism
Christ christian christened Contract for christened chronicle chub chuf chuk
chune churl churlish choose. chux Ori chuks Plural Cicle cygnet Enfran. cifer
cifering cimball Efran. cinnamon cipresse cypress Enfran circle circuit
circumlocution circumcise circumcision circumference circumspect circumstance
cisers cite city citation citisen citern citron civil civility Clad clak
claker claie clame clam clammie clamor clamorous clamp clampor clang clap
clapper claret clarion clarify clark Enfran clerk clasp clash clat clatter
clatter basket claue clauicord claw clawbak clause clean clemency clenlie
cleanliness clear cleared cleave cleft cleg cleanse clergy clew client clif
clift clim clime climate clinch cling clinge clink clip clister Enfran. glister
clod clog cloie cloied cloister clok cloak close close closet clot cloth clothe
clothes clothyer cloue cloven cloun clounish cloud clout club clubbish clubhead
clung clumperton cluster clutter Cob coble cobbler cobhead cobunt cobweb
cocatrice cokle cod codpece cof coffin cofer cofret coferer. cog cogger coif
quaif quait coyt coin coiner cok coks Plural Sing. cokes cokall cokker
cokkering cokkrell cokkish cokfight coknie cokneg colander colap culler cole
cold collet. Enfran. collect colerak. colyer col collect collector college
collegiate college collection collectarie collation collusion colmouse colt
coltish columbine colie colebrand colewort com come comecase command
commandment combat without. combatting comedy commence commencement commend
commendation commendable comment commentary comete commit commission
commissarie commodious commodity common commonaltie community communicate
communication compact compare camparison compassion compatible compatibilitie
compear compel compendious compendiarie competitor compile complain complaint
complexion accomplices compound compose compost composition comprehend
comprehension comprehensible comprise compromit compromis compulsion conceal
concealment conceit conceive concent consent concern concerning conception
conclude conclusion concord concordance concubine concupiscence concur condemn
condemnation condescend condition conditional conditionally conduct Enfran.
cundit confection confects Enfran. cumfits confederate confederacy confer
conference confess confession confidence confirm confirmation confiscate
confiscation conflict confound confute confutation confuse confusion congeal
congeald Cont. congregate congregation congrew congruitie congrewence conjure
Distin. without e, coniur coniurer coniuration coniurate coniect coniectour
coniectur coniecturall conquest conquer conscience consecrate consent
consequence conserve conservation consider consideration consist consistory
consolation consorte consort conspire conspirator conspiracy constant
constancy constrew conster Contr. constrain constraint construction consume
consummation consumption consult consultation contagion contagious contain
contents contend content contentation contentment contempt contemn contentions
contention contemptuous contemptible continue continewance continent continence
continency contract contraction contradiction contrary contrary contrariety
contribute contribution contriue contrite contrition controversy control
controller conueie conueiance convert convert conversion conuertible convict
convent conuention conuenticle convocation conuocate convulsion cook cookold
coop cooper cop copt cope coped copt Contf. copartner coparcener coparcenerie
copy cople coplement copihold copious copper coppresse coptank coral courage
core cord cordwaner coriander cork cormerant corn corner cornet cornish
coronall corpse corse corporal corporation corpulent correct correction
correspondent correspondence corroborate corslet corrupt corruptor corruption
cosen cosinage cost costemarie costif costifnesse costard costerdmunger cotage
cote coten couch covent couin coueie covenant cover covert couerlet covet
covetous coul could color counsel council counselor count counter
countenance counterfeat counterfeit counterpoys counterpoint counterchange
countercharge counterchek countermand countermure country cour course court
courtyer cow coup cout coward cowheard cowslip Crab crable cradle craft crafty
craftsman crak crake craknell crakle crag craggie cram cramp crampiron cramok
campring crank crane cranecol^r craneshank crash crase crased cratch crave
crauen Monosyl ^issillab. crauin crall creast creak creed credence credit
creditor credible credulity credulous crepe creper crept cresses creuis crew
crewell creuet crib crible criell criket crikle crime criminatorie crimosin
criple crisp cristall cristalline cringer cringe crok crocodile crop cropped
croke crooked cross crosbow crowtoes cro crow crowd crouder croup crouk croun
crouner crouch crucify crucifix cruches crud cruds crule crum crup crupper
cruse crush chrusht crust cry crying crier Cub cube cubit cucumber cudgel cud
cuf cukcow cull culpable culuer culuering cum cumlie cumber cumbersom
cumlinesse cumfort cumfortable cumpanie cumpanion cumpas cumpases cumpassed
cumpast Cun cunning cunger cup cupboord cur cure curb curle curate curace
curious curifauor currie currier current currish cursed cursed courtesy Deri.
curtsie curtin curtain curtall custard cushion custom. customer. customarie cut
cute cutpurse cutthrote cutler cutlerie cursorie
D
Dab dable. dace dad daddie daffadill dag dagle dagtail dagletail day daily
dainty dale dam dame damn damnation damp. dampt Con damask damosel Contract
damsel damosen Enfran. Contract damson dampish damage dance dancing dandie
danger. dandle dank dankish dapper dar dare dark darkness darling dearling
darnell darte dasle dash dasie dastard date daw daub daunt daughter daun
dauniug Deacon deaf deafness deal dean deanrie dear dearling death debate
debase. debar debonair decaie decadence Enfran. deceive deceit decease deceased
decaiuer decem^rat decent decency decide decision decifer decifring Contra.
decifering declame declamation declamatorie declare declaration dicline
declination Ensra. declenson decoct decoction decease decrease decre decrees
deed ded dedicate dedication deduct deduction deface defalt defame defamation
defamatorie defeat defeasance defect defend defense defensible defile deflour
defraie defraud deformd deformity defy defyance define definite definitive
degree degrees degrade degradation deity deify deification deirie deintie a^
dekt dek dealt dele delight deliver delaie delicate delectable delectation
delegate delue deluer delude deluge Enst delusion deem demain demand demean
demeanor demolish demur demure deem den denison denounce denuntiation dent
dented deny denial deep depth depart departure depend deponent depose
deposition deprave deprive deprivation deputy depute dear deride derision
derive deriuatiue deriuation derth descant describe description desert Distinct
desert deserve desire desirous desist desk desolate despare desperate
desperation despise despite despitefull destiny destinate destitute destroy
desultorie det detain detect detection detinew determ determine determination
detest detestable detract detriment divide devise Distinct devise devil
devotion prop. devour devout dew dewtie dewie dewlap dexterity Diadem dial
diamond diamant diameter diaper dialog dible die Deri. dice did didopper diet
differ Distinct. differ difference different difficulty diffue diffuselie dig
digest digestion dignity digress digression dill dilate dilatorie dilatation
dilapidation diligence diligent dim dimmie dimnesse diminish Der. diminution
dimilance din dine dingle dint diocese diocesiane dip diphthong Enfran.
difthong direct direction dirige Enfran. dirt disagre disagrement disallow
disanker disanull disard disappoint disburden descend descent dissent
dissension discharge discern disciple disple discomsort discumfit discumfiture
discord discrete discretion discontinew discontinuance discountenance discourse
discourage discouragement discuss disdain disdainful disease disenherit
disfigure disfigured disfranchis disgrace disgise dish dishclout dishonest
disloyal disloyalty dismiss dissinisse dismes Enf. decimae dismaie
dismaldaie dismantle dismember disobeie disobedience disorder disparage
disparagement dispatch dispark dispend dispense dispensation disperse disperple
dispeple dispaie dispose disposition displease dispraise dispossess dispute
disputation disquietnesse disquiet dissemble dissimulation dissolve dissolute
dissoluteness dissonant distaf distance distill distinguish distinct
distinction distress distrain distribute distribution dissuade disuse disunion
disuniting dissie dizzie disworship ditie diue diverse diversity diuerticle
divine divination divinity divorce diuorcement division Do do dok dokket
doctor doctrine docilitie dodg dog dodkin dole dolt dolfin dominion dook doom
doomesdaie don door dor dormouse dortor dormitorie dosen dote doterell
Contract. dotrell does dotage dorniks dove dow dowry dout doulasse down
dounward dought doughtie Drab draf drad drag dragon draiman drake draw drank
dram draper draw draught drawlatch dread dream dred dredge dregs drench dress
dresser drigh drive driuil drift drink drip drippingpan drone drop dropsy
dross drove droun drousie drought drunk drunken drudge drumbledorie drum
drumslade dry Dub duble dublet duk duke dug duchy dull dulcimer dullard dump
dumpish dun dunstable dung dunghill dungeon dure durance during dust dustie
dusk duskish Dwarf dwell dweller dwale Die dyer
E
E, making the first sillab alone is a latin preposition, as edict, eue^t. The
affinity between, e, and ye quik i, causes a duble search in the table,
intent, or intent Eager eagerly eagle ean early earl earn ear earnest earth
earthie ease easy easment east easter eat eaues eawe Eb Each echone each echer
eclipse ecclesiastical Eddie edgeling edict edify education Effect effectual
effeminate efficacy eftsoon Eg eglantine egresse Eye eien eiebrie eight
eightene eighty either Ell ele elbow elder elect election electuarie elegant
elegancie elephant Enfran. elefant eleven element elementarie elicampane elm
elf elues eluish eloquent eloquence else elsewhere Ambassador embassage embasie
embosse embrace embrew embroder embroderer embush embushment embuscado emrods
Enf aimorhords emmet empare emperor empire empeach emplant employ employment
emply empouerish empouerishment empoison emprison empty emptiness Enchant
enchantour enchantment enclose enclosure incline encounter encourage increase
encroche end endless endeavor endew endif endite endited enditement endow
endowment enduce enemy enimitie enforce enform enfranchis enfranchisment
inflame engender engine engrate engraf engrosse engroser enlarge enioin enough
enjoy enquire enquest enrage enrich enroll enrolment ensample enseam entangle
entend intent enter Enfran. enter enterred entered entire entered enterfear
entermedle enterprise entertain entice enticement entrance entrap entralls
entreat entreatie enuiron enure envy envious Epitaph epitome epistle epicure
Equity eqnall equality Er erand erect erection error erroneous escape escheat
escheater eschew especial espy esquier establish estate esteem estimation
estimate estrange Eternal eternity Evangelist evangelical eve even euensong
evening ever everlasting every euirate euict euiction euocation evident
evidence evil Ew ewbow eawer Enfr. eawrie euet Contr. eut Exact exaction
exaltation examine examination example excede excel excellent excellence
excellency except exception exchange exchekker exclame exclamation
excommunicate excommunication excuse excuse execrable execute execution
executour executour exempt exemption exemplify exemplifycation exercise exhibit
exhibition exhort exhortation exigent exile expedient expedition expel expend
experience expert expect expectation expenses expire expiration explicate
explication expound exposition express expulsion exquisite extend extenuate
extenuation extol extort extortion extract extraction extreme extremity
F
Fable face fact factor faction factious facility fade fadom fadge fafle faggot
fail fain faint fained Contr. fair fairing farie faith faithful faithfulness
fall falconer false falsify falsehood fallow falter falt faltlesse fame famous
family familiarity familiarlie familiar famine famish fan fane fantsie
Contract. Eufran fantasy fantastik Enfra. fantastical And why not with f,
and yet the originalls be with ph? farse farding fardle farcie fardingale
Enfr. verdingale far fare farewell farrow farm farmor fashion fast fasten
fastening fasting fat fate fates fatal fact farther fawcet favor favorite
fauburg faun Fe fees fealty feather feasant ph. Enfran fear fearful feast
festival festinitie feat fever feauerfew feeble fed feed fefment field fell
feel feldifare felmonger felon felony fellow fellowship fells felt female
feminine fen fend fenell fenelstalk fense feodarie fern ferret ferrar ferie
fertle Enfran. fertile fertility fervent feruencie festew festur fet fete
fetter fetch few fewterer fuel Ficle fidle fidlingstik fire fiery fierce
fifth fiftene fifty fig figur figurative fight fill filberd file filet fillie
filch filth filthy filthiness filthilie fin fine fines sse. finesse finers
finally finch find finder finger finish fir firm firmament first fish
fishmonger fist fiste fisle fit fitches fitchew five fixed Contra. flag flagon
flake flaile flame flamflew flanell flank flang flap flaps flash flatter flask
flasket flaw flawn flax fle flees flea fleam flear flece flecher fleming flesh
fleshook Con. flete fleting flexible fly flew flidge flight flikkering fling
flint flindermouse flitch flit flite flitting fliting flix flok flote flourish
flounder flout flour flow flud fluke flute flux fly Fo foder fog foggie foil
foin foins foist fool folly folk fold follow four fond fondness food footman
foot for fore forbear forborne forbid forthought forethought forfit forfiture
forget forgive forgiveness forgiven forsake forsaken forsoot'h for-soot'h
forspeak forslow forthink forward forswear forsworn fore foren forecast
forethought forehead foredeal forese forespeak forestall foretell forethink
foreward forage force forceable forcible forcet fork forell form form former
formal formalitie forest forester fornication forman foreman foreset forced
fort forty forth fortress fortify fortification fortun fortunate fortnight
foster fostered foul four found founder fountain fox Fraie frail frailty
fragments frait frame frank franion franch franchis franchisses frankincense
frantik fraternity fraud fraudulent fraught fre frehold frekle frekled fredom
frenzy frese fretish friend frequent fresh fret freat fridaie fringe frind
frindship frisle frisk friskaie friter frivolous fro frog frok frolik from
front frontlet froun frounce froward frost frosen froth frustrate fruit
fruterer frump fry fryingpan Fugitive full fulfill fuller fulmart fulsom fume
fumble fumish fumitorie funeral fundation funell furbish furbisher forth
further furmentie frumentie fur furnish furniture fury furious furlong furnace
furnesse furrow furtherance fustiane future
G
The strong g, before, e, and i, in English is warra^ted by the like in the
greek tung Gaie gaie gable gable gab gag gage gagle gain gainful gainstand
gainsaie gale galedeliuerie galerie galiemaufrie gallant gallous galie galon
gallop gall gald galdbak game gambold gamon gander gant gap gape garbage
garbish garble garboil garden gardener guardian gargle garish garland garlik
garment garnish gardnape garnet garner garter gaunt gauntlet gase gash gasp gat
gate gatehouse gather gangrell gave gaud gaudie Geat gek geld gelding gelie
geloflour gelosie gentle gentleman gentleness gentilitie gentry general
generality generation genet gender genealogy german germander guess gest
gesture gese gesling Gib giblet gibe giant gide giddie giddiness gift gill
gill gig gig gigle giglet gilt guilty gild gimlet gimew gin ginger gird girdler
girdle girk girl girn girkin girth girdiron gise gittern give 1 Genesis give
Glabber glad glade glase glass glance glaiue glean gle glede glide glister
glitter glory glorious gloss gloss glove glouer gloom glow gloworm gluton O,
passant glut glutonie Gnash gnat gnaw gnawing gnible Go gobet goblet God good
goddess godly godliness godfather godmother gogs gogleeie gold goldsmith
good goord gouse gorbellie gore gorgeous gorget gosse gosehauk gosling gossip
Enfran. gospel gospeller got got gotten gole ghost govern governor government
goun Grab grable grace gracious gradation grade graduate graf graie grain
grammar grandam grandfather grape graper graple grass grashoper grase grasp
grate grater gratify gratification grave grauie gravel gravity grand grant
grease great greihound gredie gredinesse grefe greek greece grene grenesse great
grieve grievous grew grewell grig grim grime grin grind grindstone gripe griffin
grisle grisling grisly groce groan groom grope grote grow gross grove
Distinct groueling ground groundsell grub grudge gruell grunt gruntle Gubbins
gudgin gull gullie gulf guerdon Enfran. gulliegut gum gun gunshot gunner
gunpowder gurnard gut gutter
H
H, is so gently pronounced, or rather so not ^pnou^ced in our tung, as many
words, which begin with it, may be sought for by there first vowell, rather
then h, onelesse the original be well known, as honest, humble, honor,
hostage, etc. which sound upon the, o, not aspirate Hab or nab habit habitable
habitation habergen had had haddok hag haggesse hak hake haknie haie heinous
haifer Enfran. haidow hail hailstone hat hate haiting hating hale hallow half
halfpenie halt halter haltersik halting hall hallowes ham hame hammer hamper
hanch hand handidandie handle handsome handful handmaide handicraft handgun
hang hanger hangman hap happy happen hapt Contract happed harbor hard
hardness hardy hardiness hardly hardilie hardhead hare harebrain hark
harlot harletrie harm harmfull harmony harness harp harper harsh heart hearty
harold harth harrow harrower harvest haste ha^st Con. hasty hastier hasp hasle
hasard hasardous hassok hastings hastiness hatch hatchet hatching hat hate
hatred hated have haven hauok haunt haw hawes hauk hauberd halberd hautie
hawthorn He hebrew head headdie headstall headpece headlong heal heap hear
hearsaie heard heardman hearing heat heath heathen heaven heave head hedelesse
hedge hedgehog heir height hell hele health helthfull helm helmet help hem
hemlok hemp hen hens Plural hence henhouse henbane henceforth herb herbinger
herbage here heresy heretical hring heritage hern hernshaw heuie heuinesse
hew Hichel hikwaie hikow hire hireling hid hide hiden hideous high highness
highwaie hikop hill hills hilding hilt him hymn Ensran. himn hind hind hinder
hinge hingel hip hipache Co^ hipocrite Enfran (...) hipocrase hipocrise hisope
hiss (...) his hist history hit hither hitherward hiue Ho hob hobbie hoble
hodge hog hogrell hoist hoistings hole holy holiness hollow holsom hold holt
home homage homely homeliness honey honicome honisucle honest honor honorable
honorablenesse hood hoodmanblind hoof hook hookvnhappie hoop hooping hoor hoors
hop hope hops hopper hopping hoping horehound horie horinesse horse horse
horsman horsleche horn hornet horrible hose hosen hospital hostage hostice
hospitality host hostility hot hot hotchpot hovel houl house house houses
houer houering houseleke how hound houlet Hukle huklebone hukster hudle huge
hug humble humility hum hah hung hunger hundred hunt hunter hunting hurl
hurdle hurlieburlie hurlewind hurlepoul hurlepit hurlebat hurrie hurt hurtefull
husband husbandry husshir hush hushed husse us hutch Hy
I
The first person alvvaie great There is great kindred between the weak, g, and
i, the consona^t and therefore theie entercha^ge oftimes both sound and place,
and so in the table may cause searching in both the letters. Iaie jade iacinct
iag iak iakdaw iakket iakes iail iailor iangle iangling iar iarring iauelin
iaundis iawbone iauell iaw Idiot idle idleness idolatry Ieat ieloous ielosie
iepard iepardie iepardous jest Iocus. ieaster ieasting iesses iet ietter jew
jewel jewish If Ignorant ignorance ignominy ignominious Ill Contr. evil i will
I will ild illed illegitimate illegitimation illation illure illurement
illusion illness Image imagine imagination imbers imbring imbard imbarg
immediate immediately imitate imitation immoderate immortal immortality
immunitie imp impacient impacience impatible impediment imperial imperfit
imperfection impenitent impertinent impertinence implement impiety import
importance impose imposition impost impossible impossibility impostume Enfra*
aposteme impostumation impouerish imprenable imprison imprisonment impudent
impudence impure impugn impute impunitie impropre improprietie improperation
immanitie importun importunate importunity implicate implicatiuelie imperious
In Great affinity between, en, in and un, enquire, in quisitio^ unquiet.
incense' incense inch incident incle incling incline inclination incommodious
incommoditie incompatible incompatibilitie incongrew incongruitie inconstant
inconstancy incontinent inconvenient inconvenience incur incumber incurable
indet indemnitie indentur indent indignity indifferent indifference
indignation indite indictment induce inducement indurate induct induction
inequall Com inequality inexcusable infamy infamous infancy infant infect
infection infer inferior inferioritie infernal infirmity inflammation infinite
infinity influence information ingredience inhabit inherit Enf. inheritance
iniquity inhibition inhibit inholder iniunction injury injurious ink inmost
Cont. innermost inmate inner innocence innocence innocent innouate innovation
inordinate inordinatelie inquire inquisition inrode inspire inspiration
instigation institute institution instruct instruction instrument intention
intercede intercession interchange interchangeable inter interring interest
interlace interline intermedle intermingle interpret interpretor interrupt
interuption entitle intricate introduction intrude intrusion invade invasion
inueagle invent invention inventory invincible inward in-ward John Ione Jonas
iog ioin joint iolie iolitie ioll iolt journey iouk iounse joy joyous Irchin
iron irruption irreuocable irreprehensible Is ise Israel israelit ishew It
itch itching Judge judgment judicial iudiciallie iug iuggler iugglerie juice
iunket iump iumper iurate jury iurers just justice justify justify
justification iustificatorie iusting iuie iuorie
K
Keie keam kearsie kele ken kenell kecle keep kept keeper kerchefe ketle ketler
kibe kibie kid kidgell kidnie Kik kill kilderken kin kindred kinsman kind
kindeship kine kindness kindle king kingdom kirchian Enf. Christian kirnell
kirtle kiss kit kite kith kitling kitching kiuer kiuering Knab knable knak
knag knap knave knauerie kne knede knele knell knew kneuet knife knight knit
knok knoll knot know knowledge known knukle knur knurrie
L
Labell labor laborer laborious laborsom lace laces lad lade lady ladle laden
lag lay laitire laid lak lake lam lame lament lamentation lamentable lamp
lamprie lampurn lane land lank language languish lantern lap lapper lapwing
lapidarie large largeness largess largis lard larder larderhouse lark larding
lare lasie lasinesse lascivious lash lashes lask last lasting lastage late
lately lat lath latin lat-in latch latchet latter later lauer lavish lauender
laue laun lance launceknight launcher laundresse laundrie law lawyer lawless
laud laugh laughter laurel lax laxatiue laskatiue Le lead leading lease leace
leaf leag leak lean leam leap leapyere learn learning least leather leare
lechery lecherour lecherous led lefe left leg legion legionarie legier dumain
leg acie legate leke lemon leman leither leugth lent leper leprosy leperhouse
lose less lesing lessen let let lettis letter lettern leuin level levy
leuitie leueret lewd libell libard liberal liberality liberty libertine
library lice license licencious licenciousnesse licoras licorish licorishnesse
life lift lifter light lightning lightness lik like likewise likeness
likelihood likely lightly lilie limbek lim lime limetwig limit limitacion
limiter limp lin line lingell linen lining ling link linet lint lion lioness
lip lipsalue list listen lether little lite liter live lend liver liuerie
lively liveliness living liuering liuerwort lisard Ly liar Lo lob lobcok
lobie lobster loche locust lode lodestone laden lodge lodging lofe loft lofty
loftiness log logiciane logik lok lokeram loin lol lome lone long longing
longer look look loop loom lop lope loophole lord lordship lording lose
losenge loss lossell lost lot lotarie lo* the Did. lo the love Did. love
loving Did. loving loun lout loutish lowly low lowliness loud loudle lour
louse Part Verb. louse loyal loyalty loyter loytering lubber long lugpudding
luk lukkie luke lukewarm lull lullaby lumber lump lumpish lunatik lungs lung
sought lurdon lurch lurcher lurk lust lusty lusk luskish lustiness
luskishnesse lute
M
May mace macrell mad made madder madness maid maidenlie mail maim main
mainlie majesty mairaltie mayor Enf. mair maintain maintenance mainprise
mahound magik magicien magical maioram magistrate magnanimity magnificall
magnificence make maker mal mall male mallet malapert malice malicious
maliciously malcontent malefactor malt maltworm malmesie mam mammering man
mane manch mangepresent mannish manly manlinesso manchet mandilion mandrag
mankiller manner manicle manifest manifold manger mangler manor manure manering
Di^. manuring manuarie mantle manumise manumission maple mar mare marble mart
march marches marie marriage marigold mariner marie marmset mark market marlin
marchpane margent marginall marle marle marmelade marquess marsh Cont. marish
marshes marshall marshalled martial martnet martyr martirdom marvel marvelous
mash mase maser mass massy mason O passon. master Enf. the i not o^ or what
if best with? master mistress mastirship mistresship mast Conf. mast
masterfull mat mate matter material materialitie matrimony matrimonial
matresse matrice mattok match (...) maw mawworm mauks maukin maund maundie Me
meacok mead meal mean meanly measles measur measured mease meat mear mearce
mearsauce mearmaid mearstone meager meanaltie mede mediocritie medicin C^.
medcin meddle medler medlie mediator mediation meditate meditation meadow meke
meekness melancholy melody melodious melow melons melt member memory
memorial men mend meant mention mere Enf. merry mercy merciful mercifulness
mercer mercy mercerie merit meritorious merchant merch andise message messager
mesling met mete metle meke mere mewe Cat Ha^ mew mible mid middle midst
midnight midrif midwife midwaie mice micher mighty might mightiness mill mile
milion miller mi lt mild milk mildew mince mine min mining mineral mind
mindful mingle minikin minish minister ministry minority minstrell E^.
minstrelsie minster C^. monastery mint minut mir myrrha mire miracle
miraculous mirror mirth myrtle miss misaduentre msbeseme misle misleto
mischance mischefe mischeue misconster mischeuous misdede misfortun misfashion
misshapen misprision miser misery miserable mises mist mistie mistake mystical
mystery misdemeanor mistrust misuse Did. misuse mite miter mitigate
mitigation mixed mixture my Mo mobs mobilitie modest modesty model moderate
moderation modern modulate moh moist moystur moystnesse moil moild mole mold
moldie molten mome moment moan money month Co^. month monster monstrous
mondaie mood moodie moon moonish moot mooting moorn more morgage moorning
morning morfew morsel mortar mortal motalitie mortuarie mortify moss mossie
most mote moth motlie mother Did* mother motherwort mount mountain move mouse
Did. mouse mouser mousetrap mousehole mouth mouthing mouth mow Did. mowing
mow mowing mowers mowers much mud muddie mug mugwort musle mukender muk mule
mullet muletter mulberie multitude multiply multiplication mum mumchaunce
mummerie mun mungrell munk munkie munkish mure murder murrie murren murrion
murmur muse muses musing muscadell musk muscle mustard must mustie mustinesse
musik musical musician muster mutable mutabilitie mutter muttering mutation
N
Naie nab nake naked nakedensse nail nall name namely nape napery napkin
narrow nation national native nativity nature natural natch naue navy
nauicularie navigations nauil naught naughty naughtiness Neb ned near
nearness neat neatness nedie need nedelie nedelesse nedle nedles needs nece
necessity necessary necessarily nek nekband nekkeirchefe negligence
negligent neighbor neighborhood neither nether nest nestie nestle nestlecok
nese nesing netle net nete never neuew nevertheless new newfangle newness
next Nib nible nice nifle nigh nighole night nightcap nightrail nightingale nim
nimble nip niple nimblnesse nit nits nine ninety nineth No noble nobility
nobs nodie noie noisome noiance anoint nok non none nonage nonste nonsuit north
northerlie northeast nose nosegaie nosethrill not note notable notorious
notarie nothing notting notify nouic^ novelty now noun Number number numbles
nurse nurice nurrish nurriture nurture nusle nun nut nutriti^
O
Obaie obedience obeisance obedient object objection oblation obligation
oblique observe observation obstinate obstinacy obstacle obscure obscurity
obtain Occasion occasioned occupy occupation occident occidentall Od odious Of
offall offense offend offensive offer offering office officiarie official
officious officiousness offspring often often oftentimes Oh Oil oilie oiace
ointment oak okar Old olif olives Omit omnipotent omnipotency Onset on one
only once ones onelesse union Open openly operation opinion opitulate
opportunity oppose opposition oppress oppressed oppression Or ore orchard
ordain order ordinary ordinance ordure orange organes origin original
ornament orphan orphanism Osier ospraie ostridge estridge Oath other otherwise
otherwhere otes oten otemeal otepite otter Over oueragainst ouercharge ouercom
overcame ouercast ouerflow Distinct. ouerflow ouergrown ouerchastice ouerlaie
ouerly ouerlook ouermost uppermost overmuch overplus ouershoot ouerskip
ouerleap overthwart overtake overthrow overthrow ouerwhelm ought ow owing oul
own ounce our ours out outch outlaw outlawrie outwardly outrage ouslie Ox oxen
Oyster
P
Pay pase patience patient pacify pacificatorie paid page pageant pak pakker
pail payment paiable pain painful paint painter pale palace palate pallet palm
palmistrie palfrie palfrieman palsy pamper pamflet pan pancake panell panyer
pang pant pantrie panthere pantofle pap pape paper pare parcel paradise
paramour parchement parch parable parabilitie pardon O passant parent parentage
parget pargetter parish parishioner park parle E^sr. parliament parret part
partial partiality partialist partake partaker parting partisan partlet
particular particularitie partition partner partridge pash pasht pass passage
passion passover pasport past paste pastime pastie pastur pat pate patch
pattern patens patent path pathwaie patriarch patrimony patrimoniall patron
patronage paue pauiour pauement pauilion paw paws pause paucitie Peace peach
pease pear pearce pearcer pearcher pearl peal pearlesse peak peat peche pecok
peculiar pecuarie piece pedle peddler pedigre pek peg pele pelf pellet pelt
pellitorie pellicane pen pendhouse penthouse penalty penie pence pens pencill
penknife pennar people pensif pensive pensifnesse pensifull pensifulnesse
pension pensioner pensionarie pent penticost peper pere perbrak perboil
perelesse paraduentur perchance peremptory perfect perfect perfitnesse perforce
perform performance performd Con. peril perilous perish perjury perjured
permit permission perpetuity perpetual perplex perplexity persecute
persecution perslie persian person personage persuade persuasion pervert
perverse peruersitie perverseness peruse pestle pestur pestilence petie
petiecote peuish peevishness pettrel petition pew pewet pewter pewterer
Fantasy E^ why not all these with f? fantastical pheasant phisician
pharisie phisiognomie philip frenzy philosophy phoenix Pible picture pidler
pidle pig pigeon pik pike pikax pikle pikler pikerell Co^. pikrell pikthank
pilate pilote pill piles pillar pillerie pilgrim pilgrimage pilgrimsalue pild
pillow pilloubear pimple pimpernell pin pindust pine pineoke pine-aple pine-tre
pinnacle pinsers pinch pinchcrust pincase pinion pink pinsons pinace pint
pintepot pip pipe pipkin pir pirate piracie piss pismere pispot pit pittance
pitch pitchfork pitcher pitfall pith pithie piety Co^. pity piteous pitiful
pitifulness py pyed Placard place plage plagie play plaing plaint plaice
plane planelie plaintiff planet plank plant plantane plash plashie plaster
plasterer plat plate platter platform plea plead please pleasur pleasant pledge
plenty plentiful pleurisy pliant plight plite plouer plough plod ploche pluk
plum plume plummer plunge plural plurality ply Poet poetry poetical pok
poke poks pokes pokkie pokket point poison poll polcat polish policy pollute
pollution pomander pomell pomewater pomegarnet pomegranet ponds pondering
ponder pooll poor pope popish popery poppie poppisede popiniaie populous pore
pork porkpine porche porpace portion port portcullis porter portall portraict
portrature pose posnet posset possess possession postern post pot potinger
potage poringer porrage potle Deriuat Compound potled potlid potluk poutch
poverty pound poul power pout powder pounse poyse Practis practicioner pray
prayer praise prank prat prate pratle prating preach preamble prease prebend
prebendarie precious preferment prefixed predestinate predestination
predominant prejudice prejudicial preeminence prelate prenumire prepare
preparation preparatiue preposterous preposition prerogative present Distinct.
present presence presentment presentation prescribe prescription preserve
preservation president presidence presume presumption presumptious press
pretend pretense pretty preuail prevent price pride prig prik prikle prikket
prime primer primitive primerose prince principal phincipalitie principle
princely print printer prioritie prison prisoner private priuet privy
privilege privily priuitie pry probation probationer probate proceed
proceeding process procession proclaim proclamation procter procure procuration
procurement prodigal prodigality profer profit profitable profess profession
professor profound prognosticate prognostication progenitors progeny prohibit
prohibition proin prolong prolongation promis promising promote promotion
prompt promptness promptuarie prone pronounce pronunciation prop proper
property proportion propriety profane And* why not f. prophanism
prophanatio prophet prophecy prophetisse prose prosper prosperity prosperous
prostrate protect protector prove prouf proverb prouerbiall provide provision
provoke pronocation proud prouander proxy prowess provident prune prudence
prudent psalter psalm psalmist Puble publish publicatiou pudle pudding puf puffed
pug puissant puke pull pullet pullen pulter pullie pulpit pulse pump pumpion
punie punch punish punishment puppet pur pure purity purblind purchase
purchaser purfle purge purgatory purgation purple purpos purse purser pursue
purslaine purseruant Enf. pursiuant pursew persew pursuit purueie purueance
purueier push ptush puttok put putrify
Q
Quaf quaif quail quailer quaint quak quake quagmire quality quantity qualify
qualification quarrel quareller quarrie quarter quart quartern quartan quartpot
quartered quash quasie quaum quear queen queen quench quern querister quest
question questionist quib quible quiddenie quiet quik quiken quiklie quikbeam
quikned quill quilt quince quinsie quintessence quip quit quite quitch
quittance quippe quiver
R
Raie rabbet rabble radish radiant race rafter rag ragged raggedness rage rail
rale railour rain rainment rainbow rak rake raker rakehell rakket ram rammer
ramp rampire ran rane rancor rankle range ranger ransak ransom rape raper rap
rapt rapacitie raze raze raser rasen rascal rascalion rash rashness raspis
rat rate rather ratify ratification ratle rattling rave raven rauin rauelin
ravish rauishment raw rawnesse rawhead Reach real realtie realm ream read reap
reason reasonable restie rebate rbek rbell rebellion rebellious rebound rebuke
recant recantation rechlesse receive receipt recognisance recomfort recommend
recommendation recompense reconcile reconciliation record record recorder
recover recovery recourse recount recognize recoil recoiling recreate
recreation recuse recusant red ready readiness redeem redemer redemption
redress redisseason refection reflection refer reform reformation refrain
refresh refuge refuse refuse refusal refine referendarie regard regent
register regiment regrate regrater rehearse rehersall reject reioyn reioynder
reiterate reiteration reign reke reken rekning relation relapse relative rele
release relent rely relefe relice religious religiousnesse reliks remain
remainder remanent Enfran. Contra. remnant remedy remediable remember
remembrance remembrancer remit remission remedy remediless remorse remove
remount rend render rent rentall renet renate renegate renew renewing renouate
renouation renoum renounce repaie repaiable repare reparation reparatiue
repaste repeal repel repent repentance repine replead replenish reply
replication report repose represent representation reprehend reprehension
repress repriue reproach reprobate reprove reprouf repulse repugnant repugn
repute reputation request require requisite requite requital resemble
resemblance reserve reservation reskew resign resignation resist resistance
residew residence resolu resolute resolution resort resound respect respit
respective rest restie restitute restitution restauratiue (...) restoritie
restrain restraint retail retain retainer retentiue retire retinew retreat
retriue return reaue reueal revel reuells reuelling revenge reverence reuerse
reuersion revile revive reuince reuolue revolution rue rewm reward Rib ribald
ribaldrie ribaud rice rich riches rid ride ridle ridge rife rifle rift rig
right righteous righteousness rigor rigorous rim rhyme rinch rind rine ring
ringtail ringleader ringworm ringdow riot riotous rip ripe ripeness rite riue
river riuel riueled rise To robuk robbery rob robin readbreast robe roche
rochet rok rokket rod rode roge roging roist roister roial roialtie roll rolf
rome roming rope roper rore roaring rose rosen rosemarie roste rostemeat rot
rote roten roue rouers row roll rowell rout round rough rouse rousle roust Rub
rubbish rubber ruble rud rude rudder rug rugd ruffiane rufle ruin ruinous rule
ruling rumble rumor rump run runt rusht russe rust rusticall rustling
S
say sables sabbath sachell sacage sacced sacrify sacrament sad sadle sadler
safe safeconduit safron safety sag sage sagenesse said sail saint sak saker
sakker sakcloth sale sallet salmon salt salter salve salvation same sampier
sand sandblind sanctuary sap sappie sarcenet sat sacietie satisfitie
satisfaction saterdaie saturitie saturnine save savage saved saunders savior
savor sauerie sauin saving sauce saucie sausage saw saucer Scab scabbed scabbie
scabbard scaffold scale scald scalingladder scallion scalop shalop scant
scantling escape scathe scar scare scarf scarce scarcity scarp scatter
scattered school schoolmaster scholar schoolfellow scold sclander sclanderer
score scof scorce scoffer scope scorn scotfre scrape scrap scrat scratch scrall
scribe scrible scribler scriuener scrip scripture screke scroll scrupulous
scruple scum scull sculler scullion scurf scurge scuruie scurrilitie scutchion
scutle Se sea seal seam seamster search searcher sear season seat second
secundarie secondly secret secrecy secretary secretelie sect sectarie sede
sedentarie seidge sedge sedition seditious seek sell self seller seller seldom
seluage selfwill seem semblance semblable seen send sense Contract of since
sense sent senate senator senser i^ censer sensual sensuality separate
sepulker sepulcher sequel sequester sequestration sergeant sermon serpent
serve service servant session sesment set setle settled sethe seven seventy
seuentene sever severe severed severity several seueraltie sew sewes sewet
sextane Shad shade shadow shaft shak shakle shall shale shallow shales shambles
shame shameful shameless shank shap shape share sharp shave shaueling shaven
she sheare sheaf sheath shed shield shell shelf sheep shepish shent show shete
shift shine shin shingle ship shirt shitle shire shirif shriualtie shit shite
shiue shiuer Sho shog shok shop shore short shoue shout shour show shows
showmaker shoueler Di^y. shoule shoot show showing should shoulder shreke shred
shrew shrewed shrewdly shrike shrill shrimp shriche shrink shrine shrive
shriven shrift shrood shrove shrovetide shraftide shroud shrub shrug shufle
shun shut shutle Sib sise sicle side sider sift sifter sifting sidder sik
siklie sign signet E^f. cygnet signify signification sigh sight silk silkworm
silly silence sillibub syllab Enf. sillab silver simple simplicity sing*
singe sin sine sinople sinful since sinew single Co^. singlie singlelie
singular singularly singularity sink sip sir sire sister sit since site
situation situate sieve six sixtifold Skape skalp skars scarce skew skull
skullet skim skin skink skip skipper skirm skirmish skirts sklender sklise
skout skoutwatch Slab slabbie slabber slade slain slaie slak slake slang slash
slave slauer slavery slavish slaughter slay sled sledge slight slight
slekestone sleep slepie sleke slew slice slid slide slike slik slight slime
sling slinge slip slipper slipperie slit slo slop sloth slouer slownesse
slubber sluice slug slut sluttish sluttishnesse sluggish sluggishnesse sluggard
slumber sly Smak smake small smalnesse smallage smatch smatter smatterer smate
smat smear smell smelt smile smit smite smit'h Con. smit'hie smok smoke smoot'h
smote smug smudg smutch Snafle snail snak snake snap snapper snape snapharunce
snar snare snatch snese snew sniuell snip snipe snore snort snow snout snuf
snuffing snufle So sob sober soberlie soberness sobriety sociable society
sod soden soft sok soke soil soilth soiourn soiourner sole solace solemn sollen
solemnity solitary solicit solicitour sold soldyer some somer son song sondaie
soon sooner sooth sooth sop soap sopemaker sore sorry sorrow sorrowful sorcerie
sorcerer sorceresse sorell sort sosse sot sotherie sothernwood sout'h sout'h
soueraign soueranitie soul sowder sowse sousing sow sow sout soul sound sought
southsaier Space spade spak spoke span spangle spanel spar spare spark sparkle
sparrow sparrowhauk spaun speak spear speech specify special specification
specialtie spectacle spekle spek sped speed spedie spedes spell spend spent
spear spice spicerie spider spin spinner spirt spirit spiritual spiritualitie
Con. spritualtie spires spirt spite spit spite spigot spinach spindle
spiteful spitefulness spitter spitle spitlehouse splaie splaiefoot spleen
splent spoil spoke spok spoken sport spot spouse spout spoun spounfull sprall
sprat spread sprede sprig sprint sprinkle spring spring sprot sprout spruce
sprung spurn spun spurge spume spurlong Spy spies Squab squach squad squak
squall squaltor square squaring squat squatter squeal squeak sqeamish squease
squese squib squint squirel squirt squib squiterbuk squitch Stare stab stable
stablish stabilitie stag stage stager stain staf staves stak stake stall stale
stalwin stammer stand standard stanche stalk staple star stare startle
starlight starch stark startop starve starueling state station stationer
stationarie stature statuarie statute stature steak steal stear sted stead
steddie stele stelth stem steme step stepe stepmother steple stern stew steward
stewhouse Con. stews Stik stikle stikler still style stillatorie stilt sting
stink stint stir stirrup stithie stitch Stok stoke stokefish stokes stokdoues
stole stomach stomacher stone stood stool stoop stop store stork storehouse
story storm stout stoutly stoue stouer straie stradle strait strain stragle
stragler struck struk strainger stranger straner straw strawberie streak stream
streat strength stresse stretch strew strict stride strid strife strike string
strip stripe stripling stripped strive stroke strew stroud strove strong strout
strumpet strugle stub stuble stubburn study student studious stuf stumble
stump stur sturdie sturgeon stuk stutter Sty Subdew sudain subject sukle submit
submission suborn subscribe substitute subsidy substance substanciall subvert
subversion suburbs such succeed success succession succor succorie sugar
suggest suggestion suffice f sufficient (...) sufficiency suffer sufferance
suffragane suk sukle sukling sum summer summarie sumner Con. summoner sumptuons
sunder sundry sup supply suple supplication supper superfluou supporte suppose
supposition supposall suppress supreme supremacy superior superiority
surcease surcharge surcingle surfeit surge surgeon surmise surmount surname
surplesse surplus surplussage surrender surety survive suspect suspicion
sustain sustinance swad swade swadle swadlingclootes swag swage swaie swallow
swam swan swane swear swarth swerve swash swear sweal swell swelt swepe swept
sweet swet swist swill swilboll swim swine swing swinge soon sword sworn
T
Taber tabret tabernacle table tablet tache taffatie tag tak take takling takle
tail tailor taint tainterhooks tainter tall tale talent tallow tamper tampering
tame taken tan tanner tankard tansie tap tape taper tapistrie Con. tapstrie
tapster tar tare tares tarry tarte tatle tatch taste taster tauern tauernour
taunie taw tawyer taunt tax task taught Teach teal team teat teastur teastie
tedious tediousness tell tele temse teme temeretie temper temperance
temperature temperate temperatenesse tempest tempestuous tempestuousnesse
temple templer tempt temptacion tend tench tent tenement tender tenderness
tendering tendering Cont. tendering ten tene tenth tends tenure term termour
terrible terrify territory testimony testify testament tethe tester tetter
teusdaie thank thaw thatch the the thence thief there therefore theuish theft
thigh thik t'himble t'hine thin think thing third thirtene thirty thirst
thirsty thistles thither thitherward though thong thought the other thorn
thornebak thousand thou thou thread threap threat thresh threshold threw thrist
thristie throne throng throat throtle thrust thrush thrum thum thump thunder
thwart thwak thwakt thwart thursdaie thy Tib tide tidings tik tike tikle
tikling ti'll tile tillage tilt tiltyard tilesharde time timber timely
timorous timorousness tin tine tinker tinkling tinder tinderbox tinsell tip
tipe tipet tippling tipler tiple tire tishew tit title ttle titmouse tithe To to
toes tod tode together toy* toious toyous toil token toll toungs tout'h touth
touthake top topnet torche torment torn toss tossed Con. toste totter tow
toward towell tough touse tour town Trace tract tractable trade trad tradition
traie train traitor traitorous tramp trample tramell traneoil transitory
transitiue transom transform transformation transgress transgression translate
translation transport transportation trap trapping trance trauerse traversing
tread treatable treachery treacherous treason treasur treasury treasurer
treat treaty treatis tred tremble treendish trench trencher tresle trespass
trewant true triacle trial tribe tribut tributarie tribulation trik trikle
trifle trim trindle trip tripe triple trivet triumph trod trodden trot troup
trough trow trowell trowt truble trub truce trulliebub trump trumpet trunchion
trunk trust trusse truth try Tub tuk tukker tuf tuft tumbe tumbler tun tune
tunage tung tunell turf turk turcasse turn turpentine turret turnep turtle tush
tusk Twain twang twelft twelve twenty twible twig twitch twylight twinkle twin
twine twing twinge twins twice twist two twagger tmy tied
V
Uacant vacation vagabond vain vanity vales varlet valleie valor valor
valiant van vainglorious vanish vanity vanquish vantage vapor vary variety
varnish vaunt vawt vawter vauntgard Vdder veal vehement vehemency venim
venomous vengeance venison vent ventur verdit verdingale very verity verily
vermin vermilion verse versify vertew vertewous vessel vesture vestrie
vestiment Cont. vestment vex vexation Viage vice vicious victory vctorious
vicar vicarage vicount view vile vilite vileness village villan villainous
villanage vine vineager vineyard vintner violet violin violent violence virgin
virginity virginalls visard visit visitation vision vitail vitalor Cont.
vitler vmpier Unaduised unadvisedly unbend unbent unbelief vnblamed vnbucle
unburden unaccustomed unacquainted unarmed unburied unchaste uncle unclean
vnclenlie uncleanness vnclenlinesse incurable vncuple uncover discourteous
uncouth underprop underset understand under undertake undermine indiscreet
unequal Der. inequality uneath unfit unfold vnfetter unfortunate unfruitful
ungentle ungodly ungentleness unhorse dishonest Deri. dishonest unhappy
unhappiness unhallow unknit unknown unlawful unlearned unlike untwine untwist
vnty vnlok unload vnlukkie unlusty vnmanerlie unmerciful union unite unity
university vneuersall vneuersalitie unicorn unsavory imperfect unprofitable
insatiable unrighteous unsearchable unsteadfast until until untilled Der. Co^.
vntilde unwise unwilling unwieldy vnwittie vnwtiting Vocation vocative vomit
voluntary volum voluptuous voluptuarie voluptuousness vow vouch vouchsafe
vowell void voyder voydance voice up vpbraide upon upper vpmost uppermost
uphold vpholster uproar us use use usury usual usher vsurp usurpation
usually utter utterance utterly utmost uttermost Vy
VV
Wad wade wadmoll wafer wag wages wager wagon wagtail way weight weight
waiward waiefaring wain wainman wait wale wallow wake waken walk wall wallop
wallot wan wane wander wandering wand want wanton wantonness warble ward ward
wardenship warrant warrantie waraen wardon wardrobe war ware warlike warfare
warrious wary waren warm warmth warmness wart was wast waste wastecote wash
washed wassell wat water waterman watle wasp waspish watch watchman wave wax We
weak weal weapon weary wear weather weaue weauer wet were web wed wedge
wedensdaie wein weinlings weak well well welcome welt welkin welfauord welsh wen
wene went wench wend weep wept were were west wesle wet wetsh^d wevil whall
Whale wharf wharfage what wheal wheat whele wheler whelm whelp whence where
wherefor whereunto wheresoever wheather whet whetstone which while whin whine
whinch whip whirle whirlewinde whisk whistle whisle whisper whister whit white
whiting whither whitle who whosoever whose whow Wid wide wider widoer widow
widowhood wisle wikked wikker wife wives withie wikket wild wild wilding
wilderness wildfoul wily wilienesse wilful wilfulness will willow wig
wigeon wimble wimple win wine wineceller window winow wind winch wing wink
winter wipe wise wisdom wisp wish wit witch witty wite with withie wither
witness witless witall Com. Woe womb wont woman wonder wod word world
worldling work worm worn wort worse worship worth worthiness worthy wolf
wound worsted wow wowed would wower wot Wraie wrat wrate wrangle wrangler wrak
wrake wrall wrap wrestle wrastler wrath wreak wreath wren wrench wret wretch
wrig wrigle wrisle wrincle wring write writ written writing wrong wrongfullie
wrote wrought wrout wrung wry wull
X
Xpmasse xpian
Y
Yard yalp yarne yarrow yaw yaun Ye yea year yeast yellow yield yelk yirk
yesterdaie yet yet yemen yew yex york yonder young younker you youth youthful
yearlie
Z
Zealous zeal zealousnesse.
FINIS.
CAP XXVI. The conclusion of this treatis concerning the right writing of our
English tung.
THis is that, which I had to say concerning the right writing of our English
tung, both for the rules, which I have observed in daily experience, and for
the table, which I have collected to confirm that experience. As for the right
of my rules, I may not take upon me any more certainty, then the natural
force of such probable directions does ordinarily infer, which is to hold
commonly true, and ever most likely, from which probability I wander not
far, if my self may be judge. As for the table I sought in it, to write all
the words gegenerallie That I do but enter and pass leaving the perfiting to
who will.
after an English ear, never yiedling much to any foren letter saving only
where some pretty occasion reco^me^ded unto me, the duble writing of both the
natural English and the the incorporate stranger. And yet I have dilige^tlie
examined the original grounds of our enfranchised terms, which be one third
part of our hole speech, tho I hold altogether with our own writing, and
follow not their primitive. For if the word it self be englishin deed, the^ is
it best in the natural hew, if it be a stranger, and incorporate among us, let
it wear our colors, since it will be one of us. In both the rules and table, I
have rather sought, by such an inductio^ to stir up some other to perform the
enterprise, then hoped my self to leave it co^plet. For it may so fall out,
that I have hit upon some truth, tho not upon all, and again it may so be, that
I have missed quite, and cut a wrong course, and yet by so doing, that I have
opened a way unto some other, by giving such a light, either to amend my course
if it like in part, or to shape a better by it, if it hollie mislike. Further,
in both I have been very careful never to depart from the custom of my
cuntrie, because I desire either to please with liking, or to mislike without
displeasing. For where ane ordinary custom does seem of long time to have made
her own choice, and that upon good show, she will either like him that cleaues
to her allowance, or not be displeased, where her self is not misliked. And if
there be any hope to procure liking in such a thing as custom is to rule, it
must needs com by following, and not by forcing. He enforces, which quite
alters the common current allredie admitted in general use, both of
ordinary letter, and customarie writing, he follows, which marketh that way
wherein custom is most conversant, and pleases it self best upon likeliest
presumptions: and withal observes wherein any error intruding upon custom,
by ignorant hands, may be easily stripped, and yet custom left clean to her
allowed direction. This following of custom, with considerate observing is a
case of great hope, that the thing may like, which is so laid down, because in
like attempts it has allwaie taken place, and bewraid her success by winning
her desire. Enforcing to the contrary, or altering to far is almost desperate,
if not altogether, because it has alwaie mist, with loss of labor where it
offered service. What my self have won, by desiring to follow the custom of my
cuntrie, and no where to enforce it, it must appear in time, which while it do,
I must crave relefe of courteous construction, and submit my self to judgment
of those which can discern.

CAP XXVII. Of the nature of an Elementarie institution.
AS in dealing with the ortografie of our English tung, I have dwelt very
long, because the argument is new, tho the handling be old, so in all the rest,
I purpose to be short, because the arguments be old, tho the handling be new.
Wherein I will keep that same course whereunto I am led by the nature of an
institution, which is, to enter the learner so far, as he may cumpas with ease
all that which follows in the same kind, if his institution be perfited.
Hence cummeth it that so many books in the latin tung bear the name of
institutions because theie enter the young and vntrauelled student into that
profession whereunto theie belong. Now in the framing of a good and proper
institution, which must be both natural to the profession whereunto it
enters, and appropriate to the learner, which it must enter: there be two
considerations chefelie to be had, the one is of what cumpas the profession
may be, whom the institution leads, the other of what kind. In the cumpas,
we consider the use thereof to direct our life, whether it stretch far, or but
some small way. In the kind we consider whether it be more in action, and
less in contemplation, or contrary wise. For according to these two
considerations the institution must be fashioned. Because the professions of
divinity, law and physik, be of themselves very large, for variety of
matter, and in use very needful, for their general service, their
institutions therefore ar commonly great, as a fair gate does best beseme a
sumptuous palace. The other faculties and Arts, as of argument under these, so
of consequence less then these, need but short institutions, as a little door
does best fit a pretty small bilding. Again, where the end of any art, is
hollie in doing, the institution would be short, for hindering of that end, by
holding the learner toto long in musing upon rules, as in our grammar, which is
the institution to speech, there would be no such length as is commonly used,
because the end thereof is to write and speak, which when we do most, we learn
our grammar best, being applied to matter, and not clogd with rules. As for the
understanding of writers: that cums by years and ripeness of wit, not by rule
of grammar, any otherwise then that grammar helps to the knowledge of tungs,
whereby we understand the arguments hid in them. But I will then handle these
things, when I deal with grammar, next after mine elementarie. In the mean
while that rule of Aristotle must be preciselie kept, whereby we are taught,
that the best way to learn any thing well, which must afterward be don, when
it is learned, is still to be a doing, while we be a learning. In this last
kind, whose rule is, to be short in precept, and much in practis, is this hole
Elementarie, and therefore, I am to deliver some pretty and few rules, pikt out
of the very substance of each principle, which to keep in practis, and then to
set down, some well chosen presidents, whereupon to practis, neither laing on to
much, to pass an institution, neither leaving out to much, to com to short of
it, neither using but the best, to work the best effect. For an institution
ought to be in lineament like the hole, as the infant to his parent, tho not so
full grown, in working forcible as a strong renet in each part pithie to sprede
full in all, without any defect, when it is to perform, least it prove it
selflame, for not preventing that, where the lamenesse appears: which would
not appear if either the institution it self had been perfect, or the following
of it full. For the failing that way is often in the institution, being not
perfitlie made, but either swelling to much, or pent in to small, or not
properly cast: but it is more often in the trainer himself, which cannot perform
that, that is perfitlie set down. But least I prove long while I promis
shortness, I will straight way in hand with my first principle, which is that
of Reading, wherein I will first appoint certain notes to direct the reader,
and after some presidents, which seem fittest to be red. This treatis concerning
the right writing of our English tung, tucheth the teacher and grown men more,
out of the which I will still collect by way of precept, and a short epitome
so much as shall be necessary for the young reader, to help his spelling, or the
young writer to direct his hand right, ear I deal with the two principles.

THE PERORATION To my gentle readers and good cuntriemen WHEREIN MANY THINGS
AR HANDLED, CONCERNING LEARning in general, and the nature of the english and
foren tungs, besides some particularities concerning the penning of this and
other books in English.
MY good cuntriemen and gentle readers, you cannot possibly have axie more
certain argument of the great desire, which I have to please you, and the
earnest care, which I have to win your liking, then this very speech directed
unto you, and that of set purpos. For if I had trusted unto my self alone, and
had thought mine own judgment sufficient enough, to have been the rule of my
right writing, which when I had pleased, I should need no further care, to
content any other, I might have spared this pains in requiring your frindship,
and have left courtesy to some hope, tho it were in some hasard, which seeing I do
not, but sew for your favor and frindlie construction, my earnest care in
sewing therefore, as in me it voids contempt of your judgment, and confidence
in mine own, so in you it may work courtesy, and a favorable mind toward a
man so affected, and so desirous to please you, as I don't not but it will,
seeing care is my solicitor, and curtisie yours. If I feared not that
inconueuience which commonly enseweth, where two speak in an unknown tung, and
the third standing by thinks himself despised, because he understands not, I
would have solicited my request in the latin tung, because the kind of people,
which I reverence most, and whose frindlie opinion I do covet most, both
desires and deliteth to be dealt with in that tung, as being learned
themselves. But the unlearned stander by must help with a smile, and is
therefore to understand the matter which is handled. Wherefor to content both,
by contemning neither, I will go on in that tung wherein I first began, and by
a mean known to both, seek frindship of both: seeing my desire is, as to profit
the ignorant, so to please the cunning. But before I do move any particular
request to any or all of you my good cuntrimen, I must needs enform you in the
state of my cause, that perceiving all circumstances you may yield with more
favor, when the motion shall be made.

The very first cause, which moved me first to deal in this argument, The
cause which moved me first to deal thus publikelie in this argument
and to venture upon the print, whereof I stood in aw for a long time, and never
durst com near it, till now of late, was to do some good in that trade only,
wherein I have traveled these many years, and by uttering my experience in
the train to learned tungs, to lighten other men's labor, because I had espied
some defects that way, which craved some supply. But the consideration thereof
being once entered my head, did sprede a great deal further then I dreamed on
at the first, and wrought in me the like impression, for the right teaching of
the learned tungs, that the inquiry What course Plato took to find out what
justice was.
for justice in things of common life did sometime work in that renouned Plato.
For Plato seking to define Justice, and what that is, which we call right in
civil doing, could not devise how to set them down in certain, by way of
definition, because theie were respective, and stood upon circumstance in
regard to other, before he had described a form of common government; which
when he had don, he straight way found out, that that was just, which was iump
with each state, as the state was appointed, whether perfect or imperfect (tho the
perfect were the best) and that procured in the state both tranquillity and
success, as that was unjust, which iard with the state, and proved to be an
instrument of discord and decaie. The execution of the first, which preserves
the state, he termed justice: the enormitie in the second, which seeks to
undo, he called injury and wrong. The reason which moved him to take that
course in finding out of justice, and to make Platoes reason to take that course
the anatomy of ane hole government the mean, to know that rule, which leads
each government, was, because the proportion, the use, naie the very substance
of any particular member, is never so known, as it may be thoroughly
perceived, and preciselie surueied until the hole it self, be exactlie known,
whereunto the part answers in proportion, in use, naie in the very
substance. Justice concerns every two, between whom there may be
intercourse, traffik, dealing, or doing any kind of way, whether prince and
prince, prince and subject, or subject and subject, whether one with one, or
one with mo, or mo with mo. Naie it tucheth nearer. For where respects may
take place, there one may do wrong to his own soul and body, as in pining the
body, and entreating it evil, in tormenting the mind, and wringing it to the
worst, contrary to the rule of both religion and reason. Wherefor that hole
body, which comprehends these circumstances, and respects in each part, was
nedelie to be described, before the particular effects, and the regiment
thereof could possibly de defined. This course took Plato and thereby found
out that, which he desired to know

My self entending at the first to deal but with the tungs, and the teaching
thereof in the grammar school, (as he thought My course to find out the right
method in teaching the tungs.
of his justice in civil doings,) was likewise enforced by swaie of meditation
to enter in thought of the hole course of learning, and to consider how every
particular thing did arise in degree, one after another. For without that
consideration, how could I have discerned where to begin, how to proceed, and
where to end, in any one thing, which depends upon a sequel, and marches
from a principle, seeing the matter which I deal with, is a matter of ascent,
wherein every particular, that goes before has contine wall respect to that,
which cummeth after, if the hole plat be artificially cast? As in this course
of mine, the Elementarie principles may resemble the first groundwork: the
teaching of tungs the second stories: the after learning the upper bildings.
Now as in Architecture and artificial bilding, he were no good workma^ which
would not cast his frame so, as each of the ascents might be conformable to
other: so in the degrees of learning, it were no masterlie part not to observe
the like, which cannot be observed, before the hole be thought on, and
thoroughlie fashioned in the parties mind, which pretends the work. Plato in
his platform for the finding out of justice has two great vantages of me. For
both himself was so learned, as he is left to wonder, and his plat is in form,
not fashioned for practis: whereby both his own authority gives credit to his
work, and his work kepes countenance, being not chekt by practis, which is able
to overthrow even the best meditations, being unfit for performance tho
bewtifull to behold by way of contemplation. My knowledge being but of
ordinary compass is subject to controllme^t of every better learned, naie it
is not exempt from the round carping, even of the very meanest, from whose
sting not even Plato himself was able to escape. My labor is so laid, as it
professes practis, and is so to be reproved if it bide not the performance.
Again his great sufficiency laid all down at once, and gave a full view of his
hole platform, tho but in general show: this The diversity in setting down
thigs of orer and of stay.
enterprise of mine cannot proceed in that order, tho I could perform it as
well as Plato could his because it mounteth still up by way of progression
from one piece to another and multiplieth infinite because of variety in parts,
which kind of attempts abides no one form aspectable at once, as Aristotle
reasons, because of first and last, which fall not in view together at one
time. Thgs of order be known by degrees, matters of stay ar to be seen at
once, which cannot be in this argument, being in order of consequence, in
number of multitude. For when year once past the Eleme^tarie train, be not
tungs of some number, where the learner has desire, not to rest upon some
certain? when ye ar past the tungs, is not the after learning of infinite
branches, tho the main be within compass? Wherefor as in depenesse of meditation
I drew like to Plato, tho in depth of judgment but his fleting follower: So in
order of delivery I depart from him and utter my wares by retailing parcels,
which he did ingrosse: when I had considered the general ascending method of
all learning, which while it is in getting, mounteth up by degrees, but when it
is gotten, does sprede through out the state as sinews, veins, and arteries do
through a naeturall body, and withal maintains the state in full proportion
of his best being, no less then the other do maintain the body, me thought I
did perceive some great blemish in the hole body of learning, as Plato no
doubt, in the ripping up, of right did find to be in government. And as Plato
himself by his own teaching did confirm his own precepts, whereby he brought
forth a number of rare men, as even the sharp Aristotle, and the eloquent
Demosthenes, and by his singular plat of chosen government, tho not all way
pleasing our religion and practis, did direct the best conceits of the most
studious people: So for my simple skill in the same course, I have armed my
self, what so ever I shall set down by way of precept, for the furtherance of
learning, and her recovery from blemish, to practis it my self, with that
success in schooling which it shall please god to bless in me and mine, for
president to others, who will follow the plat, and with that allowance in
writing, which my gentle reader shall bestow upon it. For the plat of mine
Elementarie, and what I have undertaken for the penning thereof, it is sullie
declared in the eleventh title of this same book: For the performance thereof
in the bringing up of children, I have all the principles there named on foot,
within mine own house, under excellent masters. Wherein I do more then mine
Elementarie requires. For mine Elementarie course is to have the principles
perfited, before the child deal with grammar: Mine execution now is by finding
out of times, without loss of learng (which I may easily do having the hole
train within mine own sight) to help those principles forward in such children,
as wanted them before, or had some imperfect, and ar willing to learn them by
apointme^t of their parents, and my provision. Which doing may serve me for
two proves, first, that all the principles may be well learned singlelie, in
their natural order, when by way of provision theie may be well compased
jointly with the tungs. Secondly, that it is a great thing, which may be
performed in the Element arie train, where, convenient place continues all the
doings within the masters sight, and the not changing of schools for diverse
things, does assure the profit without loss of time, or lingering by the way.
But to leave speaking of the Eleme^tarie execution and to return to the pen and
the platting of this my writing course: upon this consideration, which carried
me thus on after I had conceived both where the blemishes lay: which
disfigured learning, and how to redress the^ by way of advise to others, but
in effect and deed for mine own charge, I came down to particulars: And began to
examine, even from the very first, what went before the tungs in their orderly
trade of bringing up children from there first schooling: which thing alone was
my first impression in conceit, ear I fell to further thoughts: and my last
resolution to tho with more advice, when I had thought upon the most. This
examining of the hole fore train I took upon me so much the rather because I
perceived a great untowardness in the learning of tu^gs, thorough some
infirmities in the Elementarie grounding, which went before them. As what a
toil is it to a grammar master when the young infant which is brought him to
teach, has no Elementarie principle so grounded in him, as it may bear a
bilding? Wherefor considring the learned tungs do require a fundation, and
careful teachers some help of foretrain, I undertook to rip up all those things
which concern the Eleme^tarie, a degree in teaching before the gra^mer train, by
mine own travel to ease a multitude of masters. Which Eleme^tarie degree,
because it tucheth such learners as are not entered into latin, and wishes well
to such teachers, as be lightly unlearned, but in their own mediocritie: I
thought it my best to publish it in that tung which is common to us all, both
before and after that we learn the latin. Upon which resolution I began with my
first book, which I call Positions in the english tung, and so proceed in this
next, which I term an Elementarie, as it is in deed, because it contains al
those Elements or principles, which children ar to deal with ear theie pass to
gra^mer, and the learning of tungs, a book divided into parcels, to lighten the
price, tho but one in volu^, distinct for execution of several arguments. For
these occasions, and to this end I ventured upon the print to help the course
of learning, in this my cuntrie, by helping of the trade which is used in
teaching and to help the trade of teaching, by beginning at the Elementarie
grounds, and to help the Elementarie by uttering it in English.

In which my attempts, these three questions, I do not say ar, but I suppose
may, peradventure be demanded: first what those 1
blemishes be, which I have espied in the main body of learning ane argument
at this day so narrowly sifted by so much variety, and so great excellency
of learned wits, as every kind of learning, is now thought to have recovered
that worship, which it was in, even then whenever it was highest.

Secondly, why in the trade of teaching I do not content my self, with the
president of some other, which in great number have written 2
learned treatises to the same end, but toil my self with a private travel,
whose event is uncertain, whereas the writers of this argument be both learned
themselves, and therefore to be followed, and their success known, which may
warrant assurance

Thirdly, if it be my best to handle a learned argument in the english tung,
why I take so great pains, naie so curious a care in the 3
handling thereof as the weaker sort, whose profit I pretend, naie as oftimes
some other also of reasonable study, can hardly understand the couching of my
sentence, and the depth of my conceit.

While I answer unto these thy motions, I must pray your patience, good my
masters, because the things may not be slightlie past over, and the satisfying
of them, makes way to that suit, which I have unto you.

First for my general care to the hole course of learning, I have A general
note for the hole course of learning.
thus much to say. The end of every particular man's doings, for his own self:
and of the hole common weal for the good of us all, is so like in
consideration, and so the same in nature, as the one being seen, the other needs
small seking: Every private man traueleth in this world to win rest after toil,
to have ease after labor, and not to travel still The end of every particular
man's doings, and of every common state is rest after labor
as being a thing exceeding uncomfortable, if so be it were endless. The
soldyer warreth in private conceit perhaps for ease by wealth, which he may win
by spoil: in publik show he trauelleth for the ease of his cuntrie by way of
defense, and pretending peace. The merchant traffiketh in private conceit, to
purchase piuat ease by procuring private wealth* in publik show hetrauelleth for
the common ease, to satisfy some wants in necessary ware for the common need.
Generally all men of what profession soever, as theie seek there own rest by
the private in their doings, so theie pretend the publik by the general end,
wherein theie all concur. Whereby it appears that ease after labor is the
common end of both private and publik, of both all and: some because every one
in the natural current of all his doings has as well a general respect to
the common quiet, which maintai neth his (private as a strong body does a febler
person) as unto himfelf for to work his own rest, which is parcel of the
publik, and not to part from it, for fear of further harm. Naie is our hole
life here in this miserable world, any other thing, then a toilsom course, to
com to some rest? or is the life after this in gods blessed kingdom any other
thing, then an endless rest, after ending travel to such people as seek for it
by the right means to com by it? And as in that rest the hole assembly of the
chosen faithful is all at rest, as every particular: so in this traveling
course, the general end of any hole state is a blessed peace, the great
benefit of a mighty protector, as in the same state the particular end of
every private person is a blessed contentment, the great benefit of a merciful
god. Whereby I take it to be most evident both in Philosophy, whence the sirfi
ground is and in Divinity whence the second is, that honest contentment and
rest, is the private man's haven, as an honorable quiet peace is the publik
harbor.

Now as both the private and publik end does pitch in quietness after stir, so
theie both have the like means to compass their own The right means for both
private men and com mon weals to com to their quiet
quietness, which means if theie use right, theie obtain their right end, if
theie use them wrong, as they wring by the way, so theie work their own worst,
by missing of their end. And in good sooth, were he not unwise, which seeing the
mark, whereat he is to shoot, will of set purpos, shoot another way? Who
having mean to com to heaven, which he daily wishes, will hedlong to hell,
which he seems to abhor? The right mean used right is the way to this good,
as awrong mean, or a wrong right work the contrary effect. As to co^tinew in
my former particulars, the soldiers mean to com to his end and right
quietness, is to use honest wisdom, and policy, for the saving of himself
from danger and death, to use honest and wise means, such as law of arms does
admit, to better himself in booty and spoil, with continewall eye to defend
for who^ he fights, to drive to peace and ease, after war and blood. The
mercha^ts mean to com to his end and right quietness is to use honest devises
and trades, for enriching himself without infamy to the world, or taint to his
conscience: to rest content with so reasonable a gain, which is the hire of his
travel, as his country may allow, and good conscience not condemn, with
continewall eye, neither to afflict the people, and surcharge the state with the
bringing in, of any nedelesse to much, nor to rob the poor, and to rak the
state, with the carrying out of any needful to much. Generally all men's mean
to com to their right and resting end is, to use that profession and calling,
whereof theie have made choice, after that rule in private, which ane honest
religious conscience leads, and after that direction in publik, which in
honest plain truth procures each man's right ease, by helping to preserve the
general peace. If these means do not proceed thus, neither has the soldyer
his rest in the end, but falls in blood or anguish, neither has the merchant
his end, but dwells in hatred or misery, neither has any profession the
hoped end, but such publik blemishes, and such private corrosiues, as unjust
dealings in every kind deserve to receive, and mete with in the end.

Now as all these particulars by their private mismeaning, work their own
mischief, so by the same means they be mortal enemies to the common peace,
which is supported in deed, by private good demeanor. That learning is the mean
to preserve peace, which is the natural end of every government
What the particular mean of every trade is, to com to the right end, I am not
to show at this time, let them look unto it, whom it particularly tucheth. My
consideration is general, and the publik mean is my care, which must be
measured by the proper end. The publik end is said to be peace, gods great
benefit in his most mercy, and his chief, naie his only charge in his new
and last commandment, to them that love him. Then those means both first to
com by this end, and when it is co^ by, to maintain it in state, must needs be
such directions, as ar for peace, and the quietness of a state, for the keeping
of concord and agreement, without any main publik breach, both priuatlie in
houses, publicly in cuntries, and generally throughout the hole government.
These peaceable directions I call, and not I alone, by the single name of
general learning, comprising under it all the arts of peace, and the
ministry of tranquillity, a matter of great moment, being the only right
mean to so blessed a main, as fortunat peace is, imparting the benefit of
publik quietness, to every particular, as a general fountain serving every
man's cestern by private quills and pipes, whose body if it be blemished it
hinders not a little, as the infected water of a primitive fountain, is not
holsom where it is used, naie as the corrupt blood passing from the liver
poisoneth the hole carcass. By the benefit of learning even war it self a
professed enemy to learning, because it is in feed with peace, is handled
very justly, and works peace at home by uniting of minds against a common
fo. So much the more deadly enemies, to all humanity, naie very devils in
deed to all common good ar theie to be esteemed, which working sedition within
the bowels of a state disioint it at home, and make it to to feeble, either
against outward fo, by way of resistance, or to recover it self by
reconcilement at home. By this learned mean in each kind, all princes govern
all states: the main and general by considerat and grave counselors, by wise
and faithful iusticiaries: and the particular branches for relligion and souls
by divines, for diseased bodies, by physicia^s, for maintenance of right, and
voiding of wrong, by lawyers, for every particular help, by every particular
professor, from every greatest to every meanest thoroughout the hole
government. A most blessed mean to a most blessed end, a learned maintenance of
an heavenly happiness, in ane earthly state, of an heavenly co^stitutio^.
And therefore any error in this mean is a maim in deed, and deserves to be
thought on, as an hindrer to peace, and a pernicious defeater of the best
publik end, beginning perhaps at a small sparkle, but encroching still and
gathering strength, by confluence of like infection in some other parts, till at
the last, it set all on fire, and brust out in confusion, the more to be
feared, because it festureth ear it flame, and shroudeth it self under show of
peace, and so consumes without suspicion, whereas it might be staid if it
professed enemitie, and stood with us in terms. The misses and blemishes
herein, as in all other goods, which profit us by using them, consist either in
to much, or in to little, or in The blemishes in learning com four ways.
to diverse, or in to dissensious, if dissension be not the greatest
diversity, tho for teaching sake theie be severed in terms: Shall I say in my
thinking of this argument for the ascent in learning from the first
Elementarie, that methought I found all these four imperfections in the hole
body of learning somwhere to much, somwhere to little, somwhere to different,
somwhere to dissensious, four great enormities in a peaceable mean, to bread
great diseases, and defyance to quietness, first, with in a state in the
governing dirrectio^, and then without by evident inflammation, a thing
therefore to be thought on, not only by particulars in way of moving, but
also by magistrates for mean to amendment.

For to much thus I conceive, that as in every natural body, the number of
sinews veins and arteries, for the quikning and motive To much in learning
use thereof is definite and certain: so in a body politik, the distributive
use of learning, which I compare to those parts, is every where certain. And
what soever is more then nature requires in either of them, as in the one it
bredes disease, so in the other it does destruction, by breach of proportion,
and so consequently of peace. In natural bodies this to much appears, when
one or mo parts engrosse them selves to much, and feeble the remnant: In a
common body this to much for learning, is then to be espied, when the private
professions do smell to much, and so weaken the hole body either by multitude
of the prefessors, which bite sore, where many must be fed, and have but
little: to feed on: or by unnecessary professions, which choke up the better,
and fill the world with toies: or by infiniteness of books, which cloie up
students and weaken with variety: or by intolerable swelling in the very
handling, which fatteh the carcass, and febleth the strength of pithie matter.
Be not all these surfets at this day in our state? Be there not enemies to the
common end, being grown out of proportion? be theie not worth the weing, and
wish theie no redress? I say no more, where it is to much even to say so
much in a sore of to much.

For to little thus I conceive. In a natural body there is then to little, when
either some necessary thing wants, or when that which is not To little in
learning.
wanting is to weak to serve the turn: And be not the same defects diseases in
learning, and disquieters to a state? when necessary professors want, either
for number as to few, or for value, as to feeble? when show is shrined, where
stuf should be enstalled? when sound learning is little sought for, but only
sursace, sufficient to shift with? When some necessary professions, ar quite
contemned, and laid under foot, because the cursorie student is to pass away
in post? When want of needful books, because theie be not to be had proves a
forcible let to greater learning: when such as we have, be as good not had for
insufficiencis in handling, and lamenesse to learn by? This corruption in
learning any man may se, who is desirous to seek both for the malady and the
amendment. A breach of proportion, and therefore of peace to a publik body,
which ought to be proportionate, a pining evil, which consumes by staruing.

For diversity in masters of learning, thus I think, that as it self proceeds
from diversities in ability, for bringing up; for wit, for judgment, for
perfection, because either all or some of these four be a great deal finer in
some then in some: so it works very much harm in the peace of any state,
chefelie where the leaders thereof, tho theie fall not out, and do but utter
their opinions, yet divide studies according to their favorites, which consider
not so much the weight of the arguments, as the liking of the autors.

If this diversity do break out in carnest, as it has commonly 4 Dissension
in matters of learning.
don in our time, while the very print it self being the instrument of
necessity, and the deliverer of learning in the natural and best use,
becomes very often to fre a mean for ambition in bravery, for malice in
envy, for revenge in enimitie, for all passions in all purposes, what a sore
blow does the common quiet receive, whose mean to quiet, is made an instrument
to distemper? For will not he fight in his fury, which brauleth in his books?
seem not those minds armed, naie arm theie not others to, by egging enimitie
forward, to an open conflict, which in private studies enter combats with
papirs? which by to much eagerness make to much a do, in a stir better
quenched to die, then quikned to live? which whet their wits before, to be
wranglers ever after, and as much as lies in them, disturb the common ease?
nedelesse combats in matters of learning, be those which I mislike, the
needful may go on and yet with no more passion, then common civility will
allow, and christian charity not condemn. To much ouerburdeneth, to little
consumes, to diverse distracteth, but to dissensious destroies. Your selves
know my learned readers, what a wonderful stir there is daily in your schools
thorough the dissenting opinions of some in logik, some in philosophy, some in
the mathematiks, Physik is not fre, tho Paracelsus were no fo, to those his
humorists. The lawyer generallic is most quiet for contradictorie writing,
because he gains not by it the thing which he sekes for: contrary pleading at
common bars, is a better pastur for a lean purse then a bissie pen to publish
controversies. The dissension in divinity is fierce beyond Gods forbid, and so
much the more, because it falls out often, that the adversary parties
entermingle their own passions with the matters, which theie deal in. For as
our arguments of controversy in cases of relligio^ do sometimes require a
necessary defense, so the^e be oftimes such, as may be well compounded, if
men's affections would abide as much water to coul, as theie bring fire, to
inflame. But in the mean while how is the common peace disturbed, by the
dissensious writhing of a worthy mean, to maintain a wrong, and to become slave
to some in ordinate passion? I enter not this argument, to stand long about it,
but in nature of a passage to let my good reader understand, how much my desire
was increased, to the furtherance of learning, after I had marked these
inconveniences, whereas at the first I meant no more but only the help of
teaching the learned tungs. The agreement of the learned generally, is mother
to contentment generally: By carping or contrarying, theie trouble the world,
and taint themselves, bearing the name of Christians, which very title
enioyneth a search to avoid contention, even by submission of the wronged:
neither charge it us to defend our religion with passionat minds, but with
armor of patience, and appointment of truth sufficient to confute, even because
it is true, not neding our affections, wherewith it is trubled.

These were the blemishes which I saw by the way in the body of learning,
which as I did moan, so I wished the amendment, which That the reformation of
learning con sisteth in the advised magistrate and the learned professor.
amendment rests upon two great pillars: The professors of learning to give
intelligence of the error, and the principal magistrates, naie the very
souerain prince, to cause the redress in so necessary a piece, as the course
of learning is, being Gods great instrument to work our quietness for souls,
bodies, goods, and doings.

The prince may take order to cut of that is to much; to make up that is to
little, to unite diversities, to expel dissensions, whose lawful authority is
a great co^mander, and no where more then in a general good, where every one
will follow, because every one is bettered. If it com not from the prince, the moon may continue, the amend meant is consumed. Which proves Platoes sentence,
to have kings Filosofers, that is, all magistrates learned, to be mauellous
requisite in any good government. It is a great corrosiue to the hole province
of learning, which is the regiment of peace, where such as must direct, ar but
experienced wise, tho that be very much, but yet both experience, and learning
together make the better consent. It is an honorable conceit besides the
incredible good, for a learned vertewous prince by the assistence of a like
counsel, to reduce the professors of learning, by choice in every kind to a
certain number, to make choice in points of learning necessary for the state,
to appoint out books for learning, both in multitude not to many, and in
method of the best. The president is princely, in every profession, and not
only now moved. There has been stripping heretofore in all these kinds,
both by consent of the learned and, by commandment fr^ good princes. Our
cuntrie is small, the thing the more easy our livings within compass, the thing
the more nedfull: the enormitie great, the less able we to bear it: our
prince learned, the liker to give ear: our people of understanding, the better
able to enform her. But neither does the physician thrive so, by the preserving
part of physik, nor the lawyer grow rich so, by taking up of contentions, nor
the divine prosper so in a heaven, where all is good, as he does in earth
where, all is evil, tho the best in each kind do honor them most: And
therefore profit will be followed, tho it be with confusion, redress will not
stir, because it judges the world, to be in some falt, which it is loath to
confess. Howbeit to procure some redress and help this way, at the Princes
hand, it stands all them in hand, which make profession of learning, if theie
do but consider the reputation of learning in these our days, whether by
insufficient professors, or contemned professions.

In the professors of learning, to whose soliciting this point is
recommended, there be two things chefelie required. First that theie 1
study soundly themselves upon stuf worth the study, in order of right
ascent, with minds given to peace. For sound learning will not so soon be
shaken at every eager point of controversy, as the fleter will. Orderly
ascent grows strong very soon, and a pacifik conceit is a furtherer to that
end, which is both priuatlie minded, and publicly intended. The consent of the
learned, and their quiet inclination is a great blessing to any common weal,
but chefelie to ours in this contentious time, where the ouerwhetted minds
work very small good to sons worthy professions. The distraction of minds,
into sects and sorts of philosophy, did a might ie great displeasur to the
quietness of that people, where the destraction Greece
fell as it did our religion more, which spreding in that cuntrie, where those
sorts were nurished, was never in quiet sense.

The second point required in a learned student is not so much to 2
seek his own auancement, as the things, which he professes, which if it take
place, himself coms forward, because he has the things. If he seek his own
auancement, and either forget the thing, if he have it, or care not for it, if
he have it not, the want of the thing will weaken his credit, tho it increase
her own, as where the ignorant is blamed, there knowledge is allowed, tho the
allower be not learned. He that studieth soundly recommendeth good letters, by
his own example: he that solliciteth other, who have authority to further,
aduaunceth them by aduertisment, he that exercises his pen to help the best
current, confirms his desire by the doing thereof. In this last kind mine
own labor trauelleth to seek for uniformity, to strip away the nedelesse, to
supply some defects, to do mine endeavor to help every one in as quiet a course,
as I can temper my style unto. And tho sometimes I do sprede upon cause in
length of discourse, yet for the matter it self, which I will commend to the
learner, I will be short and sound enough, and leave more to practis, then I will
lay in precept. Thus much for the generality of learning, and the learned, to
whose considerations I commit the soliciting, as to the magistrates the
amendment.

The second question, which I said might be demanded of me, why 2. Why I follow
not some of the teaching plats allredie laid by learned writers.
I do not follow some learned president of those writers, which have dealt this
way with great admiration, may be answered very soon. I confess the number
of them, which have written of the training up of children, to be so many in
number, as either private cuntrie or private cause might move to deal in it. I
confess the excellency of many in that kind, as Bembus, Sturmius, Erasmus,
and diverse other. But we differ in circumstance. Afre city, a private frind,
and an hole monarchy, have diversities in respect, tho theie agree in some
generals, wherein those writers dissent not from me. Neither do I but follow
good writers, fetching my first pattern from such writers, as taught all those
to write so well, a thing alredie proved in the second chapter of this book. I
am servant to my cuntrie. For her sake I travel, her circumstances I must
consider, and whatsoever I shall pen, I will se it executed by the grace of
God, mine own self, to persuade other the better by a tried prouf.

The third question for my writing in English, and my so careful, (I will not
say so curious writing,) concerns me somewhat, because it 3. Of the English
tung and the penning in English.
bears matter. For some be of opinion, that we should neither write of any
philosophical argument, nor philosophicallie of any slight argument in our
English tung, because the unlearned understand it not, the learned esteem it
not, as a thing of difficulty to the one, and no delight to the other. For both
the penning in English generally, and mine own penning in this order, I have
this to say.

No one tung is more fine then other naturally, but by industry of the
speaker, which upon occasion offered by the kind of government wherein he
lives, endeuoreth himself to garnish it with eloquence, and to enrich it with
learning. The use of such a tung, so eloquent for speech, and so learned for
matter, while it keeps it self within the natural soil, it both serves the
own turn with great admiration, and kindles in the foren, which com to
knowledge of it, a great desire to resemble the like. Hence came it to pass,
that the people of Athens, both bewtified their speech by the use of their
pleading, and enriched their tung with all kinds of knowledge, both bred
within Greece, and borrowed from without. Hence came it to pass, that people of
Rome having platted their government, much what like the Athenian, for their
common pleas, became enamored with their eloquence, whose use theie stood in
need of, and translated their learning, where with theie were in love. Howbeit
there was nothing so much learning in the latin tung, while the Roman
flourished, as at this day is in it by the industry of stude^ts, thoroughout
all Europe, who use the latin tung, as a common mean, of their general
delivery, both in things of their own devise, and in works translated by them.
The Roman authority first planted the latin among us here, by force of their
conquest, the use thereof for matters of learning, does cause it continue, tho
the conquest be expired. And therefore the learned tungs so termd of their
store, may thank their own people, both for their fining at home, and their
favor abroad. Whereupon it falls out, that as we are profited by the mean of
those tungs, so we are to honor them even for profit sake, and yet not so but
that we may cherish our own, both in such cases, as the use thereof is best:
and in such places, as it may be bettered, tho with imparing of them. For did
not those tungs use even the same means to brave themselves ear theie proved so
beawtifull? Did the people strain courtesy to pen in their natural, even these
same arguments which theie had from the foren? If theie had don so, we had
never had their works, whereat we wonder so.

There be two special considerations, which keep the Latin, and other learned
tungs, tho chefelie the Latin, in great countenance among us, the one thereof
is the knowledge, which is registered in them, the other is the conference,
which the learned of Europe, do commonly use by them, both in speaking and
writing. Which two considerations being fully answered, that we seek them from
profit and keep them for that conference, whatsoever else may be don in our
tung, either to serve private uses, or the beawtifying of our speech, I do not
se, but it may well be admitted, even tho in the end it displaced the Latin,
as the Latin did others, and furnished it self by the Latin learning. For is it
not in deed a meruellous bondage, to become servants to one tung for learning
sake, the most of our time, with loss of most time, whereas we may have the
very same treasur in our own tung, with the gain of most time? our own bearing
the joyful title of our liberty and fredom, the Latin tung remembering us, of
our thraldom and bondage? I love Rome, but London better, I favor Italy, but
England more, I honor the Latin, but I worship the English. I wish all were in
ours, which theie had from others, neither offer I them wrong, which did the
like to others, and by their own president do let us understand, how boldly we
may ventur, not withstanding the opinion of some such of our people, as desire
rather to please themselves with a foren tung, wherewith theie ar acquainted,
then to profit their cuntrie, in her natural language, where their
acquaintance should be. It is no objection to say, well ye rob those tu^gs of
their honor, which have honored you? or which if theie had not been to make you
learned, you had not been to strip them of from learning? For I honor them
still, and that so much as who so does most, even in wishing mine own tung
partaker of their honor. For if I had them not in great admiration, because I
know their value, I would not think it to be any honor for my cuntrie tung to
resemble their grace. I confess their furnitur and wish it were in ours, which
was taken from other, to furnish out them. For the tungs which we study, were
not the first getters, tho by leerned travel the prove good kepers, and yet
ready to return and discharge their trust, when it shall be demanded in such a
sort, as it was committed for term of years, and not for inheritance. And
therefore no disgrace where theie did receive with condition to deliver, if
theie do deliver, when theie ar desired. But a dishonor to that tung, which
has a delivery both devised and tendered, and will not receive it. From which
dishonor I would English were fre, and that learning received, which is ready to
be delivered. I confess their good fortun, which had so great a forestart,
before other tungs as theie be most welcome, wheresoever theie set foot, and
allwaie in wonder above any other for their rare worthiness: which have all
men's opinions concerning other speches, in such a captiuate prejudice of their
own excellency, as none is thought any, but when it is like to them, and yet
the most like to be maruellouslie behind.

The diligent labor of learned cuntrieme^ did so enrich these tungs, and not
the tungs them selves, tho theie proved very pliable, as our tung will prove,
I dare assure it of knowledge, if our learned cuntriemen Why not learning in
English?
will put to their labor. And why not I pray you, as well in English, as
either in Latin or any tung else?

Will ye say it is nedelesse? sure that will not hold. If loss of 1. It is
not need full
time while ye be pilgrims to learning by lingering about tungs, be no argument
of need: if lak of sound skill, while the tung distracteth sense, more then
half to it self, and that most of all in a simple student or a silly wit, be
no argument of need, then say you somewhat, which pretend no need. But because
we neded not, to lease any time onelesse we listed, if we had such a vantage,
in the course of study, as we now lease, while we travel in tungs: and
because our understanding also, were most full in our natural speech, tho we
know the foren excedinglie well, me think necessity it self does call for
English, where by all that gaietie may be had at home, which makes us gase so
much at the fine stranger.

But ye will say it is uncouth. In deed being unused. And so was 2. It is
uncouth.
it in Latin, and so is it in each language, and Tullie himself the Roman
parago^, while he was alive, and our best pattern now, tho he be dead, had very
much ado, and very great wrestling against such wranglers, and their nice
lothing of their natural speech, ear he wan that opinion, which either we our
selves have now of him, or the best of his frinds did the^ conceive by him. Is
not every his preface before all his philosofie still thwakt full of such
conflicts, had against those cauillers? our English wits be very well able,
thanks be to God, if their wills were as good, to make those uncouth and unknown
learnings very familiar to our people, even in our own tung, and that both by
president and protection of those same writers, whom we esteem so much of, who
doing that for others, which I do wish for ours, in the like case must needs
allow of us, onelesse theie will avouch that which theie cannot auow, that the
praise of that labor to co^ueie cunning from a foren tung into a man's own, did
die with them, not to revive in us. But whatsoever theie say, or whatsoever
theie can say to continue their own credit, our cuntriemen may not think, but
that it is our praise to com by that thorough purchase, and planting in our
tung, which theie were so desirous to place in theirs, and ar now so loath to
forgo again, as the farest flour of their hole garland, which would wither soon,
or else decaie quite, if their great cunning, were not cause of their
continewance: and if our people also, were not more willing to wonder at their
workmanship, then to work their own tu^g, to be worth the like wonder. Our
English is our own, our Sparta must be spunged, by the inhabitants that have
it, as well as those tungs were by the industry of their people, which be
braued with the most, and brag as the best.

But it may be replied again, that our English tung does need no 3. Our tu^g
is of no compass for ground and authority.
such proining, it is of small reatch, it stretches no further then this Ila^d
of ours, naie not there over all. What tho? Yet it reigns there, and it
serves us there, and it would be clean brusht for the wearing there. Tho it go
not beyond sea, it will serve on this side. And be not our English folks
finish, as well as the foren I pray you? And why not our tung for speaking,
and our pen for writing, as well as our bodies for apparel, or our tastes for
diet? But our state is no Empire to hope to enlarge it by comma^ding over
cuntries. What tho? tho it be neither large in possession, nor in present hope
of great increase, yet where it rules, it can make good laws, and as fit for
our state, as the biggest can for theirs, and oftimes better to, because of
confusion in greatest governments, as most vnwildinesse in grossest bodies.

But we have no rare cunning proper to our soil to cause forenners study it,
as a treasur of such store. What tho? yet ar we not ignorant 4. No rare cunning
in English.
by the mean thereof to turn to our use all the great treasur, of either foren
soil, or foren language. And why may not the English wits, if they will bend
their wills, either for matter or for method in their own tung be in time as
well sought to, by foren students for increase of their knowledge, as our soil
is sought to at this same time, by foren merchants, for increase of their
wealth? As the soil is fertile, because it is applied, so the wits be not barren
if theie list to bread.

But tho all this be true, yet we are in dispare, ever to se ours so 5. No hope
of any greatness.
fined, as those tungs were, where publik orations were in ordinary trade, and
the very tung alone made a chariot to honor. Our state is a Moanarchie, which
mastereth language, and teaches it to please: our religion is Christian, which
half repines at eloquence, and likes rather the naked truth, then the neated
term. What tho? Tho no English man for want of that exercise, which the Roman
had, and the Athenian used in their spacious and great courts, do prove a
Tullie or like to Demosthenes, yet for sooth he may prove very comparable to
them in his own common weal and the eloquence there. And why not in deed
co^parable unto them in all points thorough out for his natural tung? Our
brains can bring forth, our co^ceits will bear life: our tungs be not tied, and
our labor is our own. And eloquence it self is neither limited to language, nor
restrained to soil, whose measur the hole world is, whose judge the wise ear
is, not in greatness of state, but in sharpness of people. And tho foren
excellency were half in dispare, must our own best be therefore vnbeautified?
It should not sure, it should perch to the height, if I could help it. We may
aspire to a pitch, tho we pass no further. The quality of our monarchy will
admit true speaking, will allow true writing, in both with the brauest, so that
it do please, and be worthy praise, so that it preach peace, and preserve the
state. Our relligion condemns not any ornament of tung, which does serve the
truth, and presumes not above. Naie is not eloquence, which co^monlie is
carried from weight of matter, to folly in words, the great blessing of god, and
the trumpet of his honor, as Chrysostom calls S. Paul, if it be religiously
bent? Theie that have red the old church story, do find that eloquence in the
primitive church, overthrew great forces, bent against our faith, and enflamed
numbers to embrace the same, when strength from the truth, joined with force in
the word. Seek it to serve God, shun it to serve thy self, but where it serves
thine own turn, with warrant from him.

But will ye thus break of the common conference with the learned 6 It will let
the learned com munitie.
foren, by banishing the Latin, and setting over her learning to your own tung.
The conference will not cease, while the people have cause to enterchange
dealings, and without the Latin, it may well be co^tinewed: as in some cu^tries
the learnedder sort, and some near cosens to the latin it felf do already wean
their pens and tungs from the use of Latin, both in written discourse, and
spoken disputation, into their own natural, and yet no dry nurse, being so
well appointed by the milch nurses help. The question is not to disgrace the
Latin, but to grace our own. And why more a stranger in honor with us, then our
own people, all circumstances served? And tho no stranger, nor foren nation,
because of the bounder and shortness of our language, would deal so with us, as
to tra^sport from us as we do from other, because we devise no now, tho we
denison the old, yet we our selves gain very much there by in the course of
study, to be set at the first in the privy chamber or closet of knowledge, by
the mere frindship of our cu^trie tung: as Iustinia^ the Emperor says to the
stude^ts in law, when he made his institutio^s to be of imperial force, that
theie were most happy for having such a foredeal, as at the very first to
hear the Emperors voice, which those of elder time, did not attain unto so
soon, by the full term least of four hole years. And does not our la^guaging
hold us tak four years, and that full think you? If it hindered us no more, tho
it help us very much, the loss were the less. For the time it is most
certain, that we are hindered by tungs, tho we must harken unto them, till we
have help at home. And that our best understanding is in our natural tu^g, if
we mind and mark it, who can deny, which is able to se, that all our fore^
learning is applied unto use thorough the mean of our own and without the
application to particular use, wherefore serves learning.

But it is pity to deface such honorable antiquity. No pity forsooth to
honor our own, doing no worse to them, then theie did to us, by either Will ye
deface the Latin tung?
spoiling our cu^trie, as all histories witness, or defacing our lear ning if
the Celtopadie say true. O spare Babylon it is a fair town, save Dianaes
chirch, it is a fair temple, worship fore^ speech, for that ye may take from
it. Then be bo^d still to Babilo^, then be paganes still with Ephesus: the^ be
still borowers of the borowers themselves. If this opinion had been allwaie
maintained, we had allwaie worn old Ada^s pelts, we must still have eaten, the
poets akecorns, and never have sought corn, we must cleue to the eldest and not
to the best.

But why not all in English, a tung of it self both deep in conceit, and frank
in delivery? I do not think that any language, be it whatsoever, is better
able to utter all arguments, either with more pith, or Why not all in English?
greater planesse, then our English tung is, if the English vtterer be as
skillful in the matter, which he is to utter: as the foren vtterer is. Which
methink I durst prove in any most strange argument, even mine own self, tho no
great clark, but a great welwiller to my natural cuntrie. And tho we use and
must use many fore^ terms, when we deal with such arguments, we do not any
more the^ the brauest tu^gsdo and eue^ very those, which crake of their
cunning. The necessity is one between cu^trie and cuntrie, for communicating
of words, for uttering of strange matter, and the rules be limited how to
square the^ to the use of those which will borow the^. It is our accident which
restrains our tung, and not the tung it self, which will strain with the
strongest, and stretch to the furthest, for either government if we were
co^querers, or for cunning, if we were treasurers, not any whit behind either
the subtle Greek for couching close, or the stately Latin for spreding fair.
Our tu^g is capable, if our people would be painful. The very Gre kish soil, as
it is noted by some, did fine Philelphus beyond all account, being an Italia^
born. The same Italy says Erasmus, would have don the like in our Sr. Thomas
More, if he had been trained there. And may not labor and emploime^t, work as
great wonders in the English wits at home, as the air can do abroad? Is the
alteration of soil, the best mean of growing, and only the best? Naie sure,
wits be sharp enough every where, tho where the trading is less, and the air
more gross, the labor must be greater, to supply that with pains, which is
wanting in nature. Which when ye have don, the^ may you be bold to take that
twoworded and thriseworthie question, Quid non? to be your posie. But grant it
were an heresy, seeing our traning up is in the fore^ tungs, eue^ to wish all
in English. Certainly it is no falt to handle that in English, which is proper
to England tho the same argument well handled in Latin were like to please
Latinists. But an English profit must not be measured by a Latinists pleasur,
which is not for studies to play with, but for students to practis, and there
the better where every one ca^ judge: the prcipal benefit of our English
pe^ng. Besides all this to co^firm a true ground with a trial as true, how
many skle^der things, ar oftimes uttered in the Latin tung, and other foren
speches, which under the bare vail of a strange covert do seem to be somewhat
for to cou^tena^ce study, which if theie were Englished, and the mask pulled of,
that every man might se the^, would seem very mi serable, and make a sorry
show of simple substance, and be soon disclamed in of the parties themselves,
with some thought at the least, of the old sa ing. Had I wist, I would not. And
were it not the^ better to gain judge me^t thoroughout in our own english, the^
either to leaseit, or to lame in the fore^ Latin, or any tu^g else? To be led
on a long time with the opinion of something which in the end will prove plane
nothing, or but a simple something? These and such considerations concerning the
foren and our English tu^g make me thank the foren for my furtherance in
points, but withal to think how to further my natural. And therefore when
occasion does offer, as in these Eleme^tarie points, I am very well content to
deal in English, not renouncing either Latin or other learned tung, when my
ascent in writing shall require their use.

Now as this penning in English may seem not impertinent to the 3 For this
kind of pen ning.
use of my cuntrie, upon these and such grounds, so my to careful penning may
perhaps offend fom, as seming to obscure, and hindering my pretense by either
writing to hard matters, for the ignorant to perceive, or in to close a style
for mean heads to enter, or into rare terms, for plane folks to reach at. All
which difficulties be very great foes to the common man's perceiving, who
cannot understand but where he has been traned, and no good frinds to my
purpos, who pretend that I write to profit the most, which is that of the
vntraned and unskillful multitude. But tho these objections make a very
probable show, yet theie must give me leave to plead mine own cause, for both
matter, manner, and term, because the three difficulties be grounded upon these
three, and yet in all these, the answer is half made, because I mean my cuntrie
tung well, and therefore tho I did try some conclusions, to work that in the
hardest, which is easy in the softest, even some insufficiences might seem
pardonable, for that all which I do, concerns my cuntrie youth and tung, it
entertaineth her profit, and enuieth not her pleasur, and desires to se her
enriched so in every kind of argument, and honored so with every ornament of
eloquence, as she may vy with the foren, if I may work it with wishing.

But first to examine that of hardness in matter, which the reader Of hardness
in argument.
is said somewhat hardly to understand, and so'after to the other, for the
manner and word. Wherein I pray you does that hardness consist, which is
fathered upon matter? Or rather does not all hardness proceed from the person,
and none from the thing, not only in this case, but eueriewhere else? If that
person which undertakes to teach, do not know the matter well, which he is to
teach to lay it so open, as it may well be understood, seeing the best and
first mean to plane opening, is perfect understanding, is the thing therefore
hard, which is not thoroughlie had? Or if that person, which should understand,
either do not in deed thorough mere ignorance, or cannot in deed through small
knowledge, or will not of a will thorough some corrupt affection, is the thing
therefore hard, which is so strangely crossed by infirmity in the party? Sure
there is not. Sure there is no hardness in any thing at all, which is to be
delivered by a learned pen, be it never so strange from the common use,
howsoever it be vnrightlie charged, to shield negligence, if the party
deliverer do know it sufficie^tlie, and the party receiver be willing, and not
weiward. For what be those things, which we handle in learning? Ar theie not of
our own choice? Ar theie not our own inventions? Ar theie not the supplies of
our own need? And was not the first inuentour, very well able to open the
thing, which he did invent, before he did persuade it? Or did those men, which
admitted the thing being invented, make choice thereof before theie were
instructed, wherefor it would serve? Or could blunt ignorance have won such a
credit in a doutfull case, tho it pretended profit, to have been believed,
before it had persuaded by plane evidence? To have the thing proved, ear it
were perceived, that it would be profitable, not only for the present, but in
time to com also, and that in every man's eye, which had any foresight? If the
first could do so both in finding and persuading, both in first admitting, and
still continewing, his follower must do so, or be in falt himself, and deliver
the thing from opinion of hardness, which rises of himself, being not well
appointed for sufficient delivery. If the party which reads do not conceive
the thing well, because he is ignorant, he is to be pardoned, the disease
proceeding from mere infirmity: But if he do not, because he will not, having
ability to do, tho not with the most, he is punished enough by being peuish
ignorant: if he can do with the best, and will deal with the worst, blinded
understanding is the greatest darkness, and punishes the ill humor with
deprauing of reason, which should judge right. If the party deliverer be
himself weak, where mine own part coms in, being a deliverer my self, he is
either unadvised, if he write ear that he know, or not well advised if he me^d
not, where he misseth so he know wherein, and can tell how. Yet the readers
courtesy is some covert against error, for him that writes, as his pardon is
protection for him, that reads, if simple ignorance be their only falt,
without further want or defect in good will. It fares oftimes with readers in
the judging of books, as it does with beholders in judging of favor, as it does
with tasters in judging of relice. In the matter of favor where loving is, all
things be amiable, where lothing is, there nothing is liked, no not beawtie it
self. But where affection is voided and reason in place, being able to judge,
there beawtie is beawtie, and deformity is ill favored, and every thing so
weighed, as it is worth in deed. The like variety is in matters of diet, a
sikkish humor can relice nothing well, an ouergiuen delight likes nothing at
all, but his own choice: an healthful humor, and a right taste neither
ouerlothes with sickness, nor ouerloues with fant sie, but measures what he
t^steth with a right sense. And therefore in judge meant of favor the corrupt
opinion must be freid from passion: in discerning of iuyces the corruption of
taste must be cleared from distem per: and in matters of reason right
information must be mean to right judgment, or else that passion is to
imperious, whom information cannot rule. Howbeit I fear not any so strong a
passion in any my reader, and therefore I will on with my argument of
hardness.

Admit this division to be true, that the hardness about matter either rises
of the thing it self, or of the handling. Is the thing hard Is the thing hard?
say you? Then is it such as is strange to the reader, either for difference
of trade between the readers profession and the thing which he rea death, or for
want of full study, which marreth that in ha^dling, that was never so studied,
as it could be well handled. For the first, what affinity is there in respect
of their profession, between a simple plowman, a wary merchant, and a subtle
lawyer? between manuarie trades, and metaphysicall discourses, either for the
mathematiks, for physik, or for divinity? Again can any thing at all be easy
eue^ to students, who profess alliance, with the thing which theie study, as
the other do not, whose trades be mere fremd, if theie have not traveled
sufficie^tlie therein? I need say no more but only this, that where there is
no acquaintance in profession, there is no ease to help understanding, where no
familiarity, there no facility where no co^fere^ce, there no knowledge. If
the man delue the earth, and the matter dwell in heaven, there is no mean to
unite, where the distance is so great without compatibilitie. And whereas the
understanding in affinity of trade is clear insufficient, there is far more
hardness then in diffe rence of profession, because vain persuasio^ in such
imperfitnesse brings much more error, then weak knowledge can work
understanding. In the ignorant vnacquaint^d there may some good follow, if he
begin to like, but the lukewarm learned does mar his own way by preiudi cat
opinion. But all this while, if there be any difficulty about the matter, the
mean is cause of hardness, which is in the man, and not the property, which
is in the matter, and may easily be had, if it be carefully sought. I am
quik in teaching, and so hard to understand, but to whom and why? To him
forsooth that is not acquainted with such a current, neither yet familiar to the
matter so coursed. Well then, if want of acquaintance be the cause of
difficulty, and supposed hardness, acquaintance once made and frindlie
continewed will reme die that complaint, if the matter seem worthy the ma^s
acquaintance in his natural tung, for that is a question in a conceit blinded
with the foren favor, or if the party be desirous to be rid of such a gest, as
ignorance is, for that is another question, in a vain opinion ouerweining it
self. For ane hole book being written in English, and so many Englishmen being
so well able to satisfy even at full the most ignorant reader in any case of a
book in that tung, it were to great discourtesie, not to lighten a man's labor
with a short question, and as long an answer, but to pretend difficulty as a
shadow not to seek, where the matter it self being no pleasant tale, nor any
amorous de uise, but an earnest argument concerning sober and advised learning,
not acquainted with all readers, nor yet with all writers, does protest no ease
before it be sought, and deserving to be sought, either for knowledge sake to
instruct our selves, or for cuntries sake to enlarge her speech, if it be not
sought at all, and thereby not found, it does bewraie an unnatural idleness,
which desires rather to find salt the^ ease. For what reason is it for one to
labor to help all and, none to list to help that one? naie for any to list not
to help himself from the danger and bondage of blind ignorance? If the book
were all Latin, and no one word of the readers acquaintance, the^ the thing
were desperate for a mere Englishma^ to compass. Where as now any man may do
it with very small inquiry of his skillful neighbor. Wherefor if any thing
seem hard to such an ignorant, as desires to know, and does not know thorough
the argument it self, being mere strange to his kind of life he must handle the
thing often, and so make it soft, where it seems to be hard: and in questions
of dowt confer with those, which are cunning allredie. He must take acquaintance
and make the thing familiar if it seem to be strange. For all strange things
seem great novelties, and hard of entertainme^t at their first arrival, till
theie be acquainted: but after acquaintance theie be very familiar, and easy
to entreat. And words likewise, which either conueie strange matters, or be
strangers themselves, either in name or in use, be no wild beasts, tho theie
be unwont, neither is a term a Tiger to prove intractable. Familiarity and
acquaintance will cause facility, both in matter and in words.

If the handling do seem to make the hardness, and that does proceed from him
which delivers and penneth the argument, not only Is the handling hard?
by opinion of the mistaking reader, but in very plane truth also, and the
sou^dest judgments in that, whereof theie judge, he is worthy to be blamed,
which seeks to deliver withowt sufficient study: as again if it be not in him
for insufficient handling, but in the corrupt reader for the plane
misconstrewing, it deserves small praise in him, that misconstreweth without
either regard to courtesy, or reverence to truth, or his own credit, if it
prove contrary, the party misconstrewed being very well able to be his own
orator.

Concerning the manner, which I use in writing, because the manner and the
handling be so near cosens, as theie both be the pencills to delivery, if
there be any falt for hardness therein, that also proceeds of choice, being
careful to show from whence I com, that is from the students forge, who being
still acquainted with strong stele, and pithie stuf in reading of good writers,
cannot but resemble that metle in my style. In penning to prove close and
allwaie with cause, and to cause that, which follows to be suitable to that,
which went before, to seek more for sinews and sound strength, then for waste
flesh, is semelie for a student, and chefelie there, where he penneth for
perpetuity, where the reader may at leasur, either look upon the book, or
lay it down by him, neither is so straited, as to read all at once, or to
forgo the book: or to hear all at once, or to hear it no more, which is
co^mo^lie so in things but once handled in speech, and in books that be
unwilling to bewraie their writer. Such discourses as be altogether popular, or
upon present dispatch, and soon after to die, may well abide slight, because
their life is short. And where theie ar to pass straight way from the pen to
present use, and make no longer tariance then for such and such a feat, or when
they salute but the ear, and so to execution, without further delaie, then the
more plane at sudden, the more plausible in deed, and therefore in their kind
very excellent perfect. Because the matters being such as serve to that end,
the utterance must be such as may work to that end, without any thing to muse
on, where there is no time to muse in. But where musing must be, and the matter
is no currier to pass away in post, another current must be kept, and yet
the manner of delivery must not be thought hard, nor be compared with the
other, which is of any other kind, considering it teaches, and with such
planenesse, as the subject does permit. Does any man of judgment in learning,
and the Latin tung, think that Tullies orations and his discourses in philo
sofie, were of like known, or of like planesse to the people of Rome, tho either
in their kind, were allwaie like plane, as theie be to us, which, know the
Latin tung better then our own, because we pore upon it, and never mark our
own? no sure. To them theie were not, as it does appear by very many places
in Tullie himself, where he notes the difference, and confesses himself that
the newness of those arguments, which he transported from Greece, were cause of
some darkness to his common reader, and of some contempt to them, that were
cunning, because of the Greek which theie fantsied more. Yet neither ignorance
in the common reader, nor contempt in the learned could discourage his pen from
the benefit of his tung, by translating their learning, which the other wished
still to continue in Greek, he was desirous to conueie it to Rome, and passed
thorough with all, and gave time the turn, which in time turned to him, and
gave him that credit which he still enjoys until this day. And that this
was not only for the matter, which he wrote of, but also for the manner, which
he used in writing, naie even for the words, which the common man kn^w not,
being artificial and strange, he himself witnesses. Tullies opinion in this
case of mine and his own person.


I could write of these things, (meaning the arguments of philosofie) says he
like to Amafanius, naming some obscure apophthegmatarie discourser, but then not
like my self, and as plane as he, but not to please my self, nor to satisfy
the argument, as I should handle it. I must define, divide, distinguish, use
Art, use terms of Art, use judgment. I must as well mark from whom I fet my
transported learning, that theie may say theie meant so, as for whom I fet it,
that theie may say theie understand it. Whereof he does not any, and is
there for thought plane, and soon seen of them, which se nothing far. For if
plane humors must still be pleased, and be dealt withal, so daintilie, as theie
be put to no pains, to learn and enquire, where theie find difficulty,
thorough their own not knowing: If theie must be made a lure for learning to
descend to, in every kind, and rather to degenerate her self, then to desire
them, to learn to look up, what state stands skill in? He that made the earth
made hills and dales, made heights and planes, made smouthes and roughs, and
yet every one good in their several kind. Planenesse is good for a pleasant
course, and a popular style in ordinary argument, where no Art needs, because
the reader knows none, neither the matter is such, but it may be so uttered,
as being then in her best colors, when she is dressed for the common. Likewise
this pretended hardness, tho it be proper to the matter, and the man which
writes without hardness in deed, has her peculiar good, to whet a wit
withal, and to print deep even because it semes dark, and contains a matter,
which must be thrice looked on, ear it be once gotten. Travel is the coin,
which is current in heaven, for which and by which almighty God does sell his
best wares, tho of his great goodness, he do sometime more for some kind of
wits, in quiknesse and cunning, even without great labor, tho not without any,
then any labor can work in some other, to give us to wit, that his mercy is
the mistress, when our labor learns best. But in our ordinary, if carpetting
be knighting, where is necessary defense? If easy understanding be the
rediest learning, the^ wake not my Lady, she learns as she lies. If all things
be hard, which every one thinks hard, where is the prerogative and benefit of
study? What helps it us to study, if what we get by travel, be condemned as
to hard for the^, which study not. I will not allege, that the old learned
men used darkness in delivery in matters of relligion to win reverence to the
argument, as of another world, and not of ordinary speech neither that the old
wisdom, was expressed by ridles, proverbs, fables, oracles, and oracle like
verses, to draw on study, and set that sure in memory, which was soundly
studied for, ear it was so uttered. Be any of our best and eldest writers*
which we study at this day, and have been thought the best, each in their
kind, ever since theie wrote first, understood at once reading, and at the
very first, tho he that studieth them do know their tung as well, as we think
we know English, naie and better to, because it is more labored? or is their
manner of penning to be disallowed as dark, because the ignorant reader, or the
nice student may not straight way rush into it. That theie fell into that
short and close kind of writing, even for very pith to say much, where theie
speak least, the commenting of the^ declares, which opens that with great
length, which theie set down in some short sentence, naie in some short cut of no
very long sentence. Be not all the chief paragons and principal leaders in
every profession of this same sort, vnpearceable for the common, tho in their
common tu^g, but reserved to learning, as to store them that will study?

But may not this dark falt, be in him that finds it, and not in the Of such
as give sentence of other men's travel.
matter which is plane of it self, and is plainly uttered, tho it be not so
to him? Our daintiness deceiues us, our want of good will blinds us, naie our
want of skill, is the very witch, which bereueth us of sense, tho we pretend
cunning and countenance for learning. For every one that bids a book good
morrow, is not therefore a scholar, nor a sufficient judge of the book
arguments. What if he have studied very well, but neither much nor long? nor
once meddled or not soundly meddled, with the argument whereof he will be judge?
What if desire of preferme^t have cut of his study in the midst of his hope,
and greatest towardness? Naie what if what not, where the means be so many to
work infirmity? notwithstanding either countina^ce in the party, or opinion
in the people, do muster very fare, for some show of learning? Every man may
judge well of every thing, which he has studied well, and practiced full, (if
the study require practis), with all the circumstances that belong thereto.
Pretty skill some one way, and in some one thing, will sometimes glance at
further matter, and show some smak of further cunning, but no more then a smak,
no further then a glance. And therefore in my judging of another man's writing,
so much of my judgment is true, as I am able to prove soundly, if I were
sadly apposed by those, that can judge: and not so much as I may carry
uncontrolled, either by pleasing my self, or some as ignorant as my self.
Apelles could allow the cobblers opinion, where his clouting was his cunning,
but not an inch further. For my manner of writing, if I miss in choice, I miss
with warrant still, rather minding the matter with substance, then the person
with surface. For howsoever it be in speech, in that kind of penning, which
will be like to speech plane for plane argument, where performance must be
present, and delivery without delaie, certainly where the matter must bide
the tuch, and be tried by the hammer of a learned resolution, there would be
preciseness, there would be ordinat method, and delivery well coucht, every
word bearing weight, and every sentence being well, and even that well well
weighed, where both time does lend weing, and the matter deserves weing. Which
kind of writing tho it want estimation in some one age, by sleightnesse of the
time, yet may win it in another, when weight shall be in price, as some hundredth
years be written both to shrine saints and to autorise books.

For the general penning in the English tung, I must needs say this much,
that in some points of handling by the tung, there is none Some general
properties of the English tung.
more excellent then ours is. As in the teaching kind no work memory with
delight, like the old leonine verses, which run in rhyme, it does admit such
daliance, with the letter, as I know not any. And in that 1.
kind, where remembrance is the end, it is without blame, tho otherwise not,
if it com in to often, and bewraie affectation not sound but followed. In the
stay of speech, and strong ending, it is very 2.
forcible and stout, because of the monosyllab, which is the chief ground and
ordinary pitch of both our pen and tung. For fine translating in pithie terms,
either pere to, or passing the foren quiknesse, I 3.
find it wonderful pliable, and ready to discharge a quik conceit, in very
few words. For close delivery of much matter in not many words generally, it
will do as much in the primitive utterance, as in 4.
any translation. Which close delivery in few words may seem hard sometimes,
but only there, where ignorance is harbored or idleness is the idol, which
will not be entreated to crak the nut, tho he covet the kernel. I need no
example in any of these, whereof mine ownpenning, is a general pattern.
Neither shall any man judge so well of these points in our tu^g, as those
shall, which have matter flowing upon their pen, that will be so uttered, or will
utterly refuse him, which refuses that utterance. For as in other tungs there
is a certain property in their own dialect, so is there in ours, for our
delivery, both as pretty and as pithie, as any is in theirs.

In the force of words, which was the third note and pretense of Is the
hardness in words?
obscurity, there are to be considered. Commonesse for every man, beawtie for
the learned, bravery to ravish, borowing to enlarge our natural speech, and
rediest delivery. And therefore if any reader find falt with any word, which
is not suitable to his ear, because it is not he, for whom that word serves, let
him mark his own, which he knows, and make much of the other, which is
worthy his knowing. Know you not some words? why? no marvel. It is a metaphor,
a learned translation, removed from where it is proper, into some such place
where it is more properly used, and most significant to, if it be well
understood: take pains to know it, you have of whom to learn. It is not
commonly so used, as I do use it, but I trust not abused, naie peraduentur in
a more stately calling, then ever you herd it. Then mark that the place does
honor the parson, and think well of good words, which tho you handle but with
ordinary lips, and those sometimes foul yet in a fairer mouth, or under a finer
pen theie may com to honor. Is it a stranger? but no Turk. and tho it were an
enemies word, yet good is worth the getting, tho it be from your fo, as well by
speech of writers, as by spoill of soldiers. And when the foren word has
yielded it self, and is received into favor, it is no more foren, tho of fore^
race, the property being altered. But he need not lak words, that will speak
of words. Howbeit in this place, there needs not any further speaking of
them, neither which be common, neither which be bewtifull, nor which be brave,
nor which be borrowed, nor that for any ornament therein we give no place to
any other tung.

For mine own words and the terms, that I use, theie be generally English. And
if any be either an incorporate stranger, or otherwise translated, or quite
coind a new, I have shaped it as fit for the place, where I use it, as my
cunning will give me. And to be bold that way for either enfranchising the
foren, or translating our own, without to manifest insolence, and to want on
affectatio^, or else to invent new upon evident note, which will bear witness,
that it fitteth well, where it is to be used, the word following smoothly, and
the circumstance about bewraing, what it meneth, till often using do make it well
known, we are sufficiently warranted both by president and precept of them,
that can judge best. Wherefor to say that in plane terms, which I mean as
planelie, he that is soundly learned, will straight way sound a scholar: he
that is well acquainted with a strong pen, whether in autors or in use, will
soon sift a close style: he that has skill in language, whether learned and
old, or liked and new, will not wonder at words which he knows whence theie
ar, neither yet marvel at a conceit quiklie delivered, the like whereof he
meteth often abroad. And therefore such skillful men, as I fear not their
judgment, because cunning is courteous, so I pray their frindship, because
their countenance is credit. For those that want of this, and cannot judge
right, tho theie be sharp censors, and commonly uttering their talking talent,
I must crave their pardon, if I pass not for their censuring, which I take for
no judgment. And yet I am content to bear with such fellows, and pardom them
their errors in my behalf, so theie that can judge will pardon me mine in their
courtesy. Those that neither ca^iudge right for want of cunning, nor may seem
to judge wrong, for bewraing their own weakness, if theie desire to learn in
any case of dout, theie have the learned to counsel, as the smatterer to
corrupt. If theie like and allow, the profit is theirs, but if theie do not,
theie fraie me not from writing, wherein I hope at length either to win their
favor, by deserving well, or at least their silence, by cumbring them to much,
tho I win not their favor. Here to conclude in general for the manner of
writing and words in our English tung, this is my opinion, that as for choice
of argument to prove with, some very near to the substance it self of that,
which is in question, some further of, tho of probable service, there is regard
to be had by him that proves, and if he do his dewtie, the thing is
discharged, howsoever it be charged: so in the ha^ dling and manner thereof, the
like respect being had for both perspicuitie and property to the thing, tho
some one point seem strange, to the man that will judge, the deliverer is
discharged. For either invention of matter or elocutio^ in words, the learned
know well, in what writers theie ly: and those that be unlearned must learn to
think of them, before theie think to judge, least by missing the level, which
the writer uses, theie miss of that right, whereby theie should judge. For
the matter it self, which shall be the subject of any learned method, as I have
said allredie, acquaintance will make it easy, tho it seem to be hard, as the
manner also, tho it seem to be strange, if the thing it self, may deserve
acquaintance, which will not appear before acquaintance. And a little hardness
yea in the most obscure, and most philosoficall co^clusions, may never seem
tedious to a conquering mind, such as he must have, which either sekes himself,
or is desirous to se his cu^trie tung enlarged, and the same made the
instrument of all his knowledge, as it is of his needs. But I have been to
tedious, my good cu^triemen and courteous readers, and yet not so, where no have
is enjoined, but to read at leasur, and not all at once: now am I to move my
request unto you, A request for courtesy.
which I mentioned at the first, or your frindlie construction and
cu^trima^like favor. The reverence to learning, which allureth the good student
to embrace her in his youth, and auanceth him to honor, by her presence in his
age, will entreat the learned in general for me, for endeavoring my self to
recover her right, by whose only authority themselves be of account. The
samenesse inprofession will work me more Hesiod. (...).
favor among my fellow teachers, then found emulatio^ can work me
discountenance: the favorable side discovering good nature, and learning in
deed: the peuish detracting, a beggarly spite, and some want of skill. The
consideration of mine own present profession and this last conceived hope of
the learned teachers does put me in mind, to aduertis them in general, of one
special point, which in dewtie must move the^ no less then me, to the
careful thought of redress in our schools, which may abide the amendme^t. I
pretend not here relligion, which charge in conscience, neither yet private
maintenance, which enforces travel, but only the munificence and that
extraordinary of our princes and parlements, toward our hole order in our
cuntries behalf: who partly by suffering us to enjoy old immunities, partly by
granting us diverse other exemptions from personal services and ordinary
paiments, wherewith our fellow subjects ar co^monlie charged, both encourage us
to labor, and bind us to requite them. For the continuance whereof, and the
assured enjoying, all the teachers in England have great cause to honor the
right honorable. Sr. Walter Mild All schoolemasters bound to these five
personages.
may knight chancellor of her majesty's court of exchequor and one of her
majesty's most honorable privy counsel. The right honorable Sr. Roger Manwod
knight Lord chief baron of her majesty's court of Exchequor, the right
worshipful master Robert Suit, master John chlinch, master John Sotherton,
Esquiers and barons of the same her maiestes court, the two first Sr. Walter
and Sr. Roger great founders to learning both within the universities, and in
the cuntries about the^: the other three Esquires great favorers to relligion
and learning eueriewhere. For the small consideration, or rather the oversight
of some to passionat sessors in the last subsidy making that a private question,
which was a general privilege, and scant charitablie seking the damage of a
number, by quarrel to some few, it pleased these honorable and worshipful
personages upon humble suit for the common benefit of a number of poor men, to
take the cause to protection, and to conster the statut, both as the parlaments
did mean it, and as we have still enjoyed it, to the common benefit of our hole
company. Which their great goodness to the favor of our order, as it
deserves at our hands an honorable remembrance, so it binds us further to
the common care, for the which we were favored. Whereunto as I find my self to
be maruellouslie affectionate, so dout I not but there is the like affection in
many of the same liuerie, whose frindship I crave* for favorable construction,
whose conference I desire for help in experience: being thankfully ready in
this common course, either to persuade or to be persuaded. Of those that are not
learned I pray frindship also, even more then half of right: by cause I labor
for them, in who^ vntha^k fullness is a falt, if my good will be none. In
general I desire but to win so much of all men, a^ Dauus in Terente desires
of his master when his good counsel had no good success. Because I am your
bo^d man (says the slave to his master) my dewtie is, to travel hand and
foot, night and day, yea with danger of my life to do you good, as common
courtesy on the other side binds you, to hold me excused, to pardon and forgive
me, if any my good meaning have contrary is show, that I do may miss, but
yet I do my best. I am bond to my cuntrie, and bound to her people, I will do my
best endeavor, and crave pardon with poor Dauus, where my best is begiled.
Common courtesy is natural, where there is no desert: forgiveness is
relligious, even where there is a falt: but where good will deserves well, tho
it fortun to fail, if favor be not showed, will not courtesy condemn, will not
relligion repine? God bless us all to the auancement of his glory, the honor
of our cuntrie, the furtherance of good learning, the good of all degrees, both
prince and people.

FINIS.
An advertisement for the print
Because the end of ortografie is the direction of the pen, therefore, where the
print has not sufficiently expressed my forms, the writer will conceive them
soon, and use both distinction by accent, and dispatch by charact to his most
auantage according to the rules. But I must crave pardon generally, for both
mine own and the printers errors, which will not be avoided, where many ar to
work, and negligence will make one. Small falts, tho many, be soon perceived,
and as soon supplied by any ordinary reader, but such as these be, require a
very intelligent mind.

Page 12. lin. 1. Not must be left out. Page 12. lin 13. wrong must be wring.
Page 33. lin. 31. unrefined reason, what great etc. the sentence continued.
Page 39. lin. 18. the foredeall which childern ar at by their education. etc.
Page 48. lin. 6. any more then himself shall need. Page 51. lin. 37. which is
to great a degree Page 60. lin. 1. resonablie well. Page 66. lin. 29. proving
more. Page 68. lin. 13. parts not parties. Page 69. lin. vlt. when put out.
Page 84. lin. 26. theie descend to particularities. Page 99. lin. 18. ar the
transporters. Page 101. lin. 24. for your particular choice. Page 12. lin. 35.
or as age and over wearing. Page 103. lin. 29. Wherefor if it shall please. Pa.
258. lin. 23. Celtopadie for Celtopaedie Page 268. line 3. this for thus lin.
4. no for to lin. 8. sound for found. etc.

But I leave the unreasonable reside^ to the gentle and considerate reader.


