A DISCOVRSE of Trade, From England unto the East Indies: Answering to diverse
Objections which are usually made against the same.

By T. M.

LONDON. Printed by Nicholas Oaks for John Pyper. 1621.

Brief Notes directing to the several parts which are handled in the Answers
made to the four Objections against the East India Trade in the Discourse
following.
The parts of the first Objection, Page 4.
1. IN the first part is showed the necessary use of Drugges, Spices, Indico,
Raw-silke and Callicoes. 2, In the second part is declared the great sums of
ready moneys which are yearly saved to Christendom in general, by fetching
the wares of the East Indies directly in shipping from thence. page 8. 3. In
the third part, is proved, that the Trade from England to the East Indies does
not consume, but rather greatly increase the general stock and Treasure of
this Realm. page 19.
The parts of the second Objection, Page 29.
1. In the first part is set forth the noble use of Ships; and that the timber,
planke, and other Materials of this Kingdom for the building of Shipping, are
neither become scant nor dearer since the East India Trade began. Ibidem. 2.
In the second part is showed the great strength of shipping and warlike
provisions, which the East India Company have always in readiness for the
service of the Kingdom. page 31.
The parts of the third Objection, page 33.
1. The East India Trade does not make victuals dear, but is a means to
increase our plenty. Ibidem. 2. In breadeth more Mariners then it does
ordinarily consume, and disburtheneth the Kingdom of very many leude people.
page 35. 3. It has not destroyed any other Trade or shipping of this Realm,
but has increased both the one and the other; besides the great addition of it
self unto the strength and traffic of this Kingdom. page 37. 4. It does not
increase the number of the poor of this Realm (as is erroniously supposed)*
but it does maintain and relieve many hundreds of people by their employments,
and Charity. page 42. 5. It does save the Kingdom yearly 75000.l. sterling,
or thereabouts, of that which it was accustomed to spend in Spices and Indico
only, when they were brought us from Turkey and Lixborne. page 43.
The parts of the fourth Objection, Page 46.
1. The East India Trade does not hinder the employment of his Majesty's Mint.
Ibidem. 2. The proposition to put down the East India Trade is grounded upon
idle and false reports, tending to the great hurt of the King and his people.
page 48. 3. A brief Narration of a Kingdoms riches, with the four principal
causes which may decay the general stock and treasure of this Realm in
particular. page 49.
A DISCOVRSE OF Trade from England unto the East Indies: Answering to diverse
Objections which are usually made against the same.
THe trade of Merchandise, is not only that laudable practice whereby the
intercourse of Nations is so worthily performed, but also (as I may term it)
the very Touchstone of a kingdoms prosperity, when therein some certain rules
shall be diligently observed. For, as in the estates of private persons, we
may account that man to prosper and grow rich, who being possessed of revenues
more or less, does accordingly proportion his expenses; whereby he may
yearly advance some maintenance for his posterity. So does it come to pass
in those Kingdoms, which with great care and wariness do ever vent out more
of their home commodities, then they import and use of foreign wares; for so
undoubtedly the remainder must return to them in treasure. But where a
contrary course is taken, through wantonness and riot; to over waste both
foreign and domestike wares; there must the money of necessity be exported, as
the means to help to furnish such excess, and so by the corruption of men's
conditions and manners, many rich countries are made exceeding poor, whilst
the people thereof, too much affecting their own enormities, do lay the fault
in something else.

Wherefore, industry to increase, and frugalitie to maintain, are the true
watchmen of a kingdoms treasury; even when, the force and fear of Princes
prohibitions cannot possibly retain the same.

And therefore, as it is most plain, that proportion or quantity, must ever
be regarded in the importing of foreign wares; so must there also be a great
respect of quality and use; that so, the things most necessary be first
preferred; such as are food, raiment, and munition for war and trade; which
great blessings, when any country does sufficiently enjoy; the next to be
procured are wares, fitting for health, and arts; the last, are those, which
serve for our pleasures, and ornament.

Now, forasmuch, as by the providence of almighty God, the kingdom of
England, is endowed with such abundance of rich commodities, that it has long
enjoyed, not only great plenty of the things before named, but also, through
a superfluity, has been much enriched with treasure brought in from foreign
parts; which has given life unto so many worthy trades, amongst which that
unto the East India by name; the report whereof, although it is already spread
so famous through the world; yet notwithstanding, here at home, the clamorous
complaints against the same, are grown so loud and general; that (my self
being one of the Society it has much troubled my private meditations, to
conceive the means or true grounds of this confusion. But at the last I
resolved my self, that the greatest number of these exclaimers, are led away
in ignorance; not having as yet, discerned the mysteries of such weighty
affairs; Some have been transported with envy, as not participating in the
said Society, or being thereby hindered (as they conceive) in some other
trade; and others, wholly corrupted in their affections; who whilst they
willingly run into these errors, do also labor diligently to seduce others;
that so, this good and glory of the kingdom, might be subverted by our
selves, which by the policy and strength of Strangers, cannot so easily be
abated; wherefore, it is now a fit time to meet with such injurious courses,
by a true Narration of the passages in the said East India Trade; answering to
those several objections, which are so commonly made against the same; That
so these misunderstandings and errors may be made known unto the whole body
of this Kingdom, which at this present time is most worthily represented in
those noble assemblies of the high Courts of Parliament; where I hope the worth
of this rich Trade, shall be effectually inquired, and so in the end obtain
the credit of an honorable approbation.

The first Objection.
It were a happy thing for Christendom (say many men) that the Navigations to
the East Indies, by way of the Cape of Good hope, had never been found out; For
in the fleetes of ships, which are sent thither yearly out of England,
Portingall, and the Low countries; The gold, silver, and Coin of Christendom,
and particularly of this Kingdom, is exhausted, to buy unnecessary wares.

The Answer.
THe matter of this Objection is very weighty; and therefore, it ought to be
answered fully; the which that I may the better perform, I will divide the
fame into three parts.

1 In the first, I will consider, the necessary use of the wares, which are
usually brought out of East India into Europe; namely, Druggs, Spices,
Rawsilke, Indicoe, and Callicoes.

2 In the Second; I will intimate the manner and means, by which the said
wares have been heretofore, and now are brought into Europe.

3 In the Third and last; I will prove, that the Treasure of England, is not
consumed, but rather greatly to be increased by the performance of the said
Trade.

Touching the First; Who is so ignorant, in any famous common wealth, The First
part concerns the use of Indian wares.
which will not consent to the moderate use of wholesome Druggs and comfortable
Spices? Which, have been so much desired in all times, and by so many Nations;
not thereby to surfeit, or to please a lickorish taste (as it often happens,
with many other fruits and wines) but rather as things most necessary to
preserve their health, and to cure their diseases; even as it is most notably
set forth, Sir. Thomas Elyot his Castle of health. Rembert Dodoneus his history
of Plants.

The French Academy second part, and others.


by some learned men, who have undertaken, to write upon this subject; and
therefore; it shall be altogether needless here to discourse upon their
several operations and virtues, seeing that, he that lists, may be well
instructed therein, if he will peruse the volumes, which are penned by the
learned, for the benefit of all those, who shall make use thereof.

But if peradventure, it be yet further urged; that diverse Nations, live
without the use of Druggs and Spices: the answer is, That either such people
know not their virtue; and therefore, suffer much by the want of wares so
healthful; or else, they are most miserable; being without means to obtain
the things, which they so much want; but sithence I intend to be breife, I
will insist no further upon this point; For the Obiecters might as well deny us
the use of Sugars, Wynes, Oils, Raysons, Figgs, Prunes, and Currandes; and
with far more reason exclaim against Tobacco, Cloth of gold and Silver,
Lawnes, Cambricks, Gold and Silver lace, Veluets, Sattens, Taffaeties and
diverse others manifactures, yearly brought into this Realm, for an infinite
value; all which as it is most true, that whilst we consume them, they
likewise devour our wealth; yet nevertheless, the moderate use of all these
wares has ever suited well with the riches and Majesty of this Kingdom.

But I will come to the Raw-silkes and Indico; this being so excellent for the
dying of our woollen-cloathes, thereby so much esteemed in so many places of
the world; that ornament, together with the great relief and maintenance of so
many hundreds of poor people; who are continually employed, in the winding,
twisting, and weauing of the same; Insomuch, that by the cherishing of this
business (as his Majesty, for his part is graciously pleased to perform, in
remitting the impost of Silk) it may well be hoped, that in short time, France
and the Low Countries of late years do make great quantities of wrought silk,
of which wares they were heretofore served from Italy.
industry will make the art to flourish, with no less happiness to this
Kingdom, then it has done (through many ages) to diverse states in Italy, and
lately also to the Kingdom of France, and to the united Provinces of the Low
countries.

Now as touching the Trade of Callicoes, of many sorts, into which the English
lately made an entrance; although it cannot be truly said, that this
commodity is ptoffitable, for the state of Christendom in general (in
respect they are the manifacture of Infidells, and in great part the wear of
Christans) yet nevertheless, France, Italy, South Barbary, and other Countries.
this commodity, likewise is of singular use, for this common wealth in
particular; not only therewith to increase the Trade into foreign parts; but
also thereby, greatly to abate the excessive prices of Cambricks, Holland, and
other sorts of Linnen-cloath; which daily are brought into this Kingdom for a
very great sum of money. And this shall suffice concerning the necessary use
of the Indian wares; The Second part Shows the manner and the means by which
Indian wares have been and now are brought into Europe.
In the next place, I will set forth the manner and means of their importing
into Europe.

It is an error in those men; who think that the Trade of the East Indies
into Europe had first entrance, by the discovery of the Navigations by the Cape
of Good-hope. For many years before that time, the traffic of those parts,
had his ordinary course by shipping from diverse places in the Indies; yearly
resorting with their wares to Mocha in the Red Sea, and Balsera in the
Persian-Gulfe: From both which places, the Merchandise (with great charges)
were after transported ouerland by the Turks upon Cammells, 50. days journey,
unto Aleppo in Soria, and to Alexandria in Egypt, (which are the Mart Towns,
from whence diverse Nations, as well Turks, as Christians, do continually
disperse the said wares by Sea into the parts of Europe:) by which course, the
common enemy of Christendom (the Turk) was Master of the Trade; which did
greatly employ, Rates upon all sorts of Spices. 22. per cent. Rawe-Silkes
esteemed about 2. per cent. Indico about 8. per cent.
and enrich his Subjects, and also fill the Coffers of his own customs, which
he exacted at very high rates; But by the providence of almighty God, the
discovery of that Navigations, to the East Indies by the Cape of Goodhope (now
so much frequented by the English, Portingalls, and Dutche; and also attempted,
by other Christian Kingdoms) has not only much decayed the great commerce,
between the Indians and the Turks in the Red Sea; and in the Persian Gulf
(to their infinite hurt, and to the great increase of Christian trade,) but it
has also brought a further happiness unto Christendom in general, and to
the Realm of England in particular, for the venting of more English
commodities; and for exporting of a less quantity of silver out of Europe,
unto the Infidells, by many thousand pounds yearly, then has been
accustomed in former times; as I shall prove most plainly by that which
follows.

And First, it will be necessary to set down the quantity of Spices, Indico,
and Persian Raw-silke (which is yearly consumed in Europe) and in them all to
consider the cost with the charges to lade the same commodities clear aboard
the Ships from Aleppo; and the like of all the self same wares, as they have
been usually dispatched from the Ports of the East Indies; wherein, will
appear that happiness, which many do so much oppose; especially our own
Countrie-men, under the gilded terms of the Commonwealth; whilst being
indeed either ignorant, Such people as affect not the good of this Kingdom
or ill affected, they do not only grossly err themselves, but also cause
others to hinder as much as in them lies, the glory and welfare of this
Kingdom; but leaving them, I will set down the said wares, in their quantity
and prizes as follows; and first,

At Aleppo. The quantity of Spice, Indico, and Persian Raw-Silke, yearly
consumed in Europe.

ll l s^ d 6000000. of Pepper, cost with charges at Aleppo at 2. s^ the l.
600000. 00 00 450000. of Cloves at 4. s^. 9. d. the pound 106875. 10 00 150000.
of Mace at 4. s^ 9. d the pound 35626. 00 00 400000. of Nutmegs, at 2. s^ 4. d
the pound 46666 13 04 350000. of Indico at 4. s^ 4. d the pound 75833 06 08
1000000. of Persia raw silk at 12. s^ the po. 600000 00 00 1465001 10 00

Now follows the same wares both for quantity and quality at their several
prizes as they are to be bought and laden clear of charges.

In the East Indies.
ll l s^ d 6000000. of Pepper cost with charges in India 2. d the pou. 62500 00
00 450000. Cloves at 9. d the pound 16875 00 00 150000. Maces at 8. d the pound
5000 00 00 400000. Nutmegges at 4. d the pound 6666 13 04 350000. Indico at 14.
d the pound 20416 12 04 1000000. Persia Raw-silke at 8. s^ the pou. 400000 00
00 511458 05 08

So that by the substance, and sums of these accounts, it does plainly
appear, that the buying of the said quantity of Raw-silkes, Indico, and
Spices, may be performed in the Indies, for near one third part of the ready
moneys, which were accustomed to be sent into Turkey to provide the same; The
exportation of the value of 953543. l. starling out of Christendom into Turkey
yearly saved.
So that there will be saved every year the value of 953543.l. 4 s. 4. d.
starling of ready moneys, that heretofore has been exported out of
Christendom into Turkey* which is a matter of such note and consequence, that
it may seem incredible, before the circumstance be duly considered; and
therefore least I should leave the matter in doubt, it is requisite; that I do
make an explanation of some particulars.

And principally, it must not be conceived, that this great advantage, which
has been spoken of* is only the Merchants gain; for the Commonwealth of
Christendoe, has a very great part thereof in the cheapnes of the wares, as
shall be (God willing) proved hereafter in his due place.

Secondly, the time of the Merchants forbearance, and interest, is very long:
his adventure and assurance much dearer; his charges of shipping, victuals,
Mariners, and factors their wages, far greater, then by the voyage into Turkey
for the same wares; so that the former great difference must be understood in
these particulers; whereby we may perceive to our comfort, that the Materials
of the kingdom, and the employments of the subjects (in liew of ready
moneies) becomes a very great part of the price which is paid for the said
Indian wares; Instance only, that ten shillings employed in Pepper in the
East Indies, will require thirty and five shillings for all charges whatsoever
to deliver it in London.
which cannot hurt the State (as some erroniously suppose) but greatly help
it, as I shall better prove in that which follows.

First therefore, I show for an undoubted truth, That the Persians, Moors and
Indians, who trade with the Turks, at Aleppo, Mocha, and Alexandria, for
Raw-silkes, Drugs, Spices, Indico and Callicoes; have always made, and still
do make, their returns in ready money: for other wares, there are but few
which they desire from foreign parts; some Chamblets, Corrall, wrought silk,
woollen-cloth, with some trifles, they do yearly vent in all, not for above
40. or 50. thousand pounds starling; The great Sums of money which the
Persians and the Indians carry yearly out of Turkey.
which is no valuable sum in respect of that wealth which is carried from
Aleppo and Constantinople into Persia for Raw-silkes, when least, 500000.
pounds starling Per annum: and from Mocha about 600000. pounds starling
(likewise yearly into India) for return of Callicoes, Drugs, Sugar, Rice,
Tobacco, and diverse other things. So here is still a very great Commerce
maintained between those Infidels; not only for the Callicoes of many sorts,
and other wares (which concern their own use) but also for the Raw-silkes of
Persia, which are altogether transported into Christendom.

How worthy an enterprise is it therefore in the English East India Company?
by whose endeauours, there is now good hope to turn a great part of this
wealthy Trade into England, by shipping directly from the Persian-Gulfe,
whereby the employments, The East India Company do endeavor to bring the
Raw-Silkes from Persia directly by Sea.
traffic, and Customs of the Turks, may be still more and more impaired;
and the general Treasure of Christendom? much less consumed; as is already
performed for the business of Spices and Indico.

And who shall then doubt our want of Silver to mainetaine the Trade? if by
this way we do obtain the Silk, which with more advantage and conueniencie,
will draw the money to this Mart, then it has been heretofore conveyed unto
those remote dominions of the Turk.

And least peradventure it should be thought, that the traffic in those parts
by the Christians for the Persian Silk, is performed by change for other
wares, or by the money which proceeds of the sales of many rich commodities,
which yearly they sell at Aleppo, Alaxandria, Constantinople, and these parts.

The answer is, that neither the Venetians; French, nor Dutche, do vent so
much of their own Country commodities in those parts, as do provide their
necessary wants of the proper wares of Turks* such, as are the fine
Raw-silke, made in Soria, Chamblets, Grogerans, Cotten-woolles, Marcellis
sends yearly to Aleppo and Alexandria at least 500000. l. sterling, and
little or no wares. Venice sendes about the value of 100000. l. and a great
value in wares.

The Lowcountries sends about the value of 50000. l. sterling moneys, and little
wares. Messina 25000. l. in ready money.


Cotten-yarne, Gauls, Flax, Hemp, Fleece-woolls, Rice, Hides, Wax, and
diverse other things; so that still the raw-silkes of Persia, must be bought
with ready money. Only the English have more advantage then any other Nation in
this kind, for they vent so great a quantity of broade-cloathes, tin, and
other English commodities, that the proceed thereof, does not only provide a
sufficient quantity of part of the said Turkish wares (which fit their use,)
but also a proportion of about 300. great balls of Persia Raw-silke yearly.

And if in any year, they chance to buy a greater quantity of silk, then
must and do they furnish the same in ready moneys from the Ports of Marcellis,
Genouay, Ligorne, Venice, or the Netherlandes. Neither are these the only
means, whereby the Empire of the Turk is so abundantly stored with God and
Silver, to the performance of the Indian-trade. For, many are the Christian
ships, which yearly lade with corn for ready moneys in the Archipelago;
Great is the commerce from Poland, Hungary, and Germany, Abissians a people in
Ethiopia whose influence has made them dull, lazy and without arts; enjoying
diverse Mines of Gold and one of Silver, which do procure their wants of foreign
wares.
with Gold and Dollers, for Chamblets, Grogerans, and other things: But that
which is very remarkable, is the great quantity of gold and some silver coined
in Grand-Cairo, which by two several Carrauans (in bullion) is yearly brought
thither from the Abissians country in Ethiopia, for return of many rich
commodities, as Veluets, Sattens, Cloth of Gold, Taffaties, Woollencloath:
polished Corrall, and other things.

Thus by the coherence of the Turkish-Trade with the Christians, Persians and
Indians, I have showed both the manner and the means, whereby the East-Indians
wares have been heretofore, and yet are, in part, procured into Christendom.
But least it should seem incredible, that the Turk would let so great a Mass
of Treasure yearly to pass his Dominions, to the Indians and to the Persians
his professed enemies: I will make the matter yet more plain.

And First, concerning the Raw-silkes, it is already showed, that he has the
money from the Christians, besides the benefit he reapeth in their customs,
with great employments also for his Subjects. And for the Callicoes (his whole
Empire having little or no other means for Linen) he cannot possibly be
without them, Turkey has little means for Linen but only from India.
although it has, and does greatly exhaust his treasure, neither does he
gain any manufacture by the same, as the Christians have always done by the
Raw-silke, to the great relief of innumerable poor people, so much provided
for, by the policy of all well governed and flourishing commonwealths; As by
this occasion, The proceedings of some States in Italy for the maintenance of
Arts.
and in a business of the like kind, I may instance the States of Genouay,
Florence, and Luca; who for the maintenance of Arts and Trade, do provide
Raw-silkes out of Sicilia for the value of 500000. pounds starling at least
yearly; and for the payment thereof they do vent at Naples, Palermo,
Messina, and those parts, a certain quantity of Florence* Rashes and some
other wares, for about 150000. pounds starling per annum; So the rest, The
ready moneys which are yearly carried from some States of Italy into Sicilia.
being 350000. l. sterling, is supplied all in ready moneies; which treasure
they do willingly forsake, to procure their Trade; for experience has taught
them that Trade is their employment, and does return them treasure; for by
those silks (being wrought, transported and sold at Franckforde and other
Marts) they have the better means, to furnish their contracts with the King of
Spain in Flanders; and so from Spain the Silver must return again to Italy.
But if I should run out in this and other particulars (fiting our purpose) it
would make me too tedious, and so carry me beyond my aim, which is to be
brief.

Wherefore, I will proceed to clear some doubts, in those men, who perhaps
not having the knowledge of occurrents in foreign parts, might think, that
neither Venice, nor Marcellis have the means or yet the minds, to exporte
such great Sommes of ready monyes, yearly out of those Dominions; especially
Marcellis being a part of France, where neighborhoode does daily tell us, that
gold and Silver, may not be conveyed out of that Kingdom, for any valuable
Sum, more then is permitted for the necessary use of Travelers; Yet
nevertheless experience has likewise taught us, that for the effecting of
those Trades (whereof we now speak, and which they esteem so much) there is
a free extraction out of the said places, of moneys both gold and silver;
whereof with them there is no want; for, the said wares do procure it
abundantly.

How Marcellis and Venice are furnished with ready moneys.
First, to Marcellis, it comes not only from Genouay, Ligorne, Cartagenia,
Malliga, and many other Port towns of Spain and Itally, but also from
Parris, Roane, Saint Malloes, Tolouse, Rochell, Deep, and other Cities of
France; who want not means to have great store of Rialls, and Dallers from
Spain and Germany.

And in like manner, the Venetians distributing the said Raw-silkes, and other
wares into the several States of Itally, Germany, and Hungaria, (who have but
few commodities fitting their barter or exchange: but only monyes) are
therewith abundantly served; For the mines of Hungary and Germany afford
good quantity of Gold and Silver; And likewise the States of Itally,
especially Genouay, Florence, and Millane, have ever store of Rialls out of
Spain in satisfaction of many great disbursments, which those Merchantes make
for that King in his occasions of Itally and Flanders; The Italyan Merchants
do furnish the king of Spain with money in Italy and Flanders.
of all which, I might make a large discourse, but I conceive I have said
sufficient, to show how the trade of the East Indies has been, and now is
brought into Christendom generally: what money is yearly sent out; by whom;
and the possibility, or means which they have to perform it. I will
therefore in the next place, satisfy the Objections; that it is not the
East India Trade, which wastes the Gold, and Silver, Coin, or other treasure
of this kingdom in particular.

For first, who knows not, The third part does show how the East India, Trade
does enrich this Kingdom.
that gold in the East Indies has no ratable price with Silver? Neither has
the Silver coin of England any equal value with the Spanish Rialls according
to their several prizes here, Besides that, his Majesty has not authorized
the East India Company, to send away any part of this kingdoms Coin either
Gold, or Silver, but only a certain limited sum of foreign Silver yearlie;
which as they dare not exceed, so never have they as yet accomplished the same.

For it does plainly appear in their books; that from the original and
first foundation of the Trade, How much money and wares the East India Company
have sent forth ever sithence the beginning of this Trade.
in Anno 1601. until the month of July, Anno 1620. they have shipped away
only 548090. l. sterling in Spanish Rialls, and some Dollers; whereas, by
license, they might have exported in that time 720000. l. sterling.

Also they have laden away in the same term of xix years, out of this
Kindgome 292286. l. sterling in Broad-clothes, Kersies, Lead, Tin, with some
other English and foreign commodities; which is a good Addition; and vent of our
wares, into such remote places; where heretofore they have had no utterance at
all.

The vent of English wares increased in the Indies
And note, I pray you, how time and industry, has bettered this Trade, when in
the last three years, there has been sent more wares to the Indies, then in
the xvi. years before; and yet our expectation is not at the highest, for
those newborn Trades within the Red Sea, and in the Persian Gulf, do bid us
hope for better things, as lately by letters from Spahan, we understand of
great quantity of Raw silk prepared by the English factors, which (by Gods
assistance) we may expect here about the Month of August next, with
encouragement also, to vent our English cloth, and Kersies in good quantities;
the like of Iron, Tin, and other things; whereof experience (of those
already sold) has given us sufficient approbation of their valliditie.

And now (omitting much matter which might be written touching the discoueries
of other Trades from one Kingdom or port to another, in the Indies: Our stock
may be much increased by Trade from Port to Port in the Indies.
with the commodities thereof, whereby the employment of our ships, together
with the stock of money and goods which is sent out of England in them, may
be much increased) I will draw to a conclusion of the point in hand; and show,
The moneys sent to the Indies is all foreign Coin-
that whatsoever Sums of foreign ready monyes are yearly sent from hence
into the East Indies, His Majesty in the letters Pattents granted to that
Company, has notwithstanding with singular Care provided, The East India
Company are obliged.
that the brethren of the Company, shall yearly bring in as much silver, as
they send forth; to bring in as much money as they carry out of the Realm.
which has been always truly performed, with an overplus, to the increase of
this Kingdoms treasure: Neither is it likely, that the money which is thus
contracted for, by the Company at certain prices, and to be delivered them at
times appointed, would be otherwise brought into England, but only by virtue
and performance of the said contracts; for, without this assurance of Vent,
together with a good price for the said monyes, the Merchants would undoubtedly
make their returns in other wares; Tobacco, Raysons, Oils, and Wines, whereof
there is no want, but rather too much Smoke.
the use and extraordinary consume whereof, would be found less profitable to
the Commonwealth, when the matter should be duly considered, as I shall yet
further endeavor to demonstrate.

And here I will suppose, That the East India Company may ship out yearly
100000. l starling (more or less) as occasion may be offered; yet it is most
certain, that the Trade being thus driven, with such sums of ready moneys, it
will not decay but rather much increase the treasure of the kingdom: which to
prove, I will briefly set down, the substance of the English Trade unto the
East Indies, concerning the quantity of the several sorts of wares, to be
yearly bought there and sold here: with the usual prices given for them in
both places. And first, I will begin with their Cost and charges laden
clear aboard the ships in the East Indies.

In the East Indies.
l. s^. d. 2500000. ll. of Pepper at 2. d.ob. the pound 26041 13 04 A propotion
of such Trade as is hoped yearly to be brought into this Realm from
East India.
150000. of Cloves at 9. d. the pound. 5626 00 00 150000. of Nutmegs at 4. d.
the pound. 2500 00 00 50000. of Mace at 8. d. the pound. 1666 13 04 200000. of
Indico at 14. d. the pound. 11666 13 04 107140. of China Raw silks at 7. s^.
the pound. 37499 00 00 50000. of Callicoes of several sorts, rated at 7. s^.
the piece one with another. 15000 00 00 100000 00 00

All the said Merchandise have bin often experie^ced, or bought at or about the
prices above written; and we do hope for our parts (besides the Trade of
Raw-silkes from Persia) yearly, to lade from the Indies, such quantity of the
several sorts of wares as are here set down (if it shall please his
Majesty, to protect and defend us concerning the Articles of agreement made
with the Dutche, that they may not violate any of them to our hindrance or
damage) all which wares in England will yield (as I do conceive) the prizes
hereafter following, Viz. In England.
l s^ d 2500000. ll. of Pepper at 20. d. the pound. 208333 06 08 150000. of
Cloves at 6. s^. the pound. 45000 00 00 150000. of Nutmegs at 2. s^ 6. d. the
pound. 18750 00 00 50000. of Mace at 6. s^ the pound. 15000 00 00 200000. of
Indico at 5. s^. the pound. 50000 00 00 107140. of China Rawsilkes at 20. s^.
the pound. 107140 00 00 50000. pieces of Callicoes of several sorts, rated at
20. s^. the piece one with another. 50000 00 00 494223 06 08

How much the kingdoms stock may increase yearly by trading to the
East Indies.
So that here would be our own money again; and more, the sum of 394223. l.
06. s^. 08. d. advanced toward the general stock of the Kingdom. For
although the East India company shall disburse the greatest part of the said
sum advanced unto his Majesty for custom and impost; 2500. Tonnes of
shipping will lade home all the wares before written from the East Indies. And
the materials of the said shipping (unwrought) is worth about 15000l. sterling
and also unto the Factors, Officers, and Mariners, for wages, together with
the cost of shipping Victuals, Munitions, Assurance and the like; yet all
these (the Materials of shipping only excepted) are but transmutations and no
consumption of the Kingdoms stock.

But if any man object, and say, that the said commodities being brought into
England (as is before written) they are either consumed in the land, or being
transported into foreign parts, they are changed into other wares; So that
still we want our 100000. l. in ready money:

1 The answer is; first, that in the occasion of this dispute, we must
conceive the said wares to be of no use for this kingdom, but only for so
much, as do concern the Trade thereof.

2 And Secondly, in the said Trade, we must consider, that although the said
goods be sent out, and returned home in other wares from foreign parts; yet
still, they are negotiated to the increase of the said stock, and for the
employment of the Subjects.

Lastly, if there be a resolution to determine and end the business: who
doubts, that the whole value, India wares will bring ready moneys into the
Realm.
may not be presently returned hither in ready moneys? For in Italy, Turkey,
and other places, where they are most vendible to profit, there likewise is the
money free to be exported at all times and by whomsoever.

And as it is most certain, that some other Merchandise, sent out of this
Kingdom were the means to bring in the 100000. l. in ready moneys, We have
no other means to procure Treasure but by Trade and Merchandise.
which is here supposed to be sent and employed in the East Indies (as
aforesaid) so likewise, there is the same power in these Indian wares, to
procure other sommes of ready moneys, to be brought into this kingdom: For
let no man doubt, but that money does attend Merchandise, for money is the
prize of wares, and wares are the proper use of money; so that their Coherence
is inseperable. The French and the Venetians send the vallue of 600000. l.
sterling yearly in ready money into Turkey.
And if the French and the Venetians, made any doubt of this, they would not so
willingly permit the vallue of 600000. l. sterling, or more in Spanish Rialls
and Dollers, yearly to be carried out of their Dominions into Turkey: whereof
three quarter parts at least are employed, only for the buying of Persia
Raw-silkes, which commodity does presently enable them with ready money from
diverse other States to perform the Trade; whereby their wealth does much
increase, Trade makes some States very rich which have little other means.
and their people are greatly employed. So to conclude this point, I will only
add, that the East India Trade alone (although it be driven in no amplier
manner then is before written) is a means to bring more treasure into this
Realm then all the other trades of this kingdom (as they are now managed)
being put together.

For if the rule be true, If the general Trade of this kingdom does export a
greater value in wares then it does import yearly, then does our treasure
increase
that when the value of our commodyties exported does ouer-ballance the worth
of all those foreign wares which are imported and consumed in this kingdom,
then the remaynder of our stock which is sent forth, must of necessity return
to us in Treasure. I am confident that upon a diligent and true inquiry it will
be found, that the ouerballance of all our other Trades together will not
amount unto so great a sum of money as the East India Trade alone does over
balance in this kind.

And to make the matter yet more plain, The trade to the East Indies may be
said to export 480000 pounds and to importe 120000. l. yearly. So the
ouerballance is 360000. pounds sterling.
whereas it is already said that 100000. l. in money exported may import about
the value of 500000. pounds sterling, in wares from the East Indies, we must
understand that part thereof to be properly called our importation that this
Realm does consume, which is about the value of 120000. pounds sterling
yearly. So the remainder being 380000. l. is matter exported unto foreign
parts in the nature of our Cloth, Lead, Tin, or any other native
commodities, to the great increase of this kingdoms stock; and that also in
so much Treasure, so far as the East India Trade can be rightly understood to
subsist in this particular.

Every action ought especially to be considered in his end.
For as all humane actions have their termination and ends, so likewise there
must be an end assigned unto the affairs of the East Indies; which are then
truly said to be finished, when this Realm is served, and the remaynder of
those wares which are sent from hence beyond the Seas, sold there and
converted into money; which likewise from thence may be brought away freely and
without the danger of Law or prohibition.

The East-Indian wares which were sent beyond the seas, are sold and have then
final end in money, which might be brought into this Realm in that kind, if
our other Trades did not divert the same.
Forasmuch therefore as it is well known to many men, that monyes are thus
procured by the Sales of Indian wares to profit, in the parts of Turkey, and
at Ligorne, Genoway, the Netherlands, Marcellis, and other places: yet
notwithstanding if all the said coin, or any part thereof should be diuerted
from this Realm by some other new employments or affairs, it must
nevertheless be granted, that the said India wares had their final end in
moncies. But I will cease to heap up any more arguments, to prove a matter
which is already made so plain; wherefore leaving this Objection, I will
endeavor to give Answer to the next.

The second Objection.
The timber, Plancke, and other materials, for making of shipping, is
exceedingly Wasted, and made dearer, by the building of so many great Ships,
as are yearly sent to Trade in the East Indies; and yet the State has no use
of any of them upon occasion; For either they are not here; or else they come
home very weak, and unserviceable.

The Answer.
THis East India Trade seems to be borne and brought up an Unthrift, for it
wastes and consumes all; Neither does it good to any.

But the Objection, in some part is very weak:
And in the rest it is mistaken.
For first, The first part concerns the folly of the Objection.
concerning the weakness thereof; would men have us to keep our woods and
goodly trees to look upon? they might as well forbid the working of our woolls,
and sending forth our cloth to foreign parts; for both are means alike, to
procure the necessary wares, which this Kingdom wants. Do they not know
that trees do live and grow* and being great, they have a time to dye and
rot, if opportunity make no better use of them? and what more noble or
profitable use then goodly Ships for Trade and war? are they not our barnes
for wealth and plenty, serving as walls and Bulwarks for our peace and
happiness? Do not their yearly buildings maintain many hundred poor people,
and greatly increase the number of those Artesmen which are so needful for
this common wealth?

The providence of the East India company for timber and Planke.
And is not all this good performed also (with great providence) by bringing in
yearly store of Timber, and other provisions from Ireland? Why then, where is
the great wast and dearnesse? I am sure, the East India Company finds it not;
for whereas they do only buy their provisions in Hampshire, The East India
Trade has not indeared the materials which serve to make Ships
Essex, Kent, and Barkeshire, in all which places they now may have both
Timber, Planks, Sheathing boards, Trenalls, and the like, both for goodness and
price, as cheap (yea better cheap) then they have bin this fifteen years;
and likewise in all that course of time their Books do plainly show that
those wares have never varied much; for if they have risen any small matter in
one year they have fallen as much the next. And yet I pray you observe
(besides the East India Companies buildings) the many goodly ships, which
are daily made for other private Merchants (such as England never had before:)
and that which is most remarkable, is, the continual late buildings of his
Majesty, thereby yearly adding more strength and glory of great Ships, to
his Royal and matchless Navy; so that, here we see this supposed wast and
want is not considerable.

Yea but, say they, The second Part shows the mistaking in the Objection
the East India Ships are never here, to serve the Kingdom upon occasion: Or
if they beat home, they are weak, and unfit for service.

In trade of Merchandise our Ships must go and come, they are not made to
stay at home; Yet nevertheless, the East India company are well prepared at
all times, The warlike provision which the East India Company keep in store
to serve his Majesty, and his Kingdoms, with many warlike provisions, which
they always keep in store; such as Timber, Plancks, Iron-workes, Masts,
Cordage, Anchors, Caske, Ordinance, Powder, Shot, Victuals ready packed,
Wine, Sider, and a world of other things, fitting the present building,
repairing and dispatch of Ships to Sea; as may be plentifully seen in
their yardes and storehouses at Deptforde, and more especially in those at
Blackewalle; which are grown so famous, that they are daily visited and viewed
by strangers, as well Ambassadors, as others; to their great admiration of his
Majesty's strength, His Majesty's strength in the East India Company alone.
and glory, in one only Company of his Merchants, able at short warning to set
forth a fleet of Ships of great force and power.

For it is well known to al men who please truly to be informed, That the
East India Company (besides their fleetes of Ships going and coming and
also abiding in the Indies) are continually building, repairing, rigging,
victualling, and furnishing to Sea, with all provision needful for such a
long voyage, some 7. or 8. great ships yearly; which are to be seen at an
Anchor in the River of Thames in a great forwardnes some 5. or.6. months
together, before they commonly depart for the Indies, which is about the month
of March: and they are no sooner got off from the coast of England, but shortly
after, is the season of our ships to return from the Indies; who come not home
so weak as some would have them; for how often has experience bin made of our
ships which have performed 2. or.3. several voyages to the East Indies? Yet
at their return, they have bin indocked, The ships which return from the
East Indies home, may be repaired in a very short time.
new trimmed and lanched out again, fitted for the like voyages, in less then
2. months. But it will be needelesse to spend any more time in showing the
errors of this 2. Objection: therefore I will rather come to the handling of
that which follows.

The third Objection.
The voyages to the East Indies do greatly consume our victuals, and our
Mariners: leaving many poor Widows and Children vnrelieued; Besides, that
many Ships are yearly sent forth to the East Indies, and few we see as yet
returned; Also, this Trade has greatly decayed the Traffic and shipping,
which were wont to be employed into the Streights: And yet the said Trade to
the East Indies, is found very unprofitable to the Adventurers: Neither does
the Commonwealth find any benefit by the cheapenesse of Spice and Indico,
more then in times past.

The Answer.
Why, what a world of mischiefs have we here?

1. Dearth. 2. Mortality. 3. Destruction. 4. Beggerie. 5. And never a whit the
near.
A very Teame of calamities, drawing on to misery; is it not then high time
to seek a remedy? yes verily, and it will be easily done, because these evils
never were (as yet at least) procured by the East India Trade, as I shall show,
by answering all the parts in order as they stand: and first of Dearth.

It is both natural and just, that every Kingdom, The first Part concerns
Dearth.
State, or Commonwealth, should feed and cherish up the Native people of all
degrees and conditions whatsoever, to their preservation of life and health,
with such means and moderation, as their plenty shall afford; and this is
not only due to them in the time of their abode at home, but also upon all
occasions of voyages into other Countries beyond the Seas, wherein they shall
be employed for their own maintenance, and for the good of the Commonwealth.

The manner how the East India Company do victual their ships.
Now therefore concerning the provision of victuals (which in this Kingdom is
yearly prepared for the setting forth of those Ships which sail to the East
Indies,) it is well known to many men, that it is always proportioned, for
about eighteen months; whereas commonly the voyages prove a year longer, so
that this ouer-plus of time, is furnished with the victuals of foreign parts.

And likewise for the Bread and Biscuit which is shipped from hence, has it not
always been made of French Corn, purposly brought over hither (and that at a
dear rate) only to preserve the plenty of our own grain? until now of
late days that the Farmers here begin to cry out and say, That the
cheapnesse of Corn does disinable them to pay their dear Rents: Thus do the
East India Company every way accommodate their proceedings for the good of the
Kingdom.

And further concerning their Drink, is it not a very great part water? Some
Wine and Sider, and but little Beer.

Also the Flesh they eat, is Beef and Porke, and that only for three days
in a week; the rest of their victuals is Fish, some Butter, Cheese, Pease,
Oatemale, and other things; all which is proportioned into a very sparing diet
to every man by allowance: so that here is no excess nor riot, or any other
means to make our victuals scant and dear, as is by some erroniously
supposed; but rather by this course of life, our plenty is much advanced. And
so I will give answer to the next part which is mortality and great decay of
Mariners.

The life of man is so precious, The Second Part concerns Mortality
that it ought not lightly to be exposed to danger; And yet we know, that the
whole course of our life, is nothing but a passage unto Death; wherein one can
neither stay nor slack his pace, but all men run in one manner, and in one
celeritie; The shorter liver runs his course no faster then the long, both
have a like passage of time; howbeit, the first has not so far to run as
the later.

Now, it is this length of life which Nature seeks, and States likewise
endeavor to preserve in worthy men; but none are accounted so worthy in this
nature, save only they, who labor in their vocations and functions, both for
the public good, and for their private benefit.

Thus may we esteem our good Mariners, Good Mariners are accounted worthy
men in a Commonwealth.
to be of no small use unto this Commonwealth: but take them from their
laudable and accustomed employments, for want of voyages to Sea; we see what
desperate courses they do then attempt, by joining, even with Turks and
Infidels, to rob and spoil all Christian Nations; so that we may conclude, we
must not only breed up Mariners, but also seek by Trade, to give them
maintenance.

Well, all this is true, but (say they) the East India company does neither
breed nor maintain, but destroy the wonted number of our Mariners.

How can this be, when it is most certain, that England (besides the East
India fleets) had never yet more shipping then at this present? neither do any
of them stay at home for want of Mariners, no, not at this time, when many
hundred Sailors are employed in extraordinary service, for his Majesty in a
Royal fleet of ships, now at Sea: besides those great numbers of our best
Mariners, which have been and daily are wasted and taken prisoners by the
Turks; so where is this want, or what is our misery more then the want of true
information in them that are so ill persuaded of our company?

Is it not certain, that as the East India voyages are long, The breeding of
400. Mariners yearly. Besides that the fear of a few men's death ought not to
overthrow or hinder the performance of honorable actions for the service of
the King and commonwealth.
so likewise in Natures course many should die by length of time although they
stayed at home? And to recompense the loss of those that dye, do not the East
India company with great providence, yearly ship out at least 400. Landmen in
their fleets, which in one voyage prove good Mariners to serve the Kingdom
and Common wealth, unto which many of them were a burden before they obtained
this employment? And thus is the Kingdom purged of desperate and unruly
people, who being kept in awe by the good discipline at Sea, do often change
their former course of life, and so advance their fortunes.

Neither indeed are these voyages so dangerous and mortal, as is reported; for
how many of our ships, have gone and come from the East Indies, without the
loss of five men in a hundredth? Our Mariners own disordered life is that
which kills many of them.
Others again have had worse success in the first beginning, when the
seasons, the places and their contagions were not so well known unto us; yet
time has taught us many things, both for the preservation of health, and
speedier performance of our voyage the^ heretofore. But the Method of my
discourse bids me write more of this in the next part, which is destruction;
and this I must divide into two parts.

In the first I will consider the want of diverse ships sent to the East Indies,
which are wasted there.

And in the second, I will answer the supposed overthrow of the Turkey trade,
together with much of our shipping which were wont to be employed thither.

First therefore concerning the decay of our ships in the Indies, it cannot be
denied, The third Part concerns the decay of shipping which have been sent to
the Indies.
but there has been great spoil of them in these three last years; not by
the dangers of the Seas, or by the strength of enemies; but by unkind and
unexpected quarrels with our neighbors the Hollanders, who have taken and
surprised twelve of our ships at several times, and in sundry places, to our
unspeakable loss and hinderance; together with the death of many of our
worthyest Mariners, Our troubles with the Dutch
who have been slain and died prisoners under their hands: and this has so
much the more (...) the rumor of their mortality: Neither list I here to
aggrauate the fact, more the^ thus briefly to give answer to the objection: for
our late union with the Dutch, does promise a double recompense of gain in time
to come.

And they who make this Trade so poor and unprofitable, are much mistaken in
the reckoning; for the present losses which causes many adventurers so much to
despair, is not in the substance of the Trade, but by the evil accidents
which hane befalne the same: and to make this point more plain, I must yet
declare some other particulars: in which I will endeavor very briefly to set
down the sum of the whole business, which the English has hitherto
performed in the East Indies.

First, therefore I do observe that since the beginning of this Trade, until
the Month of July last Anno 1620. The sum of the affairs to the East Indies
ever since the Trade began.
there have been sent thither 79. ships in several voyages, whereof 34. are
already come home in safety richly laden, 4. have been worn out by long
service, from port to port in the Indies: 2. were overwhelmed in the trimming
there: 6. have been cast away by the perils of the Seas; 12. have been taken
and surprised by the Dutch, whereof diverse will be wasted, and little worth
before they be restored: and 21. good ships do still remain in the Indies. So
this is a true account of our ships.

Account of all the money and goods which has been sent to the East Indies
ever since the beginning of the Trade.
And next concerning our stock, it is a certain truth, that in all the said
ships there has been sent out in ready money as well out of this Realm, as
from all other places wheresoever beyond the Sea (which has not been landed in
this Kingdom) the vallue of 548090. pounds sterling in foreign coin; and
together with the said money there has been shipped the vallue of 292286.
pounds sterling in sundry sorts of English and foreign commodities; all which
moneys and wares amounting unto 840376. pounds, have been disposed as hereafter
follows.

First, there has been lost 31079. pounds sterling in the 6. ships which are
cast away: and in the 34. ships, which are returned in safety, there has been
brought home 356288. 356288. l. sterling has been returned from the East
Indies which did produce here toward charges 1914600. sterling.
pounds sterling in diverse sorts of wares, which have produced here in England
toward the general stock thereof 1914600. l. sterling; for the charges
arising here, is but a change of effects from one to another, as has been
said before in this discourse: So there ought to remain in the Indies, to be
speedily returned hither, 484088 pounds: neither can we conceive that our
charges and troubles with the Dutch, will have wasted more then the odd 84088.
pounds sterling: so that I am confident, that there yet remains 400000 pounds
sterling of good estate, for both the joint stocks. There remains yet in the
East Indies to be returned home from thence about 400000 l. starling.
And what a great value of Indian goods this sum of money may (by Gods blessing)
shortly return in our ships, which are there ready to bring the^, the example
here does teach us to make up the reckoning. So that notwithstanding our great
charges of discoueries, our losses by the danger of the seas, our quarrels and
infinite hinderance by the Dutch: yet here the kingdom has and shall have her
stock again with a very great increase, although the Merchants gains
concerning the two joint stocks will prove but poor, in respect of the former
voyages, which have not had the like hinderance.

And thus in a few lines may be seen, much matter truly collected with some
pains, out of the diverse volumes of the East Indian Books.

Concerning the decay of shipping and Trade into Turkey.
Now concerning the decay of Trade and shipping which were wont to be employed
into Turkey, I doubt, that in time it will likewise be affirmed, that the East
India Company, have hindered the vent of our white Cloth in the Netherlands,
which to report were a very strange thing. But (praised be God) to our
comfort, we see the great increase of goodly Ships, daily built and employed,
by the Turkey Merchants with vent of more of our English Cloth (by one third
part at least) then in times before the East India trade began.

Yea, but (say they) we have lost the trade of Spices, and Indico, from Aleppo
into England.

Well, I grant they have; yet the Kingdom has found it with more profit by
another way; and they likewise are recompensed with a greater Trade, by the
exporting from hence of the selfsame commodities into Italy, Turkey, and
other places: neither can it be less profitable for this kingdom, to turn
the Trade of Raw-Silkes from Aleppo, and to bring them from the Persian gulf,
with one third part less money, then it does now cost in Turkey; Besides, that
by this means, the money proceeding of our English Cloth, Tin, and other
wares in Turkey (not finding commodities sitting to return for England) would
undoubtedly be brought home in Gold, as it has been performed heretofore,
when by superfluity of stock sent from hence in Spice, together with our
English wares; the Merchants (being thereby furnished with a sufficient
quantity of Turkish commodities) brought home the remainder of their stock of
those years in gold for a great value. The Turkey Merchants can and will
justify this truth.


Thus does it plainly appear, that these reuolutions of Trades, have and do
turn to the good of the Commonwealth; neither has the affairs of the East
Indies impaired or decayed any other Trade, Shipping or Mariners of this
Realm; but has mightily increased them all in it self. Wherefore let us now
take a view of this noble addition of the kingdoms strength and glory.

But this I must not do, by setting down the number of our English shipping
row in the Indies, or lately gone that way; for they have been heaped thither,
these three last years together without return, save only five ships in all
that time; the rest have been kept there to oppose the fury of the Dutch; but
now we are at union, we shall (by Gods assistance) daily exspect diverse great
ships with rich returns.

And for the future time, The strength of the East India ships.
this Trade I do conceive, will royally maintain ten thousand tuns of
shipping continually: (That is to say) going, and returning, and abiding there
in the Indies; which said shipping will employ two thousand and five hundred
Mariners at least; and the building with the repayring of the said ships,
here at home will set to work five hundred men, Carpenters, Cawkers, Caruers,
Ioiners, Smiths, and other laborers, besides many officers; and about 120.
Factors, in several of the Indies. And so from these matters of great
consequence, I must begin to write of Beggary.

The fourth Part concerns the poverty of widows, etc^
The poverty of Widows and Fatherless is matter of great compassion, and
does always move Christian hearts to commiseration and charity; whereby many
receive relief and help of those who^ God has blessed with better means:
but how this poverty should totally be prevented, it seems not only
difficult, but altogether impossible: For besides the evil accidents and
miseries, which ever attend on our humanity, we see how many daily (even
through their own folly and wilfulness) do as it were desperately plunge
themselves into adversity. And thus the number of those is great, who having
the charge of wife and children, are notwithstanding altogether without means
and arts to procure their maintenance; whereby some of them, wanting grace, do
run a desperate course, and have untimely ends. The East India Trade does employ
many poor men, and deboist people which other trades refuse
Others again, being better inspired, seek for employment, but find it not, or
with great difficulty: for, who does willingly entertain a man poor and
miserable, charged with a family, and peradventure debauched in conditions?
Neither do any of our other Merchants voyages to foreign parts accept of
those nouices who never have been used to the Sea: Wages before hand is not
given in other Merchants voyages, neither yet so great wages as the East India
company pay.
So that when all the other doors of charity are shut, the East India gates
stand wide open to receive the needy and the poor, giving them good
entertainment with two Months wages before hand to make their neeedfull
provisions for the voyage: And in the time of their absence, there is likewise
paid unto their wives for maintenance, two other months wages upon account of
every years service: and also if any chance to dye in the voyage, the wife
receives all that is found due unto her husband (if he do not otherwise
dispose it by will:) and this often happens to be more money then ever they
had of their own together in any one time.

And likewise, are not many poor Widows, When did any of these widows beg
for relief in our Churches as others often do?
Wives and Children of Blacke-wall, Lime-house, Ratcliffe, Shadwell, and
Wapping, often relieved by the East India company with whole Hogsheads of good
Biefe and Porke, Biscuit and doales of ready money? Are not diverse of their
children set on work to pick Okam, The East India company their charity.
and other labors fitting their age and capacity? What might I not say of
repayring of Churches, maintenance of some young Scholars, relieuing of many
poor Preachers of the Gospel yearly with good sums of money; and diverse
other acts of charity, which are by them religiously performed, even in the
times now of their worst fortunes? for all which I hope there shall be a reward
unto them and theirs. And so I come to the fifth part of this third Objection.

And here I must intimate how much they are deceived who think that Spices and
Indico are no better cheap in England now, then in times past, The fifth Part
concerns the cheapnesse of Spice and Indico at this present in respect of
former times.
before the East India trade began.

For, it is an undoubted truth, that in those days we often paid 6. shillings
or more for a pound of Pepper, and seldom or never less then three shillings
and six pence the pound; whereas since the Trade has come directly from the
Indies, it has been bought commonly at several prices between 16. pence and
two shillings the pound; but I will make the difference of price appear more
plainly by setting down the quantities of Spices and Indico, which are
yearly spent in the Realm of England, together with the lowest prices, which
they were wont to sell at, when we brought them from Turkey and Lixborne; and
the like concerning their usual prices now that we bring them from the East
Indies directly; And first as from Turkey.

Prices of spice and Indico in former times.
400000. ll. of Pepper at 3. s. 6. d. the ll. 70000. l. 00. s. 00 d 40000. of
Cloves at 8. s. the ll. 16000 00 00. 20000. of Maces at 9. s. the ll 9000 00
00. 160000. of Nutmegs at 4. s. 6 d the ll. 36000 00 00 150000. of Indico at 7.
s. the pound. 52500 00 00. 183500 00 00

And the self same quantity and sorts of wares are commonly sold at the prices
here under written now in these later times.

Prices of spice and Indico in these later times.
400000. ll. of Pepper at 20 d. the ll. 33333. l. 06. s. 08. d 40000. of Cloves
at 6 d. the ll. 12000 00 00. 20000. of Maces at 6. s. the ll. 6000 00 00.
160000. of nutmegs at 2. s. 6 d the ll. 20000 00 00 150000. of Indico at 5. s.
pound. 37000 00 00. 108333. 06 08

So that this Trade in Spice and Indico only, does save the Kingdom yearly
74966. l. 13. s. 04. d. which is a matter worthy to be observed; and so much
the rather, because it is a certain truth, Less then 18. thousand pounds
sterling in the Indies, will buy Spice and Indico to serve this Realm for a
year, which is not halte so much money as it spends beyond the seas to buy
Currants only, or to buy Tobacco.
that less then a quarter part of this sum of money which is thus saved
yearly, shall buy in the Indies the full quantity of all the several sorts
of wares before written, which do serve for a years provision for this Realm
of England; but still, it must be remembered, that the custom, impost, wages,
victuals, shipping, and other charges (which are to be added) will be a greater
sum, then the money which is paid for these wares in the Indies; but as I have
noted before, the said charges do not consume the Kingdoms stock, although
it does greatly abate the Merchants gain.

And to conclude this point, The wares only which are sent out of this kingdom
into the East Indies are of sufficient value to (...) this Realm (...) Indian
wares, Persian Raw Silks only accepted)
I will add unto that which has been said; that the commodities only which
we now send yearly into the East Indies and Persia, are of sufficient value
there to return us Indico, Spices, Drugs, and all other sorts of Indian wares,
( Raw-Silkes of Persia only excepted) for one years consume, or more in this
Kingdom; So that now all the money which is sent forth in our Ships does
procure an ouer-plus of the said wares to the furtherance of Trade from India
hither, and after from hence to foreign parts again, to the great employment
of the Subjects, and enriching of this Realm, both in Stock and Treasure; all
which is matter very worthy to be diligently observed; And so I come to give
answer unto the fourth and last Objection.

The fourth Objection.
It is generally observed that his Majesty's Mint has had but little
employment ever sithence the East India Trade began; Wherefore it is manifest,
that the only remedy for this, and so many evils besides, is to put down
this Trade: For what other remedy can there be for the good of the
Commonwealth?

The Answer.
This fourth objection may be divided into three parts: 1. An evil declared.
2. A remedy propounded. 3. And counsel demanded.


The first Part concerns his Majesty's Mint
And first concerning the Evil or want of Silver, I think it has been, and
is a general disease of all Nations, and so will continue until the end of
the world; for poor and rich complain they never have enough: but it seems
the malady is grown mortal here with us, and therefore it cries out for
remedy: Well, I hope it is but imagination makes us sick, 25000. pounds
weight at least of Silver yearly melted down into Plate, besides old Plate new
fashioned, as by credible report.
when all our parts be sound and strong; For who knows not the inestimable
treasure of this Kingdom in Plate possessed by the people thereof almost of
all degrees; in such measure, as never has been seen in former ages?

And for his Majesty's Mint, it is well known, that there has been coined in
five years together since the East India Company began, 6214. There has bin
coined great store of Gold and Silver in his Majesty's Mint since the East
India Trade began.
pounds weight of Gold, and 311384. pound weight of sterling Money; all which
Gold and Silver do amount unto the sum of 1213850. pounds of sterling Money;
How then does this Trade turn the current and employment of the Mint?

But upon the sight of this truth, perhaps it will be said, That we must
resort unto the present times, (the Mint being idle now.)

To which I answer, That likewise the Mint had little or no employment for
coynage of Silver in former times, There has bin little or no Silver coined in
some years, when the East India Company sent out very small sums of money.
when the said Company did not export above fifteen or twenty thousand pounds
sterling at the most per annum; no, nor yet in the years 1608. and 1612: when
in the former they shipped out but 6000.l. -- 00. s. -- 00d. and in the latter,
but 1250.l. -- 00. s. -- 00.d. sterling. So that both ways we see, that the
Mint has had very great employment five years together, sithence the East
India Trade began; and also it has been without employment diverse years,
when the East India Company have sent away but very small sums of money;
wherefore of necessity there must be some other causes and means whereby our
Silver is not exported only, but also it is not imported into the Realm as in
former times. For we have not had the means by our own plenty, not by the
scarsitie of our neighbors, (for the space of the last fourteen years
together) to send out hundreds of Ships laden with Corn, as in times past
which was returned home in Silver; but rather of late years (as is much to be
feared) a great quantity of our money has been carried out of the Kingdom,
Some causes and means which were wont to bring Silver into the Realm, are
ceased at this present time.
for that Corn which has been brought us from the East Countries, and other
places, to supply our wants. Thus times do change, and our fortunes change
with them: neither list I to make this matter plainer, by setting down those
means, which heretofore brought us store of money, even out of France and
other places, which now are ceased. But without any further meddling in the
Mint, I will come to the remedy which some propound, by putting down the East
India Company.

The Second Part concerns the putting down of the East India Trade.
But here our comfort is, that the Obiectors are not our Judges, whose wisdom
and integrity laboring for the honor of his Majesty, and the good of his
Kingdom, will soon perceive the mischiefs of this supposed remedy. And that
the pretended evil which many with malice chase, is that great good, which
other Nations seek by policy and strength to keep, The East India Trade is
greatly desired by other Christian Nations.
and likewise to obtain; In which proceedings, it concerns us, especially to
observe the diligences and practices of the Dutch; who with more gladness
would undertake the whole Trade to the East Indies, then with any reason we can
abandon that part thereof, which we now enjoy; neither can our restraint from
the Indies keep our Silver from thence, as long as the Dutch go thither: for
we know, that devices want not to furnish such dessignes; and when their Ships
return from India, shall not our Silver our again to help to pay a double
price, or what they please, for all those wares which we shall want for our
necessities?

Thus should the Dutch increase their honor, The Dutch might grow strong and
rich by our destruction.
wealth and strength, whilst we abate, grow poor and weak at Sea for want of
Trade; and call you this a Remedy; no, rather term it Ruin, Destruction, or
what you list; And so I come unto the conclusion or last part.

And here I must confess my self aground, The Third Part concerns the
council which the Obiecters demand.
for this matter is much too high for my handling: besides, my excuse is fair,
having already done my task to clear the East India Trade from imputation;
the which, for want of learning, although I have performed, without variety of
words or eloquence: yet it is done with all integrity of truth, in every
particular, as I shall be ready to make proof upon all occasions, which may
be offered.

And yet before I make an end, although I cannot satisfy every man's desire, in
such measure as is necessary: yet I think it not amiss to perform the same
so far as I am able by common practice, and my observations in the Trade of
Merchandise, which is my profession.

And first therefore, all men do know, that the riches or sufficiency of
every Kingdom, State, or Commonwealth, consists in the possession of those
things, which are needful for a civil life.

This sufficiency is of two sorts: the one is natural, and proceeds of the
Territory it self: The riches of a Kingdom is of two sorts.
the other is artificial, and depends on the industry of the Inhabitants.

The Realm of England (praised be God) is happily possessed of them both: as
first, having great plenty of natural riches, both in the Sea for Fish, and
on the Land for Wool, Cattle, Corn, Lead, Tin, Iron, and many other things
for food, Raiment and Munition; insomuch, that upon strickt terms of need,
this land may live without the help of any other Nation.

But to live well, to flourish and grow rich, we must find means, by Trade to
vent our superfluities; therewith to furnish and adorn us with the Treasure
and those necessary wares, which foreign Nations do afford: This kind of
industry makes some Countries which are poor in themselves, to grow rich and
strong by other Nations, who have greater means, and are less industrious.
and here industry must begin to play his part, not only to increase and
guide the Trades abroad; but also to maintain and multiply the Arts at home:
for when either of these fail, or are not effected with such skill as their
mystery shall require, then does the Commonwealth abate and grows poor;
neither is this easily perceived at first, until some evil accidents do
stir up our diligence to search out the true causes, that so they being
removed, the effects may cease. And this is the subject of our discourse which
we now pursue.

That which I have hitherto delivered, has been altogether Negative, still
defending and proving by arguments, that the East India Trade has not hurt:
this Commonwealth; And now changing my style, I must affirm as fast the true
causes of those evils which we seek to chase away.

These causes then (as I conceive) are principally four. Four Principal
Causes which carry away our Gold and Silver.


1. The first is the breach of Intercourse by foreign Nations.

2. The second is the abuse of the exchanges betwixt us and other Countries.

3. The third is neglect of duty in some Subjects.

4 The fourth is our damage in Commerce with Strangers.

Now concerning all these, I might make a very large discourse; but my purpose
is only to explane the meaning of every point in order, as briefly as I can.

And first for the breach of Intercourse; The First Cause concerns the
Standard.
by this I understand those Nations, who have either debased their Standard, or
else ouer-valued the price of their Coins from that equiualence which formerly
they had with the Standard and Moneys of this Realm; And also do tolerate,
not only their own Moneys, Proceeding against intercourse.
but also the Coin of other Countries (and especially of this Kingdom) to be
current with them at higher rates, then the prizes of the Exchange; by which
courses (being directly against the Intercourse) there is a greater cause given
of exportation of the Moneys of this Realm, then otherwise there would be. For
although this is done with great danger to the exporters of the same, (it being
an act against the Law of the Land) yet notwithstanding Covetousness, being
ever conversant in wicked actions, thinks nothing unlawful, which promises
a certain gain; and how to remedy this evil practice I find it not easy.
For the debasing of the Coin, or raising the price thereof in this Realm,
would much impouerish the estates of particular men, and yet in the conclusion,
would prove a business without end: for who does not conceive that which would
follow beyond the Seas upon any such alteration here with us? so that still the
evil will remain, until we find some other remedy.

The Second Cause concerns the Exchanges of moneys with foreign Countries.
And for the exchanges of money, used betwixt Nations, although the true use
thereof, is a very lawdable and necessary practice, for the accommodating of
Merchants affairs, and furnishing of Travelers in their occasions, without
the transporting of Coin from one State to another, with danger and loss,
both to the public and private wealth; yet is the abuse thereof very
prejudicial unto this Kingdom in particular; whilst in the interim the
benefit does arise unto other Countries, who diligently observing the prizes
whereby the moneys be exchanged, The practice of those strangers here in this
Realm, who make a Trade by Exchange of moneys.
may take advantage, to carry away the Gold and Silver of this Realm at those
times, when the rate of our sterling money (in Exchange) is under the value of
that Standard, unto which place they are conveyed; For in respect the prizes of
the Exchanges, do rise and fall according to the plenty or scarsitie of
money, which is to be taken up or delivered out, the exchange is hereby become
rather a Trade for some great monyed men, then a furtherance and accommodation
of real Trade to Merchants, as it ought to be in the true use thereof.

And thus many times money may be made over hither by strangers, to a good
gain, and presently carried beyond the Seas to a second profit, and yet the
mischefe ends not here: for by this means the takers up of money in foreign
Countries must necessarily drive a Trade to those places, Foreign wares
brought in with our ready moneys carried out of this Realme^
from whence they draw their moneys; and so do fill us up with foreign
Commodities, without the vent of our own wares, but for this great evil,
there is an easy remedy, and so I come to handle the next cause which is
neglect of Duty.

Neither is it my intent to write of Duties in their several kinds; The third
cause concerns neglect of duties.
but only of that kind of duty which is here thought to be neglected by some
men in their several vocations. As it might peradventure come to pass, in
those who have the working of his Majesty's coin, either gold or silver: if
diligent care be not had in the size of every several piece, to answer justly
to his weight: for howsoever upon trial of many pieces altogether, the weight
may be found according to the covenants, and within the remedies ordained in
the Indentures: Our heavy money is conveyed beyond the seas and melted down
here in the realm.
Yet notwithstanding many of those pieces may be sized too light, and others as
much too heavy; which gives the greater advantage to some people, to carry
away that which is ouer-weight, and so to leave us them which are too light, if
they leave us any.

And this mischief is not single; for thereby also some Goldsmiths, regarding
profit more then duty, may be the more readily drawn to melt down the heavy
Coin into Plate and other ornaments both of gold and silver.

But what might we think of those men who are placed in authority and office
for his Majesty, if they should not with all dutiful care discharge their
trust concerning that excellent Statute, Anno 17. Edw. 4.
where in it is ordered, that all the moneys received by strangers for their
Merchandise, shall be employed upon the commodities of this Realm? the due
performance whereof would not only prevent the carrying away of much gold and
silver, but also be a means of greater vent of our own wares: whereof I
purpose to write something more in the next part which concerns our commerce
with strangers.

The fourth cause concerns our co^merce with strangers.
And now I come to the last point, which I fear is not the least amongst the
causes of our want of money (so far as any such may be:) and let it not
seem strange to any man, that Trades should hurt and impouerish a
Commonwealth, since it has been always accounted an excellent means to help
and enrich the same: for, as this truth cannot be denied with reason, so it is
likewise most certain, Unskillful Merchants overthrow our Trades.
that the unskillful managing thereof has ever proved a great decay unto
those nations who have been entangled with such errors. And are not the
examples too frequent in many of our own Merchants, who not only by the
perils of the Seas and such like misfortunes, lose their goods, but also even
through want of knowledge, wisely to direct their affairs, do overthrow their
whole estates: neither may we properly call this their loss, but rather the
kingdoms loss in them. Wherefore it were to be wished, that this mystery of
Merchandising might be left only to them, Merchants by education are only fit
to trade in foreign parts.
who have had an education thereunto; and not to be undertaken by such, who
leaving their proper vocations, do for want of skill in this, both overthrow
themselves and others who are better practiced.

But there is yet a far greater mischief by our Trades beyond the Seas, when
peradventure, there might be imported yearly a greater value in foreign
wares, then by any way or means we do export of our own commodities; How
rich co^monwealths may become poor.
which cannot otherwise come to pass, then with a manifest impouerishing of
the Commonwealth; for as it is a certain cause to make us rich, both in stock
and treasure, when we shall carry out a greater value of our own goods then we
bring in of foreign wares; so by consequence, a course contrary to this, must
of necessity work a contrary effect.

Neither is this importation meant otherwise the^ concerning those wares, which
are consumed in this Realm: for the commodities which are brought in, Foreign
wares brought in for Transito cannot hurt, but greatly help the commonwealth.
and after carried out unto foreign parts again, cannot hurt but do greatly
help the commonwealth, by increase of his Majesty's Customs and Trades, with
other employments of the subjects; by which particulars I might yet set forth
the glory of the East India Trade, which has brought into this Realm in
fifteen months space, Hopes to increase Trade by exportation of Indian wares
to foreign parts
not only so much Spice, as has served the same for the said time; but also
by the superfluity thereof, there has been exported into foreign parts for
about 215000. pounds sterling. So then let all men judge, for what a great
value we may hope hereafter to export yearly: when unto these spices we may
(by Gods assistance) add the infinite worth of Raw-silkes, Indicos, Callicoes,
and some other things: All which are to be issued in the nature of Cloth,
Lead, Tin, or any of our own Merchandise to the enriching of this Kingdom
by increase of the Common-stocke. So then to conclude this point, we ought not
to avoid the importation of foreign wares, but rather willingly to bridle our
own affections to the moderate consuming of the same: for otherwise, howsoever
the East India Trade in particular is an excellent means greatly to increase
the stock of money which we send thither yearly, The particular Trade to the
East Indies will bring great store of treasure into this Realm, if the general
Trade of this kingdom do not hinder and consume it
by returning home five times the value thereof in rich commodities, all which
(in short time) may be converted into Treasure, as is plainly showed already in
Page 25. Yet notwithstanding, if these Indian wares thus brought home, cannot
be spared to serve for that purpose of Treasure; but must be sent forth
together with our own native commodities: and yet all little enough to provide
our excess and extraordinary consume of foreign wares: then is it likewise as
certain that the general Trade of this Kingdom does hinder and divert the
coming in of the said Treasure, by ouer-ballancing the value of our wares
exported; with the importation and immoderate consume of foreign Commodities.

Therefore, forasmuch as the number of the people in this Realm, are thought
to be greatly increased of late time (both in themselves and strangers) whereby
necessarily the Commodities of this Kingdom, and also foreign wares, are the
more consumed and wasted, a double means to abate the Commonwealth;) it
therefore concerns us all in general, and every man in his particular, to
stir up our minds, and diligence, to help the natural Commodities of this
Realm by industry, and increase of Arts; seeing that the materials cannot be
wanting to make such Stuffes, and other things as are daily brought unto us
from foreign parts, to the great advantage of Strangers, and to our no less
damage. Neither should we neglect the riches which our Seas afford, whilst
other Nations by their labor do procure themselves great Treasure from the
same. The Dutch in particular, are said to reap such infinite wealth yearly
by this fishing Trade, that without more certain knowledge thereof I dare not
set down the sum, it seems so incredible.
And as the diligent performance of these things, would plentifully maintain
the poor, and much increase the common stock of this Kingdom: so likewise
for the better furtherance thereof, we ought religiously to avoid our common
excesses of food and raiment, which is grown to such a height in most degrees
of people (above their ability) that it is now beyond all example of former
ages. Neither is it needful for me, to set down the particulars of these
abuses; for they are too well known: and I am confident, that the wisdom of
our Government does endeavor to see them as well amended, to the glory of God,
the honor of the King, and the good of the Commonwealth. Amen.

FINIS.

