A FVLL SATISFACTION CONCERNING A DOUBLE ROMISH INIQVITIE; heinous Rebellion,
and more then heathenish Aequiuocation. Containing three Parts: The two former
belong to the Reply upon the Moderate Answerer; the first for Confirmation of
the Discovery in these two points, Treason and Aequiuocation: the second is a
Justification of Protestants, touching the same points. The third Part is a
large Discourse confuting the Reasons and grounds of other Priests, both in the
case of Rebellion, and Aequiuocation.

DEVT. 32. VERSE. 32. Their grapes are grapes of gall, their clusters are
bitter.

Published by Authority.

LONDON, Printed by Richard Field for Edmond Weauer. 1606.

TO THE PVISSANT AND MOST RENOWNED PRINCE, OUR GRACIOUS Sovereign, James by
the grace of God King of great Britain, France and Ireland, Defender of the
Apostolic faith, etc.
IT is not long sithence (most gracious Sovereign) that one inscribed A
moderate Answer, did traduce before your Majesty the late Discouerer of Romish
rebellious Positions for an injurious and slanderous Pamphleter: Now therefore
Innocence, which ( Genesis 2. 25.
though naked) was never ashamed, has charged me to manifest my self unto
your Highness, and, together with my Adversary, to appeal unto your
incomparable wisdom, which I do in so constant assurance of an upright
conscience, as that I shall willingly remit that just advantage, which the
difference of comparison both between a legitimate or conformable subject, and
a person suspiciously degenerate; as also between a Minister of simple truth,
and a professed Aequiuocator, does offer unto me: and to be contented only
with that respect which the equity of my cause may allow. It has pleased my
Adversary thus to decipher me: Answer cap. 1. in initio.
The Discouerer (says he) is like to the espiall of king Alexander, who
brought word that an army of enemies was approaching, when they were but a small
company of silly Apes, imitating soldiers in a march from the mountains:
thus he, as a man distempered in his brain, and deluded in his fantasy, has
beheld our Catholic Priests, whom in every page he calls seditious and
traitorous persons. This then only was my error; I thought, indeed, that I had
discovered a company of men, but my Answerer tells me they were but beasts:
and I partly believe him, for what men could ever be so savage, as (for so they
have professed concerning Protestants) to deprive men of the due respects of
all humanity? Notwithstanding though I had been so much mistaken, as not to
know that his Monks were but Munkies, and his Priests but Apes, yet sure I am
(and he so acknowledges) that they were a company of creatures which did
imitate soldiers on the mountains. This I then partly discovered, and now
(God willing) will prove more plentifully in this Reply. The mountains, from
whence they march, be those Apoc. 17. 9.
Seven hills of Babylon, whereon the woman clothed in scarlet sits: which (by
the confession of two most learned Ribera and Viega in their comme^taries upon
this place.
Jesuits) does signify Rome, as it must be in the days of Antichrist. May it
now please your sacred Majesty, to see how exactly they imitate Soldiers in
their march? Parsons, teaching persecution against all Kings and States
Protestant, does propound for his imitation the example of David in his
conflict against Goliath; Allen the example of Eliah in calling, if it were
possible, for fire from heaven to consume the messengers of Kings; Renalds the
example of Iabel to knock Generals on the head; Bellarmine the example of
Iehoida and other Priests for murdering of opposite Queens; Sanders the
example of Mattathias, who fought against King Antiochus; Simancha the example
of Heathenish Scythians, who murdered their natural King Scyles; Buchier the
example of Sampson, to kill, if they can, a thousand, of his supposed
Philistims with the iaw-bone of an Ass. These, and many such like be but his
silly Apes: which I should rather judge to be of that kind whereof the
proverb speaks, (...), because they cannot be discerned but by events. But
this Moderate answerer may be referred to our faithful Reply, wherein he will
appear often to have betrayed his own title, except some will call that
moderation, which has in it neither modum nor rationem. After the Reply is
finished, there is presented to your Princely and most religious judgment, a
Confutation of the reasons of two of their more then unreasonable positions; as
namely, of heinous rebellions, and execrable aequiuocations: both which are
refelled (I hope) sufficiently by the testimonies of their own most principal
Doctors. A course which I profess in all disputes; knowing that by no better
wisdom may this new Babylon be confounded, then wherewith God wrought the
destruction of the old, even Genesis 11. 7 and 9
The division of their tongues. In the first part of the Confutation is
examined the ambition of Romish prelacie, who would advance their myters above
scepters: which usurpation the right honorable Earl of Northampton, at the
arraignement of Garnet, did, according to his singular learning formed and
habited with sound judgment, publicly convince of palpable novelty, and
insolency intolerable. In the last place is discovered the other mystery of
iniquity, a book which has this inscription by the Author, A Treatise of
Aequinocatio^, but thus altered by the Authoriser thereof, A Treatise against
lying and fraudulent dissimulation. We read of the idolatrous Jews, who,
worshipping a Exodus 32. 5.
Golden calfe, did name their adoration of an abominable idol, an holy day
unto the Lord. Plutarke makes mention of certain Apothecaries who painted
upon their boxes of poison the titles of Antidote or Presernatiues against
poison. Polydore observes, that the Popes a long time in their election had
their names changed by Antiphrase, viz. the elected if he were by natural
disposition fearful, was named Leo; if cruel, Clemens; if uncivil Vrbanus;
if wicked, P^s; if covetous, Bonifacius; if in all behauiours intolerable,
Innocentius. So now this Popish Treatise of aequiuocation, the notablest Art of
lying, and most bottomless dissimulatio^ that ever the prince of darkness did
invent, will be styled, A Treatise against lying and fraudulent dissimulation.
Yet why may not a lying title best befit the doctrine of lying and
dissimulation? Which kind of public transfiguration of sin into the habit
of virtue, (as it were the Angel of darkness into an Angel of light) S.
Bernard often names Demon meridianus, The devil at noone day.
Notwithstanding lest that the publishing of this cursed Art might in respect
of the more carnally minded, aedificare ad gehennam: edify unto hell (as that
reverend Bishop of Chichester, and learned father of our Church has said:) I
have so framed this dispute, that it may seem (I hope) to be like Aristotle
his books of natural Philosophy, So published, as not published; because the
clause of mental Reservation (the tail of this serpent, wherein the whole
poison lies) is always delivered in Latin phrase, to this end, that only
the guilty party by his sensible conjecture may perceive his error confuted,
and yet the ignorant, though desirous to touch pitch, may not be defiled. Which
doctrine because it is acknowledged by your Highness, in your admirable
wisdom, to be in Religion most sacrilegious and detestable, in politic state
most pernicious and intolerable, and in every actor most banefull to the soul
of man: it may please your excellent Majesty to provide in this behalf for
your faithful and religious Subjects, that they never be so intoxicated with
this Antichristian spirit, as either to deceive or be deceived thereby. First
not to be deceived: but seeing that the authors of Aequiuocatio^ are by it, as
by a Gyges ring, made in a sort invisible unto Protestants to plot and practice
against them what and when they will, and Vlysses-like make a very Polyphemus
of your most noble State, that whenever they be asked, who is the Traitor,
license themselves during life to answer (till they be co^uicted) by that
aequiuocating (...): that therefore against such as cannot hurt us but by our
credulity, there may be enacted, (the only refuge of Tullie) Lex non
credendi; a law of not believing them. Concerning deceiving by the same policy
more subtle then any Machiauellisme, I would be a most humble suppliant to
your gracious Highness, not to permit any, of what condition soever, in the
cure of the diseased body politic, (as it were driving out poison with
poison) in winding out these aequiuocators to aequinocate. For this purpose the
counsel of S. Augustine is most sovereign: August. cont. mendac.
Non minus pernitiose mentitur Catholicus, vt haereticos capiat; quam mentitur
haeretiens, vt Catholicos lateat; nec cuiquam persuaderi potest hominem non
mentiri, ne capiat; ur
qui mentitur vt capiat. For it is certain Ephesians. 4. 11.
We (to speak in the Apostles tenor) have not so learned Christ as the truth
in Jesus: by whom we are taught that the new man must crucisie the old man, and
therefore not to seek by such devilish exorcisme to drive out Satan by Satan,
but to mortify ambition by humility, intemperance by sobriety: in brief, to
conquer all evil by goodness, and therefore only truth must catch and kill a
lie. Let not your Majesty be offended with my boldness in exceeding the
measure of an Epistle against my accustomed brevity in all my labors: it is
Psalm. 116. 10.
Credidi that begets Ergolocutus sum. Therefore speaking from the truth, I
could not but speak for truth: and now, in high detestation both of idolatrous
superstition, and hellish aequiuocation, beseech the God of truth to make your
name glorious in Christendom, in the zealous defense both of the true faith of
Christ, and Christian faithfulness: establishing your Majesty's kingdom in
peace, your person in safety, your soul in grace, your Queen in mutual joy,
your royal Succession in happy success as long as the world endures; and in
the end of mortality to crown you all with endless blessedness.

The unworthy Minister of Christ, and your Majesty's most dutiful subject,
Thomas Morton.

TO THE SEDVCED Brethren, Grace and peace in Christ Jesus.
AFter that I had discovered unto you (my Brethren) the heinous positions of
your Priests, there arose some one, I think, of that priesthood, entituling
himself A moderate answerer; and me A slanderous and lying libeller: And why?
Because the testimonies alleged (says he) are falsely applied. For proof of
this, scarce examining one of twenty, he commonly returns this answer: If
this (says he) be the opinion of these Authors, or if these Authors write thus
etc. wilfully seating himself in the chair of those Doctors, whom the Apostle
has described: 1. Tim. 1. 7.
They will be Doctors, and yet understand not what they say, nor whereof they
affirm. To the manifold and manifest In the 1 and 2. part.
proofs, I may now add the In the third part
Arguments of the same Priests for the defense of their discovered rebellious
conclusions. By what reason then can my Moderate Answerer charge me as
slanderously misreporting that to be the doctrine of those Priests, which the
Priests themselves by Reasons labor to confirm? Wherefore I persuade my self
his intent in answering was not to answer, that is, to satisfy the judicious:
but only to be thought to have answered, that is, to delude the too credulous:
like the answer which the priests of the Synagogue did prescribe, for
repressing the discovery of the resurrection of Christ out of the sepulcher,
saying: Whilst we slept his Disciples came and stole him away. Common sense
might have replied, How could you tell what was done when you were all asleep?
But minds enthralled in the opinion of a never c^^ing Priesthood (which
confirmed that Answer) could not possibly but err with their Priests. Such,
alas, is the case of all them, whom (because they will not seek or see the
truth) God in his iustce 2 Thessalonians. 2. 11
Deliueteth up to believe lies, as idle and fabulous as fancies and dreams of
men asleep. Of which kind be many of your lying Revelations: as that of the
Deliverance of the soul of Traian out of the lowest hell. Many lying
privileges, as that temporal Donation of Constantine: and the other
Ecclesiastical forged Canon for Appeals to Rome. Many lying Traditions, as
that Bodily assumption of the blessed Virgin into heaven. Many lying Saints, as
that of Saint Christopher (except in a picture) never seen. Many lying
Sanctities, as that of S. Francis in harboring of alouse. Many lying Histories,
as the Golden Legend, an abstract of a leaden brain. Many lying reports, as of
the now Miracles among the Indians: to omit many lying prophecies and reports;
with infinite such other, which they call Piae frauds, that is, godly
cosinages: invented to keep the people in devotion, and their priesthood in
estimation. But that which excels all the rest in falsehood, is their
Aequiuocation, as being not only alying Art, but also an Art of lying. This is
now practiced (as will be proved) in most detestable periuries for covert of
the horrible treasons of their priesthood: teaching you to imitate the wisdom
of the Ostrich; which bird, if she can but cover her head, thinks all her
body safe. Notwithstanding that Romish See, like to the Jud^ v. 13.
raging sea (when none sought to discover it) fomed out her own shame:
especially in these two mischiefs which are noted as individual companions in
holy writ, Psalm. 5. 6.
Speaker of lies, and the bloud-thirstie man; Prou. 6. 17.
Lying tongues, and hands that shed blood; Esa. 59. 3.
Hands defiled with blood, and tongues that speak lies: Such are their hands
of Treason, and tongues of Aequiuocation. But hearken a little, 2 Timothy 3. 4.
In the last days (says the Apostle) shall come perilous times, when men
shall be void of natural affection, truce breakers, false accusers, Traitors.
All which we prove to be the express characters of your Priests. O but it may
be thought that the Apostle does not describe any that do such things with any
religious intent, but only desperate and profane miscreants, who make no
conscience of sin: not so: for in the next words the Apostle describes the
color of their cloak: 2 Timothy 3. 5.
Having (says he) a show of godliness, but deny the power thereof. A
prophecy plainly verified by your Priests in their godless practices and
godly pretenses. Wherefore you are exhorted in the words following, Turn away
from such. You should have had this Reply two months ago, but that I was to
add another discourse of greater importance, which is contained in the third
part. You see Beloved, how upon all occasions, as I am exhorted by the Spirit
of God, I 2. Tim. 2. 25.
cease not to instruct you, though contrary minded, trying if at any time God
will grant you repentance, that you may acknowledge his truth. And now the God
of truth and life illuminate and sanctify your hearts in knowledge and
obedience of his will, to the glory of his saving grace in Christ: In whom

Yours, T. M.

The first Part of this Reply, containing the Confirmation of the former
Discovery against the frivolous Cauils of the immoderate Answerer.
CHAP. I.
The Discovery of Romish Positions and Practices rebellious.

The first Reason.
THeir general Assumption, whereupon all their rebellious Positions are
founded, is this, that All Protestants are Heretics and Excommunicate.

The Answerer. A moderate Answer to an injurious and slanderous Discovery.
Answer cap. 2. Wherefore.
I answer, that this Position of the Discouerer, [All Protestants in the
censure of Catholics are Heretics and Excommunicate,] is no general
assumption in Catholic Religion: from whence it will follow, that none of our
Positions are to be judged rebellious; because he tells us that all these are
builded upon this Assumption.

A faithful Reply.
By which answer I am challenged to a double employment: first, to confirm this
my former Assumption, [All Protestants in the common censure of Papists
(superarrogantly called Catholics) are esteemed as Heretics and
Excommunicate: the second, to improve this your illation and consequent, [If we
judge not Protestants Heretics and excommunicate, it will follow that our
Positions cannot be proved rebellious.] Our Assumption you impugn both by
ample asseueration, and also (in your opinion) by learned proofs and
demonstrations. Your Asseueration follows.

The moderate Answerer.
Answer chap. 2. Wherefore.
I suppose that not one particular learned Catholic in this Kingdom (yet such
can best judge of our country cause) does or will defend this opinion, that
Protestants are Heretics and excommunicate: for there is not one Protestant
esteemed with us to be in that case within the dominions of our Sovereign, of
condition whatsoever in my knowledge.

The Reply.
What is this? No Papist does judge any Protestant an Heretic or excommunicate
to your knowledge? As though you could instruct us, how to know, when you
speak from your knowledge: knowing that you profess your self to be one of
that sect, who cannot possibly be known of us, so long as you lurk in the
hole of that Fox, which you call Aequiuocation. And surely this your minsing
Suppose gives us cause to suspect in you some such prodigious conceit: whereof
Part. 3.
hereafter. In the instant we may demand, why you, who fetch all practices and
positions, as it were Dagges and their cases, from beyond the sea, should now
stand only to the judgment of the Papists of This kingdom in this your
Country case? Is the cause of us Protestants the same, and shall we be subject
to contrary Tribunals? Have you 1. Reg. 12. 29.
One God in Dan, and another in Bethel? Not, but that we wish that the same
sea, which seuereth our country Region from Rome, might likewise distinguish
your Religion. But, to leave your Suppose, we will examine your proof.

CHAP. II.
Containing five of the Arguments of The moderate Answerer.

Answer chap. 2. Fourthly.
NO man doubting in faith, Ibid. For first. and Secondly.
But only such as be obstinate; Thirdly.
No ignorant believer, or, For first.
deceived of Heretics, but he to whom the truth has been made known; Fifthly.
None only internally infected, but he that is a manifest professor, is
subject to the censure of Excommunication for Heresy. But Protestants (in our
opinion) are of these conditions (implying that they be doubting, and not
resolute; ignorant of the contrary Romish faith, and not understanding;
internally infected, and not outward Professors of their faith) Therefore (in
our opinion) no Heretics.

The Reply.
We may not be ignorant, first, that, seeing the nature of Heresy is such,
that Malitia huius peccati in intellectu, non voluntate consummatur. Vasques
Iesuita did. 126. cap 3. number. 6.
It is a vice proper to the mind; it may denominate the subject whatsoever an
Heretic without obstinacy, which is only a perverse obliquitie of the will:
and therefore man may be an Heretic, though he be not obstinate. Secondly,
because Ecclesia non potest aliquid praecipere circa actus interiores aut
punire: vt docent Scholastici. Tolet. Jes. Instruct Sacer. lib. 1. cap. 19.
The Church, consisting of men, does only judge of outward actions of men; we
must consider that there is difference of the judgment of an Heretic, Cuncrus
lib. de Offic. Princ* paulo ante finem.
Fori and poli, namely, of man judging the outward act; and of God, who
discerns the inward thought. And may hereupon conclude, that Possit esse
aliquis occulte Haereticus, and tamen exterius ob metum, aut aliquod lucrum
fidem profiteri. Bellar. Ies. and Cardinal. lib. 3. de not. Eccl. cap. 10.
There may be an internal Heretic, though not manifest unto the Church. But
because you do only understand outward Heretics subject to the censure of
men, I approach to the Question, to disable both your Propositions by the
general and ordinary, but (in some points) new and unreasonable
determinations of your own school, By a threefold evidence: from a Popish 1.
Definition of an Heretic, 2. Explication of a person excommunicate, 3.
Application of Romish censures to them both.


CHAP. III.
Popish definition of an Heretic.

Haec est Religionis sola ratio, vt omnes intelligant sic simpliciter esse
credendum atque loquendum, quemadmodu^ Romana Ecclesia credendum esse docet ac
praedicat. Cunerus lib. de O^, Princ. cap. 13.
THat is only true Religion (say your Romish Doctors) which is taught in the
Romish Church. And therefore Qui intelligens aliquam sententiam express ab
Ecclesia damnatam, eam retinueri^, Haereticus pertinax est censen dus. Alphons.
de Castro lib. 1. de iusta punit. Hare. cap. 10. and Tolet. Ies. Instruct.
Saccrd. lib. 1. cap. 19
Whosoever maintains any doctrine condemned in that Church, must be accounted
an obstinate Heretic. What, obstinate? It may be, some do but doubtingly
defend it; what will you judge of these? Qui voluntary de side dubitat,
censeiur vere and proprie Haereticus. Azor. Ies Inst. Moral. lib. 8. ca. 9.
Sexto. Eodem modo Tol^t. Instruct. Sacerd. Alphons. and alij.
If he doubt thereof willingly, he is certainly an Heretic. But, it may be he
is ignorant; will no ignorance excuse him? Ignorantia cras^a non excusat
aliquem a pertinacia. Tol. Ies. lib. 1. instruc. Saccrd. cap. 19. Haeretici and
Azor. Ies^nstit. Moral. page 949.
Affected ignorance does argue him an obstinate Heretic. Yet it may be, he is
no principal one to profess the supposed heretical doctrine, but only to
favor the Doctors or professors thereof: In prima Excommunicatione Bull
^coenae, ex communicatio ^ulminatur in omnes Haereticos and eorum credentes;
nec tantum in istos, sed etiam defensores and fautores. Tolet. instr. Sacerd
lib 1. cap. 19. Alphons. lib. 1. cap. 7. Turrecrem. part. 2. lib 4. cap. 21.
Azar. I^s. instit. lib. 8. cap. 15.
Yet then does the Bull of Excommunication, called Bulla Coenae, thunder
against them; and not only them, but also all wilful defenders and favorers.
Of which kind all such, as Credentes, qui optant in eorum fide mori. Tolet. quo
supra.
Wish to die in their faith: Defensores, qui scientes opem illis praestant.
^zor. les quo supra.
Harbor their persons: Fautores, qui verbis, scriptis, aut factis ^os laud^nt
vt bonos viros, and eorum causae patrocinantur. Tol^t. Ies. quo supra.
Commend their behauiours: Illi sunt intelligendi Haeretici manifesti, qui
contra sidem Catholicam public praedicant aut profitentur, seu defendunt
errorem. Alphons. de Castro.
Or do either publicly preach or profess their doctrine, are to be accounted
manifest Heretics. In brief, our countriman upon this case of conscience.
Contumax Haereticus est tam praesumptus quam manifestus. Sayr. Casib. Consc.
lib. 1. cap 9 3^.
An obstinate Heretic is as well he that is presumed so to be, as he that is
manifest. Now let me be beholden unto you for an Answer, whether that all
Protestants of all conditions do not renounce your Romish Religion? Do not
Ministers preach publicly, and people also profess the contrary? Does not
the King and whole state enact laws, and Magistrates execute them to ruinate
your Babel? What sort of people is there in England (Recusants excepted) which
does not either believe the doctrine of Protestants, or defend their persons,
or read their books? etc. Seeing therefore Iam supra lit. k.
That (as your great Casuist has said) every one presumed to be an Heretic,
is taken for an obstinate. What one is there among all these kinds who can be
free from your censures against Heretics? For when your Leo Pope as Apolog.
Taking ears to be horns, shall judge truths to be errors, what shall then
become of innocents? But lest your invisible modesty may deny this, it will be
largely proved in the fifth Chapter.

CHAP. IIII.
Concerning the second evidence by Romish Exposition of a person excommunicate.

The moderate Answerer in two other Arguments.
Cap. 2. Sixthly.
Sixthly, before Excommunication no communion is forbidden with any, whatsoever
this Discouerer obiecteth from I^sia Rat. 4.
Panormitanus, [that where the crime is notorious;] such as the man tells us
heresy is, [There needs not any declaration of Excommunication.] For it is
absolutely against the general Council of Conc. Lateran. cap. 3.
Haereticorum. Cunerus de Offic. Princ. cap. 7. 8. Nauar. de Council.
Lateran, to the which consents Cunerus, and Nauarr. Ibid. Seventhly.
Seventhly, no Protestant or Heretic not Excommunicate by name (as none in
England is) lies subject to any penalty pretended.

The Reply.
I have justly manifested your darkness, and now also hold it necessary to
continue a Discouerer, when you make your self so notorious a couerer of so
many palpable untruths, which I must unfold in every passage. For the present
three. 1. No communion forbid to any before Excommunication. 2. No Heretic,
not excommunicate by name, is subject to any penalty. 3. No Protestant is
excommunicate by name. The falsehood of all which is discovered by the judgment
of your own school. First, Panormitan, you know, defends that Iam supra
lit. a
When the heresy is publicly known, there needs no pronunciation of the
sentence of Excommunication. But this is but as one swallow with you.
Whatsoever (say you) the Discouerer obiecteth from Panormitan, etc. to make
your Reader suspect, that I relied only upon the judgment of Panormitan for a
point of so necessary consequent. Did I not allege also your most famous
Jesuit Gregory of Valentia for confirmation thereof? though then indeed the
exigence of time would not permit me to translate it, and my presumption of a
Modest Answerer whomsoever (as of one that would understand Latin) thought it
also superfluous: yet now for your better information, and the Readers
satisfaction, I am constrained to English it. Crimen haerefis, etc. Greg.
Valent. Vide R^^. 4.
If the guilt of heresy be so notorious (says he) as that by no evasion it
can be concealed, the party does incur the penalty thus far, that his
subjects may deny such a Lord all fealty, yea before the sentence of
judgment.

I did also allege a third, namely, Bannes, a man famous among your Doctors,
and guarded in this point with the common consent of the school. His words are
these: In hoc Articulo, etc. Infra Rat 4.
In this Article do Felinus and Caietan, and the more common opinion of the
Scholars of Thomas concur: proving that the evidence of the fact is as
effectual in this caese, as a public sentence in judgment. I did furthermore
(pardon me if I must discover your partial concealements) add yet another
Jesuit, your Father Creswell, auouching that this opinion Hoc vniuersa
Theologorum, etc. Infra Rat 4.
Has the universal consent of Lawyers and Divines. I might have cited more
witness to appear, if I had thought it as necessary for evidence to the
cause, as I feared lest it should be tedious to the judicious Reader.

But lest you or I may seem to unisconstrue (because you name it) the Lateran
Council, give your own Doctors leave to interpret it. Arma in Regem sumere,
etiam ante lata^ Iudicis sententiam, vbi crimen est notorium, Bannes 2. 2. q.
12. docet. idque patet ex Conc. Lateranensi, [Si Princeps incidit in sententiam
Canonis, incidit in poenam designatam citra nouu^ iudiciu^.] Author de Jast.
Abdicat. page 352 and 357.
It is evident (says your Jesuit) from this Decree of the Council of
Lateran; If the Prince fall into the sentence of the Canon, forthwith he
falls into the penalty denounced, before any further judgment. Your next
Author, whom you name, Manifestum est ex Concilio Lateranensi co^tra Haereticos
decretum esse in haec verba: [Sub Anathemate prohibemus, ne quis eos in domo
vel in terra fouere praesumat] Cunerus lib de Offic. Princ. c. 9.
Cunerus, does only report the sentence of Anathema: but that an Heretic is
not to be exempted from all communion before a judicial and personal
sentence, he lends you no voice, but proves the contrary. Wherein I further
marvel that you dare match the the Council of Lateran, and your Author
Cunerus in one consent, because if you follow that corrupt Council, you must
necessarily be disloyal: if you yield to Cunerus, there is hope you may prove
a good subject, as I^fra in the 3. Pa^^.
hereafter will appear in due place.

Lastly, those others you only would name, may not be compared to our
witnesses which we have expressly named, Panormitan, Bannes, Thomas and his
Scholars, Creswell and the universal voice of Schools.

Those other also which (I say) I might have cited, do now approach, as namely,
your Cardinal, and sometime Jesuit, Tolet from the nature of judicial
Excommunications in Councels, Iuris Excommunicatio semper est generalis, non
enim ponitur contra determinatam personam, sed determinate contra facientes vel
non facientes hoc vel illud. Tolet. Jes. instruct. lib. 1. cap. 5.
The Excommunication of the law is general, not directly against any
determinate person. Which will appear presently in the use of Infra cap. 5.
Anathema: so that (as says your Jesuit Sa) Excommunicatio sine monitione
fere semper est inualida: Suffici^ tamen in Excommunicatione generali generalis
monitio; and quidem ipsum praeceptum generale promulgatum monitio est, and
quaeuis prohibitio peccati futuri. Eman. Sd Aphor. Tit. Excommunicatio.
A general Admonition is sufficient to infer a general Excommunication; and
that which is generally published contains in it a general Admonition. So
general, that your Jesuit Azo^ius does wickedly extend the censure not only
to the namelesse, but also blameless sons of his supposed Heretics. Poenam
haeresis contrahunt filij Haereticorum, si filij sunt eorum, quos Haereticos
esse constiterit, ^ue per euidentiam facti, five per sententiam iudicis. Azor.
Ies. instit. Moral. lib. 8. cap. 13.
The sons of Heretics (says he) are subject to the punishment of heresy,
if they be the sons of known Heretics, whether known by evidence of their
offense, or by sentence of the Judge. And upon this Assertion your Cardinal
Allane is bold to conclude, Allan^ in his book against the executi^^ of
English justice, entitled, A modest Defense of English Catholics, page 87.
The Canon laws being Authentical in all lawful Tribunals, do make all
Heretics, not only after they be named particularly, but ipso facto, as soon
as they be Heretics, de Iure, by law excommunicate for the same to be
deprived. If this his (so entitled) Modest Defense be true, then doubtless in
this your Moderate Answer (as you term it) your last Arguments you call
Sixt-ly, and Seuenth-ly, must be taken as the sound of their last syllables do
import. Hitherto we have confuted your only exceptions of an Heretic, and an
Excommunicate from your own explications. We furthermore disprove them by

CHAP. V.
The third evidence from Popish Applications of Censures proper to Heretics.

The moderate Answerer.
Answer cap. 2. Seventhly, and For first.
NO Protestant in England is, in our opinion, excommunicate by name; and
therefore lies not subject to the penalty pretended. Ergo The foundation of
this Discouerer is ruinate.

The Reply.
This your Proposition, [None is excommunicate who is not excommunicate by
name,] we have discovered, by many witnesses, to be your proper forge and
miserable refuge, which the desperatnesse of your cause did enforce you unto.
That no English Protestant is excommunicate by name, how can you warrant us? If
they be all excommunicate in the name of English, or in the name of Caluinists,
or in the name of Protestants, or in the name of Heretics; are they not namely
excommunicate? To expect that all Heretics should be cited by their sirnames
of Tesimond, Garnet, Blackwel, etc. is against the tenor of Councels in this
word Anathema, as will appear. Shall we think that the grand Heretics, the
Arrians, were thus formally denounced? This in those times, for their infinite
number, had been impossible: much less can it be possible in these days,
(though the Heretics were but ten) because each party by change and
multiplication of names, may alter his summons; as by your late example to be
called The Proclamation against Garnet.
Garnet, alias Wally, alias Darcey, alias Farmer, alias Philips: and so, like
an Indiuiduum vagum, in infinitum. But I dispute.

Those who both doctrinally and practically apply the laws and censures of
Excommunication, proper to obstinate Heretics, unto the professed Protestants
of all conditions, do thereby manifest that all professed Protestants be, in
their opinion, obstinate Heretics. But all Romish Priests and Jesuits do
apply the sentences and censures, which they hold to be proper to Heretics,
and truly excommunicate, against all sorts of professed Protestants. Ergo your
former Suppose can be no sufficient repose for any Protestants to rely upon.

The Minor proved by Popish 1. Councels, 2. Bulls, 3. Doctors.


First, the Council of Trent in their general Anathema: for Mayor
Exco^municatio multis private bonis, eaque de causa absolute dicitu^
Excommunicatio, and sole^ let Graeco verbo exprimi, sc. Anathema: quasi seorsim
positus, and separatus a c^m^unione fidelium. Aduerte igitur quod Anathema non
differt ab Excommunicatione maiori, quoad vinculum, sed tantum quoad
solennitatem. Tole. Ies. instruct. Sace. lib. 1. cap. 5.
Anathema (says your Cardinal and Jesuit) is to be numbered in the great
Excommunications: signifying a separation from the Communion of the faithful.
Whom did they intend to excommunicate in their some hundred Anathema's? Was it
not the Protestants? Whereof there can be no better Interpreter then Vega, Fuit
Vega vir eruditus, and in Primarijs Gonc. Tridentini Theologis, Doctorum
iudicijs, numeratus, and in eius Conc. expositione studioseversatus. Canis.
Ies. Praef. in libro Veg^ de Justificat.
A man (as your Jesuit says) very learned, and reckened among the chief
Divines in the Council of Trent: who afterward performed good diligence in
the expounding of that Council. This Vega answering Cal^in in one point, says,
Non paucis vos omnes (Protestants intelligi^) Synodus ferijt Anathematis. Vega
lib. 15, de Iustif. cap. 23.
The Council of Trent has pierced you all with many Anathema's.

Secondly, the Popes Bulls.
The Bull of Pope Urban against Protestants in this form: Statuimus itaque
sancientes vt Haeretici omnes quocunque nomine censeantur, vbicunque per
imperium damnati fuerint, animaduersione debita puniantur. Volentes vt de
Imperi, finibus haereticae labis germina modis omnibus deleantur. Constit.
Urban. 4. Cap. 2. Statuimus, and Sivero.
We decree that all Heretics within the Empire, by what name soever they be
called, be punished, and that by all means they be rooted out. The Bull of
Pope Paulus 3. against King Henry the eight: the form: Praeterea sub
Excommunicationis poenamandamus, ne vllus Princeps Christianus dicto Henrico
Regi Angliae, eius nominis octauo, aut eius fautoribus, direct vel indirecte
sub praetextu confederationum and obligationum quarumcunque etiam iuramento aut
quauis alia firmitate roboratarum: quas omnes confoederationes atque
obligationes factas absoluimus, and sanciendas sub eadem poena prohibemus.
Insuper Principibus praedictis, alijsque quibuscunque personis in virtute
sanctae obedientiae mandantes, vt aduersus Regem Henricum eiusque fautores, dum
in erroribus praedictis permanserint, armis insurgant, eosque and eorum
singulos persequantur, and ad obedientiam Sedis Apostolicae redire cogant, and
nostris mandatis non obtemperantes, ex regnis and dominijs suis expellant; and
vbicunque eos inuenerint, bona eorum mobilia immobiliaque quaecunque possint,
capiant. Bulla Pauli tertij lib. Constit. Papal. de Pauli 3. Bulla cap. 2.
We, under the pain of Excommunication, command, that no Prince Christian
entertain any league or covenants with this King, or any of his followers, or
favorers whomsoever: but that every one of any condition do take arms against
them, thereby to compel them to the obedience of the sea of Rome. What was
their principal Error? Quia pestilentem Lutheranorum haeresin amplectitur, and
omni crudelitatis genere in Catholicos bacchatur, induratissimus Pharao. Petrus
Math. Com. in eam Bullam.
Because they embraced the Lutheran heresy. The third. The Bull of Pope Sixtus
Quintus against all Protestants, whom, as though they differed in substance of
Religion in substantial points, he therefore repeateth in diverse names. The
form: Nos excommunicamus and anathematizamus quoscunque Vssitas, Lutheranos,
Zwinglianos, Hugonottos, and alios Haereticos quocunque nomine nuncupentur,
ipsorumque receptatores, and generaliter quoslibet defensores, and libros eorum
^ine authoritate nostra scienter quomodolibet legentes a^t tenentes,
imprimentes seuquomodolibet defendentes, ex quauis causa public vel occulte
quouis ingenio vel color. Constit. Sixti quinti cap. 13.
We excommunicate and anathematize all Hussits, Caluinists, Lutherans,
Zwinglians, Hugonots, and all other that receive or fauoitr them, by what name
soever they be called; and generally whosoever shall either publicly or
privately read, print, or defend their books not licenced first by our
authority* This is the Bull; can any Protestant now escape his horns? Nay,
but that we may know that these are those Excommunications, which are a lure
(as they term them) Excommunicatio a iure huiusmodi est quae perpetuo statuto
lata est, quaeque semper valet, etiamsi admonitio nulla praecedat. Felicianus
Epis^. E^chir. de Censuris. cap. 9. Talem dicimus Bullam Coenae Domini, quae
(vt patet ex forma ipsius Bullae) duratura ^rat donec a Pontisice alio
reuocaretur. Ibid. cap. 16. Forma eius huiusmodi fuit, Nos excommunicamus omnes
and singulos Lutheranos and Calninistas, etc. Ibid. cap. 14.
Which is such a kind of Excommunication as does continue after the death of
the maker, and is in force though there be no admonition thereof given. Such is
the Bull called Bulla Coenae, excommunicating Lutherans, and Caluinists all and
every one. This Bull all Tolet. Ies. Instruct. lib. 1. cap. 19. Alphons. de
Castro de punit. Haeret. lib* 1. cap. 7. Tu^recrem. lib. 4. part. 2. cap 21.
Azor. Ies. Instit. Moral. lib. 8. cap. 15. Sayr de Casib. Consc. lib. 1. cap.
9. 13. Cunerus de O^^ic. Princ. cap. 9.
Jesuits and Romish Priests have always enforced upon all Protestants of
their times. Seeing therefore that these Bulls run upon Protestants so madly,
as that (according to their tenor) they anathematize all Lutherans and
Caluinists with all their favorers whomsoever, to be subject to censures due
to Heretics, whatsoever, and to be inflicted upon them by means howsoever:
can you secure All, or any one Protestant, that he is (in the opinion of the
Popes) no Heretic, or not excommunicate? But because in modesty you would
seem to favor his Majesty, as being no formal Heretic in your opinion; we
must entreat you to drive away three other Bulls, which do violently assault
him: Qui terminarunt quod non solum Insideles ad regnum sunt inhabiles, sed
etiam Haeretico, e^si improptie Haeretico sint: vt Greg 2. Clem. 5. Bomfacius
8. Isidor* Mosco^. de may. milit. Eccles. lib. 2. Part. 1. cap. 2. page 657.
Three Popes ordaining, that no Heretic, though improperly an Heretic, shall
be capable of a Crown. From Pope we may descend to

Popish Doctors.
I may euince my former Assertion from the effects proper to persons
excommunicate: which (as your Doctors do define) are of diverse kinds: wherein
we must make bold with you to justify Protestants in despite of all Popish
adversaries.

The first.
The first censure is, Vna Haereticorum poena est ^a, vt Haeretici appellentur.
Az^^. Ies. Inst^t lib. 8. cap. 13. Septima.
Infamy to be cal'ed Heretics. But your Popes have censured them * Heretics:
and your Popish Authors call them Rhemists upon Ephesians. 4. 29.
An adulterous generation of Heretics: and Rhemists upon Joh. 2. 19.
Very Antichrists, Haeretici, Ranae Aegyptiacae, incircumcisi Philistaei.
Canis. I^s. Epist. ante lib. Vegae de Ius^ificat.
Heretics, Aegiptian frogs, and uncircumcised Philistims. And Gygantes
(...). F^uardent. lib. qui si^ inscrib^r (...).
Giants sighting against God. Audaces, astuti, factiosi Haeretici. Staplet.
Com. in Act.
Impudent, subtle, and sactious Heretics: Nullus profecto Haereticus vnquam
fuit, aut es^e possit, si illi non sunt Haeretici. Maldon. I^s. Com. in Mat. 13.
For who is if these be not Heretics? Quos Haereticos Catholici nunc maiori
odio, quam Gentes, prosequuntur, quia periculosius est cum his quam cum
Mahometanis agere. Maldon Ies. Com. in Ioh. 4.
Which Heretics all Catholics now hate more then Infidels, holding it more
dangerous to dwell with them, then Mahometans. Bellarm^l olet. B^zius,
Valentia, Allane, Creswell, etc.
They are, etc. But a whole Volume would not serve me only to recompt the name
Heretic, and Arch-heretike repeated almost thousands of times in most of the
Volumes of Priests and Jesuits. But cease your blasphemies you sons of
Shimei, and revile not Protestant Princes the Anointed of God, for this is a
certain truth, Protestants are no Heretics.

The second.
The second Censure is to be denounced Poena Haereticorum est dici Anathema,
quae est separatio a communione fidelium. Toletus Iesuita instruct. lib. 1.
cap. 5. Quae vox (^t Hie^onymus exponi^) est maled^ctus. Vega lib. 15. de
Iustificat.
Anathema, signifying a separation from the faithful communion by a spiritual
curse. From which arises, Ab Haereticis non solum quia excommunicati, sed quia
Haeretici, Sacrame^ta recipere prohibemus: quia Haeretici omni jurisdiction
ca^ent, vt docet Thomas. Azor. Ies. Inst. Mor. lib. 8. cap. 10. Septimo.
Not admitting any communion in their Sacraments: Haeretici a Sacramentis
arcentur. Al^hons. de punit. Haeret. lib. 1. and Azor. Instit. cap. 10.
Nor permitting them ours: Ob Haeresin quilibet in rebus diuinis euitandus est.
Azor. idid. Primo.
But utterly excluding them from all divine Service: Et publicis Ecclesiae
precibus priuatur. T^let. lib. 1 Instruct. Saccrd.
And depriving them of the aid of public prayers. Hearken now therefore you
Priests of Trent, Who have p^erced Protestants with so many Anathema's: fear
you the path of Balaam, and know that cursed are your curses against
Protestants, as Heretics, for this is a Catholic defense: Protestants are no
Heretics.

The third.
The third and last Poena Haereticorum est capitis suppliciu^. Azor. quosupra
cap. 13.
Is to put them to death: Poena Haereticorum est pri^atio sepulturae,
specialiter in Haereticos constitut^, postea irrogata in omnes excommunicatos
Azor. Ies. ibid.
And after death to deny them Christian burial, a punishment first ordained
as proper to Heretics. Wherefore you Conspirators, in that which you call
in^ra.
Holy league, Infra part. 2.
Butchers of twenty thousand Protestants in one month: and you Officers
ordained hereunto, namely, Inquisitors of Heretical impiety; but impiously
urging one newly invented Article of your Creed, Nostri Inquisitores haereticae
prauitatis iurisdictionem suam, in Pontificum Decretis fundatam, crudelissime
exercent; non aliud quaerendo expostulantes, quam si credat in Romanam
Ecclesiam: quodsi quis opinionem suam ex sacris Scripturis defendere conetur,
cum Haereticis (inquiunt) non Scripturis sed igne and fasciculis decertandum
esse. Mayor erat Ecclesiae veteris mansuetudo, Haereticos per Scripturas
conuincendi. Cornelius Agrippa lib. d^ vanit. Scient. cap. 96.
To believe (as says your Doctor) in the Romish Church, answering them only
with fire and faggots, who maintain their cause by (the fire of the holy
Ghost) the word of God; howl and cry in the foresight of Gods wrath, who will
revenge the blood of his servants: for this is a conclusion to be held of all
Catholics: Protestants are no Heretics. But let us (if it please you)
conclude this point.

The Conclusion of the modest Answerer.
Cap. 2. Thus I have.
Thus have I proved at large, as my violent and distressed leisure would give
me allowance, that the chiefest building of all these slanders against us is
ruinate and overthrown: that we do not esteem all Protestants for Heretics,
and excommunicate, as he pretends; neither that they are subject to such
penalties as he alleges.

The Reply.
Thus have you proved your self a distressed, or rather desperate Answerer;
and such an one as may be thought rather vinolently then co^sideratly to have
undertaken this task. Notwithstanding as Caiphas A mente mala vera verba
prophetiae protulit, ore eiu^ vsa est gratia, cor contaminatum non tetigit.
August.
Did deliver a good sentence with an evil mind: yet must we think that the
spirit of grace might use his tongue, which never touched his corrupt heart,
says Saint Augustine. So you, though in your mind you gain say that which
with your pen you publish, yet will we acknowledge grace in your pen, and leave
the spirit of dissimulation to your equiuocating mind, and with good
consciences concur with you in this conclusion, Protestants are no Heretics.

Thus have we been beholden unto you for your answer, Protestants are no
Heretics: Not that we care to be called Heretics of you, so long as we
defending the Apostolic truth, are taught by the Apostle how to answer, [
Act. 24. 14.
After that way which you call heresy, so worship we God.] Yet because it is
comfortable to the arraigned, when against many crying, Luc. 23.
He is a seducer, crucify him, one iudicially shall stand up and say, verse. 4.
I find no fault in the man, and stop the mouth of the blasphemous and
murdrous. Notwithstanding you are taught by this parenthesis of the Apostle
[That which you call heresie] to acknowledge truly with your fellows, that you
call them Heretics, whom so often you falsely call heretics, yet one thing I
mislike much in you.

The moderate Answerer.
Answer ibid.
Thus is his chiefest building of sclanders against us ruinate.

The Reply.
O (good Sir) you might have learned this good by others late evils, to take
heed you intermedle not in ruinating of buildings.

CHAP. VI.
Hitherto have we only confirmed our Antecedent, namely, That Protestants in
the common censure of Papists, are esteemed Heretics: It remains we now
disable your consequent following.

The moderate Answerer.
Answer Cap. 2. initio.
HIs Assumption being ruinate, that Protestants are not esteemed of us
Heretics, or Excommunicate: it follows, that no positions, which we
maintain, are rebellious; because he tells us that all such are built upon
this Assumption.

The Reply.
Which [It followeth] wants feet to follow, because there be two other
reasons to prove your doctrine rebellious. The first from the effects we see;
the second from another principle of doctrine, which you generally maintain.

The first. He that looks upon a goodly building, though he be deceived in
the foundation (which is the cause) whether it be a rock, or artificial work;
whether wool or stone, because it is covered in the earth: yet can he not be
ignorant in the building it self, which he beholds in the clear sun.
Whether therefore I might mistake the cause of your rebellions, as not to
discern whether it be in the Protestants scisme, or heresy, or in your selves
(whereof I make no question) malice, covetousness, or triple-crowned pride: yet
when we show these your positions, as it were turrets of your Babell: No
Protestant may be elected a King, being inthronized must be excommunicate, and
deposed, and being hopeless to be reclaimed during life, must be violently cut
off by sudden death. Neither this only, but All Protestant Magistrates and
people, and their favorers are subject to like censures, their kingdom is to
be invaded, and themselves expelled: Reason teaches us to judge from these
doctrines of the effects to the doctrine of the cause, and justly to esteem
them rebellious.

The second reason; though they be not yet excommunicated or censured Heretics
by your Pope, yet is this but durante beneplacito, or as in the Council of
Trent, [ Council. Trid. ^ess. 15. Saluus conductus datus Protestantibus. etc.
Pro hac vice saluus conductus:] Protestants shall have safe conduct for this
time. Mark here your Censurers, Only during the time of the Council
Protestants must be safe. Plainly signifying that they accounted Protestants
heretics before judgment; and not that only, but before judgment also
(praeiudicium autem tollit iudicium) against common rule of justice had
resolved to account them Heretics ever after. As our borderers to them they
have in deadly feud, if peradventure they find them at their own house, will
give kind entertainment, yea and defend them from violence, but after they be
dismissed, saying, only for this time, do honestly give them a watchword ever
after to look to their own safety. And this your self will tell us, for
Infra Cap. 13.
His holiness (say you) sent lately a iubet of obedience, and prohibet of
disobedience in behalf of our King, therein not obscurely confessing, that if
the Pope shall turn his style of iubemus, then will you also turn your pikes
of paremus; and what then but rebellion? Infra.
Then no duty to King, Magistrates, husbands, wives, creditors, fathers,
children; but among all conditions of Protestants hellish confusion. Think you
so to babish the wisdom of our State, as not Ianus-wise to look as well
before them as behind? No, for when they remember what has been Vide suprae
cap. 5. and Infra.
Kings and Queens English excommunicate by the Pope, and assaulted by secret
treasons, and open invasions by his instigations; they well know that there is
no safe repose in an arbitrary power of excommunication: but being warded by
Gods hand from your last mischief, will so provide, as not to lie open to a
second terrible blow. And thus our building (if our former foundation should
have failed) by these two reasons might be sufficiently supported. Thus much in
defense of our Assumption. We proceed to the confirmation of our several
reasons.

CHAP. VII.
The discovery in the first Reason in the Mayor.

THey who by their slanderous doctrine make all Protestants (in their common
opinion Heretics) so odious, as unworthy of any civil or natural society,
must necessarily be judged seditious and intolerable amongst the Protestants.

The moderate Answerer.
Cap. 2. Now will.
My answer is absolute before, that no learned Catholic reputeth the
Protestants, or any one Protestant of this Kingdom an Heretic.

The Reply.
And my Reply has already passed to encounter your Answer, showing that you
by this your Answer have made your greatest Doctors of all kinds Friars,
Jesuits, Cardinals, Popes, yea Councels not only no learned Catholics, but
even no Catholics; but (as they be) impious traducers, iniurers, murderers of
Protestants, no heretics, for heresy: for which Answer made to us how you
may answer them, you may deliberate.

The Discovery in the Minor.
But the Romish Seminaries and Jesuits do brand all Protestants with
detestable crimes, thereby to deny them of all civil, or natural respects.
Ergo

The Minor has two parts, both proved, Crimes slanderously objected. All
humane society detracted.


The first part proved.
First a Stranger says, that Protestants articulum omnino nullum tenent
symboli Apostolici Audraeas Iurgi^ici^ lib. III. Euang. quinti Proses^ores.
Protestants believe not one article of the Apostles Creed. Our countryman more
strangely: Wright in his late book of Articles.
Protestants have no faith, no Religion, no Christ, but are mere Infidels. The
Master of the Seminary at Rhemes writes, and entituleth his book En Caluini
Turcismum, and plane Mahometismum. Reinald. in lib qui inscribitur,
Caluinoturci^mus.
Caluinish Turcisme, and pla^e Mahometisme. Which book Deane Gifford does no
less impudently then impotently maintain, saying, that Calui^ pseudo
euangelium Alcorano esle in nullo melius, in multis te^^iu^ and flagitiosius. D
Gifford Deca^. D. Petri, pr^f. in lib. D. Keinaldi.
Caluins doctrine is worse then the Alcoran of the Turks. The Jesuit Institu^
Protestantium Atheismos explicate etc. Possiuin. Ies. lib^llo de Atheismis
Protest.
Possiuinus with the same spirit of blasphemy does compile a book, wherein he
calls Protestants doctrines, concerning Christ, mere Atheismes. And all to
this end, that all humane society with Protestants may be utterly dissolved.

The moderate Answerer.
Answer Cap. 2. Therefore.
This is no more then other Protestants charge Calvin, and such like with: as
first the Deane and College of Tubinge, writing a book of this subject,
gives it for a title, Fundamentorum Caluinianae sectae cum veteribus Arianis
and Nestorianis communium detectio.

The Reply.
That which they did in the spirit of opposition, and contention, is not much
to be regarded; especially, seeing (as it may seem by their objections) their
judgment has been depraved by your malignant Doctors. For first concerning
Arianisme, Heresin Arianorum Caluinus docet, vbi dicit Patrem esse per
excellentiam Deus. Bellar. lib. de notis Eccles. Cap. 6. Ariani and pref.
contro. de Christo. Sed iam. Greg. Valent. lib. 1. de Vnitate and Trin. Cap. 9.
Armand^s Ies. epist. ad Cami^. Possiuinus Ies. de notis diuini verbi. lib. 3.
page 78.
Calvin (says your Jesuits) does plainly teach Arianisme, saying, that the
Father is by a kind of excellency God. Whereas both the speech and sense is
most orthodoxall, and agreeing with the tenor of holy writ, and judgment of
all ancient Fathers, as your own learned Jesuits confess. For the words of
our Savior are plain, Apud Ioh. 14. [Pater mayor est me.] Quidam ratione
diuinitatis Pat^ dici censent, non ratione substantiae, sed ratione originis:
and hanc expositionem sequuntur illustres Doctores, inter quos Athanas. Nazianz
Hilar Orig. Tollet* Ies. Com. in Ioh. 14. Etiam Epiphanius, Leont. Cyrill.
Theoph. Euthym. Maldonat. Ies. in eundem locum.
Ioh. 14. [My Father is greater then I:] in the true sense, Is, (say your
Jesuits, and truly) The Father is greater not in substance and being, but by
reason of Birth and begetting. For their Authority they produce an inquest of
Fathers of free Calvin in this point: who was so far from Arianisme, that your
own Bellarmine does acknowledge that Arianos Caluinus impugnauit Bellar. lib.
de not Eccles. Cap. 9. Primum erro^em. Vid^ before sp^^su^ Apolog. Cathol.
part. 1. Cap. 31.
Calvin did impugn the doctrine of the Arians. Your Jesuits likewise impute
Bellar. lib. de notis Eccles. Cap 9. Valent Ies. Tom. 4* Disp. 1. q 2. punct. 2.
Nestorianisme: whereof Calvin does free himself saying, Procul abigedus est
Nestorij error, qui Christi naturam distrahere potius, q^m distingue^e volebat,
Script^ra clara voce reclamante etc. Caluin^^ I^st^t. de ^oc articulo, [Natus
ex Virgine] Vide de hoc plura Apolog. Cath part. 1. Cap. 43.
We must therefore abandon the heresy of Nestorious, who rather distracted
then distinguished the nature of Christ, against the doctrine of the holy Ghost
in Scripture. It would therefore become your modesty, to have omitted these
imputations: but we shall find your moderation immoderate in this kind.

The moderate Answerer.
In the place above. I will.
I will next bring in Master Hugh Broughton, a man greatly commended by Master
Willet, who tells the Bishops of England that their translation of the
Scripture is corrupt; and that Christianity is denied here in England.

The Reply.
Master Broughton (which I am able truly to witness) was as greatly commended
and reverenced for his learning among your greatest Jesuits at Mentz, and the
Bishop elector there, yet he never allowed your Translation, but debaseth it
more then any other: neither did he ever go to Italy or Spain to learn
Christianity there. How you ought to esteem of our Translation, I have made
it elsewhere evident from your own Vide Apolog. Cathol. part. 2. lib. 1. Cap
14.
Romish censures, who have given the translation of Tremelius as good an
approbation, as any Protestant would require. Where also may appear, by
confession of your most learned Jesuits and others, the Ibid. Cap. 10. and
deinceps.
manifold deprauations of your vulgar, falsely entitled Ibid. Cap 8. and
deinceps.
S. Hieromes Translation. But what modesty can this be in you, to object unto
us a man, whom you know to be sequestered from us rather by impotencie of
passion, then any difference of Religion; living now among them who maintain
both the same profession, and the same Latin Translation? so immoderate in
speech (to confess that which all, that know him, can witness) that the least
error he hears he names heresy, and the least opposition to his opinion,
infidelity. This is but the language of passion, which no moderate Answerer
may mention to prejudice the moderate.

The very moderate Answerer.
Cap. 2. The Admonition.
The Admonition to the Parliament, written with no small consent, uses these
words; That no man, in whom there is any spark of grace, or conscience, can
live in the Church of England, whose inhabitants be all Infidels, going to the
Churches of Bishops, and Archbishops, whose government is Antichristian and
devilish.

The Reply.
This writer and you may both join fellowship: You dedicate your book to the
King, he to the Parliament. He pretends the consent of a thousand; you [No
Catholic will say Protestants are Heretics,] implie a thousand thousand: He
with all his consent is not many; and you (for ought you well pretend) but one,
both invisible and namelesse, neither of both able to make up any great
consent, except you multiply the name of forenamed Alias A, alias B. etc. You
see what is themaladie of this Admonitor, namely, to condemn our Religion only
because of Bishops, as, in his illiterate brain, an order Popish, and
therefore Antichristian. Say now, do you think his Admonition tolerable? then
must you (who do defend that Bishop of Rome) conclude your self an Infidel,
and an Antichristian hireling. Do you think it immoderate? then are you no
moderate Answerer to condemn us by that Admonition, which your self does
condemn. Let us hear something else which may prove Protestants guilty of the
imputation of Turcismes and Atheismes.

The very moderate Answerer.
Cap. 2. Therefore first.
The denial of Christ to be God, which Master Willet and Doctor Fulke do,
denying Christ to have received the substance of his Father; or that he is Deus
de Deo; God of God: as the first general Councels defined.

The Reply.
Deny Christ to be God? God forbid: but to be God of God only in a particular
sense, this indeed they do; but can you find no more Protestants of this
opinion? Your Campian. Ies.
lesuite reckneth up Calvin and Beza; and I think he says truly: I would
either he or you did as truly understand them. But yet we wish to hear what
your Doctors think of this Protestants opinion: your Campion calls it
Portentum. Rat. 8. Mox.
monstrous: your Haeresis vt refert Bellar. lib. 2. d^ Christo. Cap. 19
Genebrard, Lindan, Canisius name it Heresy: your Nefaria haeresis. Staplet.
Prompt f^r. 3. post Domin. Pass.
Stapleton and Feuardentius do aggrauate it by an epithet, Heinous heresy:
your Caluini Atheismus. Possiuin. Ies. lib. 3. de notis verbi Dei. ca. 74.
Possiuinus notes it of Atheism: and your Blasphemy. Annot. in Joh. 1. verse.
1.
College at Rhemes of Blasphemy. And now, belike, this is that doctrine which
deserves your general clamors, which being examined with the eye not ouercast
with the web of prejudice, Dum rem ipsam excutio, non facile audeo pronunciare
illos in errore fuisse: quia non videntur velle negare filium esse a Pa^ sed
essentiam genitam esse negant. Quae sententia non video cur Catholica dicenda
non sit. Bellar. lib. 2. de Christo. Cap. 19.
Does (in the judgment of your famous Bellarmine) seem Catholicall: because
they deny not the Son to be from the Father; but they deny the essence of
the godhead to have any generation. This likewise is not the part of common
modesty, to blindfold your self, and strike you know not whom.

To the former inuectiues I must add another of the same die, even deep black
malice: Speculamini Angliam, non iam Catholicorum, sed Anthropophagorum, and
immanium Cyclopum Insulam reperietis nulla n^ minima quidem vestigia his
terrarum partibus fidei Catholicae superesse. Lodouic. de Orleanc. page 48.
Look upon England (says your french Rabsacah) and you shall find it to be an
I Will of men, who cate men's flesh, and who have not among them (yet they profess
Jesus Christ and the Apostles creed) the least footstep to Catholic Religion.
This we see written, which gives us cause to believe that which is reported by
our Travelers, who affirming, that in our last Embassage into Spain, the
people there gazed upon our English Nobles and Gentlemen with that eye which
Pope Gregory a thousand years since beheld them, when they were Pagans; and
admiring the comely feature of their personages, and the fairenes of their
complexions, asked Quaerens cuiates essent negotiatores quidam Britanni, and
audiens Anglos fuisse: Been, inquit, Angli, quasi Angeli; sed proh dolor quam
splendidas facies Princeps tenebraru^ nunc possidet!
Who they were, and hearing they were named English, they may well be called
Anglish, (quoth he) as it were Angels But, alas, what fair faces does the ugly
feend and Prince of darkness now possess? Thus the vulgar in Spain are said
in their Christian charity to have bewailed the misery of the English, Alas,
that these men have not the knowledge of Christ! Being persuaded by their
Monks that we worship the devils, which is more probable by their writings,
as, Caluinistae furentes detestantur Christum Dominum nostrum. Pintus in cap.
3. Dan.
Caluinists are Heretics detesting our Lord Christ. Caluiniana haeresis est
Sarecenismo and Paganismo detestabilior. Reinaldus in Rosaus.
Caluinish heresy is more detestable then the Religion of Turks and Paganes.
What is this else then to dissolve all communion with Protestants?

CHAP. VIII.
The Discovery in the second part of the Minor.

1. In Neigbors.
Haereticis licitum est auferri quae habent; melius tamen est quod authoritate
Iudicis fiat. Decretum Papale apud Gratian. Cause. 15 q. Glossa.
Neighbors, if Heretics, may lawfully be spoiled of their goods (by force:)
though it be better to be taken from them by authority.

2. In Parishioners.
Where the question is concerning paying of Tithes, it is resolved: Non est
dubium quin populus Catholicus iure posset haereticos Pastores Decimis
defraudare. Alanus Card. and Parsonus.
Parishioners may lawfully defraud Protestant Ministers of their Tithes.

3. In Debtors, and whosoever have any matter of trust committed unto them.
Is apud quem Haereticus aliquid deposuerit non tenebitur post manifestam
haeresin rem depositam illi reddere. Simancha Instit. Cathol. Tit. 46. Sect. 73.
Such are not bound to restore that which they have received, or to satisfy
their Creditors, who are Heretics. Non tenentur reddere rem verbis contractam.
Tolet. Jes. instruct. Sacerd. de Excom.
They are not bound thereunto. Si iuraui me soluturum alicui pecuniam, qui
excommunicatur, non teneor exsoluere: quia qualitercunque possumus debemus
venare malos, vt cessent a malo. Apud Great. Cause. 15. q. 6. Glossa.
This is an ancient Decree.

4. In Servants.
Custodes arcium, and caeteri Vasalli eadem constitutione liberati sunt a
vinculo Sacramenti, quo Dominis sidelitate promiserant. Simancha Episc. quo
supra sect. 74.
Also keepers of forts, and all other vassals and slaves are freed from the
oath of subjection to their Lords.

5. In Wives.
Quinetiam vxor Catholica viro haeretico debitum reddere non tenetur. Simancha
in instit Greg. 13. dicatis, and eius iussu Romae impressis.
Wives are not bound to render due benevolence to their Husbands, if Heretics.

6. In Parents.
Pater, qui filiu^ habet haereticu^, qui conuerti no^ velit, si pater liber and
sui iuris esset ad disponendum de bonis suis vt vellet, tenetur exhaereditare
filium talem. Huc adiunge. Parents mortaliter peccant tradendo filias
matrimonio Haereticis Card. Allanus.
The father must disinherite his son, if he will be a Protestant.

7. In Children.
Sacerdos in Angliam reuersus, and rogatus de parentibus, qui sunt Haeretici,
respondere possit and veraciter negare eos sibi esse parents, intelligendo
quales habere debeat: quia Patres solent respuere filios propter Religione^ and
silij Parents. Allanus and Parsonus.
A Priest returning into England, if his father be a Protestant, he may deny
him to be his father: meaning that he is not such an one, as he ought to
acknowledge his father. Nam propter haeresin patris filij sunt sui iuris.
Simancha quo supra. Tit. 46 Sect. 74.
For by the heresy of the father the child is freed from obedience.

8. In all Kindred.
Haeretici filij vel consanguinei non dicuntur, sed iuxta Legem, Sit manus tua
super cos, vt sundas sanguinem ipsorum. Apud Great. Glos. in Decret. lib. 5. ex
Greg. 9. Ca^s. 23. q. 8. Cap. Legi.
Heretics may not be termed either Children or Kindred, but according to the
old law, Thy hand must be against them to spill their blood.

9. In Natives.
Si Ciuitas tota, vel mayor pars sit haeretica, potest ille negare hanc esse
suam patriam^intelligendo, quod haereticam non habeat loco patriae. Card, Alan.
and Parsonus.
If any find his native City to be most part infected with heresy, he may
deny it to be his Country.

Finally, by Iuxta Constitutiones Greg. 9 Haereticus priuatur omni dominio
naturali, civilly, politico. Sima^cha Jastit. Tit. 46 Sect. 74.
Pope Gregory his Constitutions; By heresy a man is deprived of all his
jurisdiction, whether natural, civil, or politic. So that the tenor of the
oath of the Leaguers in France is this: Si vnquam ad Haereticorum parts
deflexero, ^i amicitiam, si foedus, si matrimonium cum ijs faxo, si opem
fidemue do, si Aue, si Vale dixero, illa die fulmine ferito. Ledouicus de
Orleance Part. 29.
If ever I make marriage, use traffic, yield aid, hold friendship, give
credence unto Heretics, or once salute them; then let God confound me. Shall
we call this Religion which dissolueth the duty of Servants, Subjects,
Debitors, and strangleth the vital spirits of humane society? and by not
acknowledgement of natural duties of Wedlock, natural Parents, natural
Children, natural Country, does bowell up nature, as it were, and deprive men
of humanity it self? O Babylon! to prove this in all particulars were
needless; one kind may satisfy.

Practice.
The Papists in France did libell against Henricum 3. haereticum, homicidam,
etc. Lib. de iusta Abd^cat. Henr. 3.
Henry the third as heretical, a manslayer: so likewise against this Henry the
fourth, callinghim a Henricum 4. Culinare^ cane^, pogonarum lulianum, bipedu^
nequissimum, foetidum Satanae stercus. Lod. de Orleance.
Kitchin-dogge, long-bearded Julian, most heathenish Apostate, and the very
excrement of Satan. No less was the rank or of our Cardinal Poole against his
Sovereign, Si Caesarem intellexerim cum omn^ sua class aduersus Turcam cursum
dirigere, acsi iam Hellesponti fauces tenentem conspicere^, nunquam
acquiescerem donec conuenite^, and in haec verba apud eum prorumperem: Caesar,
quo part? quid cogitas? Si amor Reip. Christianae te mouet, vt Rego Turcarum,
antiquum Christians nominis hostem aggrediare annon vnde maius periculum Reip.
Christianae imminet, and vbi nou^s hostis viget, multo quam Turea infestior, eo
potius cursum conuertere oportet? viz in Angliam, cu^us semen adulterinum vix a
Turcaico internosci possit? Card. Poole ad Henric. 8. pro unit. Eccles. defens.
lib. 3. page 384.
Desirous to divert the Emperors forces from the Pagans, and to enforce them
upon Henry the 8. as upon an enemy more pernicious then the Turk.

The modest Answerer.
Cap. 2. The rest.
Those penalties this Author alleges as belonging to the Excommunicate, and
such Heretics, as spoiling them of their goods, denying Tithes; I answer, that
these Societies of neighbors wives, and such like are not to be denied to the
Protestants in England, because we do not esteem them in the case of
Heretics; again, we perform these communications and respects as well to our
Country Protestants, as they themselves. Lastly, I answer that those penalties
mentioned were not of purpose ordained against Protestants, but Decrees against
Heretics of those times, and not now in use in France, Heluetia, Sweueland,
Denmark, and most part of Germany. And if the penal Constitutions of the
Council of Trent are not yet after 40. years continuance received into those
recited Provinces and Kingdoms; there is not so great fear that those Papal
pains will ever give to this man so much cause of so outrageous exclamations.

The Reply.
If all your Sect would allow your Answer, we should need no clamor: for first
your answer de iure, Protestants are not to be demed these duties: secondly, de
facto, that You do not deny them: for confirmation of the right you infer:
that These punishments were not ordained against Protestants; and auouching the
fact, you instance in other countries, where these penalties are not in use.
Concerning the fact, let us admit that these are performed, yet the Apostle
distinguishes of performance of duty, and propter Iram, and propter
Conscientiam; one for fear of civil power, the other for conscience sake.
Whether bond does tie you to obedience the subsequents will manifest. We do
likewise acknowledge that some part of those penalties were more aunciently
ordained against others, and not against Protestants; What then? if they be now
extended against Protestants? For thus dealt the Jews against our Lord Christ,
1. Pet. 2.
We have a law, and by that law he ought to die, because he has spoken
blasphemy. The law they had, was, Holy, just, and good: but the application
was their own, ungodly, furious, and murderous; we may herein compare Christ's
blasphemy, and Protestants heresy. And if your late penal Decrees of Trent
be not of force in other countries, you have given us a reason, Quia vires
desunt: because they want outward force. Otherwise I have showed that those
penalties, as non-payment of Tithes, are by your John 19. 7.
Allane extended against Protestant Ministers; of Debts, by your Insra.
Tolet; against Protestant Creditors; of due benevolence, by your Supra.
Simancha against Protestant husbands; of due reverence and acknowledgement, by
your * Parsons, against Protestant fathers; of allegiance, by your * Simancha
against Protestant Kings and Magistrates. And for further evidence,

CHAP. IX.
I add a Supplement to your former Positions.

His admonition to the Nobility and people of England. Anno 1588. page 41.
IT is clear (says Allane) that what people and person soever be declared to
be opposite to Gods Church, by what obligation soever, either of kindred,
friendship, loyalty, or subjection I be bound unto them; I may, or rather must
take arms against them: and then must we take them for Heretics, when our
lawful Popes adiudge them so to be. A little after he strikes an Alarm, Page
53.
Now therefore my Lords and dear Countrymen fight, etc. In the whole book the
English Clearke exhorts now (since the Council of Trent) the English gentry
to take arms against their English Sovereign. Say now (moderate Answerer)
will your modesty give your face leave to blush at this doctrine of your
Cardinal? The like trumpet of rebellion against German Protestants, after the
Council of Trent, did Friar Alphonse sound alowd: Licitum est Haereticos bello
oppugnare, postquam de little pertinacia constiterit, bona enim intentio est
fide^ Catholicam exaltare: quae fuit intentio Caroli Caesaris in bello suo
aduersus, Protestants, Germanos. Alphons. de Castro.
It is lawful to overcome Heretics by force of arms. As long then as we
hear of such Proclamations, sounding nothing but Arma virumque: there may be
reason given of our exclamations. But you insist.

The moderate Answerer.
Answer cap. 2. page 12. The rest.
We have not now another Queen Marie inheretrix to the Crown, to be joined in
marriage with a potent Prince, symbolizing with husband, conformity in country
discipline: to breed scruples in this behalf.

The Reply.
This Answer gives us no more security, then the Cat does the Mouse, when she
seems but to play with it: for though you have not a Maria, yet may your
Dolman have an Infanta, or your Catesby and his Accomplices an Elizabetha to
match, and to ouermatch also at their pleasure, making her but as a garland of
flowers in a May Game, to flourish for a day or two, and then to wither and
perish. And before him your Watson saw no metaphysicall he or she to succeed.
But though there be no such heir apparent, yet a man by troubling the water,
may think peradventure to catch an Eele, and AEsop. in Apol.
The little Fly has power enough to set the Eagles nest on fire. I leave the
confirmation of my Discovery, and come to the confutation of those denied
duties. It is written, Romans 13. 8.
Owe nothing to any man, but love one another. And therefore that debt of
Tithes which Joseph (as due unto them) paid to the Egyptian Priests: of
Debtes and due benevolence, which was never denied to Infidels: of Allegeiance
and Homage, which Saint Ambrose did perform to an Apostate: may not be denied
to any, though in case of heresy, much less then to Protestants. But to
conclude with your own words, Those duties are not to be denied unto
Protestants. It were well if either you writ as you thought, or that your
Doctors did think as you write: and so should we have less cause of scruples,
to fear either you or them. Let us proceed to the second Reason.

CHAP. X.
The Discovery in the second Reason.

Mayor. Whosoever do profess any civil power sovereign, whether directly or
indirectly, are to be accounted seditious. Minor. But all Popish Priests do
profess a double prerogative over Kings, Democraticall and Monarchical,
namely, both of people and Pope. Both which are proved by the Positions.

The moderate Answerer.
Answer cap. 3. in initio.
To the Mayor. I would wish him to except the Emperor of Germany, and such as
be subject to the Empire, and such cases: I say Transeat Mayor for Christendom.

The Reply.
Why Transeat? Do you then make all Kings in Christendom subject to the
Emperor? I know you dare not proclaim this in Quae regna Regibus suis
contenta, nullius dominio vnqua^ paruerunt. Francisc. de Victor. Relect
France or Spain. Dare you, (who thus insinuate your self into grace with his
Majesty: Epist. Dedic. to his Majesty. Therefore.
I, one of your Highness obedient subjects) subject your Sovereign to a
foreign State? as namely, to the Emperor, so far from Imperial, that (as
one Jesuit confesses) Romanum Imperium iam fere deletu^ est. Bellar. lib. 2.
de Romans Pont. cap. 2.
It is almost ruinate: Yea, considered as it is called Roman Empire, Imperium
illud Romanum iamdiu euersum est. Salmeron Ies. Com. in 2 Thessalonians. 2. Disp. 2.
Caeterum.
It is (as another Jesuit acknowledges) long ago (an infallible note of the
prophesied time of Vide 2 Thessalonians. 2
Antichrist) utterly extinct. Cui vix Germani ipsi obtemperant. Costerus.
Whereunto (says your Costerus) scarce the Germans (whom you object) do obey.
Which is very true; for, in the tenor and form of Election and Coronation of
the Emperor, you may find, as I remember, this power ascribed to the Prince
Palatine Elector, that he (as being Steward rather to the Empire, then Emperor)
may cite the Emperor to the diet of the State, and constrain him in some case
to yield satisfaction. And therefore my Mayor may still recide in Christendom.

To the Minor Proposition.
The moderate Answer is of two kinds, 1. Recriminatio^ against Protestants. 2.
Apology and defense for his own Priests.


1. Recrimination or Accusation.
Answer ibid.
And thus I frame my Minor. But all Protestant Writers do ordinarily teach, and
practice this doctrine, as I shall prove.

The Reply.
This kind of Answer of retorting, which you call returning the Argument upon
Protestants, you use in every Answer: if truly, you shall prove your sin to
have been more common, which cannot justify your selves; If unjustly, you
shall but slander them and multiply your wickedness. Which will be proved,
when we come to give the Vide infra in the second part.
Justification of Protestants in answering your blindfold exceptions.

The moderate Answerer in Apologizing for his fellows.
His second Proposition is this, [But all Popish Priests do profess a double
prerogative over Kings, Democraticall or Monarchical, namely, both people or
Pope. Ergo) This his conceit fights with his own Assertion, and present
Position of the Popes Monarchical prerogative over Kings: for where there is a
Monarchical power and government in one, there is an vnpossibilitie of a
Democracie and Democratical power and regencie in the people: and yet this
simple Disputer does thus argue.

The Reply.
Simple I confess, professing also that simplicity in Christ, as never either
in word or writing to aequiuocate. Notwithstanding your simple Disputer wishes
that he had met with so subtle an Answerer as could have distinguished betwixt
mentiri, and mendacium dicere: to lie, and to report a lie. Say: this
proposition, The Pope is taught to have a Monarchical power over Kings, and
people Democraticall, does it imply contradiction? Seeing then I only show, in
this present reason, that your Jesuits defend both, it is an unreasonable
modesty to favor the Autors, and inueigh against me the reporter: which I have
done justly in both, as will appear in due order. Be not idle, but conform
your self to the laws of dispute.

The Discovery. First, of the peoples power.
Parsons. Parsons in his Dolman.
The Commonwealth has authority to choose a King, and to limit him laws at
their pleasure. The French Jesuit shows a Reason. Maiestas regni est in
populo potius, quam in persona Regis. Ies. lib. de i^s^a Abdicat. page 36.
For Majesty (says he) is rather seated in the Kingdom, then in the King.
Like to Stapleton his Gloss. Non populus in Principum gratiam factus; sed
Principes in populi gratiam creati. Didymus page 261. Stapl.
People are not ordained for the Prince; but the Prince for the people. But
more finely Reinalds. Rex humana creatura est, quia ab homimbus constituta.
Reinald d^i^* s^a authorit. page 8
A King is but a creature of man's creation.

The moderate Answerer.
Answer cap. 3. But let.
People were in the beginning without Kings, and made Election of diverse kinds
of Regiments, as they thought meet and most secure for their defense: for as I
have made demonstration, and his Majesty's words in the Parliament do conclude:
Although a Kingdom and people be relata, yet can he be no King if he want
people and subjects.

The Reply.
This Position, People, as subjects, were before their Governor, does taste too
much of Machiauellisme: for in nature the birth is called prodigious, which is
delivered with heels forward, from whence some have received their names to be
called Agrippa: such is this politic curse which you fancy, but remember that
though, as you truly affirm, King and subject be relatiues, even as Father
and Son: yet consider them in the nature, in the real foundation as things,
and not of accidental relation; and then (I hope) you will suffer the Father
to go before the Son. And so Adam, as an Oecumenicall King, was before his
family; after his decease, always the right of government was invested in
the firstborn, as a birthright: so God did signify to Caine, [ Genesis 4. 7. l
Baldus lib. ex iure D. de just. Andr Hostensis, Pet. Ancoranus, Card.
Florentinus, Panorm. Olradus, Albericus, Angelus, Felinus, Paulus Castrens.
Barbatius, Fran. Curtius, Card. Alex Phil. Francus, Jason, Philippus decimus,
Carolus Ruinus, Anton* Corsetta, Ripa, Caldriue, Al^iat. As I find them cited
by M. Haywood in his answer against Dolman. Page 17.
And thou Caine shall rule (meaning Abel) over him. And that Kingdoms have
been successiue by law of nations in the firstborn, is confirmed by a grand
inquest of your own (...) Lawyers: not that we deny Election of people to
have been upon necessity usual; but so to magnify the power of a people
electing, as to continue still Sovereign over the Prince elected, this is that
which we call a position rebellious: the very intent of your forenamed Authors,
making regal power to be from the commonwealth, but as Parsons in his Dolman.
page 73.
Potest as vicaria and delegata: delegate and by commission; to this end, that
establishing the peoples dominion, they may use them at their assignement for
the subversion of the King, as their places alleged do manifest, and is yet
more amply avouched by another Jesuit, saying, that Si quis Rex fieret
Christianus, and Catholicus, and postea fiat haereticus, aut Apostata; ratio
exigit vt inter Catholicos populos a regni administratione re^ou^atur: and hoc
iure, quia protestas prius in populo est quam in rege; and a populo in Regem
deriuatur. Salm. les. in epist. Pauli, in Genesis Disp. 12. ^a^ de.
If any King Catholic shall prove an Heretic, it is reason for the people to
depose him: because this power is in the people, which is derived unto the King
from the people. This is that position which we called rebellious, and yet
behold Abyssus abyssum inuocat; one depth of rebellious disloyalty, in
deposing, does draw one another of cruelty, in murdering their Kings, where
the French yields them In populo est potestas vitae and necis, Author de iu^^a
Abdicat. page 33.
Power of life and death over their Sovereign. To overthrow this many-headed
beast, by weapons borrowed from your own men.

The Confutation.
There is one honest Friar that dare adventure to light a candle to discover
the murderous: for speaking of the power of and by Election, Nemo potest ^e
Regem facere. sed populus Regem eligit; sed Rex iam factus and constitutus, non
potest populus iugum a cer^^ce sua repellere: populi voluntas in necessitatem
conue^titur. Roiardus Dominic. 1. Adu nt.
Though there be (says he) in the people a freedom of Election, yet after
they have chosen their King, they have no more power to remove the yoke, but
stand in necessity of subjection. This man was but a Friar, and therefore
peradventure in your Synods may not have any definitive sentence, Bellar.
which (you say) is proper to Bishops. Here is therefore (one of this order)
Bishop Cunerus, who from the holy writ does mainely impugn your former
assertion, Quidam putant Regum autoritatem, solum explac^to and co^sensu
pendere subditoru^, qui Principes eligunt, vel re^ipiunt: caeterum B. Apostoli,
qui spiritu scrutabatur profunda Dei, long altius potestatis eorum originem ac
fundametum er^^nt. etc. Cune^us lib. de Ossic. Princip. Cap. 5.
Some there be (says he) who imagine that the authority of Princes depends
upon the courtesy of people, as to think that they, who gave consent to
choose Kings, have likewise now a power to depose them: But the blessed
Apostles, who by the holy Ghost were enabled to search the mysteries of God,
have more profoundly enquired into the foundation of the state and authority of
Kings. * Saint Peter (says he) entering into this argument, does thus admonish
Christians. Be ye subject unto the ordinance of man, whether to the King, as to
the more excellent, or his messengers sent from him; to the punishment of
wicked, and praise of the godly: so is the will of God as free, and not as
having liberty as a cloak of maliciousnes, but as the servants of God. And S.
Paul, 1. Pet. 2.
There is no power but of God; and whosoever resists the power, resists the
ordinance of God etc. From whence he infers, Though all means whereby Kings
come to the Crowns be not commanded of God, yet whatsoever means they use,
whether by Election, Succession, or invasion, whenever they are by consent of
the Kingdom once established, this is the ordinance of God: and henceforth he,
as sent from God, is to rule, and people to obey; the Apostle saying of the
people, Romans 13. 1.
It is necessary to be subject. This witness your self called for, saying, [
Ans^ ^r supra Cap. 4.
As says Cu^erus,] so I, thus says Cunerus. You may not in equity refuse
him. For this was justice in the Governor, when S. Paul said, [ Act. 25. verse.
11. and 12.
I appeal to Caesar, to answer, And to Caesar shall thou go. Yet if he be
not sufficient, behold a Jesuit will plead our cause, Qua^uis Principes
subinde non admodum boni sunt, and humanis saepe medijs vel artibus principatum
obtineant, nihil tamen horu^ Apostoli Christianos attendere voluerunt, sed
ordinationem Dei, per quam potestatem habe^t, non quod semper media, quibus
facti sunt reges, a Deo fiant, sed quod a Deo or dinentur: ita vtquicunque
sublimiori potestate praefulget, huic ex voluntate and ordinatione Dei competit
autoritas, qua subditis potest imperare, and cui subditi parere tenentur. vt
licet medijs humanis, nempe, contractibus vel electione, vel postulatione, vel
successione, vel quacunque regni consensione, vel iure belli, vel simili
ratione Princeps fiat, Principi tamen nunc facto haec diuinitus potestas adest,
and competit autoritas, quasi ipso Deo regnum and potestatem illi dante, and
populu^ illi subjiciente, vnde de Jeroboam 2. Reg. 12. Te assumam and regnabis.
Et 3. Reg. 11. Dedi te ducem super popul^. Et 3. Reg 14. Scidi regnum domus
David, and dedi tibi illud: Sicut apud Daniel. 4. Dominatur excelsus in regno
hominum, and cuicunque voluerit dabit illud postquam constitutus est rex, tum
dicit Apostolus de populo, [Necesse est subijci.] Rursus.

Qui velit concludere a Barbaris imperium esse eripiendum, quia sunt imperiti
and compara^ ad parendum, eadem ratione consiciet, a foemina aut adolescente,
vbi regnat, posse per vim extorqueri dominatum, itemque a Rege imperito regnum,
a Praesule indocto Pontificatum: Aliud est enim quid faciendum est ex ratione
and secundum naturam; aliud quid, si fiat, infectum sieri nequeat Iure igitur
Sapientiores regnant, sed reipsa imperitus and barbarus si regnet, iniuria est
de regno hunc pellere: alioqui rapinae and caedi res mortalium omnes expositas
esse opo^tebit. Haec Joseph. Acosta Iesuita lib. 2. de Indorum salute. Cap. 5.
* 1. Pet. 3. 1.


Though it be better to have a more wise King, then a simple; yet when he, whom
we have is but silly, then may he no more be deprived of his Kingdom, then an
unlearned Prelate of his Bishopric: otherwise the state of mortal men should
be exposed to rapines and bloodshed. But to return to the Oracles of God, S.
Peter called man's entrance into the kingdom by consent of people, man's
creation; upon this ground, it may be, your Reinolds did descant, where he
called the King, men's creature: as though he could see in man's election nothing
but man, whereas S. Peter in the same place says to man creating, Be ye
subject unto the creation of man, Propter Deum, for the Lords sake, in the
creature beholding God: Why? S. Paul will satisfy, Because the powers that
are, be ordained of God. Romans 13. So that man's creation is but the body of
soueraintie, Gods ordinance in that means is the very soul thereof, and ought
in all Christians to be the life of loyal subjection.

The Answer retorted.
In the last place I must make bold to strike you with your own sword: There
is no King to rule (say you) where there is no people to be ruled: for King and
people be Relata. All this is most true: Well now our Question is, whether
after the peoples election of a King the power to depose a King remainestill in
the people; you affirm, we deny it, strengthened by this your Argument from
relation original, thus. The power of government rests rather in the Ruler,
then in the party to be ruled. But a King is elected to rule the people. Ergo
the rule remains not in the people, but in the King. In conjugal society
before the contract the woman is free, but after contract (a relatis) now his
wife: there follows a necessity of subjection, not to be dissolved: * Let
the wife be subject. Notwithstanding in your conclusion you bewray this
modesty, to exact Learning in your Accuser, and show none in your Answer.
Thus much of your people, now we proceed orderly to the Pope.

CHAP. XI.
The Discovery. Secondly of the Pope.

TO avouch his preeminence, these men go beyond the Moon: as first Bozius.
Pontisicem esse Caput totius Ecclesiae, and habere potestatem etiam circa omnia
temporalia, probamus ex Theologis and Canonistis. Bezius de Eccles. Monarch.
Tempor. Epist. Dedicat. ad Clement. 8. Pontif.
The Pope, the head of the Church, has power in all temporal causes and
States.

The moderate Answerer.
Answer Cap. 2. But it.
It will be objected from the second Reason, that Catholics hold the Pope head
of the Church in civil power; and also over Kings, and circa omnia temporalia:
Therefore he may depose Princes, and command Subjects to take arms against
them once excommunicate. First I answer.

The Reply.
But first I ask, why would you answer this in discourse of the first Reason,
and omit it here in this second, where (being his proper place) you had reason
to answer. I should think it was for love of brevity; but that your manifold
superfluous repetitions do except against it: yet I rather think it was your
modesty, least that my accusation and your Answer (as different colors)
jointly examined, might one illustrate the other; that, to be constant and
just; this, a mere fugitive. But (be not offended) we must compare them,
seeking your Answer where it is, seeing we cannot find it where it should be:
your first and second and third must be discovered in the reason following.
What say you to the present point? Have Popes prerogative over Kings in causes
temporal, as of authority to depose them?

The very moderate Answerer.
Answer Cap. 2. Secondly.
I answer for all Catholics in general to the maine Objection, that
Henricus, Victor, Johannes de Turrecremata, Couor^^ius, and the common opinion
of Schools do teach, that there is no such temporallor regal power in Popes
over Princes in civil affairs. And again: Ibid. Sixthly.
These Autors do not say that this civil power is simply and absolutely
subject to the Papal authority. And yet again, Ibid. Therefore.
The discouerer cannot sinde any such power sovereign over Kings challenged by
Popes, against which he so much inueigheth.

The Reply.
The sum of your Answer is, that the general doctrine of Papists is to
deny all temporal and civil power absolutely over Kings; and that no Pope
did ever challenge it. And yet behold, before your eyes, in this Reason to
which you now would answer, your own Doctor Bozius produced against you, who
in his book inscribed, De Temporali Ecclesiae Monarchia. Clementi 8. Pontifici
Opt. Max. Franciscus Bozius.
Of the temporal monarchy of the Church, and dedicated to the last Pope
Clement the 8. is so absolute for this absolute temporal jurisdiction of the
Pope above all estates whatsoever, that he extends it throughout the
universal world, even Etiam Ethnici, quoad temporalia Ecclesiae, adeoque summo
Pastori eius Romano Pontifici subijciuntur, vt docent Innocentius, Johan.
Andraeas, Hostiensis, Syluester, S. Antoninus, caeterique Doctores Canonistae,
cosque puniri posse affirmant poena etiam temporali. Bezius in codem libro.
Over all Infidels, to punish them for some causes with corporal punishments.
And he challenges herein the consent of Andraeas, Syluester, Antoninus, and
other Doctors Canonists; yea also (which you denied, that it can be showen)
Pope Iam infra.
Innocentius does challenge it. A doctrine so common, that Bellarmine does
confess, that Affirmant hoc Aluarez, Syluester and multi alij. Bellar.
Aluarez, Syluester, and many others do affirm it. Furthermore (because you
say, Your Discouerer cannot show etc.) I must yet discover a greater and
grosser consent amongst your School in this point. Alexander Carerius
Patauinus of late has writ; the title of his book is this, De potestate
Romani Pontisicis aduersus impios Politicos, and huius temporis haereticos
Libri istius inscriptio.
Concerning the power of the Pope of Rome against all wicked Politicians and
heretics of this time. This sure will be something to the purpose: say on.
Hanc opinionem, [Summum Pontisicem iure diuino habere plenissimam potestatem in
vniuersum orbem terrarum tum in rebus Ecclesiasticis tum in politicis,]
sequendam censeo, quam communis Theologorum schola secuta est: Thomas, S.
Antoninus; cui opinioni subscripserunt (enumerat vigi^^i duos, inter alios
vero) Franciscus Mayronus, cognomento Doctor illuminatus, nuperrime vere Celsus
Mancinus, qui in Tractatu de luribus Principatuum. lib. 3. Cap. 1. and 2. ita
scriptum reliquit: In summo Pontifice est vtrauis potestas, seu iurisdictio
spiritualis, and temporalis: and vti omnium est eminentissimus in spirituali
potestate, ita etiam in temporali; ita vt liceat de Pontifice Romano illud
similitudine quadam asseuerare, quod Plato in Timaeo, quidnam esset Deus
respondit, Non est homo, non coelum, non bonum, sed quid? praestantius. Roget
quis an summus Pontifex sit Dux, an Rex, an non Imperator; caute respondebit,
si negando asserat, esse quid praestantius, quidue eminentius. Haec ille. Et ex
illo haec Carerius lib 1 de Potest. Romans Pont. Cap 9.
This opinion, namely, that the Pope by the law of God has most full power
throughout the world even in all temporal or civil causes, I defend: and
hereunto the common Schools of Divines do subscribe. He numbreth two and
twenty Authors, and among others one called The illuminated Doctor, and an
other called Celsus, by interpretation, High or Aloft; and therefore insignes
him with Vere Celsus, as truly so named, and so truly he may be, if we judge
him by the loftiness of his style and conclusion, which only this Carerius
does therefore express, as being more eminent then any other. Such and so great
is the spiritual and civil power of the Pope (says Celsus) that as Plato to
one asking what God was, answered, he is not man, not heaven, not good, but
what? more excellent: so if any shall demand what the Pope is; by a kind of
resemblance one may warily answer, he is no Duke, no King, nor Emperor, but
more excellent. What can this be else (seeing God only is for excellency
called 1. Tim. 6. 15.
King of Kings, and Lord of Lords) but an other God? Warily answered, but
wickedly. Next he assumeth for authority of his defense Eadem opinion probatur
ex Canonistarum, testimonio, qui sic adhaeserunt decreto desumpto ex C. per
venerabilem: qui filij legitimi: vt infinitum sit illos enumerare. Carerius
ibid. Cap. 9. and 10.
The common judgment of Canonists, all building this opinion upon the Decrees
of Popes. As if they should say, if we be deceived in our opinion concerning
the Popes jurisdiction, then the Popes have deceived us. What is that which
Pope Innocentius decreed? Secunda Canonistarum ostensio sumitur ex C. Solitae
de mayor. and obed. vbi Innocentius tertius ait: Deus creauit duo luminatia in
coelo, solemn and lunam; id est, duas instituit dignitates, quae sunt,
Po^^ficalis, and Regalis: harum quae praeest diebus, spiritualibus, scz. mayor
est, and dignior ea quae temporalibus praeficitur; vt quanta est inter solemn
and lunam, tanta inter Papam and Imperatorem cognoscatur differentia. Optime
explicat summus Pontifex hac decretali Pontificiae dignitatis eminentiam.
Carerius ibid. Cap. 12.
That God created two great lights, the Sun to rule the day, and the Moon to
govern the night: signifying two dignities, the spiritual, which is the
Papal, and the temporal, belonging to to the Emperor like the Moon. Yet so,
that there is as great difference of excellency betwixt the Emperor and the
Pope, as betwixt the Moon, and the Sun. What can you infer from hence?
Vnde sic formo rationem; Ea est proportio inter Pontificem and Imperatorem,
quae est inter Solemn and Lunam; sed sol est praestantior luna, quae ab illo
mutuat splendorem ac lucem: Igitur Imperatoris potestas a summo Pontifice
pendet. Carcrius ibidem.
That as the Moon has no light, but that it borrows of the Sun: so the
Emperor has no power, which is not depending of the Pope. Thus Pope and
popish by too much gazing on the Moon, are become lunatike, who by a spirit of
pride carnally pervert the literal sense of the holy Ghost, as it is Vide
Apolog. Catholicam. Part. 2. lib. 5. Cap. 17.
Proved. And the whole doctrine will be plainly confuted in the Infra part 3.
Confutation. Wherefore seeing that this temporal universal jurisdiction of
the Pope, some Papists with great consent, even from Popes, have proclaimed,
all which you have vnlearnedlie denied, which will yet be further confirmed in
the next Chapter: learn henceforth a necessary point of modesty, not to
avouch a negative, No one Papist says so, till you have read sufficiently what
they say. Thus much of the temporal power popish, considered directly: Now
must we enquire how it may concern him indirectly.

CHAP. XII.
The discovery of the common doctrine of the Iesuitically opinionated.

THat the Pope has power in temporal causes. Habet tamen indirecte in ordine
ad bonum spirituale. Bellar. lib. 5. de Romans Pont. Cap. 6. and 7.
This is true (says Bellarmine) understood indirectly, as it may avail for
the spiritual good. In brief, Stapleton in his English Counterblast against
Master Horn.
This supremacy of the Pope (says Stapleton) is a doctrine to be holden of
all Christians upon pain of damnation, and separation from the Church of God.

The moderate Answerer.
Answer qu^ supra Cap. 2. Secondly.
But Catholics defend only a spiritual, as that is which they claim in
temporals, in ordine ad Deum* (that is, for Gods cause) and is not to use the
Disputers words, A civil power [Soueraigne over Kings directly:] but only a
spiritual pre-eminence.

The Reply.
Use my words, but abuse not my meaning, to make the Reader think I only
entreated of the power temporal over Kings directly: whereas in the Discovery
there is express mention of the temporal jurisdiction challenged of Papists
both directly, and also indirectly, both which are hereafter confuted. Here
only we are to explain them, and to show, how both of them challenge a power
in the Pope at his discretion to depose Kings. This has been manifested in the
former, now it will appear in the second, which you, forsooth, Answer in his
Epist. Therefore.
His Majesty's most loyal Subject, do now maintain, namely, A power
spiritual (say you) in temporal causes, as it may be behoofull for Gods
cause. And how that is meant, your Bellarmine does interpret. Altera sententia
in altero extremo posita est, Pontisicem non habere potestatem aliqua^
temporalem iure diuino, nec pos^e vllo modo (Ex civilly autoritate) imperare
Principibus secularibus, nedum eos ^egno and principatu priuare, etiamsi
alioqui priu^ri mereant^r: non habet have potestate direct, sed indirecte in
ordine ad b^ spi^, habet potestatem ea^que sum^^m in tempo alibus. Hoc modo
possit Reges deponere, regna transfer, vni auferre, alteri confer, tan^m
sum^us Pontifex. Hanc sententiam Protestants negant; quam communis
Catholico^u^ scho^ defendit. Bellar. lib. 5. de Romans Pent. Cap. 1. and 6.
Protestants deny (says he) that the Pope has any temporal or politic
jurisdiction and power over Kings by the law of God, as to be able to command
Kings, much less to depose them from their thrones, and dispose of their
Kingdoms. But the common consent of Catholic Divines is, that indirectly and
mediatly, that is* so far as it may concern the spiritual good of the
Church, the Pope has a supreme power even in temporal causes, to put down
Kings, and bestow their Kingdoms. And yet you deny, Superest vt demo^stremus
Papa non habere direct vllam temporalem jurisdiction iure diuino. Bellar.
ibid. Cap. 4.
That he has directly any temporal government by the law of God. A
spiritual cosenage, as is proved by arguments in the Infra part. 3.
Consutation, and only in this place to be exemplified. You may peradventure
remember that King, whose name I have forgot, who being desirous to decree
something contrary to that law whereunto he was sworn, required counsel in
this case: Sir (says his counselor) the Law directly forbids you this; yet
there is another law which permits the King to do what he list. A dangerous
State, where the Kings lust is his law. Now how is it in this your
controversy? to say the Pope can directly judge and depose Kings. O no, you
will not, For (say you) we deny: This opinion (says Bellar.) is the first
extremity, as though you would acknowledge that to be directly a ground of
treason: yet you hold it lawful, When the Pope shall think it be^oofull for
the spiritual good, then he may judge, depose, and kill. Herein giving us a
special argument of your singular modesty; whereas being ashamed to give the
Pope Direct Sovereignty over Kings, have closely conveyed unto him the same
power by the other term, called Indirectly. It were to be wished you would
leave that subtle modesty, and learn honest simplicity. It may be we shall
perceive some dragme thereof in your fourth-ly.

The moderate Answerer.
Answer cap. 2. Fourthly.
Fourthly, the maintainers of this doctrine do not urge greater indignity, or
defend any sentence more offensive (in equal judgment) to any Pralate,
sheep, or shepherd; then to the chiefest Shepherd under Christ the Pope
himself: for they all with one consent affirm, that in case of heresy (now
in question) he is either actually and really deposed, or to be deposed; The
Canonists do hold, that he is ipso facto deposed, if he fall into heresy; with
whom Turrecrem. Castr^, and others do consent.

The Reply.
Wherein I dare appeal to any equal, or almost any unequal judgment of my
greatest adversaries, to determine whether this your answer be not absurdly
false in two degrees.

First: Answer cap. 3. Secondly.
Those (you say) who urge this opinion, of deposing Princes in case of heresy,
offer no more indignity to any sheep, then to the chief shepherd under
Christ the Pope: and yet in the same Chapter, I Answer (say you) if any man
hold that opinion of such power over Princes in Popes, yet they will plead it
more tolerable in the authority of one supreme Pastor in the Church, whereof
Princes be sheep, etc. The argument then of these men, as you confess, and
Infra Part 3.
is hereafter showed, is this, As the shepherd to the sheep, so the Pope to
Kings: but shepherds have power over sheep, and not sheep over shepherds.
Ergo Popes may depose Princes, and Princes may not remove Popes. This is your
Popish and (as it is In the third part.
after proved) your sheepish conclusion: wherein whether there be not offered
greater indignity to Princes, then to Popes, let the equal Reader judge.

Secondly, the Authors of the doctrine of deposing of Kings in case of heresy,
do profess concerning Popes, Bellar. Ies. lib. 4. de Romans Pont. ca. 2. Greg.
Valent. Ies. Analys. lib. 8. cap. 3. Salmeron Jes. Com. in Gal. 2. Disp. 24.
Canus loc. T^^ol. lib. 6. cap. 8. Staplet. Doctr. Princ li. 6 Cos^erus Enchir.
Tract. de Pontif.
That they cannot possibly be Heretics, as Popes, and consequently cannot be
deposed: Not (says Bellarm. in^ra.
Bellarmine) by any power whether Ecclesiastical or temporal, no not by all
Bishops assembled in a Council. Not though (says Ibidem.
Carerius) he should do any thing prejudicial to the universal stat^ of the
Church: Not though (says Ibidem.
Azorius) he should neglect the Canons Ecclesiastical, or pervert the laws of
Kings: Not though (says your Ibidem.
Gratianus Gloss) he should carry infinite multitudes of souls headlong with
him into hell. And these forenamed Authors do avouch for the confirmation of
this doctrine the universal consent of Romish Divines, and Canonists for the
space of an hundred years. Whether therefore to affirm, that Kings may be
Heretics, and for that cause deposed, and that Popes cannot be deposed,
because as Popes they cannot be Heretics, be equal indignity to Popes and
Kings, let (if you will) your unequal Reader judge. And now (not to stand upon
other transparent absurdities of these Authors) your modesty is to be put in
mind, not to appeal unto equal judgment in that, wherein you manifest your
total eclypse of judgment. Hitherto have we disputed of the power of people
and of the Pope, considered as it were intensiuely. Now we approach to examine
both of them in their extent and execution.

CHAP. XIII.
The Discovery in the third Reason.

Whosoever upon any pretended supremacy, whether of Pope or people, do deny
the necessary right of Election. or of succession of Protestant Princes; are
to be holden amongst all Protestants seditious: But all Popish Priests do
utterly abolish the title of Succession in all Protestant Princes, by pretended
prerogative of Pope and people. Ergo: The Minor proved by their Positions.

In Election.
1. The Romish Cardinal: Nulla est Imperatonis aut Regis electio, si cum
eligitur, excommunicatus sit. Tolet* Ies. and Cardinal. lib. 1 instruct. cap.
13. Aduett. autem.
There is no election, whether of King or Emperor, of any force, if he that is
elect (such as they esteem all Protestants) be excommunicate.

In Succession.
Reinalds: Ius ad regna Christianorum maius est in Religione, quam in
Successione: maius in vltione haeresis (loquitur de Protestantibus) quam in
cognatione sanguinis. Debent igitur Christiani omnem tali spem praescindere, ne
ad eam celfitatem aspiret* Reinald Anglus in suo Ros^us page* 649 and page 670.
The right of Kings Christian must depend rather upon their Religion, then upon
order of Succession: and therefore all Christians are bound to cut off all
hope, lest that any such (speaking of Protestants) may aspire to the throne.
Qui contra facit, Deum homini postponere, carnem spiritui anteponere dicendus
est. Staplet* in suo Did^m. page 122.
Otherwise (says Stapleton) what do people else but even prefer man before
God. Hereupon does Simancha conclude, that Regnum Haeretici defuncti ad filium
Catholicum pertinet: quod si filius and consanguinei eius haeretici fuerint,
Regnum Catholicum possit Regem orthodoxum eligere: si vero Regnum haereticum
fuerit, Electio Regis Catholici ad summum Pontificem pertinet: sed and r^gnum
illud possit a Catholicis occupari.
The Kingdom of an Heretic departed does lineally descend upon his son: but
if the son in the race Royal be heretical, the Catholic Commonweal may
choose him a Prince: but if also the Kingdom be heretical, then the choice of
the King belongs to the Pope: and so the Kingdom may be taken by Catholics.
And lest, peradventure, any should consent to the lawful Succession, father
Parsons does pronounce sentence. Parsons in his Dolman. page 216.
Whosoever shall consent to the succession of a Protestant, is a most grie^ous
and damnable sinner. Thus far of the Position. Now behold their

Practice.
1. In France. Reinalds does forewarne the French. Vultis in Regno Galliae
Christianissimo Regem proclamare Nauarraeu^ Caluinistam? eadem opera hominibus
imperare iubetis canem; templu^ Dei viuentis prostituitis Satanae, and in
vineam Domini immittitis truculentum apru^, qui illam vastet and depascatur.
Reinald in suo Rosaeus. page 466.
Will you proclaim Navarre a Caluinist King of France? What is this else then
to advance a dog to be Sovereign over men? Illi ne clament Viue Rex, que^ ne
salutare possint, nec in domum suam recipere? Ibid page 476.
Shall Catholics pray, God save that King, whom they may not admit into their
houses? Dicit fortassis Nauarraeus, Ego saniorem Religione^ induco, sed hoc ad
rem nullo modo pertinet; tenetur enim Religionem Romanam defendere. Creswellus
in suo Philopater.
For suppose (says Father Creswell) that he profess to bring in a more sound
Religion; what is this to the purpose? he is bound to defend the Romish faith.
From France we will return home, where father Parsons busieth himself to
disable the title of Succession of our most dread Sovereign King James:
Parsons in his bocke called, A Conserence concerning the next succession of the
crown of England.
with intent to advance the Infanta of Spain thereunto. Thus much of
Successors, now of Possessors.

The moderate Answerer.
Answer cap. 4. I Answer.
Let all be true which he cites, and that they so teach: yet if five
particular men could make a general Council, and their sentence be termed a
public Position: yet they speak only of a Prince excommunicate before his
Election; which case is not now in rerum natura, much less in England, as this
unjust Accuser would prove.

The Reply.
Unjust? not so, your self will acquit me: I have instanced in six of your
Priests and Jesuits, whereof four be our own countrymen, and therefore, by
your own judgment, Best able to judge of our country cause. And you answer,
Let all be true which he cites, when you could not answer that one testimony
was untrue. Secondly, you start back; If (say you) five particular men could
make a Council, or their sentences be termed a public Position: as if we may
not rather understand your public Positions by these five your best learned
Clearkes, then by only you, who by that your [Yet if] would only seem to
take exception unto five, and bring instance to the contrary from none. In all
which you testify that I am not an unjust Accuser, but that you are now an
idle Disputer.

But if these five should be thought private, whose books are privileged with
the most public and ordinary approbation of your Church; I could add five
score more of your side conspiring in these Positions belonging to conspiracy.
Thirdly, They speak (say you) of a Prince excommunicate, which is not our
English case at this present. Good, Now at this present: namely, when you writ,
and yet peradventure whilst I reply the case is presently altered, or at the
Popes pleasure may be. And is not this a safe case for our Sovereign, trow ye?
Whereof more in the next Section.

The most moderate Answerer.
Answer quo supra.
His Majesty was not excommunicate before his Election, neither is he now, but
is both elected and settled in his throne both without any contradiction of the
Pope, and with his Iubet of all obedience, and Prohibet of denial thereof. All
the Catholics of this Kingdom applauded it as much as Protestants, and his
union and league with Catholic Princes and people abroad is sufficient Answer,
that this is a malicious slander of holy Priesthood, and proves Catholics
innocent, Protestants guilty, and this man an unjust Accuser.

The Reply.
If his Majesty was not excommunicate by the Pope before his Election, (which
you should rather call Succession) then was he unjustly (that I may so say)
excommuned by the Pope before his Election: but your Superior Garnet confessed,
that he had received two Breues from the Pope, to make use of, whenever our
late Queen Elizabeth should depart out of this mortality. The content of
those Breues was this: that Quamprimum contigerit miseram illa foeminam ex hac
vita discedere, etc. Garnet bis Comfession at the Bar.
None should be acknowledged King of England, but such as was a professed and
resolute Catholic: Nulli, quantacunque sanguinis propinquitate nitantur: that
is, No other, though never so nigh in blood. Which Breues, he (perceiving the
general applause of people yielding to the right of Succession according to
nearenesse in blood) burnt. Thus we see if the Popes power had not been
disappointed by want of force, his Majesty, though nearest in blood, might not
have entered but with blood. Now therefore what a case am I in? If I shall deny
my fonner assertion, then your superior Priest Garnet will accuse me for a
liar; for his Majesty's case was not different from others, seeing The Pope
gave contradiction to his succession: if I still defend it, then your
Priestship does accuse me for a Slanderer of holy Priesthood.

The very moderate Answerer.
Lam supra.
Because the Pope gave a Iubet of all obedience, and prohibet restraint of
disobedience.

The Reply.
Yea, Iubet of obedience? Iubet? what is that? Every child can expound it
literally to signify To command, but by Popish Gloss may happily signify to
forbid: for we must not be ignorant of your like glozing in the public Decrees
of Popes. Whereas your Canon is Great. did. 4. col. 2. Statuimus.
Statuimus, We decree: that is, (says your Expositor) We abrogate, or
disallow. Is it not as easy for you to turn Iubet, to an id est, prohibet?
Howsoever we perceive your subjection stands still upon the Popes Iubet, that
(as it is recorded of the French) Arnold. in Orat. ^^uers. Jes.
If he shall command to kill the King, you must be his subjects. Lastly, there
is but one of these Authors above mentioned, who speaks expressly of the
excommunicate: and there is not one of them, but judges a public professed
Protestant in the state of an Vide supra. chap. 2. and 3. etc.
Excommunicate. To conclude therefore, be you admonished not to prejudice your
modesty so much, as to tax any for an Unjust Accuser, against whom you can
show no just exception. Yet there remains two other mysteries to be unfolded,
the first is yours, the second is your Superiors.

CHAP. XIIII.
The new device of our moderate Answerer.

Answer cap. 6. But first.
TThere is at this present a great difference between the Emperor, who is
created by the Popes laws, and with his solemnities from whence he receives
his sword; and a King that is absolute, and not so created or depending for
power or jurisdiction, such as our Sovereign in England: for the Emperor is
the Popes Minister, as says Molina.

The Reply.
We might peradventure be beholden unto you for this distinction, if we could
presume you knew what you said: being guilty herein of a double falsehood,
first, to think, That the Emperor has no power, but from the Pope: the
second, to say you think, That other Kings have not any power, which is not
from the Pope. The former is confuted Infra part (...)
hereafter: the other now in this place. For your Carerius, making unction by
Romish Bishops in Coronation of Kings to be essential to royalty, without
which they be no Kings, says: Notissimum est Reges Galliae, Angliae, Scotiae,
Daniae, Suethiae, nisi vngerentur ab Episcopis, non fuisle pro Regibus habitos:
vt aperuit Thomas Bozius, etc. Carerius lib. 2. de Pont. cap. 17.
That this is a doctrine most commonly known of all, that the Kings of France,
England, Scotland, etc. were never esteemed Kings before their Unction: Parsons
in his Dolman page* 132
No more (says your Parsons) in the rigor of justice before (Popish)
Coronation, then the Mayor of London can be called Mayor before his oath. Qui
non sinit ^e a Sacerdotibus vt Regem vngi in eum finem vt Religionem
Christianam defendat, nullo iure possit Christianos in Baptismo vnctos regere.
Reinald. in Rosaeus page* 535.
Which Unction whosoever shall refuse (says Reinalds) can have no right to
govern Christians anointed in Baptism. In brief: Allane in his Admonition.
page 31.
None is lawful King or Queen of England (says your Cardinal) without the
approbation of the Sea Apostolic. All grossly false: for first: In Francia
Reges, qui iure haereditario succedunt, ante solennem inaugurationem and
coronationem, vt ex amplissimi ordinis decreto constitutum est, pro consecrato
and inaugurato habentur Barclaius lib. 3. contra Monarchomach. cap 2.
In France (says your Barclay) Kings who are to succeed by inheritance, are
judged as consecrate and inaugurate before they be solemnly anointed. And
shall we think the French Kings to exceed our English herei^? No, I have heard
Lawyers say, The King of England never dies. I think they speak not without
book; otherwise Q. Mary could never have justified her act, when she beheaded
the Duke of Northumberland, some months before her Coronation, for high
treason against her royal person, I return to your argument. Si Imperator
saltem honor and dignitate cunctis Regibus in Ecclesia excellentior reputatur,
a Papa demum reprobari possit, multo magis caeteri Principes a Papa punientur:
nam, vt aiunt, qui eminentem Aquilam domat, facile Accipitres comprimet.
Carerius quo supra. lib. 1. cap. 3.
If the Emperor (says your Carerius) who is held more eminent, at least in
dignity, then any King, may be rejected by the Popes: then much more other
Kings may be punished by the Popes authority. For he that can tame an Eagle,
may much more command Hawks. Here we observe your spirits of contradiction:
you from comparison of disparitie between the Emperor and other Kings, would
seem to free Kings, and inthral the Emperor: your Doctor Carerius from the
contrary disparitie would bring all Kings into subjection. But know, that
howsoever now the Eagle be entangled, whom you esteem no better then the Popes
vassal, yet Non facile Accipitri rete sternitur. And that neither Emperor nor
King are lawfully subject to this yoke, is afterward made manifest.

A second new device.
Garnet publikly at his Arraignment.
His Maistie is not in the case of Excommunication, as other relapsed
Protestants, because he was borne in that faith which he professes.

The Reply.
And yet the now Henry 4. King of France sucking Protestants doctrine from his
nurce, was excluded from his birthright of the Crown, till he was reconciled
unto the Pope. And this same father Garnet had a Breue from the Pope to bar
our Sovereign from Succession, except he should be found absolutely a Romish
Catholic. If then the Borne Protestants be free from Excommunication, why did
the Pope exclude the King of France, or by his Breue to you, except against the
King of England? If the case be otherwise, what Quacksaluers be you to offer a
salve which cannot possibly cure the sore? I have digressed a little, but I
hope not transgressed; for this point was, you see, pertinent. I return to you
our moderate Answerer, and we will now join issue in the next Reason.

CHAP. XV.
The Discovery in the fourth Reason.

WHen the King is established in his throne by the common consent of the
Kingdom; whosoever shall manackle the hands of his subjects, detracting all
obedience, may justly by order of law be challenged and condemned for a
disordred and rebellious person. But all popish priests do dissolve the oath of
obedience to all Protestant Governors. Ergo. The Minor proved by

Their Positions.
First one of their Bishops resolves, that Quamprimum Reges Christiani facti
sunt heretici, protenus eoru^ Subiecti ab illoru^ Dominio liberantur. Simancha
Episc. Instit. lit. 23. sect. 11.
As soon as a Christian King becomes heretical, forthwith people are freed
from subjection.

Secondly their Cardinal. Durante excommunicatione qui obnoxij erant vinculo
fidelitatis vel iuramenti tali vinculo liberabuntur. Tollet. Ies and Card.
Instruct. Saccrd. lib. 1. Cap. 13.
As long as the Prince continues excommunicate, the subject is freed from the
oath of subjection. By whom are they freed? Non videtur negandu^, posse Romans
Pontificem se and alios soluere a iurisiurandi religione and lege, modo iusta
causa subsit. Azor. Ies. Instit. Mor. Cap. 15. Sexto quaeritur.
By the Pope (says the lesuit) who upon just cause has just power to absolve
from oaths both himself and all others. Sometime the Prince is personally
excommunicate, what then? Postquam per Pontificem (nominati^) excommunicantur,
extunc Vasalli ab eius fidelitate denunciantur absoluti: Et terra eius
exponitur Catholicis occupanda, qui eam, exterminatis hereticis, absque vlla
contradictione possideant Massonius Iuriscons de May. milit. Eccl. par. 2.
lib. 4. de Imperijs page 676.
Then (says their Lawyer) Subjects are freed from their allegiance: and all
his heretical Assistants to be rooted out, and their land to be exposed to be
possessed of (Strangers) Catholics. But how if he be not excommunicate by
name? yea, what though not excommunicate? Cum est crimen notorium, nulla est
opus declaratione sente^tiae excommunicationis Panormitan. Cap. Cum in homine
extra de iudicijs.
If (says an other) his heresy be publicly known, there needs no
pronunciation of the sentence of Excommunication. Crimen heresis, si fit
notorium, vt nulla possit tergiuersatione caelari, etiam ante Iudicis
sententiam, incurritur (ex part) poena praedicta: nimirum, eatenus, vt subditi
licite possint tali Domino negare obsequium. Valent. (...). 3. in Thom. Disp.
1. q. 12. punct. 2. page 463. Nunc.
So that (says the Jesuit) Subjects may lawfully deny him obedience. How
so? In hoc articulo ^u^t ^chnus and C^jetanus, and communior sent (...) ap^d
^ulos D. Thomae, and probant, quia ia hac causa adest ^emper volu^tas
interpretat^ Pontisi^^s, qui obtinet vim s^ntentiae, atque euidentia ^acti
habet vim sententiae. Bannes in 2. 2. q. 12 Act. 2. Con^lus. 2.
For the evidence of the crime (says their whole school) does infer a
sentence of condemnation, because (as the more common opinion defines) there
must we understand the Pope his will is to have him excommunicate, whom upon
the knowled^e of his fault he would excommunicate. Say, Father Creswell, is
this true? Hoc vniuersa Theologorum and lurisconsultorum Schola tene^t, and est
certum, and deside. Cresa ^llus I^s. in suo Philopater. page 194.
It is certain and of faith avouched by the universal voice of Schools.
Satisfy us yet in one question more: Suppose that the Protestant Prince have a
just quarrel, what then? In the coppie of a letter sent by Card. Allen to Sir
VVilli^m Stanley. page 10.
No war can be lawfully denounced or waged by the Queen (being
excommunicate by name) though otherwise in it se^fe it were most just, because
her power is unlawful.

The very moderate Answerer.
The Answer cap. 5. in initio.
This is the first Proposition I grant unto; but how false and standerous his
Assumption is, I have proved before. Secondly all his Autorities he brings
are private men, not able to make a dogmaticall principle, or public position;
again they entreat of such as be nominatim excommunicate: of which sort there
is no Protestant Prince; neither can there be any just fear of the Popes
general proceeding herein: except any Protestant Prince should be incited by
some such unchristian spirits, as this Discouerer seems to be possessed with,
to exceed all others in persecuting Catholics, and offering indignities to
the Church of God.

The Reply.
It seems you were now in your natural choler, because in this one Answer
you do vilify your friends, threaten your Sovereign, traduce your Adversary,
and in conclusion condemn your own ghostly fathers.

Your friends: to call these your Doctors, Cardinal Tollet, Reinolds,
Symancha, Creswell, Stapleton, Azorius, Panormitan, Greg of Valentia, Bannes,
and such like, and the most of them most public and eminent Doctors your late
Romish Church did glory in, and autorized with the common consent of
Ordinaries, privileges of Collegies, and your universal school; to call, I
say, such like private men, and not be able to oppose one private man of that
sect against them, does argue a spirit of rare modesty, and singular
insufficiency.

Your Sovereign: If he shall offer, as you misconster it, to persecute, and to
cut off the most capital enemies to his state, and gangrenes of their
country, then The Pope etc. O sir, ^emember your self, One of his Majesty's
loyal Subjects etc. This is not modesty, but hypocrisy.

Your Adversary, The Discouerer, forsooth, an unchristian spirit: who does
discover only the hook, of treason, whereby silly souls are catched; and
herein not chargeable with misieporting his Autors, desirous to recall you to
the ancient truth of Christian subjection, and (if it be possible) to saving
health; And yet is thus censured as an inciter of his Majesty against Romish
Priests, whom their own positions and practices do proclaim publicly to be
persons seditious.

Your Fathers: for this proposition, Whosoever shall manacle the hands of
Subjects, denying obedience to their established Kings, must be judged a
rebellious person, you say you Grant: now it has been proved, that not only
these above named Jesuits, but also your Popes have been principals in these
kinds of Treasons both against the Emperor Henry the fourth, and also the
mirror of all princely wisdom, Elizabeth our late Sovereign. And therefore
in your conclusion you infold your Popes in the root of these rebellions.
These Popes we have discovered by their practices, as for example.

CHAP. XVI.
The Discouerer in the Practice.

FIrst, Pope Gregory the seventh, alias Hildebrand, begins his pageant Nos
eos, qui Excommunicatis fidelitate and sacrame^to censtricti sunt, Apostolica
autoritate ^ramento absoluimus. Greg. 7. Pont. ap^d Great. Cause. ^5. q. 6.
We by Apostolical authority do absol^e all from their oaths, which they have
given to persons excommunicate. And another Gregory uses the like tenor, Nos
excommunicamus vniuersos haereticos, vt absolutos se nouerint omni fidelitatis
debito, qui ijs iuramento tenebantur astricti. Greg. 9. Pont. lib. 5. D^cr^t.
tit. 7. Cap. 5. Glossa.
We absolve, etc. in the same case. Lastly, Pius Quintus, their successor in
place, but superior in malice: Volumus and iubemus etc. and absoluimus subditos
vinculo iuramenti, quo Reginae Elizabethae co^stricti tenebantur. Pius 5.
Pontifex in Bulla.
We command all Subjects (says he) etc. and absolve them from the faith they
have plight with Elizabeth their Queen.

The moderate Answerer.
Answer Cap. 5. And first.
First to Gregory the seventh, who, as this man urges, absolved all from
obedience to Excommunicates: I answer for all Catholics in general, that
this nothing concerned Protestants, neither any heretics; but only such as he
had other quarrels and contentions against.

The Reply.
True, the histories of those times show, that the Popes were after some 600.
years after Christ always quarrellous; and according to that proper name of
Gregory the seventh (now mentioned) called Hildebrand, the very firebrands of
Christendom. But how do you satisfy for Hildebrand? I grant (say you) that he
that dissolueth the obedience of Subjects to their Sovereigns, is justly
accounted seditious: Here you cannot deny, but that Pope Gregory the seventh
absolved all from obedience to excommunicates. You know what follows: Ergo,
the Pope is condemned as one guilty of high treason: This is commendable
modesty, which is void of partiality. To the second example you answer.

The moderate Answer.
Answer Cap. 5. But he.
But he urges the Gloss of Gregory the ninth, and cites the Decret where
there is no such matter, or any thing like unto it.

I commend your diligence, and wish you were as modest to acknowledge all my
other truths, as I am to confess this my only escape: which the importunity
of the time, and not the exigence of examples did occasion. For besides other
examples, I might have insisted upon that Bull of Paulus the 3. against King
Henry the 8. which differs not from the tenor of the decree alleged Supra.
We command the Nobles of England by force of arms to expel Henry the 8.
out of that Kingdom. This then was an error of mistaking my Author, not by
^eigning of false matter, which is proved by so many witnesses. But I thank
you for your taxation of this default, trusting that your modesty will
condescend to that point of law, He that excepteth in some does yield to the
rest.

The moderate Answerer.
Ibid. Lastly.
Lastly he brings in the Bull of Pius Quintus against Queen Elizabeth: but
I answer, that many grave and learned men have thought the information of the
case of Queen Elizabeth to the Sea Apostolic, whereupon the censure of
Excommunication was awarded against her, to have been untrue: and Pius Quintus,
an holy man, himself after bewailed the proceedings upon such suggestion.

The Reply.
In this Answer (I confess) you show some art, as namely, to deplore the
state past, that you may more easily delude the present. Touching the first.
Say, was the information against the Queen untrue? and did Grave men so judge
of it? Take heed what you say; This answer will more prejudice the two
principal prerogatives of that your Romish See, then you are aware of; as
namely, the power of canonizing Saints, and excommunicating of Princely
sinners, which both are cases reserved as proper to the Pope, and both
proceeding (as you say) from the De Apostolicae autoritatis plenitudine
declaramus etc. T^nor Bullarum Papalium.
fullness of Apostolic authority.

The truth of canonizing Saints; as for example, Thomas Becket, depends upon
true information: so (by your own confession) the truth of excommunication,
(as of Queen Elizabeth,) must rely upon a just suggestion. Now then did your
Pope Pius err in excommunicating, and so in condemning e Canus locis Theolog.
and Bellar. lib de Cultu Sanctorum.
an innocent? and might he not likewise err in canonizing an Offender?

The second prerogative which that See does challenge is, Appeals to Rome: but
seeing a lying fame (like a rolled snowball) the further it moves the more
increases in her falsehood: we must learn wisdom from that ancient Council
of Carthage (whereunto Saint Augustine did subscribe) which thought it
necessary, for fear of false information, to have all causes judged in their
own Countries: and therefore did expreslie decree against the Sea of Rome,
that none should make appeal beyond the Sea.

But because this practice of Pius in excommunicating our late gracious
Sovereign, does lively exemplify all popish positions in our late Discovery,
we must desire your patience to be informed in the true circumstances which
concern this excommunication, not by the witness of your imagined Grave men,
who, if they ever were, yet now happily be dead in their graves: but by those
monuments which make the acts of dead men immortal, such as the tenor of the
Bull of Pius does purport.

Pius etc. Ad perpetuam rei memoriam.
The Bull of Summa Constitutionum summotum Pontificum a Greg. 9. vsque ad
Sixtu^ Quintum: Per Petrum Mathaeum collecta and commentarijs illastrata.
PIUS QVINTVS, with the principal circumstances and interpretation thereof:
written by Petrus Mathaeus, and dedicated to Sixtus Quintus then Pope.
The Bull.
Pius etc. Cum impij multi alios pessimis doctrinis corrumpentes ad Angliae
Reginam, veluti ad Asylum, omniu^ infestissimi persuger^t: vbi illa supremi
Ecclesiae Capitis locum in omni Anglia, ^i^ que praecipuam autoritatem atque
iurisdictionem monstrose vsurpans, amplexis haereticotum erroribus, Regnum
illud obscuris hominibus haereticis comple^it, Catholicae fide^ cultores
oppresset, Mi^ae sacrificium, ieiunia, delectum ciborum, coelibatum, ritu que
Catholicos aboleuit, impia mysteria and instituta ad Caluini praescriptum a se
suscepta and obseruata, etiam a subditis seruari mandauit* Catholicos Episcopos
and Ecclesiarum Rectores suis Ecclesijs dejicere, in homines haereticos
disponere, deque Ecclesiae causis disponere ausa; Clero and populo ne Romanam
Ecclesiam agnoscerent, neue eius sanctionibus Canonicis obtemperarent,
interdixit, seque solam in temporalibus and spiritualibus Dominam agnoscere,
iureiurando co^git; poenas in ^os, qui non essent audientes, imposuit;
Catholicos Antistites in vincula co^t: quae omnia cum apud omnes nationes
perspicua and notoria sunt, grauissimoque quam plunmorum testimonio ita
comprobata, vt nullus omnino locus excusationis relinquatur; quo^am animum eius
ita obfirmatum intelligimus, vt ne huius quidem sedis nuncios in Angliam
trajicere permiserit: De Apostolicae sedis plenitudine declaramus praedictam
Elizabetham Reginam haereticam, and haereticorum ^autricem, eique adhaerentes
in praedictam Anathematis sententiam incurrisse, esseque a Christi corpore
praecisos: quinetiam ipsam quocunque dominio ac dignitate priuatam, and item
Proceres, and subditos dicti regni, and caeteros omnes, qui illi quomodocunque
iurauerit, a iuramento huiusmodi, and omni prorsus dominij, fidelitatis, and
obsequij debito perpetuo absolutos. Eulla Pij Quinti.
BEcause the Queen of England has filled her Country with Heretics,
oppressing the Catholics, translating the Byshopricks of Catholic Prelates
upon Heretics, not acknowledging the Jurisdiction of the Church of Rome, but
making her self head in all causes within her Dominions; We from the fullness
of our Apostolical power do pronounce Elizabeth an Heretical Queen, and a
favorer of Heretics, and denounce Anathema to all that shall adheere unto
her; and also deprive her of all rule and dignity, Absoluing all the subjects
of the land, of what condition soever, from the oath of their Subjection, and
from all manner of obedience. This is the sum of the Bull of Excommunication.
Now hear

The Interpretation thereof.
Propter huius Apostolici scripti publicationem vnus aut alter maiori zelo
praediti mox Londini, vbi ipsius pseudoepiscopi valuis affixum fuit, extremum
supplicium laesae maiestatis condemnati constanter subierunt. Hoc scriptum, Pio
Quinto mortuo, a Successore suo renouatum ac confirmatum fuit: quod haeretici
palam, vt puerorum terriculamenta, ita se prorsus contemnere simulabant, licet
reuer a de rei euentu vehementer dubitantes, dicerentur secreto Romae, per
quosdam magnos vi^os de sententiae reuocatione plurimum, sed frustra,
laborasle. Petrus Matthaeus infra Bullam. Et Elizabetha Regina haeretica etiam
fuit and est. Ibid. in margin Bullae.
This Bull after the death of Pius Quintus, was confirmed by his Successor;
which the Heretics themselves, doubting the danger of the event, did labor
(as it is said) secretly by great men to have this sentence of Excommunication
repealed: But all in vain. The Queen was and is an Heretic.

By this Bull, and interpretation thereof, your whole moderate Answer is
convinced of extreme impudency.

First, Answer supra Cap. 1.
No Protestants are by any Catholics accounted Heretics: yet here, he whom
you named the chief Shepherd, has named our Queen and her Subjects six
times Supra.
Heretics. We dispute of Bulls, and Bulls have horns: I must therefore
encounter you with a Dilemma, which the Logitians call an Horned argument;
thus, If that no Catholics can call Protestants Heretics, then was not Pius
Quintus and his Successor (both Bishops of Rome) Catholics; who have numbered
Protestants in the catalogue of Heretics: If Protestants be to be judged
Heretics, then this your Answer is blasted, Protestants are no Heretics. You
are then in these straites, either to recant your Answer, or to renounce your
ghostly father.

Secondly, the horned syllogism does assault you the second time, thus: If the
excommunication of our Queen by your Pius was just, why was it The Answer
supra.
Bewailed? If it were unjust, why was it Matthaeus supra.
not repealed? This is a second strait, either to confess your Answer to
have been inconsiderate, or else your Popes Bull to have run mad: and so it
did: for Prou. 17. 15.
To condemn the innocent, and justify the ungodly both are abominable to the
Lord.

Thirdly, the horned Argument does again tume upon you, thus, Either you
Priests will take an oath of constant obedience, without the Popes arbitrary
pleasure, or you will not; If so, then the pretended power Papal indirectly
over Kings, must be directly renounced: If not, then, for me to affirm, that
Every Priest Romish does deny the oath of obedience, is no Slander. This is an
other strait, and does constrain you to acquit me as no slanderer, or else to
confess your Pope an usurper.

Lastly, your Pope Pius did Bewail the proceedings of that Bull, and so we
verily think, but so as your Guido Faux immediately after his apprehension,
sorrowed for the proceeding of his stratageme, namely, Because it did not
proceed. For (as your Interpreter complains) Regina, postquam Bulla publicata
est, maioti molestia Catholicos affecit Mat. quo sup.
The Queen after that time did more grievously afflict the Romish. Wherefore
we wish the Article verified of your excommunicating Bulls, which is vulgarly
common in the like kind, viz. To have always short ^ornes. This of the acts
past.

CHAP. XVII.
Concerning the State present.

The moderate Answerer.
Answer quo supra in fine.
IF the case was such betwixt the Popes and deceased Princes: yet I cannot
conceive how any equal minded Protestant can think that the Pope so strictly
commanding obedience of all Catholics to his Majesty, will or can be so
contrary to himself, to publish a contrary command against a King, offering
in public Parliament to meet with the Romish Church, all novelties taken
away, (we wish no more) and in the mean time acknowledge the same Roman
Church to be our Mother. Church, and that his mind was to free us from
persecution for matters of Conscience. Of such a King Bellarmine himself,
cited against us, will be witness, that he thinks the Pope cannot proceed
against him.

The Reply.
Conceive but how strictly the Pope has commanded obedience; and then you
will easily understand how largely you may become treacherous.

First, the Popes Bull of Excommunication against our late Queen, Supra cap. 1
6. lit. (...).
was nailed publicly upon the Bishop of Londons gate: but this gentle Bull of
obedience does without any voice range secretly, we know not where, (it may be
as the Popes Breue, in Garnets pocket) and named to be, by them, who are not,
because they do equivocate.

Secondly, the Popes Bull of obedience is so strictly commanded, as always
limited within the crooked hooks of this Parenthesis ( Vide infr^ Rat. 8.
Rebus sic stantibus) or ( Vide infra Rat. (...). in prect.
Donec vires habeant) that is, (Till there be opportunity,) or ( Vide supr^
cap. 6.
Pro hac vice, for this time.) Whereof our English State has had too large
experience. For to insist only upon the present: when the opportunity of
surprising the King, Queen, and Prince, was plotted by the Disciple of
Machiauell; then the Pope has two Priests (Watson and Clearke) to dissolve
that knot of obedience: when after the opportunity of that Sudden blow, against
the whole State, had possessed the malignant; then there is presently at hand a
Provincial and his Priest subordinates to kindle the minds of their Agents,
hellishly to consume and swallow up both obedience, and all the persons to be
obeyed.

That his Majesty so graciously wished there might be some means of
compounding dissentions, and an universal marriage betwixt temporal peace and
truth of Religion, proceeded from his most Christian heart: teaching rather
what you should, then what you will do, who deny to remit any Romish
superstition, though it savor of mere novelty. As is apparent in the Oration
of Gasper in the Council of Trent: where question was concerning the use of the
Sacrament in both kinds, according to the institution of our Savior Christ,
and the use Ecclesiastical for a thousand years in Gods Church; did resolve
notwithstanding, no: but why? Ne errasse videamur.

His Majesty says, All novelties taken away; you say, We wish no more. But if
you would have been correspondent to his Majesty's wish, you should have
answered, We wish no less. But your modesty would never yet grant, that there
were any novelties in that Church, where notwithstanding there is nothing else
but daily brewing new liquor, hopped with Wormwood.

His Majesty has expressed his meaning, to call the Romish Church our Mother
Church; as that Church Romish may now call Jerusalem: but when both mothers
will be parricides, to murder their children which speak against Idolatry
their spiritual adultery, they may be called mothers in name, in deed
monsters.

You cite Bellarmine and omit this his sentence: Non licet tolerate Regem
haereticum conantem pertrahere subditos ad suam opinione^. At iudicare an Rex
pertrahat suos subditos ad haeresin nec ne, pertinet ad Pontificem. Bellar.
lib. 5 de Rom Pont. cap. 7. Tertia.
It is not lawful to suffer a King who is an Heretic, when he shall labor to
draw his people to heresy. To judge hereof whether he draw his subjects to
heresy or no, is the proper office of the Pope. I suppose there is no Infidel
in the world, endued with any opinion of God, but he would labor to draw his
subjects to his opinion. Now then the cause of our King persisting to be a
Protestant is no better then his Predecessor; for it is yielded to the Pope
both to judge who is an Heretic, and when he shall so judge, then, according
to his Libet to send from Rome, comes a Non licet tolerare Regem. Will your
modesty never leave deluding us by pretended allegations of Jesuits? as here
to that purpose to give hope of reconciliation, whereas only by the insolency
of Jesuits all such hope is debarred. As is plain by this forecited Jesuit:
for whereas that most grave and learned Cassander, honored of two Emperors for
his singular learning and piety, did teach, that Debent Principes inuenire
rationem pacis inter Catholicos, Lutheranos, Caluinistas, qui omnes, dum
Symbolum tenent Apostolicum, vera sunt membra Ecclesiae, licet a nobis in
particularibus dissentiant. Cassander lib. de Officio (...) viri.
Emperors should endeavor a reco^ion betwixt Papists and Protestants: because
(says he) Protestants hold the Articles of the Creed, and are true members of
the Church, although they dissent from us in some particular opinions. The
grand Jesuit does answer, that Falsa est haec sententia Cassandri, non
possunt^n Catholici reconciliari cum Haereticis. Bellar. lib. 3. de ^aicis cap.
19.
This judgment of Cassander is false: for Catholics cannot be reconciled with
Heretics, heretically meaning Protestants.

CHAP. XVIII.
The Discovery.

WE have already understood, how they forbid to Kings: now will we also
examine how they enforce violence. And in this case we argue thus:

The fifth Reason.
Whosoever suggesteth a doctrine of forcible deposing of Princes from their
thrones, are therein manifestly rebellious: But all Popish Priests defend
violent deposing of Kings and Emperors. Ergo

Their Positions.
Costerus. Penes Romanos Pontifices semper fuit potestas ad tollenda incommoda
Ecclesiae, and damna animatum, Reges regnis, and Imperatores imperijs priuandi.
Costerus I. s. Apol. pro part. 1. Enchirid. page 64.
This power (says he) of deposing Kings of their Crowns, and Emperors of
their dignities, in behalf of the good of the Church, was always peculiar to
the Pope: Non enim minus authoritatis a Christo collatum est Vicario suo ad
ouium tutelam and commodu^, quam a Villico datur Mercenario, qui pecora pascit.
Ih. page 64
who has no less authority, as Christ's Vicar over Christians, then the
hireling has over his beasts. Depositio Imperatoris ex iusta causa pertinet ad
summum Pontificem: quia Imperator est tanq^am Minister summi Pontificem,
gladium Iurisdictionis temporalis ad nutum summi Pontificis exercens. Molina
Ies. Tract. 2. de iustitia disp. ^9. ^d (...). page 149.
So the Pope has authority over the Emperor (says Molina) because the
Fmperor is but the Popes minister, and is to use his temporal sword only at
his beck. But what if Kings will not inthrall themselves to the Popes
authority? Non licet Christianis tolerare Regem haereticum, si co^t^r
pertrahere subditos ad suam haeresin. Bellar. ^es. and Cardinal. lib. 5. de
Pont. cap. 6. 7. and 4.
It is not lawful for Christians (says the Cardinal) to tolerate any King,
who draws his Subjects unto heresy. Sed debent Subditi operam dare, vt in
eius locum alius quamprimum surrogetur. Sanderus Theolog. Pro^essor. devis^.
Monarch lib. 2. cap. 4. ^us autem page 70.
But subjects ought (says Sanders) to endeavor to set up another in his place.
Debent illum, tanquam Christi h^stem, ex hominum Christianorum dominatu ^i*
cere: quae est virorum doctis^imorum ind^tata sententia, doctrinae Apostolicae
conformis. Creswel. les. in suo Philopater page 194.
Yea, they ought (says Creswell) to expel him out of his kingdom, as the
enemy of Christ. An undoubted doctrine among the learned, and agreeable to
Apostolical truth. Yea which is more: Etiam^i Pontifex toleraret Regem
Apostatam, tamen Resp. Christiana possit illum pellere e regno quoniam Pontifex
sine ratione permittit illum impunitum. Dom. Bannes 2. 2. quest. 12. A^^. 2.
Although the Pope (says Bannes) should tolerate an heretical King, yet may
the Commonwealth remove him. And yet behold a greater mystery of this
iniquity then all these: for suppose that the King deposed shall be willing to
be reconciled to the Church, Nec (...) hoc recuperabunt, quamuis poste^
reconcilientur Ecclesiae. Simancha Instit. Cathol. ^it. 33. Sect. 11.
Yet notwithstanding (says Simancha) he may not recover his Crown.

The moderate Answerer.
Answer in his Chap 6.
Let us grant this Proposition, Whosoever, etc.

The Reply.
Let us grant? We know not by this whether you grant it by Asseueration, to
allow it; or only by way of Concession, for disputation sake, as not to grant
it. This your Art of answering would be discovered for of one Mayor Proposition
in your 4. Chapter you say, For this present I grant this Mayor, and yet after
in the fifth Chapter of another Mayor, This is the first Proposition I grant
unto. Wherefore sophisticating in this manner [Let us grant:] and deluding a
Proposition, which discovers so manifestly a doctrine rebellious, will
somewhat impeach your moderation of a guilty disposition. To the matter.

The moderate Answerer.
Ibidem.
Not one of these particular Authors defend violent deposing of Kings.

The Reply.
Though I know your devotion can dispense with lying, if with an Insra.
intent to cover the leprosy of your Sect, yet me thinks, your discretion
might have taught you, to use that Art where it should not be so transparent as
that any one of small reading might easily convince you. For what? not one of
your sect teach violence? First, your Frenchman Vt Ichu lezabelem. Lib. de
iusta Abdicat. page 57. So Lodouic. de Orleance.
The Nobles must depose the King, as Iehu did Iezabell: there was violence.
Your Parsons, Parsons in his Dolman. page 33.
As David did Goliath: violence. Your Card. Allane. Allane in his Admonition.
page 33. and 53. in the place forceited
My Lords and dear Countrymen, for Gods love fight against the Queen to
depose her, as the Priests did Athalia: violence. Your Reinolds: Reinalds in
his Rosaeus in the plowfurniture.
Revenge and root out as Judith did Holofernes: violence. Your Costerus: Vt
Villicus pecora Costerus locis citatis.
As an heardsman his cattle: violence. Your Bellarmine. Non licet subditis
tolerare Regem haereticum, sed expellere eum debit, vt Pastor ^upu^. Bellar.
lib 5 de Romans Pont. cap. 7.
It is not lawful to suffer a King heretical, but to expel him, as the
shepherd does a Wolf: violence. Your Creswell. Creswell in Philopater.
Subjects ought to expulse such a King out of his dominion: violence. Your
Simancha. Vide infra.
As the Scythians, who murdered their King: violence. Your Bannes: Tenentur
Anglivi Reginam suam deijcere. Infra.
The English ought to depose their Queen by force, all which is violence. We
hanc also alleged examples of many Popes, who used all open violence. To which
might be added Azorius, Salmeron, Bristow, Stapleton and others, all crying
Adarma. And yet you say, Not one. What impudent modesty is this, to deny
before the Reader, that which none who reads can deny: idly conceiting a
power to depose without violence, (in your opinions Heretics obstinate) that
is, such as cannot be deposed without violence. Your comparison of the Emperor
with our King is but a shadow, which Vide supra.
vanishes in this Treatise following.

CHAP. XIX.
The Discovery.

Let us now see this family of Corah.
WE will omit Henry's, Frederickes, Othoes, and like Emperors and Kings of
former times: call but to mind that which has been visible in our days, the
late Henry of France, concerning whom their own Prophet has published a
Treatise, the scope thereof is this: Henricam dig^ regia excid^sse, Gallosque
secura conscient^a in cum, vt publicae sidei violatore bella^le. Lib. de iasta
Abdicat. Henr. 3. page 370
The French have with good conscience borne arms against K. Henry the third,
and deprived him of his Crown. Return home, there we see a Comet. The Rebel
Oneale is up in arms against his Queen: the College of Salamane bring pitch
to quench this flame, and resolve thus: Eos omnes Catholicos peccare
mortaliter, qui Anglorum castra contra Augonem Oneale sequuntur, nec posse ^os
aeternam salutem consequi, nec ab vllo Sacerdote apeccatis absolui, nisi
priusquam resipiscant, and Castra Anglorum deserant. Determinatio Vniuersitatis
Salamancae. Anno 1602.
Whatsoever Catholics shall not for sake the defense of the English, and
follow Oneale, does sin mortally, and cannot obtain life everlasting, except
he desist. Shall we think that other Priests can have more loyal spirits?
Impossible, as long as they receive their breath from that Master, who
commends the former Positions against the foresaid King of France. Theologi
illi ^ecerunt quod Consultorum, Conse^^arioru^, Doctorum ^uit. X^stus Quintus
Papa, vt habetur lib. de just. Abdi^. Henr. 3. page 370.
Those Divines (says Pope Xistus) have done the parts of good Lawyers,
Confessors, and Doctors. His Successor (this rancor growing by Succession
inueterate) Pope Pius against our late Sovereign: Volumus and iubemus, vt
aduersus Elizabetham Angliae subditi arma capessant. Bulla Pij Quinti Pen. Max.
We will and command the Subjects of England to take arms against Elizabeth
their Queen.

The moderate Answerer.
Answer cap. 6. Now let.
Now let us hear this the supposed public practice in this point: I answer,
he alleges three authorities only of private men, which do not pronounce the
judgment to be public.

The Reply.
You contest for all Catholics, and teach us to answer, that this your Answer
is but the writing of a private man: but you have public approbation from your
Superior, and they from many are publicly authorized. And yet again remember
your self. Answer cap. 2. Lastly, let.
Not above four or five examples (say you) can be given in the whole Christian
world, for the space of 1500. years of Popes of Rome, who have translated
titles to depose Princes. Well then you grant five; your Bellarmine does urge
Bellar. 5. de Romans Pont. cap. 8.
Seven, as from public Records: a notable contradiction. You But four or
five, willing to substract, as one ashamed of the number of your Fathers of
Rebellions: but he alleges Seven or eight, desirous to multiply, to make the
pride of Romish Prelacie more glorious. Whether But seven, or But four, what
can this avail for answer? As much as a fellon accustomed to steal, he cares
not how many horses: yet indicted for seven, shall answer, I had but four or
five: which commends the want of that he would, not his will to want. Pope
Paulus tertius Papa Principibus ac Ducibus Angliae caeterisque Nobilibus
praecepit, vt vi and armis se He^rico opponant, illumque e Regni sinibus
eijceren tantur, vt pate^ in hac Bu la Pauli 3. qui sic incipit: Paulus
Episcopus Seruus seruotum, ad futuram rei memoriam, etc. Petrus Matthaeus
Comment^n illa Bullam.
Paulus teruus did excommunicate Henry the 8. King of England, commanding his
Nobles to bear arms against him. Your Pope Pius Quintus, now alleged, Did
excommunicate Queen Elizabeth, dissoluing all her subjects from their
obedience. And yet he that is The King of Kings, maintained their Scepters, not
to suffer them to be deposed by those Popes, notwithstanding their good wills
were manifested by their acts, their acts condemned by the events, which
examples none can deny but were public. You further add.

The moderate Answerer.
Quo supra. I answer.
But his Majesty's case is different, except this Discouerer will inrolle him
in the number of Excommunicate, which is most injurious to his Highness: for
who sees not that the Queen was Excommunicate?

The Reply.
Why injurious? what evil can ensue? for you seem by this Answer to portend
some mischief, if it should happen his Majesty should be excommunicate: say,
what evil? is it spiritual, as only to be excommunicate by the Pope? Why,
this is nothing, because your Tolet says truly, Excommunicatio iniusta est
inuallida. Tolet. I^s. in instruct. and Azor* Je^. Justit. Moral.
An unjust Excommunication (such as we know the Popish is) does not endanger
the soul. Is it bodily? belike his Majesty shall find you a good Subject,
howsoever (your spiritual being accompanied with violence in this his
different case) you teach his highness to provide a corporal prevention, lest
(as in the defect of our law sometime it happened, that a man might have been
outlawed, and not have known of it, and so subjected to the extremity of
that law) your Excommunication of Bulla Coenae upon your Maundie Thursday by
some Faux did avouch the Maundie Excommunication for bi^ warrant.
Guido be closely executed before his Majesty be aware.

CHAP. XX.
The Discovery.

HItherto has been manifested only their violence against the dignity of
Princes: now hear of the violating of their sacred persons in conspiring their
deaths.

The sixth Reason.
Whosoever does intend, design, or practice the murder of Princes, must
necessarily be holden for desperate Traitors: But all Popish Priests are
guilty in some of these kinds. Ergo. The Minor proved by their Positions.

They profess all, that it is lawful to take arms against their Kings, as we
have proved: from whence we may argue against them, as he against a seditious
one, Cicero pro Ligario.
Quis sensus armorum? what other meaning can arms have but only blood? But
not to dispute from our suppositions, but their Positions, by these degrees.
First, the french defense says, that Any man may lawfully murder Tyrannu^
occidere honestu^ est, quod cuiuis impune facere pe^, q^ consensu di^o. ^a
Abd^cat. H^n. 3. page 262. (...) 270.
Tyrant: which I defend (says he) by common consent. Now Facile constat eum,
qui quamcumque tuetur haeresin, apud Chustianos non minus propri^ perfecteque
Tyrannum effici; quim qui apud Philosophos, spreta ciuitatum conseruatione,
omnia in republica stupris, rapinis, and hominum caedibus implet. Reinald. in
suo Rosaeus. page 157.
It is evident (says our Reinolds) That every Heretic Prince is most proper
lie and perfectly a Tyrant: which is supposed by the Spanish Jesuit, speaking
of this point, That if (says he) they may be bereaved of their lives, then
much more of their livings and Crowns. And, which is the height of fury, Imo
grauiori paena digni sunt Principes haeretici, quam priuati homines: lure
igitur et merito Scythae Regem suum Scylen occiderunt propter externos ritus,
quia in Bacchanalibus sacris initiatus erat. Simancha Inst. Cath. tit. 23.
Sect. 12. and 13.
Heretical Kings (says Simancha) deserve more grievous punishment then
private men: therefore the Scythians (as he well deserved) did put to death
their King Scylen, for violating their Bacchanals. Scythia a most barbarous
Nation is the fittest glass that these Priests can find to look their faces
in. Well, show us then your Scythian and heathenish practices: But first, let
us hear your answer to these positions. c Vita priuari possint; tum multo
magis ommbus alijs bonis, atque adeo etiam praelatione in alios. Greg. Valent:
some. 3. disp. 1 qu. 11. punct. 2.


The very moderate Answerer.
Answer, cap. 7.. But against.
I answer, that the late Lord Treasurer was thought in his days a man not
second to many in political wisdom: And yet he tells us in the book
entitled, [The Execution of English justice,] that many Catholic Priests and
Bishops also in this Kingdom, which although they were deprived of their
dignities, and also imprisoned by Queen Elizabeth; yet are they dignified by
that wise Councellor, with these titles of faithful and quiet subjects,
inclined to dutifulness to the Queens Majesty.

Reply.
Nay, that honorable Treasurer was not second to any in his time, so worthy a
Counselor both for policy and sound Religion, that you may be thought
unworthy to commend him: whose wisdom as it was most excellent, so even in
this question will prove as sufficient to display your fellie. For his most
commendable Treatise, of the Execution of English justice, did defend the
proceedings of the Queens Majesty; whom for the same justice your Pope did
(if our Lord Treasurer in his singular wisdom knew justice) unjustly
excommunicate. Yet he then commended many grave and learned Bishops and Clerks
on your side for their faithful subjection. What though they then in the
Orient of her Majesty's days were faithful? (peradventure because they then
wanted force) yet after, toward the Sunne-set of her years were otherwise
affected. This the Reason of that honorable and sage Counselor does show,
bringing the examples of the former more moderate Romish Clarks by comparison
to condemn the insolency of the later brood. This you modestly conceal: But
father Creswell will deal plainly, who speaking to the Lord Burleigh (whom
for honor sake I often mention) has these words: Si seditionem intelligis
(nobiliss. D. Thesaurarium alloquitur) de qua Christus, [Non veni pacem in
terram mittere, sed gladium] sane intelligis; fateor, Sacerdotes nostros tibi
inobedientes esse and sore semper. (...) in Philop^^er page 298. and 300.
If you by sedition (says the Jesuit) understand that whereof Christ spoke,
saying, (an holy text wickedly perverted) [I came not to send peace into the
world, but the sword,] which you (indeed) do so understand; I confess that we
Priests both are and always will be seditious. Now then the question will be,
whether your moderate, or his impudent answer be more dangerous.

The moderate Answerer.
^pra. (...).
The sentencer discursseth, as though arms had no other meaning but blood. But
against Catholics, who know both offensive and (...) fensiue war, this man's
bloody judgment can give no deadly wound.

The Reply.
Neither was your Sentencer ignorant of that distinction, which he learned long
since from the very Heathen, who were illuminated with this truth, saying, that
Contra Reges sumendum esse scutum, non gladium. Iucius.
Against Kings we may use a shield, but not a sword. But it was spoken
according to the meaning of your Authors applying it to them, who both by
position and practices have given sufficient tokens that their arms were most
cruelly and cursedly offensive, which agrees with your positions, as the
discourse following will demonstrate. Yet again you insist.

The moderate Answerer.
Answer quo supra. Seeing.
The Discouerer brings the Author de Iusta Abdicat. to say of Henry the
third, that it is an act honest to kill a Tyrant. Well then, King James by his
judgment is a Tyrant: otherwise both he and the Author be judges against
himself, for that Writer expressly names a Tyrant.

The Reply.
And the next Author does interpret the meaning of the first, That every King,
who defends heresy, is properly a Tyrant. This said your Reinolds,
entreating of Protestant Princes, defining them to be properly Heretics:
whereunto your Jesuit Gregory de Valentia did assent. Whence I, according to
the true and infallible law of Schools, conclude, that Romish Priests would
have all Protestant Kings, as Tyrants, censured with death. Where is now your
judgment? to make me guilty of that inference, which I noted to be most
detestable in your sect? King James or our late Queen Tyrants? No, but they
that say so be Traitors, who cannot discern betwixt a most gracious Prince,
and a barbarous Tyrant; but by their monstrous mischiefs have turned extreme
clemency into just extremity.

CHAP. XXI.
Discovery in the Practice.

LEt us travel (but in our thoughts) into India, Arnoldas in Synodo Parisiensi
omne Tyannidem Hispanorum apud Indos solis Iesuitis ascribit. Gal^ belgic. tom.
2. lib 10.
where (as your Arnoldus in his public Oration in the University of Paris did
contest) the general clamor of the poor people wa^s, that Jesuits were the
causes of all tyranny which was exercised amongst them. Pass homeward through
Germany, there we see Rodolphus Comes contra Henricu^ 4. (fulmine Greg.
Po^t^sicis percussa^) bellu^ gessir, etc. Abbas Vrspurg. Cranzius, and alij in
suis Cronicis.
Duke Rodolph persecuting the Emperor his King by force of arms, thorough
instigation of the Pope. From thence we come to France, where Clemens the
Monk, as a bloody patricide, did murder Henry his King. Lastly to arrive at
home, where after the Bull of Pius Quintus few years passed without desperate
attempts against their Sovereign, that Bull bellowing thus. Iubemus vt
aduersus Regina^ Angliae Subditi arma capessant. Bulla Pij Quinti.
We will and command Subjects to take arms against their Queen. Which breath
possessed all those late conspirators, Arden, Someruile, Parrie, Cullen,
Squire, Lopez with others: all by instigation of Priests sought the death of
our and their Sovereign. And now at this present behold, and be astonished: A
so^ace provided to consume at once, not only the King, but also (because an
absolute state assembled) the whole kingdom. Du^st these Enginers do any such
thing without direction from their priests? First they conspire by oath under
the seal of the Sacrament, (here is probably a Priest.) Secondly G. Faux.
he that was to put fire to it, runs once again to the Seminary at Doway,
doubtless, to consult with that Priestly Oracle. Thirdly, he will not bewray
his accomplices, except he may be warranted by a Priest. And that this is their
Priestly function, will appear in the subsequents.

The moderate Answerer.
A^.. For prac^.
For practice in this point, he only alleges three authorities, besides this
unhappy Stratageme.

The Reply.
Your self knows, that I might have brought in threescore of that kind, if I
had been bent to have been as tedious in Allegations, as you are in
repetitions: yet besides your late Stratageme I gave you examples of diverse
Conspirators English, for whom your modesty durst not, or your wisdom would
not yield any other answer then dumb silence.

The moderate Answerer.
Answer qu^ supra.
It is known that Arnoldus was an enemy to the Society, confuted by
Montanus: and Gallo-Belgicus is not without his hyperbolicall locutions.

The Reply.
You know, that Arnold was the choice Orator and mouth of the University of
Paris elected to plead against the Jesuits Society, whose judgment the State
and Parliament of France did justify by their public act of expulsing the
whole Society of Loyalists out of the Kingdom. Gallobelgicus indeed was more
then hyperbolical, but it was in magnifying the Romish faction. But what say
you generally for Priests?

The most moderate Answerer.
Answer cap. (...). First.
I answer concerning Priests most maligned in this matter, that the Canon law
it self is to the contrary: that neither Bishops nor any Clearkes may take
arms either by their own authority or by the authority of the Pope of Rome:
and reasons be added there, authorized by De Episcopis vero vel quibuslibet
Clericis, quod nec sua nec authoritate Romans Pontificis arma suscipere valiant,
facile probatur. Deer. 2. cause. 23 q. 8. de Episcopis.
Gregory the 13. alleged against us in this Treatise. And therefore all of
that Order are absolutely freed from that jealousy, and may answer with Saint
Ambrose against Auxentius, saying for his defense: My tears are mine armor,
for such are the defense of Priests; otherwise I neither ought nor can resist.

The Reply.
The force of your Answer is this: There is a Canon contrary to them that
shall say, Priests may take arms: Ergo, Priests have no Positions contrary to
the Canon; or else is not your Order freed from all jealousy in this point. It
will be therefore first material to show the doctrine of your Priests
concerning this military discipline of Priests. Was not the Jesuit and Author
of the Book, De iusta Abdicat. a Priest? and yet he admonishes Sacc^dotes
primi ab oppressore religione discedant, and animos in^ictos induant, Elia^
imitantes, qui quadraginta Psendoprophetas interfecit. De iusta Abdicat. 57.
Priests to be the first of them that forsake the Oppressor of Religion,
imitating Elias zeal, when he killed the false Prophets. Was not your Reinolds
a Priest? and yet he would persuade Postunt viri sanctissimi Monachi quoque
haeretico Regi vim pro side inferente, viribus quoque resistere, vbi probabilis
est defensionis oportunitas: and qui hoc sanctissimo certamine cum Catholicis
Episcopis contra Haeren^um Rege^ moriuntur, ij sunt Marty^s, and a Deo, non vt
perduelles patriae vel Regis, poenam, sed vt. Martyrs Christi praemia coelo
aeterna reportabunt. In his Rosaeus page 638. 639 and Rursu^.
That holymen, even Priests may resist by force Kings oppressing Religion,
whenever opportunity will serve: and that dying in such a quarrel they are
not to be accounted Traitors, but Martyrs, not deserving punishment of God
herein: but, as the soldiers of Christ, an eternal reward in heaven. Adding
further, Graeci Sacerdotes optimi Imperatoribus suis armata manu resistere
nunquam putarunt esse peccatum; aut laesae Maiestatis crimen: sed contra potius
scelus piaculare sese non opponere. Page 560.
As the Priests of Greece resisting their Emperors, (* A presumption
absolutely false) by force of arms, thought it not a sin of treason, but
rather judged it an heinous crime not to resist. Your Cardinal Allane was a
Priest, and yet he wickedly and falsely defends, that Allen in his book
entitled, A true and modest Defense of English Catholics, page 107.
The ancient Bishops might have excommunicated Arian Emperors, and have
defended themselves against them by force, but they did not (says he) by
reason of the greater forces of the Persecutors. This Answer he calls A true
and modest defense of English Cathotholikes: which in his Admonition ^e
indeuoureth to prove from the example of Gods Priest Allen in his Admonition to
the nobility. page 31.
Against Athalia. And again, in behalf of the Pope, whom you esteem as High
Priest, he says: Allen in his true Defense. page 143.
In truth if it be lawful for the Pope to occupy his forces, which God has
given him, against the Heathen; much more may he employ them against those,
whom he accompteth Rebels against the Catholic Church, which be properly under
his correction. Yet all this is nothing to the resolution of your Sanders a
Priest also: Ad Episcopos spectat tum vt Regem ipsum pronuntient haereticum,
tum vt Subditos eius declarent ab omni deinceps obedientia illi praestanda
liberos esle, ipsosque operam dare debete, vt alius in eius locum quam primum
surrogetur. Quod si nec subditi hac in re officio suo consulat, Pastorum est
quacunque ratione possint, prou^dere, vt non regnet in Ecclesia. Dei. Sander.
lib. 2. de visib. Monarch. Cap. 4. Hac igitur.
It belongs unto Bishops (says he) both to pronounce the King an Heretic,
and the Subjects, freed from their obedience, ought to endeavor to place
another instantly in his throne: but if the Subjects shall fail in this their
duty, then it is the office of Pastors (Priests) to provide (Kings must look
to the Priests mixed Chalices, perfumed gloves, privy sheaths) by what means
soever, that such a King reign not in the Church of God.

Again, who was it that would have killed the now Ioh. Castile. vide Orat.
Arnold.
King of France with a knife? was he not a Nouice devoted to be a Priest? And
he that killed your last King Henry the third, I mean your Monk Clemens, had
he no affinity with a Priest? Such an one was that Monachus quidam Iohannem
Regem Angliae veneno interfecerat. Barck'a^us co^tra Monarchom. lib. 6. cap^.
De hoc fa^^o Clementis.
Monk, who poisoned John King of England. And who (I pray you) did commend and
magnify that your Clemens his desperate exploite? You know who, Pope Xistus
Quintus your high Priest. A fact also highly commended by your French Jesuit,
(sure one of your Priesthood) saying, Aeglonem Moabitam alter Ahod, imo etiam
sortior, in abdomine trai^cit, vociferatur laesum se Tyrannus: nihil iam est
quod Iudithae Holophernem, aut Dauidis Goliam obtruncan^s, aut Samsonem maxilla
Asini mill ^iros interficientis, historias ^remur; quia maiora his vidimus,
qui clamaremerito debemus, Dextra Domini fecit virtutem: dextra Domini
exaltauit nos. Author de ius^a Abdicat.
That he is worthy to be esteemed another Ahod, who killed Aeglon the
Moabite; yea more forcible then Ahod, for he (the Monk) stabbed the King
through the guts: so that we need not now to wonder at former histories,
where we read how Judith killed Holofernes; David, Goliath; Samson a thousand
men with the iawbone of an Ass, this act is far more marvelous. These be
thy Priests, O Babylon: who boasting falsely of a real unbloody sacrifice of
Christ to be offered to God: Now in later times by rebellions have offered
sacrifice to their Moloch the man of Rome in blood.

Secondly, to this your consequent, Therefore all of this Order are absolutely
freed from jealousy of Rebellion. As though in war only the figh^ing
soldiers were enemies: does not Reason in the Apologue teach you the
contrary? For there AEso'us in Ap^l. qui s^c incipit, (...)
The Trumpeter that gave the Alarm to excite men to war, was taken of his
enemies: and to free himself, O good Sirs, (says he) kill not me, for I would
never have slain any of you: alas, you see I have no weapon, the only
instrument I possess is this trumpet: to whom they answered: (...), therefore
thou shall rather die, because, when thou can not fight thy self, yet do
thou incite and encourage others to fight. Your Order will make the moral: for
in France your Reinolds did sound his trumpet for the battle thus: Vniuersa
eo pertinent, vt milites, praefecti, daces, and ecclesiastici omnes, qui haec
castra sequuntur, persuasissimum habeant haec esle bella Domini. Reinaldus in
Rosaeus. page 155.
All that we have spoken are to this end, to persuade Generals, Captains, and
all Ecclesiastical men, who follow the battle, that these are the wars of
the Lord. Hearken another trumpet sounding so loud, that it is heard from Rome
into Ireland, the Pope (a Priest) Dilecte vir salutem, etc. Tibi caeterisque
qui sunt hodie vnanimes and pro fidei Catholicae propagatione adhaerent,
nostram and Apostolicam benedictionem impertimur. Literae Clementis. 8. ad
Tyronem. Anno. 1601.
Promising his blessing to Tyrone and all his adherents, who should fight for
the Catholic cause against their Queen. And another in the same Ireland of
the College of Priests in Age. etc. Nam ei bello fauentes sanctis^imis
Pontifex multis gratijs prosequitur. Colleg. Salaman. in Determ. Anno. 1602.
Salamane, resounding Benediction of the same Pope to encourage the O^eale in
the same wars. Listen yet again, and you shall hear another terrible sound
in England for the joining with the Spanish Armado, in that their expected
invasion Anno 1588. Cardinal Allane (a Priest) Allane in his Admonition to the
Nobility of England. Anno 1588. page 53.
Now therefore Lords, Nobles, and dear Countrymen for the honor of Knighthood
fight. And lest we should be too deaf in sense, not to hear, or dull in
heart, not to believe, that Priests secular were interested in these affairs:
Parsons a Priest does proclaim against the Seculars, (who would seem herein
to be only excusable) saying, Parsons in his book called A Manifestation of
folly against the Important Considerations. page 24.
Was not Doctor Story, Doctor Lewis secular Doctors, who are known
principally to have furthered the action of Sir Thomas Stukesl^y for Ireland?
were not Ballard, Gifford, and Gartly secular Priests? And of all Priests in
general. Si hant Seditionem vocas, gladium iu terram mittere, and nou pac^m;
fateor Sacerdotes nostros tibi inobedientes esse, and fore semper, etc. Cresw^l
in Philopater. page 300.
This holy sedition, (if you call it so) which is to send war into the world,
I confess our Priests do and will teach. These are the phrases of Baals
Priests, except it be that those launced themselves, these let others blood.
These are their alarmes against Protestants, neither can we read of any one of
note among them, who by public writing did ever sound a retraite. A question
material: for if Popes were not pleased with all these abouenamed Positions
and practices, show us where ever he did condemn seditious Priests. Can you
then apply the sentence of holy Ambrose to this order? Is this to pray for us,
and not to prey altogether upon us? Wherein also I cannot but marvel at your
modesty, who bring in an old Canon, teaching not to fight, to the end you may
cloak their shame who openly profess they must fight: which is to cover a
bald head with a Crystal glass. There is yet another point you would
satisfy.

The moderate Answerer.
Answer Chap^ Lastly and For practice.
Lastly, he adds the late unhappy Stratageme and conspiracy against the
house of Parliament: but I trust that all Priests will be innocent in so vile a
practice against our present Sovereign.

The Reply.
If, as S. Gregory calling the first transgression of mankind Greg. Magn^s.
foelix facinus, an happy mischief: because of the event, Quia talem meruerit
habere Saluatorem: because it begat so gracious a Savior; you likewise may
call this, unhappy Stratageme, because thereby your mischief was prevented,
and malice discovered; then you are no better then a painted sepulcher
outwardly presenting us with hieroglyphicall shows of fellowship, and inwardly
full (through your hateful wishes) of dead men's bones. Yet I think you may
presume that not any Priest will be found innocent in so vile an act: meaning
till he be found: but many are found and convicted: God, who hunteth out the
unjust person, maruellously by the diversity or rather contrariety of their
languages, confounding them, as in the dissolution of Babell, each one of them
impeaching another, A just presumption, that scarce any Priest is innocent.

The moderate Answerer.
Answer ibid.
And it is certain it serves not to his purpose to prove all Priests to
intend such things. For first, the chiefest Priest the Pope had absolutely
forbidden all disobedience to his Majesty by these words: Quia Papa iubet, the
obedience; and prohibet, the disobedience: which the chief Superior of Priests
in England in spiritual things, as the Archpriest, had received and promulged
the same command long since in August last. And upon this first notice of this
pretended wickedness condemned it by his particular letters, for an
intolerable and desperate fact against the order of holy Church, against the
prescript of general Council, against the commandment of the Pope. Then if
the Priests of England will acknowledge the Archpriest for their Superior at
home, or the Pope at Rome, as all both regular and other must do: neither all
the Priests of this nation, nor any one, except disobedient to his Superior,
was guilty of this Conspiracy.

The Reply.
And yet behold your Superior a Jesuitical Priest is found guilty of this
Conspiracy, but the frame of your Argument does infold in it a Sorites, thus:
The inferior Priests are subject to their Superior the Anchpriest; this
Archpriest is subject to the (what is there a Chief above Arch-?) chief
Priest the Pope. But the Pope has commanded dutiful subjection to the
Archpriest, to command subjection to the inferior Priests. Ergo all inferior
Priests (except they will be disobedient to their Superior) will be faithful
Subjects. Wherein first I do observe that in this gradation of your obedience
to Kings the highest staire is the Pope. But the true Disciples of Saint Peter
did soar higher, [Propter Dominum] to God and his word. And in the descent the
last degree you make is a Priest: as though you would suffer Laymen in a blind
zeal, with an intent to advantage the Catholic cause, to practice any vile
act, and you stand to give aim: that in the success you may cry, Well shot;
but when they miss, the Actors may perish, and you cry out: O an unhappy
fact! Otherwise by this series causarum it must as probably follow, that the
Pope and Archpriest, and other inferior Priests are guilty of this vile
practice, viz. Every Romish Catholic does acknowledge a spiritual subjection
to their Priests, every Priest to his Superior, the Superior to his General
the Pope. But many of the most deu^ute Romish have bin found guilty of this
graceless attempt, Ergo the Priests, ergo the Superior, ergo the Pope. Or else
the Pope failed to give his proh^bet and restraint of disobedience to the
Archp^iest; or the Archpriest neglected to give command to the inferior
Priests; or your other Priests foreslowed to forewarne the Laymen; or (which is
the truth) you are but spiritual Politicians, bearing the world in hand, that
none of your mischiefs can be proved by us, till, by the vpshot, they be
proved upon us. And then those Priests and traitors, whom you now call
unhappy, Watson and Clearke will be of better esteem. Thus has your modesty
made good gradation for the break-necke of your cause.

CHAP. XXII.
The Discovery in the seventh Reason.

SEeing Nihil interest fauea^ne s^ele^i, a^ ^llud facias. Seneca.
It is in a manner all one to commit a villainy and to commend it: we may argue,
that whosoever shall justify acts of treasons and parricides, are not
vnguiltie of the same crimes: but all Priests do justify such heinous
paricides, Ergo.

The Minor proved by their Positions practical.
The famous Cardinal and public Reader in Rome says, Multi Pontifices
Principes multos authoritate sua regia merito priuarunt: vt Leonem 3.
Fredericum 1. O^honem 5. Childe^icum Rege^ Francie. Card. B^llar. lib. 5. de
Rom* Pont. cap. 6. and 7.
Many Popes have justly deposed many Princes. Our Count^iman In the Copy of
his letter to Sir William Stanley.
Card. Alane, ^eina^n Rosaeus cap. (...).
Reinolds, In his Dolman part. 1. page 62.
Parsons, inciting subjects to arms against their Prince, do persuade by
examples merely rebellious, as resisting of K. John, of Edward the second, of
Richard the second, of Henry the sixth, as presidents to be followed. The Author
of the book of Gratias agimus Deo immortali, qui operis huius fructum (nimir^m
parricidium Monachi) tam been anteuerterit. Lib. de iusta Abdic. He^r. 3.
Deposing Henry King of France, does sing a Gaudeamus for his death. And
again, Allane approves the perfidious rendering up In his letter to Sir
William Stanley Anno. 1587.
Douentore, and encourages the English Mal-contents to join their forces with
the A Book entitled, An admonition to the Nobiliue and people of England. The
i^scriptio^: G^lielmus miserati one d^i^. S. R. E. Tit. S. Martini in montibus
Cardinalis, cunctis regni Angliae and Hiberniae proceribus.
Spanish invasion. So the College of the Jesuits at Salamane approved the
insurrection of See above Rat. 6. lit. i.
Tyrone. And do not the most of that sort canonize in their conceits all such
Popish ones, as have been executed for treasons?

The moderate Answerer.
Answer cap. 8.
I grant the Mayor, and deny his Minor, [That all Popish Priests, etc.] And
have proved that all such assertions are most false and slanderous.

The Reply.
And I have proved from your own Authors, that they are the doctrines, which
you (granting the Mayor) must confess to be truly rebellious, and now further
confirm it by many examples. Answer them in order, and because in the most you
have been extrauagant, be entreated in this seventh Reason to be regular.

The very moderate Answerer.
Answer ib. But he.
He will maintain his sentence, because Bellarmine says, [Many Popes have
worthily deprived many Princes of their regal authority.] The examples be in
Leo 3. Fred. 1. in Otho 5. and Childericke King of France: to the which I have
answered before; and sincere dealing would have alleged the true causes, which
known, prove a flat disparitie in the matter.

The Reply.
Whatsoever cause there was to wish any wicked Emperor to be deposed, yet was
there never cause to authorize the Pope to depose him, which is plentifully
Infra part. 3.
proved.

But Popes (you will say) did formerly depose Emperors: as though from a case
de facto, that is, of an act of deposing, you would conclude a case ex iure,
that is, infer a right to depose. This would be a welcome plea to malefactors
of all kinds, and in this kind not a little prejudice your Popes: because
Bellarmine being urged with examples of many Christiani Imperatores iudicarunt
and deposuerunt summos Pontifices* haec quidem facta ^unt, sed quo iure ipsi
vide^int. Bellar. lib. 2. de Romans Pont. cap. ^9. Argumentum quintum.
Emperors who did judge and depose Popes; does return this answer: These
Emperors indeed, did so, but by what right let them show. So we driving out one
nail with another, oppose acts to acts, and say; But by what right Popes have
vnthronized Emperors let us know? For we shall hereafter show, that they had
from God no such authority. Where is now your moderation to require of us
acknowledgement of just causes of Popes acts, who (you know) prove that no
cause can justify such proceedings? If you yet insist, and urge to know the
causes, why Popes did so insult upon Emperors, moderate your appetite a while,
till we come to the confutation: where I doubt not but you will at least
satisfy your self, if not surfeit. For the interim, it will content the Reader
to understand that which your Barckley proves, namely, In veris antiquitatis
historijs exemplum nullum legimus cuiusquam Imperato^ is, qui, propter haeres^,
per populum exactus abie^tusque fuit. Bar^klaiu^ contra M^narchom. lib. 6. cap.
12.
That in true history it cannot be found, that ever heresy was a cause of
abrogating the authority of Emperors.

The moderate Answerer.
Answer Cap. 8. He accuses
He accuses Cardinal Allane for approving of the rendering up of Douentore
unto the hands of the King of Spain the true owner: by which he condemns
himself to be within the compass of his own conclusion of Rebellion: for all
the world can witness, that town truly to belong to that King.

The Reply.
Was the King of Spain the true owner? Who are you, I pray you, that can thus
define? if you will be a true Divine, then learn from our Savior, [ ^uc. 12.
14.
Who made me a Judge over you to divide inheritances among you?] If you will be
(according to your State-style) a Statesman to justify that the King of Spain
was then the true owner of Do^entore, and for confirmation call all the world
to witness; we shall not greatly marvel at this in you, being of the Order of
them, who would make that King the Monarch of all the world. How the case might
stand I may be lawfully ignorant, excepting only, that howsoever Sir William
Stanley, being no subject to either parties, but only a substitute to the
States, and subject to his Queen, from whose command he had received that
charge, he is therein intolerably perfidious: for if the right were doubtful,
then it is a conclusion, which your Jesuit cannot deny, but that In dubijs
Subditus parere debet praefecti sui mandato; possit miles suo Regi, Duci, vel
Reip. in bello, obedire, vbi dubitat sitne Principis bellum, quod aduersus
alterum gerit, iustu^: in tali dubietate non est quod dubitet, Principis
mandato esse parendum, et hoc modo dubium remouendum. Azorius Ies. Just lib. 2.
cap. 19. Nono quaeritur.
When the soldiers shall doubt whether the war (and so the possession he
holds) which his Prince makes be lawful: in all such doubts he ought to
obey his Prince, for even to obey does remove the doubt.

Secondly, if the case were plain, yet many things are lawful to be done,
which are not lawful for this man or that man to do: for our Law says, A man
(as he that shall go to his neighbors house, and take twenty pound he lent his
neighbor) may be hanged for taking his own: and is there no justice against
him, who will render up that which is not his own? But what his intent was he
has discovered to all the world: who, as he then, in violating his Princes
repose, fled from her subjection, so in the invasion in 88. was bent to
return, not as a good subject, but as a mortal enemy against his Sovereign.

Lastly, for the States in this point, suppose their getting of Deuentore were
unjust, yet another Jesuit (though I should condemn it) would defend their
possession, who in like case thus resolves: Quidam specie forte pietatis
grauit^r errant, ^us regium vocantes in dubium, quaerente^interdam quoiure and
titulo Hispani dominentur Indis; number haereditario iure ad nos deuoluti fiunt,
an bello iusto nobis subiecti^ ego existimo nullam aliam subtiliorem petendam
esse causae euictionem, quam quod vt demus maximum peccat^m esse in vsurpatione
dominatus Indici: tamen neque restitui iam potest; cui enim, and quibus modis?
neque si maxim posset, fidei susceptae euidens ini^ia and periculum id vell^
modo pateretur. Joseph. Acosta Jesuit. Lib. 2. de Indorum salute. Cap. 11.
Admit (says he) that it was a great sin for the Spaniards to usurp the
Kingdoms and possessions of the Indian people: yet can they not ( For they are
due to the posterity of the Nation.
O Confessors!) now be restored; for to whom and how can this be performed? nay
though it could, yet will not the danger of decay of (O Religion!) Religion
permit restitution. Yet there remains another example to be satisfied of you,
which is this.

CHAP. XXIII.
The Discovery.

An example of a notable Patron of high Treason.
Xisti Quinti Pont. Max. de Henrici tertij morte Oration habita in Consistorio
Patrum. 2. Septembris Anno Domini 1589.
XIstus Quintus makes a public Oration in his Consistory of Cardinals: the
subject matter he shows is this: Mortuus est Rex Francorum per manus monachi.
page 3.
The King of France is slain by the hand of a Monk. And what of this? Rarum
and memorabile facinus.
This (says he) is a notable, rare, and memorable act. But why? Occidit
Monachus regem non pictum aut fictum in Charta aut pariete, sed Regem Francorum
in medio exercitus.
Because he slew not (says he) a King painted in paper, or graven in stone,
but the King of France in the midst of his host. Is it a wonder any should
wonder that a Monk could murder a mortal King; seeing Popish histories do
record, that Hadrianus Pontifex exco^municationem Henrico 2 denuntians, ipse a
Deo maledictus, a musca suffocatus est. Nauclerus general. 137.
Pope Hadrian being guilty of the like seditious practice against the Emperor
Henry the second, was choked with a Fly? Nay, but if the Monk had killed a
painted Image, that had been an act farremore memorable, and less intolerable:
notwithstanding no fact is good, because great; but therefore great, because
good. Say then what is to be thought of the worthiness of the fact? Facinus
non sine Dei Opt. Max. particulari prouidentia and dispositione, (page 5) non
sine expressa eius voluntate, (page 4.) and succursu perpetratum.
It was a fact done by the admirable providence, will, and succor of Almighty
God. How? by Gods will counselling and approving it? Nota quam insignis est
historia illa sanctae mulieris Judith, quae vt obsessam ciuitatem suam, and
populum Dei liberatet, caepit consilium; Deoque sine controuersia suggerente,
de interimendo Holopherne hostilis exercitus principe, quod and perfecit. etc.
page 8.
Holy Judith is famous (says he) for the slaying of Holophernes, which she did
not without the suggestion of Gods Spirit. Hic vero Religiosus aggressus est
and rem confecit long maiorem non sine Dei concursu. page 10.
But this religious man has done a far more marvelous work. O marvelous
Relgio^! Yet so it is in this sin of parricide, where A Monk does murder a
King. The best word the Pope affoordeth the murdered is, Rex infelix, and in
peccato mortuus. page 3 and page 9.
An unhappy King, and one perishing in his sin. The worst he does bestow
upon the murderer, is: Vir Religiosus page 9. and 10.
Religious man. And thus in not condemning, but rather commending, one Traitor,
he has made up two. Lastly, this Henry (a note very material) was a Papist;
only he favored the Protestants, and especially Prince Navarre (because a
Protestant) excommunicate. By this Pope this was his crime, upon which ensued,
This fact (to paraphrase truly of the Popes words) rare for the attempt; not
able for the wickedness; memorable for the shame of the Sect.

The moderate And most modest Answerer. The Reply.
What nothing? not one word in behalf of Pope Sixtus? Sixtus; who Principum
Catholicorum faedera in excidium haereticae prauitatis prohauit: and Rodulpho
Impera tori per literas significauit Regem Nauarraeum, and Principem Condaeum
^ede Apostolica excommunicatos and proscriptos esse, vt p^m B^llis huius Pont.
Petrus Matthew. cu^ Sum. Constit. Romans Pont in Arg. ante constable. Sixti. Quinti.
First did confirm the league in France for the utter destruction of
Protestants? Sixtus; who Did excommunicate (in that name) the King Navarre and
Prince of Condie? Neither only them, but expressly Nos excommunicamus at
anathematizamus omnes Lutheranos and Caluinistas. Constable. Sixti Quinti. Cap. 13.
All Lutherans and Caluinists: proclaiming a Iubilaeum omnibus Christi
fidelibus, qui in Ecclesijs regni Galliae pro selici contra haereticosvictoria
etc. Orauerint cum facultate eligendi confessores, qui a delictis and
criminibus etiam in bulla Caenae Domini contentis absoluant. Ibid cap. 16.
Jubilee and indulgence for all in France who should pray for the success of
the Leaguers against the Protestants? One to whom you ascribe power of
absoluing you from all your sins, and yet not one syllable to free him from
the suspicion of (but one sin) patronizing a most brutish parricide? Could
you not answer that his speech was only an admiration and no approbation; or
that he did declaime only and not determine; taking upon him the person of an
Orator, and not of a Pastor; or that he spoke as a private Doctor, and not as a
Pope? Nay, all such answers (you know) had been frivolous, for he uses
examples of commendation, arguments of asseueration, and the Oration was not
pronounced in his private closet, but in the public Consistory and Convent of
his Cardinals. And therefore herein only you have given us a token of your
extraordinary modesty, who not finding one ragge to cover your Fathers
shameful nakedness, you shut your eyes, as loath to behold it. God grant you
grace truly to detest it. But we find (as in all Societies) in your Synagogue
men of diverse foreheads. For the Sixtus Quintus supra.
Pope and his Bucherus li. de Iusta Abdic. supra. vide cap. 21.
Acolythus do extol the Monk for an Excellent instrument of God: whom your
Lawyer does decipher to be a Scelerati Monachi Cl: atrox and perfidiolum, ce^
monstri teterrmi, facinus haereticis occasionem dedit calumniandi non hominem,
sed ordinem vniuersum Monachorum. Barclaius lib. 6. conta Monarchom. cap. 28.
and deinceps.
Wicked, faithless Monk, and a most hateful monster. He depresseth that King
as One most impious and sacrilegious; whom your Lawyers upon better
intelligence, do commend (if this be a commendation) Fuit mihi cum Patre
Mathaeo antiqua olim amicitia, and intima familiaritas qui Regem illum Henricum
3. siquis alius intus, vt aiunt, and in cute nouerat, qui de Regis moribus sic
mihi satisfecit: vis (inquit) vt dicam tibi quis Rex fuit? vir bonus fuit, sed
non perinde Rex, quia nimium religiosus esse studuit, qui deuotioni ac precibus
deditus Regni curam nonnihil negligere videbatur, Barclaius ibidem.
As one that was too devout and religious. But you (as it becomes a moderate
Answerer) answer nothing; and thus in saying nothing bewray what you would, or
rather, what you would not say.

CHAP. XXIIII.
The discovery in the eight Reason.

THose Snakes that do naturally sting, as soon as they get warmth, may not be
harbored in the bosom of the Commonwealth: but all Popish Priests profess
rebellions, as soon as they can presume of their strength, Ergo, etc. The
Minor proved by

Their Positions. The Discovery.
Bannes maintains this as a necessary Parenthesis: Sit haec tertia
Conclusio: vbi euidens adest notitia criminis, ante declaratoriam Pontificis
sententiam licet (si modo vires ^i suppetunt) Regem deponere. Domin. Bannes in
Thom. 2, 2. q. 12. Art. 2.
Subjects before sentence of Excommunication (if they have sufficient force)
may then depose their King. This Father Creswell adds as a war^e caution: Sit
haec cautio adhibenda, vt vires habeant ad hoc idoneas subditi: alioqui in
Religionis Catholicae praeiudicium cederet. Cr^swel in suo Philopater. page
198. and 199.
Let subjects take heed (says he) that they have competent strength in such a
case: otherwise it may prejudice the Catholic cause. And lest any taking an
Antidote against their poison, should object the condition of the Church of
Christ primitive, and of the glorious Christians of those times, who intended
not killing of Kings the enemies of the Gospel; but to be willingly killed for
the profession of the holy faith: mark with what intemperate mortar those men
daube up the consciences of Christians, Quasi vero eadem instituendae Ecclesiae
ratio atque institutae esse, credenda sit; add quod id tum non licuit, dum
impiorum multitudo superior esset: sed neque illi Christum professi erant, vt
cogi in verba eius mortis supplicio possent; sed tum demum, silicet, id datum
est, cum impletum fuit id Prophetae, (Esa. 49. ^3.) Reges erunt nutri^ tui, and
in quae tempora venimus. Lib. deiusta addicat. Regis Henric. 3. p g. ^78.
Then (says the French Defense) the Christians did only suffer, because the
Church was not yet perfect, and because their enemies were more in number.
Again, Illud non moueat quemquam; id laudabile est quum resistere nequeas.
Lib. de iusta ^ag. 371.
It is commendable to suffer when thou can not resist. Which is the last
miserable refuge of their desperate cause. Whereunto notwithstanding their
grand-Cardinall is glad to betake himself. Quodsi Christiani olim non
deposuerunt Diocletianum, lulianum, Valentem ad s^t, qu^a de^rant vires
temporales Christianis. Bell. lib. 5. (...) To. Pont. cap. 6. and 7. and 4.
I answer (says he) that Christians in ancient times did not bear arms and
seek to depose Emperors and Kings, enemies to the Catholic faith; because
they wanted power. Whereby the now Romish faith does seek to make wicked men
excusable. Ex hac secunda conclusione sequitur, excusandos esse Anglos, quia
non se eximunt ex superiorum potestate nec belium contra eos gerunt* quia non
suppetunt illis vires, ob sequentia pe^la, D. B ^s in 2. 2. Thom. quaest. 12.
Art. 2.
By this second conclusion (says Bannes) the English Catholics, who now do
not take arms against the Protestants, are excused, because they want
sufficient power. Hence we may perceive, that as long as Protestants live safe,
they must acknowledge themselves beholden to the Popish faction, because they
have no power to hurt them: otherwise they may hear of them before they can
see them, peradventure in such a manner, as to The letter of Tresham to the L.
Monte^gl^.
Receive a terrible blow, and yet not know who did them the hurt. Yea, they
must perish, for Populus Christianus obsistere tenetur conscientiae vinculo
arctissimo, and extremo ani^um periculo, si prastate rem possit. Creswell in
suo Philopater. page 201.
Christian people (says Creswell) are bound in conscience and hazard of their
souls, to resist whenever they can make resistance.

The moderate Answerer.
Answer cap. 91 Thus he.
To the first Proposition I say, Concedo.

The Reply.
Concedo, that is in English, I grant it: woe then, and thrice woe to all your
Priests, who fall violently upon it, thereby to be convinced rebellious. Is it
not so?

The moderate Answerer.
Ibidem.
To the second Proposition I answer, that if this be the opinion of Bannes, he
speaks ignorantly in this case.

The Reply.
Bannes an Author easily to be had of all men: I deliver his name, I cite the
place, I express his words, apparently signifying that this was Bannes
opinion: and yet your Answer is (to speak moderately) too moderate: If this be
(say you) the opinion of Bannes. I allege for the same opinion your English
Jesuit Creswell, your French Jesuit De iusta Abdicatione, your Romish Jesuit
Bellarmine, al of the opinion of Bannes, teaching, Then and not before, to take
arms, as soon as they have strength. And you answer to one only saying: If
this be the opinion of Bannes. Is this modesty? This opinion (say you) is
false: this is honesty: but then are your greatest Clearkes Blind, and leaders
of the blind: as namely, Creswell, Felinus, Caietan, Tolet, Sa, Alane,
Bellarmine, Saire, and the present current of Romish Schools, Supra.
as has been proved. This doctrine therefore being false, which the supposed
lights of your Religion do auerre, I may well take up the complaint of our
Savior against your Church: Matthew. 6. 23.
If the light that is in thee be darkness, o how great is that darkness! In the
last place you name Gregory the 13. for the contrary, but (all you could do)
only name him; opposing names to express writings, shadows to things. O
moderatorem! These are but Positions. Now follows

CHAP. XXV.
Their Practice.

The Discovery.
IN the year 1580. when Campion and Parsons came into England, they procured a
dispensation from the Pope, that al Papists in England, notwithstanding the
Excommunication of the Queen, might profess a large obedience in all temporal
causes: but with this addition, (Rebus sic stantibus) i. the case thus
standing: that is, (as the sequel did interpret) till you wax stronger. For
in the year 1588. when the Spanish Armado was a sloate, when by doubling their
strength they might presume the better, then our Countriman Alane does write an
Admonition to the Nobility of England, making his book the Popes Nuncio, to
expound his former Parenthesis: In his book of Admonition.
Though the Pope (says he) has tolerated obedience unto the Queen in
temporal conditions: yet now our holy Father Xistus Quintus does discharge all
men of their faith and loyalty unto her. This is the Popes common guise, when
he doubts his faction shall be ouermatched, then to inioyne obedience: but it
is only in policy to gain his soldiers a breathing; as Clement the late
Pope dispensed with the Irish for their fidelity to the Queen, till that he
had some confidence of Tyrones success. For then in the 20. of January the
year 1601. he writ a letter for encouragement: Clemens Octauus.
Fili dilecte, nobilis vir salutem, etc. My dear son all health, etc. After
he calls the Rebellion Sacrum foedus, an holy league; promising in the way of
blessing an happy success: Deus pugnabit provobis, conteret inimicos suos ante
faciem vestram. i. God will fight for you, and tread his enemies under your
feet. But he (God be thanked) proved a false Prophet.

The moderate Answerer.
Answer quo supra cap. 9. But where.
I answer, that Cardinal Alane, better acquainted with these affairs then any
Protestant Writer, relates the Popes declaration for Catholic obedience to
Queen Elizabeth, without any restraint or limitation: neither does this man
discover where he finds any such restricting clause.

The Reply.
It seems you are not acquainted with Cardinal Alane: shall he be brought to
auerre a Commission of subjection without restraint of, [Rebus sic stantibus,
the case so standing:] who, Rebus sic non stantibus, Anno 1588 raised English
Recusants against the Queen, provoking them to Supra.
fight? I did not indeed discover where I find any such restraining clause.
Here is one only little clause, Rebus sic stantibus, that wants the Author;
and I must be suspected for a coyner: you in all your Answers scarce allege
the express sentence of any one, and yet challenge credit. Such are the times
which are fallen upon us, and the odds which by men's wilful infatuation, you
have obtained. But I must produce my Author, for your pleasure: who^ though I
persuade you, yet (a grievous case) will you not be persuaded. Notwithstanding
hearken to your Father Creswel, who tells you that, Quae quidem moderatio id
exposuit, Subditos Anglicanos, non obstante primo Ecclesiae mandato,
Subiectionem obedientiamque suam, sicut antea Reginae, exhibere in rebus
omnibus ciuilibus, salua conscientia, [pro praesenti terum statu:] modo in
rebus Ecclesiasticis summa^ obedientiam summo Pastori deferant. Cresvvell. ^n
his Philopater. page 204.
That moderation concerning obedience unto the Queen, was comprised within.
these lists, [For the present state and condition of things.] Here your clause
and your expectation is satisfied: I pray you satisfy me in the next example.

The very moderate and modest Answerer.
The case of the Earl of Tyrone, whatsoever it was, is not now imputed against
him, as his liberty and favor in England since then be witnesses: therefore it
might be better suppressed, then urged by this Discouerer.

The Reply.
That is, The Earl of Tyrone his offense has been pardoned by the King: Ergo,
it might better be suppressed, then that the Pope the patron of his Rebellion,
should be discovered. None can find fault with the modesty of this Answer,
wherein you seem to be ashamed of the Popes blessing; and there is hope in the
end, you will be ashamed of your own answer. To the next Reason.

CHAP. XXVI.
The Discovery in the ninth Reason.

Whosoever does perfidiously either deny or violate, with men of diverse
Religion, an oath, the most sacred bond that Ier. 4. 4.
God has allotted unto men, as the most secure H^b. 6. 16.
Confirmation of all fidelity with men, and * End of all contention, must
necessarily be esteemed of them as a person perfidious and treacherous: But
Popish Priests are guilty of such perfidie, Ergo, etc. The Minor will appear
in these three: 1. in the manner of disallowing: 2. of deluding: 3. of
dissoluing of a necessary oath.

The moderate Answerer.
Answer. cap. 10.
In his Mayor Proposition the Discouerer must needs make some exceptions: or
else, etc.

The Reply.
Let us descend to the several Propositions, and after show your instances.

The Discovery. From the manner of denying a requisite oath, we reason:
Whatsoever servant being demanded of his master, to say or swear, whether if
he saw his master assalted by his professed enemies he would defend or betray
him, would either dislike the article, or defer the answer, he should
evidently bewray a treacherous disposition: But all Popish Priests in like
articles concerning loy all subjection to Protestant Kings, are in like manner
affected. Ergo, all their other kind of Matthew. 26.
Hail Master, is but to kiss and betray. The Minor proved by

Their Positions and Practices.
When as it is demanded of Priests (a necessary Article in civil States) what
if the Pope should autorize the Queens subjects to rebel, or other foreign
Princes to invade her Realm; whether they would take part with the Queen or
her enemies? First, they dislike this Interrogatorie. Alane calls it Allen in
his book entitled, A true Defense page 68. 70.
An unlawful, unnatural, and intolerable search of men's consciences. This
kind of examination which Princes make for preservation of the lives of
themselves and subjects, Creswell terms Examen iniustissimum, and postulata
sanguinaria. Creswell. in s^o Philopater. page 350. and 351.
Unjust and bloody demands. And these questions Stapleton names Nouae and
captiosae, in quibus inest inauditum quoddam nequissimae impietatis, and
barbarae calliditatis exemplum. Sapl^ton* in suo Didymus. page 205. 206.
Captious questions, wicked, and full of all impious subtlety. As though
Samson were bound to put his head in Dalilahs Jud. 16.
lap. Nay but their answer shows that this Interrogatorie was as
necessarily invented, as it is wickedly impugned: for this being an inbred law
of Nata lex, quam non didicimus, sed a natura exhausimus. Cicero pro Milone.
Nature, to study for a selfe-preseruation; these men call unjust and
unnatural: but how senslesly let the very heathen judge, Vt iugulent homines
surgunt de nocte Latrones: vt teipsum serves non expergisceris? Horatius.
Thieves watch to murder, do thou not awake to save thy self?

Now secondly, their delaying. When the question is urged, whether, if the Pope
or any of his appointment should invade the land; which part they would take:
then they shift footing, and some (as our Governors have observed) have
answered: I will then take counsel when the case shall happen: others, I will
answer then and not before: others, I am not yet resolved: lastly, I shall then
do as God shall put in my mind. As though these masks were large enough to
shadow their faces: which their Creswell has already discovered, saying that
Si Pontificis iussu de Religione restituenda bello decertaretur, se conscientia
salua facere non posse, quin pa^tibus Catholicis adhaereant. Creswel in suo
Philopater. page 352.
If by the Popes command the war should be undertaken, to the end of
restoring Religion, then (to answer) that he is bound in Conscience to hold
with the Romish. This man speaks without Parables: make then but a pretense
of Religion, and farewell subjection.

The moderate Answerer.
Answer quo supra. Now, etc. in fine Sectioni^.
There is none bound generally to every oath: for as the law of nature, and
his Majesty, with Bishops and Nobles, in the last Conference taught: if the
Article either touched the parties life, liberty, or scandal, he may refuse
to swear.

The Reply.
This Answer and my Question differ as much as yesterday and to morrow: for my
argument a simili concludes of an oath concerning a matter to be done, and not
of that which is past: yet not so, as to enforce any to the oath de futuris,
but from the denying, or delay thereof to euince a political demonstration of
a disloyal heart. You have another answer no whit more true, though somewhat
more pertinent.

The very moderate Answerer.
Answer quo supra. As concerning.
As concerning Interrogatories de futuris contingentibus, things which are to
come: no creature, man, nor Angel naturally can perceive them: therefore the
examen of such things may be left to God.

The Reply.
You have reason to refuse the examination of men, lest they (understanding
your treachery) might prevent their own danger: I dare say, there is no
malefactor in the world bent to any mischief, but he is of your mind. But you
are deceived; the question is not absolutely de futuris, that is, of things to
come, as if your debtor promises to repay you this debt, may he not answer he
will pay it? The act of payment has respect to the time to come, but the will
to pay it, it is an internal and present act, and a resolution of the mind,
which no perfect man can be ignorant of in himself. Nemo nescit se velle quod
vult: No man can be ignorant of his own will. And this is that present will,
which by his outward messenger, the tongue, he does through a corporal oath
manifest to man, what it does resolve. Else why are leagues betwixt Princes,
contracts between man and man, consent of wedlock, holy vow in Baptism to
God: are not all these visible acts, symbols, and signs of inward will? Acts
(I say) de futuris of things to come, as namely, of fidelity, loyalty,
sanctity hereafter to be performed? Otherwise how is it, that you dare contest
Answer cap. 10. Now.
For all Catholics, not to refuse an oath of allegiance according to the just
proceeding of law? promising in your self, that other shall take an oath of
allegiance and obedience to his Majesty, A thing (except you mean they will
not take the oath) hereafter to be done. Wherefore when you are about to make an
answer, take forth this l^slon of true moderation; It is better to hold your
peace, then say nothing.

CHAP XXVII.
The Discovery.

THe second point is their deluding of an oath by a new trick of Equivocation,
as they (improperly) term it. Others call it Reseruatio^: but most fitly we
may call it Collusion.

Their Position in the Mator.
Cum Iude^ non iutidice peut iuramentum, vel contra iustitiam, li^et vti
aequiuocatione secundum mentem suam, contra mentem Iudicis; vt puta, quaerenti,
fecistine illud? Respondeat non feci; intelligendo inter se, non hoc tempore,
aut, vt narrem tibi; aut aliquid simile. Tollet. Card lib. 4. Instit. Sacerd.
cap. 21. and 22.
When any Judge (says one) shall demand an oath unjustly, then may the
examinate swear by an equivocation: as for example: being thus demanded;
Whether did thou that fact or no? he (though he did it) may answer, I did it
not; understanding secretly in his mind, at this time; or, I did it not,
meaning, to tell you: or some such like evasion. If you desire to know the
Author, it is Cardinal Tolet; if his authority, De hoc illustri Cardinali
Gregorius 13. Pontifex fic scribit: Dilecte fili. etc. Tanta est tua doctrina,
que longo and inumo vsu nobis cognita est, vt tua scripta, sicut caeterorum
al^orum iudicio atque examini subijci aequum non sit V^sques I^s Epist. de
dicat. ante Com. in L^ue.
Vasques the Jesuit shows he had a special privilege from Pope Gregory
the 13. writing thus unto him; We so approve of your singular learning, that we
hold it unmeet that your books should be subjected to the censure of others.

Now their Assumption in this case of our English justice, concerning
examination of Priests is: Officiarij Reginae Angliae non iuridice iuramenta
exigunt; quia Regina haeretica non est Regina. Martinus in lib. R^solut. Cas^^m.
The Officers of the Queen of England (says Martin) cannot challenge Answers
and oaths iud^^iously, because an heretical Queen is no Queen. Upon this
sand is builded that which they conclude, namely, Alane, Parsons, Gregory
Martin, that Si Sacerdos interrogetur in portu, vel alibi, de antiquo suo
nomine ab aliquibus, qui cum habent suspectam, possit respondere, illud non
es^e suum nomen: atque eodem modo si interrogeturde pat^a, parentibus, amicis.
etc. Resolutio quorundam c^suum Nationis Arglican^.
If a Priest shall upon suspicion chance to be asked either in any haven, or
else where concerning his ancient name, his country, kindred, or friends; he
may deny all. And again: Cum Sacerdos sistitur ad tribunal, vbi adsunt
magistratus regni, accepto iuramento, possit ille prestare iuramentum
aequiuocando, quia, qui quaerunt non ^ridice interrogant, cum sint Tyra^ni, and
velint punire bona opera. Ibidem.
When a Priest is conuented before a Judge, after the oath taken, concerning
such questions, he may answer by the foresaid Equivocation: because these that
ask this oath, are not to be accounted Judges, but Tyrants. Which point of
Equivocation (says Parsons in his brief dpolog. fol. 193.
Parsons) is not only to be allowed by all Divines, but judged necessary also
in some cases for avoiding lying and other inconveniences. This man, we see,
(as if he would drive out Satan by Satan) teaches by lying how a man may
avoid a lie. This is the general doctrine of their See Aquinas.
School, more then heathenish: for among Pagans this was a Decree of
Conscience: Fraus non dissoluit, sed distringit periurium. Cicero.
Craft in an oath does not lessen but strengthen perjury.

Now the Practice.
The practice of this device of Equivocation in Priests has been found to have
been common of late, by experience of Magistrates. It may be thought to have
crept out of Saint Francis sleeves. For Sanctus Franciscus rogatus qua
perrexisset quidam homicida, qui iuxta cum transierat; manus per manicas
immittens respondit, no^ transi^sse illac: intelligens, non transi^sse per
illius manicas. Nouar. Tom. 3. cap. 12.
He (as Navarre writes) being asked which way the murderer did fly; putting
his hands into his sleeves, answered, he went not that way, meaning, through
his sleeves.

The moderate Answerer.
Answer quo supra. This.
For Tolet among the Jesuits I cite another Jesuit, famous among the
Casuists, Quidam dicunt eum, qui non tenetur respondere ad intentionem
Rogantis, posse respondere aliquid subintelligendo, vt non e^^e sc^licet, ita
vt ei dicere teneatur^ vel se non habere, sc. vt ei det. licet alij id non
admittunt, and for^ poti^ri ratione. Eman. Sa. in Apboris. 4.
Emanuel Sa, who writes, that some are of another opinion, and peradventure
with better reason.

The Reply.
If you oppose the persons of these Authors, there is (in the opinion of a
Jesuit) no comparison; if their opinions, there is scarce any opposition. For
their persons: Tolet was lately a Cardinal, Illustrissimum Cardinalem
Baronium, inter Iesuitas recensere est, ac si inter infimae magnitudmis stellas
Arcturum imperitus numeret Astrologus. Seraries Ies. in Minerual aduers. Scalig
lib. 4. cap. 1.
But to reckon a most reverend Cardinal (speaking of Baronius) among the
Jesuits, (says a Jesuit) is as if a fond Astronomer should number Arcturus
among the lesser Stars. Examine now their opinions, Tolet says: This kind of
Equivocation is lawful; Jesuit Sa says, There is more probable reason to the
contrary. These may seem contrary to men of syn^eritie, but among these
speakers, in their practical judgment, there is no contradiction: for they
have another winding in this their Labyrinth, that Frequent'r quidem opinio
probabilior non est eligenda. Azor. Ies. J^t. Moral. lib. 2. cap. 16. Tertio
quaeritut. (...) modo Tolletus Jes. Inshuct. Sa^e^d.
Many times the less probable opinion is to be followed. So then as yet we
have but an Eele by the tail. Again, to determine against so damnable a
doctrine only in these terms, More probable; yea and peradventure more
probable: I say, to doubt of such a Protestant and orthodoxall truth, is
doubtless to deny it. But of this hereafter. How will you therefore excuse
your selves?

The moderate Answerer.
Answer quo supra. For our.
For our excuse in this place and question Catholics do generally agree, that
to equivocate before a competent Judge (such as we allow all Magistrates in
England to be in temporal causes in as * Infra in the 3. part.
ample manner, as if they were of our Religion, keeping order of law) is a
mortal sin: as it is defined by Thomas, Navarre, and others.

The Reply.
This excuse will make you more inexcusable, because I shall prove that by your
dissembling parenthesis you do but cloak your liars. Are all Magistrates in
England reputed of your Equiuocators competent Judges? So you answer, but
falsely, both against your ordinary Thesis and practice: For in your Positions
your now-cited Author Navarre (I omit Thomas, as one not acquainted with our
English affairs) says, that, Coram haereticis (loquitur de Iudicibus
Anglicanis) potest Catholicus vel recusare (quod est prudentius) vel sophistice
iu ^ans and interrogatis, ni^i quantum interrogatur de fide, sophistice
respondere. Nauar. cap, 12. number. 8*
It is lawful for a Catholic (except it be in question concerning his faith)
to equivocate (speaking expressly of English Magistrates) before Heretics. Your
Reinolds was by birth English, by baine Romish, and tells us plainly, that
Episcopi tenentur fidei suae commissos instruere, vt a co^mercio Regis
Haeretici abstineant* and ei nec in bello, nec in pace opitulentur: vt omnes
Idiotae ratio cinari discant, Talis vir Haereticus est: Ergo in nos, qui
Catholici sumus, authoritatem nullam habet. Reia^ld. Rosaeus. page 335.
All people must be instructed thus to reason, (speaking of the King of France
when he was a Protestant) This man is an Heretic, therefore has no authority
over us. Your Parsons, English by nature, though now translated into Romish,
commending your Southwel, Parsons in his brief Apology. fol. 193.
This point of Equivocation M. Southwell (says he) defended (before English
Protestant Judges) at the bar. The book entitled, Resolution of English
cases, by Alane and Parsons, resolves thus: Cum Sacerdos sistitur ad tribunal,
vbi suut magistratus ciuiles regni, and for^an aliqui pseudo-Episcopi, non
tenetur quis respondere ad interrogata, sed possit vti aequiuocatione, quia non
iuridice interrogatur, cum sint Tyranni. Rosolutio casuu^. Nationis Anglicanae,
p^r Alanum and Parsonum.
When (say they) any is brought before those Magistrates to be examined, they
may answer by Equivocation: because they being Tyrants do not examine
iuridically. This was then in the days of Queen Elizabeth: but now in the
reign of our Sovereign King James, it may be the case is different. Nay now
also has your Arch* priest authorized the book in defense of Equivocation in
behalf of Catholics (the words of the title) before a Magistrate: speaking
professedly of our present English State: and the present practice both of
Priests and their Disciples is (alas!) so ordinary, that the daily experience
of their equiuocating lying is ready for this your answer to give you the lie.
I will not trouble my memory with multitude of examples, which diverse
Magistrates have reported: I will only be contented with two, proved the last
day in the Arraignment of Garnet the Jesuit your Superior.

Garnet: He (as before almost all the Honorable of our State was proved) had by
manifold protestations and execrations denied before the Lord Chief Justice,
and his Majesty's Attorney General, that he had conferred with his fellow Hall
since their coming into prison: by and by was witness produced, who heard
their conference, and related the very words so directly, that both Garnet and
Hall did confess, they indeed had had conference together. What was his excuse
now for his first Answer? He did equivocate, (his own words at the Barie)
because he was not bound to accuse himself, before he saw witness to convince
him. An answer wretched and witless; wretched (I say) because to use
equivocation in a religious execration, is execrable wickedness: witless,
because to defend a denial of truth, till one be convicted of a lie, is to
profess a defense of an untruth, till he be not able to defend it.

The second example is in your Disciple M. Tresham, who upon his deathbed,
moved by a sinister spirit of a woman to retract his former true confessions,
wherein Garnet was brought in suspicion of the last treason, (least the guilt of
such a Priest, might be prejudicial to the Catholic cause) did before the
formerly named Magistrates at the point of death recall his foresaid confession
thrice with protestation: Upon my salvation (says he) I was not acquainted
with Garnet this many years. After his death is Garnet apprehended, and
examined of that point of acquaintance with Tresham, who did under his hand
writing confess both the times and places of their conuersing together: all this Garnet did acknowledge at the Bar. Then the right Honorable the Earl of
Salisburie, (whose rare wisdom did in that vmuersall audience prove it self
often the only rack to that Jesuit, in extracting many truths from that
Equiuocator to his often public confusion) asked him: What judge you, M.
Garnet of that false protestation of M, Tresham he made upon his salvation?
Garnet smiling, answered. I think he did equivocate. Smiling, a thousand
beheld him. A very ridiculous answer indeed, if it had not been horribly
impious, which therefore the whole audience, as children of truth, did then by
a common murmr openly detest.

To conclude, I must now (my moderate Answerer) necessarily rack you: but
(fear not) only by that Logical instrument, which is therefore called (...):
thus: you would persuade us that Priests think our Protestant Magistrates
competent, before whom you may not use Equivocation: your Superior, by whom
(if you be a Jesuit) this your book was privileged, did both by practice and
position more then allow the use of Equivocation the last day, even in a most
honorable presence. Now therefore if your book was not privileged by Garnet,
then this inscription of your book, Answer in the front of the book.
[With license of Superior] is untrue: if you say he did privilege it, then
this excuse for all your Priests, saying: [We allow Magistrates in England co^
petent, before whom we may not equivocate,] (Garnet gain* saying it) is
likewise untrue.

The greatest difficulty now will be, to tell whether of you two be the
Superior in lying: you in saying, You do not defend that, which you do so
manifestly defend, a flat lie; or he, who defends that, which no man can ever
defend, Equivocation, the very damme of all damnable lying. Whereof more at
large in the Confutation.

Yet behold a greater mystery of this iniquity, then has been yet revealed:
Tresham takes it on his salvation, that, to his knowledge, no Priest was
acquainted with the plot, Digby and others make the like protestations at their
death: Garnet a Priest did deny with maine and many protestations, that he had
conference with Hall, and defended it lawful, till he was convicted by
witness. To what end? lest that Priests guiltiness might make their priestly
function and Religion more odious. Whence I may conclude, that it were more
then sottishness for any Protestant to believe the Priests protesting their
innocence (as Garnet did) at the Bar, or their disciples protesting (as
Tresham and Digby did) the innocence of Priests and their adherents at their
death: I say, all their witnesses deserve no credit, who defend thus to
equivocate, till they be evidently convicted by witness.

CHAP. XXVIII.
The Discovery.

The third abuse of Oaths is in dissoluing them.
THat though they take an oath of allegiance in cases temporal, yet their
common interpretation is still with respect of their more supreme head. See
before Reason 4. lit. c.
During the will of the Pope, who (say they) has power to free both himself
and others from the bond of an oath. Which is their old gloss, saying, that
Debuit intelligi, nisi Papa remittat ei iuramentum: Nam in iuramento excipitur
authoritas Maioris. Glossa ad Decret. lib. 2. tit. 24. cap. 10.
The case is so to be interpreted, namely, except the Pope shall release him
from his oath: because in every oath the authority of a Superior must be
excepted.

The moderate Answerer.
Answer cap. 10. This is.
There must needs be some exception of lawful oaths, else whatsoever
wickedness is sworn must be performed: as that of the Jews against Saint
Paul; and of Herod against the Baptist.

The Reply.
There must be some exception of an oath, which is this, In male promissis
rescinde fidem: that is: A wicked vow is well broken. But your Popish exception
for two respects we justly think intolerable; this will be plain by this
example: If now the Spanish, in his league upon express conditions with the
English, would, for the performance of his oath, depend upon the Popes
arbitrament, which is, [Till you can find opportunity for a mischief,] then
silly English are in no better case then a goose tied with a line by the leg
to a fox tail, which does appear in the Discovery following.

The Discovery. Practice.
Their practice we have showed in the former Reasons: we may here add a more
ancient example. Canonicus qui dan^ inuehitur in Greg. 12. Pontificem, quod
tempore magni schismatis, antequam Pontifex crearetur, iurauer at publico and
^olenni ^itu, se se abdicaturum Pontificia dignitate: Postea vero Pontifex
electus, noluit Pontificatum deponere. Azor. Ies. Ins^it. Moral. lib. 5. cap.
15.
A Canonist (says a Jesuit) did inueigh against Pope Gregory the 12. who in
the time of a great schism did openly and solemnly swear, that if he were
made Pope, he would give it over again: but being elected, he performed
nothing less. The Canonist, doubtless, wanted not a Canon to condemn this
perlurie, though the Jesuit upon presumption of iusta causa does defend it.
For the cause was indifferent, whether to give over his Popedom, or to keep
it: but the oath of indifferent matters does infer a justice in performance,
and condemn the not performance of perjury. Who also in the same Volume
holds their general position saying, Aliorum quoque iuramenta possunt
Pontificis authoritate relaxa^i. Ibidem. lib. 11. cap. 9.
Other men's oaths may be dissolved by the Pope. So that when the Pope shall
send but his Bull of freeing our English, the bond of their oath will prove as
strong as the knot of a Bull rush.

The moderate Answerer.
Answer Ibid.
But to speak unto this Obiector concerning Protestants proceeding in
equiuocating.

The Reply.
But first, men should be so modest as to cover their own bald pates, Of the
Answer for Protestants see the 2. part.
before they note others of like imperfections.

The moderate Answerer.
f I plainly answer, that all Catholics of this Kingdom both Priests and
others, do and ought syncerely to acknowledge his Majesty absolute and really
a true King of all his kingdoms, etc. And that among other duties to deny to
swear, or violate an oath, iuridice, justly and according to the course of
law proposed, and to equivocate therein is a sin damnable.

The Reply.
In this your protestation by these words, It is damnable to use Equivocation
before them judging, iuridice, justly and according to law, I doubt much that
you your self use some damnable Equivocation: for what is (I pray you)
iuridice, justly? may you Priests take a corporal oath before a civil
Magistrate whomsoever? this is against your own Decrees. Coram Iudice and
Magistratu civilly nunquam Sacerdos ^urat, etiam Episcopi consensu: at Episcopus
facit vt coram se Sacerdos iuret. Azo^. I^^. Ins^it. lib. 11. cap. 11. Sexto
quaeritur.
A Priest (says your Jesuit) may not take an oath before any civil
Magistrate, though the Bishop should ^^cence him thereunto.

Secondly, call to mind the form of our English oath, To acknowledge no
foreign power either of any King or Prelate to have any pre-eminence over our
Sovereign (to insist only upon this branch) in causes temporal, either
directly or indirectly. Say now, will you be sworn to this or no? If you shall
say, you will not, take heed, then shall you be a Preuaricator, denying that
which you would seem before to defend. If you say, you would, which all yours
say, Videsupra. The Pope is indirectly suprem in temporal causes. Bellar^.
Aadagaine The Pope may dis^olue oaths. Vide supra Rat. 4. lib. (...).
you may not, then are you (whom you would seem not to be) a damnable
Equiuocator.

CHAP. XXIX.
The Discovery in the tenth Reason.

Whosoever is possessed with these former seditious Positions, that ex Officio,
that is, as he is a Romish Priest, he must profess them; such an one is to be
judged a most desperate Traitor. But all Romish Priests, as Priests, profess
some, and othersome all of these seditious Positions, ^go, etc.

The Minor 1. proved, 2. confirmed.


Proved by an argument of Relation: that seeing the Auth^ of this rebellious
doctrine are the principal Rabbis of (...) Sect, and publicly authorized
with the ordinary pr^ of that Church; it may not be imagined, but that the
(...) are infected with the leaven of their Professors and D^ bouenamed. To
wit, 1. Tolet a late Cardinal, whose (...) have this special privilege by
Pope Gregor^e 1^. a That ((...) Vasques the Jesuit) they may without censure
or examination of any be published to the world. Now the book wherein these
positions or rather poisons are contained, is entitled, De Instructione
Sacerdotum: that is, The Book of instructions for Priests.

2. Cardinal Bellarmine public Reader in Rome, in his Book entitled, Of the
Pope of Rome, dedicated to Be^o, Sanct^ssimoque Pat^ X^o Quinto P^^t. Maximo
Rob. Bellarminus. In princ^i^i ep^^t. ^cat. d^ T^m. Roman.
(...) Quintus Pope of Rome, and authorized by the same Pope of Rome to no
other end, but (as he confesses) Ad eos ^^uene ^uendos qu^ a Tran^ ^egio^^bu,
Authorit^s tua reuoca^^. (...) d.
To instruct those Scholars, whom his Holiness did send for from beyond the
Alps, that is, all Scottish, Polish, Flemmish, Danish, and English extrauagants.

3 Cardinal Alane created of the same Pope Xistus Quintus, Anno Dom. 1588. to
the like end: for in the same year when the Spanish invasion was intended
against England, he published his book entitled, An Admonition to the
Nobility of England.

4 L. Molina Divinity Reader in the University of Ebornensis.
Ebor.

5 Gregory of Valentia Divinity Reader in the University of Ingolstadiensis.
Ingolstade.

6 Doctor Stapleton, Divinity Reader in Lo^aine.

7 Dominicus Bannes Divinity Reader in the University of Salmaticens^s.
Salmat. Another much infected with the same leaven, and yet privileged in
Spain with these commendations: Legi and expendi diligenter iussa and imperio
Senatus, F. Dom. Bannesij Cathedratij Sacrosanctae Theologiae in Salmaticensi
Academia in 2. 2. Dom. Thomae Commentarios. and nihil reperi lima dignum, sed
admiratione vt appareat fore opus Theologis vtilissimum, and fructuosissimum.
Idque ego ratum mea fide iubeo. Frater Daques Regis Hispani^ Consessarius in
coment. Francisci Ban^^sij.
A work admirable, and profitable for all Divines. Dignified also of the
Friars, called Minors, in these terms: Ne tam glorioso open sanctae
obedientiae meritum deesse contingat, hoc ipsum ei praecipimus in virtute
Spiritus Sancti sub formali praecepto, In nomire Patris, Pilij, and Spiritus
sancti. Amen. non obstantibus in contrarium quibuscunque. Fratrem Minorum de D.
Bannesij Commentarijs Encomium.
Aglorious work, which lest it want his deserved obedience, this we challenge
in the power of the holy Ghost, under our formal command (without all
exceptions) in the name of the Father, Son, and holy Ghost, Amen.

We have also alleged the resolution of the Jesuits College of the
University of Salamancha in Spain, Anno Dom. 1602. As likewise Creswell his
Philopater, printed at Rome, Licentia Superiorum, by the license of the
Superiors; signifying the Jesuits there. What shall I need to mention Reinolds
(in his Rostus) a Doctor of Divinity, and chiefest man in the English
Seminary at Rhemes? Father Parsons (in his Dolman) a principal Rector in the
Seminary at Rome? Seeing all these be Seminaries, you may try the young
plants by their fruits. If any desire further experience in this kind, he may
consult with Carolus Molinaeus, and Pontus Tyardaus, both Parisiens, and but
even now, before I can read them, to be read of all men.

The Confirmation.
It will not be denied of any Priest, but that in these Popish Seminaries he
has vowed obedience to his general Fathers in those schools: and it is as
notorious, that all Generals are absolutely enthralled to their chief General
the Pope; all of them as hands and feet to work and walk, as that their head
shall devise. Which (as we have heard in Gregory the 7. Gregory the 9. Pius
Quint us, and others) have absolved Subjects from all obedience, and charged
them to take arms against their Emperors, Kings and Queens excommunicate,
etc. Shall we now imagine, the old Foxes being such, that their cubbes can
degenerate? If ever any of that kind gave hope unto us, it was the secular
Priests; who for a fit did write many things very truly against Jesuitical
rebellious Practices: but after, perceiving the Recusants to withdraw their
benevolence, as rather devoted to the Jesuits, and that the Pope also took
part against them, they, searing their consciences, wholly submitted themselves
unto the Archpriest, whose command upon occasion is countermaunded by the
faction Jesuitical. So that now we may as well expect grapes from thorns, or a
white Ethiopian, as loyal subjection from this Religion.

The moderate Answerer.
Answer cap. 11. The tenth and And whatsoever.
His tenth Reason is no new Reason, but an Epilogus of the former. But I
answer, that the Catholic Students neither of Englandn^r of any other Nation
are bound to defend their Masters reading, but in matters of faith and general
received doctrine.

The Reply.
Nay, it is a different and demonstratiue Reason, taken from the formal cause
of conspiracy and consent in such practices, because Doctors and Disciples
with you, are more then Relatiues: for what can most of your Priests say here,
but as Schoolboyes, Dictata Magistri; and as Infants, who receive no more food,
then that which they suck from their nurces. A matter notorious: and how (I
pray you) may we better, then by the doctrine of your Generals, know what is
your general doctrine?

The moderate Answerer.
Answer ibid.
These Assertions are most falsely objected, for the Scholars do not vow any
obedience to their Superiors; and that obedience which they follow, is in
observing the Collegiall Rules.

The Reply.
Yet they acknowledge obedience, as a due thing, Non sub modo praecepti, sed
sub modo perfectionis. Tollet. Tract. de 7. Peccat. mort. cap. 15.
Though not in the bond of precept, yet of perfection. And I think your vows
do arrogate perfection.

Secondly, it is requisite you should show us some reason, why your scholars
should in these points dissent from their Masters; and whether we should rather
believe you herein, living in cryptis, or them who for their excellent
learning, dominantur in Cathedris, your doctrine couched under a bushel, or
theirs within their public and privileged books, set as it were on the house
top.

The moderate Answerer.
Answer Ibidem. in sia^sectionis.
And yet there is not any one sentence alleged from any of them or any other
Catholic, which in his true sense will bring any preindice to our most holy
innocent cause: as I have demonstrated.

The Reply.
In his true sense, say you? Why? by what reason can you challenge my sense of
untruth? Answer supra.
Because the authorities be falsely applied. Why so? (...). 1. ^g.
Because this particular Reason, whereupon, as (...) most certain foundation,
his arguments are built, is this, Protestants are by us accounted Heretics and
excommunicate; which is most false. O, this then is the only cause you can
pretend, but seeing ^ll ^s (...).
it is confirmed by impregnable demonstrations from Popes and all Popish
Authors, that Protestants by all Papists (though heretically) are esteemed as
Heretics: it will demonstrati^ely follow, that all the authorities I alleged
are rightly applied, and all the crudities of your indigested answer
sufficiently dissolved. Whether therefore that doctrine, whereby detestable
lying, under the shadow of Equivocation, is authorized for truth; where
desperate Rebellion is advanced in the pretense of Religion; where most
barbarous massacres of Christian people, and monstrous murders of Kings and
Princes are magnified as glorious Stratagemes, be preindiciall to the holiness
of any cause. I dare call heaven, earth, yea and hell also to witness between
us. Thus I leave you as persons convicted of high Treason, (God grant you grace
of repentance) and now I proceed to plead the cause of Protestants generally
impeached by you as persons guilty of the same crime.

The second Part, containing a Justification of Protestants against slanderous
imputations, objected unto them by this Answerer in two points, Doctrine of
Rebellion, And sacrilegious Aequiuocation.

CHAP. I.
THE second kind of answer in this our moderate Answerer, is by Recrimination,
to make Protestants as much, or rather more guilty of crimes Rebellious, and
Aequiuocations, then the Romish sect.

First is the case of Rebellion, 1. generally, 2. more particularly.


1. In general.

The moderate Answerer.
Answer cap. 1. Lastly.
Let the Discouerer battle himself against his Protestant brethren, which, of
all the people in the world that ever were, or will be, are most guilty in
these proceedings. Ibid. Fourthly. ^t cap. 15. in initio. and cap. 7. We have.
All iumping together in this conclusion, that Kings differing in Religion from
them, are not worthy to be accounted either Princes or men, but must be
deposed. We have read and seen many conspiracies and rebellions proceeding
from the dogmaticall men of this profession, and their Rebels s^aine in their
actual rebellions, and approved of them, and canonized for holy Martyrs.

The Reply.
Loud clamor and lewd! Which your general accusation must have a general
satisfaction, to show that it is childish, extrauagant, and slanderous.

As childish as your boy-trick, when, about to be convicted for a truant, you
accused some other for fellowship. Admit then this to be a true recrimination;
yet, as S. Augustine reasons of two kind of thieves, so may I of diverse kinds
of rebels. Horum duoru^ non ideo alter bonus, quia peior est vnus. August. lib
contra mendac. cap. 8. in initio.
This thief (says he) is not therefore good, because the other is worse. Can
the one of these be saved by the other man's halter?

2. Extrauagant: wandering out of the circuit of the question, thus, The
question was whether Romish Priests can be true subjects unto our Protestant
King: you would satisfy by examples of Protestants disloyalty to Romish
Governors. Suppose it be so, although we condemn all such Protestants, yet
here is your iniquity: those Protestants in the Romish regiments, you call
Rebellious traitors; and yet you Romish, in Protestants kingdoms, will be
called dutiful and faithful subjects: contrary to the natural law of all
equity, Feras legem, quam fers: To be judged by your own law; and acknowledge
your like case with such Protestants (if yet there have bin any such) worthy of
the like condemnation.

3. Slanderous: for those, whom you in this place accuse rebellious, in another
place by consequent you acquit as innocent Answer cap. 2. Therefore seeing.
Protestants (you say) allege this Scripture, [ Romans 13.
Omnis anima potestatibus sublimioribus subdita sit:] Let every soul be
subject to the higher powers, etc. to prove Princes supremacy. By the which
also Protestants prove, Primum probant Pont. Romanum nullo iu^e posse imperare
Principibus secularibus, nedum eos regnis priuare, etiamsi illi priuari alioqui
mereantur. Hoc docet omnes (intelligit Protestants) hoc tempore, vt Caluinus,
Martyr, Brentius, Magdeburgenses. Bell (...). lib. 5. de Ro^ Pont. cap. 1. in
initio.
That the Pope of Rome (says Bellarmine) ought not to overrule Princes, or
deprive them of their regiments, although otherwise they deserved to be
deprived: of this opinion be all Protestants. Now I would demand of any
indifferent Reader, whether they do suffer any to resist, who challenge every
one ^o acknowledge obedience. We may divine now, what moderation you will keep
in the rest of your accusations, who have thus plainly confuted your self in
this first.

CHAP. II.
The particular Recriminations are fetched from diverse Kingdoms. First (to
begin at home) England.

The moderate Answerer.
Answer cap. 7. I have.
The Discouerer has made a fond argument against the Protestant ministers in
England convinced of sedition, for taking arms against their Sovereign.

The Reply.
I would this your objection were such, whereby we might only charge you of
fo^dnesse, and not of falsehood also, and malice. For of the Church of England
your Jesuit has given a contrary verdit; Anglicani Protestants Principem
Christianu^ etiam in causa Ecclesiastica Superiorem agno^cunt. Salmeron Jesuita
com. in Epistol. Pauli in gener. disp. 1^. Verum. s^^^king of the latter days
of K. Henry the eight.
The English Protestants (says he) do acknowledge their Christian Prince
supreme, even in causes Ecclesiastical. Which is true in his lawful sense.
But here again we behold the spirits of giddiness: you defame the English
Christians, as denying due subjection to their Sovereign: your Jesuit
accuses the same English for yielding more then due. But I leave you both to
battle together, you to accuse him of impudency, and he you of stupiditie.
This has bin of English only yet in general. Next you

CHAP. III.
Descend unto Indiuiduals in our English nation.

The moderate Answerer.
Answer cap. 1. adfinem. Fourthly.
I must put the Discouerer in mind, that he has beheld his visage too much in
the glass of Cranmer, Ridley, Latimer, Sands, Rogers, and all Protestants of
all places. What have these men done? Answer cap. 3. repeating it Against, etc.
It was the consent of these and the chiefest Protestant Bishops and Divines,
that Queen Marie might be deposed; and not only she, but her sister Queen
Elizabeth a Protestant, which was put in practice both with wit and weapons, to
the uttermost of the Protestants power by the Duke of Northumberland and
Suffolk, and many others of great estate: and not this only against the
express statutes of the kingdom, but their own oath to the Lady Marie in her
fathers life. Answer cap* 4. repeating it, in initio.
Thus did these with their Protestant Preachers and forces against the
succession of Queen Elizabeth. Answer, repeating this, cap. 9. For England.
For England I have spoken already more then I desire, had not such wicked
accusations against us urged me to the breach of silence. Now I will only say,
that the public and dogmaticall positions and practices of rebellions by the
greatest Protestant subjects of this kingdom, the Dukes of Northumberland and
Suffolk, and so many Nobles to be passed with oblinion, with the whole
Clergy, against not only God and their Queen, but oaths of fidelity to
King Henry the eight, that I am bold to affirm, etc.

The Reply.
No marvel though you be bold to affirm thus much concerning the knowledge of
these things, seeing you (verifying the vulgar article) are herin blind. Seek
therefore into history, the light of verity, and life of antiquity, and you
will easily see how much you have bin ouerseene.

First your boldness, touching history, has presumed to affirm, that Answer
cap. 10. Secondly.
K. Henry the eight did illegitimate his two daughters M. and E. and after
declared the contrary, making them legitimate by statute. I have inquired into
the Acts which are extant, and I find three Acts, whereby the aforesaid
daughters were disabled, as namely in annis 25. 28. 33. of King Henry his
reign. But for establishing of them in the right of succession, I think you
cannot show it, except it be in anno nunquam, canone nusquam.

The case is more manifested by the answer of the whole Council to the letters
of Queen Marie, wherein she now after the death of King Edward made challenge
to the right of the Crown. The Councels answer is thus framed. The Counc^l^
letters to Lady Ma^ie.
This is aagainst the sundry Acts of Parliament remaining yet in force,
confirmed by the King of famous memory Henry the eight, against the letters
patents of our late Sovereign King Edward the sixth, and his great seal,
against the consent of the most part of the noble Universities of Christendom,
etc. Wherefore you, that tell us of a statute of Legitimation, as a matter
evident, in modesty should not have concealed your evidence. Otherwise you know
in a proposition copulative, if but one point be true, the whole is a lie.

Say then, whereof can you accuse Cranmer, Ridley, and all Protestants, wherein
you will not make King Henry the eight, King Edward the sixth, and many
Parliaments guilty? I did never hear the whole state of any kingdom termed
Traitors but by your boldness: If you had struck at the head of that
opposition, you should not have needed to have lopped the branches: for if King
Henry might have spoken from the dead in the day of the succession of Queen
Mary, he would have pleaded the cause of the opposites, as David did in the
behalf of his people, Oues hae, etc. It is I: these other what have they done?
Notwithstanding we acknowledge her succession just: and after the proclamation
of her title, show us what Protestant ever resisted? what Minister of the
Gospel in all that fiery trial did kindle the least spark of sedition among
her people? Was it because they wanted hope of succession? Behold there was the
hand-maide of God, Elizabeth their hopeful successor to the Crown. Was it for
want of power? why death is rightly described to be a Giant, having a thousand
hands, able to give any living creature his mortal wound. But I abhor to
discourse of these rebellious conceits. Lastly, of all Protestants which were
burned in Queen Mary's days for Religion, name but one that was accused of
treason; I require instance but in one: an apparent demonstration, that their
Religion taught them loyal subjection.

The second Instance for England. The moderate Answerer.
Answer cap. 3. Against. Repeated, cap. 4. But.
Sir Thomas Wyat warranted by Protestants Clergy, with diverse others in the
short regiment of Queen Marie may be given for instance.

The Reply.
The History relates the pretense of Wyat, thus, H^shed Chro
A Proclamation against the Queens marriage, desiring all English men to join
for defense of the Realm, in danger to be brought into thraldom to strangers,
who be Spaniards. The like was the Proclamation of the Duke of Suffolk,
Against the marriage with the Prince of Spain. Where auouching his loyalty to
the person of the Queen, laid his hand on his sword, saying, He that would
her any hurt, I would this sword were at his heart. Again, there is recorded
the Oration of Queen Marie against Wyat; where there is not to be found any
scruple concerning the (subject of our question) cause of Religion: neither was
there (to make it more apparent) any Minister of the Gospel brought in
question, as a commotioner in that cause. Though therefore it is requisite that
that which is lawful, be performed by lawful proceedings; yet if intent (the
subject of this dispute) might answer for Protestants accused in that name,
then is it plain, that it was not Religion: if for Wyat and his fellows, it
is as plain it was not against the Queen or State, but for both, that the
whole land might continue in their former subjection, and that by Spanish
insolency, her Highness pre-eminence and soueraignetie might not be impared.
Let us hear

The third Instance for England. The moderate Answerer.
Answer cap. 4.
Goodman published a book, concluding it lawful to kill Kings transgressing
Gods laws themselves, and commanding others to do the like.

The Reply.
If I should justify this Goodman, though your examples might excuse him, yet
my heart shall condemn my self. But what do you profess to prove? All
Protetestants teach Positions rebellious. Prove it. Here is one Goodman, who
in his public book does mainetaine them. I have no other means to avoid
these straites, which you object, by the example of one, to conclude All
Protestants in England rebellious, then by the example of * All the rest, to
answer there is but one. And now let me be beholden to your moderation, to
remember multitudes of your Priests, Jesuits, Cardinals, and Popes in their
public authorized books, Bulls, Decrees; and now you requite me with one.
But shall one dram of dross prove the whole mass no gold? Let us
therefore leave this Goodman, as a man, who by his vnauthorized, wicked and
false positions has falsified his name. You proceed

The fifth Instance against English Protestants. The moderate Answerer.
Answer cap. 2. And whence*
The English Protestants notes upon the Bible (as his Majesty is witness) do
not disallow the killing of Princes in such case: as is showed by the book of
Conference, page 47.

The Reply.
It will be requisite, without prejudice to the most learned and religious
judgment of his Majesty, to satisfy for two places related from that
conference. The first place touching the act of the midwiues of Egypt, who
mercifully spared the lives of the infants of the Hebrews, notwithstanding the
commandment of the King. The note: [Their disobedience herein was lawful,
but their dissembling was evil:] And was not this disobedience lawful? Let us
consult with the holy Ghost, Heb. 11. 23. where it is written [By faith Moses
when he was borne was hid three months of his parents, neither feared they the
Kings commandment.] The same is the case of the [midwiues disobeying the
commandment of the King.] Now that which is noted by the Spirit of God, as
commendable in the parents of Moses, may it be condemnable in these merciful
midwiues of the Egyptians? Nay, for it is also written, [ Exodus 1. 15. and 20.
The midwiues of Egypt feared God, and did not as the King commanded them, but
preserved alive the male children, and therefore God prospered them.] But we
must discern in this act two colors, white and black, which S. Augustine
distinguishes: In vi^andis pueris, opus mi^ericordiae fuit; mendacio vero illo
pro se vtebantur ne noceret illis Pharao: non ad laudem, sed ad venia
pertinebat. August. Quaest. super Exodus 1.
They did a work of mercy in preserving the lives of the young babes; but they
did lie unto the King for safeguard of their own lives: The first deserved
praise, the other needed a Pardon. Therefore this their lawful and merciful
disobedience for preventing the bloody Massacre of Infants, can be no
president for your practices intended in malice, to end in the blood of
Protestants of all sorts. The other point of the note against Dissimulation,
does indeed cross your equiuocating profession: but you are not to be offended
with us, if we condemn that as sinful, which (as S. Augustine says) ^m su^a.
needed a pardon.

The second place, 2. Chron. 15. 16. the Text, [King Asa deposed Maachah his
mother from her estate, because she had made an Idol in a grove.] The note,
Mother, or Grandmother, yet herein the King showed that he lacked zeal: for
she ought to have been burnt by the Covenant, as verse. 13. And by the law of
God, Deuteronomy. 13. but he gave place to foolish pity, and would also se^me after
a sort to satisfy the law. The truth then of this exposition (as al
Orthodoxal Comentaries show) is grounded upon the direct Scripture, the Oracle
of truth: for in the law, Deuteronomy. 13. 6. and 9. If thy brother, etc. the sum
whereof is repeated in the Text in question, verse. 13.] Whosoever will not
seek the Lord God of Israel, shall be slain, whether he were small or great,
man or woman.] What shall we say then; is the Sovereignty of Kings disabled?
God forbid, but it is rather established hereby: for the King is made the
Deposer, yea even of whosoever. Now that Commentary does not defend deposing a
King, neither possibly can it be defended by any ordinary command of God in
all Scripture: which is Infra.
proved. Wherefore supposing that the Relation of the Conference be direct, yet
may you not think that his Majesty (whose judgment is so divinely
illuminated by the light of the word of God, that he never refused Conference
with the greatest Jesuit or Doctor Romish) could take exception to the note,
as from an offense thereby given, but only in suspicion, an offense taken by
weak ones prepossessed with your Romish malady, whereof you have given us
experience in your many controversies. For wheresoever in all Scripture almost
you feel but any sent of fire, O behold, this does Vide Apolog. Cathol. Part
2. lib. 5. cap. 40 and d^. cep^.
Prove Purgatory fire after death. Whereas indeed the context is plain, there
is only signified * Afflictions of this life. Where you read promised Reward
for goodworkes, there you presently conclude, Amerit of Condignitie; when as
all is the only justice of Gods promise, and the consequent of the only grace
and mercy of God, who gives to will, to work, to perfect, and crowns his
gift of grace, with the grace of the gift of glory. I may not digress. Here
doubtless his Majesty doubted lest some impotent Reader, not ignorant of your
suggestions, understanding a Prince deposed by the King, might justify your
proceedings, where so many popishly inspired, have assumed the office of Kings,
to depose a Prince. But know you, there is not in any part of our Commentary
upon the Bible any one spark, whereat any Guido may light his match, to give
fire to his powder.

The last instance for England. The moderate Answerer.
Answer in his Epistle to his Majesty. Which as.
If I had traveled no further into that doctrine, then to the late printed
book, by your Majesty's Printer of the late intended Conspiracy, I might
easily perform a just defense: for the Protestant Author gives it out as a
general rule, and undoubted Maxim to all Professors of worship to take arms,
if their Religion be in hazard: and that no private man should think his life
more happy then to fight pro Aris. Which is greater liberty then our
Adversary can find in Catholic Writers, so of him attached of Treason and
Rebellion.

The Reply.
This shoot is but twelve score wide of the mark you aim at: your bent is to
defend them, who profess it lawful for Catholics in the maintenance of
Religion to murder Kings, and harrow Kingdoms (in their opinion) heretical.
This Author teaches us to Fight (his own words) pro Aris, pro focis, pro
Patre patriae: his Reason, Because the indangering of one of these would at
once stir the whole body of a Commonwealth, not any more as divided members,
but as a solid and individual lump. What is then the difference? he in the
whole Treatise, teaches every private man to arm himself by all possible
means, but first armed with authority of the King and State. You teach to
fight for Religion (violating the obedience of God) against your King and
kingdom, to destroy them. The difference may be illustrated by the like: A
private man, if without authority temporal he kill a murderer, he is a
murderer; but authorized by the public law, he is now no more private, but
an Officer, but the lawles homicide does best pattern your lawless parricide.
So that there is no more odds between our and your Authors opinion, then cum
Rege, and contra Regem: to fight with, and against the King. You can find no
more exception in England, whither will you now? it is but a step to Scotland,
what see you there?

CHAP. IIII.
The Objection of the moderate Answerer against the Church of Scotland.

Answer cap. 3. repeating it cap. 7. and cap. 9.
KNox, and Buchanan defended the power of people over their King.

The Reply.
You might have added, that there was in Scotland an Anno. 1584.
Act of Parliament, to call in that Chronicle of Buchanan, censuring all such
contempts and innouations: but it stood your modesty in hand to conceal this,
lest we might reply upon your moderation thus: That is not to be called the
doctrine of Scotland, which the general current of that Church and State in
public Parliament does condemn: such is this seditious doctrine of resisting
and deposing Kings, a learning substantially popish, your Proved by the Popes
Bulls supr.
Popes being Authors thereof, your other Priests of Rome suggestors publicly
authorized herein, and your traitorous Actors canonized for Saints in the
conceit of all Romish. And now you may bid great Britain adieu: you may make a
short cut into France.

CHAP V.
The Objections of the moderate Answerer against the Protestants in France,
both in their Positions and Practices.

Answer cap. 9. Let us.
LEt us come into France.

The Reply.
But upon condition, that you will not return. Yet what of France?

The moderate Answerer.
Answer Ibid.
Calvin and Beza, and the rest of that holy Synod say, that the Kings and
Queens, their children, posterity, and all Magistrates must be put to death:
and so every Protestant must be more then a Pope.

The Reply.
Nay, God forbid; that any should be so great a man in Rebellion, as your
Popes, who have been the heads of the greatest tumults in Christendom. Calvin
and Beza, whom you traduce (if your moderation will suffer that which justice
does exact) must answer for themselves.

Caluins judgment in this case.
In his book of Institutions, which he framed for instruction of all the
Church of Christ, touching the case now controuerted, he begins to consult
with God, saying: Caluinus Instit. li. 4. c. 20. 22. Verbum Dei docet,
Principum omnium, qui quoquo modo rerum potiuntur, etiamsi nihil minus
praestent, quam quod ex Officio erat Principum, imperio es^e parendum. Paulo
post Vt homines intelligant, in homine deterrimo honoreque omni indignissimo,
penes quem modo sit publica potestas, praeclara^ illam and diuinam potestatem
residere, quam Dominus lustitiae and Iudicij sui Ministris verbo suo detulit:
I^roi^de a subditis eadem reuerentia ac dignatione habendu^, quantum ad
publicam obedientiam attinet, qua Regem optimum, si daretur, habitur^ estent.
Nabuchadnezar strenuus erat aliorum inuasor, ac populator, and Dominus ta^en
per Prophetam d^cit, se illi terram illam dedisle. Ezech. 29. and Dan. 2. Vt
^os nequissimum Tyrannum eo loco habeamus, quo Deus eum posuit. C^ Samuel
describit Regem iniquu^. 1, Samuel. 8. 11. Hoc ius (inquit) erit Regis, filios
vest^os tollet, etc. Cert^ non quod iure ita facturierant Reges, quos lex
Domini ad omnem continentiam instituebat* sed ^us ^n populum vocatur, cui
patere ipsi necesle erat, nec obsistere liceret and ^er. 27. S8ruiet Regi
Babel. Videmus quant^ ^e ^ti^ tetrum illu^ ferocemque Tyrannum Deus coli
voluerit, non al^a ratione ni^i quia regnum* ^bat, quod exemplum vobis assid^e
ob animos obuetletur: ita nunquam in anim^ ^dit^ cogitationes venient;
Tracta^dum esse pro me^itis Regem; nec aequum esse vt subd^s ^s praestemus, qui
v^cissim Regem nobis se non praestat. and de hoc extant general^a Sc^ip^
testimonia. Hunc reu^rentiae atque ade^ p^^tatis affectum* debemus ad extremum
^llis, qu lescunquetandem sint; Quod saepius ideo repeto, vt satis hab^amus,
quod eam Domini voluntate personam s^stine^t, cui inuiolabilem maiestatem
impressit ip^e and insculpsit.
The word of God teaches us to obey all Princes, who are established in their
thrones, be it by what means soever: yea and though they shall do nothing
less then the Offices of Kings, yet must they be obayed; though the King be
never so wicked, and indeed unworthy of the name of a King, yet must subjects
acknowledge the image of divine power in his public authority, and therefore
must in all temporal duties reverence and obey him, as well as if he were the
godliest King in the world. To contract his other sentences into a brief. We
are instructed (says Calvin) by many documents of holy writ never to suffer
these seditio^s co^ceits to possess our minds; as to think an evil King must
be so dealt withal, as he deserves: but we are directly charged to obey the
King, though he be a savage Tyrant, and never so wicked: which I therefore
often urge, that in such a case it may content us to know, that even such Ki^gs
bear in their office the image of God, in whom God has stamped andingrauen an
inviolable Majesty, not to be contemned. Thus far Master Calvin: neither
does he ever restrain the outward power of any King, except in those States
where there is customably ordained for that purpose, the Magistracy of those
who are called Ephori, and Tribuni plebis. But when? when they shall command
any thing against the law of God? then Calvin embraces the doctrine of Saint
Peter, Act. 15. 29. [We rather obey God then man:] but how? not to obey man? as
actiuely to resist, that is, to rebel against him? God forbid! but only
passiuely, which is not to do that which shall be wickedly commanded; Perpeti
potius, quam a veritate discedere, au^ a pietate deslectere. Rather suffer
(says he) then to betray the truth of God, or to accord to iniquity. But
read and examine all the lines which ever Calvin penned, and you shall not
find one syllable that can prejudice his loyalty. Whereof more hereafter.

The moderate Answerer.
Answer quo iam supra.
Beza also and the rest of that holy Synod, defend the same.

The Reply.
Belike then this rebellious doctrine will be proved a Synodicall Decree among
Protestants: but if you should vow faithfully not to eat, till you prove this,
I could easily prognosticate what death you should die. But Beza, as he
succeeded Calvin a Doctor, so in doctrine likewise. Hear Bezas own
confession, and it will prove him innocent, you a slaunderer, and your Popes
the capital delinquents in this kind.

1 His innocence. Quod attinet ad p^iuatos homines, a qui^ us etiam aut ^ihil
aut no^ ^ltu^ absunt ^o^es m^gistratus, t^ne^e ^llos opott^t ^l^^imu^ inter le
de^^r^e, in^am ^erre, and ^m pati: Iniuriam enim pati nostrum est, sic
praecipiente Domino and exemplo suo nobis praeeu^te, cum nobis illum vi arcere
non licet a nostrae vocationis praescipto, ext^a quam ne^as ^vel pedem ponere.
Neque aliud remedium proponitur priuatis hominibus ^yranno sub^ter vitae
emendationem, preces, and lach^ymas, quas Dominus pro tempore non a^p^r* Impie^
aute^ facere nec volentes nec ius^os fas erit; quoties enim ho^inum imperijs
patere n^n possumus, qui^ Regis Regum authoritatem violemus, Deo parendum est
potius quam hominibus; ita tamen vt memine^im^s, aliud esse non parere, quam
resistere and ad arma ^e co^patare, quae a Domino non acceperis. B^za confess.
fid. cap. 5. 45.
Private men, among whom I account inferior Magistrates (in respect of their
King) have no other remedy against Tyrants, to whom they be subject, then
amendment of their lives, prayers, and tears, which God in his good time will
not despise. They always provided not to do, but only to suffer evil, as
Christ by his own example has taught us. And if it shall so happen that we
cannot obey the command of the King, but that we must offend God, the King of
Kings: then must we rather obey God then man. But how? so, as likewise to
remember, that it is one thing not to obey, another thing to resist and betake
our selves to arms. This kind of violent disobedience we may not use. Can any
moderate spirit call this doctrine rebellious?

Secondly: Your slander. Quid de Subiectorum erga suos magistratus officio
sentiamus, ex his cognosci potest certius ac verius, quam ex little calumnijs,
quibus nullus est pudor nos inuoluere cum vertiginosis Anabaptistis, qui
magistatuum authoritatem tollunt, iurisiurandi religionem euertunt, indicia and
B^lla aduersus se illata illicita esse contendunt, a quibus sceleribus quantum
absumus, nemo potest ignor are nisi qui lucem recusat intueri. Beza quo supra.
What our opinion is concerning subjection unto Magistrates, (says Beza) a man
may better be instructed by our writings, then by the slanders of such as
number us among the company of intoxicate Anabaptists, who renounce the
authority of Magistrates: which doctrine how much we abhor, none can be
ignorant, which does not obstinately refuse to see the light. Of which kind you
must needs be, seeing you had rather believe any libels against Beza, then see
his own writings.

Thirdly, your Popes capital Offenders, Auget etiam illud aduersariorum
nostrorum impudentia, quod cum ipsi palam contra Dei Verbum Reges and Regna
sibi subiecerint, nec vllum sit hominum genus aduersus magistratus magis
rebelle, audent tamen illi nobis illud ipsum scelus impingere, quod sibi licere
non obscute iactant. Beza ibidem.
The impudency of our Accusers (says Beza) herein is most notorious; that
they, who contrary to the word of God have openly subjected Kings and
Kingdoms to their authority, being themselves the most rebellious Sect under
heaven in contemning Magistrates; dare notwithstanding object the guilt of that
crime unto us, which they think to be a virtue in themselves, and wherein they
glory and vaunt. Which is most true, as we have proved out of your Bellarmine
and others, glorying in the acts of such Popes, who have deposed Emperors.

CHAP. VI.
The Practices of Calvin and other Protestants of France objected by this
Accuser in diverse particular instances.

The first instance. The moderate Answerer.
Answer qu^ supra.
THese were instruments of all Rebellions and oppressions in the Monarchy of
France, wherein they took all authority from the King and Magistrate, against
King Francis, whom they rebelliously persecuted.

The Reply.
For your proofs against Protestants in this your Answer you produce
Genebrard, Claudius de Sanct. Petrus Frar. Coclaeus and such like, all
professed Adversaries to the Religion of Protestants. How moderate dealing this
may be accounted will appear, when I shall oppose your own Historians to
condemn you, and acquit the Protestants. Two witnesses shall suffice, who how
far they were from favoring the Protestants you may judge by their
complexions: for the The Historical collection of the memorable acts in France
from Henry the 2, till Henry the 4 Before his Treatise of the reign of
Henry the 3. he has inserted. A brief Discourse (for so ^e ^^th i^ title it)
of the grace and wonderful effects that have insued the Kings conversion,
collected. Wherein are these words following: His Majesty by revelation of the
holy Ghost and for his own salvation turned to the bosom of the Church,
leaving the ^ors of the new opinion, ab^uring his former impostures* etc.
first greedily relates a Discourse, wherein he calls our Religion new and a
plain imposture. The L'histoire de France, ^es plus notables occurrances, etc.
Au Roy.
second is dedicated to Charles the then French King; and to L'histoire de
Franc. etc. A la R^in^.
the Queen mother: in which History he calls the doctrine of M. Luther, La
multitude des absurdes Heresies, etc. Lib. 1. fol. 9.
A multitude of absurd heresies. Therefore you may not think these men partial
in our behalf.

Both proving 1. The pronenesse of Papists to slander the Religion of
Protestants. 2. That this accusation is a slander, which is now objected.


For the 1. I will allege of many but one story, published by them both. The
first Hist. page 5^. A^^o D^. 1559. and the second History lib. 15. A^^o 1559.
Or come.
False witnesses were brought against (Protestants) them of the Religion,
affirming that in a place at Maubert, at a Counselors house, great numbers of
them had eaten a pigge instead of a pascall Lamb before Easter; and after, the
candles being put out, every man took his woman, and had his pleasure of her.
The Cardinal upon these informations moved the Court, the Queen mother took
occasion hereby to revile some of her Gentlewomen, who were of the Religion:
but they desired and obtained means that the principal witnesses might be
examined: it was done, two young boys come forth, and affirm that then and
many other times they had had the use of your Counselors daughters: but in the
end the witnesses began to stagger, and covertly to deny it. The Councellor
(sought after for his Religion) understanding this shameful slander, went with
his wife and his two daughters, yielding himself prisoner for his Religion,
desiring that the cause of his daughters might be examined. They were
diligently searched by Physicians and women, and found to be virgins: and the
young men did thus justify themselves that they did it in devotion, being
persuaded that such an accusation against such Heretics was good, whether it
were true or false. But the virgins were cleared, and yet their father remained
in prison, and the witnesses were not punished.

The second. Concerning the present Accusation thus it stands. The first
Hist. page 86.
The Guizes (who were no natural Frenchmen) not able to accuse the Prince of
Condie of Treason, (Daniels case) called him in question to be condemned of
heresy for his Religion. But what was the right cause of tumults? Page 62. and
67.
There was delivered an exact declaration to prove, that those of the Guizes
had decreed to put all the Princes of the blood Royal to death, as soon as
they had cut off them of the Religion; and they were evidently proved to be
guilty of his treason. Page 83.
And the King could not otherwise judge, but that great wrong was offered to
his blood. Then not the Protestants, but the Spanish faction of the Guizes were
guilty of those broils in the days of King Francis. Notwithstanding Page 85.
86. 87.
Though the Prince of Condie did acquit himself of Treason, and boldly stood
to his Religion, yet not long after they pronounced judgment of death upon him:
But King Francis fell extremely sick, and in his sickness made a solemn vow
to all Saints in Pieardie, that if it pleased them to help him, he would wholly
purge his Realm of (meaning Protestants) all those heretics. And thus all
Protestants were freed then from this design: the Saints of Piccardie belike
were of your mind, Protestants are no heretics.

The second Instance, of The moderate Answerer.
Answer cap. 9. After the.
They raised such rebellions and civil wars against Charles the ninth,
wherein the King of Navarre, and Duke Nyuers with others were slain.

The Reply.
I read the story in our foresaid The first History. Page 114. and deinc^p^.
Historical collection of memorable accidents in France, and others, and I can
find only this thing memorable concerning this point, that The King was then
in his minority, and the Queen Mother was regent, who yielded too much unto
the Guizes faction, who persecuted the Prince of Condie, and sought the
destruction of all the blood royal: at length Duke Nyuers with King Navarre in
the war against his brother, at the siege of Roane are wounded and slain.
See the cause of the Prince of Condie his defense. Page 111.
In lan. 1^. anno 1562 was made an Edict, whereby permission was granted to
them of the Religion to assemble without the towns, and order was taken, that
either part, Protestants and Catholics, might live in quietness and peace
with each other: But a while after the Constable did deface all places of their
assemblies, and those of the Religion were cruelly handled. This was the first
beginning of the horrible troubles in France. But were Protestants after this
rebellious? Page 152.
In those of Languidoch the King did pardon whatsoever they had done in their
just defense, holding them for good subjects. What was then the cause why the
Prince of Condie and the Admiral did bear arms? Page 184.
They understanding that 6000. Switzers were now entered into France, with
intent to execute violence upon them of the Religion, they betake themselves
unto the King, from whom they received no favorable answer, therefore they did
fly for defense against those Switzers, not suffering their throats to be cut
by thieves. Page 194.
After this was there concluded a peace, the Prince of Condie does lay down
his arms, his adversaries were contented only to promise to do the like,
alleging that there is no faith to be held with heretics. Showing themselves
herein false, and not only faithless; for you know Protestants are no
heretics.

The third Instance of The moderate Answerer.
Answer ibidem
The Duke of Guize was trecherously murdered by Pultrotus, for that fact
suborned by Beza and the Protestant Admiral.

The Reply.
The story is, that The first h^storia page 118.
The Duke of Guize had appointed a day to take Orleance, wherein he would not
spare any man, woman, or child whomsoever; and after he had kept his Shrouetide
there, he would spoil and destroy the town: Pultrot riding upon a Spanish
Ginnet shot the Duke with a Pistol and slew him; after was taken and tormented
with hot tongs to make him confess, and then torn in pieces by force of
horses. Let us leave him (if you will) justly executed by them; come to the
other unjustly slaundered by you: for Ibidem.
It was evidently known at his execution, that Pultrot did it of his own
motion and particular intent, thereby to free France and especially Orleance
from the violence of the Duke of Guize. To this first Historian agrees the
second. L histoire de France, depuis l'an 1550 iusques a ce temps Tom. 2. Lib.
26. anno 1581.
The King after he had examined the Admiral, to ^ether with his Council, did
acquit him of suspision, and imposed perpetual silence to all, not to speak
of it. You therefore (though no subject) might have been taught silence,
especially seeing that Ibid. lib. 19 anno 1563. Nous page 360.
the confederates of the Religion, among whom was Theodore Beza, did condemn
this fact of Pulirot as rash, and directly contrary to the commandment of
God, who will (herein condemning all such desperate examples, inspired only
with a devilish motion) that every crime and offense shall receive punishment
according to the institution politic and form of government established in
every state, at the discretion of the Magistrate.

The moderate Answerer.
Answer quo supra.
Such were the miserable murders and calamities which they brought to that
distressed kingdom, that in the two first ci^ wars and rebellions above an
hundred thousand were slain, as Gaspar Collen witnesses.

The Reply.
It is not unlikely but an hundred thousand were slain; but it is as probable
that a thousand for an hundred of them were Protestants persecuted for their
Religion, who always lay open to Popish trecheries, as is plain by the
barbarous massacre, wherein (as testifies your own L'histoire quo supra. lib.
29. fol. 70.
author) there was slain twenty thousand Protestants in less then one month
by the fury of the Catholics. What could there be in the Protestant? was it
rebellion? No, but only constancy in Religion, then persecuted by the
malignant. But what kind of motion might this be in those Catholics which
egged them on to this butcherie? whether was it zeal or fury; Christian
justice, or Antichristian malice? Quo supra fol. 65.
The Catholics not content (says your Author) to live always assured, having
the authority of the State for them, aspired with a burning desire to bring to
pass that which they had a long time plotted against their enemies. But let us
leave this G^lgotha (for so you made France by your monstrous massacres) as
then a place of dead men's sculs. Whither shall your next voyage be?

CHAP. VII.
The Instances of the moderate Answerer in Heluetia.

The first. The moderate Answerer.
Answer cap. 9. Let us come.
LEt us come to Heluetia, and especially Geneua, the Mother Church of the
Reformed; M. Calvin the supreme head of thereformed there, has told us
before, that Princes not agreeing with us in Religion, are to be spitted upon
rather then obeyed: they are not to be numbered among men, they are to be
bereaved of all authority.

The Reply.
What? absolutely deprived of all authority? Prove this, and I will as
absolutely deny all his doctrinall authority: whom, by reading of your most
learned Jesuits, as Maldonate, Ribera, Pererius, Salmeron, Tollet, and such
others, and conferring their expositions with Caluins, I dare boldly affirm
him, to be of that excellent judgment, that these your greatest Rabbis (for
their best expositions) light their candles at Caluins to arch. But to the
point. Calvin does consider in the person of a wicked King two situations, one
as he sits under God, the other when he exalts himself to sit above God:
when he commands as a substitute and subordinate, God has commanded us to
obey man: but when he commands contra Deum, against God (says * Calvin) he
usurps Gods throne, and herein he loses his royalty, which is to be
obeyed. A matter so reasonable, that in the behalf of God, the A postles in
like case are content to appeal herein to the judgment of his adversary, man,
[ Act. 4. 19.
Whether it be better to obey God or man, judge you.] To explane this by
example: If a Justice of peace shall command me to kill a fellon, I deny his
authority, this is against the commission of his and my King, and in this case
of too peremptory a command I acknowledge him no Justice, yet not absolutely
no Justice: for if presently he shall command me to apprehend the same fellon,
I willingly obey him. He therefore in his former command was as it were
disjusticed only by that act of disobedience; wherein obedience to him had
been disobedience against the Crown: but yet he remained Justice in office,
and therefore comanding justly, I dutifully obeyed him. Thus is it in Caluins
judgment, in the comparison between man and God: If the King exalt himself
to Gods throne, then pull him down, that is, do not obey, yet so, that we
dispossess him not of his own throne, which is Gods footstool. Therefore,
said Calvin, (...) supra c. 5.
In the most wicked King, that is enemy to God; there is by Gods ordinance an
impression of majesty, which is inviolable, and his authority is not to be
contemned. This is clear in Daniels case, wherein Calvin does insist: for
Daniel commanded by the King to worship the Idol, refused; and cast among
Lions, was miraculously preserved, and in the end delivered: then he thus
answered the King, Dan. 6. ^2.
Against thee, O King, have I done none iniquity. Wherein Calvin observes,
that Respondet Daniel, se nullam prauitatem co^sisle ad. ^e (...) Regem: vt hoc
pateat tenenda (...) ^entet^a Petn* De^m ^ete, ^eg^m honorate, (...) haec ^^ter
^e co^ex^ possit vnum ab ^o ^lli: pr^dat oportet timor Dei* vt Reges obtineant
suam autoritatem, sic ^^men vt Deus emineat. ^ure ^rgo Daniel se defendit, quod
^llam prauitatem commisit aduersus Reg^ q^a, sc^^icet, co-actus D^perio Reg^s
mandatum neglexerat Abd^^ant enam se potestate terreni Principes, dum insurgunt
contra Deum, imo indigni sunt qui (...) in hominum numero, po^s ergo con^p^ere
opo^tet in ip^o^um capita, quam (...) parere, ^bi i^ proteruiunt, vt vel^nt
etiam Deum iurespohate, and quasi occupare sohum eius, acsi postent eum e coelo
detra^ere. Calvin. com. in Dan. 6. 22.
No King ought to think it iniquity to be disobeyed in that which he shall
command contrary to God, because the order of obedience to Kings begins at
God: as S. Peter says, [Feare God, honor the King.] This is the sum. And is
there any King which fears God, that can call this exposition rebellious? For
to * give to God that which is Gods, does not deprive a King (though most
wicked) of his due: for it follows. Matthew. 22 21.
Give unto Caesar that which belongs unto Caesar: but you do not only take
away duties belonging unto Caesar, but also take out of the way Caesar
himself, if opposite unto your super^^itious doctrines. Thus have I satisfied
according to the truth of Caluins opinion. Now for his phrase.

The Phrase of Calvin injuriously urged. The moderate Answerer.
The answer, quo (...).
But Calvin says, that such a King is to be berea^ed of all authority, and
not to be numbered among men, but rather to be spit upon then obeyed.

The Reply.
You have weighed the words of Calvin in false balances I would I could say
ignorance only, and not also malicious deceit: but first of ignorance. For
when we consider man created with a reasonable soul, and after rebelling
against his maker; shall we not think him unworthy of the name of reasonable
man? What is this else then that which we read, Psa. 49. v^. 20.
Man in honor has no understanding, and is become like the beast that
perishes? Showing (as ancient Fathers do comment) that man by disobedience to
God, is degenerate from his kind: and therefore as God said for the presumption
of his transgression by an Ironie, Genesis 3. 22.
Behold man is become as one of us, etc. So the beasts may say in man's
confusion, thus: Behold man is become like one of us, because he is degenerated
from the first sanctified reason: for which cause our Savior called Herod a
Luke 13. 32.
Fox, and his own Disciple M^rk. 8. 33.
Satan. And yet in regard of their offices, neither did the Apostle cease to be
an Apostle, nor Herod to be acknowledged King. Nay Nabuchadnezzar by a savage
distraction metamorphosed into the disposition of a brute beast, to live in
deserts with beasts; yet lost not, in the interim, the right of his empire. The
next word of [rather spitting in their faces,] spoken comparatively, does not
rebelliously teach irreuerence to the majesty of a King, but only
emphatically, enforce a more zealous obedience unto God: as when I say, I had
rather burn my hand, then write any thing against my conscience; I do not
danger my hand, but I avouch the sincerity of my conscience. Notwithstanding
if the word had bin used simply, yet could it not have bin understood
literally, but figuratively. As when it is written of God, that Apoc. 3. 16.
God will spue the lukewarm professor out of his mouth: signifying he does
loath such. Therefore you must not deal with men's speeches, as Solomon
teaches men not to deal with their own noses: Prou. 30. 33.
He that wringeth his nose too much, does fetch blood.

2. D^ceit. Calvin says (say you) that such a King is to be bereaved of all
authority. It is noted of Satan's temptation, that in alleging a text of
Scripture [ Math. 4. 6.
He has given his Argels charge over thee, to keep thee in all thy ways,
etc.] the subtle Tempter left out the words of greatest importance, In all thy
ways. I will not charge you with imitation of that spirit of lying by
substracting; for you do but add only one word [All:] bereaved of [All]
authority. But Calvin [Abdicant se potestate] bereaved of authority, meaning
only in that case of contradiction against God. But this kind of dealing is
but ordinary in your moderation. Thus is Calvin i^stified concerning his
doctrine, and in him also Beza: because Beza (say you) his successor in place,
succeeded him also both in opinion and practice. We have heard of their
opinion. Have you any thing to except against their practice?

The practice of Calvin and Beza, objected by The moderate Answerer.
Answer ^os^ (...).
Both Beza and Ca^n armed subjects against their Prince at Geneua, and (as
Calu^ himself, Doctor Su^cli^^e, and the Archbishop of Canterbury be
witnesses) deposed their Sovereign from his temporal right, and ever since
continue in that state of Rebellion.

The Reply.
I am sure if Calvin has written to that effect, your modesty would not have
concealed it: but as the Comedian Poet makes his parasite to speak, Aeque
quidquam nunc quidem* ^uen any thing so I may seem to say something. The book
of Doctor The b^oke which you cite in your m^r^^nt, Be^al. de^ Magis (...) no
^or^ to ^e called B^za^s, the the Vindic^ae contra ty^annos* (...) hereof your
(...) ^uthor writ t^ thus: Vindicia^um contra Tyra^nos Autorem expiscari non
possumu^. B^claius ^ib. 3 contra Mo^. (...). 1.
Sutcli^fes I could not find, and I needed not seek it, for I have con^erred
herein with the master, who answered me, that the book De Iure Magistratus, he
never thought to be Beza his work: and concerning the State of Geneua, the
Bishop thereof, whom you call Prince and Governor of Geneua, was never there
Prince, but the state of the town was a free state of it self. To make a
question, whether I should rather believe him or you, is to doubt whether he
that has bin at Geneua, or he that never saw it can better report the state
thereof. The words of Calvin his confession, which should have be^e produced,
are these: lus gl^dij* and alias ciuilis iurisdictionis parts, quas sua
immu^tatis specie personati ^lli ^piscopi and Sacerdotes fraudulenter Magist^a^
e^eptas sibi vendic^^unt, annon Magis^^atui restit^? C^l^in in lib. Tract.
Theolog* R^sp. ^d Sad^let. page 142.
We have restored to the Magistrate of Geneua all the civil power which those
false Bishops had, under color of liber^ie and privilege, taken from the
Magistrate, and by collusion did challenge to themselves. Add that which may be
observed, the continual contentions partly between the Bishops and the Dukes
of Sauoy about that soueraignetie, partly also of the citizens against them
both. An argument of no constant consent. The conclusion will be, that you may
rather prove those Bishops to have been injuriously ambitious, then the city
rebellious.

CHAP. VIII.
Instance in Burgundy.

The moderate Answerer.
Answer cap. 9 In Burgundy
IN Burgundy a like assembly and conuenti^le was kept at Cabillion, therein
was decreed that three wor^ to be taken out of the world; first the Church of
Rome, secondly ^le ^es of ancient houses, and thirdly all civil policy and
government.

The Reply.
Were ever any Protestants so fantastical? who were the authors of that
decree? nay who was your author witnessing that there was any such decree? You
express neither. We may not marvel if through the weariness of your so long
travel into many countries you fell at length a sleep, and dreamed this idle
dream of three worms; so I had rather think, then that you dreamed it
waking, for then should you find a fourth worm worse then all those three,
even the Mark. 9. 44. 46. 48.
worm of conscience which gnaweth every lying soul. The like may I answer for
your imagined rebellions A^sw^r quo ^u^ I^ Denmark.
In Denmark, but that you have for your witness your own Peter Frarer, you
might say Frater; for who so shall read his idle pamphlet, shall easily
perceive that his ink wherewith he writ was of that co^ound which the Jews
offered our Savior, vinegar and gall. There is an established Church of
Protestants in Sueueland; do you see no beakons of ^i^e there which might
portend rebellions?

CHAP. IX.
Sweueland objected by

The moderate Answerer.
Answer quo supra. ^o^ Sueueland.
FOr Sueueland the Protestants themselves gi^e also testimony, that the
Catholic King thereof was enforced by his rebellious Gospellers to make
himself a subject unto their designements, and condescend, that no Catholic
should bear office in that Kingdom: as is witnessed by Cytraeus Chron. Anno
1593. 1594.

The Reply.
The Story is long* but the sum is short: that the whole State of Sueueland
required that according to the former Parliament of their Kingdom, the King
should swear to defend them in their former liberties, and especially the
fruition of the Religion then professed. Does your Protestant witness call
them Rebellious Gospellers? It was the demand of an whole State for defense of
their country privilege; can any Papist call this rebellious? You will be as
loath to confess this, as you are prone to forge the other. Let us travel
homeward again, and end there where you began.

CHAP. X.
In the Imperial State of Germany: particularly obiecting Luther. Muntzer.


The moderate Answerer his first instance against Luther.
Answer cap. 9. First Martin.
MArtin Luther the prime Protestant of that time said, he cared not for Kings,
and so careless he is in this case, that he tells, that it is the nature of
the Gospel to raise wars and seditions: that among Christians there is no
Magistrate, no Superior, that it is a thing to be obtained by prayers, that
countrymen obey not their Princes; No law, or syllable of law can be imposed
upon Christians neither by men or Angels; there is no hope of remedy, except
all humane laws be taken away.

The Reply.
Here is your common Linsi-woolsie, mixture of truth and falsehood: but as you
would have us to confess a truth, so be you willing to acknowledge your Error.

The truth. Luther professed that he did not care for Kings: true, but in that
comparatiue sense, which he had learned of our Lord Christ. Luke 21. 12.
You shall be called before Kings and Rulers for my name sake: but fear not
man, who can kill the body, but fear God, who is able, after the body is
dead, to take the soul, and cast it into hell fire, I say, fear him.
Secondly, Luther tells that it is the nature of the Gospel to raise wars
and seditions. And does not the Gospel it self tell us the same likewise?
Matthew. 10. 34.
Behold, I came not to send peace into the world, for I will set the father
against the son, and the daughter against the mother, etc. You cannot be
ignorant of the difference of a cause and an occasion, a thing considered
properly in his own nature, and improperly by external accident. An nos
frangimusianuam, cum effractoribas suribus, quia, si non ca^ clauderemus, illi
non frangerant? August. lib. de m^ndacio. cap. 9
Do I (shutting the door) break it, because the thief would not have broken
it except it had been shut, says Saint Augustine. So Luther: Because the
Gospel is preached, the professors thereof are persecuted with the sword; is
therefore the innocent professor cause of the persecution? no, but only an
occasion. Christ, who is in his own nature * Petra salutis, a rock of
salvation to the elect; to the reprobate is called a 1. Pet. 2. 8.
Stone of offense: because the godly are by faith edified to life, and the
wicked by the malice of their heart do spurn against Christ, stumble, and
perish through unbelief. The Gospel likewise has a double savor, vital and
mortal; being 2. Cor. 2. 16.
The savor of life unto life to the sanctified by Gods spirit, and the savor of
death unto death to the irrepentant and unregenerate. So then the Gospel is no
otherwise seditious then the sweet flower is venomous; from this the Spider
sucketh sweetness, but through the fiery malignitie changes it to peyson: so
that obstinate hearing of grace, peace, and salvation, by his natural malice
resists grace with contempt, peace with war, and eternal salvation, by
working bodily destruction.

The falsehood: to affirm, that Luther did abandon all Magistracy, and abhor
all humane laws, is first false: for then I should marvel in what
commonwealth the doctrine of Luther could^ long breath. Secondly false, for
Luther defends Magistracy in his public books. Thirdly, thrice false, for
Luther also condemns the Romish for their contempt of Magistrates.

His doctrine. Obijci solet vide^ Impenu^ tyrannidem, cum sit Caesar alijs
homimbus si^, qu^d imperium in h^nes vlurpet. Vetum nos, q^^ verbu^ Dei
habemus. debemus mandatum Dei op ponere, quia nostrum est diuinae ordin^uom
patere. Luther. tom. 1. in Genesis cap. 9. Prohibitum est gladium accipere,
dicente Christo, Qui accipit glad^um gladio peribit, quia iniussus and propria
sua libidine a^^ipit, sed mandatum est gerere gladium, and est ministerium Dei
Though some think government of man over man to be a tyrannous usurpation,
because all men are naturally of like condition: yet we that have the word of
God must oppose to this delusion the commandment and ordinance of God, who
has put a sword into the hand of the Magistrate, whom therefore the Apostle
calls Rom 13. Minister Dei est. ^r. Tom. 3 A^ot. in D^. cap. (...). fol. 40.
Anarchia Satanae consilium est. Ibid fol. 552.
Gods Minister.

His taxation of the Romish. I am vehementet piget p^detque imo miseret me,
quoties cogito quae and quanta ludibtia sibi ab Imperatenb is, Principibus,
vniuer^ Natione German^ae Papa fec^rit: Deus bone, quanta ^bi^ine and fiducia
in eislusit, non secus eos ducens, and tractans, quam irrationabilia bruta,
q^ibus tantum ad^des, dolos rapinas, and quicqaid Satan suggerete potuit
Papisticatum artium abuteretur ^ut^er. Tom. 2. Resp. ad A^ Catherinum. fol.
15^. Sanctus Petrus Pap^tum gra* hice depinxit. 2. Pet. 2. [Dominationes
spernant] Quis hoc nisi Pa^ ecta fa^ Quid, Don in^t^^nes. Apostolus nisi
Principes and magistratus vocat? Nonne hoc est Do^ ^^S spernete, serp^os
propria authoritate (...) a tubutis subiectiombus, and v^etsis (...)
Reipublicae contra doctrinam Petri and Paul^ tantum abest vt dominationem
agno^^at P^pa, vt luminos Principes aeque ad oscula pedum admittat; dein
Monachum and Sacrisiculum stipite rudiorem, and ^enone sceleratiorem super v^os
mundi Proceres ^t propter characterem illum indelebilem; i^ (...) coguntur
Dominationes contemptae honotare idol^, a quibus hono^ari debuerant, igna^um
hoc Papalium hominum genus vix poreis alendis idoneum Luth quo (...). fol. 152.
I grieve, and blush, and groan, roses how scornefully our Emperors and Princes
of Germany are abused: whom the Pope leads and handles like brute beasts,
both for spotle and slaughter at his pleasure. This Popery is lively described
by Saint Peter, saying, that in the latter times [Some should despise Rulers:]
by Rulers, signifying secular Princes. Now the Popish Clergy by their own
authority have exempted themselves from performance of tributes to Princes.
And the Pope is so far from acknowledging the Sovereignty of Princes over
him, that he will scarce admit them (saving your presence) to kiss his sh^oe.
How like you this doctrine of Luther? If well, then must you free him from
rebellious conceit, for he defends subjection to Princes; if ill, then you
condemn your self, for he renounceth Popish Hierarchy, as a rebellious
tyranny.

The moderate Answerer His second instance against Luther.
Answer quo supra. First, etc.
He censured King Henry the eight of England, the Princes of the Imperial
Orders, the Princes of Germany to be unworthy either of obedience from
Subjects, or life in themselves; and giving the same doom of his natural
Sovereign George of Saxony, names him the Calamity of his country, and
Tyrant: so he scorned the Emperor and wrote directly against his Edicts. He
taught, that Protestants hands must be imbrued with blood, teaching that he had
warrant from God to battle against Princes.

The Reply.
His literal censure of words will be partly confessed, but the other of
swords which draws blood, never can any prove. But to him that looks
through red spectacles, whatsoever he be holds seems red. No marvel
therefore though your fantasy preoccupated with the reflection of your last
bloody stratageme, cannot see your adversary but with suspision of blood. It
may be you will allege Wicelius: as though your own Romish might suffice in
this case, or professed malice could ever speak a truth. A man whom Luther
thought so unworthy the naming, that Miror quo consilio velis, Erasme, Wicelio
respondere, cum per hunc librum satis sit responsum. Summa doctrinae eius haec
est, Lutheri doctrina est haeresis, quia a Papa and Caesare damnata est; sua
vero est Orthodoxa, quia Episcopi, Cardinales, Principes and Reges mittunt and
donant ei aurea pocula. Si aliud est in suis libris, moriar. Agnosco Dei opus
and eius mirabilia video, sidem esse donum suum, quia exci^auit Christam a
mortuis. Luther. Tom. 2. Epist. ad Eras. fol. 487.
He does marvel that any will answer the book of Wicell, which does
sufficiently answer it self.

The former censure of sharp speech let us see how Luther can excuse. He
writing to the Duke of Saxony, does thus reconcile himself: illust^^ssime
Princeps Domine clemen^ (...) constat, qu^d (...) me^ tribuit Deo, (...)
principio (...) and asper castigat homines, vt p^st leniter eos, am^nter and
patern^ comple^. Reg. 2. Dominus n^at and vinisicat, etc. ^^go itaque nec
instituto plan^ dissimuli, nec om^^o diuerla ratione cum plures altos, tum
vestram celsitud nem tractaui alicubi asperius, and immituis calamo perstrinxi,
sed a Deo precatus sum, vt aliquando me reconciliaret, and restitueret in
gratiam celsitudinis vestrae: ac interim Conciones consolationis plenissimas
edidi, in quibus non opinione, non oculis, sed, vt ita dicam, manibus
deprehendi potest, me nulla maleuolentia aduersus quenquam labora^e: vt
intelligat Celsitudo vestra, obiurgationem acerbissimam animi beneuoli and
candidi pectoris notam fuisse, quam omnium qui nunc gratulatiombus and
blanditijs inflant in aures Celsitudinis vestrae, lauds and fucata dicta, etc.
Luther* Tom. 2. Epist. ad D. Georg Duc. Sax. fol. 487.
As God does severely chasten those, whom he purposes afterward lovingly and
fatherly to embrace, killing that he may revive: I likewise (most excelent and
gracious Sovereign) had no other intent in my bitter speech, wherein I might
happily offend your Highness or any other. Wherefore my humble prayer to God
has been, that I might recover your Highness favor, especially seeing that a
tart reprehension for good, is a (...) simple and sincere heart, more precious
then all ^ses of painted flattery. He writes almost the like Apology unto
King Henry the eight, wholly to the same end: granting, that Quanquam vereri
merito deberem (sereni^. Rex illust^^s. Princeps) (...) Matestatem tuam
tentare, and qui mihi conscius maxim sum, grauissime offensam esse Maiestatem
tuam libello meo* quem non ingenio meo, sed incitantibus his, qui Maiestati
tuae parum fancbant, stultus and praeceps edidi: tamen spem mihi fecit Regia
tua clementia, vt cum n^ortalem sese nouent, immortales inimicitias ser^aturam
esse non credam. Tom. 2. Epist ad Regem A^gh^. c. 493.
He had offended his Majesty with his writings, yet not with intent to offend
him, but by instigation of such as did not so greatly favor his dignity: and
did not therefore doubt but his Princely clemency, knowing himself mortal,
would not harbor any immortal displeasure against him. He craved pardon only
for words: O that your case would suffer such an Apology! Concerning his
allegiance to the Emperor, the Emperor himself did acquithim, who never
charged him with seditious doctrine against his State, but only religious
profession against the sacrilegious superstitions of that time. Which his
doctrine he justified in the presence of the Emperor at Auspurge: whereof
Luther writes thus: Audita est nostra causa Augustae coram Caesare and toto
mundo, inuentaque est i^reprehensi^s, and sacram doctrinam referens. Deinde
nostra Apologia vulgata est, in qua respondemus infinitis Papisticis mendacij^
cal^j^ quibus hanc facultatem m^me inuidemus, cum nullis alijs virtunbus
po^ta^t v^nt esle n^b^les. Luther. (...). fol. 187.
Our cause was heard at Auspurge before the Emperor, and before the whole world
manifested to be improuable. I have published our Apology, answering therein
to all Popish lying slanders, which are infinite: but I may not envy in those
men that faculty, because they have no other excellent virtue, wherly to
ennoble themselves. A certain argument of your ruinous house, whose best
supporter is the privilege of lying: by virtue whereof to your other more then
a good many evil slanders, you add these two next following.

The third instance in Luther by The moderate Answerer.
Answer quosupra. Munster.
By Luthers doctrine, that Christians must not fight against the Turk, in
short time Belgrade and Rhodes were taken, Hungary was entered, King Lodowike
slain, Buda conquered, etc. Witnesses Munster in Chron. and Pantaleon Chron.
121.

The Reply.
I have perused the follies you quote, and perceive that your wisdom in
deluding your Reader is excellent: for Munster and Pantaleon both writing of
Belgrade, Hungary, Rhodes, etc. never attribute the least scruple or suspicion
of occasion thereof unto Luther. Can you be contented to understand the true
causes of those mischiefs? Hearken then unto your own Historian. L'histoire
de France, enrichie etc. lib. 1. Anno. 1521. page 13. See also the History of
Turkey lately set forth by M^ster Know^^s in English, collecte* ^out of the
true stories, etc. and concerning Rhodes, ^e says,
Because it was publicly known that Leo the Pope had not employed the great
sums of money, which he raised from Pardons, against the Turk: there followed
the ruins of Hungary, Bohemia was assaulted, Rhodes surprised, and a thousand
other evils fell upon Christendom. This is certain from the truth of all
Story concerning the Turks, that Popes and Popish Clergy by their insatiable
riot and covetousness have been the bane to all If Adrian the Pope had been as
careful to send aid against the Turk, as he was to de^end the Emperor
Charles against the King of France, the Isle of Rhodes had been safe at this
day: Belgrade also was lost by the want of experience of their King, and
through the insatiable conciousnes of the Clergy, who in the minority of the
King got possession of the wealth of the Kingdom, and performed no strengh to
resist the Turk. So was Belgrade lost, and a gap made open into Hungary. And
you^ Gaicciardine shows that The not rescuing of Rhodes was imputed to the
Popes fault. lib. 15. Of the which sum of money he gave that vv^ich (...)
gathered out of the most quarters of Germany to his ^ler Magdalene; and 50000.
crowns to his n^phevv Laurence. Hist. quosupra. and Guicciardin. quosupra.
Christendom, and always since their temporal Hierarchy by kindling
firebrands of seditions among Christians, have given the greatest advantage to
the Turk.

CHAP. XI.
The last instance against Munster and other Anapabtists.

The moderate Answerer.
Ansvveribid.
Munster was of the same opinion and practice, and called Rebellion for his
Religion the war of God: affirming that he had received some special
commandment from God to war against Kings, and had promise of victory from
heaven: and hereupon such Rebellions ensued, that of his own adherents and
Traitors were slain within the space of three months one hundred and thirty
thousand.

The Reply.
You being in your self Magnus opinator, told us of the opinion of Luther, and
now descended to Munster, say, Munster was of the same opinion, (viz. with
Luther) and called, etc. But your Peter Frarer, whom you brought to accuse
Calvin, is herein ready to justify Luther, saying, that P^t Frarer. supra.
Luther wrote against these rebellious ones, proving that it belonged to all
Christians to persecute them to death. Calvin also wrote a book, entitled, *
Aduersus Libertinos: against fantastical and Anabaptisticall Libertines: and
Beza, as we have heard, says, Supra.
That it is impious wickedness for any to object unto Protestants the opinion
of those rebellious Anabaptists, and spirits of giddiness. But what think
you? were Anabaptists Protestants? or were Protestants whom you have named, of
this opinion of Anabaptists? Thus would you persuade your English Reader; but
your Cardinal, and Reader at Rome does confute you, Potestatem politicam esse
apud Christianos illicitam, est opinio Anabaptistarum: quam non solum Catholici
omnes execrantur, sed etiam Philippus Melancthon, Caluinus, Lutherus in
visitatione Saxonica instiss^ and acertime oppugnant. Bellar. lib. 3. de
Laic^s. cap. 2, ad^in^m.
For this opinion of the heretical Anabaptists (says he) not only we
Catholics, but Melancthon also, Calvin, and Luther, do abhor. Recount now
your words: Munster was of opinion that it was the commandment of God he should
war: True: and that he sa^ he had a special revelation from heaven, promising
him victory: True: And that thereupon ensued rebellions to the death of many
thousands. All these yet true: but now there is wanting this one word [same:]
Munster (say you) was of the same (meaning Luthers opinion). It is written,
Eccles. 10. 1.
One dead ^e in the ointment of the Apothecarie, does poison the whole box: And
so in one little word [same] your great lie has disabled your whole
accusation. For as well may you call the Bandites, namely those grand thieves
and out-lawes in Italy of the same incorporation with the citizens of Rome, as
name Anabaptists who depend upon extraordinary and fantastical revelations of
the same opinion with Protestants, who are wholly directed by the express
written law and Gospel of Christ.

I perceive you are now grown weary with long travel, I could have wished you
would have visited Polonia, and after that Bohemia in some particular
observations: for in both those kingdoms there has bin long time manifold
vexations executed upon Protestants, and yet never any of them or others can be
named, who deposed Princes, invaded Crowns, or by any treason did practice the
deaths of their Sovereigns. Now therefore let your moderation be admonished to
return home into England: and seeing you cannot find Protestants for your
fellowship in your kind of rebellion, now let Protestants (I pray you) have
your fellowship in faithful subjection. But lingua, quo vadis?

CHAP. XII.
The second kind of Recriminations against protestants, is in the second
wickedness of Aequiuocation.

YOu return the guilt of this cursed doctrine upon Protestants after two
fashions,

Reasoning, Railing.
1. Reasoning, (if it may be called Reason, which is mixed with most slanderous
untruths) but you would be heard speak with good will.

The moderate Answerer.
Answer cap. 10 But to.
But to speak unto this Obiector concerning Protestants proceedings in
aquiuocating: Luther used it at his pleasure, now appealing to the Pope, and
after renouncing his authority. Cranmer did often recant his errors by oaths,
and again often defend them; counter fetted the hands of fifty Convocation men
(Fox himself being judge) to give alying credit to his false cause, but
excused his false oaths by equivocation. Protestants of England in the days of
K. Henry the eight, King Edward the sixth, and Queen Elizabeth, did
equivocate. Such was the proceeding of P. Martyr and Bucer, two great
Professors of Divinity in Oxford and Cambridge. Such was the Protestant
adherents the Dukes of Northumberland and Suffalke, and now the ordinary use of
Puritanes.

The Reply.
Luther, Cranmer and others, as they were persuaded that the Bishop of Rome was
a faithful Bishop, did swear obedience unto him; but afterward being better
illuminated, did renounce him, as Antichristian. But if all recantation shall
be thus censured, then might you teach S. Augustine to retract his
retractations. But we will not deny their infirmities, for it has pleased God
to note the like in his chosen Saints in holy writ, to the amplifying of the
glory of his grace in their repentance and his pardon. Yet was not there in
these acts any equivocation, no more then in the acts of Peter, who, at the
cock-crow, went out Math. 26. 75*
of the high Priests hall and wept bitterly. Thus Cranmerawaked by the call of
the spirit of God, executed vengeance upon that hand which subscribed unto your
idolatrous service, Fox Act. Mon.
Burned it in the fire. Then whatsoever his dissimulatio^ was, he thought it
worthy of repentance, not as you do think your equivocation worthy of defense:
whereas in the truth of Christianity, there is the same punishment due to your
equiuocating tongues which he executed upon his dissembling hand. O but Fox is
witness that he defended himself by saying he did equivocate. I am sure you
would not have been indebted unto us for the words if they had been extant: I
found the place of M. Acts and Monuments, anno 1596 page 1309.
Fox, but no mention of equivocation. A monster not hatched in those times.
That which was objected by Doctor Weston, is there satisfied by M. Cranmer: but
you are more rigorous then ancient Adversaries.

Yet further would I demand, why Protestants, turning from Papacy in the days
of King Edward, must be condemned for such as have equiuocated: and Papists
reuolting from Protestants in the reign of Queen Mary, must be thought to
have been innocents?

The moderate Answerer.
Answ. quo supra.
Aequiuocating was practiced by Calvin, as the Lord of Canterbury, and Beza,
and others record.

The Reply.
I reported this your accusation to my Lord of Canterbury, and his Grace
answered, that you had wronged his testimony: for I am sure (said his Grace)
that this mystery in those times was not set abroach. We also examined the book
you allege, and find not one syllable for your purpose. But what can we expect
from you, Patrons of lying equivocation, but in your accusations against
Protestants equiuocating lies?

The most moderate Answerer in his railing.
Answer ca. 10 But to.
Luther was so vile in this kind of equiuocating, that never pillory mate
behaved himself so as he did. Cogging, lying, equiuocating, dissembling was
practiced by Calvin, who was banished for a dissembling seducer. Cranmer
perjured himself, and excused it by equivocation.

The Reply.
In these your lying slanders, you give us good hope that you will leave your
equiuocating lies, because, as though you detested the impiety thereof, you
vilify it with these terms, vile equiuocating, adiudging it worthy the
pillory, matching it with cogging, lying, seducing, perjury. This is yet very
well. But we find that true which the Orator says, Natura suilena: Every man
naturally is a band unto himself. Now you examining your Glycerie equivocation
in your adversaries, Luther, Cranmer, Calvin, O then it is vile, cogging,
lying, seducing, etc. But beholding her in your own embracements, so Answer
ibid, Secondly.
In equiuocating there is nolie nor sin. Adulterous Judah judging of Thamar,
whom he had vnknowingly known, hearing that she was brought in for an
adulteress, gave presently sentence, Genesis 38. 24.
Let her be burned: but when by certain evidences and pledges she made it
known unto him, that if she were the woman, he was the man; then he
confesses, She is more righteous then I. There was some modesty in this, but
what moderation do you use to adiudge equivocation (which you fas^ly feign to
be in Protestants) to the pillory: and for your selves, in whom the Leprosy
reigns, to use an Apology?

Thus have I justified the innocent, whose names your equiuocating spirit has
wickedly traduced: for whom this might have bin a sufficient answer, that
(because you bring only accusations without proof) Si accusa^^e sufficient,
qui^ innocens (...) Seneca.
If it be sufficient to have accused, who can be innocent? For our Lord Jesus,
even innocence it self, was accused: who of his grace turn you to repentance,
that these your slanders be not laid unto your charge.

THE THIRD PART,
Which is a Confutation of the principles of Romish doctrine, in two points: 1.
The supreme head of Rebellion. 2. The impious conceit of Aequiuocation.


Concerning the first, this shall be our Conclusion:

The Pope has no authority from God to depose Kings or dispose of their
Kingdoms.

CHAP. I.
Romish Objections answered.

THIS pretended predominance of the Pope in temporal causes, whether Direct,
queadmodu super Episcopos, in quos ipse autoritatem exercet vel ordinandi vel
remouendi* Carerius Tract. de Potest. Romans Pont. and (...) Tract de M^arch
Eccles.
Directly, or Habet Papa potestatem temporalem indirecte in ordine ad Deum in
disponendis rebus temporalibus omnium Christianorum; quemadmodu^ Spiritus
dicitur praeesse carni, non quidem ipse exercendo corporales actiones, sed per
intellectualem facultatem, viz. voluntatem, carni imperando vt se castiget, and
alia exercitia and afflictiones, etiam martyria subeat, Bellar, lib. 5. de Romans
Pont. cap. 4. and 6, and Sauderus Tract. de visib. Monarch.
indirectly considered, (in the which division of governing, the Romish school
is at this day extremely divided) if it be from God, it will sure plead,
Scriptum est, and be warranted by Gods word either in the Old or New Testament.

This point is discussed by the state of Gods church in the Old Testament.

Object. 1. In the general view. The Romish Pretense.
Dico Pontificem in veteri Testame^to fuisse Regemaiorem. C^^eriu^ lib. 2. de
Romans Pont. cap. 5. and 9. E^dom modo Sauderu^ in visib. Monarch.
The high Priests in the Old Testament were supreme in civil causes. Ergo:
Ought to be in the New.

The Answer.
This is so contrary to the Story in holy writ, that by the examples of Kings
in ordering (though never in ordeining) of Priests, the Jesuits are enforced to
allow that the King was supreme over the Priest. Their reasons: Dicunt,
Protestants, Reges in veteri Testamento praescripsisse Sacerdotibus quae in
rebus sacris gerere debebant, and etiam negligentes Sacerdotes a ministerio
abdicasse: respondotur, mirum esse hoc non debere, quia synagoga Iud^eorum,
etiam si aliquos iustos contineret, tamen dicebatur terrenum potius quam
coeleste regnum. Itaque cum populus constet ex corpore and anima, carnalis pars
in veteri populo primas tenebat. Salmeron Iesuita in Epist. Pauli in giner.
disp. 12.. Sed contra.
Because (says one) in the Synagogne of the Jews was a state rather earthly
than heavenly; so that in that people (which was, as in the body of a man,
consisting of body and soul) the carnal part was more eminent. Meaning, the
temporal to have been supreme. Or, as another says more conceitedly; In
veteri lege Regnum erat Substantiuum, and Sac^rdotium Adiectiuum, etc. Carerius
quo supra lib. 2. cap. 1.
The Temporal state exceeded the Spiritual in the old Law, as much as the
Substantive is more excellent than the Adjective. In both these we dislike
their comparison, and accept their conclusion, which is this: In the Old
Testament the Kings authority was above the Priests. And therefore they can not
prove the* souerainty of the Pope over Kings by the state of the Old
Testament. Albeit this is infallible, yet are not the Romish ashamed to argue
from thence both by typical Analogy, and by examples.

Their Analogy.
CHAP. II.
The second Objection.

The Romish Pretense.
Et hoc regnum terrenu vmbra tamen fuit spiritualis regiminis in ecclesia
Christiana. Salineron Ies. quo supra. Bellarm. lib. 5. de Romans Pont. quo supra.
THe Old Testament was a figure of the New in Christ. And Regnum in Lege
veteri Substantiuum fuit, Sacerdotium vero Adiectiuum: In lege vero Euangelica
sacerdotium Substantiuu^, and regnum Adiectiuum. Car^rius quo supra.
Therefore in the New, the Spiritual (as Popedom) is the Substantive, and the
Kingdom is but the Adjective.

The Answer.
In this Objection there is more childhood than manhood, babish Grammar than
sound Divinity. The Old Testament indeed in his earthly elements was a figure
of the spiritual and heavenly, but of the truly heavenly, the day of that
eternal Heb. 4.
Sabbath and the celestial Jerusalem the mother city of the Saints of God.
And the Argument may be retorted.

The Argument returned upon the Romish.
Christ being Christus no fuit rex temporalis Iudaeae sed spiritualis
Ecclesiae; cuius regni eius figura fuit regnum temporale Dauidis and Salomonis
hac enim ratione de dit Christo Pater sedem Dau^d Patris. Salmeron Ies. quo
supra.
King and Priest was shadowed by the types of the Old Testament: but in
Christ, his kingdom had the pre-eminence of Priesthood, because he is Priest
only for us, but he is King over us: secondly, as Priest he is suppliant to the
Father; as King he is predominant over all powers and principalities equally
with the Father. Ergo this order inherent in Christ ought to hold as
convenient among Christians. An argument Demonstratiue.

CHAP. III.
Object. 3. from 14. examples.

The Romish Pretense.
Deus
IN the old Testament we find Saulem per Samuelis,
Saul deposed by the Prophet Samuel; Rehoboam per Achiae,
Rehoboam by the Prophet Achia; Athaliam per Iehoidae Sacerdotis vocem regnis
suis priuauit. Sander. de Claue David. lib. 2. cap. 6.
Athalia by Iehoiada the Priest; Mattathias gladium politicum sibi sumpsit, and
postea silijs reliquit, quo Regem Antiochum (qui Iudaeis imperabat) iure eius
imperij priuabant. Ibid. lib. 2. cap. 42. Scriptura exemplum
Mattathias lift up his sword against Antiochus, and did remove him; Elias, and
Elias also and Elizeus both Prophets did kill the false Prophets, and other
Ministers of the King.

Judith, Aeglon ab
Judith did kill Holophernes, Ahod, Sisera a
Ahod Aeglon, Iabel occ^sus est, ita cum haereticis agendum est in vindictam
populi. Ibidem 271. Quemadmodum
Iabel Sisera: Saul was dispossessed of his kingdom by David, Ahab by
David, Ahab by Elizaeus; de quorum altero dicitur [Deiecisti Reges ad
perniciem:] de altero, [In diebus suis non pertimuit Principem] hoc est
officium Christianum. Reinaldu^ in R^saeus page 619. and 697. Vt Holophernes
(...)
Iehu, Amon by the people. Parsons in his Do^man. We must follow herein
Amon by the people: and the Macchabaei, and ipsi de genere Sacerdotum exemplum
praebent Sacerdotibus nostris contra Principes religioni Catholicae infestos
pugnandi. Lib. de ^^sta Abdicat. page 57. In 2. Paralip. 26.
M^cca^ees sought against Kings for defense of God^ worship: L^stly king Ozias
Rex cum Sacerdotis officium exercere vellet, a Pontifice de templo eiectus est,
and separ^tus extra regnum, and consequenter regnandi autoritate priuatus.
B^llar. lib. 5. de Pont. cap. 8.
Ozias for exercising the Priests office was by the high Priest deprived of his
kingdom. Mattathiae imitandum proponit: sic fecerunt Prophetae, nominatim,
Elias quadraginta Prophetas, inuito Rege, occidit; and
(...) Ahod Aeglon^m Mo^bitam; ita aduersus Regem and populum haereticum
animati esse debemus, Lib. de iusta A^dicat. Hen. 3. page 57. and 273. We must
follow
(...) Eliah, and
(...) Elizaeus, who etc. Saul was deposed by
Iehu, and
(...) Elias, and
(...) Elizaeus. A^^e^ in his Admonit. page 30. and 31.


The Answer to six kinds of these examples.
Here we hear of nothing but fighting, dispossessing, killing of Kings, and
those chiefly by Priests and Prophets of God in the old Testament: propounded
to the Prelates of the new, to teach them to erect their miters above crowns.
But first our question is of the obedience of Subjects to their lawful Kings,
not of for^aine inuadors o^ false usurpers. But Legimus quidem filio^ Israel
tempore Iudicum frequenter eorum, qui imperabant, iugum excussisse, and
clarissimam viduam
Many examples of the old Testament (says your Doctor) we read of such, as
have borne arms and used hostility against Kings, who being not their
natural Princes, either did, or would invade their kingdoms, to bring them
into thraldom: Such both by the law of nature and ordinance of God may be
resisted. Quemadmodum
And this was the case of Ahod, qui Aeglonem regem Moab, dolo and art
con^ecit: ac
Ahod against Aeglon, Iabel, quae Siseram Principem Regis Canaan sustulit:
Gedeon qui tyrannidem Madianitarum amolitus est, Iephthe Ammonitarum, Samson
^hilistaeorum, and heroi^a
Iabel against Siser^* Judith, and
Judith against Holophernes, the Macchabaeos Regibus fortiter restitisse, and
bellis ac armis repugnasse. Sed haec exempla non quid contra legitimum suum
Principem ac naturalem Dominum populos facere debeat ostendunt; sed quid
aduersus eos, qui very Regis autoritatem, seeds regi^s, bona and thaesauros per
vim occupant: Neque enim illi, contra* quos a sanctis bels^ illa fortiter
gerenda suscepta sunt, legitimi filiorum Israel Principes fuerunt, sed
tyrannice vi sibi populum Dei subiugarunt, vel subiugare volebant. C^nerus de
^s^ic. Princ. Christ. cap. 7.
Macchabees against Antioch^. Therefore our adversaries have roaued at a wrong
mark: for by this your Cunerus confession, your 3. example of ^eho^d Huiusmodi
exempla non sunt ad rem, quia non agunt de rege legitimo, sed deinuaso^e, etc.
Barcla^s lib. 3. contra Monarch^. cap. 24.
your 4. of Mattathias, your 7. of Judith, your 8. of Ahod, your 9. of Iabell,
and your 13. of Macchabees; Who only resisted unjust inuadors, and not
natural kings, pertain nothing to the purpose. 7 Judith caput sustulit
Holophernis, and
13 Macchabaei fortissime Antiocho and Deme^o Tyrannis restiterunt, and per vim
ingressos, viribus suis auctis, simili vi expulerunt. Quod lex and Dei
ordinatio exigit. Cunerus ibid. cap. 8.


The Answer to two other examples.
Secondly we dispute of lawful examples of deposing kings: but behold your 1
2. Sam. 1. ver. 8 and 15.
Saul was killed of an Amalachite, who^ therefore David commanded to be slain.
Your 12 2. Reg. 21.
Ammon also was slain of his own servants, who were therefore pursued and
slain of the people, because of their conspiracy against the king. Thus your
1. and 12. examples which you propound for your imitation rather show what you
would, then what you should be, yet so it is, that wicked acts are the best
examples you can allege to proportionate your godless conclusions.

The Answer to five other examples.
Thirdly, extraordinary acts can be no presidents for ordinary or general
axioms: Sed quae haec (bone Deus!) consequentia est? Propheta pronunciauit
contra Jeroboam iudicium diuinum. Ergo Ecclesia habet ius in Reges. Nihil
inscitius: nihil enim ad Prophetam, nam Prophetae multi nulla potestate
Sacerdotali praediti fuerunt. Deinde Prophetarum munus in denunciatione
iudiciorum Dei extraordinaria fuit: quae ad probandam ordinationem nulla
consecutionis necessitate valeat. Barclaius ibid.
But (your selves cannot deny) many of your examples were specially privileged
functions by Prophets and others extraordinarily and immediately from God
appointed to those offices: and therefore cannot infer any ordinary power of
altering States and kingdoms. Of this kind was 1. Samuel the Prophet, who
dissolved the succession of Saul. 2. Achia the Prophet who divided Jeroboam
from Rehoboam: 5. Elias the Prophet, who slew these Baalites, and destroyed the
messengers of the King: 6. Elizeus the Prophet who raised up Iehu against Ahab
and his family: and 2. Chron. 26.
Nathan and David Prophets who preferred Solomon in succession. Therefore your
Christus cum ciecit Mercatores e templo, non quasi Regia aut Pontificia
autoritate, sed, more Prophetarum, zelo quodam: quemadmodum Phinees occidit
scortatores, and
2. 5. 6. examples be satisfied. For in them, that will hold which Bellarmine
acknowledges in one Elias Prophetas Baal. Bellarus. lib. 5. de Romans Pont. cap.
4.. Respondeo Christum.
Elias; To have been done by zeal, and not by Pontisicall authority, like
that act of Phin^es in destroying those fornicators of Israel.

The last two examples objected.
In 2. Paralip. 26.
In the 2. Chron. 26. The high Priest deposed Ozias Rex cum sacerdotis officium
exercere vellet, a Pontifice de templo eiectus est, and separatus extra regnum,
and consequenter regnandi autoritate priuatus. Et 2. Paralip. 23. vbi
Oziah, or Vziah, from his kingdom: And in the 2. Chron. 23. Iehoida the
Priest put down Athalia tyrannice occupasset regnum, and foueret cultum Baal,
Iehoida, and Pontifex vocauit centuriones and milites, and iussit cos vt
Athaliam interficerent. Bellar. lib. 5. de Romans Pont. cap. 8.
Athalia, and commanded her to be slain.

The answer to the former example.
King Ozias was struck by the hand of God with leprosy, and therefore by the
law of God might not come into the common society of men, for fear of
contagion. He was not therefore deposed from his sovereignty, but only as a
sick King disabled and debarred the ordinary execution. A thing so manifest,
that your own Doctor calls this your assertion Hoc (quod obijcit Bellar.
supra chap. 3.) ipsa imprimis Biblia, historici etiam atque interpretes
falsitatis arguunt: nunquam enim de regno eiectus fuit Ozias, sed tamdiu
regnauit, quamdiu virit, nempe, totos quinquaginta duos annos ex quo regnum
anno aetatis decimo sexto inierat, vt patet 4. Reg. 15. and 2. Paralip. 26.
Mortuus autem Ozias, inquit Josephus lib. 9. Antiq. cap. 11. aetatis suae anno
68. regni vero anno sui 52. Si ergo annum 16. agebat cum regnare coepit, and
annos quinquaginta duos (scriptura test) regnabat, obijtque annum agens 68.
Ostende, si potes, quo and quanto tempore de regno deiectus fuerit. Magna sane
impudem a est ea scriptis mandare, quae manifestis Scripturae testimonijs
redarguuntur. Aegrotante Patre, filius Rectorem and Curatorem dicitur domus
Patris, non Regem egisse: testante ibidem Scriptura, [Dormiuit Ozias sepultus
in agro sepulchrorum regalium, eo quod esset leprosus, regnauitque Jonathan pro
eo.] Falsissimum igitur est, quod scribis, Oziam ab Azaria Sacerdote de regno
fuisse de^^ctum. Barclaius lib. 5. contra Monarchom. cap. 11.
Most false, and contrary to the direct history of the Bible, and ancient
Interpretors, because it is manifest (says he) that he died a King, and his
Son during his leprosy was only Rector, etc. It falls out oftentimes that
some Nobleman is ordained Regent to moderate matters during the minority of
the King; is therefore the right and real King bereaved of his crown?

The Answer to the example of 3 Athalia.
This example is satisfied Supra in the first Answer.
already: only now I will add a confirmation of that which has been said.
Athalia (2. King. 11.) put to death all the Kings seed, excepting only Ioash,
who by good means was hid from her; after he was come to age, produced, and,
according to his right of succession, proclaimed lawful King, commanding
Athalia, as an usurper, to be slain. So plain, that the forecited Doctor
does yield unto it: Expulsit Iehoida Athaliam quae immani tyran. ^^ide per
caedem regiae Sobolis regnum occupabat. Barclaius quo supra. lib. 5. cap. 11.
She was deposed (says he) for destroying the Princes of the blood royal, and
usurping the kingdom. Now what manner of disputation call you this, when to the
defenders of the sovereignty of lawful Kings, you oppose only the examples of
intolerable usurpers?

The last Answer to all the former examples in general.
Fourthly, example without law is as a body without a soul: for though God be
a law to himself, yet his revealed commandment is a law to man. As Genesis 4.
verse. 7. His desire shall be subject unto thee: this is the canon law, the eldest
is to be preferred in succession, but yet dispensable only with God, Genes.
25. 23. The eldest shall serve the yoongest. And thus was Iehu a servant sent
of God to resist Ahab his King; and thus was tolerated that defection of Israel
from 2. Chron. 10. and 11. forged to allow that that defection of the people
from their lawful King, was malu^ poenae; the evil of punishment, and just:
but for the people to deflect and re^^lt to idolatry, that was malum culpae,
their own sin.
Rehoboam their lawful King, unto Jeroboam the idolatrous. These be all your
own examples.

Now I would argue thus: If Gods dispensation in particulars could infer a
general application, then might we conclude from this example of Jeroboam,
that it shall be lawful for subjects to forsake their lawful Kings religious,
and to adhere to another King idolatrous: A conclusion (I am sure) in your own
doctrine most impious; and yet your argument does enforce this conclusion.

CHAP. IIII.
The Argument from examples of the old Testament returned upon the Romish.

1. In general.
IN general observe: there be recorded in the old Testament the examples of
nineteen wicked Kings of Israel; such as were either Idolaters, or Tyrants, or
Apostates: with fourteen others as wicked in the Kingdom of Judah, and yet not
one of all them were by a Priest or people deposed from their Kingdoms.

2. In particular. The first example of Saul and David.
King Saul, Nam Saul primus rex populi Israel, pessimus, vt notum est, postea
Tyrannus extitit, qui innocentissimum Dauidem, optime de ipso ac regno meritum,
crudelissime ac obstinatissime persecut' est. Cuner. de off^. Princ. cap. 7. 1.
Sam. 28.
For he was the first King of Israel, proving himself in the end (you know) a
most wicked man, and a very tyrant. yea such an one as was in a sort
excommunicate: David, cum in spelunca a militibus suis incitaretur; ne quaquam
manus suas extendere voluit, sed quod amplius est, cum silenter partem
chlamydis abscidisset, quasi alicuius peccati propter id conscius, percussit
cor suum David, and dixit ad viros suos: [Propitius sit mihi Dominus, ne faciam
hanc rem Domino meo Christo Domini, vt mittam manum meam in eum, quia Christus
Domini est, viuit Dominus, quia nisi Dominus percusserit eum, aut dies eius
venerit vt moriatur, aut descendens in praelium perierit, propitius sit mihi
Dominus, vt non m^ttam manum meam in Christum Domini. Et iterum cum Saulum
dormientem, and sopore sepultum repe^iret, dixit David ad Abisay, ne interfi^s
eum, quis enim extendet manum suam in Christum Domini, and innocens erit?
Aperte ostendens se non propter amorem erga hominem, sed propter conscientiam
erga Deum a caede abstinuisse. Cunerus quo supra.
God refusing to speak unto him either in dreams or visions, etc. This
example your Cardinal obiecteth against Protestants: Allen in his Admonition
page 30. and 31.
This man (says he) was by Gods appointment deposed from his Kingdom by
Samuel: so that after the sentence known, David might lawfully have killed
him. A Carnals, (I should have said) a Cardinals conceit, utterly condemned by
David himself. For Sane
David persecuted by Saul (as the 1. Sam. 24.
story shows, and your Bishop acknowledges) when he was now in a cave where
he had Saul in his power, excited by his soldiers to kill him, would not lay
violent hands upon his person; but which is more, closely cutting off a lap
of his cloak: (as though even in that he had offended) stroke his own breast,
saying thus to the soldiers, [God be merciful unto me, that I do not this
wickedness against him; as the Lord lives, except the Lord strike him, or his
day shall come to die, or that he perish in wars, God be merciful unto me
that I ^ay not mine hands upon the Lords anointed. 1. Sam. 26.
Yea after David found Saul asleep, he said to his own servant Abisay; Let us
not kill him, for who shall lay his hands upon the anointed of God, and be
innocent?] Showing evidently that he did refrain to kill Saul, not so much for
the love to his person, as for conscience toward God. And yet your purpurate
Cardinal would from this same example of David die his gown afresh in the
blood of his Sovereign: concluding (contrary to David) It was lawful for
David to kill Saul.

The Application of this former example in the position confuteth the Romish.
This example of Saul and David, (if there were no other in the whole book of
God) might suffice for full determination of this cause: for there is nothing
which you can pretend for the just deposing of any person, which is not
correspondent in this example.

First you require in the person to be deposed that he be either a Tyrant, or
Excommunicate, or an Apostate from God: but 1. Saul by persecuting David an
innocent, (which he did not by order of law, but by mortal enmity) is by your
Bishop defined a Cunerus supra in hoc cap. lit. (...).
Tyrant: 2. by being 1. Sam. 28.
forsaken of God, an excommunicate: 3. by 1. Chro. 13. 3.
asking counsel of a witch of Endor, an Apostate.

Secondly, the end of deposing you pretend is the Catholic cause, propagation
of true religion. This end might David have proclaimed, because (after Saul's
death hec says, The moderate Answerer supra.
[But we will bring again the ark of God, for we sought it not in the dates
of Saul. Signifying equal necessity of the restitution of religion.

Thirdly, you in deposing of the possessour must foresee a probability of 1.
Sam. 16.
an hopeful Successor: behold here is godly Supra.
David anointed of Samuel the Prophet, ordained of God to succeed Saul after
his decease.

Lastly, you profess to attempt this deposing and murdering of such a King, 1.
Sam. 24.
As soon as there is an opportunity to effect it. Mark here, * David has
the tyrant in a ca^^, as able to stabbe him to the heart, as to cut off the
lap of his garment: another time finding him and all his guard asleep, and
able now to cast him into a dead sleep: Notwithstanding all this, David, who
was afterward to perform the office of a gracious King in ruling, does now
practice the duty of a faithful Subject in obeying. And now from the
application of the position we descend unto

The Application of his practice.
1. David flies into a Cave or vault of the earth, yet not to plot, but to
avoid parricide. 2. David having Saul in his power, he cutteth off only the
lap of the garment of the King, so far was he from cutting off the head and
shoulders of a kingdom. 3. David prays not God speed the proceeding of the
complot of treason, but God forbid; and, God be merciful unto me, that I do
not this wickedness. 4. David swears also, but what? a sacramental oath of
secrecy, and confederacy, To do it as soon as possibly he can^ No, but As the
Lord lives I will not lay my hands upon the Lords anointed. To conclude, when
Saul is slain by an Amalakite, David entertaineth the murderer, but how?
reioicing and approving the act? or as thus dignifying the malefactor, So said
Pope Sixtus Quintus of the like.
o memorable act! o religious man! No, but he 2. Sam. 1. 11.
Rent his own clothes, fasted and wept and commanded the murderer to be
slain, saying, Thy sin be upon thine own head. etc. This one example of this
incomparable servant of God David is therefore recorded in the volume of Gods
book, that in one man all men might have a double example to imitate; Kings to
behold him as he was a gracious King, and no Tyrant: Subjects to behold him,
as a faithful subject even to a Tyrant.

CHAP. V.
The second example, which must be returned upon the Romish, is that which has
been of them objected of Elias.

2. King. 1.
ELias did call for fire from heaven, and destroyed the Captains and
Messengers from the King. Ergo (say your men) Protestants officers may be so
dealt with by us Priests. Now, we argue contrarily, Ergo this may not be
attempted of Gods Ministers. 1. because Elias was no Priest, but a Prophet,
that is, his calling was not ordinary, but extraordinary, as appears by his
act, [Fire from heauen] a work miraculous. 2. Our Savior Christ, who did
assoile this question long ago, has taught us how to conclude; for Luc. 9. 52.
When his Disciples asked him saying, Master shall we command fire from heaven
to destroy them, as Elias did? verse. 55.
Jesus rebuked them, saying, you know not what spirit you are of: for the son
of man came not to destroy but to save the world. Concluding from the same
example negatiuely, namely, that the Ministers of the Gospel must not herein
imitate Elias.

The Application of this example and Answer.
Whom do you seek to destroy? Protestants, whom you call Heretics: but
mark, 1. these disciples desired to destroy Those verse. 51.
Samaritanes, namely the false worshippers, which had long before forsaken the
true religion of God; and therefore now disliked Christ, verse. 53.
Because his face was as though he would go to Jerusalem: that is, because of
his religion, for that he gave some signification that he meant to go to the
feast at Jerusalem to solemnise the true worship of God according to the law.
Secondly what have Protestants done? Jesuits supra.
They will not admit of our Priests, and our high Priest and Vicar of Christ
the Pope they do reject.

And these Samaritans in this place, verse. 53.
Would not receive Christ. 3. What therefore? A general destruction at The
stratageme.
one terrible blow: and these desire to Luc. 9. 54.
Call for fire to consume these Samaritans. 4. Now who are you? Men zealous of
Gods glory: and these for their zeal are Marc. 3. 17.
Surnamed the Sons of thunder. 5. To what end do you breath fire, and why
are your mouths so hot? In ordine ad Deum: even for the glory of God,
advancement of the church of Christ: So these wished verse. 54.
fire from heaven, namely, that it coming by the prayer of Christ immediately
from heaven, God might be glorified in his Son. 6. What ground have you for
such an attempt? The example of Elias: the same example did these Bonarges
allege saying, verse. 54.
As Elias did.

Notwithstanding all which, Christ answers you in them, saying, verse. 55.
You know not what spirit you are of, adding, I am not come to destroy, but to
save: showing that there is as much difference between a mind so resolved,
and a true regenerate spirit, as is between Christ and Elias, Law and Gospel,
destruction and salvation. Thus the Sons of thunder and our Sons of powder
being rightly compared, there is only this difference: They would not have fire
except from Gods own hand, from heaven, an argument of their patience; these,
as men desperate, will work it in many barrels in the earth, as if it had
been from hell. they consult with Christ, verse. 54.
Master will thou that we command? you without all command, yea against Gods
forbid, seek the ruin of a Kingdom.

The Conclusion from the old Testament.
Seeing that 1. there was No sovereignty either of Supra.
Priests or Nullum extat in sacris literis exe^plum pro potestate populi in
Reges. Barclaius lib. 3. contra Monarchom cap. 6.
People over Kings; we are taught from the example of the people of God (as
says your Cunerus) Magna patientia populus Israel plurima ab hu^^smodi
Tyrannis mala sustinuit, qua tamen facile poterat resistendo repellere, vsque
ade^ cordibus hominum lege naturae inscriptum est, potestati non resist^,
Scriptura vbique nobis attestante, Regibus, licet reccent, vim nullan esse
inferendam, quoniam causa nostra est ^unc Deo committenda. Cuner. i. de^.
Princ. cap. 7.
With great patience to endure the tyranny of mortal Kings, yea when we have
power to resist. And because they be next under God in earth, in all their
injuries To commend the revenge unto God. Nay he teaches Kings an other
excellent rule of policy, fitting for the preservation of all States, which
is, Paralip. 24. De quo sic Cunerus. Qui fuit verus Rex Iudae, and cum ad Idola
impune relicto D^o declinaret, and Zachariam Prophetam, ^ilium Ieho^dae,
interfecisset, serui quidam Zelo commoti, insidiat^nt Regi, and occiderunt
illum in lectulo suo: sed just ab Ama^ia regem sequente regulati sunt. Cunerus
lib. de O^^i^ Prin^. cap. 7.
He who succeeds a King violently murdered of any, though of a godly zeal,
yet ought he to revenge his Predecessors death by the death of the male factors.

Thus much of the old Testament concerning the law of Subjection; wherein we
have many laws to obey Kings, but none to resist: We ascend to the new
Testament sealed by Christ his death, whose speech is true concerning the
Civil law of the prerogative of Kings which he spoke of the Moral law of God,
Matthew. 5. 17.
I come not to destroy the Law, but to fulfill the Law.

CHAP. VI.
The former Question disputed according to the state of the new Testament.

The Romish showing the state of the question.
Carerius, and Bozius. Vide supra.
THe Pope has all absolute and direct power and dominion temporal over all
Kings and Kingdoms of the world. Which we prove by consent of Divines, and
Canonists: And the Defendors of the contrary to be but mere Politicians. Take
heed, there was a spirit that showed a synopsis of All the nations of the world
to our Savior, and said, Matthew 4. 9.
All these will I give thee: he was no lawful Doner, but a lying Tempter. From
whom it may seem this your doctrine had his stamp, Francise. de Victoria
Relect. 1. Sect. 6.
For (to believe your own Doctor) to say that the Pope has all temporal
domimon over all the world, is nothing else but a flattering of the Pope: And
Bellarminus, vide supra.
False (says your Jesuit) as I shall prove. You will not then contend for
all the world; what say you to all Kings in Christendom? Bellar. vide supra.
Victor. Relect. 1. Sect. 6 Sander. de visib. Monarch. pertotum and alij supra.
He has over these indirectly, that is, as it may be behoouefull for the
Spiritual good, power temporal over all these. By what law? Non iure politico
sed diuino. Sanderus lib. 2. de Clauib. David. cap. 10.
Not by Civil but Divine law. Well then, this would be proved, either by
Scripture or by tradition, or at least some probable reason.

Objections from Scriptures.
1. Objection. The Romish pretense.
Petrus quo tempore accepit ^laues regni coelorum, accepit ius quoque
destruendi and aedificandi regna in Ecclesia Christi, quando id expediret.
Itaq: gladium politicum habuit Petrus concessum sibi, non quidem ad finem
politicum, sed ad spiritualem, viz. salutem animarum: in quem finem ^o gladio
Pontifex vti debet. Sanderus lib. 2. de Clauibus. cap. 10. page 41.
Saint Peter when he received of Christ the keys of the Kingdom of heaven, he
also received the temporal and civil sword, and a right of erecting and
destroying kingdoms; as far forth as he might think it behoouefull for
the good of souls, and to this end ought the Popeto use the civil sword. This
cannot be, for In Ecclesia sunt claues regni coelo^um. Matthew. 16. and 18. Sed
haec potestas est alia a civilly potestate, quae certe non habet huiusmodi
claues: confirmatur, quia vsus ostenditur, Remittendi and r^endi peccati, Ioh.
20. quae potestas non est in Rege civilly. Victoria Relect. 1. Sect. 2.. Teruo
probatur.
By the k^ies of the kingdom of heaven (as your Victoria determines) is
signified a spiritual authority different from the civil jurisdiction, as is
proved by the use, which is remitting and deteining of sins: which no way
can belong to civil authority. Neither can any show me any one Doctor of but
reasonable antiquity, (Peto vel ex millibus vnum) who by keys, understand a
civil power. It were au excellent Art if you could make a sword of a pair of
keys; and as profound Divinity were it to turn spiritual regiment into
politic.

2. Objection. The Romish pretense.
Cum dicitur Petro, [Pasce oues] Ioh. 20. intelligitur ea potestas, quae est ad
gregem regendum necessa^a, id^irco ad Lupos, id est, Principes haereticos
arcendos, and pabulu^ ouibus ministrandum. Bell. lib. 5. de Pont. ca. 7.
Where it is said to Peter, John 21. [Feede my sheepe] is understood the power
whereby the Pastor may drive away a woolfe (such an one is an heretical Prince)
from his flock. Again: Nam Princeps ours and silius est sacerdotis
spiritualis, at Sacerdos Ouis aut silius Principis nullo modo dici possit:
quoniam omnes Clerici suum habent Principem spiritualem, a quo non in
spiritualibus solum, sed etiam in temporalibus reguntur: neque sieri possit vt
duas agnoscant Principes in rebus temporalibus, cum, iuxta Euangelium, nemo
possit duobus Dominis seruire. Bellar. disp. de Exempt. Cleric. cap. 3. in
calce. Quod opus vna cum libris de Indulgentijs compingitur.
A Prince is the spiritual sheep of a Priest, but a Priest cannot be called
the son of a Prince: for Priests have their spiritual Governor, to whom
they are subject both in spiritual and temporal matters, and to no other.

The Answer.
It was never read, heard, nor dreamed, that [Feed my sheep] should signify
any temporal feeding, as though Princes must be dieted corporally at the Popes
discretion; this will follow upon your assertion, because the metaphor, Feed,
has more significant relation to diet then to dominion. Again, Aliae
Scripturae Principibus Pastoru^ and Patrum officia tribuunt, quemadmodum David
pro subditis suis interpellans; Ego, inquit, peccaui, iste grex quid co^metuit?
vbi 70 Interpretes habent, Ego sum Pastor, istae Oues etc. 1. Paralip. 21.
Cunerus de Offic. Princ. cap. 1. Rex saepe Pastor dicitur. Mich. 5. Ribera Ies.
Comm. in hunc locum. Number. 31.
Scriptures do often call Princes Pastors, as your own Doctors demonstrate,
and as plain it is, Kings are called nourcing fathers; Es. 29. And we will
make no question but that Father is a relative to a Son, and therefore a
Priest may be a son unto a Prince.

Lastly your device of exemption of Priests is too crude to be easily digested
of any reasonable Divine, for (as your Victoria says) Personae Clericorum non
exemptae sunt omnino, and quo ad a potestate civilly, nec iure humano nec
diuino: qui praeter quod sunt Eclesiae, sunt etiam ciues Reip. and Rex est Rex
non solum Laicorum, sed etiam Clericorum; Ergo aliquo modo Clerici subijciuntur
ei, qui in quantum ad temporalia non administrantur potestate Ecclesiastica,
sed in istis Principi obedire tenentur. Fr. Victoria Relect. 1. Sect. 7.
Priests, besides that they are Ministers of the Church, they are likewise
members of the commonwealth; and a King is as well a King of the Clergy, as
of the Laity: therefore the Clergy is subject unto the civil authority in
temporal things; for such matter is not ruled by any power spiritual. a
plain demonstration.

The third Objection from the prophecy of the old Testament, and the events of
the new. The Romish pretense.
This is the tenor of the late yongue Bulls of Popes, as of Paulus ^piscopus,
seruus seruorum Dei, etc. Nos in iustitiae sede constitu^i, iuxta Prophetae
vaticinium dicentis, [Ecce te constitui super Gentes, and regna, vt ^u^llas and
de^^ruas, plants and aedifices. Bulla Pauli 3. aduersus Henric. 8. Regem
Angliae.
Paulus 3. Pius, etc. Regnans in excelsis, cui data est omnis in coelo and in
terra potestas, quem super omnes Gentes and super omnia regna Principem
constituit, Qui euellat, destruat, dissipet, disperdat, plantet, aedificet,
etc. Bulla Pij Quinti cap. 39. and aliae aliorum Pontificum Bullae.
Pius 5. and all their followers. I the servant of the servants of God, placed
in the seat of justice, according to the Prophecy of Jeremy, where it is
written (Ierem. 1.) [Behold I have appointed thee over Nations to root them up
and destroy them, to plant and establish them] do excommunicate these Kings
and their favorites, absoluing subjects from their obedience, and commanding
them to take up arms to root them out. Is this the true sense of that
Prophecy? Hoc Propheta in persona Christi ad Romanum Pontificem loquitor.
Carerius de potest. Romans Pont. lib. 1. cap. 3. Rursus. ^er. Prophetae autoritas
haec temporalis con^irmatur, sc. per correctionem and punitionem, si Reges mali
fierent. Carer. ibid.
It was spoken to the Bishops of Rome in the person of Christ.

The Answer.
O arrogant glossers, yea impudent glosers and peruerters of the sacred Oracles
of God! Did ever Jeremy put down Kings to root them out? Hearken to your
Lyranus: Tantum denu^ciando esse destruendas. Lyranus in cum locum.
No, he did only denounce Gods judgments against wicked Kings. Hearken to
that godly Pope Gregory, who shows that Ieremies act was only Frustra
Hieremias, nisi peruersa destrueret, praedicando recta edificaret. Greg. Mag.
Past. cura Admonit. 35.
By preaching, and not by fighting. If you demand in whom this prophecy was
fulfilled, listen to your Doctor Capella: His verbis totum Hieremiae
ministerium comprehend^tur, haec in Christo completa sunt, qui Idolatria and
erroribus destructis, and Principe huius mundi for as eiecto, Ecclesiam suam
aedificauit atque plantauit. ff. Andr. Capella Theol. Doctor in hunc locum.
It was fulfilled in Christ, at whose coming Idols and false Oracles ceased,
and the Prince of the World was cast out. Which Scripture lest the Pope might
unadvisedly apply to himself, holy Bernard does forewarne him to Propheta,
cum art, [Vt euellas, etc.] Quid horum fastum sonat? schemate quod a magis
rust^cam ^udor^s labor spiritualis expressus est. Vt nos etiam sentiamus
impositum esse nobis minist^um, non dominium datum. Esto Propheta, sed nunquid
plusquam Propheta? si sapis, er is contentus mensura quam ubi mensus est Deus:
nam quod amplius est, a malo est. Bernard. lib. 2. Consid. ad Eugen.
Beware of insolent pride: for these words being applied unto the Pastors of
the church, betoken only an industrio^s ministry, but no predominant
authority.

CHAP. VII.
The antiquity of this pretended Papal power is examined from the Apostles
times.

The Romish pretense.
Allen in his Admonition page 34.
THe Priest of the new Testament in the Priesthood of Christ have more
authority than that of the law over Kings to depose them.

The Answer.
This is not probable, except you can show some footings either of Christ, or
his blessed Apostles, or their holy successors in the purer periods of times.
But

1. Christ used not this civil jurisdiction.
For Regia autoritas non erat Christo necessaria, neque vtilis, sed plane
inutilis and supers^ua: nam finis aduentus eius in mundum erat redemptio humani
generis, ad quem potestas regia necessaria non fuit, sed solum spiritualis.
Bell. lib. 5. de Pont. cap. 4.
Princely authority (as your chief Jesuit confesses) had been supers^uou^
in Christ, whose end was to work the work of Redemption of man, whereunto the
only spiritual power was sufficient.

2. Peter and the other Apostles never challenged temporal authority.
This also is confessed: Carerius, Bellarmunus, Acosta, and alij.
Apostles (says Carerius) were subject unto the heathen Kings in all temporal
respects: because Pontifical government is only over Christians, within the
church, but the Heathens are said by the Apostle to be without. 1. Cor. 6.
Hereupon your Saunders does conclude, that Quo te^pore Principes erant
Ethnici, Petius illoru Iudex non erat, sed e contra in omnibus causis
ciuilibus, non minus quam caeteri homines, illis subijciebatur: quia Pontifex
non est Iudex nisi Christianorum. 1. Cor. 6.
Peter received of Christ no power over Heathen Kings. He conceiteth a reason.
Duplex fortitudinis potestas est, altera in faciendo res arduas animose, altera
in patiendo res aduersas constanter: cum igitur illa, quae in patiendo
consistit, sit praestantior, hanc patiendi potestatem sibi ac suis Christus
elegit, vt mundum in admirationem potentiae suae cohuerteret. Idcirco Apostoli
and primi Apostolorum successores hoc mysterium non ignorantes, ab armis pro
fide sumendis abstinuerunt. Sunderus quo supra. cap. 13.
There is a double power, of fortitude, and Christian valor, (says he) The
one in suffering adversity constantly, the other in attempting and effecting
hard matters courageously: that power of suffering, as more excellent, Christ
chose as fittest for himself, and his Apostles, and their successors for the
gaining of the world to the faith, and therefore they did abstain from arms
and prescribe obedience. Quid ad me de his qui for as sunt iudicare? Careriu, de
potest. Pont. lib. 2. cap. 23. Idei^ co Petrus in Neronem and Tyrannos Gentium
nullam potestatem accepit. Sanderus de Clauib. David. lib. 2. cap. 13.


The Romish insist.
Non Johannes Baptista, inquiunt Aduersarij, non Christus, non Apostoli in
Regem impium surgere, aut eum e medio tollere docuerunt: hoc leuissimum est,
quali vero eadem mstituendae Ecclesiae ratio atque institutae credenda sit; ac
non potius prius plantari atque irrigari vineam, quam incidi conuenit. Lib. de
Abdicat. iusta Henric. Regis. page 278.
As though there were not a difference of the condition of the church; as of a
vine, there is one time to plant and water it, an other to loppe and prune it.

The Answer.
As though the Church, which before time was planted and watered with the blood
and deaths of holy Martyrs, ought now (for that is this man's scope) to be
lopped in the cutting off of the heads of wicked Kings. Nay but if the patient
suffering of the tyranny of Kings, be (as your Sanders truly said) the more
excellent Christian power, than acting and working the death of Kings: and that
therefore that power was practiced of our Lord Christ, and bestowed on the
Apostles for the confirmation of the glorious faith: pardon us if we fall at
Jesus feet, to choose the better part: especially knowing that 2. Tim. 4.
To all those who suffer unjustly for justice, there remains a crown of
justice, which the just Judge will give in that day of Revelation.

CHAP. VIII.
The primitive Successors of the Apostles for the space of two hundred years
and long after, did acknowledge all Obedience temporal to all Emperors and
Kings, whether heathen or baptized; although Tyrants or Heretics or
Apostatates, yea even then, when they wanted no force to resist.

The Romish pretense.
Bellar. supra.
IN former ages Christians (said your Bellarmine) did not depose wicked
Emperors, as Diocletian, Julian, and such, because they wanted force. Which
makes some Catholics (said your Bannes) now not resisting their Kings,
excusable, because they want force: For it is commendable (said your Frenchman)
to suffer when thou can not resist. Otherwise Catholics (said your
Creswell) are bound to hazard their lives in this cause, assooue as they can
make resistance. Whereunto might have beeneadded your Cardinal Allen, Allen in
his true and modest Defense of English Catholics.
Ancient Bishops (says he) might have excommunicated the Arian Emperors, and
hauedefended themselves from them by force of arms; but they did not, by
reason of greater forces of their Persecutors.

The Answer.
This is the very Arche of all your rebellious building, which all your
Jesuits have erected, and whereupon our bastard English Cardinal does insist
in his book entitled, A True and modest Defense for English Catholics:
which how false and shameless it is, I am now ready to show unto all true
catholics for their confirmation, and to the others for their conversion.

First in general.
For. A Christo passo per interuallum ducentorum annorum, nusquam legimus
Chr^stianos contra Imperatores iam saeuientes in eos and plu^imos necantes,
contra tempublicam quiequa^ esse molitos, etia^ cum Christiani pares viribus
and nu^o fuerunt; imo religionem suam anteferri alijs omnibus, seque ab eo
Christianos dixerunt appellari, cuius sit hoc pijssimum dogma, vt Magistratibus
pareant. Tolossanu^ lib. 26. de Repub. cap. 7. 10.
For the space of two hundred years we cannot read (says your learned
Tolossanus) of any christians resisting Emperors of other times, or in their
most bloody persecutions to have raised any tumult in the Commonwealth; no not
then, when they were able both by equal number and power to match them: But
heerin they thought their religion advanced before all others, and gloried in
this behalf to be called Christians, who professed this as a most holy
doctrine, namely, obedience to Magistrates.

True, the patient Christian did advance Christian religion by suffering under
Kings; but the now pragmaticall Christian (God grant I may be a false Prophet)
by acting and plotting Strategemes, in resisting Kings, will ruinate the holy
faith.

To Tolossanus agrees your Cunerus, saying, Cum Martyrs no^ Testament^,
propter multitudinem, facile contra tyrannidem Persecutorum suorum conspirare
potuissent, pro obedientia tamen and honor, quem iussi sunt Christiani regibus
and sublimiori potestati defer, maluerunt pati quam resistere, si quando
^^gerevel euadere non poterant. De quibus perpulchre Augustinus lib. 2. contra
Faustum, Vbi venit plenitudo tempo^is, iam demonstrandum erat esse aliam vitam
pro qua debet hae^ vita contemni; promde per quorum confessiones and mortes hoc
Deo placuit attestari Martyrs appellantur, quorum numerus tantus essloruit, vt
si eos Christus vellet armare, atque adiuuare propugnantes, sicut Hebraeos
Patres ad. unit, quae Gentes restiterent, quae regna non caederent? C^nerus de
O^^ic. Prin^. cap. 7.
The Martyrs of those times, when they by reason of their multitude, might
easily have conspired against their persecuting Tyrants; (Hearken you
conspirators and be ashamed) yet for the honor of Christ by performing
obedience to the higher power chose rather to suffer then resist. For, as says
S. Augustine, they would demonstrate their hope of the life to come, and, by
their confessions and deaths, whereby they gave witness to the truth of God,
were called Martyrs, witnesses: whose number was so great, that if it had
pleased Christ to arm them, and aid them, as he did the Hebrews of old, what
nation could have resisted thew force? Although these glorious Martyrs of the
mother Church in their death, whereby they have anouched that good and glorious
profession of Christian faith, have thereby also sealed the infallible truth of
Christian obedience due to earthly Potentates: yet will we not be content with
these two hundred years, but challenge the current and successiue practice of
4000. more. We therefore come to

CHAP. IX.
The same duty of Subjection proved in the next 400. years.

FIrst Tertullian in his Apology in defense of Christian loyalty. Absit vt
virtute humana vindicetur Christiana secta, aut doleat pati in quo probatur: si
enim hosts extraneos, no^ tantum occultos, vindices agere vel. lemus, deesset
vis numerorum aut copiarum? externi sumus, and vestra omnia implemus vrbes,
insulas, castella, municipia, conciliabula, castra ipsa, tribus, decurias,
Senatum, forum; sola vobis templa reliquimus: cui bello non idonei, non prompti
suissemus, etiam impares copijs trucidamur, si non apud istam disciplinam magis
occidi liceret quam occidere? Tertull. lib. Apolog. cap. 37.
God forbid (says he) that Christian professors should revenge themselves
with humane power, or fear that touch of persecution whereby they are tried:
for if we would either seek secret revenge, or use open hostility, can you
imagine we could want sufficient force? we are visibly known unto you, and are
interested in all your affairs, your Cities, Isles, Forts, Borrowes, Tents,
Tribes, Decuries, Senate, Ma^kets are all full of Christians, except only your
temples. Now what war are not we ready and sit for, who being in power more,
yet do willingly suffer death, if by this profession it were not more lawful
to be killed, than to kill? Herein you who boast often of yours as great
multitudes in England, as there were locusts in Egypt, able to do mischief if
you would, and professing also to be willing as soon as you are able: Compare
but your God speed, with Tertullian his God forbid, and then you shall see that
God cannot be said to be otherwise in your Popes Bulls to kings, than he was in
Aarons calfe, for in both there is a sin of rebellion against Gods ordinance.

The second is Cyprian; he likewise penneth an Apology, and directs it to
Demetrianus the Officer of the persecuting Emperor, answering in behalf of
all the Christians of his time. Laedere seruos Dei and Christi persecutionibus
tuis desine, quos laesos diuina vltio defendit: inde enim est quod nemo
nostru^, quando apprehenditur, reluctatur; nec se aduersus iniusta^ violentiam,
quamuis nimius and copiosus sit noster populus, vlciscitur, etc. Cyprian. ad
Demetr.. 14. vt refert Pammel. page 328. col. 2.
None of v^when he is apprehended does resist, or revenge himself of your
unjust violence, although the number of our people be marvelous great: for our
certain confidence we have in him that will take vengeance of all
transgressors, does confirm our patience. Whereby you are taught not to glory
of patience, who (if you had force) would banish obedience.

The third is Athanasius, writing an Apology for himself to Constantius an
Arian Emperor, and therefore heretical; to free himself of a slanderous
imputation, which was that he had suggested some matter to the Emperor
Constance a Catholic, thereby to kindle coals of dissension betwixt
Brethren; therefore he says. Deum test muoco in anima^ meam, and testis est
frater tuus, me nunquam tui mentione^ in malam partem esse loquutu^; non adeo
insanus fui, neque oblitus sum ma^dau Domini, Non maledices Regivel in cord
^o: sed obsequutus sum mandatis tuis, quae praeceperent vt ab Alexandria
discederem. Athanas. in Apolog ad Constantium.
I call God to record upon my soul, and your Brother Constance could witness,
that I never spoke word of you in evil part; I was not so mad as to forget
the commandment of God, who says; Thou shall not speak evil of thy King, no
not in thy heart: but did obey your command, when I had charge to depart from
Alexandria. The sum is this. When he had power to stir the Emperor
Constance a true professor, against his brother Constantius an heretic; yet
he made conscience, not to raise rebellion, but rather submitted himself to
the violence of persecution. If your Pope had been truly catechized in this
Creed of Athanasius belonging to the truth of faithful allegiance, he would
not so often have raised King against King, as your selves confessed: And why
then may not he be that man prophesied of, Apoc. 6. 4.
Sitting on a red horse, and having power (permissiuely) given unto him, to
take peace from the earth, and that they should kill one another?

The fourth is Gregory Nazianzene, in his Oration against the Emperor Julian,
who (the very hinge of this cause) had been a Christian, and did after
Apostate and prove an Infidel, says: In quos vestium populum, exaest^antem
contra vos, insurgere sollicitauimus? quibus vitae periculu^ attulimus? etc.
Nazianz. Orat. 2. in Iulianum.
Against whom of you did we ever raise any insurrection, or sedition among
your people, though otherwise of themselves prone to rebellion: or whose death
did we ever conspire? But, you, lately whose deaths have you not conspired?

The fifth is Ambrose. When the Emperor infected with the heresy of Arius,
had sent magistrates to remove Ambrose from his Bishopric, and the people
thronged to rescew him, Auxentius haeret. de Imperatore vult inuidiam
co^moucre, etc. quasi vero superiori anno, qua^do ad palatium suum petitus, cum
praesentibus Primatibus, ante consistotium tractaretur, cum Imperator Basilicam
vellet atripere, ego tunc aulae regalis contemplatione fractus sim, nonne
nouerunt, quod vbi me cognouit populus palatium petisse, ita irruit vt vim eius
far non possent? nonne tunc rogatus sum vt populum muto sermon mulcerem?
reuocaui populum, and tamen inuidiam non euasi, quam quidem inuidiam ego
temperandam arbitror, non timendam. Ambros. Tom. 3. lib. 5. post Epist. 32.
Oration ad Auxent. Et Lachrymae meae arma mea sunt, aliter nec debeo, nec possum
resistere. Ibid.
In such power (says Ambrose) that the Officers could not resist their force;
I quieted the people, and yet could not avoid their malice. Then sure he did
abhor by raising sedition among the people, to provoke magistrates to malice.
The same Father upon that penitential dumpe of holy David, [ Psalm. 51. 6.
to thee only have I sinned* proves that some Qui tenentur legibus audent suum
negare peccatum, dedignantur rogare indulgentiam, quam petebat David, qui
nullis tenebatur legibus humanis, neque enim vllis ad poenam vocantur legibus
tuti imperij potestate. Homini ergo non peccauit cui non tenebatur obnoxious.
Ambros. Apolog David. cap. 4. and cap. 10.
Kings are not subject to any penal law of man. And for S. Ambrose his active
profession in this kind, it is confessed by your own Doctor, saying that
Potuit Ambrosius armis Ecclesiam suam tucri, and vim virepellere, nec ideo
armis abstinuit, quod armis esset inferior, ab eo namque populus stabat, and ab
eo pars maxima militum, ab eo (quod caput est) Christus Jesus omnesque
coelites, vt Augustinus Epist. 166. Barelaius lib. 3. contra Monarchom. cap
(...).
Saint Ambrose when he was sufficiently armed both by power of people and
soldiers, strengthened with the might of Christ, yet would not defend his
Church with violence against the fury of the heretical Emperor.

The sixth is Basil, Basilius Magnus, vt est in eius vita, Iuliano Caesaria^
Cappadociae ven^enti obuiam processit, and pandi ^i Ciuitatis portas, om^que
subditorum officia exhibere suasit, and vt odium conceptu^ in Christianos
mitiga^et, supplex deprecatus, quanquam poterat se vallo ac muris sine vllo
periculo co^tinere, etc. Barclaius qu^ supra lib. 5. cap. 5.
Who by reason of the strength of the forts, wherein he was, needed not to
fear any danger; yet suppliantly offered himself to Julian, the Apostate: and
caused the gates of the city to be opened unto him, thereby to appease his
wrath against Christians.

The seventh is S. Augustine: who in his expositio^s of some proposition, does,
concerning this point, give this instruction. Romans 13 [Necessitate subditi
estote.] Ad hoc valet vt intelligamus, quia necesse est propter hanc vitam
subd^os nos esse, non resistentes, Principilius, siquid auserre illi voluerint,
in quo illis potestas data est in temporalibus rebus, tamen quoniam dixit,
[Necessitate subditi estote] ne quis non integro animo and pura dilectione
subditus non fieret, huiusmodi potestatibus addidit, dicens, [Non solum propter
itam, sed etiam propter conscientiam:] id est, non solum ad iram eundendam,
quod possit simultate fieri, sed vt tua conscientia certus sis, illius
dilectione ^d facere, cui subditus ^ussu Domini tui: Hoc est quod alio loco
serus suadet, Obedite Dominis vestris etiam dyscolis, non ad oculum seruientes,
tanquam homi^ placentes. August. lib. exposit. quorundam proposit. ad number. 74.
Whereas the Apostle (says he) exhorts that we should not resist governors
in temporal matters, he says, [It is necessary that we be subject:] and lest
any might not perform this in love, but as from constraint and necessity, he
adds; [Not for fear of wrath, but for conscience sake:] that is, not
dissemblingly, but dutifully in good conscience, and love to him (God) who
commands subjection: and, as in another place he exhorts, Servants Ephesians.
6. and ^ss. 3.
Obey your hard and injurious masters; but not with eyseruice, as only pleasing
men, but God. Therefore you must not plead Your most humble subject above
ground, and from the concaue and vautes of the earth seek how to humble your
sovereign. Forey service and hart-seruice do distinguish a Christian from a
Pagan, according to that of Arnobius, Vos Eth^ios ^entes, nos ^ro consci^um.
Ar^b. contra Gentes. lib. 8.
You Pagans do fear only the outward sight of men; we only the inward
conscience of our mind.

The eight is Pope Leo, writing to a true Catholic Emperor. Debes Imperator
^er aduertere Regiam potestatem tibi non sol^m ad mundi regimen, sed, maxim ad
Ecclesiae praesidium esse collatam. Epist. 75. ad I^on. August.
You may not be ignorant (says he) that your Princely power is given unto you
not only in worldly regiment, but also (Spiritual) for the preservation of the
Church. As if he had said, Not only in causes temporal, but also
inspirituall, so far as it belongs to outward preservation, not to the
personal administration of them: And this is the substance of our English
oath; and further neither do our Kings of England challenge, nor subjects
condescend unto. We are not yet passed the lists of 500. years.

The last is Pope Gregory in his Epistle to Mauritius, a right Christian
Emperor. Ad hoc, potestas super omnes homines dominoru^ meorum pietati ^elitus
data est, vt qui boni sunt, adiuuentur, and coelorum via largius pateat, vt
terrestre regnum coelesti regno famuletur ad haec ecceper me seruum vltimum and
vestrum. Lib. 2. Epist. cap. 100. Rursus.
To this end (says he) is power over all persons given from heaven unto my
Lord, that good men may be helped in the way to the kingdom of heaven. And
again, In serenissimis iussionibus suis Dominorum pietas, dum me in quibusdam
redarguere studuit, parcendo mihi minime pepercit: nam in eis vrbanae
simplicitatis vocabulo me fatuum appellat; Sacerdotibus autem non ex terrena
potestate Dominus noster citius indignetur, sed excellenti consideratione
propter cum cuius serui sunt, eis ita dominetur, vt debitam reuerentiam
impendat. Idem. Epist. 75.
In those gracious commands of your Highness, your grace in sparing me did not
spare me one whit, but was pleased to call me (whereby is signified a civil
simplicity) fool. But let not my Lord from his earthly preeminence too hastily
disdain the Priests of God; but in his princely wisdom, for his cause whose
servants they be, so rule over them, that he deny them not due reverence.
Herein we find another clause of the form of our English oath, Power over
all persons, even the Pope himself yielding that, which is not due but only to
a Superior rule: and requiring that which may be yielded to an inferior, 1.
Pet. 3. 4. Giving honor to the woman, as to the weaker vessel.
Reverence, or courteous respect. Hoc Gregorius Magnus ingenue agnoscebat,
Imperatoribus (inquit) concessum est domiminari Sacerdotibus. Espencaeus Comm.
in Tit. 3. Digress. 10.
For it is without doubt (says your Bishop Espencaeus) that Gregory did
acknowledge a sovereignty in Emperors over Priests. We have not yet passed
the period of 600. years: now therefore

CHAP. X.
We descend unto the ages following of four centuries more: which may make up
a complete thousand years.

The Romish Pretense.
Tunc Con^ genera^ fi^^ant n^ sine Imperatorum sumptibus; and ^o tempore
Po^tifex subijci^ bat se Imperatoribus in te^poralibus; and ideo non poterant
inuito Imperatore aliquid agere: id^irco Pontifex supplicabat Imperatori, vt
iuberet co^uocari Synodum. At post illa tempora omnes causae mutatae sunt, quia
Pontifex, qui est caput in spiritualibus, non est subiectus in temporalibus.
Bellarm. lib. 1. de Conc. cap. 13.. Habemus ergo.
ANcient general Councels were gathered not without the cost of (good and
Christian ones) Emperors, and were made by their consents: for in those d^ues
the Pope did make supplication to the Emperor, that by his authority he would
gather Synods. But after those times all causes were changed, because the Pope,
who is head in spiritual matters, cannot be subject in temporal.

Who would think this man could be a Papist, much less a Jesuit, how much
less a Cardinal, who thus disableth the title of the Pope, granting to us in
these words, [After these times (that is, after 600. years) the truth of purer
Antiquity challenging Popes to be subject unto Christian Emperors? And yet,
who but a Papist would (as it were in despite of Antiquity) defend the
degenerate State, saying, After those times Popes might not be subject in
temporal matters? As if he should have said; Thou gracious favor of ancient
Christian Emperors, thou sound judgment of ancient reverend Fathers, thou
devout subjection of ancient holy Popes; in sum, thou ancient purity, and
pure Antiquity adieu. But we may not so bastardly reject the depositum and
doctrine of humble subjection, which we have received from our Fathers of the
first 600. years: and not so only, but which (as your Bercklay witnesses) the
universal Christian world embraced Sed id grauissimo argumento esse debet,
quod nemo sanctorum Patrum, vel Scriptor alioqui Orthodoxus per totos mill
annos and amplius, licet Ecclesia tunc omnibus flo^eret copijs, and impiorum
Principum and Tyrannorum magnus esset numerus, tale quid vnquam vel verbo vel
scripto doc^sse legitur. Nec tamen ab autoritate negatiua tantum argumentamur,
sed proponimus Ambrosij, Hieronymi, Augustini, Gregorij, and aliorum eius aeui
tempora, in quibus satis plantatam and rigatam Ecclesiam esse nouimus. Barel.
lib. 6. aduers Monarch. cap. 26.
With common consent for a full thousand years. Which is further confessed by
others in the Chapters following.

CHAP. XI.
We further challenge the consent of successiue Antiquity in the current of
more than 1000. years after Christ, wherein the Papallpretended Jurisdiction
over Kings, has been evidently controwled.

The Romish Pretense.
Bellar. supra. Carerius lib. 2. de potest. Romans Pont. cap. 21. The Apology of
the English Catholics cap. 5
WE have many examples of Emperors deposed by Popes, as Leo, Frederick, Henry
1. Freder. 2. Otho 1. Lewis 3. Lewis 4. Henry 4. who was deposed by Gregory the
7.

The Answer.
This argument, The Popes did depose them from their temporal authority, Ergo,
He had authority to depose them, will justify all Pirates, and thieves in
their spoils; all Tyrants in their usurpations; and will impeach this
authority of the Pope, which you would hereby defend. For (as your Cardinal
does confess) Bellarm quo supra.
Many Emperors have deposed many Popes. Therefore from the act done to
conclude a right of doing is no good argument. Let us therefore examine the
work by the square, and not the square by the work; and by the law of doing,
try the lawfulness of the thing done. And first, beyond the antiquity of a
thousand years granted, we find that the first who ever violently deposed an
Emperor, is the last of them whom you cite for authority of deposing them. For
Lego and relego Regum and Imperatoru^ res gestas, and nusquam inuenio que^quam
illorum ante hunc Henricu^ Imperatorem, quem Gregorius 7. alias Hildebrandus
deposuit, a Summo Pontifice priuatum. Otto Frisingens. lib. 6. Chron. cap. 35.
vt refert Tolossanus lib. 26. de R^pub. cap. 5.
I read and read (says your Otto Frisingensis) and I find that Pope Gregory
the 7. called Hildebrand, (in the year 1060.) was the first Pope that ever
deprived an Emperor of his regiment. Hildebrandus ^uit, qui nouello schismate
regnum and sacerdotium scindens, primus sacerdotalem lancem contra diadema
eleuans; se, s^o^; exemplo Pontifices alios contra Principes and excommunicatos
gladio accinxit. Claud. Espen^. Epise. C^mm. in Tim. lib. 2. digress. page 275.
He was the first Pope (says your bishop Espencaeus) who by making a new rent
betwixt Kingdom and Popedom did raise force against the Imperial diadem,
arming himself and by his example excited other Popes against Princes
excommunicate. An act new, you see; and that it is also naught will appear by
the Actor. Gregorius septimus, qu^ ipsum omnes Italiae Episcopi iampridem
excommunicassent, quia sedem Apostolicam per Simoniacam haeresin occupasset,
and alijs capitalibus c^iminibus polluisset; Regem autem secus ac decuit
egisse, quod homini haeretico and probris omnibus infamato maiestatem regiam
submiserit. Scaffneburg. In Anno 1077.
Pope Greg. the 7. (says your Chronographer) was excommunicate of the Bishops
of Italy, for that he had defamed the Apostolic See by Simony and other
Capital crimes.

There is an Instance given in the Donation of Constantine, which proves the
Popes to have been notable forgerers. The Romish Pretense.
Bonifacius Papa ad Philippum Franciae Regem ita scripsit: Noueris te in
spiritualibus and temporalibus nobis subesse; and oppositum sentientes
haereticos esse reputamus, and declaramus. Carer. lib. 1. de Pont. potest. cap.
3.
Boniface Bishop of Rome, (so says Carerius) writ to Philip King of France: to
let him understand that Philip ought to acknowledge unto him both spiritual
and temporal subjection, and whosoever shall think otherwise (says Boniface)
we judge and declare him an Heretic.

The Answer.
May it be lawful for us to ask you by what law this temporal is assumed?
Constantini donatio saus contra haereticos a nostris defe^sa and probata est.
Sanderus lib. 4. de Clauib. David. cap. 4.
There is extant the Donation of Constantine (says Sanders) sufficiently
defended against all Heretics. Then belike this jurisdiction was from man and
not from God. Quam Catholici veram esse fatentur: quae quidem potius redditio
dici debet, quia Constantinus reddidit Christi Vicario, quod tyrannica^
autoritate diu det^^uerat, vt dicamus cum Tu^ ceremata, De Eccle. lib. 2. cap.
41. Pontificem Romanum habere dominium temporale immediate a Deo, declaratiue a
Concilijs, a Constantino promulgatice. Carerius lib. 2. de Pont. cap. 21.
Not so (says Carerius) for it was rather a restitution than a Donation,
because he did but return it, being a Christian, which he had received by
Tyrannical usurpation, being an Heathen: therefore according to the judgment
of Turrecremata, did not now so much give it as publish it to be due to the
Pope. What was contained in this schedule? In ipsa Donationis pagina contulit
in Pontisicem Regnum S. ciliae, Neopolitanum, Italiae, Galliae, Hispaniae,
Germaniae, ^ritannae, totum denique occidentem. Valla Declam. de Donat.
Constant. And this is expressly challenged in the form of the pretended
donation.
There was heerin specified (says your Valla, and so is the tenor of the
Donation) a conueiance of the kingdom of Sicily, Naples, all Italy, France,
Spain, the Countries of the Germans, and Britans, and all the Western part of
the world. This is a goodly gift, if it be good: but I hear Luther say, Ingens
est hoc mendacium, quod tamen reperitur Did. 96. etc. Luther. Tract. aduers.
Pa^.
It is a large lie. But you had rather hear your Doctors speak, although they
may seem partial, because yours. Antiqui probatae fidei Autores, qui omnia
gesta Constantini scripserunt diligentissime, eius Donationis mentionem nullam
faciunt. Canus loc. theol. lib. 1. cap. 5.
The most ancient Historians, authors of best credit (says your Canus) and
such as purposely, and most diligently recorded the acts of Constantine, and
yet make no mention of any such Donation: Quam Pius secundus Pontifex, vt
adulterinam and subdititiam refellit; inuehiture; contra miseros (vt eius verbo
vtar) Legistas, qui tantum sudant disputando and valuerit, quod nullo vnquam
tempore fuit. Balbus de coronat. ad Carol. 5. Imperatorem.
Which Pius the second Pope of Rome, did (as says your bishop Balbus) Infra
cap. 12. in Ballus test. and cap. 13. by Popish Lawyers.
prove to be a slatte counterfeit. So that now your Popes temporal hold should
be forfetted, because it does appear that your Pastor, in this challenge, is a
mere imposter. The Donation is called palea, and therefore as light chafe I
pass this over. What is your next claim?

CHAP. XII.
Popish Arguments from Reason. The first, wherein they (failing to prove the
temporal dominion of the Pope by succession) endeavor to prove it from
success.

The Romish Pretense.
Romanos Pontifices vrbis Romae non solum possessionem, verum etiam dominium
iamdiu adeptos esse nemo est qui nesciat: stupenda quidem res, and supra quam
dici possit admiranda; vt cum potentissimi quique Imperatores per aliquot
secula omnem suam vim in ex^erminandis ex v^be Roma Pontificibus Romany
srustra explicassent, nunc e contrario Pontifices Romani absque vlla vi Romano:
Imperatores ex arce imperi^ semouerunt, palatijs Caesarum atque adeo tota vrbe
in suam proprietatem conuersa. Digitus Dei est hic. Sander. lib. 4. de Clau^b.
Daui^. cap. 4.
THe Popes of Rome have long since got not only possession but also dominion of
the city of Rome: a matter to be wondered at, to see how after that the
Emperors had many times sought to root out the Popes of Rome by force, the
Popes have b Id quod diuina prouidentia factu^ est. Bellar. lib. 1. de Conc.
cap. 13.. Quarta. etc.
contrarily removed the Emperors out of Rome, the chief town of their
Empire; and the property of Caesar's palaces and the city of Rome is without
force come unto the Pope. This (says Sanders) is the singer of God: This
(says Bellarmine) is Gods providence.

The Answer.
As though that which is without force might not be by Proved. Vide infra.
craft; or that they who pretend a Vide supra. cap. 11.
forged donation, of the Emperor Constantine, (as your own Pope called it
before he was Pope) would want art to delude his Successors. It it not
impossible for Pirates to build a ship, for spoil, and call it Gods
providence. Which will so much rather appear in this, by how much more you
labor to obscure it: for Ex Pontificibus primus Bonifacius nonus Anno Domini
1400 vrbis Romae sibi dominatum vindicare tentauit. Balbus Episc. detoronat..
Post mortem.
Boniface the 9. (as your own Balbus notes) was the first who did assay to
challenge there giment of Rome to himself, which was in the year of Christ
1400. And this was but a forged challenge too, as is evident, because Carolus
Quintus ex Imperatoribus Christianis primus vrbem Romam vna cum oppidis vndique
circum sedi Apostolicae habendam sumendamque donauit. Ibid.. Munificentia.
Emperor Charles the fifth, (about the year 1550.) was the first that bestowed
the city of Rome and the Territories adioining upon the Pope.

CHAP. XIII.
Their second Reason from a pretended right of Confirmation of Emperors, to
conclude a power of abrogation and deposing.

Imperator in electione sua a Papa approbatur and confirmatur, and tanquam
minister summi Pontificis gladium ad Pontificis nutum exercens: Ergo est quod
ex nutu Pontificis reprobatur and deponitur. Molina. Ies. Tract. 2. de Iust^.
disp. 29. ad 2.
THe Emperor in his election is confirmed by the Pope, and as the Popes
minister is to use the sword at his command, and at his command be is deposed.
Prove this. Hoc in eoru^ coronatione and consecratione fidelitatisque praestito
iuramento apparet. Carerius lib. 2. de Potest. Pont. cap. 17.
This is apparent by the oath that he takes at his coronation. Prove this.
Propterea in D. Cap. Venerabilem, de elect. Papa loquens in persona sua,
inquit; Ius and autoritas examina^di personam electa^ in Regem, and promouere
ad imperium ad nos spectat, qui eum vngimus and consecramus. Carerius ibid.
cap. 18.
The Pope himself says of himself, that the right and authority of examining
the person elected (says he) to be a King or Emperor belongs to us, who do
anoint and consecrate him. What will you prove by this? Et cum vacat potestas
temporalis, in Administratione Papa succedit: sic enim va. cante imperio
concludit Innoc. Abb. and Felin. and est casus Clem. Past. in sin. de re Ind.
In every vacancie of temporal States the Pope is Successor in the
government. What yet more? Quinimo de causa vel dubio aliquo inter Imperatorem
and Pontificem, Papa erit Iudex competens; imo de causa vel dubio inter Papam
and Imperatore^ cognoscat Papa. Clement. Rom.. Caeterum de iur^iurand. Carer.
lib. 2. de Potest Romans cap. 16.
That when there arises any doubt betwixt the Emperor and a Prince, the Pope
is a competent Judge; yea, when there is a cause or doubt betwixt the Pope and
Emperor, the Pope himself is Judge.

The Answer.
You know the fable: If the wolf may judge the sheep in the cause of troubling
the water, the wolf will be the guilty, but the sheep shall be the condemned.
But that you say [The Emperor is not without the approbation of the Pope,] is
false: And your Consequents, [Ergo the Pope does succeed in vacancy; Ergo he
may depose] are both frivolous and preiudicious to your own cause. To the
Antecedent: your Bishop Lupoldus has satisfied long sithence, saying: Electus
in Regem aut Imperatorem post electionem Principum concordem, vel ex maiore
part ipsorum de se facta^, a Papa vel ab Ecclesia Romana nominatione^ vel
personae approbationem petere and recipere non tenetur. Lupoldus Epise.
Bubenburg. lib. de Iure Regni and Imperij Romans cap. 8. in initio.
That he that is chosen Emperor by the consent of the greater part of
Electours, needs not either seek or receive any approbation of the Pope.
This does your other learned bishop Rations, quibus euincitur ex sola
electione aliquem verum and legitimum Imperatorem nec confirmatione Pontificis
indigere, probatur ex constitutione Ludouici Baiuari Imperato: is de Imperij
iuribus and excellentia: qui legem sanciuit, promulgauitque, in qua haec ad
verbum habentur [Quia nonnulli auaritiae and ambitionis coecitate ducti,
diuertentes a tramite recti sensus in quaedam praua commenta, and assertiones
detestabiles prorumpant, FALLACITER asserentes Imperialem potestatem esse a
Papa, electumque in Imperatorem non esse verum Imperatorem, nec Regem, nisi
prius per Papam confirmetur, approbetur, coronetur: per huiusmodi praua dogmata
Serpens antiquus SEDITIONES procurat. Ideo ad tantum malum eui. tandum de
consilio and CONSENSV ELECTORVM and aliorum P^ncipum Impe^ declaramus,
IMPERIALE^ dignitatem and potestatem a SOLO DEO pendere; nec postquam electio
si^ Pontificis consensu indigere qui^unque contra hoc decretum aliquod ASS^^ERE
aut asserentibus consentire praesumpserint, eos omnibus fe^dis and priuilegi^s,
quae ab imperio detin^t, PRIVAMVS and ipso ^ure and facto decernimus esse
p^tos. Iusuper cos CRIMEN LA^SAE MAIESTATIS incurrisse, and poe^s omnibus
impositis cumen laesae maiestaus committentibus subracere. H^c omnia (...) us
Ep^sc. G^ce^s lib. de Coronat. ad C^r^m 5. Imperat Rations etc. and
Constitutio. etc.
Balbus by many arguments determine, and to this end produces A public
decree of the Emperor Lodouicke, by the consent of all the Electours: Ad ^ging
All such as deny the imperiali dignity to depend only of God, as not needing
the Popes confirmation, to be seditious, and presently they that deny it, and
whosoever consents unto the, to be reputed as guilty of high Treason, and to
incur all the p^s due to so great a guilt We proceed now to your consequent:
and first show the novelty of your claim. Veruntamen qu^cunque ratione ad
Pontificatum pateret ingress^s, nemo Apostoli^ae cymbae gubernacula capescebat
nisi prius Imperatoris autoritas intercessisser, vt cap. Adrianus in Syn. 30.
Did. Mos e^m apud veteres inu^l^erat longo annorum decursu obseruatus, vt
Cleritus populusque Romanus Pontificem eligeret; quo designato in* Imperatoris
manu erat eius electionem ratam initamque habere. Cap. Agatho. Did. 63. (...)
vt collubitum fuerat, aut eum admittere approbareque, aut (...) reiecto atque
exploso alium subrogare: Durauitque is mos vsque ad Adrianum, anno salutis 815;
qui tanti a^mi fuit, vt initio Pontificatus su^, ad senatum populumque Romanum
retulerit, ne^ creando Pontifice Imperatoris autoritas expectaretur, vtque
libera essent cleri populi^; Romara suffragia. Sed huic edicto minime fuit
obtemperatum, permansitque VETVS illa consu^tudo Pontificis (...) Imperatore
confirmand^, use ne ad Gregor. 9. qu^ praefuit Pontificatui anno Christi 1072.
quem Gregor. (vt a^ Pla^) in Pontificem Romanum confirmauit, vt tunc tempo is
mos erat. NVNC AVTEM NOVA RERVM FACIES fortuna immurata est (...) contra^
eflante: C^ legum interpretes hanc (vt put^^t) Imperij calamitatem deplora^e
non desinunt, and causantur ASIV potius DOLOQVE, quam ex aequo bonoque tam
certa diuturna^ue (...) Caesares amisisle ex longa Impe^^j vacatione; non enim
potentia prudentia^u. Summorum Pontificum tantum decoris esle ademptum. Haec
ille, qui mutationem non (...), ^usa^ tripl^ asserit. Vel Imperatores priuile*
^te a se abdi^sse, vel ex abusu perdidisse, vel ad extremum cessante causa
p^g^, e v^o p^ euanuisle. Haec, inquam, Balbus Episc. lib. de Coronat. ad
C^r^nt 5. Imperatorem.. Quomodo olim.
For (as the same your author witnesses) It was an ancient custom and of long
continuance, and till Adrian the Pope in the year of Christ 815. without
contradiction, that the Emperor did confirm the election of the Pope, that
none could be Pope without the approbation of the Emperor: which custom after
the death of Adrian was enforce, till Pope Gregory the 9. which was in the
year 1072. But now we see a new and contrary countenance of the state of
Christendom, which the Lawiers deplore as miserable, and complain that the
Emperor lost his privilege by cosenage and deceit. etc. How it was we leave
the case to be disputed among your Romists: that here is a change of Antiquity
it is not denied, either by your Balbus, or Aliquando saecularis Principis, vt
Imperatores and alij, Pontificem eligebant, vt patet Cap. Adrianus. and cap.
Agatho. Quae priuilegia durabant vsque ad tempora Adriani Secundi. Carerius
lib. 1. de potest. Pont. cap. 17.
Carerius, or any other. Hence we argue.

That if power of approbation of the election of the Emperor do confer a
temporal authority Imperial upon the Pope, then when the Pope was confirmed
by Emperors there was in the Emperor a spiritual authority over the Pope: if
you will deny our latter consequent, then you teach us to deny your former.

CHAP. XIIII.
Their third Argument from a presumed danger.

The Romish Pretense.
The Apology and Defense of the English Catholics. cap. 5.
EXcept there were a way of deposing Apostate Princes, God had not provided
sufficiently for his Church.

The Answer.
This objection is in your Non videretur Dominus satis discretus fuisse, vt cum
reuerentia eius dicam, Extrauag. Com de Mayor. and Obedient.. Vnam sanctam.
Extrauagants, and so it may be called, because it rangeth Extra without the
bonds of Gods ordinance, beside the presidence of primitive example, beyond the
compass of your own allowance.

First from Gods ordinance. An igitur, inquiunt, nunquam Principibus resistere
liceat? huic quaestioni non corrupto and temerario carnis nostrae iudicio, cui
frequenter recta sunt, quae coram Deo stultissima and impia reputantur; sed ea
diu nis literis, quae nemini blandiuntur, respondendum esse puto. Nam vtcunque
verisimiliter nobis humanitus ratiocinari videmur, naturali iure nobis licitum
esse nos nostraque defendere: Diuina tamen Lexid contra sublimiorem potestatem
armis fierivetat: quemadmodum Christus Dominus Petro volenti Dominum defendere,
dixit [Conuerte gladium tuum in vaginam tuam, omnes enim qui gladium acceperint
gladio peribunt] Non enim subditi contra Potestatem, sed potestas contra
subditos gladium diuinitus accepit. Cunerus lib. de Offic. Princ. cap. 7.
For by the word of God (as your Cunerus divinely reasons) which is not
partial, and not by the selfe-pleasing fancy of sensual affection must this
question be determined. Though therefore it may seem to us a decree of nature
for every one to defend himself and the things he does enjoy; yet the law of
God does forbid to do this by taking arms against the higher powers: as our
L. Christ taught his Disciple now about to defend his Master, [Put up thy
sword, for he that smites with the sword, shall perish with the sword.]
Because the sword is not put into the hands of Subjects against their Kings,
but into the hands of Kings against Subjects. Accordingly S. Augustine does
conclude. Omnes gladio diuim iudicij pe^ituti sunt, qui contra Principis
voluntatem glad^ assumunt: ideoque simpliciter and generatim ab Apostolo dictu
est, [Qiu potestan resistit, Dei ordinatio^ resistit; qui aute^ resistunt, ipsi
sibi damnauonem acquirunt.] ^t alibi.
Those who bear the sword (says he) against rulers, must perish: therefore
the Apostle speak Non defende^tes vosmet, charissimi, sed date locum irae,
scriptum est enim, Mihi vindicta and ego retribua^, dicit Dominus: Noli vinci a
malo, sed vince bono malum. Aug. lib. 2. cont. Fausium. cap. 73.
th generally, [ Romans 13.
He that resists the power resists the ordinance of God.] And again [ Romans
11.
not defending your selves, (my Dearest) but give place to wrath (of the
Governor) for it is written, vengeance is mine, (therefore no revenging power
over Kings) and I will revenge, says the Lord: be not overcome of evil, but
overcome evil with good.]

The second is the consideration of examples of the primitive Church, when for
the space of 300. years, it was in grievous persecution: where (as S. Paul
speaks) the faithful Romans 12. 19.
fought with beasts after the manner of men: namely, (as some do allegorize)
with men as savage as beasts; and there was found no power on earth to
restrain that earthly power. Was therefore God awanting to his Church? God
forbid. Nay rather he was not awanting, for it is written, 1. Cor. 15. 32.
Virtue is perfected in infirmity. And again, 2. Cor. 12. 9.
As gold is purgedin the fire, So by affliction etc. Because, 2. Cor. 22.
When the outward man suffers the inward man is renewed: And 2. Cor. 12.
When I am weak, then am I strong. As therefore the wisdom of the Artist is
then present with the gold, when he is refining it; the Physician with his
Patient when he wounds to cure him: So whenever the three faithful be in
the fiery furnace Dan. 3. 25.
Behold a fourth, that is, a divine succourer either by the inward miracle of
comfort in patience, or the outward of deliverance.

The third is the view of your own Popish Principles, which is this: Pontisex
non potest vllo modo ^udicari in terris ab vllo Principe saeculari, sieve
Ecclesiastico, neque ab omnibus simul in Concilio congregatis. Bellar lib. 2.
de Romans Pontif. cap. 26.
That the Pope (says Bellarmine) may not be judged of any person upon earth,
whether secular or Ecclesiastical, no not of a general council: Etsi Papa
contra vniuersalem Ecclesiae statum aliquid ageret, non possit tamen a Concilio
depo^i. Carerius lib. 1. de potest. Pont cap. 23. number. 12.
Nether may be (says your Carerius) be deposed, though he should do something
contrary to the universal state of the Church, Quaeres quid si^ se Pontifex
Canones legesque ^ura negligat, delicta im^ relinquat, innocents opprimat, res
Ecclesiae dissi e^* Regu^. iura pe^tat? Respondeo Romans Pontificem nulli
Princi^um in terris ^e, a nullo nisi a Deo iud^: pro eo orandum etc. A^. Ies.
Instit. lib. 5. cap. 14. E^ Autores sibi Suffragantes plurimos adducit.
As for example (says your Azorius) though he should neglect the Canons of
the Church, spare offenders, oppress Innocents, make a pray of the goods of
the Church, and violate the laws of Kings: yet is he not to be judged of any
but God. Did. 40. Si Papa offecit tibi. and alus omnibus nihilo ^us
innumerabiles populos cat^m secu^n du^ man^ ^o Gehennae, huius culpas
redarguere praesumet nemo mortalium. ^ritur in Calend. Martyrum.
Not though (says your Pope himself, one placed in the Calends of your
Martyrs) he should carry many people with himself to hell: yet no mortal
creature may presume to say, why do you so? Here is a desperate disease,
wherein you will not suffer so much as practice of Phlebotomy, much less an
incision or exustion. And yet in like case against the secular state object
Gods providence: said I like? O no, far different!

The difference of Kings and Popes in this point.
The Papal power will be thought spiritual; and thus being evil, may be the
baine of souls, the power of Princes is but corporal, Matthew. 20. 28
[Therefore ^^are them not] because they can go no further then the body. Now
the bodily tyranny works in the godly, patience, patience supports
martyrdom, martyrdom gains a crown of life: Therefore this evil with
patience may happily be endured; but the spiritual tyranny does captiuate the
inward soul, the sou^c commands the senses, these practice sin, and the
stipend of sin is death, even the everliving death of hell. Therefore here
is need (according to Gods providence) of power to depose so desperate a
spiritual evil, whereof it is written: Matthew. 5. 13.
If the salt want his salinesse, it is good for nothing, but to to be cast upon
the Dunghill. Mark then concerning the spiritual that God has ordained,
Eijciatur for as, cast out: concerning the temporal, Romans 1^.
Resist not the powers.

CHAP. XV.
The Arguments of Protestants against the pretended Papal power over Kings
from 1. Scripture, 2. Fathers, 3. Reasons.


1. Scriptures. In the Old Testament.
IT is granted us for the old Testament that Supra cap. 1. and 3. and 5.
Priests were subject to their Kings; and the necessity of due subjection to
wicked Kings, we have exemplified in Supra cap. 4.
David the mirror of all perfect loyalty: which case is made more lively by the
Answer to the example of Supra cap. 5.
Eliah.

Scriptures. In the New Testament. Of many one shall suffice.
Romans 13. Romans 13. 1.
[Let every soul be subject to the higher powers:] If you doubt what power
this is to whom subjection is due; look what he has in his hand, verse. 4.
He bears not the sword for naught: It is a sword therefore power temporal,
if from whom this is due, it appears, verse. 1.
Every soul be subject, all other conditions of reasonable men: If why? this
is expressed, verse. 1.
For the power is ordained of God. The point in question is concerning the
Subject: The Romish seek two enasions to free their Pope from subjection.

The Romish pretense.
Obijciunt Protestants ex hoc loco, concludunt etiam Pontifices Regibus
subiectos esse debere. Respondeo negando consequ^, quia alia est ratio
Principum infidelium, alia Christianorum, etc. Costerus Ies. Euchirid. Tract.
de summo Pont. Object. 11.
From this place the Protestants conclude, that therefore the Pope ought to be
subject: But I deny their consequent, for the Apostle writes of subjection to
Heathen Emperors, to whom every Christian was to submit themselves: But now
that Emperors be Christians, they ought to acknowledge a superior power in
the spiritual Pastor the Pope.

The Reply.
This your solution does destroy a general maxim, confessed of all divines,
to wit, that (as your Acosta confesses) Omnes fatentur, and est persecertu,
etiamsi Barbari conuertantur ad Christu^, non tamen re^um suarum iure excide^e.
Acosta les. lib. 3. de Inforum salate. cap. 7.
Insidels converted to Christian faith, do not therefore lose their former
temporal right. Which we have already proved by your own confessions, and
more then ten circles of Antiquity. We argue further now from this known
principle; Princes by conversion to the Gospel lose no temporal right, which
they had before their conversion: But in the state of Infidelity we never
read that they could be deposed by their Pagan Priests. Ergo, this their
prerogative may not be impaired by their obedience unto the Gospel: nay, it is
rather confirmed thereby, even in this text, especially in three degrees.

First, it teaches greater Christian reverence, because in the Prince a
Christian man does not behold only man, but the hand of God, Romans 13. 4.
He is the Minister of God. Secondly, from Christian fear: For Pagans, as
hirelings, only performed obedience propteriram, for fear of the temporal
Sword; which man (because it is in the hand of man) might avoid by many means:
But Christians, [ Romans 13. 2
He that resists purchases damnation,] are dutiful for fear of the
eternal wrath of the just omnipotent God. Thirdly, from Christian confidence,
For Pagans, as soon as the King does tyrannize, do rebel, as though freedom
corporal were their special good: but Christians Romans 13. 3.
[Wilt thou not fear the power? do good and thou shall have praise of God in
suffering outward evil for well doing are confirmed in the hope of an
everlasting good. Fourthly, from the bond of Christian love, for Pagans by
their Princes commands are naturally inclined to discontent and hate: but
Christians [ verse. 8.
Love is the fulfilling of the law] are by the law of Love made perfect to obey
the just laws of men. If therefore Christians would, as they ought, be subject
to the law of Christ, I suppose there is no Pagan Prince (if persuaded of this
doctrine of Christ) but would more easily be a Christian.

Their second Evasion. The Romish Pretense.
Apostolus hoc in loco non restring^ personam ad Principem saeculare, sed
d^omn. potestate loquitur tam spirituali quam seculari: ita vt ex hac sententia
deduci Papam subditum esse Regi, aut Regem Papae etc. Bellarm. lib. 2. de Romans
Pont. cap. 29.. Argumentum tertium.
The Apostle does not restrain his speech to any kind of superior power, but
speaks generally of [powers that be:] signifying as well the spiritual power,
as the temporal. Therefore Protestants may not conclude hereupon, that the
Pope ought to be subject unto temporal Kings.

The Answer.
If we suffer the spirit of God to be our Judge the cause is plain, [He
bears not the sword in vain,] he means the temporal Governor: If we
require witness of this truth from all antiquity, behold Apostolus docet omnes
credentes mundi potestaubus esse subiectos: [Omnis anima,] Id est (Chrysostomus
ait) sieve Propheta, five Apostolus, five Episcopus, subditus sit: sequitur
Chrysostomum Euthymius, Theod. The^^ hylact. Oecumen. and qui non Graeci? Idem
Gregorius Magnus agnoseebat. and Bernardus ad Episcopum Senonensem idem
colligit, [Omnis anima] tum vestra, inquit, quis vos excipit? si quis tentat
excipere, tentat decipere. Espentans Epis. Comm. in 1. Tim. D^gress. lib. 2.
S. Chrysostom (says your own Bishop, and that truly) does understand by
(every soul) that every Apostle, every Prophet, and every Bishop ought to be
subject: To whom do other ancient Fathers, as Euthym. Theod. Theoph. Oecumen.
and all the Greek Doctors agree. Yea Gregory surnamed the Great, Bishop of
Rome, does so likewise expound it: and S. Bernard in his Epistle to a Bishop
said the (Every soul) says the Apostle: then must you also (speaking the
bishop of Senona) be subject, he that shall offer to exempt you, shall but
offer to tempt and delude you.

CHAP. XVI.
Arguments of Protestants from Antiquity.

HE that is Alpha and Omega, first for Antiquity, and last for Eternity, Christ
our Savior (by the confession of your grand Bellarm. vide supra. cap. 7.
Jesuit) as he was man and the Messiah, had no power temporal on this earth.

Secondly, S. Peter and the other Apostles (as is also confessed by your most
vehement Carerius and Sanderus vide cap. 7.
Advocates in their plea for Papal hierarchy) were all subject to the
temporal States.

Thirdly, all ancient holy Popes, Martyrs, Fathers, (as is Vide supra cap 9.
and deinceps.
commonly granted) yea when they had force to resist the violence of Tyrants,
Heretics, and Apostates; did perform subjection to temporal government, as
the ordinance of God, Vide supra cap. 9.
Tertullian saying, If we would be revenged we could not want force: Ibidem.
cap. 9.
S. Cyprian, We do not resist, although our number be great: S. Ibidem. cap. 9.
Nazianzene, Not though the people be prone to resist you: S. Ibidem. cap. 9.
Ambrose, Not when the people are present and offer a defense: S. Ibidem. cap.
9.
Augustine yielding the cause, Because Christian subjection is to be performed
in love, and not in fear or by constraint. A doctrine for those times, namely,
the first 600. years in general use, says your Vide supra cap. 10.
Bellarmine: And continued after Christ the space of 1000 years says your
Ibidem.
Be^^la^^s: never changed till the year 1060. says your Supra ca. 11.
Tolossanus, Friburgens. Espencaeus and others. And shall we dare to remove
Deuteronomy. 27. 17.
The ancient Land-markes of our forefathers?

CHAP. XVII.
Other Proofs of Protestants from Antiquity in two most Christian and potent
Nations: England, and France.

THat this soueraignity of his Majesty (whereunto, notwithstanding all Papal
jurisdiction, we do willingly subscribe) may be known to be as anciently as
earnestly challenged, I will only point at some few heads of examples of our
ancient Christian Kings, which Sir Edward Cook, his Majesty's Attorney
general, in his always reportable and memorable Reports has lately published.

Reports. part. 1. fol. 12.
In the reign of K. Edward the first, a Subject brought in a 1
Bull of excommunication against another Subject of this realm, and published
it: But it was answered that this was then, according to the ancient laws of
England, Treason against the King; the Offender had been drawn and hanged,
but that by the mercy of the Prince he was only abiured the Realm. Compare
this Bull, which did only push at a Subject against his benefice, with that
Bull which more mankeen goareth Kings, to give them their mortal wound. At the
same time The Pope by his Bull had by way of provision bestowed a benefice upon
one within the province of York; the King presented another: the Archbishop
refuses the Kings presentation, and yielded to the Popes provision. This
Archbishop then by the common law of the land was deprived of the lands of his
whole Bishopric during life.

Reports. fol. 15.
In the reign of King Edward the third, the King presented 2
to a Benefice, and his Presentee was disturbed by one, who had obtained Bulls
from Rome, for the which cause he was condemned to perpetual imprisonment.
Compare this Bull of disturbing only the Present of Kings with that which does
ordinarily violate the Kings person.

Fol. 21.
In the reign of Richard the second it was declared in the 3
Parliament [R. 2. cap. 2.] that England had always been f^ce, and in
subjection to no Realm, but immediately subject to God and to none other: and
that the same ought not in any thing, touching the regality of the crown, to
be submitted to the Bishop of Rome, nor the laws of their Realm by him
frustrated at his pleasure. Compare this English King immediately not subject
to the Pope, and the above mentioned Iesu^ticall principle, Supra.
All Kings are indirectly subject to Popes.

Fol. 23.
In the reign of King Henry the fourth it was confirmed 4
that Excommunication made by the Pope is of no force in England. Compare this
Of no force in England, with those excommunications which in these later times
have been made Supra.
against England.

Fol. 26.
In the reign of King Edward the fourth, the opinion of the 5
Kings bench was, that whatsoever spiritual man should sue another spiritual
man in the Court of Rome for a matter spiritual, where he might have remedy
before his Ordinary within the Realm, did incur the danger of praemunire,
being an heinous offense against the honor of the King his crown and dignity.
Compare this with their Acts, who have made no other suit at Rome, but means
to dispossess English Kings of their crown and dignity. Many other examples
of like nature I pretermit, and remit the Reader desirous to be further
satisfied to the book of Reports, Habet enim ille quod det, and dat nemo
largius. The conclusion is, that that challenge of Sovereignty which was in
opposition to the Popes Bulls, ancient right and justice in Kings which were
predecessors, be not traduced now as an irreligious impiety, in the
successors. The like might be spoken of France, but I hasten to the last
Argument, presuming that my studious Reader perusing the French stories will
ease me of that travel.

CHAP. XVIII.
The last Argument of Protestants from Reason.

IT will be sufficient only summarily to recapitulate the Arguments dispersed
in this former Treatise.

The first Reason was long since Christened: for The Apostles (says your Supra
cap. 7.
Sanders) did choose rather to suffer evil, than to revenge: wherein they were
seconded by other heroical Martyrs of Christ, Who thought (says your Supra
cap. 8.
Tolossanus) their faith glorified in this, that being persecuted, yet they
performed obedience. Questionless they had some reason hereof: One is
specified by S. Cyprian, Ibidem.
Christians must be Preachers of the supernatural virtue patience, and not of
vengeance.

Another by S. Augustine, that Ibidem.
Enduring the misery of this life, they may avouch their hope of a life
eternal. And lastly by Arnobius, Hereby to make distinction of Christian
obedience, from that other of Pagans: that whereas these yield only obedience
proceeding from fear of man, ours should appear to be from Conscience toward
God.

The second Reason is politic, which is that of your Supra cap. 6.
Victoria, that the Clergy be members of the commonwealth: Ergo, they ought to
be subject unto the state temporal. I will add another of this kind which we
borrowed from your Acosta, showing that license of deposing Kings, is an Supr.
cap. 10.
occasion of much spoils and bloodshed.

The third Reason is violent enforcing you by your own confessions to grant
our conclusion; your confessions be of two kinds; first, Bellarmine and all
Jesuits. vide supra.
The Pope has not temporal Sovereignty over Kings directly, but only
indirectly, in ordine ad bonum spirituale, that is, as the temporal does
necessarily help or advance the spiritual good of the Church. But Quia
sequeretur hinc, quod nec Rex direct Dominus esset in te^poralibus, quia
cuilibet Regi competit dominium in ordine ad spiritualia, vt ad iustitiam
administrandam. Carerius lib. 2. de Romans Pont. cap. 7. n. 13.
So you may as well say (says your Carerius) that a King has not jurisdiction
temporal, but only indirectly; because his authority does intend a spiritual
good, a^ namely preservation of justice in a commonwealth. And he says truly
as may be confirmed by Saint Augustine. Aliter seruiunt Reges, quia homines
sunt, aliter quia Reges; quia homines sunt, Deo seruiunt recte viuendo; vt
Reges sunt in regno suo bona iubendo mal aque prohibendo, non solum quae
pertinent ad humanam societatem, verum-etiam quae ad Diuinam religionem
conseruandam conducunt leges sanciendo. Augustinus supra.
A king as a man (says he) does serve God by his own good life; as a King, by
governing other men's lives, to see that they do that which is good: It is his
office not only to ordain laws for the preservation of the politic peace,
but also to establish true religion. From hence I conclude: that if this your
distinction be good The Pope has temporal jurisdiction over Kings to depose
them, indirectly: that is, as far forth as may be behooffull for Religion:
then must you grant that Kings have jurisdiction temporal only indirectly,
because their Office also is ordained of God [in ordine ad Deum] as a minister
of God for defense of his Church. If your position be false, then has not your
Pope that power over Princes, no not indirectly.

The second Confession I take from Carerius, your most importunate, and most
impudent magnifier of Papal authority, that (excepting your Bozius) we can
read of. This Carerius reasons thus: Donatio Constantini vel vera ^uit vel
falsa; si vera, vt very Catholici consitentur, ^m constat quo iure (quasi
dixerit Papali) Principes Ital^am caeterasque parts occidentales possideant:
si vero est falsa, quanam autoritate Zacharias primus Pipino petenti Regnum
Franciae confirmauit? Cur Leo tertius Carolum Magnum Imperatorem constituit?
cur Alexand. 6. orbem terrarum partitus, insulasque noui orbis Arragonum Regi
einsque haeredibus donauit, vt ex eius diplomate patet? Carerius lib. 2. de
Donat. Constant. cap. 21. number. 14.
The Donation of Constantine to the Pope (whereby the possession of all the
kingdoms in Europe were bestowed upon the Pope) was either true or false; if
true, then the Princes of the West parts hold their thrones by the Popes
authority: if false, then had Pope Zachary no authority to confirm K. Pepin of
France, nor Leo the third to constitute Emperor Charles the great etc. This
your Doctor gives us this antecedent proposition. If the pretended Donation of
Constantine to the Pope be counterset, then has not the Pope authority to
dispose of these Kingdoms. But, Canus vide supra.
That pretended donation (by your own confe^sion) is fabulous: so false is it,
as this is certain, Balbus supra. cap. 12.
That no Pope was possessed of the dominion of the city of Rome, till the year
of our Lord 1400. Insomuch, that Anno 755. donauit Pipinus Romany Pontificibus
Exarchatum Rauennae, cum magna part Italiae, vt Historici testantur. Bellar.
lib. 3. de Pont. cap. 3.
Bellarmine can find no title of the Pope till the year 755. To the Dukedom
of Rauenna.

The fourth from a necessary consequent, strengthened by the authority of S.
Bernard, who writes unto Eugenius the Pope concerning this very point. His
argument is; The successor of S. Peter cannot challenge any authority as
descending from Peter, which Peter had not in himself: Apostolis interdicitur
dominatus; ergo aut tu vsurpare audi aut dominans Apostolatum, aut Apostolus
dominatum? Et paulo post: Non iure Apostolico haec tibi vendicares, neque enim
ille, quod non habuit, tibi dare potuit. Bernard. lib. 2. de Consider. ad Eugen.
But Peter had not this temporal. Ergo, (for Eugenius did not challenge it
directy essential to the Popedom) the Pope, by S. Bernards judgment, may not
assume any such authority either directly or indirectly.

We may conclude, that both direct scripture, torre^t of Fathers, and evidence
of reasons do all confute this Papal Usurpation over Kings as a challenge
merely ambitious, fraudulent, and rebellious. Come you therefore out of
Babylon in this point with holy Bernard, and put upon you his Christian
resolution: for writing to king Lewis, who was Erat ei negotium cum Ludouico
Crasso Rege improbo multa in Deum and homines flagitia perpetrante. Barclaius
lib. 5. contra Monarchom. cap. 5. and 6.
A wicked man (says your Barclay) multiplying most heinous crimes both against
God and man: yet against the suggestions of the rebellious spirits of those
times thus does S. Bernard determine for himself: Si totus mundus aduersus me
coniuraret, vt aliquid molirer aduersus Regu^ maiestatem, ego tamen timerem
Deum, and ordinatum ab eo Regem offendere temere non audere^: Nec enim ignoro
vbi legerim [Si quis potestati resistit, Dei ordinationi resistit, and qui
resistit etc.] Bernard. Epist. 221. ad Lodo^icum regem.
Though all the world (says he) should conspire against me, to move me to
practice any conspiracy against the Majesty of the King, I would fear God, and
not willingly offend the King ordained of God: for I cannot be ignorant of
that which is written, [If any resists the power, he resists the ordinance
of God, and purchases to himself damnation. etc. Mark, S. Bernard makes this
necessity of subjection an article of Christian morality necessarily to be
defended upon danger of damnation: relying upon a canon: what, Papal? of Si
quis nostris mandatis? etc. no, but Romans 13.
Apostolical, Si quis; If any resist regal powers, he resists the ordinance
of God, and purchases damnation. Whereby you are taught never to delude your
souls in any such mischiefs by presumption of your good intent, as for the
Catholic cause, or, in ordine ad Deum, for that can never carry an order to
God, which is against the ordinance of God. Who graciously sanctify you with
that 1. Pet. 2. 17.
Fear of God, which works Honor to your King, and glory, through patience,
to our Christian faith.

The second Member of this Third part, Which is a Confutation of the wicked
doctrine of Aequiuocation.
CHAP. I.
I Am now to encounter this new-bred Hydra, and ugly Monster, which lurked a
while in the invisible practice of the Aequi^ocating sect; but, at length being
discovered, is now by the Archpriest drawn into public by a solemn
Approbation, as it were a golden chain, that it might hereby appear less
monstrous.

The Privilege of this Treatise of Aequiuocation by their Archpriest.
Tractatus iste valde doctus, vere pius, and Catholicus, certe sanctaru^
Scripturaru^, Patrum, Doctorum, Scholasticorum, and optimaru^ rationum
praesidijs plenissime ^irmat aequitatem Aequiuocationis: ideoque dignissimus
est, qui typis propagetur ad consolationem afflictorum, and piorum
instructionem. Ita censeo, Georgius Blackwellus Archi-Presbyter Angliae, and
Protonotarius Apostolicus.
THis Treatise is very learned, godly, and Catholic: wherein doubtless the
Author does confirm the equity of Aequiuocation by evidence of Scriptures,
Fathers, Doctors, School-Diuines, Canonists, and soundest reasons. A work^
worthy to be published in print for the comfort of all afflicted Catholics, and
instruction of the godly.

Thus do I judge,

All this is very semblable, for who could be more fit to commend this
Aequiuocation, a piece of black art, than Blackewell? Who can be more willing
to autorize this Aequiuocation, the Arch-piller of security for Romish Priests,
then their Archpriest? And from whence rather shall a man expect a privilege
of lying, then from that place (falsely called Apostolical) Paulus 4. Pont.
Max. cum de me in consacerdotum suorum collegium cooptando se cogitare serio
dixerat (nihil hic singo) Immortali Deo gratias immortales egi, quod mihi
tantum mali non permis^t Christus: Quid fa^erem Romae, mentiri nescio?
Espenc^us Episc. epist. ante sex Tract. ad Cardinal. Castilion^um.
where (as their own learned Bishop says) there is nothing but lying? Of
which kind (by the assistance of the spirit of truth) I shall prove this
Aequiuocation to be, and also the approbation thereof: showing that not one
iota in all Scripture, not one example in all Catholic antiquity, not one
shadow of reason in all the wit of natural man can be brought for the just
proof or color of this Mystery of iniquity.

First we must understand that our Aequiuocatours teach a double kind of
Aequiuocation.

The first is a mental reservation in the mind, differing from that which I
outwardly express, whether it be by voice or writing. Their example: The
Preface in the front of the book of Aequiuocation, and the Argument of the
book.
If a Catholic or any other person before a Magistrate shall be demanded upon
his oath, whether a Priest be in such a place, may (notwithstanding his perfect
knowledge to the contrary) without perjury securely in conscience answer no,
with a secret meaning reserved in his mind, namely that he is not there so, vt
(loquar enim Latin, ne hinc Idiotae ansam sibi arripiant nequiter mentiendi)
quis teneatur illud detegere.

The second is a verbal Aequiuocation, whether it be vocal, that is, uttered
in the voice, or literal, that is, expressed in writing: when one word shall
import two or more different significations: as thus, To go to fast: the word
fast, whether vocal or literal, does equally signify to abstain from meat,
and also, to make haste. By liberty of this Aequiuocation one merrily did play
upon his friend going at dinner time to a churles house, O sir (says he) you
go to fast. But to use the example of our Aequiuocatours; The same popish
Treatise, ^hap. 5.
If one shall ask whether such a stranger (this is for security of a Priest)
lies (meaning whether he lodge) in my house, I may answer he lies not i^ my
house: meaning, non mentitur, and herein I say truth.

Concerning these two kinds of Aequiuocations I make two conclusions to be
manifested in this dispute.

Our first conclusion is this; Every Aequiuocation by a mental Reservation is
not an hidden truth, but a gross ^e.

The second conclusion is this; Every Aequiuocation, (whether it be mental or
verbal) if it be used in an oath, though it be no lie, yet is it an
abominable profanation of that sacred Institution of God; by whomsoever or to
whomsoever this oath be performed.

To prove that Aequiuocating by a mental Reservation is a lying falsehood, we
must first distinguish of falsehood, lest the doubtfulnes^e of this word
falsehood, dull the understanding of my religious Reader, not to perceive the
State of the Question.

There is a double kind of falsehood in speech; The first has respect to the
thing spoken, the other to the mind of the speaker. The example of the former:
If thinking it to be ten of the clock (when it is but nine) I shall say it is
ten, this is false, but not a lie: Because Nemo me^tiens iudicandus est, qui
dicit fal^um qu^d ^utat ^sse verum; quia, quantum in ipso est, non fallit ipse,
sed fallitu^: lingu^m enim ream non fac^, nisi men's ^ea, Aug^st. ^n^hirid. cap.
18.
None must be judged a liar (says Saint Augustine) who speaks false,
thinking it to be true which he speaks: because herein his purpose is not to
deceive the hearer, but he is only deceived in himself. The other, when
thinking that to be false which I speak, I affirm it to be true, (and so on
the contrary) as thinking it to be ten of the clock, shall say it is nine:
thus whether it be ten, or no, I do lie: and thus sometimes a man does lie in
speaking a truth. As the Client, who having in his pocket both counterfeit and
current gold, intending to cozen his Counselor with the worse metal, by
chance gave him the better, saying; Sir, I cannot be unthankful to any that
shall deserve well, here is an Angel, and so he departed a falsely true, a
deceived deceiuer, and an unthankfully thankful man. The first kind of false
speech is against truth, as it is defined Logically, A congruity or consent of
the speech with the thing: the second falsehood is defined morally, as it is
opposite to truth, which is a consonancy of the speech with the understanding
of the speaker, and this falsity we call properly a lie. Ille falsum loquitur
contra scientiam, iste contra conscientiam, and vere mentitur. August. contr.
me^d. cap. 5.
The former kind (says S. Augustine) speaks falsely for want of knowledge:
the latter speaks falsely against his knowledge and conscience, properly a
liar. And only of this liar now we frame our dispute.

CHAP. II.
NOw we must come into the lists of this conflict, and enter upon our
Aequiuocator, to convince him a gross liar by manifest arguments, and to
answer all his Objections in their due order.

The first Argument from the definition of a lie.
Mayor.) Whosoever uses any signification of speech against his conscience, is
properly a liar: (Minor) But our Aequiuocator does use a signification of
speech directly against his conscience. Ergo, he is directly a liar. The Minor
is not only the confession, but also the profession of our Aequiuocator, as
has been showed. Vide supra cap. 1.
If a Catholic (says he) shall answer, [The Priest is not in my house]
contrary to his perfect knowledge. etc. And can any man of conscience deny the
conclusion? Yet because we have to deal against consciences Ezech. 13. 11
Dawbed up with mortar untempered; we add

A confirmation of the former Argument.
Let us consult with the principal Doctor of your more ancient school, as
the first of all, with him, who for his excellency obtained the name of
Master, as it were the (...) of his time.

Mentiri est co^tra id quod animo sentit quis dicere, five veru^ sit, sieve
falsura. Lombardus l^b. 3. did. 38.
This is properly lying (says he) when a manspeaketh any thing contrary to
that which he thinks in his mind.

This Doctor is seconded herein by Aquinas, who in your opinion was not
second to any in, or since his time: Veritau opponitur qu^d aliquis per verba
ext^ora aliud vult significate, quam quod hab^t apud se, quod ad mendacium
pertinet. Aquinas 2. 2. q. III. Art. I. Mentitur quis cum verbis aliquid
significat quod non est, non autem quando tac^t quod est. Ibid. ad 4.
This is proper to a lie (says he) when a man will signify in outward words
another thing then that which he thinks in his mind. In which consideration
S. Hierome about to free S. Paul from suspicion of lying, who promised to the
Corinthians, to come unto them, but did not: Cum Paulus (1. Cor. vlt.) promi^it
se venturum ad Corinthios, nec tamen veniebat, culpam mendacij non contraxit,
qui^ sic animo sentiebat, and quantum in ipso fuit, verum dixit: ita nemo
mendax, nisi qui alite^ sentit quam dicit. Hieron. Comm. in cap. 4 in princ.
Tom. 5. de 1 Cor. vlt.
S. Paul (says he) did not lie, because he purposed with his heart to do that
which he had promised with his pen: but he only is a liar, who thinks
contrary to that which he speaks. For, Omne mendacium falsum testimorium est
dicendum, vnde est quod Dominus monet, [Sit in ore vestro, Est est, Non non.]
August. lib. de Men^ac. cap. 5.
Every lie (says Saint Augustine) is that false witness (which is forbid in
the commandemnet) therefore it is that our Lord Christ does admonish every one;
[Let there not be in your speech yea and nay, but let your yea be yea, and your
nay nay.] This being his judgment against, as I may so say, Sarai, a free
speech: what think you he determines concerning Hagar the bondwoman, that
is, such a speech as is obliged by an oath? Formale in per^io est, putare
falsum esse quod i^^ as: interest igitur quemadmodam verbum procedat ex animo,
quia ream linguam non ^acit nisirea men's. August. sermon. 28. de verl i^ Apost.
Tom. 10. and recensetur hoc testimon. ab Aquinate 2* 2. q. 98. art. 1. ad 3.
This is a formal property of perjury (says S. Augustine) to swear that
which I think is false: for nothing can make a guilty tongue, but only a
guilty mind. To endeavor to prove this point by testimonies of all men, who
maintain it, were a labor infinite; and it may seem also unnecessary to
confirm unto men that which no man can deny. Now must we examine whether that
we have not by this proof so intrapped the fox Aequinocatour, that he cannot
find any hole whereby to escape.

The Aequiuocatour.
Treatise in initio and a^ibi.
Though the Catholic think the Priest to be in his house, yet may he answer,
No, with a secret Reservation in his mind, as this, Vt narremtibi. Or demanded
whether I be a Priest, notwithstanding, contrary to my knowledge, I may answer,
No, with a secret reservation, Vt me detegam.

The Reply.
Suffer me Socratically to debate this point with you, and answer me friendly
to these demands: Q. When being asked, whether you are a Priest, you answer No,
what signification has this word No? R. It does signify directly, I am no
Priest. Q. And yet you think you are a Priest. R. Yea I know it: Q. Wherewith
do you know it? R. By my inward mind and understanding, my conscience
testifying this unto me. Q. Can conscience bear witness? then can it also
speak. R. It speaks as verily to my inward soul, as my tongue speaks
sensibly to your ears. Q. When therefore I ask you whether you be a Priest,
your conscience saying to your self, I am; would it not say the same to me
likewise if I could hear it? R. Certainly it would. Q. Yet it may be your mind
may demurre or vary in that which it thinks, as namely, thinking thus, [I am
a Priest] yet to be able to persuade your soul, and say, [I am no Priest.] R.
Impossible, for this is an infallible position, Men's non potest non intelligere
quod intelligit: The mind cannot possibly but think that which it thinks. Q.
And it is as impossible but, [I am] the direct voice of your conscience, and [I
am not] the express voice of your tongue, must be as contrary as yea and nay.
R. True. Q. Then will this be as true, that when your conscience affirms that
which your tongue denies, that your tongue speaks, against your Conscience.
Proved in the beginning of this chapter by common consent.
And this is that which we have proved to be flat lying, a conclusion which no
art of Aequiuocation can possibly avoid.

Our Aequiuocator conceiteth a double intention of the mind, the one directly
respecting the signification of the words; and thus they grant that the Nay of
their tongue was contrary to the yea of their understanding: the second is an
indirect intention, which is a clause of Reservation, [Vt dicam tibi.] Whereby
they would reconcile their tongue to their mind. Whereas our Witnesses have
thus determined, that truth and falsity does consist only in the conformity or
contrariety of the signification of the words, and direct intention of the
mind, plainly calling it a lie, When one shall speak words (says Aquinas)
which do not signify that which he intends: When he speaks otherwise then
he thinks, says S. Hierome: When he speaks that which he thinks is
false, says S. Augustine. But the indirect intention of the speaker [Vtreuelem
tibi] cannot alter the signification of his outward words, [I am no Priest]
which his direct intention of conscience does contradict, saying, [But I am a
Priest.] Ergo our Aequiuocating Priest cannot possibly reconcile such a
contradiction of his heart and his tongue. Wherefore we will desire S. Augustine
to conclude against our Aequiuocatours; Da mihi aliquem qui jurat veru^ esse,
quod scit esse falsum, videtis ista quam detestanda sit bellua. Aug. lib. de
verbis Apost. Sermon. 28. paulo post medium. Tom. 10.
Whosoever shall swear that which he knows is false, is but a detestable
beast.

CHAP. III.
The second Argument from the Definition of Aequiuocation.

The Aequiuocator must speak.
The Treatise of Aequiuocation, chap. 2.
WE will speak with Aristotle and the Logicians speaking of four
propositions: first mental, only conceived in the mind; secondly vocal,
uttered with my mouth; thirdly written (which I have called literal;) and the
fourth mixed, when we mingle some of these propositions together, when one part
is expressed outwardly, as to say [I know him not:] the other part reserved in
my mind, as to say, [Vt tibi significem] both joined together make up one true
proposition.

The Reply.
Dare you appeal unto Logic? This is the Art of all Arts, and the high
Tribunal of reason and truth it self, which no man in any matter, whether it
be case of humanity or divinity can justly refuse.

Consult therefore with the ancient Logicians, and prove (mark what scope I
yield unto you) that from the beginning of the world in the whole current of so
many thousand generations of mankind, till within the compass of these last
four hundred years, and less, that ever any Logician, whether Infidel or
Believer, did allow your mixed proposition (which is partly mental, and partly
verbal) or think it a Proposition: and I will be (which my soul utterly
detesteth) an Aequiuocator.

Yet I must not now expect impossibilities, to try what you would prove, but
show herein what I can disprove.

The Argument.
Your proposition [I am no Priest,] mixed with your mental reservation, [Vt
tibireuelem;] if it be true, it is so either in his simple signification, or by
virtue of Aequiuocation: but it is not true in his simple signification; this
you grant: neither can it be true by virtue of Aequiuocation; this I prove.

(...). Arist. E^ench. lib. 1. cap. 4.
Aequiuocation in word or speech (says the Oracle of all Logicians) is when
one word or one speech does equally signify diverse things. As when one shall
say, I am afraid of a Dog: this word Dog has a triple signification; for
it signifies as well a fish in the sea, called a Dogge-fish, and a sign in the
heavenly sphere, wherein when the Sun has his course, we call the days
Dogge-dayes; or as thirdly, it does signify man's faithful servant, a barking
dog. Therefore when he says, I fear a Dog, whether he means he is
afraid of the household dog to be bit with his teeth, or to be drowned, and
so devoured of the Sea dog, or to go mad by the poisonfull influences of the
Planeticall dog: If, I say, he understand any of these kinds, this his speech
is true, [I am afraid of a dog.] But your mixed and patched proposition is not
one word or speech signifying equally diverse things; but contrarily (as you
pretend) diverse parts of speech (one in the mind, and another in the mouth)
signifying one thing: for, I am no Priest, and To tell it to the, what words
can be more different? which whosoever shall call Aequiuocall, may be justly
suspected to be bit with the highest dog; the position is so absurd and
unreasonable.

The Aequiuocator does insist. His Objection.
The Aequiuocator chap. 3.
Voices and writings are ordemed for instruments and signs to express a
Proposition which is in the mind; therefore may I express all in word or all
in writing, and the proposition in the mind remains the same. So may I by
another mixed proposition express some part, and reserve some part in my mind.
For example, If when I say [God is not] should lose presently my speech, before
I could utter the word following [vniust,] which having my pen in my hand, I
exhibit by writing; who doubts, but all that is but one proposition, the
truth whereof consists of the mixture of both parts together? So is it where
one part is delivered with the mouth, and the other reserved in the mind.

The Reply.
It were better that both you and I should become speechless and handlesse,
than either in word or writing to minister such a bainfull Conclusion unto the
world. But to the matter: Voices and writings (say you) are outward signs of
the inward propositions of the mind. This is true: What then? And the part
wanting in voice is supplied by the other word in writing. This is also true:
But why? Because words and writings be mutual signs and interpretations of
the mind. This is again most true: What can you infer from all this? So the
signification of the part outwardly expressed [I am no Priest] may be supplied
with the other part of the proposition reserved in my mind [Vt tibinarrem.] I
tell you this comparison is utterly false. For the foresaid Oracle in his book
entitled, The interpretation of speech, says, that (...). Arist. (...).
Every proposition enunciatiue (that is, every outward speech, whether by word
or writing, whether affirming or denying) is ordained for signification: that
is, (as you have well said) to express some thing. But no mental, or inward
conceit of the mind is ordained of God as a sign to express or signify (as
words and writings do) but as a thing signified has need to be expressed and
expounded. Such is your mental clause reserved [Vt narrem tibi.] Can you make
this a sign or instrument to express and signify your true meaning, which
you have purposely devised for a den to lurk in, lest your false meaning might
be signified and revealed? Thus have you by your comparison of voices and
writings made a strong loope whereby to strangle your self.

This is confirmed by S. Augustine.
Omnis Enunciatio ad id quod enunciat est referenda. August. lib. de Menda^.
cap. 5. At omnis Enunciatio est vel affirmatio vel negatio alicuius de aliquo.
Arist. 1. de Interpret.
Every speech (says he) whether it affirm or deny any thing, is to be
referred unto that which it does affirm or deny. But your Negative, I am no
Priest, can not be referred to your supposed true clause [Vt narrem tibi;] for
it does not signify any such thing: but only to your Priesthood. In which
simple signification it is (by your own opinion) most false. A delusion
notably confuted by your own Seraphicall Doctor, who affirms, that Dicitur
Oration vera quatenus est signum intellectus. Aquinas part. 1. q. 16. art. 1.
Cum voces natural ter signa sunt intellectuum, innaturale est and indicium vt
aliquis significet id quod mente non habet. Vnde Philosophus dicit Ethic. 4.
quod mendacium est per se fugiendum. Aquinas ibidem.
A speech is so far forth true, as it is a sign of a true understanding.
But your voice (you know) is contrary to your understanding. And as concerning
Voice, which is the sign, he adds from Aristotle, That it is against nature
to signify any thing by words which we have not in our mind. If then this
equivocation be unnatural, we have not without reason called it a Monster. And
now we will show your unnatural countenance in a like example.

An example of like Sophistry.
A presumptuous Gorgias and Sophister in Cambridge undertook the defense of
this Problem, Virtus est vitium, virtue is a vice: but being plunged in his
answer, he fled to a reserved clause, fugere. And was not this his fugere,
plainly your subterfugere? Therefore as any Philosopher only hearing these
words, Virtus est vitium, must necessarily call it after that name of one of
the marks of Sophistry Arist. Elench. lib. 1. cap. 2.
(...), that is, A singular absurdity: so might any hearing a Priest say
simply, I am no Priest, call this after the name of the second scope of
Sophistry, which is Ibidem.
(...), a lie.

CHAP. IIII.
The third Argument from the description of lying.

Mayor.) Nemo dubitat mentiri eum, qui falsu^ dicit causa fallendi. August.
lib. de Menda^. cap. 4. and in ^ine ca. 5. Lombard. lib. 3. did. 38. Canus
loc, theol. Mendacium est verbu^ cum intention fallend^. Tract. de 7 peccatis.
cap. 5. 4.
No man can doubt (says S. Augustine, and your whole school) but he lies,
which speaks any thing which is false, with an intent to deceive another:
(The Minor) But our Aequiuocatours profess by a false speech to Creswell,
Allen, Southwell, Tollet, and others. Vide supra.
delude (their own words) Protestant-examiners, Magistrates, Pursuuants, and
other Officers, and whosoever may be instruments to call their persons in
question, Ergo, by their art of Aequiuocating have they obtained a perfection
of lying. What can you answer?

The Aequiuocatour.
Treatise of Aequiuoc. quo supra.
This speech [I am no Priest] is not false, being mixed with that clause which
is understood [Vt tibi significem.]

The Answer.
I have already proved from the judgment of S. Hierome and S. Augustine, two
of the most judicious Fathers; out of Lombard and Aquinas, the two eyes of your
Romish school, that wheresoever the speech is contrary to the knowledge (such
you have granted your Aequiuocating to be) there the speech is false and a slat
lie. Which is now further proved from the end of lying, which is, To deceive
the hearer: except you profess an intention to deceive men by true speaking,
and so make truth a Seducer.

The Aequiuocatour does insist.
The Treatise of Aequiuocat.
Our Aequiuocating does not always deceive the hearer, for if a man of
Couentry, a place generally infected with the plague, dwelling himself in a
part of that city, which is free from infection, and coming to London, shall
be asked if he came from Couentry (they intending to ask him concerning a
place infected) may answer, No: for herein he deceives not the mind of the
Questioner, but answers directly to his intention.

The Reply.
If this one instance were true, yet could it not justify your other
Aequiuocations, as that [I am no Priest:] whereby your whole purpose is to
delude the intention of the examiner. Sic proferre sententiam vt diuersam
opinionem in alterius animo generes: haec est intentio fallendi aliu^. Tol.
Ies. Instr. Sacerd. lib. vlt. de Septempercatas cap. 54.
For this is an intention to deceive, (says your Jesuit) to seek to beget a
signification of your speech in the mind of your hearer, diverse to that which
you conceive your self.

Secondly, this your instance is false; for every one that asks a Question,
does intend to receive a direct answer: and therefore his answer, [I came not
from Couentry] who came from Couentrie, cannot satisfy the intention of the
Examiner.

Thirdly, though it shall satisfy the remote intention of the Examiner, yet is
it a lewd lie in the speaker, because he that speaks truth has always a
conformity between the intention of his mind and his speech: but to deny, He
came not from that place from whence he knows he came, is no conformity, but
infinite contrariety between his speech and his own intention. An answer so
grossly false, that a Jesuit of high esteem in your church, writing against
this spiritual iugling of his subtle lying brethren, does confess, Quidam
putant eum, qui venit ex loco aliquo peste minime infecto, qui falso habetur
pro infecto, posse tuta conscientia and citra mendacuum dicere, se non venisse
ex eo loco, du^modo intelligat se non venisse ex loco pestilenti: quod si verum
est, nihil tam falsum esse possit, quod non queat ab omni mendacio libe^ar^;
quia mentitur qui verba aliter accipit, quam ipsa significant. Azor. Ies. Inst.
moral. lib. 1^. cap. 4.. Primo quidem.
That if this kind of answer (concerning a place infected with the plague etc.)
be not false, then there is no speech so false, but it may be freed from
falsehood: because willingly to use words in a contrary sense to that they
signify, is plain lying. By whom you Aequiuocators may learn, that if the
man you fancied came not from a place infected with bodily pestilence, yet this
your aequiuocating proceeds from minds spiritually infected with the
contagion of pestilent lying. O but you are more subtle then your Adversaries;
and so was the Genesis 3. 1.
Serpent (the Devils instrument) more subtle than all the beasts of the field.
Yet behold one Doctor amongst you so subtle, that for that faculty he has (by
figure of excellency) been called the subtle Doctor: who does conclude all
you Aequiuocatours liars, saying, Dicere [non feci] quod tamen seci, licet cum
hac mentis limitatione, [vt tibi significem] non est aequiuocatio, sed
mendacium. S^^us lib. 5. de Just. q. 6. art. 2.
To say that [I did not] that which I know I have done, although I speak it
with this limitation (or reservation of mind) [Vt tibi significem it is not
aequiuocation, but a lie. And not he alone, but even the subtilest of all your
Jesuits must be called a liar, if this your aequiuocating subtilty be not
rank lying: Quisquis fingendo alium fallere conatur, etiamsi aliquid
praeterea significare velit, haud dubie mentitur; alioqui nullum esset
mendacium, quod non ista ratione possit defendi. Maldonat. Ies. Com. in Luc.
vlt. verse. 28.
Whosoever (says he) does endeavor by feining to deceive another, although he
intend to signify something else, yet doubtless he lies. Which kind of
aequiuocating when your divine of Cullen does examine, he makes his
Theophilus, that is, the lover of God, to answer Philetus, that is, a lover of
himself; to wonder at your Quis te docuit tam belle nugari? quis tibi
periurium tam latam latebram indicauit? qua mendacij excusatione si vti
vellera, quis me ferret grauium prudentiumque virorum? siquid very habet
vulgaris isthaec interpretation, [Mentiri quasi contra mentem i^e] men^^i est
aliud animo sentire, aliud fallendi gratia significare. Genesius Theol. Doct.
in lib. qui in^eribitur Theophilus de causis occultis. cap. 6. Vbi ex professo
in hoc Aequiuocationis dogma vehementer inue^itur.
Trifling foolerie thus contrary to the judgment of grave and wise men, to
invent such a lurking hole and refuge for perjury. Concluding that It is
certainly a lie, when any does think one thing in his mind, and signify the
contrary in words, with intent to deceive another. Therefore are you to be
exhorted as his good Theophilus, for the love of God, who is the truth, to
recant this your doctrine of aequiuocating, the metropolis of lies.

CHAP. V.
The fourth Argument a Specie, or from a particular kind of lying, which is
Perjury.

Mayor.) Periurium est mendacium in iuramento factu^. Tollet. Ies. Tract. de
septem peccatis. cap. 54.
Perjury (as both your now Jesuits, and also your ancient School says) is a
lie made in an oath. Iuramentum, cui deest veritas, est Periurium. Malden. Ies.
Sum. q. 1. Art. 11.
For an oath void of truth must needs be a lie. Iu^are quod falsum esse putas,
est formale periurium. Aquinas 2. 2. q. 98. A^t. 1. ad 3.
Because in an oath to use such a speech as thou think is false, is formally
perjury. Anancient doctrine, for the Prophet requires in every Iurist truth;
Iere. 4.
Thou shall swear the Lord lives in truth etc. But mental aequiuocating is
in an oath per^urie. Ergo simply in it self without an oath it is a lie.

The Minor proved.
This is a certain maxim in Divinity, grounded upon the eternal commandment
of God, [ Exodus 20.
Thou shall not bear false witness;] and expounded by his Prophet, Thou shall
swear in truth; and confessed by your Azorius, Illud Ierem. 4. Iurabis in
veritate: ad est, ad veritatem confirmandam, and ex veritate, vt is qui iutat
non leui sed probabili ratione, ita esse arbitretur. Azor. Ies. lib. 11. Moral.
cap. 2.. Quanti quaeritur.
That is to swear both for the confirmation of a truth, and so also in truth
as to think probably that true whereunto thou art sworn. (Minor.) But our
Acquiuocatours do neither swear from truth, nor for confirmation of truth.
Ergo their oath is plain perjury. A conclusion thought so just, that your own
great Moralist does condemn all Aequiuocators herein as perjured liars;
Quidam putauit fas esse cuiquam, vt vitam suam conseruet, hosti iurare,
tantummodo eo sensu, quem mente intus concipit: possemus enim hac ratione
quiduis negare, and nihil non, absque mendacio, dicere. Azor. ibid. cap. 4..
Primo quidem.
or otherwise (says he) there is nothing which may not be affirmed and denied
without a lie. Yet against your conceived reservation we will object a
conceived supposition for further confirmation of this point,

This last Minor confirmed.
Suppose that your Guido has wrongfully impeached some man of honor, as to
have been an Inginer and worker in the Powder-vault together with Piercie and
Catesbie brethren in that evil: and thus is the noble person made guilty of
high treason; but after by more exact trial of circumstances, it is found that
the man of honor was never incorporate in that conspiracy, what can you
answer for your G^? What else, but as your Garnet answered for your Tresham, I
think he did aequiuocate? saying [The honorable man was present in that
vault] reserving in his thought this clause [Quatenus vir longissime absens,
praesens esse potuit. But answer, (for we will draw you out of that fox hole)
He swearing according to these words, [This man was one of us Pioners,] did his
words accord with his direct meaning? No: then was not his oath a veritate,
from truth; But did his oath (the second property of a true oath) confirm a
truth? No: for it did betray an innocent; then was it not pro veritate, for
truth. Therefore call you such an oath, Aequiuocation, or, Reservation, or
secret limitation, or what you will: our great grandfathers (I am sure) would
have termed it peri^rie, and adjudged it to the pillorie, a shame too little
for so shameless a collusion. For seeing that Periurium grauius est homicidio
ex part peccati, e^si secus sit ex part damni. Sa. Ies. Aphoris. tit.
Iuramentu^. ^t. 26.
Perjury (though not in the injury to man, yet in it own iniquity) is a more
grievous sin than murder; it may be wished that mental aequiuocation might
have a corporal suspension; and where any of whatsoever profession he be,
shall be found guilty of both murder and the aequiuocating clause of
Reservation; the sin of Reservation, may have a reservation of punishment:
that if, for the one, he hang by the neck, for the other, he may hang jointly
by the tongue, as it is written, Iuxta peccatum ita erit and poenae modus.

CHAP. VI.
Our fifth Argument from the principal subjects of Truth, God: and Lying, the
Devil.

1. God.
HEb. 6. 17. God willing to show more abundantly unto the heirs of promise the
stablenesse of his Counsel, bound himself by an oath, that by two immutable
things, wherein it is impossible that God should lie, we might have strong
consolation etc. Here we see the nature of a lie, Mendacium est malu^ tam
intrinsece, vt bonu^ reddi nulla^ ratione possit. Vasques Ies. in Thom. disp.
53. number. 22.
To be so absolutely evil in it own nature, as (which all Divines hold) that
nothing can make it good. Therefore so it is said, that to say it is
impossible, that our good God, father of truth, should lie: is as much as to
say, it is impossible for goodness to be evil, or for truth to be a ^ie;
because this is as contradictorie, as God not to be God.

Hence we argue.
Mayor.) That, which God can not do by reason of lying iniquity, has in it
the iniquity of a lie. (Minor.) But your aequinocating conceit is that which
for the lying iniquity thereof God can not possibly do. Therefore it is a
godless and lying wickedness.

The Minor proved.
If God by an oath of promising salvation in Christ could use your
aequiuocation, then should the Elect of God not have any strong consolation,
when God by word or oath he promises life, and though Romans 8. 16.
his spirit witnesses to the spirits of his Elect, that they are the sons of
God, and that they shall no* perish: yet might they suspect (which blasphemy
far be it from the hearts of his Regenerate) that it is spoken with some
secret reserved clause of delusion. Romans 3. 4.
But let God be true, and every (especially aequiuocating) man a liar, as it is
written: for he who is Truth will be justified, when this sect continuing in
this sin must necessarily be condemned.

The principal subject of lying is the Devil.
Because when the voice of the Almighty had denounced death to the
Transgressors, saying, Genesis 2.
Eating of this fruit ye shall die: the Devil in his instrument contradicting
that truth, said, Genesis 3.
You shall not die at all: he is therefore truly called Ioh. 8. 44.
A liar from the beginning. From whence we may argue thus.

Mayor.) That can not be a doctrine of truth, which stops a man's mouth,
that he can not give the Devil the lie. (Minor.) But admitting your
aequiuocation, all mankind is silenced, as not able to give the Devil his due
title of a Liar. Ergo aequiuocating is no doctrine of truth.

The Minor proved.
For Eve, who was catechized in this truth, God said that if we eat we shall
die, and hearing the Devils contrary suggestion, Though you eat you shall not
die: might she not say to the serpent, Spirit thou lie? If she might not,
then is that no lying spirit, which is father of all lies: if she might, then
is your close aequiuocating a lie. Otherwise, the Devil might have freed
himself as you do, saying, I said truly, for I did aequiuocate.

The Minor confirmed.
Though the Devil have plunged himself in Abyssum, the bottomless gulf of
wickedness, as to do wickedly for love of wickedness: Nemo tam i^probus, qu^
malit honestis rationibus quam nequitia peruenire ad ad quod cupit. Cuero in
Offic.
Yet is there not the most desperate sinner amongst men, but if he could, he
had rather by honest than by wicked means atchieue whatsoever his wicked heart
lusts after. We will borrow of you an example: The moderate Answerer in his
Epistle to his Majesty.
The late intended conspiracy, which (as you confess) was so heinous an
impiety, that God and heaven condemn it, men and earth detest it: Now then,
what wickedness under heaven would not these Conspirators have attempted,
which have been found guilty of so damnable a mischief? Yet am I persuaded
that for advancement of their Religion they would never have practiced by
powder, if they could have prevailed with paper. All which I produce to this
end, to let you understand, that if mental aequiuocation were lawful, and did
qualify a false speech to free it from a lie, no man instructed in that Art
would or could lie; and so we should seem to live in an Outopia, where men
shall be convicted of most manifest aequiuocating falsehood; only he shall be
the liar, that gives the convicted the lie.

CHAP. VII.
The sixth Argument, from examples of dissimulation condemned by 1. Scriptures,
2. Fathers, 3. Pagans.


1. Scripture.
ACts 5. 1. Ananias with Saphira his wife sold a possession, and kept back
part of the price, his wife being of counsel with him; and the other part he
brought and laid it down at the Apostles feet. Then said Peter, Why has Satan
filled thine heart that thou should lie? thou have not lied unto men, but
unto God. When Ananias heard these words, he fell down and gave up the ghost.
After this came in his wife, ignorant of that which was done; and Peter said
unto her, Tell me, Sold you the land for so much? and she said, Yea, for so
much: and Peter said, Why have you agreed together to tempt the spirit of the
Lord? and she fell down, and yielded up the ghost.

These pretended to bring all their substance, and to tender it to the Apostles
for the common good of the Saints, an act proper to the infancy of the Church:
but they reserved one half for supply of their peculiar uses, if happily they
might come to want. The woman is asked, Sold you the land but for so much? her
answer is, Yea, but for so much: and yet this dissimulation is called a lie.
When she answered, For so much, meaning but one half, concealing the other
half, it was not possible but in that dissimulation your reserved clause must
have come into her mind, to think, But for so much: vt in commune bonum
conferamus: or, vt alijs largiamur: or your own crotchet, [Vt vobis
significemus.] Let any but enter into the meditation of such a dissimulation,
and he shall find it impossible but some such conceit will be flittering like
a butter-flie in his mind, and like one of the 1. Reg. 22.
false spirits of Satan, delude his soul, as not to discern of a lie: but S.
Peter calls it a Satanicall lie. This is the first example of lying we read
of in Christianity, wherein the actours by the visible vengeance of God were
struck dead suddenly and perished in their sin, and should therefore teach
you, that though you may delude man, who only judges the mouth, (therefore S.
Peter said of it, Thou have not lied unto men*) yet for fear of the all-seeing
just God, not any more thus, Act. 5. 9.
To tempt the spirit of the Lord.

CHAP. VIII.
Examples out of ancient Fathers.

SAint Augustine uses many, especially two: The first; Ecce graui morbo
periclitatur aegrotus; cuius vires far non possunt, si ei mors vnici and
charissimi filij sui nunciaretur: quid respondebis? quicquid dixeris, nisi vnum
de tribus responderis, proinde erit ac si filium mortuum esse dixeris; aut enim
respondebis mortuus est, a^t viu^t, a^t nescio; haec duo, [Viuit, and, nescio]
falsa sunt, illud autem vnum verum, mortuum esse dicere. Ex quo dicetur,
homicida veritas: number si stuprum petens impudica f^mina, and, te non
consentiente, saeua amore perturbata moriatur, homicida erit ca^titas? August.
lib. contr. Mendacium ad Consentium. cap. 18.
Suppose there is a man so dangerously sick (says this holy Father) that if
he should but hear of the death of his dear and only son, his strength
cannot bear the grief of it, but he must presently die: thou knowing his
child is dead, and being asked of him whether he be dead or alive; what
would thou answer? Thou must either say he is dead, or he lives, or I know
not: but these two, [he lives, and, I know not] are both false; the only true
is, He is dead. But thou will say, then truth shall be a murderer: why? if an
impudent woman shall soliicite thy chastity, and thou deny, she in the rage of
her passion shall shortly die: will thou say that chastity is a murderer? Me
think I hear our Aequiuocators say, what, no true answer but only he is dead?
simple S. Augustine! for both of the other might have been made good, as
either to say, I know not, inwardly understanding, [Vt narrem tibi, or, nescio
calcibus, or, nescio cras] and such like: the second vi^it, he is alive, might
have stood for current, intending in the mind, [Viuit in Purgatorio, or, in
coelo, or, vitam spiritualem, or, sibi, or, Deo,] and an hundred such
qualifications and reseruatiues, both to free the answerer from lying, and the
man from dying. Well S. Augustine his simplicity made him a Saint; what your
doubleharted subtilty may make you, I had rather you should duly consider, than
I utter.

His second example: Erat quida^ Episcopus, nomine Firmus, ^irmior voluntate,
qui cum esset interrogatus, vbi esset quidam, quem ab ipsis persecutoribus
occultauerat, Apparatoribus Imperatorijs respondit, se neque mentiri posse, nec
homine prodere: and ne alterum e duobus faceret, tormenta multa perpessus est:
quid hoc dici possit fortius aut honestius? August. lib. de Mendac. cap 1^.
There was a certain Bishop, by name Firm, but firmer by the constancy of his
will: who being asked where the man was, whom he had hid from the hands of the
persecutor; answered the servants and officers of the Emperor thus: I (quoth
he) may neither ^e, nor yet betray my brother: and lest he should do either, he
suffered many torments of these persecutors. What answer could have been given
more resolute and honest than this? Thus resolves S. Augustine even upon the
case in question: only differing herein, that the example which the Father
propounds, is of a Bishop for the safety of a Christian; the answer which
our Aequiuocator teaches is especially directed to laymen for preservation
of Priests, viz. themselves. S. Augustine resolved that the Bishops answer was
most honest: what will our Aequiuocators judge? surely their subtilty teaches
that it was most sottish, by ignorance of another mean of evasion, through
this backdoore of Reservation, [Vt tibi reuelem.] Therefore the Catholic
Bishop might seem foole-hardie to expose himself to torments when by
aequiuocation he might have kept his knowledge as invisible for that time, as
Christ did his person by his almighty divine power amongst the persecuting
Jews. But S. Augustine could not find that passage, because it was not heard
of in those days; therefore does resolve thus, that the answer of the godly
Bishop was honest: Scriptu^ est, os quod mentitur, occidit animam. Eccles. 1.
Peruersissime igitur dicitur, vt alter corporaliter viuat, alterum
spiritualiter mori, homo enim non potest ni^i corpus occidere, Deus autem
corpus and anima^ in Gehennam detrudere possit. August. lib. de Mendac. cap. 6.
Because it is written, he that lies slaieth his own soul: therefore it were
perverseness to say, that one should choose to die spiritually, that another
may be saved bodily: for man it is who may kill the body, but God can take body
and soul and cast them both headlong into hell. Dicit aliquis, ergone Rahab
melius fecisset, si nullam misericordiam hospitibus prestitisset nole^do
mentiri? Nonne potuit dicere, scio vbi sint, sed Deum timeo, eos prodere?
posset hoc quidem dicere, si vera esset Israelita, in qua dolus non esset.
Verum illi hoc audito (inquies) illam perimerent, domum scrutarentur: Sed
numquid consequens erat vt illos etiam, quos diligenter occultauerat,
inuenirent? perspexerat enim cautissima foemina, and ibi eos posuerat, vbi
inuen^ri minime potuissent: Si tamen a suis ciuibus esset occisa, vitam istam
finiendam pretiosa in conspectu Domini morte siniuisset, and erga illos eius
beneficium inane non ^u^sset. Sed (inquies) quidsi eos occultatos perscrutando
inuenissent? isto^odo dici possit, quidsi turpissi^ae mulieri mentienti credere
noluissent? at vbi ponimus voluntatem and potestatem Dei? A quo enim post
mulieris mendacium custoditi sunt, ab eo potuerunt, etsi illa mentita non
esset, vtique custodiri: nisi forte obliti sumus quid Sodomitis contigit, qui
Lothi hospites quaerentes, domum in quo erant inuenire non poterant. August.
lib. contra Mendac. 17.
But the example of Rahab (says he) will be objected, whether she had not done
well if she had not showed mercy unto her guests the servants of God, when
inquisition was made by their enemies to know whether they were there; She
might have said, I know where they be, but I fear God, and therefore will not
tell you to betray them: thus should she have answered if she had been then a
true Israelite in whom there is no guile. But you will say that then they would
have slain her and have sought out the strangers: does it therefore follow
that they should find them? But suppose she had lost her life, a life which
must be lost, yet had her death been right dear and precious in the eyes of
God, and the benefit to her guests had not been in vain. You will furthermore
object that they by this means might make more diligent search for her guests,
and have found them out; and what I pray you, if they would not have believed
that lewd woman? Howsoever, who are we that we should censure or limit the
power of God? For he that preserved them after by this woman's lie, might have
preserved them without her lie: except we can forget his power against the
Sodomites; they sought the guests of Lot, but were struck blind, and not able
to find the door. This S. Augustine his Scio our Aequiuocators turn into
Nescio: they can spy out a bench-hole to hide the persecuted by her answer,
[Vt tibi reuelem] which was never revealed to S. Augustine, nor yet to the holy
Popes of ancient time: for S. Hoc mendacij genus perfecti viri magnopere
fugiunt, vt ne vita quidem cuiussibet per ^orum fallaciam defendatur. Greg.
lib. 18. Moral. in Job. cap. 2.
Gregory, and Scriptura sacra prohibet etiam pro alterius vita menti^i.
Innocentius. tit. de Vsuri^ cap. 4.
Innocentius in the same cause of preserving the life of a brother was of the
same mind. Neither is there one in all antiquity who ever knew the Nescio of
your mixed proposition, no not for any cause of danger to be free from them
there is no greater Tyrant than Sap. 1.
a lie, which slaieth the soul.

There remains the third example derived from Paganism; and also other two
arguments, the one deduced from comparisons, the otherfrom effects, which will
follow in their convenient order. In a conflict we know it is required that the
Soldier be provided as well defensiuely, to ward; as offensiuely, to impugn
his Enemy. Let us a while try the forces of our adversaries in

CHAP. IX.
The Objections, which our Aequiuocators urge for their mental Reservation
from Reasons, Scriptures, Fathers.


1. Reason.
The Treatise in the Preface. Ibid. cap. 3.. Two others.
WE will prove our mental Aequiuocation by natural reason. Thus, If I were
alone and should talk with my self, and say one thing, understanding a thing
different from that, this is not a lie. Ergo mental aequiuocation is just and
true.

The Answer.
Of these two most divine properties, whereby man is discerned from beasts,
Ratio and oration, Reason and speech: the use of speech was not ordained for a
looking glass, whereby a man might see himself, but as the Vide supra.
Interpreter of the mind, whereby he might be known of others: as the learned
Philosopher looking earnestly upon a Scholar professed in all arts, Loquere,
inquit, vt t^ videam: Speak, (quoth he) my friend that I may see thee. Now
because there is no man of sound brains, but he knows before he speak, what
his tongue utters, there can be no need that by speech he should interpret
his own meaning to himself, no more then a man may be properly said to steal
his own goods, or commit adultery with his own wife: because both these are
actions ad extra, that is, without a man, and have relation to others then to
our selves. Which is yet more apparent herein, seeing that he cannot be said
properly to speak unto himself, who cannot properly be said to lie to
himself: but whosoever can lie to himself may also by speech properly deceive
himself; because a lie is described to be a false speech, to this end, Supra.
To deceive. And can any by any wilful lie deceive his owneselfe, as thereby
be made ignorant of his own meaning? This were to distract a man from
himself. Therefore this natural reason taken from the speech of man with
himself, might best befit a pure natural, or some person distracted; namely,
such a one as being beside himself can best talk with himself.

The second Objection from Reason. The Aequiuocator.
Vide supra.
When there is a mixed proposition the two different parts make one etc.

The Answer.
This is already answered, and proved that this patch of mixture is no better
than a new piece of cloth in an old garment, Luc. 5. 36.
which makes the rent greater.

CHAP. X.
The Objections from examples of Scriptures in the Old and New Testament.

1. From the old. The Aequiuocator.
Aequiuoc. chap. 10.
THe Scripture tells us how Genesis 27.
Iaacob told his Father Isaac that he was his eldest son Esau: which was not
so in the sense of the Patriarch Isaac etc.

The Answer.
First, Si dixisset Iaacob [Ego sum primogenitus tuus] and non addidisset
[Esau] excusari potuit: nunc autem non possit, quia Pater repetens, dixit,
[Tues filius meus Esau?] de industria restringens interrogationem ad personam
Esau; respo^dit Iaacob, [Sum,] inexcusabilis a mendacio. Caietan. Cardin. in
Genesis 27.
Esau (as your Cardinal Caietan says: Haec est opinio nec paucorum nec
ignobilium Doctorum. Pererius Ies. Comm. in Genesis 27.
Which is also the opinion of many learned Doctors) being a proper name, which
Isaac did purposely restrain to that particular person, saying, [Art thou my
eldest son Esau?] Iaacob herein is inexcusable from alie.

Secondly, your Aequiuocators do prescribe the use of this your art to be put
in practice only before a judge, or hearer incompetent: and shall wethinke
that Isaac the blessed Patriarch and father of the promised seed could be an
unfit and incompetent hearer of his son now only craving his blessing? This
Disputer therefore (to speak mildly) is incompetent; although, I must
confess, this example is very semblable to your persons, in whom we hear
Iaacobs dissembling voice, but feel the rough hands of Esau, who intended the
murder of his brother.

The second example. The Aequiuocator.
The moderate Answerer. cap. 10.
Such aequiuocation did the Prophet Jeremy use (Ier. 38. 26.) when he took
advice of the King.

The Answer.
You discern^e nothing in the outward speech of this Prophet but a lie, falsely
imagining an inward aequiuocation of thought, which no man can discern. But
your ancient expositour tells us, that In hoc veru^ dixit Hieremias, alias
non obediuisset mentiendo; and hoc patet, quia hoc quod super dictu^ est, quod
Rex iurauit ei, quod non interficereteu^, nec traderet eum in manus Principum,
qui miserant eum in lacum; nec est verisimile quod Rex iurasset de aliquo, quod
Hieremias no^ petiuisset. Lyra^ in Ier.
The very outward speech of Jeremy was true, as may appear, (says he) in that
the King swore unto him, that he would not kill him, nor deliver him over into
the hands of those Princes. Neither is it probable that the King did grant any
thing to Jeremy which he did not require. Which is plain by the 15. verse.

Again, if we judge the outward speech of Jeremy was false, yet is it not
written for our imitation, but for direction, that (as S. Augustine does
observe in the like examples) Casus maiorum sit cautio minorum: the faults and
slidings of the stronger might be warnings to the weaker. According to the
wisdom of the holy Ghost in S. Paul, saying, 1. Cor. 10. 12.
Let him that stands t^ke heed lest he fall. Howsoever, for your gloss of
mental resernation; show us but one Father whether Greek or Latin; one Pope,
whether Catholic or Antichristian; one Author, whether learned or unlearned,
who did ever so fancy. But now you shall receive

A general Answer to all examples of the old Testament, wherein there may be
any scarres of infirmities: from Saint Augustine.
Haec quide^ in Scriptures sanctis legimus, non ideo tamen, quia facta
credimus, facienda credamus, ne violemus praecepta, dum passim sectamur
exempla. An vero quia iurauit David se occisur um esse Nabal, and clementi
consideratione non fecit, propterea illum imitandum esse dicemus: vt temere
iuremus nos esse facturos, quod non faciendum esse postea videamus? Imo sicut
Lothum, cum volu^ filias suas prostituere, ita Dauidem cum temere turabat, ira
turbabat. Aug lib. cont. Mendac. cap. 9.
We read of such kind of examples in holy writ, not that, because we believe
they were done, we should therefore believe they may lawfully be done; lest
when we would imitate examples of men, we transgress the precepts of God. This
Answer does S. Augustine use against the Heretics of his time, called
Pris^^lli^ists, who defended lying by the same examples whereby you would
defend Aequiuocating, yet not so modestly, (I confess) as you do: for they
maintained openly lying in his proper name; you covertly under an adopted name
of Aequiuocation, an evident argument that those Heretics, whose best refuge
was lying, either by ignorance knew not your aequiuocating crotchet, or
according to the common language of Divinity in those times, called it by his
proper name, lying. And yet your book for aequiuocating must be entitled, A
Treatise forsooth against lying.

CHAP. XI.
Examples out of the new Testament objected.

The principal be four. The first Example. The Aequiuocator.
The Treatise cap. 4.
THe infallible Verity says to his Disciples, (Ioh. 11.) [All things which I
have heard of my Father have I manifested unto you:] Yet in the chapter
following affirms, that he had many things to say unto them, but they were
not able to bear them away then. Therefore must the first proposition be
understood according to his meaning reserved. Ibid. paulo post.
Aequiuocation therefore is evidently convinced out of thi^ speech of our
Savior, who is infallible truth.

The Answer.
I answer (with S. Augustine) that Agit suas parts infirmitas: sed vt esse
sibi adulterandum nemo discat a castitate; cuiquam nocendum esse nemo discat a
benignitate; and esse mentiendum discamus a veritate? August. cont. Mend. cap.
1^.
Now man's infirmity plays her part: but know that no man learneth of christity
to be adulterous, or of godliness to be impious, or of bounty to be injurious;
and shall we learn of truth to be liers, and periurious? God forbid! Touching
the text, your own Bishop Iansenius answering this objection, says, that
Obseruandum est tales propositiones esse limitandas ad status, loci, temporis,
conditionis circumstantias; alioqui falsae essent: vt illa, Quodcunque
petieritis Patrem in nomine meo, dabit vobis, id est, quaecunque pro co^ditione
vestra expediu^t, etc. Iansen. Concord. in Ioh. 15. and 16
These kinds of speeches, and all such are to be expounded according to the
circumstances either of state, place, time, or condition of the persons
speaking, or to whom they were spoken: as namely that, Whatsoever you ask my
Father in my name he will give you; what any thing absolutely? nay, but upon
condition it be expedient for you. So here, Christ saying, I have manifested
all things, it is expounded by the circumstance of the present state;
signifying, All that appertain unto you to be known. So then here is no
concealed sense to deceive the hearer, but it is evident by circumstance of
speech. Whereby you may perceive, that not that infallible Verity, but your
own infirmity and vanity has deceived you: in so perverting the truth to
patronize your lie.

The second place objected. The Aequiuocator.
Aequiuoc. Treatise. chap. 4.
Our Savior said to his Disciples, that he himself knew not the day of
judgment, but his father only: which by consent of holy Fathers is to be
understood, that he knew it not [vt significaret eis.] Thus Ambrose,
Chrysostom, Theophilus, and Basil expound it. And Garnet at his arraingment
objected S. Augustine, and wholly depended upon his judgment in the same
exposition.

The Answer.
It will not be pertinent to oppose the other exposition of ^Multi veteres
Patres Athanas. Greg. Nazian. Theod. Cyrillus, Author operis imperfect. in
Matthew. docuerunt Christum quatenus hominem diem iudicij ignorasse. Maldon^^.
Ies. Comm.
Fathers, Who were many (says your Maldonate) expounding this text thus; that
Christ, as he was man knew not the day and hour etc. but the question is,
whether the former exposition of S. Augustine and others does imply any mental
equivocation. And because Garnet did select only S. Augustine of all the
Fathers, we will appeal to S. Augustine for answer to them all. By whose
testimony it does appear, that when our Savior said, I know not the day,
signifying, [vt dicam vobis;] this clause whereby he meant to conceal the
time, was not concealed from them; who though they were by the sense of the
speech held in ignorance not to know the day, yet were they not ignorant of the
sense of the speech, which was, I may not let you know it. For he makes the
sense of the word Nescio, I know it not, to be a figurative speech, and by the
emphasis of pronunciation to signify so much to his Disciples, as you shall
not know. His examples. Qemadmodum dicitur de Deo Deuteronomy. 13. [Tentat vos Deus
vester vt sciat si diligatis eu^.] non vt ipse sc^^t, quem nihil latet, sed vt
scire vos faciat quantu^ in eius dilectione profecerimus, tentari nos
permittit. Secundam ipsam locutionem dicit Dominus noster nescire se diem and
hor a^ de sine seculi: quid enim potest esse, quod ipse nesciat? sed quia hoc
vtiliter occultabat Discipulis, nesciente^ se esse dixit, quia illos nescientes
occultando faciebat. Secu^dum hanc figuram etiam Patrem solu^ dixit scire diem
ipsum, quia eundem filium scire facer^t. Talibus locutionibus etiam abundat
nostra consuetudo, cum dicinuis laetum diem, quia nos laetos facit; and pigrum
frigus, qui pigros nos facit, etc. August. de Genes. 1. contra Manich. lib. 1.
cap. 22.
When it is written Deuteronomy. 13. The Lord your God tries you, that he may know
whether ye love him. These words, [That he may know] do not signify that God
may receive knowledge, who knows all things before they be; but the sense is
this, That he may make you to know how much you have profited in his love. So
Christ speaking to his Disciples, saying, The Son of man knows not the day
of judgment, had this meaning, to make his Disciples that they should not know
it. Now therefore as the people of God understood the figure of the phrase, Vt
sciat Deus, in his id est, vt scire vos faciat: so did his Disciples by
circumstance, or emphasis of Christ; speech understand his Nescio, in his id
est, vt vobis dicam, which is yet more perspicuous by that which S. Augustine
does add; Such kind of speeches (says this holy Father) are ordinary in the
common speech of men, as when we say, It is a pleasant, or a drowsy day:
signifying that the day makes us pleasant, or drowsy. I would desire the
Reader to compare this Nescio of Christ with S. Augustines Nescio, in his Supra
chap. 8. lit. (...).
former example, and he shall easily interpret S. Augustine by S. August, to
understand that Nescio cannot admit a concealed sense. Now what man of common
sense does not know the sense of such speeches? plainly showing that the
Apostles did then know the sense of that Nescio, the day of judgment, only
that they might not know it. Can then your unknown Reservation have
approbation by S. Augustine? fie no: his Christian ha^t was ^o divinely precise
in this point, that the did not admit of dissimulation for preservation of the
glory of woman-hood, woman's chastity; no not for the preservation of another
man's life, no not of our own life, no not for gaining a man's soul. And will
you make him guilty of more than Heathenish Aequiuocation?

Secondly, consider but the use of your imagined Reservation, which you
prescribe to be then only requisite, when the hearer is incompetent and unfit
to understand the clause reserved: but shall any imagine, that the Apostles
were not fit to understand (the only reason of your imagined Reservation) that
they were unfit to know the day of judgment? senseless, for our Savior
elsewhere says, Act. 1. 7.
It is not for you to know the times and seasons. And why was not that [vt
vobis significem] at this time also seasonable for them to understand? Yes
doubtless, if that were the meaning of his words, they understood it, and
then it was no concealed reservation; if it were not his meaning, there was no
aequiuocation.

Thirdly, the purpose of the Aequiuocator is by his secret reservation To
delude his hearer. And will you say now therefore that Christ did aequiuocate,
that is, delude and deceive his Disciples? This were blasphemy.

Fourthly, this exposition [Vt vobis significem] is either derived from the
circumstances of Christ his speech, whether of time, or place, or persons etc.
Or else it is idly imagined, to say that the Fathers doted dreaming upon a
sense without light of some circumstance would be injurious to reverend
Antiquity, and prove the subversion of your own cause: but if the Fathers
collected this by circumstances and consequents of Christ's speech, then was it
not the sense concealed, except you will say S. Augustine and S. Ambrose did
understand better the meaning of our Savior then his prime, chosen, and
(concerning the tenor of Christ's speeches) his familiar Disciples. Lastly we
will conclude this point by the testimony of your Genesius, who will tell you
that this sense which you conceit, is not only contrary to the sentence of all
Fathers, but also against all common sense: Non sustineamus hac interpretatione
nitentes. quidquam no^ modo contra veterum and grauissimorum Doctoru^
consensum, verum-euam contra communem sensum, quasilegem in vitam communem
inducere. Genesius in lib. qui inscribitur Theophilus, Tract. de cansis
occultis.
We may not suffer (says he) those who rely upon this interpretation to bring
in (speaking of purpose against your Aequiuocation) any doctrine amongst men,
which is not only contrary to the common consent of ancient Fathers, but also
common sense.

The Aequiuocator.
The moderate Answerer chap. 10.
Our Savior Christ in going to Luc. 24. 28.
Emmaus, did feign as though he would go further. Ergo, it is lawful to
aequiuocate.

The Answer.
Graece est, (...); quod honestius conuerti possit, and conuenientius [prae se
ferebat:] vt quidam exponit. Iansenius Concord, in hunc locum.
The Greek word (says your Doctor) might have been more securely and
conveniently translated, as one does it, [He made as though he would go
forward:] But Aequiuocatours delight in faining: will you therefore behold your
own visage? Priscillianistae haeretici ex hoc loco, (vt docet August. lib. ad
Consentium cap. 13.) probare contendunt licere nobis aliquando mentiri. Maldon.
Ies. in hunc locum.
The Heretics, called Priscillianists, as appears in S. Augustine (says
your Jesuit) from this text did labor to prove a lie lawful. And in reading
S. Augustine you shall find, that never either Catholics or Heretics could
discern in your mixed proposition any thing but a lie. But to the text; the
Fathers shall be our Judges, and your Authors our witnesses.

First, Mendacium non est, inquit Augustinus, verba ambigua proferre occultandi
veritatem causa, modo non fiat animo fallendi alium: ita fictio illa in factis
vitiosa non suit, sed salutaris, qualis fuit illa Pauli cum circum cidebat
Timotheum, vbi non circumcisionem tanti fecit, sed vt Iudaeus Iudaeis factus
Iudaeum lucrifaceret. haec Augustinus. Nec hic Christi gestus ad fall^ndos eos,
sed vt hac ratione excitaret discipulorum animos ad hospitalitatis vi cut^.
Iansen. Concord. in hunc locum. Christus figurate sinxit se longris ^re: qui^
cum lo^s esset recessurus ascendendo in coelum, per hospitalitatem quodammodo
reti^ebatur in terra, inquit Augustinus. Aquinas 2. 2. q. 111. art. 1.
Saint Augustine (as your Bishop relates) says that Christ did seem to go
further, but not with any purpose to deceive those Disciples. How then? your
Aquinas will tell you. S. Augustine says, that Christ made as though he would
go further; to signify figuratively, that he was ready to go into heaven, but
that for a while he was in a sort retained by earthly hospitality. Christus, vt
Greg. and Beda exponu^t, noluit discipulos istos fallere, sed postus docere cos
falli, ^ocue cos errore liberare, qu^ utabant illum non resurrexisse, nec
Christum esse posse: ergo fingebat se tanquam, eorum opinione, peregrinu^
longius ^e. Quemadmodum Propheta Michaiah 1. Reg. 22. 15. respondet regi
quaerenti an esset praeliandum in Ramoth [Ascende, inquit, and vade propere,
quia tradet cos Deus in man Regis] cum tamen ^atis intelligeret. Regi ibi esse
moriendum, haec loquens non sua, sed Regis and falsorum propheta^ opinione, a
quibus rex erat deceptus: non vt homine falleret, sed vt ^si^ doceret. Solemus
enim aegro dicere, qui aquam rubio color^ tinct^m, quam ^^s, vinum este putat:
Accipe vinum; vbi (...) on sall^mus, sed aegrum (...) signis^s. Maldonat.
(...). s. (...). in (...)
Pope Gregory likewise and Bid (says your Jesuit) hold that Christ did it
not to deceive them, but rather to show how they were deceived. He cannot be
said to he (says Gregory) who uses words, which are not intended to deceive
another, but to show that he is deceived, as the Prophet Michaiah dealt with
Ahab. 1. Reg. 22. The story is plain: when King Ahab was bent to go to fight
against Ramoth Gilead, all the false Prophets promised him a prosperous
warfare: the King calls for Micheas, and asks, [Shall we go up against
Ramoth Gilead, or no? the Prophet answered, Go up and pros^er.] When
notwithstanding he knew that the King should perish: but this was an irony, and
in a sense known to the King himself, who therefore charged him to speak
seriously. Therefore the Prophet spoke these words now according to the meaning
of the false Prophers in scorn: as When a sick man shall take water died with
a red color, which he is persuaded to be wine, we would say in jesting manner,
well drink your wine; thereby to tell him his error, and not to cause him to
err: so here these disciples not persuaded that Christ was risen from death,
but held him as a stranger and passenger feined himself a passenger to go
forward. Come to the literal and historical sense. [He made as though he
would go further: and they (...), that is, did compel, or, constrain him,
saying, Abide with us, and he abode with them.] And now it appears, he meant
as he seemed, to go further, but after was overcome by their courteous
importunity to yield unto them: as the Genesis 19.
Angel of God was by the urgent request of holy Loath: hereby teaching us a
double instruction: in respect of man not to be perverse, but when our
occasions may suffer us to yield to the sweet violence of curtuous humanity; in
respect of God [Who loves an importunate beggar] to be instant in prayer,
knowing that God, who in our remissness will, by withdrawing his graces, seem
to go from us, yet condescendeth in mercy to our importunity, and will abide
with us. If therefore we consider the figurative sense, then in this fiction
there could not be your aequiuocation, for it was done to instruct them, and
not to deceive them: If we embrace the literal, then it was no fiction, but a
plain and familiar humane practice, as any one who departs from his friends
is truly said to depart. What reason or religion then shall we call this,
which thus from an action of sensible instruction, would prove an
aequiuocating dissimulation, a reservation insensible, that is to say, a
deceitful delusion: turning by this means the Oracle of the son of God
Christ Jesus, author of the truth, into the Oracle of Delphos, the professed
devilish school of Sophistical aequiuocations?

The fourth place. The Aequiuocatour.
Treatise of Aequiuocat. chap. 4.
Jesus said to his Disciples, Ioh. 7.
I will not go up to the feast at Jerusalem, and yet afterward went, meaning
(as Bellarmine in his Dictates does expound) not as the Messiah, but in secret,
or (as S. Cyrill does interpret) not to solemnize it publickely; or (as S.
Augustine will have it) not to manifest my glory; or else not the first or
second day, but in the midst of the week. Thus have we from Scriptures and
Fathers sufficiently proved our mixed proposition.

The Answer.
You have bestowed many leaves in Commenting upon this text, to euince from
hence your reserved conceit: let me borrow a little leave to plead as well for
truth, as you do for a lie, and show you, how expounding this place, you,
blinded with the love of your Thais, had rather snatch at any meaning, then
take that which is meant: for those words [I will not go up* in the Greek are,
[I will not go up yet:] and then (as your Jesuit Maldonate well observes) Qui
dicit se, nondum, ascendere, non dicit se non a scensurum, nec aliquid
contrarium dictis postea fecerat, atque it omnis question tolleretur. Maldon.
Ies. Comm. in Ioh. 7.
He who says he will not go up yet, does not deny that he will not go up at
all, and therefore going ap afterward, that act does not contradict his former
speech, and so all doubt and question is easily assoiled.

But your Helena, the Latin vulgar text must be embraced, for Treatise quo
supra.
Albeit, (says our Aequiuocator) in all the Greek co^ies it be [(...),
nondum, not yet,] yet all Catholics are bound to admit [(...), non, not,]
because it is so in the vulgar edition. How far they err from Catholics
herein, I have Apoleg. Cathol. part. 2.
elsewhere showed; how we are to esteem of the Greek translation in this
present text may appear by the testimony of your forenamed Jesuit, saying:
Innumeri pene codices Graeci sunt, in quibus legitur [(...), nondu^ ascendo]
maxim vero antiquissimus Vaticanus, toto terraru^ orb celeberrimus, deinde
Autores graves, Nonnus, Chrysostomus, Euthymius. Maldon. Ies. quo supra.
Almost innumerable Greek copies have [I will not yet ascend] and in that most
ancient Vatican copy universally commended throughout the world, it is sore^d,
which reading many grave and learned Fathers do fellow.

Yet we will not so strictly challenge our right in this equity approved by
all antiquity, which is, that as in discerning pure water, rather to examine it
by the fountain, then the river: so we judge of the truth of texts by the
Original, rather then by the translation. For your Latin text does
sufficiently betoken the same sense of the Greek, [Not yet]: so do two of the
principal Doctors of your Church paraphrase: the first is your some-time
Jesuit, and late Cardinal, Tollet: [Non asce^dam] id est, Nondum; quia
[Tempus meum] quando me i^e oportet, [nondum est impletum:] quo tamen impleto
ascendam, ne scandalizentur, quod ipse nollet ire ad festum, nondam enim legis
obseruantia cessarat. Non absolute nega^, significans se postea venturum; nam
vox [Non] est dictio limitata, quae est in Graecis (...), quae vox eadem in
sequentibus, [Nondum tempus meum impletum est.] Tollet. I^s. and Cardin.
[I will not go up,] that is, (says he) not yet, because [my time] when I must
go up [is not yet fulfilled:] which being fulfilled, then I will go up; lest
that his Disciples should have been offended at his absence from the solemn
feast at (...) rusalem (because the observation of Jewish rites was not yet
abolished) Christ did not absolutely deny to go, but did signify that after
a while he would go up. For the word [Not] in the Latin is the same with [not
yet] in the Greek, as appears in the words following, [For my time is not
yet fulfilled. Our next witness is your bishop Ia^senius, who from the sound
light of the text concludes that [ Verba quae sequuntur, [Tempus au^em vestrum
paratum est] significant Christu^ non opera sua facere aliorum hominu^more,
prout occurrit, sed certis temporibus praescribere sibi, and prout nouit ^a
maxim facere ad Dei gloriam, idcirco tempus sibi nondum opportunum ascendendi,
vobis autem, ou^ ex praescripto Dei viuitis, te^pus paratum est adeundi festum.
[Non ascendam] id est, non adhuc ascendam: qui sensus satis indicatur, cum
sequitur, [Quia tempus meum,] quo scz. mihi ascendendum est, nondum est
impletum. Et Erasmus testatur antiqua quaedam Latinorum exemplaria habere
[Nondum:] and hae est Germana expositio. Iansenius Concord. in hunc locum.
Not] signifies plainly, not yet* and that this is the proper exposition of
the place. Adding ou^ of Erasmus, That many ancient Latin translations follow
the Greek, having, [not yet.] Therefore this text admits no reservation.

What shall we then say to the other expositions objected? only this, that
whatsoever exposition they understand, did think that the same was as well
understood of the Apostles, as of themselves. For if the Apostles ha^ not t^
that Christ would have gone at all to the feast, they should have been
scandalized: says your Iansenius. But your coined Reservation is always
supposed of you to be a clause concealed, and not understood. Therefore in all
these expositions alleged, there appears not the least hair of your
foxtaile, you call Aequiuocation. Scriptures forsake you, or rather you them:
now you will have recourse unto Fathers.

CHAP. XII.
Objections from Fathers.

The Aequiuocator.
Treatise for Aequiuocat. chap. 8.
SAint Gregory ( Humanae aures talia verba nostra iudicant, qualia foris
sonant: diuina vero iudicia talia ^a audiunt, qualia ex intimis proferuntur;
certe noue^t ille, qu^ intentionem alterius varijs explicat verbis: quia non
debet alioqui verba considerare sed voluntatem and intentionem, quia non debet
intentio verbis deseruire, sed verba intentioni.
lib. 26. moral. cap. 7.) teaches that we ought not to respect w^rds, but the
intent of the speaker. Ergo the intent makes the Proposition true.

The Answer.
You roue from the mark, your learned Doctor will direct you to understand the
meaning of S. Gregory, as thus: Gregorius eoru^ calumniam taxat, qui contra
loquentis indubitatam mente^ verba malitiose interpretantur. Sic enim hunc
locu^ viri doctissimi interpretantur, qui docent cum calliditas adhibetur ab
alterutro dic e^te, vel accipiente, tum demum orationem accipere ad mentem
eius, qui simpliciter intelligi^* Genesius in suo Theophilo. cap. 6.
Gregory does in that place (says he) reprove a quarreller, who knowing the
simple meaning of him, with whom he does contend, yet maliciously does wrest
his words: And thus do the most learned expound S. Gregory. This kind of
example we read of in our Stories: An Inne-keeper in London at the sign of
the Crown, to encourage his son to learning, would usually say, Learn fast,
child, and I will make thee heir of the crown. One peruersly taking advantage
of the ambiguity and double sense of the phrase, heir of the crown, brought
him in question of high Treason, and the poor Inne-keeper (as I take it) lost
both his artificial and natural Inn. Here was place for S. Augustine his
moderation not captiously to catch at men's doubtful words, where we are not
ignorant of their simple meaning. The like I have heard of a Minister called in
question of perjury, because he had sworn that N. was possessed of a lease,
as it might be the 13. day of May. It appeared, indeed, that upon the same day
the said lease was delivered to the forenamed N. according to this form of
law, To hold from the day of the date hereof. O sir, (says a Lawyer) you are
now convicted for a notorious periurer; for these words From the day etc. are
understood exclusiuely, signifying after that day, and that the lease was not
in force till the next day. Seeing then (says the Minister) both law and
Lawyers fail, I must beseech your honors to give me leave to show the
simplicity of my meaning in a case of like tenor; leave was granted him to
plead his own cause: thus then (quoth he) when any in this honorable assembly
was married after this form, To have and to hold from this day forward;
whether were they man and wife before the next day, or no? If they had said no,
they should have stained their firstborn; and, affirming it, they were forced
to acknowledge the simplicity of his meaning, and remit the rigor and
extremity of the law. Have you no Father to father your aequiuocating lie upon,
but only Saint Gregory? (For this is the only direct testimony which you
allege out of the Fathers, to this purpose.) You thought, belike, that if you
must have an author for a lie, it was most likely he should be a Pope. But you
must then make choice of some other, than S. Gregory, who I am sure) as Popedom
is now defined) was nothing less than a Pope. We will conclude concerning
Fathers with your own authors: Hanc sententiam aliqui tueri mo^tur co^tra
(...) and summorum Theologorum auto* itate^. ^ullu^autem ante G^brielem hanc
aequatiocationem co^mentus est. Genesius quo supra.
That this manner of aequiuocating is against the authority of most ancient and
chief divines, and that none before Gabriel (not that Gabriel, Angel of light,
but Gabriel Biel a Sophister) taught it. Whosoever was the author, I dare
boldly conclude, that though S. Gregory, or a thousand of Saints, yea though
celestial Gabriel, or any Angel from heaven should teach and authorize such a
doctrine as this, we may from the word of God pronounce him Galat. 1. 8.
Anathema. Now that we have wrested your weapons out of your hands, it will be
easy to pierce you even with similitudes, the bluntest kind of Argument.

CHAP. XIII.
Our seventh Argument from comparison of a 1. Sign, 2. Interpreter, 3. Coin,
4. Gygesring.


Aequiuocat. supra.
VOices and writings are as signs (say you) and instruments ordained to
express a proposition. Very good, now every sign which a man shall use
contrary to the signification thereof, is a lying sign: thus to hang an ^uie
bush at a Bakers door would be a lying sign; thus idols in visible forms made
to express the essential form of the invisible and incomprehensible God are
called Is. and Ier.
lying vanities: the mirabilia, that is, wonderful works which exceed not the
principles of nature, and yet challenge unto themselves the name of Miracula,
as though they proceeding from an omnipotent power above nature are called 2 Thessalonians. 2.
lying wonders: the action of the stage-plaier, who lifted up his hand to
heaven crying, (...) earth, cast them down again to the earth, crying, (...)
god in heaven; was counted a solecisme and lying gesture. And shall not your
voice, I am no Priest, which cannot possibly express (that which you are) a
Priest, be a lying voice? Yes verily, and your pen also defending and approving
this doctrine of lying, is made of the same wing, whereof others were, whom God
condemned by his Prophets, saying, Ier. 8. 8.
Stylus Scribarum est styl^s mendax; the pen of the Scribes is a lying pen. But
whereunto shall I compare this generation? they are like unto Cacus in the
fable, who is said to have stolen oxen, and lest he should be traced by their
right footings, he dragged them backward by the tails into his den: so the
right answer of our Aequiuocator should have been, I am a Priest, but he says
contrary, I am no Priest. Even by this devise wresting a meaning by a clause of
reservation (this is the tail) and so like Cacus lurketh safe in the closet of
his hollow heart.

The second similitude is an Interpreter: for Aristotle defines every
proposition to be an interpretation of the mind, You must now imagine that your
Pope should send his Nuncio to congratulate (together with Amba sladours, from
other Princes) our Kings last miraculous deliverance, with all complementall
pretenses of joy; for his Interpreter he shall make cho^^e of you
(Aequiuocator) who profess your self his Majesty's loyal subject, whom he
shall acquaint with his secret meanings and clauses reserved in his message:
Notwithstanding our Aequiuocator shall report it thus. His holiness does
greatly rejoice (most renon med King) at your happy deliverance* Reserving that
which was the meaning of the Nuncio; Ab omni spe obtinendi Romanum imperium:]
and wishes unto your Majesty with all his heart [reseruing another clause,
which was intended by the Nuncio from his holiness, Admodum exiguam]
contiauance of Gods protection. Will any judge otherwise of such an
Aequiuocator than of a notorious liar?

The third Similitude, vulgar and country speech by Plutarch is resembled to
the country coin: now your selves cannot deny but that in all states Falsare
monetam est crimen laesae maiestaus. Sa Ies Aphoris. lit. Falsarius.
Stamping of a false coin is high treason; and so is also clipping and
impairing the Kings stamp: But Aequiuocators by their clause of reservation
clip off that part of speech, which is the image of God, the truth of the
speech. Ergo guilty of higher than high treason.

The fourth similitude: Mental Aequiuocation is not unlike Gyges his ring,
which Plato and others mention, being of that virtue, that Cic. Offic. l. 3.
Whilst the pale of the ring was kept on the backe-siae of his hand he was
visible; but being turned into the palm of his hand he was invisible, seeing
any, and seen of none. By means whereof he shortly after practiced adultery
with the Queen of Lydia, and murdered the King. So our Aequiuocator, when
happily he shall turn his aequiuocating clause outward to manifest it in
speech, he lies open and is easily known for a dislo^al subject: but when he
keeps it close in his mind, he is imboldened to practice against his King.
But the Heathen Ora^our entreating of the property of an honest man, he would
have him tried by the opportunity of Gyges ring: No good man (says he) would
abuse it, because honest men do not seek means how they may be secretly
evil, but always resolve to be absolutely good. Surely this Pagan must rise
up in judgment against this Aequiuocating generation to condemn it.

I might add another Similitude taken from chastity; the Fathers calling
always veritatem (...) virginitatem; and S. Augustine castitatem mentis:
Verity is the ch^y of the Soul. It may be they have taken this from S. John in
the description of his Apoc. 14. 4.
V^gines, in who^e mouth there is found no guile: as though a chaste soul
should abhor as much the use of a lie in the mouth, as a devout Virgin would
loath to stain her self with a known adulterer: such is the a^tinit between
these devises, that S. Paul does range 1. Tim. 1. 10.
w^gers and liars in one sentence. From hence it is that the craft of Vintners
in the mixing and coloring of their wines is called Adulterare, adulterating
of the wine. Compare this craft of mixture of wine with your Aequiuocation,
which you call Amixt proposition, and what shall you perceive else but an
artificial adultery? Our last argument which is belonging to this conclusion,
taken from the effects of Aequiuocating, I reserve for the last in the next
conclusion, because there it will be more effectual for confirmation of both.

CHAP. XIIII.
Our second conclusion, that no manner of Aequiuocation, whether mental or
ver^all, can be used in an oath without sacrilegious profanation.

WE deny not but ambiguous words may sometime be used in common speech: for so
we read of Athanasius, who, flying by ship the malice of the persecutor, and
at last overtaken the pursuer asked, Socrates, Sozem. and alij.
Did not Athanasius pass this way? Athanasius himself made answer, Yes, he is
a little before you, if you make have you shall soon overtake him. The
Persecutor imagining, A little before, must signify some other ship then
that which was immediately before him, passed by Athanasius, and pursued a
butter-fly.

The state of this Question from the opinion of the Aequiuocator.
Treatise chap. 4.
This aequiuocation of ambiguous words, is to use one word which has diverse
significations: as being asked whether a Priest be in my (...), Treatise chap 7.
may answer non est: understanding by est, the signification of edere, and not
of esse. May this kind of aequiuocating be used man oath? No, not before a
competent Judge lawfully examining* this were a mortal sin. We suspect you
will prove an honest man: therefore tell us, Whom do you hold competent Judges?
Do you esteem any competent and fit, who are Adversaries to your Romish
profession? Treatise quo supra. And this is the opinion of the^ all, to judge
Protestant-magistrates not fit Judges. Vide supra.
When a Magistrate shall swear me to bring a (Papist) Recusant to the Assies,
which is unlawful, yet seeing there is no other way for the Recusant to
escape, then will I swear by aequiuocation. Now you return to your former
wallow, but we must take you as we find you.

CHAP. XV.
Our first Argument from the form of an oath.

WE are not now to prove that wrought to take an oath of all them that exact
it, but only that whenever, or to whomsoever we sweat, we are bound in
conscience to answer directly. To show therefore what an oath is, we will be
come^ed with your Iesu^ts definitions. One defines it Iuramentu est religiosa
inuocatio di^ testimon^, in dict^a^us confirmatione ^iet, Ies Instruct. Sacerd.
lib 4. cap. 20. (...) addit, sieve explicit sieve imp^e.
A religious invocation (whether it be expressly, or implicatiuely) of God, as
witness of our speech. Another, Est religionis officium and opus quo credimus
Deum totius ve^atis autore^ esle, quinee decipivnqua^ possit, nec alios (...)
e^e: sicut ad Heb. 4. Hac agitur religio^n. ^homines, Deum ve^^atis tes^e^ad
habent. and ^j^ ^an^ fide habere impium and nefarium sit.
It is a dutiful act of religion, whereby we profess God to be the author of
all truth; who can neither deceive, nor be deceived. Hence may we reason thus:
The competencie of God, by whom we swear, makes every one competent Judges
and hearers, to whom we swear: but by swearing by God, whom we can not
deceive, we religiously protest that we in swearing intend not to deceive. Ergo
our deceitful aequiuocating is a profanation of the religious worship of God.

The Mayor is true, for that our Savior in auouching truth, held Pilate a
competent Judge, although he did not Iuridice, but falsely proceed. S. Paul in
his cause appealed to Caesar's tribunal seat, who was a Pagan. Jacob did
covenant with Laban an Idolater: and the maid, to whom S. Peter swore, was
competent enough to hear a true oath, if he had been as ready to swear truly:
and yet neither the maid, not that Judge did proceed turidice; for she was no
lawful Examiner, and he was a partial Judge.

A Confirmation of the former argument from the authority of the Fathers.
To know in what sense of words we must take any oath, the doctrine of Isidore
is insallible: Quacunque art verboru quis iuret, Deus tamen, qui conscientiae
testis est, ita accipit sicut is, cui iuratur, intelligit. Isidor. lib. 2. de
su^. 13.
Though man use never so great art and cunning in swearing, yet God does value
the oath according to the sense of him, to whom the oath is made. Hereby your
art of Aequiuocating is quite excluded, which teaches to use that
signification and sense which is most contrary to his understanding to whom we
swear. To know what is the necessity of performance of a lawful oath, the rule
of S. Hierome is most divine; which is this: In iurame^to sides seruahda est,
nec co^side^a^du^ est cui, sed per quem iu^^^eris. Hieror. ^n Ezeth 17.
Faith must be kept in an oath, because we must not regard to whom; (man); but
(God) by whom we have sworn. And thus also your cousenage of falsifying your
oath is likewise excluded. In both these testimonies we see the Iurer is taught
always in swearing to man to fix his eyes upon God; and his omnipotent
justice, by whom I swear, makes every man, to whom I swear, a competent
hea^er; therefore charge me to swear directly, evidently condemning our
Aequiuocatours, who make a Protestant-magistrate competent to take their oath,
but hold him incompetent to take their sincere and direct oath: as though man
only, and not also God, did take our oath. Impious; for so sacred a thing is an
oath, that Mu^i falluntur (inquit Augussinus) vt pute^t, quia nihil est per
quod iurant, ideo se non ^ine periurij ener^: pro^^us per^^ us es, quit per id,
quod sinc um non putas, fal^um iuras as, si tu^^hum sanctum non putas, sanctum
tamen illu^ putat cui jurat. Genesius in suo Theoph. cap. 6.
Though a man should swear by a thing, in his own opinion unholy, which is
holy in the opinion of him to^ hom he swears; this man swearing falsley is
perjured. Still we see, that though an oath appear outwardly, Exodus 3.
but as a flame in the hush, yet God is in this flame, therefore we must put
off the shoes of our feet, that is our carnal affections; for Gods name, the
foundation and ground of an oath, is holy ground.

A Confirmation of the former argument from their ancient School.
These our Aequiuocators do by their new subtleties foolifie the honest
simplicity of their ancient School: the two eyes whereof Lombard and Aquinas
law clearly in this kind of swearing an homble prosanation of the sacred name
of almighty God. Qui calliditate vtitur in iuramento, dupliciter est reus, ^u^a
and nome^ Dei in vanum sumit, and proximum dolo capit. Lombard. lib. 3. did.
39. lit. (...).
Whosoever (says Lombard) does use craft o^ sub^ in an oath, does defil^ his
conscience with a double guilt; he both deceives his neighbor, and also
takes the name of God in vain. Therefore Aquinas does expressly conclude: Si
Iudex hoc exquirat, quod non potest secu^dum ordinem i^ris, non tenetur
accusatus respondere, sed potest vel per appellationem, vel aliter licet
subterfugere; mendacium autem dicere non licet. Et paulo post. Falsitatem autem
proponere nullo casu alicui licet, neque etiam aliquem dolum vel fraudem
adhibere, quia fraus and dolus vim mendacij habet, and hoc est se calumniose
defendere. Aquinas 2. 2. q. 69. art. 1. and arg. 2.
If a Judge (says he) shall require any thing, which he cannot (the point in
question) by order of law, the party accused is not bound to answer, but either
by appeal, or some other manner of m^anes may deliver himself: but in no case
may he tell a lie, or use falsehood, no nor any kind of craft or deceit, for
this is to answer, etc. I may from Thomas insult upon our Aequiuocatours in the
words of their own Genesius; Potuitne Thomas apertius damnare istorum
sententiam, qui docent fas esse Reo crimen verum sibi intentum art verborum
inficiari? Genesius in Theoph. cap. 18.
Could Thomas more plainly deny their opinion, who teach the guilty person to
avoid a true accusation by words of guile and deceit?

CHAP. XVI.
The second Argument taken from the end of an oath, as it is affirmed in
Scripture.

HEb. 4. An oath is for confirmation, to make an end of all contention. This
Mayor is Scripture. (Minor.) But in an aequiuocating oath there is neither
beginning of confirmation, nor end of contention. Ergo it is a vain and
sacrilegious oath.

The Minor proved out of that mouth of the Aequiuocatour.
Treatise of Aequiuocas. chap. 10.
For further direction of the party examined, let him admit the oath with a
secret inte^tion of aequiuocation, and if he be more urged to swear without
aequiuocating, let him swear that also (namely that he does not aequiuocate)
but with the forsaid intention of aequiuocation. What should the Disciple of
Christ say to this Doctor, though he sat in Peter's chair? What, but as our
Lord Christ taught by his example, who in the favorable temptation to do evil
for security of his life, answered, Math. 16. 23
Get thee behind me Satan: for this is the mouth of Satan, to swear by an
aequiuocation. We do not aequiuocate; and urged again to swear this without
aequiuocation, to swear aequiuocatingly we do not aequiuocate. etc. Here is
contention without end, by this aequiuocation which is as bottomless as the
pit of hell.

A confirmation of this former Argument from the Jesuit Azorius.
Azorius Iesuita qu^ supra.
Whosoever (says your Azorius) is rightly catechized in this point of religion
concerning an oath, calls God to witness of the truth, and therefore it is
an heathenish impiety not to believe Christians thus swearing. Say now, you
Aequiuocators, who swear Sophistically, turning Supra.
esse into edere, thereby to deceive your hearer; Is he to whom you swear
bound to believe you? this were hard, for so a Christian should be bound to be
deceived: may he lawfully suspect you? then this your doctrine, which takes
away the consecrated use of an oath, which is, for Confirmation of speech, is
plainly Antichristian.

CHAP. XVII.
The third Argument, a minori, as the Logicians term it, from the less to the
more.

Mayor.) That doctrine which is less honest then the doctrine of Pagans, is
intolerable among Christians: (Minor) but Jesuitical aequiuocating is less
honest than the doctrine of Infidels and Pagans. Ergo, ought to be esteemed
abominable among Christians. The Mayor is taught by our Savior: Matthew. 5. 20.
Except your righteousness exceed the righteousness of the Scribes and
Pharisees, you shall not enter, etc. showing where there is more knowledge of
Christ, there the profession must be more honest. And more expressly S. Paul: 1.
Cor. 5. 1.
There is such fornication among you, as is not among the Heathen. Concluding
that it is blasphemy against God for a Christian to be more vile in life than a
Paga^. The Minor proved: for your Jesuit Sa does tell us, that there be but
Iurans redire in carcere^ tenetur (nisi esset ini^; detentus) etiam cum
periculo vitae; quidam etiam ad iniustum carcere^ redeundum ^iunt, nisi
iuramentum relaxetur per Episcopum. Eman. Sa. Ies. Aphor. T^t. Iuramentum.
Some of you, who think that a Prisoner unjustly detained upon his oath is
bound to return, except he be absolved from his oath by a Bishop. This in an
oath without aequiuocation: but our Aequiuocators think their Aequiuocation in
making an oath better, and of more power than any Bishop to free them from
perjury in an oath; esteeming it as good as no oath wherein they use their
Reservation: when as yet the very Infidels in respect of their natural
knowledge of God, kept better fidelity among men.

An Example of the Pagans fidelity out of Tullie.
Vnus ex december illis captiuis, etc. Cicero Offic. lib. 3.. Regulus.
There was a man, who together with nine other prisoners being dismissed out of
the prison of Carthage, upon his oath, that he within a prefixed time should
return again: as soon as he was out of prison, he returned as though he had
forgot some thing, by and by departs home to Rome, where he stayed beyond the
time appointed, answering that he was freed from his oath. See now the opinion
of his own countreyman concerning this aequiuocation of Return; Non re and e,
fraus enim distringit, no^ dissoluit periurium: Itaque decreuit Senatus vt ille
veteranus and callidus vinctus ad Anni balem duceretur. Cicero quo supra.
Non recte (says Tully) this was not well done: for craft in an oath does not
lessen but make the perjury more heinous: wherefore the grave Senators of Rome
sent this cousening mate bound, with cords, again to the prison of Annibal
their enemy, from whom he had escaped. Qui vero dcunt nullam esse sidem, quae
Infideli data sit, videant ne quaeratur latebra periurio; quiduis enim potius
argute excusari possit quam iusiurandu: quantum enim mali excidit ex ipsa
fraud? Cic. ibid.
But some object, That we are not bound to keep faith with them that are These
Poeni, or Carthaginians, whom Tully calls Infidels, were of all men in the
world most perfidious, so that they came into a proverb, [Punica fides] The
Carthaginians faith, which was as if one should have said Falsehood: and if any,
then this people was incompetent to challenge truth in an oath.
faithless: o let them take heed, this (such is our Aequiuocators objection of
a Judge incompetent) is but to seek a lurking hole for perjury: whereas we
may excuse subtletie in any thing rather than in an oath, wherein even the
least deceit is a great mischief. This was the honesty of the ancient
Heathenish Rome, which must rise up in judgment against this present Rome to
condemn it, which has changed that faithful Romanam in Punicam fidem.

CHAP. XVIII.
The fourth Argument, a paribus.

SOcrates reports this story of Arius, the arch-heretike, Imperator Arium ad
iu^iurandum adegit, ille id quoque simulate and fallaciter praest^tit: ^ucata
vero ratio, qua ad fraudem in subscribendo vsus est, sicut audiui, huiusmodi
fuit; Arius suam ipsius opinionem in charta habebat, eamque sub ala gestat,
jurat se vere and ex animo sentire, quemadmodum scripserat. Socrates lib.
(...). hist. cap. 38.
who being compelled by the holy Emperor Constantine to deliver his
subscription to the Council of Nice, and to avouch his integrity by an oath,
he used this art and slight: his own (heretical) opinion he closely kept
under his left arm, and then swore (laying his hand upon his left side) that
he so believed as he had written. What can be the difference betwixt the oath
of our Aequiuocators, and of this blasphemous Arius? He kept secret his
aequiuocation under the hollow of his arm, but these conceal theirs in the
hollow of their hearts.

An Objection removed.
You peradventure will insist and say, that Arius did aequiuocate in the cause
of faith, which all Christians hold a thing most abominable: but first know,
that although the matter of deceitful swearing may make the deceit to be more
wicked, yet it can not make the wickedness to be more deceitful; for every
thing is defined by his form, and not by his matter, Vero nihil verius, and so
on the contrary: for example, to say the mouse worried a cat, and to say
adultery is no sin, this latter is not the greater lie; yet by reason of the
matter is the greater sin, because besides the wickedness of lying, it does
justify (another wickedness) adultery. Now to the matter.

You will aequiuocate in the question concerning your Priesthood, saying and
swearing against your knowledge that you are no Priest, by some secret
reservation of mind; as according to the example of one of your fellows, I am
no Priest; meaning, No Priest [Apollonis]: as though an aequiuocating Priest
can consort with any better than with those Satanicall Priests of the Pagan god
Apollo. For all their answers (as every scholar knows) from their Oracles was
by Amphibologies and Aequiuocations. Of many, be you contented with this one.
Pyrrhus his question to that Oracle was; Whether he should give an overthrow to
the Romans, or no: the answer of the Oracle was this: Aio te Aetacidi Romanos
vincere posse;
That is to say, I say that Pyrrhus the Romans may overcome.
So whether the Romans (which after was true) should overcome Pyrrhus, or
Pyrrhus (which was false) should conquer the Romans, the aequiuocating Oracle
might be found to have said truth. It is recorded by Eusebius. Prapar. Euang.
Eusebius, that at the birth of Christ all those devilish aequiuocating
Oracles were put to silence: when the last which spoke, being asked Why they
now ceased to give answers; returned this last answer; (...). Because the
Hebrew babe (meaning Christ) is borne. So doubtless, in what heart soever
there is the regenerating spirit of Christ, there the aequiuocating spirit of
Delphos does wax dumb.

Now you hold, that your Priesthood is conferred upon you by a Sacrament of
Ordination; and that Bellar. lib. 2. de effect. Sacram. in genere.
Ex opere operato it does impresse in your souls Characterem indelebilem, that
is, a mark never to be blotted out. Ordo praestat caeteris omnib' quoad hoc,
quia constituit homines in gradu sublimiori, quam sunt caeteri Christiani.
Bellar. quo supra cap. 28.. Ordo.
By the power of that Sacrament of Order, which herein (say you) excels all
other Sacraments, that it aduanceth Priests a degree above all other
Christians. The end thereof you believe is Tooffer sacrifice for the sins of
the quick and the dead. Yet do you aequiuocatingly deny your Priesthood
sealed unto you by a Sacrament belonging to faith. And what matter can there be
wherein such a Priest will not aequiuocate, who does aequiuocate concerning his
Priesthood? But we have not so learned Christ, but defend that it is essential
to a Christian, whenever or to whomsoever he swears, to use simplicity,
and not to sophisticate: for there is a double faith in the Iurer to be
tendered; the first is faith to the man, to whom he swears, which we call
fideline: the other is our faith in God, by whom he swears, to believe that
he is omnipotently wise, to discern whether my words be true according to
their signification, and omnipotently just to take vengeance upon me, if I do
dissemble. The first faith is violated by aequiuocating; for it is therefore
interpreted to be called Cic. in Offic. lib. 1. and S. August. lib. de
Mendacio. cap. 20.
Fides, quia fit quod dicitur, that is, The thing is, as it is said to be. And
the dissemble^ in this kind, Tullie (as the golden mouth of all reasonable
men) calls Speaking of the Poeni, who used to falsify their faith with men.
Infidelem, An Infidel. So, likewise, your faith in God is impeached, for how
shall I call God to acknowledge those words to be true in that sense which I
ought to speak them in, wherein I know them to be false?

CHAP. XIX.
This doctrine concerning Aequiuocating must in the last place be discussed
both pro, and contra in the effects.

The Aequiuocator obiecteth.
Treatise supra.
When a Protestant Magistrate shall swear me to bring in a Papist Recusant to
the Assizes, when there is no way for the Recusant to escape, I will swear by
aequiuccation.

The Answer.
Think thou it unlawful to bring a Recusant to the Assizes? then is it also
unlawful to swear that thou will bring him; for this is one essential
property which God challenges by his Prophet, that where there is Iusiurandum,
Ius should go before iurandum: and therefore the Prophet says, Iurabis viuit
Dominus in veritate, in iudicio, and iustitia. ler. 4.
Iurabis in iustitia; Thou shall swear in justice: Iudicio caret ^ramentum
incautu^, veritate mendax, iustitia iniquum and illicitum. Aquinas.
That is (to admit your own Aquinas for expositour) not to swear any thing
that is unjust. But notwithstanding this direct command [Thou shall sweare]
will thou swear? Then may thou not swear by aequiuocation, for that does
wound the very soul of an oath, which is simple Truth: but verbal
aequiuocation takes away the necessary simplicity of an oath, because therein
is dissimulation. If therefore the thing be unlawful thou must not swear, no
not truth, though thou be urged; if thou will swear, yet know thou art not
urged to swear an untruth.

The second Objection is popular, (supposing Aequiuocation to be a lie) thus:
Est mendacium triplex; perniciosum, officiosum, iocosum^ per^ciosum est in
damnum alicuius; officiosum quod est in al^ vulitatem; iocosum quod nec in
dettimentum nec vtilitatem al^cu^us est. Dicimus omne mendacium esse quidem
peccatum, and cum sit in turamento, omne mendacium esse peccatum mortale; sine
iuramento, officiosum autem and iocosum esse veniale peccatum. Tollet. les.
Instruct. Sacerd lib. de septem peccat. cap. 54.
There are three kinds of lies (that one Jesuit may speak for all his
fellows) one is a pernicious and hurtful lie, which turns to the hurt of
another; the second is an officious and charitable lie, which is for the good
of another; the third is but a jesting (...), whereby no man is either helped
or hurt. Of these we define thus, that every one of these used in an oath is a
mortal sin; considered without an oath, the pernicious is only a mortal
sin; the officious and ^esting are but venial.

The Answer.
I am not ignorant that the use of this distinction of mortal and venial, in
the comparison of sins, is frequent in the Fathers, but as different from you
in sense, as they be consonant in terms: for they never valued any sin so
venial in his own nature, as not to deserve of it self an infinite eternal
torment: for they always taught that every sin being a transgression of an
eternal law of the infinitely just God, does challenge an infinite punishment,
and so to be accounted mortal: and yet not therefore equal, except you will
say that theft and murder and blasphemy against God be therefore equal,
because they be equally mortal: which I think you will not. But when they
consider man in the state of Grace, they taught that the sins of humane
infirmity in a man regenerate are not rigorously exacted: and in this sense are
called venial. Notwithstanding I dare affirm, that of these kinds of sins
which you call venial, there is not one but being done upon presumption, it is
damnable and equal with your mortal: As thus; suppose your officious lie be
unto the examined venial, because he was instantly surprised (as it were) with
a sudden passion, and not able to know how to resolve, which I call infirmity:
yet if he had ^^ed presumptuously, that is, been of this resolution, that
whenever such a case should happen, his purpose was to lie, this unto that
man had been a sin grievously mortal: yet this manner of resolution in like
case is your general doctrine, and practice. Therefore we must show that

Every Officious lie, for what good intent soever it be, resolutely done,
whether in, or without an oath, is damnable in it self, and ought to be
avoided of all Christians.
Your practice in the popular opinion is justified in these respects; We do it
for a good end, as to secure our selves, or a Priest; and for the Catholic
cause, lest holy Priesthood might be defamed, and our Catholic faith
blasphemed. Have you said? Then see, I pray you, how much Christian simplicity
does abhor this infatuation? For holy Fathers will not allow any lie (the
adultery of the soul) no not for Non ad tuendam pudicitiam, mult^ enim mag^s
custodienda est a^ castitas, quae m^o mendacio, quam ea, quae aliena libidine
violatur. August. de M^ac. cap 20.
the defense of Chastity; nay not for Non ad seruandam alterius vitam
corporalem. August. ibid cap. 17. and 18. and Greg. Pent. supra.
preservation of a man's bodily life; nay not for the Non ad lucrandam salutem
hominis aeternam. August. quo supra, cap. 20.
winning of a man's soul; nay, no evil may be done, (as your Acosta says
well) Non ad malum faciendum, vt omnes Barbari Christi fidem amplectantur.
Acost. Ies. desalut. Ind. lib. 2. cap. 2.
not for the gaining of many thousand Infidels to the faith. So precious a
thing is Truth, unto truly Christian souls.

Now because by experience in reading your best authors I have observed that
the Romish Church has been bold often to publish to the world lying
Revelations, lying Miracles, lying Privileges, lying Legends, and Stories,
Slanders, and other lying Reports: All which I am as able particularly to show
as to name, and would also if it were not impertinent in this Treatise; and it
may be some moderate answerer, will by someidle Reioinder hereafter extort
them: Seeing also that your Superiors both secular and Iesuitical have
autorised this art of lying, and that all such conceits are esteemed with them
but as piae frauds, godly deceits: as though the evil of them [Deceit] were
venial, and not so only, but because it is mixed with [Godly] that is, [with a
good intent] it becomes also meritorious:

I must entreat patience of the gentle Reader, to peruse a Christian reason,
able to overthrow a thousand such Antichristian and heathenish profanations.
For it is written Romans 13. 7. If the verity of God have more abounded through
my lie unto his glory, why do we not evil that good may come thereof? as some
affirm we do say, whose damnation is just. The argument of the Apostle is
this: though it be most true in the verity of God, that man's unrighteousness,
(as for example a lie) does redound to the glory of Gods grace in pardoning of
the same unrighteousness of man by Jesus Christ, according to that verity of
the Gospel of remission of sin: yet God forbid that any man should therefore
multiply unrighteousness in sinning (as for example lying) that Gods glory
may be magnified in forgiving! Showing that it were blasphemy to teach that it
is lawful for any to lie, although it would establish and advance the glory
of God in that wherein God so loved ye world that he gave his only begotten
son. Ioh. 3. 16.
God is most glorified, even the glory of his grace in pardoning of sin by
Christ Jesus. And therefore the Romish godless deceits, must be bundled up
with those condemned Coloss. 2. 23.
Wilworshippes, Iud. 8. 27.
Gedeons Ephod, 1. Sam. 15. 21.
Saul's sacrifice, 2. Sam. 6. 6.
Vza his supporting of the arc, 1. Reg. 12. 32.
Ieroboams altars, 1. Tim. 1. 13. and 2. Tim. 1. 3.
Paul's persecuting of Gods Saints, yea the crucifying of Act. 3. 17.
Christ the son of God (all which notwithstanding their pretended good
intents) are subject to the same just condemnation. And why? holy Job has
debated this matter long ago, Job. 13. verse. 7. 8. 9. 10.
Will ye talk deceitfully (says he) for Gods cause, or will you accept his
person? Will you make a lie for him, as one lies for a man? he will surely
reprove you. Doubtless; because God is truth: but no man will defend any
thing, no not a lie, but he will defend it in the name of truth: for who will
say I lie; therefore it is true? Can then any without blasphemy defend the cause
of the God of all justice and truth with a lie?

CHAP. XX.
The Protestants last Argument against A^quiuocation, from the effects.

The Confirmation of both our former Conclusions.
The effects be of four kinds: It 1. Dissolueth the natural policy of all
kingdoms. 2. Challenges all Romish Priests and their adherents in this
kingdom to the rack. 3. Gains the infamy of deceit and lying upon the
professed Aequiuocators. 4. Begets scandal to souls, blasphemies against
Christ in the profession of the holy faith.


The first.
THe last anchor that man can cast for any security in this tumultuous and
tempestuous world, in any Commonwealth, is an oath: for man's name, goods,
lands, and life, whenever they be formally called in question, do all in the
end depend upon the presumption of the testimony of witnesses in the truth of
their oath; and in one word, for the Heb. 4.
end of all contentions, the last link of confirmation, is ordained an oath.
For preservation therefore of the integrity of an oath, all Nations have
provided punishments for all such as wilfully transgress therein; some
countries adiudging the perjured to be whipped; others to be hanged; others to
be slit in the nose; others to be branded in the forhead: and the judicial law
of God does command Deuteronomy. 19.
legem talionis; that every false witness should suffer that evil or loss,
which by his false swearing he would have brought upon another; eye for eye,
hand for hand, life for life. And in all the kingdoms of the world, from all
generations, the offense in an oath is called Perjury; Jesuits supra.
which is a lie in an oath. But if the secret intention might excuse from
lying, then could never any have been justly condemned for perjury or false
witness. Thus the false witnesses suborned against 1. King. 21.
Naboth, the false witnesses against chaste Hist. of Susanna.
Susanna, the witnesses against Matt. 26. 60.
Christ the just one, even the only just, might each one have justified
themselves, saying, We spoke truth, for we did aequiuocate. And thus all
humane laws against perjury must have been abolished.

The second effect which must move the Aequiuocators to give over this art, is
extremity against their own bodies.
Because they, who by their aequiuocating do profess to conceal most
desperate treasons, till they come to be tortured, do necessarily challenge the
rack: but all Romish Priests and their disciples are instructed not to reveal
any of their sect to be guilty of such practices, till they be enforced by the
torture: for thus your Cardinal in his instructions of Priests, has
determined, Quando aliquis in tortura positus reuelat alterius peccatum vere,
quando non interrogatur iuridice, non peccat: ratio, quia nullus tenetur cum
tanto suo detrimento conseruare famam alterius, occultando crimen commissum
illius. Tol^et. les. and Cardin. lib. 5. Instruct. Sac. cap. 66.
When any (says he) is put upon the rack, and does truly reveal the crime of
another, although he be not examined iuridice, justly, and according to the
order of law; yet therein he does not sin, because none is bound, upon so
great bodily harm to himself, to preserve the good name of another, by
concealing his offense. Therefore when you make all Protestant-magistrates
incompetent, with whom you may use aequiuocation till you come to be tortured,
what do you else but teach them, that your only competent Judge and Examiner
must be a Rack?

The third is infamy against the Aequiuocators good name and faith among men.
Your doctrine is, that The Treatise. Vide supra.
answering your incompetent magistrate by aequiuocation; if he shall further
ask whether you do not aequiuocate, to answer, No; but with another
aequiuocation: If again, in his jealousy, he urge whether this third time you
do not aequiuocate; then the third time also to say, No, but with another
secret aequiuocation; and so as often as he shall ask the like: likewise by
aequiuocating to say you do not aequiuocate. This is that monster which I
called Hydra, which, as Poets feign, Hercules did impugn; in the which as
often as one head was struck off, immediately there sprung up another;
signifying an endless business. It will now be requisite that we hear what
our Moderate Answerer would say in the behalf of his dissolute Treatise: The
Moderate Answerer in the conclusion of his book.. And if etc.
We have (most merciful Sovereign) in the sincerity of our souls, without
ali aequiuocation or doubtful sense, purged our selves of those opinions or
practices of rebellion objected unto us. Say you so? without all aequiuocation?
How shall his Majesty be persuaded that these words without all aequiuocation
are not spoken in some doubtful sense and aequiuocation? How can you free your
self from this jealousy, seeing your doctrine is in protestation of not
aequiuocating to aequiuocate? You may now ges^e what will be the effect of this
your Art; even that, which is the due reward of a liar: namely, that seeing in
his protestations and oaths, when he should say truth, he will dis^emble, he
may not be believed, when sometime he says truth.

The last effect is scandal against men's souls, and blasphemy against God.
Seeing that all Christians be exhorted, Coloss. 4. 5.
To walk warily toward them that are without, (meaning Infidels) to the end
1. Pet. 2. 12.
That they which speak evil of you, (...) of evil doers, may by their good
works which they shall see, glorisie God in the day (that is, when God shall
have mercy to call Infidels to the faith) of visitation. Showing that a wicked
life in the professor of faith does hinder unbelievers from the faith.

Secondly, every Christian is admonished 1 Thessalonians. 5. 22.
To abstain from all [(...)] show or appearance of evil: the reason is
expressed in the Apostles exhortation to Christian servants, challenging of
them subjection to their Heathen-masters, Tit. 2. 5.
That the doctrine of God be not blasphemed, or evil spoken of: and to the
same end he charge all Christian wives to be chaste and obedient to their
Infidel husbands: 1. Tim. 1. 6.
That the word of God be not blasphemed: showing that the wickedness of a
wicked professor (by man's blindness) edoundeth unto the blasphemy of the godly
profe^on. But in your Aequiuocating by a clause reserved and concealed in your
thought, (which God only, Psalm. 7. 10.
The only searcher of the heart sees) no man can discern in your speech any
thing but appearance of damnable lying. Therefore not only Pagans by this
scandal shall continue in infidelity, but the glorious name of Christ and his
true religion, shall suffer blasphemy: and if this do follow upon the examples
of wicked servants, wicked wives, wicked children; how much more by the
principal professors, wicked Priests?

Neither this only, but by this doctrine the Gospel of Christ, in the opinion
of all Pagans, will be more justly condemned, when the Pagan shall not only
examine the most godly Christian religion by a wicked Professor, as it were a
right rule by a crooked example, or Christ by Judas (which is wicked) but as
the rule in it self, that is, the Religion in his moral truth, and find that
this your doctrine of aequiuocation is non solum doctrina mendax, verum-etiam
mendacij; not only a lying doctrine, but a doctrine of lying. What can this
work in the Turks and all Pagans at this day, but obstinacy in their
infidelity, and blasphemy of that faith, which is the only life of souls?
Especially seeing I may as justly say concerning the Aequiuocation of your
contagious Romists, as the blessed Apostle writ of the incestuous among the
Corinthians: 1. Cor. 5. 1.
I hear that there is such fornication among you, as is not once named among
the Heathen.

This our Apostolical Defense of Protestants I will conclude from
Protestations of the Apostle.
The blessed Apostle of the Genules, and elect vessel of grace, S. Paul, when
he would avouch his inward zeal for the salvation of souls, he protests
thus; Romans 9. 1.
I say the truth and lie not, my conscience bearing me witness that I have
continual sorrow of heart for you. And again, 2. Cor. 11. 31.
God the father of our Lord Jesus Christ knows that I lie not. Secondly, to
persuade to others the authority of his Apostleship, he protests thus; 1.
Tim. 2. 7.
Whereunto I am ordained an Apostle; I speak the truth in Christ, and lie not,
even a Teacher of the Gentiles. And again, Galat. 1. 20.
This that I write unto you, behold I witness before God and lie not. He would
then confirm unto the minds of the Romans, Corinthians, Galathians the
sincerity both of his affection and function by the force of an oath; calling
God to witness to his words, as directly proceeding from his conscience;
otherwise these Conuerts might have replied upon the Apostle thus; We hear of
a doctrine of Aequiuocating, which teaches that you, by a secret clause in
your mind, may alter the sense of words in your understanding; differing from
the sense which outwardly they signify, and which only we can possibly
understand. How can you then persuade us in this sense, that, you are an
Apostle, seeing you profess a reservation of a contrary sense, which may
signify you are no Apostle? Would you persuade us to believe that by that your
protestation, which you teach we need not believe by your reservation?
therefore it will be to no end to persuade us to believe you in that wherein we
may be deceived. Otherwise, if by the outward sense you may confirm us that
you do not lie, the contrary aequiuocating sense, doubtless, must be
accounted a plain lie. And yet our Aequiuocators have made as strong
protestations to deny their Priesthood, as ever S. Paul did to confirm his
Apostleship; these being as certainly no true Priests, as he was truly an
Apostle.

To seal this truth by a memorable example of antiquity, reported by S.
Hierome as a mirror of Christian simplicity, De muliere septies ^cta, Ad
Innocentium: E^mulieri maritus crimen adulterij impegerat, and cum eculeus
corpus extenderat, oculis in coelu^ erectis, Tu Domine Jesus testis es, qui
serutator es renu^, non ideo me negare velle ne peream, sed ideo men^ nolle ne
peccem. Hieron. Tom. 1.
Of a wife accused of her husband, an^ tortured to draw out a confession of
guilt: but she lifting up her eyes to heaven, said, Thou Lord Jesus, who
searchest the heart and reins, art witness that I do not deny truth for
fear of death, but therefore refuse to lie for fear of sin. Me think I see
Tollet with other Jesuits standing by beholding this spectacle, and saying (
Tollet. Ies. Instruct. Sacerd. lib. 4 cap. 21. and 22.
for he did instruct their Catholic adulterous wife to aequi^ocate) Alas good
woman! it pitieth me to see you abide such torment only for want of wit; and
then whispering her in the ^are, gives her this ghostly counsel: Thou may
use a secret abstracted reservation in thy mind, and so both escape torture
and avoid a lie. These be Jesuits, the new Theological Alchymists of our time,
able to abstract Aurum ex carbone, Truth out of a lie: who must be admired of
the world as the Monopolists of all Arts, whereas no Art is singular in them
but this Aequiuocation. In respect whereof I may say of them, as Tully spoke of
the Soothsayers of his time: Miror si non riserit Haruspex, cum Haruspicem
viderit; I marvel how our Aequiuocatours do not laugh, when they behold one
another. But here is the difference of the spirit of wit, and the spirit of
grace: this with that woman may look up to heaven and call Jesus to witness,
when he that is in heaven, shall look upon them and have them in derision.

Thus have I discussed of these Antichristian doctrines of lying and treason;
the last trial of both which we refer to the judgment of God, not as wood
or straw, subject to their fancied Purgatory fire of trial; but as pitch and
tar, sulphur, and powder reserved for the unquenchable fire of hell; From
whence our Lord Jesus preserve us and them, to the glory of his saving grace.

Gloria Deo.
ERRATVM: In the third part, Page 40. lin. 25. for 100. read 1000.


