THE GOLDEN BALANCE OF TRIAL. Wherein the Reader shall plainly and briefly
behold, as in a Glass of Crystal; as well by what rule all controversies in
Religion, are to be examined, as also who is, and of right ought to be the
upright Judge in that behalf. Whereunto is also annexed a Counterblast against
a masked Companion, terming himself E.O. but supposed to be ROBERT PARSONS the
traiterous Jesuit.

Vos Vnctionem habetis a sancto, and nostis omnia.

1. Ioh. 2. v. 20. Determinatio solius Papae in his quae sunt fidei, non
obligat vt praecise est talis, ad credendum alioquin staret in casu, quod quis
obligaretur ad contradictoria, vel ad falsum contra fidem. Gerson prim. part.
de examinat. doctrinarum, consider. secunda.

LONDON. Imprinted by John Windet, for Richard Bankworth, dwelling in Paul's
Churchyeard, at the Sign of the Sun. 1603.

THE GOLDEN Balance of Trial.
CAP. I. Of the Uncertainty of Judgments, of all Bishops severally in
themselves.
THE Prophet David shows plainly the uncertainty of Judgment, Psalm. 116. v.
11
when he tells us, That all men are liars: The Prophet Jeremy cries aloude,
Iere. 16. v.19.
that the Gentiles in the end of the world shall come to him, and shall freely
confess, that their forefathers inherited lies and vanity. Romans 3. v. 4.
S. Paul confirms the same, telling us, that only God is true, and every
man a liar. The Prophet Malachie shows the whole matter, Mal. 1.8.
to have been verified in the Priests of the old Law: His words are these: The
Priests lips shall keep knowledge and they shall seek the law at his mouth:
for he is the messenger of the Lord of Hosts: but ye are gone out of the way,
ye have caused many to fall by the law: ye have broken the covenant of Leui,
Ezech. 7 v. 26 and cap. 22. v. 26
says the Lord of Hosts, yea this is it, that the Prophet Ezechiel says, Then
shall they seek a vision of the Prophet, but the Law shall perish from the
priest, Esa 28. v. 7.
and counsel from the Elders. The prophet Esaias says, The priest and the
prophet have erred by strong drink, they are swallowed up with wine, they have
gone astray through strong drink, they fail in vision, Micah* 3. v. 11.
they stumble in judgment: this is it, that Michah says: The Heads thereof
judge for rewards, and the priests thereof teach for hire, and the prophets
thereof prophecy for money: This is it that the prophet Sophonie says; Soph.
3. v. 4.
Her prophets are light and wicked persons, her priests have polluted the
Sanctuary, they have wrested the law.

This uncertainty of judgment cannot be denied: For Tertullian erred,
Montanizinge, Cyprian, Rebaptizinge, Origin, Cerporizinge, Nazianzen,
Angelizinge, Eusebius, Arrianizinge, Lactantius, Millenizinge, and the like may
be verified of all the Residue.

The sentence of two learned papists, highly renowned in the Church of Rome,
shall conclude my Theme. Roffensis. art. 32. aduers. Luth. page 420.
John Fisher the late Bishop of Rochester, has these express words: Nec
Augustini, nec Hieronymi, nec alterius cutuslibet auctoris doctrinae sic
ecclesia subscripsit, quin ipsi locis aliquot ab iis liceat dissentire, nam in
nonnullis ipsi locis se plane monstrarunt homines esse, atque nonnunquam
aberrasse.

The Church has not so subscribed, either to the doctrine of Austen, or of
Hierome, or of any other Writer, but that we may sometime dissent from their
opinions; for themselves have plainly showed themselves to be men, and that
they wanted not their errors: the Jesuit Ballarmine has these words; Sine
dubio singuli Episcopi errare possunt, Bellarm. de conciliis lib. ^. cap. 2.
and aliquando errant, and inter se quandoque dissentiunt, vt nesciamus quisnam
eorum sequendus sit.

Without doubt, all Bishops severally may err, and do sometime err indeed,
and do also sometime so dissent one from another, that we cannot tell in the
world, which of them we may safely follow.

Out of the words of these Writers, whereof the one was a learned Bishop,
and a popish canonized Martyr, and the other a Jesuit and Popish Friar, who
did dedicate his Book to the Pope himself; I gather these singular documents.
First, that the Church of Rome gives every one liberty Augustine, Hieromie,
and other Writers whosoever. Secondly, that the Fathers

CAP. II. Of the uncertainety of judgment of many Bishops, even when they
employ their wits and learning to teach one and the self same doctrine.
WE find in holy Writ, that the chiefest of the Priests and people
trespassed wonderfully, 2. Par. 36. v. 14.
according to all the abominations of the Heathen, and polluted the house of
the Lord* which he had sanctified in Jerusalem. Hos. 9. v. 10.
The Watchmen of Ephraim, says Hoseah, should be with my God: but the prophet
is the snare of a fowler in all his ways, and hatred in the house of his God.
The Prophets says Jeremy, Iere. 14. v. 14.
prophecy lies in my name, I have not sent them, neither did I command them,
but they prophecy unto you a false vision, and divination, and vanity, and
deceitfulnes of their own heart.

Iere. 6. v. 13.
The same Prophet says again in an other place after this manner; From the
least of them to the greatest, every one is given to covetousness, and from the
Prophet to the Priest, they all deal falsely.

Esa 56. v. 10.
Their Watchmen says Esaias, are all blind, they have no knowledge, they are all
dumb dogs, they cannot bark.

Many of the old writers taught with uniform consent, that the souls of the
faithful departed do not see God, until the day of general doom. To recite
the words of a few may suffice for this time.

Lactantius has these words; Lactan't. lib. 7 cap. 21.
Nec tamen quisquam putet, animas post mortem protinus iudicari, omnes in vna
communique custodia detinentur, donec tempus adueniat, quo maximus iudex
meritorum facit examen.

Yet may not any man think, that the souls of the just shall forth with after
death, have their judgment, for they are all kept in one common prison until
the time come, when the great Judge shall discuss every man's deserts.

Justinius Martyr has these words; Justinius, q. 60 and q. 76. ad Orthod.
Neque enim ante resurrectionem, vitae cuique peractae retributio contingit.
Iterum, vtilitas latroni quod Paradisum sit ingressus, haec finit, quod fidei
commodum re ipsa percepit, per quod dignus reputatus est, qui sanctoru^ caetui
adiungeretur, in quo vsque ad diem resurrectionis and remunerationis reseruatur.

No man has his reward before the day of resurrection: The Thief by going to
Paradise, had this benefit, that he received in very deed the fruit of his
faith, by which he was reported worthy of the Fellowship of Saints, where he
is reserved until the day of resurrection and remuneration.

Victorinus has these words: Victor. in Apocalips.
Sed quia in Nouissimo tempore sanctorum remuneratio perpetua, and impiorum
ventura est damnatio, dictum est eis, expectate.

But because in the last time, Saints must receive their rewards, and the
wicked their damnation, it is said unto them, Expectate, ye must expect, or do
ye expect a while.

I could allege the words of Ireneus, of Euthymius of Oxigenes, and others
to the same effect, and yet the doctrine taught by these Fathers, is this day
holden for a flat heresy* even of the Papists themselves.

Caietanus a learned Papist, and sometime Cardinal of Rome, (for which respect
he must perforce be of great credit among them) does gravely advise the
Reader in his commentaries upon the Pentateuch of Moses; Caietan, in quinq.
lib. Mosis.
willing him to contemn nothing rashly, but to examine all things by the
holy scripture, and to embrace that which is agreeable thereunto: although it
swerue from the opinion of never so many Fathers. His words are set down at
large in my book of Motives.

Canus lib. 7. cap. 1. de locis.
The great Schooleman and renowned popish Bishop Melchior Canus confesses
very plainly, that the consent of many Bishops and learned men, does not
yield a sound argument for man's conscience to rest thereupon.

The same Canus in an other place avouches boldly, Canus, lib. 8. cap. 5.
that though all the Thomists with the Scotists, and late writers with the old
take part against him; yet must he perforce have the victory, because reason
is on his side: his words are set down at large in my Book of Motives.
Argumentum ad hominem.


What need long periods? Austen, Ambrose, Bid, Chrysostom, Remigius,
Eusebius, Bernardus, Bonauentura, Maximus, Erardus, Bernardinus, Aquinas, Hugo,
and almost all the rest affirm with one consent, alleging express textes of
Scripture for their opinion, that the blessed Virgin Mary was conceived in
original sin, and yet does the late hatched nest of Jesuits with other
Papists this day avouch the contrary for a truth if any man be desirous to
know more of this point, he may find it at large in my books of Motives and
Suruay, lo, these cannot always be judges in all matters of faith and religion.

CAP. III. Of the uncertainty of the Popes Judgment, whose faith say the
Papists, can not fail.
ALbeit the Popes Canons, and popish glosses thereupon tell us, Causa 17. q. 4.
cap. si quis suadente.
that it is sacrilege to reason of the Popes power, yet by his holiness favor,
I hope I may set down without offense to any godly man what I find in his own
popish decrees. and that I may proceed sincerely and plainly for the better
satisfaction of the Reader, I will distribute this Chapter into several
sections.

The First Section. Of the manners, lives, and conversation, of the late
Bishops of Rome.
ALthough the Bishops of Rome be now a days termed by the name of Holiness,
yet have the lives and manners of many Popes been most wicked, most notorious,
and most scandalous to the Christian world. I will pass over Pope Stephanus,
Carranza in summa consiliorum.
who disanulled all the Acts of Pope Formosus, degrading those whom he had
made Bishops and priests: a rare and strange Metamorphosis in the Church of
God. Pope Romanus did reprove and abrogate all the Acts of Pope Stephanus and
Pope Sergius the third did so hate the name of Formosus, Platina in vita
Sergii. 8.
that he caused his body to be beheaded, after it was buried, and laid in the
ground, yea, he commanded his dead corpse to be cast into the river Tyber, as
unworthy to be interred in Christian sort.

Pope Bonifacius the eight, entered into his popedom as a Fox, Carranza vbi
supr. fol. 369.
reigned in it as a Wolf, and died in the end, as a dog.

Pope Christopher was deprived of his pontifical dignity, and enforced to be
a Monk. Pope Bonifacius the seventh, and Syluester the second, aspired to
their popedomes by Necromancy and Diabolical means. Syluester the third
obtained his popedom by sedition, Platina in vitis Pontificum and Carranz. vt
supr.
and Damasus the second was made pope by violent means, without consent either
of the Clergy, or of the people, pope Gregory the fifth was by sedition thrust
out of his throne, and pope John the 18* by tyranny, occupied the popedom.

But I may not let pass to speak at large of Pope Syluester the second of
that name: the story is most memorable, well worthy for edification sake to
be engraven in golden letters: of the truth thereof no man can stand in doubt.
For Martinus Polonus, the popish Archbishop of Consentina, and high
Penitentiarie, as also the chief Chaplain to the Popes Holiness, has published
the same in writing to the view of all the world. Which thing doubtless, he
world never have done, Martinus Polonus in Chroni. an. 1007.
if he had not thought it a thing necessary to be known. Thus therefore does he
write; Pope Syluester the 2. was first a Monk, a Frenchman borne, Gilbertus by
name: he promised homage to the Devil, so long as he did accomplish his
desires, which his request the Devil undertook to bring to pass: he being
very ambitious did so often express his desire to the devil, as he made
homage unto him: the Devil procured him to be made Archbishop, first at
Rhemes: then at Rauennas: and at the last to be Pope of Rome: for the Devil
knowing his ambitious mind, brought him to honor by begrees, being made Pope,
he would needs know of the Devil, how long he should live in his Pontifical
glory, the Devil answered him that he should live so long, as he did not say
Mass in Jerusalem: the Pope receiving that answer, was very joyful within
himself, thinking that he was as far from death, and from the end of his
worldly pomp, as he was far of in his mind, from going on pilgrimage to
Jerusalem beyond the Sea. But what will ye more? The Pope in Lent said Mass
in the Church, Sanctae crucis, which they call in Jerusalem, my self know the
place. Yet the Pope as it seems, infatuated with pride, and excessive desire
of honor, had quite forgot the name. While he was at Mass (O holy sacrifice)
he heard a great noise of Devils, and so remembered not the place only, The
Pope in his Pontificalibus forgets the name of his churches
but also his death to be at hand. He therefore wept (though he were before
most wicked) disclosing his offense to all the company, and nothing doubting
of Gods mercy, withal he commanded to cut away from his body, all the
members with which he had done sacrifice to the Devil. This history I have
truly set down as I find it recorded by the said Martinus Polonus Archbishop of
Consentina, a man most dear unto the Pope: so as no Papist can without
blushing deny the truth thereof: and me thinks it is an unfit thing, that the
faith of all the Christian world should depend upon the resolution of such
wicked Popes.

Benedictus the ninth, (as writes the said Polonus) appeared to a man going by
a Mill, Polonus. an. 1042.
in the likeness of a monstrous beast, who had a head and tail like an Ass,
and the rest of the body was like a Bear. And when the man that saw the
Monster fled away for fear, the monster cried after him, in these words: Fear
me not, Repent ye Popes of Rome.
for I am a man as thou art: but I show my self in this likeness, because I
lived like a beast when I was a wicked Pope. Much like stuff I could recite,
but I study to be brief. He that desires to know more hereof, may satisfy
himself, by reading my Suruay. In these holy disholy Fathers, no sound
judgment can be found.

Sect. II. Of the Schisms and conflictes which have been among the Popes, or
Bishops of Rome.
POpe Benedict the ninth, was deprived of his popedom, and the Bishop of
Sabina, who after that was called Syluester, Martinus Polonus an. 1042
became Pope in his room. This Syluester was afterward expulst, and Benedict
restored to the popedom again. After that, the same Benedict was yet again
expulst, and the popedom was given to John Archdeacon of S. John ante portam
Latinam, who was after that called Gregory the sixth. This pope being
altogether unlearned, caused an other Pope to be made jointly with him, that he
might execute the Ecclesiastical function, which himself was not able to do.
Which thing displeased many, and therefore the third Pope was appointed, who
alone should supply the places of the other two. One therefore contending
against two, and two against one for the Popedom, and Gregory being dead:
Henry the Emperor came to Rome against the two, and deposed them by canonical
and imperial censure, This solemn promise was not long kept
and placed Sindegerus the Bishop of Babemberge in the popedom. At which time
the Romans promised by solemn oaths, that they would never elect the
Bishop of Rome, without the consent of the Emperor of Rome.

Many Schisms have been in the church of Rome and amongst our Romish
Bishops, even for many years together. And thereupon it follows evidently
that the succession of the latter Popes, can never be proved constantly, to
have descended without interruption from the former.

The great Papist Onuphrius Panuinius makes mention of no less then thirty
Schisms, Onuphr. in Chron.
which were all in the Church of Rome.

Bartholomeus Carranza a learned Writer and popish Friar, Carranz. in summa
council. p.370. and p. 373.
reckons up two most notable Schisms in the Church of Rome. The former
Schism says he endured for the space of 64 years, during al which time, their
godly Popedom was at Auinion in France, and not one day at Rome, though at
Rome (as they prate) God placed their holy seat. In the latter schism three of
their holy Bishops were Popes at one, and the self same time: to write,
Johannes, 24. of that name, Benedict 13. and Gregory the 12. From which three
striving and contending, like Dogs fighting for a bone, I would gladly learn
how they ca^ derive their holy so supposed succession: of which succession I
have spoken more at large in my book of Survey.

Of this Romish Schism, speaks their own dear Abbot Bernarde egregiously:
Bernard ad Gauf. epist. 125
these are his words: Tempus faciendi, etc. It is now high time to do good for
they have trode^ underfoot Gods law. The beast mentioned in the Revelation, to
whom was given a mouth, speaking blasphemies, and to make wars with the
Saints, sits in Peter's chair, like a Lion ready to take his pray.

Now I ween, that all wise men well observing and pondering with themselves,
these manifold and notorious Schisms in the Church of Rome, which have
continued above fifty years together, and in which sundry Popes co^tending
who should be the Pope, no one could truly be discerned to be Pope; will be
fully persuaded therewith, that if Gods holy pleasure had bin, to have tied all
people in the world, to hang and depend wholly upon the Bishops of Rome from
time to time, in matters touching faith and their everlasting salvation, as
upon those persons whose faith should never fail: that God (I say) would have
provided for the security and common good of his people, that the same Bishops
should have been more honest and godly in their lives: more peaceable among
themselves: more free from doing homage to the devil: more constant in their
seats: and not so doubtful and uncertain in their succession: that Gods
people were many times at their wits end, which Pope they should take for
Peter's successor. These men, therefore can not be judges in Religion.

Sect. 3. Of the privileges falsely supposed, to be granted from heaven to the
Bishops of Rome.
AVgustinus de Ancona, a religious Friar, August, depotest. ecclesiast. q. 45.
in quaest. 2.
has these words: Papa Vicarius Jesus Christi, vice Dei viuentis in toto orb
terraru^ spiritualium and temporaliium habet vniuer salem iurisdictionem. The
Pope being the Vicar of Jesus Christ, has in steed of the living God,
universal jurisdiction of all things spiritual and temporal, throughout the
whole world.

Bartholomaeus Fumus a famous popish Friar, and renowned Canonist, Fumus in
aurea armilla verbo Papa. 7.
has these words: Omnis potestas jurat fidelitate^ Papae and obedientiam
recognoscens ab eo omne quod habet. Et si aliquando aliquid imperator douauit
Ecclesiae, vt de Constantino dicitur, non fuit donatio, sed restitutio. Every
power swears fidelity and obedience to the Pope, acknowledging themselves to
have from him all that they have, and if any Emperor, as Constantine gave any
thing to the Church, it was no gift, but restitution.

John Gerson sometime the Chancellor of Paris, Gers. de potest. eccles. consid.
12. part. 3.
sings the same song, in these words: Consurgit ex aduerso, etc. There
starteth up on the contrary side, fair spoken and crafty adulation,
whispering in the ears of Cleargy-men, specially of the Pope. Oh how great,
how great is the majesty of thine Ecclesiastiall power? For as all power was
given to Christ, in heaven and on earth; so Christ left all the same power to
Peter, and to his successors. Wherefore the Emperor Constantine gave nothing
to Pope Syluester, which was not his own before; but only restored that,
which was unjustly detained from him. Further, as there is no power but of God,
Oh, what a blasphemy is this.
so is there neither any temporal or Ecclesiastical, Imperial or Regal, but
of the Pope; in whose thigh Christ has written, the King of kings, the Lord of
lords.

The Popes own decrees tell us plainly, Great. did, 40. cap. si Papa.
that though the Pope be never so wicked, and carry to hell with himself never
so many people, yet may no mortal man reprove him for the same. And the reason
thereof is this; because forsooth he may judge all, but none may judge him,
neither great nor small.

The Popish parasites, Glossa. lib. 1. decretal. tit 7. cap. 3.
the interpreters of the Canons, do ascribe titles yet more magnificall to the
Pope; yea, titles plain divine, and proper to God alone. These are the
express words, in the popish Gloss upon the Decretals; Sic (Papa) dicitur
habere coeleste arbitrium, and ideo etiam naturam reru^ immutat, substantialia
vnius rei applicando alii; and de nihilo potest aliquid facere. So the Pope is
said to have celestial arbitrament, and therefore does he alter the nature of
things, by application of the substantial parts of one thing to another; and
he can make of nothing something.

To have recited these absurd and profane assertions, may be a sufficient
confutation of the same. Victor. de potest. papae and concil^^. p. 151.
Only Victoria a very learned popish Doctor, shall conclude this section. His
words are these: Paulatim ad hanc, etc. By little and little we are brought to
these inordinate dispensations, and to this so miserable state, where we are
neither able to endure our own griefs, nor remedies assigned for the same.
Give me Clements, Lines, Syluesters; and then I will commit all things to their
charge. But to speak nothing grievously against these latter Popes; they are
doubtless inferiors to Popes of old time, by many degrees. Here is falsehood
enough but certainty of judgment none can be had.

Sect. IIII. Of the Popes private errors.
THat the Bishops of Rome may become heretics, yea that they have been
heretics de facto, it is so clear a thing, as I shall not need to stand
long about the same.

Many Popish decrees tell us, that Popes may be deposed, Great. did. 40. cap.
si Papa.
when and so often as they swerve from the Christian faith, and become
heretics in deed. Which Decrees perforce must presuppose that the Popes may
be heretics; otherwise they should be frustrate, and to no end at all. These
are the words; Cunctos ipse (Papa) iudicaturus, a nemine est iudicandus, nisi
deprehendatur a fide deuius. The Pope judges all, and must be judged of none;
unless he swerve from the faith, and be an heretic. Lo the Popes own
Decrees do plainly grant, that the Pope may be an heretic; and then God be
thanked, he has a superior and judge upon earth. So he may lawfully be
controlled, yea condemned; unless he keep the Christian faith better, then
many popes have done.

Again in another decree I find these express words; Cause. ^. q. 7. cap.
oues.
Oues quae suo pastori commissae sunt, eum nec reprehendere, nisi a fide
exorbitauerit, nec vllatenus accusare possunt. Sheep which are committed to
their pastor, may neither rebuke him, nor in any wise accuse him; unless he
depart and forsake the faith.

Dominicus Soto, a great Papist, Soto in 4. s. d. 22. q. 2. art. 1
has these express words: Quamuis Papa vt Papa errare non possit, hoc est
statuere errore nequeat tanquam articulum fidei, quia spiritus sanctus id non
permittet; tamen vt singularis persona errare in fide potest, sicut alia
peccata committere. Albeit the Pope, as Pope cannot err, that is to say, can
not set down any error as an article of our faith, because the holy Ghost
will not that permit; nevertheless, as he is a private person, so may he err
even in faith, as he may do other sins.

Pope Anastasius, Pope Honorius, Pope John, Canus de locis and Viguerius de
virtute fidei.
and others, have been heretics, as Viguerius, Melchior Canus, Alphonsus, and
Adrianus, who was Pope himself, confess; and no wise papist, will or can
deny the same.

Nicholaus de Lyra a very learned and famous papist, has these express
words. Ex quo patet, Lyra in 16. cap. Mat.
quod Ecclesia non consistit in hominibus, ratione potestatis vel dignitatis,
Ecclesiasticaevel secularis. Quia multi principes and summi pontifices, and
alii inferiores, inuenti sunt apostatasse a fide. Whereby it is evident, that
the Church does not consist in men, by reason of power or dignity, either
ecclesiastical or secular, because many princes and popes, and others of the
inferior sort are found to have swarued from the faith, and to have been flat
Apostataes.

Josephus Angles, a famous popish Bishop, Josephus Angles in. 4. s. par. 2. q.
de excom. art. 4. dific. 1.
and religious Friar, in his book dedicated to the Pope himself, confirms
this matter in these words; Papa haereticus aut apostata, ab universally
concilio deponi potest; and ratio est, quia sicut nullus potest esse alicuius
religionis praelatus, qui non sit in illa religione prosessus, ita neque potest
esse Papa, si fide Ecclesiae careat. The Pope being an heretic or apostata,
may be deposed by a general Concell; and the reason is, because as none can
be a Prelate of any Religion, which is not professed in that religion: so
neither can he be Pope, that holds not the faith of the Church.

Thus it is clear, even by popish Doctors and Decrees, that the Pope as a
private person, may forsake the Christian faith, teach false doctrine, and
become a flat Apostata. The Pope therefore in his private person, can not be a
competent judge.

Sect. V. Of the Popes public errors, in his general and definitive Decrees
and constitutions.
DOctor Gerson, a famous Papist and Chancellor of Paris, teaches so
plainly, that Popes may err in their public doctrine of faith and manners,
as none can doubt there of that ponder well his words; Gers. in sermon. de
paschat. part. 3.
thus therefore does he write: Hos fecit latroni, qui very similiter nondum
compleuerat poenetentia^ pro omnibus peccatis suis, qui fuit illa hora propria
beatisicatus, and vidit Deum facie ad faciem, sicut sancti in Paradiso: propter
quod insuper apparet falsitas doctrinae Papae Johannes 22. quae damnata fuit
cum sono buccinarum, coram rege Philippo per Theologos Parisienses, and
credidit potius Theologis Parisiensibus, quam curiae. This did he to the thief
(which by likelihood had not yet accomplished penance for all his sins,) who
was blessed in that very hour, and saw God face to face, as do the Saints in
Paradise; by reason whereof appears further the falshoode of the doctrine of
Pope John, which was condemned by the sound of Trumpets, before King Philip by
the divines of Paris, and the king believed rather the divines, then the court
(of Rome.)

Out of these words, the indifferent Reader will easily note with me these
important points. First, John. Thirdly* that his doctrine was condemned

Pope Adrian testifies the same truth, as witnesses the zealous Papist
Alphonsus, in these express words; Nouissime fertur de Iohanne. 22. quod
public docuit, Alphon. a Castro. lib 3. aduers. haeres. prope finem.
declarauit, and ab omnibus teneri mandauit, quod animae purgatae ante finale
iudicium non habent stolam, quae est clara and facialis visio Dei; and
vntuersitatem Parisiensem ad hoc induxisse dicitur, quod nemo in ea poterat
gradum in Theologia adipisci, nisi primitus hunc errorem iurasset se
defensurum, and perpetuo ei adhaesurum. Last of all, it is reported of Pope
John the 22. that he publicly taught, declared, and commanded all men to
hold, that the souls of the just before the day of judgment, have not the
stole, which is is the clear and facely vision of God. And he is reported, to
have enduced the University of Paris to this: that no man should take degree
in the same, but he that did first swear to defend this error, and to adhere
to it for ever.

Thus writes Adrian, who was himself Pope of Rome. And Alphonsus a man of
good credit with the papists, after he had reckoned up five heresies, sets
down this for the sixth heresy, (that the souls of the just do not see God
till the day of doom, Alphons. vbi supra.
) ascribing the said heresy to the Armenians, as to the authors thereof, and to
the Greeks together with pope John, as to the patrones and defenders of the
same.

Here the simple Reader must note well, that he may the better understand
this verity, Bellarmin de-Rom. pontif. lib. 4. cap. 14.
and not be seduced with the colorable Gloss of the Jesuit Bellarmine, who
seeing the force of this testimony to overthrow the highest point in popery,
bestirreth himself more then a little in defense of popish faith. He tells
us forsooth, if we will believe him, that Pope John (with all obeisance to his
holiness be it spoken,) erred in deed, as is here said: but he did that as a
private man, A subtle, but falsely coined distinction.
(says our Jesuit) not as Pope of Rome. Which distinction doubles, wants
not only a good foundation, whereupon it should be built: but also it flatly
destroys the plain Text. The reason is evident to every child. First,
because pope Adrian Docuit, he taught. Secondly, because he faith, Public,
publicly. Thirdly, because he says, Mandauit, he commanded all to hold it.
Fourthly, de facto; even in his public decree of faith, as well as an other
man. And that even by the consent of Adrian, who was pope himself: yea, who
for learning and knowledge, was one of the rarest popes that ever were at Rome.

Melchior Canus, Canus, de locis lib. 6. cap. 5. in fine.
though otherwise he be a great papist, tells us plainly, that Gerson,
Almayne, and Thomas Waldensis, do all hold this for a constant position, that
the pope may err, as is already said.

pope Celestine the third of that name, erred as pope and public person, in
his judicial sentence, Alphonsus. lib. 1. cap. 4. aduers. haeres.
and public decree. This to be so, Alphonsus above named, is a constant
witness in these express words; Celestinum Papam errasse circa matrimonium
fidelium, quorum alter labitur in haerisin, res est omnibus manifesta, neque
hic Celestini error talis fuit, qui soli negligentiae imputari debuit, ita vt
illum errasse dicamus, velut priuatam personam, and non vt Papam, qui in
qualibet reseria definienda consulere debet viros doctos, quoniam huiusmodi
Celestina definitio habebatur, in antiquis decretalibus, in cap laudabilem,
titulo de conuersione infidelium. Quam ego ipse vidi, and legi.

That Pope Celestine erred about Matrimony of the faithful, Lo the Pope erred
publicly, not as a private person.
whereof the one is fallen into heresy, is a thing so manifest, as all men know
the same: neither was this error of Pope Celestine such, that it can be
imputed to sole negligence, so as we may think him to have erred as a private
man, and not as Pope, who ought in the decree of every serious matter, to ask
counsel of learned men. For that definition and decree of Celestine, was in the
old Decretall Epistles, in the Chapter Laudabilem, which I my self have seen
and read.

Out of these words of Alphonsus, who was a man highly renowned among the
papists, I note Celestine erred, and that not as a private man, but even
Alphonsus, was manifest to every man to be an heresy. And the late Council
Celestine, was in those days enrolled in the Popes Decretals. Fourthly,
Alphonsus saw and read the same Decree. Fifthly, Note this well, it is a point of
weight.
Where I wish the Reader to note by the way, that the Decrees of our holy
Fathers the Popes, have been such and so much against late Popery, that they
are ashamed to bring them now to light. If any man desire to know the Popes
errors more fully, let him read my book of Motives. But now it remains, that
I answer to sundry important objections, whereupon the Papists would build
the supposed Privileges of their Popes, as that their Faith can not fail, and
such like. The decision whereof God willing, shall be performed in the Chapter
following. The Pope therefore in his public person, is no infallible Judge.

CAP. IIII. Containing the answer to sundry objections, by which the
Papists labor to prove, that the Popes faith can not fail.
The First objection.
CHrist prayed for Peter, that his faith should never fail, Luke 22. v. 32
therefore the Bishops of Romes faith cannot fail, nor the Pope err in his
judicial decrees.

The Answer.
I say first, that Peter's faith quailed, when he denied Christ, swearing that
he knew not the man. For these twain are the chief fruits of faith, Romans
10. v. 10.
to believe with the heart, and to confess with the mouth. And where either of
these two is wanting, there cannot be a right faith. For he that puts away a
good conscience, 2. Tim. 1. v. 19.
makes shipwreck of his faith.

I say secondly, that Christ prayed as well for all Peter. I pray not says
Christ, for the world, Ioh. 17. v. 9.
but for them which thou have given me, for they are thine. Again he says, I
pray not for these alone, Ioh. 17. v. 20.
but for them also which shall believe in me through their word. And
consequently, seeing Christ directed not his words to Peter, as to one
private man, but as to one representing the whole Church: it must needs follow,
that what soever Christ did or said touching Peter's faith, must perforce be
understood of the faith of the whole Church. Which faith, as I have copiously
proved in my Book of Suruay, shall never fail indeed. This my answer is
confirmed, in these words of S. Austen: August. in quaest. mixed is, q. 5. to.
4.
Quid ambigitur? pro Petro rogabat, and pro Iacobo and Iohanne non rogabat, vt
caeteros taceam? manifestum est in Petro omnes contineri, quia and in alio loco
dicit; ego pro his rogo, quos mihi dedisti pater, and volo, vt vbiego sum, and
ipsi sint mecum.

What doubt is there? did he pray for Peter, and did he not also pray for James
and John: to say nothing of the rest? it is clear, that in Peter all the rest
are meant: because he says in an other place, I pray for these O Father,
which thou have given me, and desire that they may be with me, where my self
am.

Origin a learned and very ancient father, affirms in a large discourse upon
S. Matthew, Origin hom. in mat.
that all things spoken of Peter touching the church and the keys, are to be
understood of all the rest. And the collection of Origin is evident, even by
natural reason. For if Christ prayed not as well for the rest, as he did for
Peter, A reason insoluble, let it be well marked.
of small credit were a great part of the holy scripture. A reason doubtless
insoluble, for all Papists in the world. For if they could fail in their
faith, they could also fail in their writing: and yet that they could not so
fail, was by virtue of Christ's prayer.

This my answer is farther confirmed, by the testimony of learned and
approved Papists. Panormitanus was their skillful Canonist, their religious
Abbot, and their renowned Archbishop: and consequently, his authority must
needs gall, and confound them all. His words are these: Panormit. apud Syluest.
de fide 9. and de cone.. 3.
Et pro hactantum Christus in Euangelio or auit ad patrem, ego rogaui pro te.

And for this, (he means the universal Church,) Christ only prayed to his
Father in the gospel, when he said: I have prayed for thee, that thy faith
fail not. Behold here gentle Reader, and yield thine indifferent censure.
When Christ (says the great Papist Panormitane,) prayed that Peter's faith
should not fail: he prayed for the faith of the universal Church, whose
faith shall never fail indeed. And the said Panormitane proves his opinion
directly and strongly, by many textes of the Popes Canon Law, De Elect. Cap.
significasti.

Alphonsus a Castro a religious Popish Carthusian, Alphons. lib. 1. de haeres.
cap. 4.
has these words: Non dubitamus, an haereticum esse, and papam esse, coire in
vnum possint* infra: non enim credo aliquem esse adeo impudente^ papae
assentatore^, vt ei tribuere hoc velit, vt nec errare, nec in interpretatione
sacrarum literarum hallucinaripossit. We doubt not, whether one man may be both
a Pope and an Heretic together. For I believe, there is none so shameless a
flatterer of the Pope, that will ascribe this unto him, that he can neither
err, nor be deceived in the exposition of the scriptures.

To these I must needs add, that all the doctors of the famous University of
Paris, Bellarm. lib 4. cap. 3. de. Rom Pontif.
as our Jesuit Bellarmine freely grants, do expound Christ's words in S.
Luke, even as I have proved out of Panormitane. That is, that Christ prayed for
the faith of the whole church, or for Peter's faith, as he did represent the
whole church. And therefore our Jesuit does easily reject their exposition,
without all time and reason. And he tells us forsooth, that Christ in his
prayer obtained two Privileges to Peter: the one, that his faith should never
fail: the other, that neither Peter, neither any in Peter's seat, should ever
teach false doctrine. But wise men I hope, will believe Bellarmines words*
when he shall bring good proofs for the same. For first, my self have proved
most evidently, even by manifest Popish Testimonies; that many Bishops of Rome
have taught false doctrine, and become flat Apostataes. Secondly, Bellarmine
himself confesses freely, that Peter's Successors perhaps wanted the former
prerogative, and sometime became Heretics; but the latter says he, they had
undoubtedly. Which Exposition is easily retorted against himself: because the
former may as well if not better, be gathered out of the text, as the latter.
And therefore Bellarmine presumes to much upon his own credit, when he will
without all reason, enforce us to expound Christ's Gospel, as he lists.

The second Objection.
Christ commanded the people to do, Mat. 23. v. 2. 3.
what soever the Scribes and the Pharisees willed them to observe: and this he
did only, because they sat in Moses chair. But doubtless, if they sitting in
Moses chair could have erred, Christ would not have commanded, so strictly to
observe their doctrine.

The Answer.
Our Savior Christ seeing many things amiss in the Scribes and Pharisees,
What it was to sit in Moses chair.
thought it meet and convenient to give the people warning thereof. And he
wisely tempereth his admonition, least they should reject the good together
with the evil. For to teach the Law and the Prophets, whith was to sit in
Moses Chair, or to execute Moses authority, (which was all one in effect,)
was a thing very honest and lawful. Therefore Christ commanded the people to
obey them, and to do whatsoever they did bid them do. But this must be
understood, with this limitation so long as they taught and commanded, Ex
Cathedra, that is, agreeably to Gods law, not otherwise. This to be the true
sense and meaning of Christ's words, I will prove evidently, both by the
Fathers, and by the Testimonies of Nicholaus de Lyra, and Dionysius
Carthusianus, two zealous and learned Papists.

August. tract. 46. in Johan. in med. tom. 9
S. Austen has these words: Sedendo Cathedram Moysi, legem Dei docent, ergoper
illos Deus docet: sua vero illi si velint docere, nolite audire, nolite facere.
Certe. n. tales sua quaerunt, non quae Jesus Christi.

Sitting in the Chair of Moses, they teach the Law of GOD, Priests must only
be obeyed, when they teach Gods law.
therefore God teaches by them. But if they will needs teach their own
opinions, and fantasies, then hear them not, do not as they bid you do. For
doubtless such men seek to please them selves, and not to accomplish the will
of Jesus Christ.

Hilarious, in ps. 158, Page 698.
S. Hilarie has these words: Cum igitur doctrina pharisaeorum ob id probabilis
esse docetur, quia ipsi in Mosi Cathedra sederunt, doctrina necessario
significatur in Cathedra. Seeing therefore that the doctrine of the Pharisees,
is for that proved to be probable, because they sat in the Chair of Moses:
therefore by the Chair, must doctrine of necessity be signified.

Thus writes this great learned and ancient Father: by whose judgment it is
plain, that the chair of Moses, and the doctrine of Moses is all one. And
consequently, that not they which occupy the room of Moses, or Peter, are to
be followed: but they that teach the doctrine of Moses and Peter, are to be
heard, and their commandment must be done.

Lyra has these words: Omnia quaecunque dixerint vobis, facite. Lyra in 23.
cap Mat.
Quia praelatis etiam malis est obediendam, nisi in his quae sunt manifest
contra Deum. Do all things that they shall say unto you, because we must obey
even those prelates that be evil, unless they teach plainly against God.

Dionysius Carthusianus has these words: Carthus. in 23 cap Mat.
Hoc non est absolute, and vniuersaliter intelligendum, quia Scribae and
Pharisaei multa superstitiosa and falsa docuerunt, corumpentes scripturam, and
irritum facientes verbum Dei per suas traditiones. Intelligendum est ergo de
praedicatoribus eoru^ non contrariis legi Mosi. Mali. N. a presidentibus
ebeniendum est, quandiu non docent, nec iubent contraria Deo. This must not be
understood absolutely and universally, because the Scribes and Pharisees
taught many superstitious and false things, corrupting the Scriptures, and
making frustrate the word of God with their traditions. We must therefore
understand it of their Preachers, which teach nothing contrary to the law of
Moses. For we must obey evil rulers, so long as they neither teach nor
command against God. See more hereof, and to this effect, in the answer to the
next objection.

The third Objection.
God commanded to obey the Priests, and not to swerve in any one jot from
their doctrine, Deuteronomy. 17. v. 9.10.11.
by turning either to the right hand, or to the left. And it will not serve to
say, A very weigh tie objection, see the answer.
that this must be done, so long as they teach the truth: for the text says
plainly: Indicabunt tibi iudicii veritatem: They shall show thee the verity of
judgment: that is, they shall not err.

The Answer.
I say first, that the Priests of the law of Moses, de facto, as is already
proved of the Scribes and Pharisees. For they were not only wicked men in life
and conversation, but they also seduced the people, taught false doctrine, and
corrupted the pure word of God. Which point because it is a thing of very
great importance, I will endeavor my self by Gods help, to make it plain
unto the Reader. And because nothing is or can be of greater force against the
Papists, then to confute their doctrine by the testimony of their own
approved Doctors: I will as my wonted manner is, ever allege the express
words of the best approved Papists, who were ever most dear unto the Pope,
wishing the Reader to markewell my answer: Note the second objection.
made already to the objection next before going. The words of the great
papists, Lyra and Carthusianus already alleged* might sufficiently satisfy
any indifferent reader: but that nothing may be wanting, I will add their
words more abundantly. Lyra has these words: Vae vobis Scribae, hic ostendit
qualiter corrumpebant veritate^ doctrinae, Lyra. in. ca. 23* Mat.
in his quae pertinent ad salutem. Dicebant n^ quod obseruare legem erat
necessarium omnibus ad salutem, quod est falsum; quia multi gentiles sunt
saluati, vt Job and plures alii. Ex suppositione autem huius falsi,
discurrebant aliqui in doctores Hebraei per diuersas civitates and castra, vt
possent conuertere aliquos de gentilitate ad Iudaismum. Et hoc est quod
dicitur: qui, etc. Woe to you Scribes. Here he shows, how they did corrupt the
truth of doctrine, even in those things which pertain to salvation. For they
said, that the keeping of the law was necessary for all men unto salvation,
which is false: because many Gentiles are saved, as Job and sundry others. Of
this false supposition, some Hebrew Doctors did wander through diverse Cities
and Towns, that so they might convert some from Gentilitie to Iudaisme. And
therefore does the Gospel say: woe unto you Scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites,
for ye compass sea and land to make one of your profession: and when he is
made; ye make him two fold more the child of hell, then you your selves are.

Again, the same Lyra says thus: Lyran. vbi supra.
Vae vobis duces caeci. Hic consequenter ostendit, qualiter corrumpebant
veritatem doctrinae, in his quae pertinent ad actum latriae* Cuius actus est
iurare modo debito, and iur amentum obser uare Pharisaei. n. and Scribae ex
cupiditate moti dicebant, quod illi qui iurabant per Templum Dei, nec
peccabant, nec erant in aliquo obligati: sed illi qui iurabant per aurum
Templi, erant obligati ad soluendum Sacerdotibus certam portionem auri. Woe unto
you blind guides. Here he shows consequently, how they corrupted the verity
of doctrine, in those things which pertain to the pure worship of God. The act
whereof is to swear after a due manner, and to perform the oath. For the
Scribes and Pharisees moved with covetousness, said: that they which did
swear by the temple of God, neither sinned, neither were bound to do any
thing: but they that did swear by the gold of the Temple, were bound to give
some portion of gold to the Priests.

Dionysius Carthus* vbi supra.
Dionysius Carthusianus has these words: Non sinitis intrare. Quia falsa
doctrina and prauis exemplis peruertitis eos. Sequitur: qui dicitis; quicunque
iurauerit per Templum, nihil est. Id est, soluere non tenetur; and si peieret,
non erit criminis reus. You do not suffer them to come in. For you pervert them
with false doctrine, and evil example. You say, who so ever swears by the
Temple, it is nothing. That is to say, he is not bound to keep his oath: and
if he be forsworn, he shall not be guilty of any crime.

Thus we see, or may see, if we be not blind, that by the judgment of these
great Papists, the Bishops and Priests of the old law, did not only
scandalize the people with their wicked life, but also taught false doctrine,
and corrupted the holy Scripture. I Priests, when they teach according to Gods
law, and not when they wrest and corrupt Gods word. The words are these: Et
facies quodcunque dixerint, Deuteronomy. 17. v. 10
qui praesunt loco quem elegerit Dominus, and docuerint te iuxta legem eius.
And thou shall do whatsoever they shall say, which are over that place which
the Lord has chosen, and shall teach thee according to his law. Lo, this
condition is required, that the priests do teach Gods law. See S. Hieroms
words, in the answer to the fourth Objection.

The Reply.
The words import no condition, but a mere assertion and promise, that they
shall not err: Malach. 2* v. 7
so says the Prophet Malach: Labia sacerdotis custodient scientiam, and legem
requirent ex ore eius. The Priests lips shall keep knowledge, and they shall
seek the law at his mouth.

The Answer.
I answer, that the words in Deuteronomie do import a conditional precept.
The precept is continued in these words, Qui praesunt loco, which are set over
that place. The condition is employed in these words: Et docuerint, and shall
teach according to the law. The words in Malachie import a flat commandment,
of that which the Priests ought to do: but no promise, that they shall do and
perform the same. Which thing I will prove many ways. First, by the words of
the very texts: then by the testimony of Saint Herome: thirdly, by the
exposition of great learned Papists. Touching the words in Malachie, the sense
appears evidently, in the words which follow immediately, which are these:
Vos aute^ recessistisde via, and sca^dalizastis plurimos in lege: irritum
fecestis pactum Leui, dicit Dominus exercituum. But you are gone out of the
way, and have scandalized many by the law: ye have made frustrate the covenant
of Leui, Malac. 2. v. 6
says the Lord of hosts. Now, of Leui it is thus said in the same place: Lex
veritatis erat in ore eius: The law of truth was in his mouth. And what was the
law of truth? S. Hierome tells us in these words: Lex veritatis, hoc est,
doctrina populorun, quae in Sacerdote nullo debet mendacio deturpari, sed tota
de veritatis font procedere. The law of truth, that is, the doctrine of the
people, which in the Priest ought not to be stained with any lie, but wholly to
proceed from the fountain of truth. By which exposition we see plainly, that
the priests lips should indeed keep knowledge, but for all that are often
void of all knowledge, and teach falsehood instead of truth.

Deu. 17. v. 9.10 Bellarmine de Pontif. Romans lib. 4. cap. 1. Deuteronomy. 16. v. 18.
Touching the words of Deuteronomie, the sense and true meaning is plainly
gathered out of the very text it self. For first, the text in the 17. chapter
speaks as well of the political and civil judge, as of the Priest, which
thing Bellarmine himself cannot deny. And yet that the civil Prince may
err, all both Jesuits and other Priests will confess. Again, in another
place of the law, the same promis that is here made to the Priests, is made
generally to all civil Judges and officers. These are the words: Judges and
Officers shall thou make thee in all thy Cities, and they shall judge the
people with righteous judgment. Where I note by the way, the falshoode of the
Latin Vulgata editio, which the late Council of Trent extolleth above both the
Greek and the Hebrew. For in the 16. chap. the text says thus: Vt iudicent
populum, that they may judge the people. But in the 17. chap. it is thus: and
they shall teach the people. And in Malachie, thus: and the Priests lips
shall keep knowledge. Note this point well.
And yet in the Hebrew text, which is the fountain and original: the word
(and) is in every place, which the papists guilefully, change into the word
(that,) in the 16. chapt. so to make their matter good, if it would be. But let
( vt) be made ( and) as it is in the Hebrew, and the question will be at an end.

Melchior Canus a famous learned papist, has these express words: Fatemur
Sacerdotes non esse audiendos, Canus, lib. 3. cap. vlt. p. 108.
nisi docuerint iuxta legem Domini. We grant (says he) that the priests ought
not to be heard or obeyed, unless they shall preach and teach, according to
Gods law. Oh sweet Jesus? How can any papist deny that which we affirm, seeing
the best learned and most renowned Papists confess the same: even in their
written books and printed Commentaries, published to the view of the world.

Lyranus in his Commentaries, Lyran. in 17. cap. Deuteronomy.
has these express words: Hic dicit glossa Hebraica: si dixerint tibi quod
dextra sit sinistra, vel sinistra dextra, talis sententia est tenenda, quod
patet manifest falsum. Quia sente^tia nullius hominis cuiuscunque sit
authoritatis est tenenda, si contineat manifest falsitatem vel errorem. Et hoc
patet, per id quod praemittitur in textu. Iudicabunt tibi iudicii veritatem.
Postea subditur: and docuerint te iuxta legem eius. Ex quo patet, quod si
dicant falsum, and declinent a lege Dei manifest, Lo papistrie is confuted by
papists, even of the best sort.
non sunt audiendi. Here says the Hebrew gloss, if they shall say to thee,
that the right hand is the left, or the left hand the right, such sentence is
to be holden: which thing appears manifestly to be false. For no man's
sentence of how great authority soever he be, must be holden or obeyed, if
it manifestly contain falshoode or error. And this is manifest by that, which
goes before in the text. They shall show to thee, the verity and truth of
judgment. It follows also: and they shall teach thee, according to his law.
Hereupon it is clear, that if they teach falsely, and swerve from the law of
God manifestly, then are they not to be heard or followed.

Out of these words, well worthy to be engraven in golden letters, I note
first, that our Papists now a Nicho. de Lyra a great learned to satisfy the
humor of their Pope, Note well gentle Reader.
and to uphold his Antichristian tyranny, do wrest the holy scripture from
the manifest truth thereof. I note thirdly, Lyra does gather The hie priest of
the old law erred.
that the High Priest might err, and teach false doctrine. And consequently,
that the Jesuit Bellarmine does but flatter the popes Holiness, when he be
stirs himself to prove out of this place, that the Bishops of Rome cannot
err, because the Jewish Bishops had the like privilege, and could not teach
against the truth.

I note fifthly, out of Lyra, Carthusianus, and Melchior Canus, whose words are
already set down, that the Caiphas the High Priest pronounced before a great
multitude, that Christ blasphemed, when he thus spoke. Mat. 26. v. 64. 65. 66.
67.
Hereafter shall ye see the Son of man, sitting at the right hand of the
power of God, and come in the clouds of heaven. Now I ween neither the
Jesuit, nor any other papist in the world will or dare call this blasphemy,
which Christ Jesus spoke of himself. If they dare so say, the scripture is a
plain testimony against them, and all the world will cry, fie upon them.
Note well this Dilemma.
If they neither will nor can so say, then is the controversy at an end: then
has the High Priest erred iudicially: then may their Pope also err, as he
has done indeed: then was not Christ Jesus guilty of deat, Leu. 24. v. 14
has the hie Priest and the people affirmed him to be. Mark the answer, to
the next objection.

The fourth Objection.
If the people may control the Priest, then in vain, are the Priests
commanded to teach the people. And it is absurd, that the sheep should
rebuke the shepherd.

The Answer.
Act. 5. v. 29. Act. 4. v. 19.
but remember the doctrine and Apostolic rule: that they must rather obey
Iuxta legem Dei, according to Gods law. Neither shall the people, for all that
contemn the authority of the Priests, but with humility admonish the
priests, and tell them why they cannot so do. This lesson if the Papists
cannot be content to learn of me, yet I hope, they will not disdain to learn
it of S. Hierome: seeing their Pope in their Collect upon his festiuity,
terms him Doctorem maximum, their greatest Doctor. His words are these: Si
Sacerdos est, sciat legem Domini: si ignorant legem, Hier. in 2. cap. Aggaei.
ipse se arguit non esse Domini sacerdotem. Sacerdotis enim est scire legem,
and ad interrogationem respondere de lege. Sequitur: discant legem Dei, vt
possint docere quod didicerint: and augeant scientiam, magis quam opes, and non
erubescant a laicis discere: qui nouerint ea quae ad officium pertinent
sacerdotum. If he be a Priest, let him know the law of God: if he be ignorant
of the Law, he accuses himself, that he is not the Priest of God. For the
Priests office is to know the law, and to answer to questions of the Law.
Let the Priests learn Gods law, that they may teach that which they have
learned: and let them increase knowledge, rather then riches: and let them not
be ashamed to learn of the Lay people, which know those things that pertain
to the Priests office.

Out of these words of S. Hierome, I note first, that many Popes are no
Priests, The Popes now a days do not preach at al
and consequently Ieromes reason is plain to every child, because many Popes
are very unlearned, and know not the law of God, neither preach his word, which
is the chiefest office of a Priest. 1. Cor. 1. v. 17.
And who will or can think, that Christ Jesus, if he had appointed the Bishops
of Rome, to rule his whole Church throughout the world: and all nations to hang
their Faith upon the popes faith: would in these dangerous times suffer them
to live dissolutely, to be as dumb dogs that bark not, and never to preach
and teach his word? none doubtless, that have any wit, sense, Esa. 56. v. 10.
or reason. I note secondly, that Priests must know the law of God, to this end
that they may teach the same. And consequently, that the Bishops of Rome, who
never preach the word of God, cannot be the Rome, if they were true Priests
indeed, both should and would increase their knowledge in the law of God, rather
then their wealth and possessions. I Ioh. 10. v. 4. 1. Pet. 2. v. 25.
and know the voice of the great shephearde Christ Jesus, as himself tells
us may with all humility forsake those shepheardes, who either for their
ignorance cannot, or for malice will not, feed them with the pure word of God,
as they ought to do. For wise sheep will not eat that meat, which they know
to be deadly poison to them. For this cause do the Popes own Canons grant
liberty to the sheep, to reprove and accuse their Pastor: yea though he be
the Pope himself. The express words of the Canon are these: Oues quae suo
Pastori commissae sunt, Cause. 2. q. 7. Cap. oues.
eum nec reprehendere, nisi a fide exorbitauerit, nec vllatenus accusare
possunt.

The sheep which are committed to their Pastor, may neither rebuke him, Lo,
the sheep may rebuke and accuse the shepherd.
nor in any wise accuse him, unless he forsake the faith. Lo, this Canon
made of Pope Eusebius himself: tells us two things: First, that the Pope
may err, and forsake the Christian faith. Secondly, that when he does so err,
the sheep may then reprove him, and also accuse him. And I am well assured,
that if the sheep may reprove and accuse the Pope, as the Pope himself
allows to be done: much more may the sheep reprove and accuse other Bishops
and priests, which are far inferior to the Pope. See the answer to the
second objection.

The fifth Objection.
If the Pope had not authority from God himself, to rule the universal Church,
and to decide all controversies in the same: all the Christian world would
never have yielded themselves unto him, in matters of Faith and everlasting
salvation.

The Answer.
I say first, that when Constantinus the Emperor departed from Rome to
Constantinople, the Pope then began to put out his Horns, and to challenge
the Imperial authority in the west parts of the world. Did. 96. cap.
Constantinus.
And his flattering Parasites and greedy Sicophantes, by false Pamphlets and
glosses, labored to confirm his Lordly Titles. These are the words of the
Canon: Constantinus Imperator coronam and omnem regiam dignitatem, in vrbe
Romana, and in Italia, and in partibus occidentalibus Apostolico concessit. The
Emperor Constantine granted to the Apostolical man (the Bishop of Rome,)
his crown and all royal dignity, as well in the City of Rome, and in Italy,
in all the west parts of the world. Lo, this was the first step to that
Lordly Primacy, The very original of Popery.
and Antichristian tyranny, which the Bishops of Rome this day challenge in
the Christian world. This I say, was the original of Popery, though it be a
very fable, and void of all credit. For Eusebius, Theodoritus, Socrates,
Sozomenus, Eutropius, Ruffinus, Victor, and other approved Writers, (who all
have written the Acts of Constantine most diligently,) do not only make no
mention of that gift, but withal say plainly, that the whole Empire was
divided among the three Sons of Constantine, and that one of them had all
Italy for his part. And Ammianus Marcellinus writes, Ammianus. lib. 15.
that Constantius had the dominion of the City of Rome, and that Leontius was
his Lieutenant there.

Laurentius Valla has written both learnedly and largely, against the false
Donation of Constantine, wherewith a great part of the world has been
seduced. To this I could add many arguments, but that the Reader may find
them, in my motives and Book of Survey.

I say secondly, that the Majesty of the Roman Rome. For the Councels had
ever great respect to the dignity and excellency of Cities, in the distribution
of Episcopal and Patriarkall seats.

I say thirdly, that the church of Rome kept and defended Paul was beheaded
there: Saint Peter crucified there: and many Bishops of Rome there put to
death, for confessing and defending the Christian faith. And hereupon it partly
came, I will it not deny, that the West and Occidentall Churches did so greatly
reverence the Church of Rome, and many times to appease controversies and
dissentions, had recourse to it, The Church of Rome, was once the true nurse of
the faith.
as to the Mother Church and ancient Nurse of the Faith. But for all this,
they never ascribed this prerogative to the Bishop of Rome, that he could
not err: neither ever did they acknowledge him to be the sole and only judge,
in questions and controversies of religion. This to be so, one only
testimony will suffice. For S. Cyprian an ancient Father, a very learned
Bishop, and blessed Martyr, although he greatly honored the Church of Rome,
and the Bishops thereof, for respects above mentioned: yet was he so far,
from acknowledging the supposed prerogative of the Bishop of Rome, that his
faith could not fail: or that he was the sole and only judge, Vide epist.
Cyprian. ad Pompeium.
in questions and controversies of religion: that he flatly rejected his
opinion, contemned his definitive sentence, and derided his judicial decree,
calling him blind bussarde, and arrogant Prelate. The controversy was this,
whether they which were baptized of Heretics, ought to be rebaptized, or
not. The matter, and Saint Cyprians words, are set down at large, in my Book
of Motives. And the matter it self is partly already proved, in the Chapters
before going: and shall be more fully confirmed, in the Chapters following.

CAP. V. Showing that Provincial Councels may err.
THAT Provincial Councels may err, even in matters of Faith, it is so clear
and manifest, that famous and very learned Papists affirm the same: to
wit, Adrianus who was sometime Pope himself, Iohannes-Gerson sometime
Chauncellor of Paris, Bellarm. lib. 4. de Romans Pontif. cap. 2.
Almainus and Alphonsus, both of them renowned Papists. For they all hold, as
the Jesuit Bellarmine grants, that the infallibility of judgment touching
matters of faith, rests solely in the church and general Councels. this
assertion being confessed by great learned Papists, were enough to satisfy
the indifferent Reader, if more could not be said.

Saint Cyprian assembled in council together with fourscore learned bishops,
defined against the truth: Council. Carthag. sub Cypriano.
that such as were baptized of Heretics, ought to be baptized again. This
decree is extant in the first tome of Councels, and is this day reputed for a
gross error, throughout the christian world.

The Provincial Council holden at Iconium, decreed with Saint Cyprian and his
fellow Bishops, Eusebius. hist. eccles. li. 7. cap. 6
that rebaptization was lawfully ministered, to those that were baptized of
Heretics.

The Council of Sardis erred grossly, Aug. ep. 163. and lib. 3 contra
Cresconium, cap. 34. tom. 7.
condemning two Catholic Bishops. Julius the Bishop of Rome, and Athanasius
the Bishop of Alexandria.

The third Council of Carthage, decreed the Apocryphal books of Tobias,
Judith, Baruch, Council. 3. Carthag. can. 47.
Wisdom, Ecclesiasticus, and the Machabees, to be Canonical. But the Council
of Laodicea (which was confirmed in the sixth general Council) condemned that
decree long before it was made, Conc. Laodic. can. 59.
and denied the said books to be Canonical.

The Council of Varmes decreed, Con. Varmac. can. 3.
that secret theft should be known and tried, by the delivery and receiving
of the holy Eucharist. Aquinas. p. 3. q. ^^. a^. 6. ad. 3
Which is a notorious error, and a wicked decree, as the great papist Aquinas
witnesses, in his Theological sum.

The Council of Rome celebrated by Pope Stephanus, Platina, Sigebertus. and
palmerius.
disanulled all orders given by Pope Formosus: and the Council of Rauennas,
called by Pope John disanulled the Acts of the Council under Pope Stephanus.

In fine, a Council holden at Rome under Pope Nicholas, De consecrat. did. 2.
cap. eg^ Berengarius.
decreed and enforced Berengarius to confess the same; that the true body of
Christ was broken with the Priests hands, and consumed with the teeth of the
faithful. And yet is this a notorious error, manifest to all the world.
Wherefore the Popish Gloss, to save the credit of the decree of the Pope and
Council, if it would be; adds these words for explication sake Nisi sane
intelligas verba Berengarii, in maiorem incideshaeresim, quam ipse habuit: and
ideo omnia referas ad species ipsas. Nam de Christi corpore parts non facimus.
Unless thou understand soundly the words of Berengarius, thou will fall into
a greater heresy, then he had: and therefore thou must refer all things to
the forms. For of Christ body, no parts are made. Lo, the Popish gloss
says plainly, (which is the truth in deed,) that Christ body cannot be
broken, or divided into parts. And for all that, the Pope with his popish
Council, enforced Berengarius to believe the contrary, and to confess the
same. The Apostles words are these: Romans 6. v. 9
Christ being raised from the dead, dies no more: death has no more dominion
over him. But certes, if the true body of Christ Jesus be broken in deed, and
torn in pieces with man's teeth: then doubtless must it be corrupted, and
Christ himself must die again. This verity does so gall the Papists, that
the Jesuit Bellarmine, (who is the mouth of all the Papists,) is enforced will
he, nill he, to confess the truth unawares. Bellarmin de council. lib. 2. cap.
8. in fine. Col. 917.
These are his own words, which I wish the Reader to mark attentively.
Certum est and semper fuit, Christi corpus incorruptibile nunc existens, non
posse frangi, and teri, nisi in signo sieve sacramento; ita vt dicatur frangi ac
teri, cum signum eius, id est, species panis frangitur and teritur. Sequitur:
verum Christi corpus ibi praesens existens, frangitur and teritur, non tamen
inse, sedin signo. It is and ever was certain, and without doubt, that Christ's
body now being incorruptible, cannot be broken and torn, but in the sign or
Sacrament: So that it may be said to be broken and torn, when the sign
thereof, that is to say, the form of bread is broken and torn. The true body
of Christ there present, is broken and torn; yet not in the body it self,
but in the sign thereof. Thus writes our Jesuit most Christanly, but
unawares against himself, if his words be well observed.

I therefore note first, that by Bellarmines own O reader, mark this point
well, for the love of God.
this proposition is inferred of necessity: to wit, that Christ body is truly
said to be present to the faithful, and to be truly eaten of them; when the
sign of Christ's body is truly present, and truly eaten of them. Again, it
must needs follow upon the Jesuits grant, and exposition of the Romish faith,
(which is a wonder to be heard;) that when Christ uttered these words to his
Apostles, (this is my body;) his meaning and the true sense of the words, was
this. This is my body, that is to say, this is the sign and Sacrament of my
body. The reason hereof is evident, because, Christ's natural and true body,
can no more be truly eaten, then it can be truly broken. And consequently, as
we are enforced to grant, that when we say Christ's body is broken, then is
but the sign of his body broken: even so likewise are we enforced to grant,
that when Christ said: This is my body, he gave only the sign and sacrament
of his body. The reason is evident, because his body can no otherwise be
eaten, then it is broken; that is to say, sacramentally, or in a sign; or if
you will so say, figuratively or spiritually, which is all one. Here then is no
certainty of judgment to be found.

CAP. 6. Showing that general Councels may err.
THat general Councels may err, and de facto have erred, even in matters of
faith: it is so plain, as nothing can be more plain, when the truth thereof
shall betold, as it is in deed.

In the great and general Council of the Jews, in which were present, (as
Christ's Gospel tells us, Mar. 14. v. 53.
) all the Priests, the Scribes and the Elders, together with the hie Priest:
Christ Jesus was condemned to death, because he named himself the son of God.
Yea, Caiphas the high Priest with the consent and assent of the whole Council,
pronounced openly that Christ blasphemed, Mat. 26. v. 65.
when he called himself the son of God. And yet is it evident to all
Christian people, and all Papists will and must confess the same; that the hie
Priest Caiphas erred perniciously, and uttered most execrable blasphemy: when
he denied Christ to be the son of God, and true Messiah of the world.

The great and famous Council of Lateran, holden under Innocentius the third,
in which were present the Patriarchs of Jerusalem and Constantinople:
Metropolitanes, 70: Bishops, 400: Abbots, 12: Priors Conuentuals, 800: the
Legates of the Greek and Roman Empire: the Orators of the Kings of
Jerusalem, France, Spain, England, and Cypres: either erred notoriously
about the creation of Angels, or at least made it evident to all the world,
that the decree of general Councels, is not an infallible rule of faith. I
prove this to be so, by two important reasons. First, because the Firmiter
credimus and simpliciter confitemur, quod vnus est solus Deus verus, creator
omnium, visibilium and inuisilium, spiritualium and corporalium; Council. Later.
1. cap. de fide Cath. 1.
qui simul ab initio temporis vtranque de nihilo condidit creaturam,
spiritualem and corporalem, angelicam scilicet and mundanam. We firmly believe
and simply confess, that there is one only true God, the creator of all
things, visible and invisible, spiritual and corporal: who from the beginning
of time created of nothing both creatures together, the spiritual and the
corporal, that is to say, the angelical and the terrestrial.

Secondly, because great learned men and most renowned fathers, Basil. hexa.
hom. 1. Ambr. hexamer. lib. 1. cap. 5. tom. 4. August. lib. 11 de ciuitate, ca.
32. Aquinas, 1. p. q. 61. art. 3.
Gregorius Nazianzenus, Basilius Magnus, Ambrosius, Hieronimus, Damascenus, do
all hold constantly, that albeit the Angels had a beginning, yet were they
before the world was made. And this their opinion is deemed probable, both to
Saint Austen, and to the great School-doctor Aquinas. Which Aquinas lived after
the said Council of Lateran, and had read the same, and had also written
Commentaries upon this very Canon; and consequently, he did not repute the
decree of the said Council, to be an infallible rule of faith. Lo, the
general Council held constantly, and firmly believed, that the Angels were
created at one and the same time with the world. But the holy fathers and the
great Papist Aquinas, thought the contrary opinion to be probable,
notwithstanding the decree of the Council. Whereupon it follows of necessity,
that that is not always the undoubted truth, which is decreed by a general
Council. For which end and purpose, Melchior Canus a learned popish bishop has
written most excellently in these words: Non satis est, vt Conciliorum and
Pontificum iudicia firma esse credantur, Canus de locis, lib* 5. cap. 5 page
169 The popish so supposed divine service* may not safely be believed.
in diuino officio public a tota etiam Ecclesia celebrari. It is not enough,
to make the judgments of Councels and Popes firm, so as we may safely
believe them, to celebrate the same publicly in divine service, throughout
the whole Church of God. These are golden words, they may not be passed over
rawly and negligently, but we must firmly imprint them in our hearts. And in
so doing, we doubtless shall reap commodity more then a little. For, if we
cannot safely give credit to the Popish service, which is publicly done in
their Churches: how can they, or how dare they avouch their doctrine, to be
agreeable to Gods word? Nay, it is a world to hear, that the Pope is not
ashamed to enforce the world, as much as in him lies: to embrace and believe
that new no Religion, lately start up Popish doctrine; whereof the best Popish
writers, can give no better reasons.

The general Council of Constance decreed firmly, Council. Constant. sess. 13.
that it was lawful to debar the lay people from the one part of the
Eucharist: to wit, the cup. Council. Basil. sess. 30.
And the general Council of Basil affirms constantly, that so to hold and
do, is not against the holy institution. And yet is it undoubtedly true, that
the lay people ought by Christ's institution, to receive both the kinds. Saint
Paul writing to the vnpriested Corinthians, 1. Cor. 11. v. 25
may be a sufficient proof hereof. For he tells them, that they ought
according to the commandment which he received of the Lord, to drink of the
cup, as well as to eat of the bread. The matter is so plain, as I deem it
a thing needless, to stand long upon the same.

The Council of Trent, (a famous general council by Popish judgment,) has
flatly decreed that to be no matrimony, which was ever approved matrimony in
the Catholic Church, and is this day perfect matrimony by Christ's
institution. The words of the Council are these: Conc. Trident sess. 8. de
reformat.
Dubitandum non est, clandestina matrimonia libero consensu facta, rata and
vera esse matrimonia, quamdiu ecclesia ea irrita non fecit. There is no doubt,
but clandestine and secret matrimonies made with free consent, were perfect
and true matrimonies, so long as the Church did not disanull the same. Yet so
it is gentle reader, that such secret matrimonies are this day to be reputed
no matrimonies at all. Of which kind of matrimonies I have written more at
large, in my book of motives.

That general Councels may err, the sole and only testimony of Panormitanus,
is sufficient and of force enough against all papists: Panormit. de elect. cap.
Significasti, prope finem.
because he was their famous Canonist, their most reverend Archbishop, and
their renowned Cardinal. His express words are these: nam in concernentibus
fidem, etia^ dictum vnius priuati esset preferendum dicto Papae, si ille
moueretur melioribus rationibus noui and veteris testamenti, quam Papae. Nec
obstat, si dicatur quod concilium non potest errare, quia Christus orauit pro
ecclesia sua vt no^ desiceret quia dico, quod licet co^cilium generale
representet totam ecclesiam vniuersalem, tamen in veritate ibi non est vera
ecclesia vniuersalis, sed representative; quia vniuersalis ecclesia
constituitur ex collectione omnium fidelium; vnde omnes fideles orbis
constituunt istam ecclesiam vniuersale^, cuius caput and sponsus est ipse
Christus. Papa aute^ est Vicarius Christi, and non vere caput ecclesiae, vt
notat glossa in Clem. ne Romani, de elect. Quae notabiliter dicit, quod mortuo
Papa ecclesia non est sine capite, and ista est illa ecclesia quae errare non
potest.

For concerning matters of Faith, even the judgment of one that is a mere
Layman, ought to be preferred before the sentence of the Pope, if that Lay
person, could bring better reasons out of the old and new Testament, then the
Pope did. And it skilleth not if one say, that a Council cannot err, because
Christ prayed for his church, that it should not fail. For I say, that
although a general Council represent the whole universal Church, yet in truth
there is not truly the universal Church, but representatiuely. Note this
doctrine well.
For the universal Church consists, of the collection of all the faithful.
Whereupon all the faithful in the world, make this universal church, (which
cannot err,) whereof Christ himself is the head. The Pope is the Vicar of
Christ, but not truly the head of the church, as notes the Gloss upon the
Clementines, which says very well, that when the Pope is dead, the church
wants not then an head, and this is that Church which cannot err.

Out of these words I note first, that by the opinion of the great Papist
Panormitan, a mere lay

I note secondly, that through the wonderful is the foundation of that
doctrine, which is this day established in the church of England, and in all
other reformed churches throughout the Christian world.

I note thirdly, that a general council may

CAP. VII. Showing that the holy Scripture, is the sole and only infallible
rule of truth.
IN the former Chapters I have showed first, that all Bishops may err Rome
may err, not only in his private opinion, but also in his See the last end of
the second Chapter.
that I find out and set down some such rule, as is infallible and will not in
any respect, point, or clause: deceive them that follow it, and lean thereunto.
Which rule (say I,) is the holy scripture, the sole and only written word of
God. And I prove the same briefly: first, by the written word it self, which
tells us plainly, that the holy scripture was written by the instinct of the
holy Ghost, Deuteronomy. 1.^. Deuteronomy. 31. ver. 19.24. Deuteronomy. 9.10. Ios. 1. v. 8. 2. Tim.
3.16. 2. Pet. 1.21. Number. 23.19.
even as God himself appointed it to be done. That prophecy came not in old
time, by the will of man: but holy men of God spoke, as they were moved by the
holy Ghost. That God is not as man, that he should lie: neither as the son of
man, that he should repent.

I prove it secondly, Dionys. Areopag. de diuinis nominib. cap 1. in initio.
by the testimony of S. Dionyse Areopagita, whose words are these: Omnino
igitur non audendum est, quicquam de summa abstrusaque diuinitate aut dicere
aut cogitare, praeter ca quae nobis diuinitus scripturae diuinae enuntiarunt.

In no wise therefore may we make bold to speak or think any thing, of the
high and ineffable divinity: but that only, which holy writ has revealed to
us from above.

I prove it thirdly, by the verdict of S. Austen in these words: August.
Epist. 19 ad, Hier.
Ego solis eis scripturarum libris qui iam canonici appellantur, hunc timorem
and honorem didici defer, vt nullum eorum authorem scribendo aliquid errasse
firmissime credam. Alios autem ita lego, vt quantalibet sanctitate doctrinaque
praepolleant, non ideo veru^ putem, quia ipsi ita censuerunt, sed quia mihi,
vel per illos auctores canonicos, vel probabili ratione quod a veritate non
abhorreat, persuadere potuerunt.

I have learned to give this fear and honor, to those only books of
scripture which are called Canonical, that I firmly believe no author thereof
to have erred in any point: but yet I read others so, that how holy or learned
soever they be, I do not by and by think it true, because they say so: but
because they persuade me by those Canonical Writers, or by probable reason,
that that is true they say.

August. de bono viduitatis, cap. 1. tom. 4.
The same S. Austen in an other place, tells us plainly, that the holy
Scripture is the rule of faith. These are his words: Sancta scriptura nostrae
doctrinae regulam figit, ne audiamus sapere plusquam oportet.

The holy Scripture sets down the rule of our doctrine, that we presume not
to be wiser, then it is meet and convenient.

Bellarm. de verbo Dei non scripto, lib. 4. cap. 12. tom. 1. col. 196.
The Jesuit Bellarmine (whose words are most forceable against Papists,
because he is the mouth of all Papists,) confesses plainly, that the word
of God is the rule of faith, and that the written word, because it is the rule,
has this prerogative, that whatsoever is contained in it, is of necessity
true, and must be believed: and whatsoever is repugnant to it, is of
necessity false, and must be rejected. But because it is a partial rule, and
not the total rule of faith, thereupon it comes, that something is of faith,
which is not contained in the same. Thus writes the Jesuit. Out of whose
words every child may gather, that the scripture is the infallible rule of
faith. For although the Jesuit would make unwritten traditions, to be a joint
rule together with the written word, (whose opinion I have disproued in my
Book of Motives:) yet neither does he, neither can he deny, but that all must
be rejected, whatsoever is repugnant to the holy scripture.

By this my discourse hitherto, it is clear and evident to every indifferent
Reader: that neither Fathers, Popes, nor councels, provincial, or general,
are or can be the infallible rule of faith, but the sole and only written
word of God: that is, the holy Scripture. But now remains a most intricate
and d^fficult question, who must be the judge of the Scripture: that is, who
must determine and set down, what writings, Who is the Judge of the Scripture.
what opinions, what preachinges, what doctrines, are grounded upon the
Scriptures, and are consonant to the same: again, what opinions, what
Writings, and what doctrines, are not grounded upon the Scriptures, nor are
agreeable to the same. Hic labor, hoc opus est. I therefore proceed to the
next Chapter, hoping by Gods grace, to use such perspicuitie in handling this
difficult question, as shall be to the contentment of all indifferent Readers.

CAP. VIII. Showing who is the right Judge, of the holy Scripture and word of
God.
ALbeit the holy Scripture be the infallible rule of Faith, Some judge must be
appoint^d, for unity sake, and external peace of the church.
and the true Touchstone, by which all doctrines are be examined and tried, as
is already proved: yet will controversies never have a peaceable end, unless
some special judges be appointed to decide and determine the same. For as the
old Proverb says: So many heads, so many wits. Out of one and the self
same Scripture, one man gathers one sense, an other man an other sense. For
the perspicuous understanding whereof, I put down these Paragraffes.

The first Paragraffe.
The examination of doctrine is of two sorts: the one is private, the other is
public. Private examination is that, upon which every man does build and
stablish his own faith. Abakuk. cap. 2. v. 4.
For as the Prophet says: The just man shall live by his faith. And as the
great Popish Doctor Aquinas writes: Aquinas, 2.2 q. 1. art. 1. and 3.
the former object of our faith, or that which we formally believe, is God
himself, or that which God has revealed to us: and not that which man tells
us. For says he, faith does not yield assent to any thing, but because it
is revealed of God. The public examination of doctrine, pertayneth to the
common consent of the Church, for the peaceable governance thereof. For GOD is
not the Author of confusion, 1. Cor. 14. v. 33.
but of peace.

The Second Paragraffe.
As the examination of doctrine is of two sorts: so are the examiners and the
judges of two sorts also: that is to say, public and private. The Public
judges are all the Ministers of the Church, by what name or title soever they
be called. The private Judges are all the faithful severally by themselves,
in all matters pertaining to Faith and the salvation of their own souls. That
all the faithful are private Judges, it may be easily proved, by many textes
of holy writ. First, by this text of S. John: believe not every spirit, but
try the spirits, if they be of God. Secondly, 1. John. 4. v. 1. 1 Thessalonians. 5.
v. 21 1. Cor. 2. v. 15.
by this text of S. Paul: try all things, and keep that which is good.
Thirdly, by this text of the same Apostle: the spiritual man judges all
things. These texts, the two famous Papists, Nicholaus de Lyra, and Dionysius
Carthusianns, Lyra and Car. thus. in comment sup* 1. Cor. 2
expound of things pertaining to salvation: which say they, all the faithful
are able to try. And which is to be wondered at, the Jesuit Bellarmine
unawares confesses the same. These are his express words: Duo vel tres
congregati in nomine Christi, obtinent semper quod petunt a Deo: Bellarm. lib.
2. de concilii^ cap. 2.
nimirum sapientiam and lumen quod sufficit eis ad cognoscenda ea, quae ipsis
necessaria sunt. Sequitur: itaque sieve pauci, sieve multi, sieve priuati, sieve
Episcopi congregentur in nomine Christi, omnes habent Christum praesentem, and
adiuuantem, and obtinent quod eis conuenit obtinere.

Two or three gathered together in the name of Christ, A point worthy to be
marked.
do at all times obtain that of God, which they desire at his hands: to
wit, Wisdom and understanding which is sufficient for them to know those
things, which are necessary for them. Therefore whether few or many, whether
Private persons or Bishops be gathered in the name of Christ, they all have
Christ's presence, they all have Christ's help, they all obtain that, which
is meet and convenient for them. Thus says our Jesuit. And doubtless it is
meet for every one, to know all things necessary for his salvation: it can
not be denied.



I note secondly, that God is as well present in

I note thirdly, that God helps private men, See the words of Melchior
Canus, in the end of this discourse.
in their assemblies for matters pertaining to their souls health: do no
less proceed from GOD, then do the Decrees of Bishops. And consequently,
the Jesuit, will he, nill he, must perforce confess, that private, secular,
and mere Laymen, can and may judge, in matters of Religion: in matters of
Faith: in matters concerning their own souls health. And all this is nothing
else in deed, but even that which Christ himself has plainly taught us. Mat.
18. v. 18.
Where two or three (says Christ,) are gathered together in my name, there am
I'in the midst of them.

I prove the same doctrine, because Christ's sheep, as Christ the great
shepherd tells us, John. 10. v. 4.
know his voice, and follow him, but will not follow a stranger. This place
doubtless does convince. For if the sheep know the voice of the shepherd,
as Christ says they do; then must the sheep perforce, judge of the voice of
the shepherd. For otherwise it will follow, that a man cannot discern that
which he knows.

Melchior Canus faith plainly, Canus de loc^ lib. ^. cap. 8. p. 29.
that the holy Ghost teaches every one, all things necessary to salvation.
This verity is confirmed, by an other testimony of our Lord Jesus: if any
man, says he, John. 7. v. 17.
will do his will, (the will of God,) he shall know of the doctrine, whether
it be of God, or whether I speak of my self. Lo, the knowledge of Gods word,
proceeds from the doing of his will. But the doing of Gods will pertains to
all, both great and small, as well to private laymen, as to ecclesiastical
persons, though they be the Bishops of Rome. And for this cause, says the
great Papist Panormitan, (his words you may read in the sixth chapter of this
discourse, Vide. sup. cap. 6
) that the judgment of a mere layman, must be preferred before the judgment
of the Pope; if that private layman have better reasons, gathered out of the
old and new Testament, then are the reasons of the Pope. See the answer to
the Objection in the fourth Paragraffe, and note it will.

To conclude holy Writ tells us, that the Bereans did search the Scriptures,
Act. 17. v. 11.
to see if they were according to Saint Paul's doctrine. And let this suffice,
for the judgment of private persons, and meerlay-men. Now that all ministers,
Archbishops, Bishops, and other pastors of the Church, may judge of the sense
of the holy Scripture, it is a thing so clear and manifest, as little or
nothing need be said thereof. 1. Tim. 1. v. 3.
For Saint Paul says, that Bishops (by which word he understands all the
Ministers of the Church,) must have great care, that false doctrine be not
taught. This the Papists freely grant of Bishops, denying the same in other
inferior ministers of the Church. But I will prove the assertion to be
verified, of all ministers in general. First, because Paul commits the
government of the church, to all the ministers in differently, calling them
Bishops, that is, overseers of the flock, or superintendents. Take heed (says
he,) to your selves, and to all the flock, Act. 20. v. 28.
over the which the holy Ghost has made you Bishops, or overseers. Lo, he
terms the Ministers of the city Ephesus, Bishops. For of one only city,
there could be but one only Bishop, or chief Minister. But let us hear,
what a great popish Doctor tells us.

Nicholaus de Lyra, has these express words: Vos spiritus sanctus posuit
Episcopos, Lvr. in Comment. in hunc locum.
id est, ministros. Sub nomine enim Episcoporum, intelliguntur alii Ecclesiae
ministri. Vnde Episcopus Grace, superintendens est Latin. The holy Ghost has
placed you Bishops, that is to say, Ministers. For under the name of Bishops,
the other Ministers of the church are understood. Wherefore a Bishop in
Greek, is Superintendent in Latin. Thus writes Lyra the great papist, whom
sir Thomas Moore a famous popish so supposed Martyr, termed a great Clearke,
and he was so in deed; but our late Romish papists cannot abide, that their
Bishops be called Superintendents. Secondly, because Peter in the person of
all. He made them all Apostles, as well as Peter: they had all equal power,
not only of order, but of jurisdiction also, as well as Peter had the same.
This their own great learned schoole-doctor Victoria, affirms to be so.
These are his express words: Victor. de potest. ecclesiae relect. 2. Conc. 3.
and 4. p. 84.
Apostoli omnes habuerunt aequalem potestatem cum Petro; quam sic intelligo,
quod quilibet Apostolorum habuit potestatem Ecclesiasticam in toto orb, and ad
omnes actus ad quos Petrus habuit. All the Apostles had equal power with Peter;
which I thus understand, that every one of the Apostles had power
ecclesiastical in the whole world, and to all those acts to which Peter had
the same.

Saint Cyprian has these express words: Cyprian. de simplic. Prelat. p. 113.
Hoc erant vtique and caeteri Apostoli quod fuit Petrus, pari consortio
praediti, and honoris, and potestatis; sed exordium ab vnitate proficiscitur,
vt Ecclesia vna monstretur. The same were the rest of the Apostles doubtless,
that Peter was, endued with equal fellowship, both of honor, and of power. But
the beginning proceeds from unity, to show the Church to be one.

The Papists would wrest these words, to be restrained only to the power of
consecration. Victor. vbi supra.
But hearken I pray you, how the the same doctor confuteth them. Nec audienda
est glossa, dicens hoc debere intelligi, in ordine and dignitate
consecrationis* non in potestatis plenitudine; vt patere potest ipsam epistolam
diui Cypriani legenti. Neither must we hearken to the Gloss, which says that
this to be understood, in the order and dignity of consecration, not in the
fullness of power; as it is evident to him, that shall read the epistle of S.
Cyprian.

Couart. tom. 1 part 2 9. p. 242. Col. 4. prope finem.
Couarruuias the Popes famous Canonist, albeit he would very gladly defend the
Popes pretensed power, and make only Peter's power ordinary and independent; yet
can he not deny, that our Lord Jesus gave equal power to all his Apostles.
These are his express words: Etenim iuxta Catholicorum virorum authoritates,
and communem omnium traditionem, Apostoli parem ab ipso Domino Jesus cum Petro
potestatem ordinis and iurisdictionis acceperunt; ita quidem, vt quilibet
Apostolorum aequalem cum Petro habuerit potestatem ab ipso Deo, in totum orbem
and in omnes actus quos Petrus agere poterat. For according to the authorities
of catholic Writers, and the common traditions of all men, the Apostles
received from our Lord Jesus himself, equal power with Peter, both of order
and jurisdiction: insomuch doubtless, as every Apostle had equal power with
Peter from God himself, and that both over all the world, and to all actions
that Peter could do.

Peter.

Peter had.

I note thirdly, that what art soever Peter could

I note fourthly, that the jurisdiction of every Peter's did.

I note fifthly, that Christ's speeches to Peter in the

I note sixthly, that the late Bishops of Rome do plenitudinem potestatis, the
fullness of power.

I note seventhly, that all this is co^nfirmed by

The self same doctrine is confirmed by the testimony of Saint Austen, in
sundry places of his works.

In one place, he has these words; Aug. in sermon. Petri and Pauli apud Canum.
Aug. in lib. de agone Christi, cap. 30. tom. 3.
Clauses non vnus homo Petrus sed vnitas accepit Ecclesiae.

Not one only man Peter received the Keys, but the unity of the Church.

In an other place, he writes thus; Ecclesiae Cutholicae personam sustinet
Petrus, and cum ei dicitur, adomnes dicitur; amas me? pasce oues meas.

Peter represents the person of the Catholic Church: and when it is said
to him, it is said to all: Love thou me? Feed my sheep. This point is
proved more at large, in my book of motives.

The third Paragraph.
Although Councels both may err, and de facto have erred, as is already
proved: yet to avoid dissension, and to establish peace in the Church; free and
godly general Councels, are and ever have been the ordinary way and mean;
to condemn heresies, errors and superstitions crept into the visible Church,
and to decide controversies in Religion; at such times, and in such places, as
they could safely and lawfully be assembled, and brought together.

Socrates lib, 1. cap. 6.
and called or summoned by the like authority. For the Nicene Council was
appointed by the authority of Constantinus surnamed the great, to condemn
Arrius, who denied the consubstantialitie of our Lord Jesus the son of God,
affirming him to be pure man.

Theodosius the younger called the Council of Ephesus, Euagrius. lib. 1. cap.
3.
to confound the cursed heretic Nestorius; who affirmed* Christ to have two
persons, and the blessed Virgin to be only (...), the mother of Christ,
Sozomen. lib. 7. cap. 7. Theodoret. lib. 1. cap. 7.
but not (...) the mother of God. The Council of Constantinople was called by
the authority of the Emperor Theodosius the elder, to confound Macedonius,
who denied the divinity of the holy Ghost. Sigebertus. an. 386.
And the Council of Chalcedon was assembled at the command of Martianus the
Emperor, to condemn Eutiches, who affirmed Christ to have but one only
nature, after the union hypostaticall: albeit he granted him to have had two
natures, before the said ineffable conjunction. This to be so, most renowned
Historiographers and Chronographers, will testify with me.

I say secondly, (at such times and in such places,

The great pillar of Christ's Church Saint Augustine, August. epist* 162. p. 472.
confirms this whole discourse in these golden words: Putemus illos
Episcopos qui Romae iudicarunt, non bonos iudices fuisse; restabat adhuc
plenarium Ecclesiae vuiuersale Concilium, vbi etiam cum ipsis iudicibus causa
possit agitari; vt si male iudicasse conuicti essent, eorum sententiae
soluerentur.

Let us imagine, that those Bishops which gave sentence at Rome, were not
good Judges; there yet remained a plenarie universal Council of the Church,
where both the cause might be examined, and the Judges also; that there
sentences might be disanulled, if they were found to have given evil judgment.

Aug. de Baptis. cont. Donat. lib. 1. cap. 7. tom. 7.
The same Saint Austen says again in an other place* that great Doctors of
the Church thought diversely of rebaptization, and that without all prejudice of
faith, until the question was decided in a plenarie general Council. Lo, a
free and godly general Council, was in Saint Austines time the end of all
controversies in religion. But now there remains a great and most important
question: to wit, what remedy must be sought to appease controversies, when a
free, godly, and lawful general Council can not be had. To which question
answer shall be made, in the Paragraph next following.

The fourth Paragraph.
I have proved at large in my book of Motives, that the decrees of general
Councels in these latter days, are nothing else but a mere mockery and
sophistical subtlety, to deceive and delude the World. To which book I
refer the reader* that shall expect a larger discourse in this behalf. I say
now for the present, that seeing general Councels cannot be gathered together,
in such manner and with such freedom, as they have been in former times of
antiquity; and seeing withal, that some judges must be designed of mere
necessity, to appease, end, and decide, doubts, difficulties, and controversies
in religion, least the Church should be vexed, turmoiled, and swallowed up,
with schisms, heresies, and variety of opinions: every Emperor and Empress,
every King and Queen, and every other civil Magistrate independent, by what
title or name soever he be called, must before all things have a vigilant,
Christian, and religious care, to settle, establish, and plant, within their
kingdoms, Realms, Precinctes, commonweals, territories, and dominions,
where they have the chief and independent sovereignty immediately under God,
the pure and sincere religion of Jesus Christ, and to abandon, extirpate, and
utterly abolish all schisms, heresies, errors, and superstitions whatsoever.
This has ever been the religious care of all godly and zealous Princes,
as well before Christ in time of the old testament, as since Christ in time of
the new testament. Holy Moses took the molten Calfe, which Aaron the High
Priest to please the people had made, burnt it in the fire, Exodus 32. v. 19*
20.21.22.23.
bet it to powder, strowed it in the water, and made the people to drink
thereof. He reproved Aaron for his offense, who calling him Lord, labored with
humble obeisance to excuse himself.

Iosue commanded the Priests and Leuits to do all their ecclesiastical
functions, to bear the Arc, Iosue. 5.6.^
to carry trumpets, to circumcise, to set up Altars, to offer sacrifice, and to
read the book of the law to all the people. yea, the same Iosue was appointed
to go out and in before the people, and to lead them out and in, Nomb. 27. v.
17.
least the congregation of the Lord should be as sheep without a Pastor.

King David ordered, disposed, and reformed the Priests and Leuits, in their
offices and functions ecclesiastical. He appointed how the Arc should be
borne; 1. Par. 24. 1. Par. 25. 1. Par. 26.
he ordained Psalms, Singers, Instruments, Officers, and all other things,
for the setting forth of Gods true religion and service.

King Solomon appointed the Priests to bring the Arc into the temple: 1. Reg.
8. v. 63. 1. Reg. 4.
he instituted the dedication of the temple: he offered sacrifice: he
directed the Priests, Levites, and other Church officers, as his father had
done before him. He deposed Abiathar the hie Priest, 1. Reg. 2.
and placed Sadocke in his room.

King Iosaphat appointed in Jerusalem Priests and Leuits, 2. par. 19.
and Princes of the Families of Israel, that they might judge the judgment
and cause of the Lord, to the inhabitants of the land. And he used these
express words unto them; Sic agetis in timore Domini, fideliter and cord
perfecto. Thus shall ye do in the fear of the Lord, faithfully and with a
perfect heart.

4. Reg. 18.
King Ezechias took away the hie places, brake the images, cut down the
Groves, and brake in pieces the brazen serpent, 2. Par. 29.
that Moses had set up. He purged the Temple, 2* Par. 10.
reformed the Priests, and commanded them to do their duties, in cleansing
themselves and in offering their sacrifices. He renewed the Passover. He
appointed the courses of the Priests and Levites by their turns, both for the
burnt offeringes and peace offeringes, to minister and to praise God in the
Temple. 2. Par. 11,
He also commanded, that sufficient maintenance should be given to the
Priests, that they might be encouraged in the law of the Lord, and not be
entangled with provision of worldly things. And (which is to be noted, 2.
Par. 29. v. 11.
) he called the Priests and Levites his sons, in regard of his royal power
and estate, in which respect he was the Father of all his people: for
otherwise, he was but a Child, and for years might have had many of the^ to
have bin his father.

King Josias brake the Altars of Baalim, 2. Par. 34.
destroyed the Groves, burnt the bones of the idolatrous Priests upon their
altars, and purged Judah and Jerusalem from idolatry.

This religious care had the noble Emperor Constantine the Great, who, (as
reports Eusebius, Eusebius Caesariens: de vita Constantini.
) thought nothing to pertain more to his royal charge, then to plant true
religion throughout his realms and dominions. S. Austen proves the facts and
examples of the Kings of the old Testament, August. epist. 48. ad vincent.
to have been figures of the new Testament; and consequently, that it is the
duty of all kings in this time of grace, to have special regard to the
service and true worship of God; to abandon all false worship, idolatry,
errors, heresies, and superstition; and to plant the Gospel of Christ Jesus in
all the parts of their realms and dominions.

The same S. Austen in an other place, among many golden sentences, August.
epist. 50. ad Bonifac.
(which I now omit in regard of brevity,) has these express words; In hoc
ergo reges seruiunt Domino, in quantum reges sunt, cum ea faciunt ad seruiendum
illi, quae non possunt facere, nisi reges.

In this therefore do kings serve God, as they are kings, when they do hold
those things, which none can do but only kings. Where me must seriously
observe this reduplication of S. Austen, (kings as kings,) as a point of great
importance. For kings (as the same father teleth us,) serve God two ways: as
they be men, and as they be kings. As men, they serve God in living a Christian
and godly life: but as king, they serve God in making godly laws, for the
punishment of blasphemers, idolaters, heretics, and all kind of malefactors.
And this is that, which S. Austen says, none can do but kings, as rhey are
kings.

Yea, this is that, which the Prophet Esaias tells us, Esa. 49. v. 23.
when he says, That kings shall be the nurcing Fathers of the Church, and
Queens her nurces. For albeit the Ministry of feeding, of preaching the
word, and administration of the Sacraments pertain only to the ministers,
neither may the mere civil Magistrate in any wise meddle therewith: yet for
all that, it is most true, that the provision for the food, the oversight that
the children of God be duly fed, and that the Ministers do exercise their
functions in vigilant and dutiful manner, belongs to the civil,
independent, and absolute Princes. For this respect is it, that kings and
Queens have the name of Nurses, not to nourish their children in civil
matters and corporal food only; but as in civil, so also in spiritual,
that is, In lacte verbi Dei, in the milk of the word of God. For though the
execution pertain to the ministers, yet the provision, direction, appointment,
care, and oversight (which is the sepreme government,) belongs only, soly,
and wholly to the Prince, as is already proved.

Now to the question proposed in the former Paragraffe, vz. What remedy is to
be had, The answer to the question proposed in the third Paragraffe.
when a free and lawful general Council cannot be had. To this question I
answer, that when any controversies shall arise to the disturbance of the
Peace of the church, then every absolute and independent civil Magistrate,
must command his Archbishop, Bishop, and other learned Ministers within his
territories and dominions, to come together, and to celebrate a National
Council or Synod, and then and there to debate, discuss, and decide the
controversy in religion. And he must charge them, (as did the religious
kings, David, Solomon, Iosaphat, Ezechias, Josias, and the rest, of whom
mention is already made:) to have the fear of God before their eyes, and
carefully to examine all doubts, difficulties, contentions, and controversies
in religion, according to the infallible rule of the holy scripture. This done,
the same civil independent magistrate, must call together his wife and grave
Counselors, and after mature deliberation had with the^, confirm whatsoever
shall tend to the advancement of Gods glory, and the peace of his church. And
withal, he must publish sharp penal statutes against all such, as shall with
disloyal contumacy violate and transgress the same. Thus did the good kings
Reccaredus, and Constantinus, and this is this day most prudently and
christianly observed, in the church of England, God be thanked for it. For
first,

This godly and most christian manner, of proceeding in religious causes: is so
lively set down before our eyes, in the honorable fact of the Noble Spanish
king Reccaredus, as it is able to penetrate the very heart, and thoroughly to
persuade every one, that shall ponder the same seriously, and in the fear of
God. This religious king Reccaredus in the year of our Lord, 585. comanded all the Bishops with in his dominions of Spain and Galicia, to come together in
his royal City of Toledo, to confute and condemn the Arrian heresy. When
they were come thither, In ipso initio concilii tolet. tertii.
the king sat down in the midst of them, and declared the cause that moved
him to call them together. After that he enacted a public Edict, for the
inviolable observation of all the decrees of the counsel, straitely charging
as well the Clergy as the Laity, to obey and keep the same. Lastly, he
subscribed his own name, and that before all the Bishops, who in their due
places subscribed after the king. These are the express words of the king,
set down in the end of the said Edict: Flauius Reccaredus rex, Habentur in a
Tomo conciliorum.
hanc deliberationem quam cum sancta definiuimus Synodo, confirmans,
subscripsi. I Flauius Reccaredus the king, confirming this consultation, which
we have defined with the holy Synod, have subscribed thereunto. The next that
subscribed after the king, was Mausona the Metropolitan Bishop of the
Province of Lusitania. After him subscribed Euphemius, the Archbishop of
Toledo. Ecclesiae Emeritensis Metropolitanus.
The residue followed in order, as in the Council is to be seen. These
particular subscriptions I note, as a matter of great moment against the
Papists: who will grant no prerogative, or royal place to kings, in time of
ecclesiastical Synodes.

Out of these words contained in the kings subscription, I note first, that
the king confirmed subscribed before all the Bishops. Fourthly, that the king
decreed and defined the controversies, together with the Bishops. To which I
add for the complement in the fifth place, that the council was called, and
the Bishops assembled, at the kings commandment. For so says the
Council. Cum pro fidei suae synceritate idem gloriosissimus princeps, omnes
regiminis sui Pontifices in vnum conuenire mandasset, etc.

When the same most glorious prince for the sincerity of his faith, had
commanded all the Bishops within his dominions, do come together to Toledo,
etc.

This was the practice of godly Princes, above a thousand years ago; when
royal Prerogatives were not brought into thraldom, by popish tyranny.

An Objection.
The councels which the Emperor called together, were plenary and general:
but those which you speak of, are but Provincial or National. The latter may
err, the former are ever directed by the holy Ghost.

The Answer.
de facto have erred, as is already proved.



I say thirdly, that the great popish Archbishops Panormitanus tells us, (as
is already proved, Gerson. prim. part, de examinat. doctrinar. consider. 5
) that a private man's judgment is better then the Popes. To which I must
needs add the words of doctor Gerson the Chancellor of Paris, and a renowned
popish writer, which are these: Quilibet homo doctus potest and debet toti
concilio risistere, si videat illud ex malitia, vel ignorantia errare. Every
one that is learned, may and ought to resist and stand against a whole
Council, if he perceive that the Council erreth, either of ignorance, or of
malice. Lo, all that I say is true, even by the popish doctrine. And so no
Papist can with reason, deny or gainsay the same. For first, you see by
Gersons doctrine, that a general Melchior Canus a famous Schoole-doctor and
popish Bishop, shall conclude and knit up this discourse. These are his
express words; Praestanti quod in se est, Deus fidem ad salutem necessariam
non negat. Sequitur; no^. n. vnctio quemcunque simpliciter docet de omnibus,
sed quemque de his quae sunt ei propria, and necessaria. Sequitur; concedimus,
liberaliter, doctrinam cuique in sua vita and statu necessariam, illi fore
prospectam and cognitam, qui fecerit voluntatem dei. Sicut. n. gustus been
affectus, differentias saporum facile discernit, sic animi optima affectio
facit, vt homo doctrinam Dei ad salutem necessariam discernat, ab errore
contrario qui ex Deo non est. To the man that does what in him lies, God
never denies faith necessary to salvation. For the unction does not simply
teach every one every thing, but it teaches every one so much, as is proper
and necessary for him. And we grant freely, that doctrine necessary for every
man's life and state, is sufficiently known to him, that does the will of God.
For like as the well affected taste, does easily discern the differences of
savors or tastes; so does the good affection of the mind bring to pass, that
a man may discern the doctrine of God necessary to salvation, from contrary
error which is not of God.

Thus writes the grauest and rarest Papist for learning, in the universal
world; and consequently, it is and must be of great force against the Papist,
whatsoever has passed from his pen. And I protest unto thee gentle Reader,
that nothing has more estraunged me from popery, and set me at defiance with
it; then the clear and perspicuous doctrine, of the best learned and most
renowned Papists. For whosoever will seriously peruse, the books that I have
published to the view of the world: shall therein find confirmed by the
doctrine of the best approved Papists, every point of settled doctrine in the
Church of England.

John says, the unction teaches us all things, 1. John. 2. v. 27
he means not the difficult questions in Religion, but all such points as
are necessary for every man's salvation.

In note secondly, that no man wants this knowledge

I note thirdly, that every private man, is able to-iudge

FINIS.
A COVNTERBLAST: AGAINST THE VAIN BLAST OF A MASKED Companion, who terms
himself, E. O. but thought to be ROBERT PARSONS, that traiterous Jesuit.

LONDON Printed by John VVindet, for Richard Bankworth, dwelling in Paul's
Churchyard at the sign of the Sun. 1603.

To the right worshipful my approved good friend, Master John Bennet Doctor
of the Civil law, and one of her Majesty's Council in the North parts of
England.
IF I should take upon me (right worshipful,) to discourse at large, of the
plots, practices, dealings, and proceedings, of our Jesuits and Iesuited
persons; time doubtless would sooner fail me, then matter whereof to speak. I
have very lately published a discourse of this argument, entitled The
Anatomy of Popish tyranny. In it the Reader may view at large, the doctrine,
the Religion, the manners, the natures, the conversation, the practices, and
the whole proceedings, of the English traitorous hispanized Jesuits. So that
now to recount the same, were actum agere, and a thing altogether needless.
One of these Jesuits has lately published a most scandalous and railing
Libell, against the reverend and learned man of God, master Doctor Sutcliffe:
as also against master Willet. In which Libell, the said masked companion
terming himself E. O. has obiter disgorged some part of his bitter gall
against my self. For the confirmation whereof, (that all the world may see his
folly, and consequently the folly of all the Jesuits, who combine and
conioyne in this affair,) I have addressed this Counterblast; in which the
indifferent Reader may plainly behold, that the Jesuits and Seminaries can say
nothing in deed, to the doctrine contained in my Books; howbeit they bestirre
themselves with might and maine, to dazell the eyes of the simple and silly
Papists, that they shall not see the Sun shining at noone tide. The work
(such as it is,) I dedicate unto your worship, in token of that gratitude which
is due unto you, for your worships manifold kind courtesies toward me.
Accept I pray you the present in good part, not respecting so much the gift, as
the mind of the giver. The Almighty bless your worship, with many happy
years; to his glory, the good of his Church, and the benefit of your own
soul. From my study, this 14. of February, 1602.

Your worships most bounden, THOMAS BELL.

A COVNTERBLAST, against the vain blast of a masked Companion, who terms
himself E. O. but thought to be Robert Parsons, that traiterous Jesuit.
CAP. I. Of the manner of Jesuitical Proceeding, in all their seditious and
scandalous libels.
THE Jesuits (as the secular Priests report in their Writings,) are
grievously offended with them, because they will not consent to their
unnatural attempts, for invasions, treacheries, rebellions, and most cruel
Spanish conspiracies: wherein themselves being entangled and plunged over head
and ears, they endeavor to set the Lay-Papistes on like mad dogs, to bark,
bite, and devour their ghostly fathers, and dear friends. They term the
secular Priests, Mal-contentes, factious, seditious, irreligious, Apostataes:
yea, knaves, villains, and rebels (forsooth) to Prince George Blackwell, king
Henry Garnet, and Emperor Robert Parsons. And all this is done, for not
allowing (say the Priests) of a Traiterous Archpriest, set up in prejudice
as well of the Church of Rome, as of the common Weal of England. And no marvel,
Import. consider. p. 14.
seeing, (as the said Priests do write,) the Jesuits came into England, by
the instigation of the Devil. These Jesuits make it an usual practice, to
publish scandalous libels, and traiterous Pamphlets, either without names at
all, or under the names of others, or at least by such two letters bare lie,
and nakedly, as may be applied to many indifferently, and no ways to the true
authors of the libels. In which kind of coggery, Robert Parsons the Jesuit
(whom the secular Priests term a notorious liar, a brazen faced Friar, a
known cozener, a sacrilegious Bastard, an incestuous villain, a cursed Fairie
bratte, and bloudthirsty traitor) seems to excel all others. This goodly
Friar Parsons, (of whose sactimony more at large in my Anotomie of Popish
tyranny) has lately published, or caused to be published, a most scandalous
libell, against a godly, learned, and very famous man, M. D. Sutcliffe: as also
against M. Willet, a very learned and grave Writer. Which railing Libel, the
said worthy men, as I hear, have already confuted to the Libellers
everlasting shame and confusion, if he do not repent in time.

In the said scandalous libell and ridiculous Pamphlet, the Libeller terms
himself E. O. like a masked counterfeit Companion, as he is indeed: and does
in the said impudent libell, combine my silly self, to my disparagement (as he
supposes,) with those worthy men. But I repute it to my great credit: as who
freely acknowledge, that I am altogether unworthy, to be coupled with such
famous and worthy Writers. That which he imputes to me, may justly and with all facility be retorted against himself, as in due place (God willing) shall
appear.

CAP. II. Of the resolution and determination, of the masked Companion, E. O.
THE swaggering divine, and hot spurmate, E. O. tells the Reader in his
Preface, that he was once determined to have adjoined me poor soul, to the
virtuous, grave, and famous Writers, M. D. Sutcliffe and M. Willet: but he
altered his purpose, (if we may believe him,) for these two respects. First,
for certain considerations counterfeit companion, remember well his words.
Concerning this determination, I think it very expedient to notify to the
Reader, these five material

In my Motives lib. 2. cap. 1.
In the first of these Books, I offered public dispute with what Seminary in
England soever, no one or other excepted whosoever: protesting in the same
work to proceed so sincerely, as if I could by the adversary be convinced,
either to allege any Writer corruptly, or to quote any place guilfully, or to
charge any author falsely: I would never require credit at the Readers hands,
neither in that book, nor in any other.

I protested likewise in the said book, that if any Papist in England, or else
where in Europe, could truly and substantially confute the same: I would once
again embrace the late Romish religion, though I did then, and still do hate and
detest the same, as the mortal poison of my soul.



all the former challenges, have been silent above eight whole years, and
never yet durst adventure to frame any answer, to any one of the said
books, and to publish the same to the view of the world.

At the last, in the end of the year, 1602. a shameless Pamphlet, and
scurrilous libell is published, by an odd masked companion, who naming
himself E.O. has set a broach, a rude lying hotch-potch of Omnigitherum, I
know not well how to term it, or what to make of it. But I hope in God to
turn it topsie toruie, ere I make an end.

Fourthly, that if the Jesuits or Seminaries, could

Fifthly, that when the said counterfaite E O. bears the world in hand, that
now at the last in the Jesuits and Seminary Priests, have consulted now for
the space of eight years fully complete and ended, and have all that time
devised how to frame some colorable answer at the least, to all or some of
the said books: and in the end of the year, 1602. have undertaken the
confutation thereof: but for all that cannot yet tell, whether it be expedient
to publish the said confutation, or no. Oh sweet Jesus? are these men the great
Statists of the world? are these men the skillful Politicians, that must manage
all Europe? are these men our learned divines? are these men they indeed, upon
whose doctrine and guiding all Lay-Papistes do depend, and on their shoulders
do hang their souls and their salvation? doubtless, they may preach this
goodly sermon to Wisemen, and repute themselves for very E. O. and his
accomplices have tossed and turned, volued and reuolued, all the parts of all my
books, and played all their tricks, and fetched all their friscoles: their
crestes are fallen, their spirits rampant are become couchant, and all that
they can devise to object against me, is nothing else in the world, but one
silly falsely so supposed contradiction. For can any Wiseman think, if they had
any better stuff, which could better serve their turn, or give more credit
to their cause, or be more likely to satisfy the peoples long expectation:
that they would conceal it for my sake, and the love they bear to me? No, no,
(my dearest,) they mean nothing less. They will never while I live, publish
any such confutation. Their own consciences condemn them, they know they are
not able to perform it. I would most gladly, (I protest before God and the
world,) once see any such confutatio^ during my life: and therefore here once
again, I challenge Robert Parsons that traiterous Jesuit, (whom I take to be
this masked E. O.) George Blackwell that seditious Archpriest, as the seculars
term him: and all other English Jesuits and Seminaries, whosoever and
wheresoever: daring them all to publish the confutation of my said books.
They are many in number, and they busy themselves with publishing other
needles books, Pamphlets, and libels: and consequently, they must of
necessity, and will undoubtedly, accept of this challenge, now after so many
years, and after so long consultation, and mature deliberation: as well for
their own credites sake, as for the consolation of their silly seduced
Popelinges, if they dare take the matter in hand. But alas they have said all
they can, and done what they were able possibly to perform.

CAP. III. Of the notorious lies of E. O.
POpe Siricius (as Thomas Bell affirms, Preface, p. 10.
) was seduced by Satan, published wicked doctrine, and taught the flat doctrine
of the devil. These are the express words of E. O. whom (as it seems) the
Devil did even then possess, when he uttered them. For not one of these
words, (taught the flat doctrine of the Devil,) can be found in my Survey, in
the place which E. O. has quoted: but these words, which he of purpose did
omit: (prohibited marriage as an unlawful thing.) This therefore is a
notorious, and a most malicious lie. The first lie of E. O.
It is a lie in grain, and that a knocker, (to use his own words else where:)
adorned with the name of the Devil, to give the more grace unto it. And that
worthily, because the Devil is the Architect and chief workman, in that art
and occupation. Where I wish the Reader to observe seriously, that my
proceeding in all my books has been such and so sincere, as the adversaries
for the space of eight whole years, can but epsy one only (falsely so
supposed) contradiction: neither that, but by belying me, and by falsifying my
words. So then, it is hereby most apparent to all the world; that if they had
any just matter against me, they would load my back till my bones should
crack. This is E. O. his first lie.

The second lie of E. O. is contained in these his words; P 37. The second lie
of E.O.
both Bell and Gough give the lie to master Sutcliffe, denying prayer to
Saints to be ancient; and Gough to Bell, affirming that it was not known,
till the year of our Lord, 370. For both Origin and Saint Cyprian lived before
that time. This is an other notorious lie, as shall be cleared by an evident
demonstration.

I therefore say first, that Vitium Scriptoris, the negligence, ignorance, and
oversight of the Printer, has been and often is the cause of many faults
extant in my books, which I note here once for all, wishing the reader ever to
have the same in remembrance. This is apparent two ways: first, because this
number of 370. should have been 350. as is evident by the sixth Canon.
Secondly, Survey. p. 338.
for that the number of 274. in my survey, is otherwise in my book entitled
(the hunting of the Romish Fox:) viz. 1215. and so the indifferent Reader may
easily perceive, that the calumniation and cavil of E. O. proceeds of mere
malice against the truth.

I say secondly, that the famous popish writer Aquinas, surnamed the Angelical
doctor; will confess with me against E. O. to his everlasting shame in this
combat. These are his express words: Aquinas. 2.^. q 98. art. 1. ad. 3.
Actus morales procedunt a voluntate, cuius obiectum est bonum apprehensum. Et
ideo si falsum apprehendatur vt verum, erit quidem relatum ad voluntatem
materialiter falsum, formaliter autem verum. Si autem id quod est falsum,
accipiatur vt falsum, erit falsu^ and materialiter and formaliter. Si autem id
quod est verum, apprehendatur vt falsum, erit verum materaliter, and falsum
formaliter. Moral acts proceed from the will, whose object is good
apprehended. And therefore if falsehood be apprehended as truth, it being
related to the will shall be false materially, but true formally. But if that
which is false be taken as false, it shall be false both materially and
formally. But if that which is true be apprehended as false, it shall be true
materially, and false formally.

Again in an other place, the same Author has these words: Aquinas 2.2. q.
110. art. 1.
Si ista tria co^currant, scilicet quod falsu^ sit id quod enu^ciatur, and quod
adsit voluntas falsum enu^ciandi, and iteru^ inte^tio fallendi; tunc est
falsitas materialiter, quia falsum dicitur* and formaliter, propter voluntatem
falsum dicendi; and effectiue, propter voluntatem falsitatem imprimendi. Sed
tamen ratio mendacii sumitur a formali falsitate ex hoc scilicet, quod aliquis
habet voluntatem falsum inunciandi. Vnde and mendaciu^ nominatur ex eo, quod
co^tra mentem dicitur. Et ideo si quis falsum enunciet, credens id esse verum,
est quidem falsum materialiter, sed non formaliter; quia falsitas est propter
intentionem dicentis, vnde non habet perfectam rationem mendacii. id enim quod
praeter intentionem dicentis est, per accidens est. If these three things
concur: to wit, that the thing be false which is uttered, and that there be
also a will to utter falshoode, and withal an intention to utter falsehood;
then there is falsehood materially, because falsehood is avouched; and there is
falshoode formally, because there is a will to speak falsely; and there is also
falsehood effectiuely, for that there is a will to imprint falshoode, (in the
hearts of others.) But for all that the formalitie of the lie, The formality of
a lie.
is derived from the formal falshoode: in that forsooth, that one has a desire
to speak falsely. Whereupon a lie has the name of this, that it is spoken
against the mind. And therefore if any man utter a falsehood, thinking it to be
the truth; then is it a lie materiallie, but not formally; because the falsehood
is beside his intention that speaks it, and so it has not the perfect nature
of a lie. For that which is beside the intention of the speaker, is mere
accidental.

These are the words, and this is the doctrine of that famous Papist, whose
works two Popes Vrbanus and Innocentius, have confirmed plenitudine potestatis
for authentical. Whatsoever therefore proceeds from this fountain, the
Papists must perforce receive it, as pure and wholesome water. And for this end
I have employed my labors, to set down his words at large.

Out of these golden words and sound doctrine of this grave Writer, a very
learned man in deed, (though elsewhere in sundry points he shows man's
imperfections,) I note first, that a man may speak the truth, and yet be a
lier; to wit, when he

I note secondly, that a man may speak falsely, reason of both the assertions
is evident, by the doctrine of this famous Papist; (whose doctrine herein is
also the constant doctrine of Saint Austen, as shortly shall be proved,)
Because forsooth, the formalitie of a lie does precisely and properly consist,
in the intention of the speaker. This point is yet more apparent, by these
words of the self same Writer: Si vero aliquis formaliter falsum dicat,
habens voluntatem falsum dicendi; licet sit verum id quod dicitur, in quantum
tamen buiusmodi actus est voluntarius and moralis, habet per se falsitatem, and
per accidens veritatem. Vnde ad speciem mendatii pertingit. If a man shall
utter a falshoode formally, being minded to speak falsely, then although it be
true which he says, yet seeing such an action is voluntary and moral, it
implies falsehood per se and of it own nature, and truth but only
accidentally. And so it reaches, to the nature of a lie.

This doctrine is confirmed by the testimony of Saint Austen, that worthy
Father and mighty pillar of Christ's Church. These are his words: Non omnis
qui falsum dicit, August. lib. de mendacio. cap. 3. ad Consenti. tom. 4.
me^titur si credit aut opinatur veru^ essequod dicit. Quisquis aute^ hoc
enuntiat, quod vel creditu^ animo, vel opinatu^ tenet, etiamsi falsum sit, no^
mentitur. Sequitur; ex quo fit, vt possit falsum dicere non mentiens, si putat
ita esse vt dicit. quamuis non ita sit; and vt possit verum dicire mentiens, si
putet falsum esse, and pro vero enuntiat, quamuis renera ita sit vt enuntiat.
Ex animi enim sententia, non ex rerum ipsarum veritate vel falsitate, mentiens
aut non mentiens iudicandus est. Potest itaque ille qui falsum pro vero
enunciat, quod tamen verum esse opinatur, errans dici and temerarius; mentiens
autem non recte dicitur, quia cor duplex cumenunciat, non habet, nec fallere
cupit sed fallitur. Not every one that utters a falsehood, is a lier, if he
believe or think that to be true, which he says. For whosoever says that,
which he either believes, or thinks in his heart, although it be false, yet
does he not lie. Whereupon it comes, that one may utter a falsehood, and be
no lier, if he thinks it be as he says, though it be not so in deed. And
likewise that one may speak the truth, and be a lier, if he think it be
false, and utters it for a truth, though in very deed it be as he says. For
one must be judged a liar, or not a liar, of his own mind and meaning, not of
the verity or falsehoode of the things in themselves. He therefore that
affirms falshoode for truth, which he thinks to be the truth, may truly
be said to err, and to be temerarious: but he can not rightly be called a
liar, for that he has not a double heart when he utters the falsehoode,
neither desires to deceive others, but is deceived himself.

I note thirdly, that it is impossible for me to Sutcliffe; as E. O. that
shameless calumniator, does most impudently affirm. The reason is evident,
if the foundation which Saint Austen and Aquinas have laid, be well
remembered; because forsooth, I published my Survey many years before master
Doctor Sutcliffes new challenge, whereof E. O. speaks in his Detection. And
consequently, I could not have any intention (as the world knows,) once to
think of that future challenge, which then was not in esse; much less could
I have intention to give the lie, to that reverend and worthy man, for any
thing contained in the same.

E. O. is both materially and formally an impudent liar in very deed. I prove
the same many ways.

E. O. who so bestirreth himself to give the lie to others, seems not to
understand or know what a lie is in very deed: but has need to go again to
the School, to learn the true nature and essence thereof.

Gough does affirm; who for all that, (as this impudent liar E. O. avouches,
but with a brazen face,) does give the lie to me. For I prove and show by
degrees, how late popish invocation of Saints crept into the Church, and I
have put down seven Canons with six conclusions to that effect. In the fourth
Canon, I prove that in the days of Origin, the first seed of invocation of
Saints began to be sown. In the fifth Canon, I prove that about twenty years
after Origin, it became a settled doctrine, which in the days of Origin was but
opinatiue and disputable. In the sixth Canon, I prove that about an hundred
years after Saint Cyprian, some of the Fathers by Rhetorical apostrophees,
did apply their Orations to the dead, as if they had been living. Who though
they did but invoke the Saints figuratively, and of a certain excessive
zeal; yet did such their inuocations minister occasion to the Papists, of all
their superstition in that behalf. And in my answer to an objection of the
seventh Canon, I say plainly, that late Popish invocation had in the year
400. after Christ, gotten deep root in the hearts of the vulgar sort.
Whereupon it is most apparent to all indifferent Readers, that the swaggering
Divine E. O. is condemned in his own conscience, when he affirms master
Gough to be opposite to me, touching my doctrine of invocation of Saints. For
I do affirm uniformly with master Gough, that invocation of Saints was in
some degree, even in the days of Saint Cyprian, and of Origin before him.
Albeit I truly say withal, that it took not deep root in the peoples
hearts, for many years after them.

I note fifthly, that master Doctor Sutcliffe, (if I of the rest, published now
many years ago, neither this hote-spurre mate E. O. nor any other English
Jesuit, or Iesuited Seminary, dare for their lugges encounter with me. So
then, there is a sweet harmony, but no discord at all: in the writings of
master Sutcliffe, of master Gough, and of my self.

P. 44. The 3. lie of E.O.
In an other place, this Libeller says, that I hold auricular confession, to
have been established in the year 254. and do but prove it by my bare word
only. This is a lie with a witness. For I have proved it in the second book
of my motives, and that by the testimony of Josephus Angles a Popish Friar and
Bishop of Bosana, Lib. 2. cap. 9. conclu. 5.
even in the second to me of that work, which he dedicated to the pope
himself Sixtus Quintus. These are the express words; Ios. Angles in 4. s. q.
de co^ses. P, 255.
Ante Concilium Later. erat Haereticum negare necessitatem confessionis,
negantes tamen non erant Haeretici. Ratio est, quia nondum erat ab Ecclesia
declaratum. Before the Council of Lateran, it was heretical to deny the
necessity of confession: but they were not Heretics that denied it. The
reason is, because the Church (of Rome) had not declared it, to be an article
of faith.

In the said second book of Motives, in the ninth Chapter and fifth conclusion,
the Reader shall find these express words: Albeit popish auricular
confession be so magnified with Papists, that every one is commanded under
pain of damnation to believe the same, as instituted by Christ himself; yet
was it not an article of popish faith, for the space of one thousand and five
hundred years after Christ. These are my express words in that place.

Here I heartily desire all people that are careful of their salvation,
especially such as are devoted to the Jesuits: and I crave it for the tender
mercy of God in the bowels of Christ Jesus, to mark attentively what I shall
sincerely deliver, as I will answer God at the dreadful day of general doom.

I therefore say first, that the author of this lewd Pamphlet, and scurrilous
libell, entitled the detection Robert Parsons the Jesuit, alias Bastard
Cowbucke, expelled out of Baliol College in Oxford, for his illegitimation,
libelling, and factious dealing, who will affirm or deny any thing, as his
own dear brothers the secular Priests write of him,) has incurred the
censures of their church, and is become an excommunicate person, for publishing
this lewd libell and slanderous Pamphlet. I prove it, because the general
council of Lateran celebrated in the year 1515. prohibiteth under the pain
of excommunication, to print or cause to be printed, any book or scripture
whatsoever, in any City or Diocese wheresoever, unless the same be first
diligently examined by the Bishop of the same Diocese, or by his Deputy, and
subscribed by their own hand. And it will not serve the Jesuits turn, to say
or pretend for his excuse, that the pope has dispensed with their sect, to
print books and libels at their pleasure. For a general council has power
to make constitutions, which the Pope is bound to obey: but the Pope has no
such power over the council, to which he is and must be subject. This doctrine
is flatly decreed, in two famous popish general Councels, Constance and
Basil. Yet to this day was it never heard of in the world, that an inferior
could make laws to tie his superior, or by his own power exempt himself or
others, from the obedience he owes to the laws of his superior.

I say secondly, that this shameless Jesuit must obiter in the two latter
books, referring the Reader to my first Book, that is, to my Book of
Motives. In which book I handled the question indeed, and decided it by
popish approbation: there affirming in express words, that Popish auricular
confession was not an article of Popish faith, for the space of one thousand
and five hundred years after Christ. Which number is set down without figures
in that place, and so less subject to falsehood, or corruption. But in the
other books the number is put down in figures, and so more easily subject to
alteration: especially, seeing my self was distant from the Press, well near
two hundred miles.

I say thirdly, that to object to me my revolt from

CAP. IIII. Of the finding out of the ends of the Gordian knot.
I Say first, that Gordius as stories do relate, was first a poor Jupiter,
and the cords to be knit in such knots, that it seemed a thing impossible, to
untie or loose the same.

I say secondly, that this masked libeller, E. or if ye will Parsons that
traiterous Jesuit, seems greatly to favor Gordius his knot: because
forsooth, as Gordius by the help of an Idol, became of a poor husbandman a
mighty Prince: so he by treasonable plottinges with the King of Spain
(forsooth,) one day of a poor Friar to be made the Viceroy of England. For
which end he bestirreth himself, to devise such knots of bloody treacheries, as
he thinks man's power not able to resist or untie.

Austens time, and long after him; and yet withal, I do charge Pope Siricius
to have published wicked doctrine, and Pope Sozomene to have falsified the
council of Nice. This is the knot, that as our Jesuit E. O. thinks, cannot
be untied. If I can find out the ends of this knot, a more large subject
(says he,) must be provided for my learning to work upon. A worthy reward of
so mighty a Personage, for the unfolding of one silly knot. Well, I undertake
in Gods name, to find out the ends of this knot: expecting that E. O. will for
his credites sake, perform his promise made herein. For the clearing of which
difficulty, and unfolding of which knot, I desire the gentle Reader

Mat. 23. v. 3.
whatsoever the Scribes and Pharisees did preach unto them, but not to do
after their works. And he added the reason thereof, because says Christ, they
say and do not. Lo, Christ reputeth the Scribes and Pharisees, both godly and
wicked men. Godly, in respect of their public doctrine: wicked, in regard of
their sinful lives. For doubtless, Christ did not command the people to obey
wicked men, as they are wicked, but as they are godly: that is to say, as they
delivered godly doctrine to them. Even so do I say of Pope Siricius and Pope
Sozimus, that they were godly Bishops in respect of their public doctrine,
as who neither taught nor decreed publicly, any material point of doctrine,
contrary to the doctrine of S. Peter. This answer is confirmed, by the
usual practice of all Papists every where. For they term every Bishop of
Rome, their holy Father the Pope. And this notwithstanding, they freely grant,
as I have proved in my book of Motives: that one Pope entered into the
Popedom, as a Fox: reigned in it, as a Wolf: and died out of it, as a dog.
That an other Pope gave himself to the Devil, that so the devil might effect
his designements. They also grant, that every Pope may err in his private
person, and become an Heretic, an Idolater, an Atheist, and whatsoever else.
And so they cannot all be termed holy Fathers, in respect of their lives, or
personal doctrine taught private lie. They must therefore term them holy, in
regard of their public doctrine, agreeable to the doctrine of their
predecessors: though they be very often wicked, in respect of their lives and
conuersations. So were Siricius and Sozimus good Popes, secundum quid, but not
simpliciter. Thirdly, it is the usual course of holy Scripture, to speak of
many, as of all: to term all wicked, when the greater part is wicked: and all
godly, when the greater part is godly. This is the constant doctrine both of S.
Austen, Aug. de unit. eccl. cap. 12. Canus de locis. p. 137.
and of your renowned Papist Melchior Canus. But because your Cardinal
Bellarmine is the mouth of all Papists, I am content to set down his express
words, so to stop your mouths at this time. These are your Cardinals
words: Neque mouere nos debet, quod Esaias loqui videatur ita generatim, vt
omnes homines comprehendat. Bellarm. de iustific. cap. 20. col. 2235^
Est enim iste scripturae mos, vt loquatur de multis, quasi de omnibus. Neither
ought it to move us, that Esaias seems to speak so generally, as if he
comprised all. For it is the manner of the scripture, so to speak of many, as
of all.

I say fourthly, that I speak of the Popes until Austens time and long after,
not generally, but in indefinitely: and consequently, my words are and must be
true, notwithstanding the bad dealing of Siricius and Sozimus.

I say fifthly, that 18. Bishops at the Nicene council

to answer to my books. The reason is evident to every child: for that now
after many years, they can find out nothing at all in any of my Books,
saving one only contradiction falsely so supposed. And yet to make a fair show
of something, they have hudled up, and iumbled together, three places far
distant one from another. Which supposed contradiction, if it were as they
imagine, would be too dear of a button. If they could have picked out of all
my books* any one thing of moment; they would not for shame have published in
a printed Book, such a silly obection as this. But the truth must prevail,
and will have the upper hand. I doubt not, but all indifferent Readers will be
better persuaded hereafter, to believe the doctrine contained in my books:
especially, seeing the adversaries can say nothing against them in so many
years: but only, that I have contradicted my self, in saying in one place,
that the Popes were godly men till S. Austens time, and in an other place, that
two Popes were wicked men. For besides that, this is so sufficiently cleared
many ways, as the indifferent Reader cannot but perceive the same: it must
needs be most apparent to the world, that if the Jesuits or Seminary
Priests, could frame any colorable answer to all my books, or to any of
them: they would not doubtless pass over with silence, all the Articles of
Popish faith, with the confutation thereof set down in my books, and busy
themselves about one only silly contradiction: and that no contradiction
indeed, but as they falsely or rather maliciously pretend unto the Reader. Where
the Reader, (if he be wise and indifferent,) must perforce condemn them and
their religion, in that they dare not adventure to encounter with my doctrine,
which does touch them and their holy father the Pope so narrowly, that many
perceiving it, have renounced both him, them, and their religion. And I nothing
doubt, but these silly euasions and poor shifts, which they are driven unto:
will be a mean under God, to cause many more to renounce all Popish faction,
every day more then other.

To show the insufficiency of the Jesuits and Seminaries, and that they know
not possibly what to say, or how to deal concerning the aunswering of my
books: I have thought good to insert in this place, the words of a letter,
which the Provincial of the Jesuits in England Henry Garnet by name,
addressed to his fellows being then in consultation, how to frame some kind of
answer to my books. These are the express words of his letter, which by a
friend of mine came very lately to my hands.

The words of the Jesuit Garnets letter, sent to the rest of his fellows.
COncerning the answer to the wrangler, I am even as I was before, uncertain,
what were expedient. The man desires nothing but wrangling; and besides that
which I fear most, is that which I have seen by experience in other his
writings, that is, exceeding and outrageous choler. Whereby he will be moved
to utter, not only al imperfections which he knows of our fellows, but also
those things which ought to be most surely sealed up, the man being past all
grace and shame. Nevertheless for this matter, as you shall al agree, for I
doubt not, but so many and such will see what is best. If it be done, it must
be very short, and rather made to describe the man, then to unfold at large
his doctrine. For if it be long, neither the time, nor commodity of
transporting up and down, nor the security of doing it can be correspondent.
That shall be done on my part, which may be. This gentle Reader, is there
whole narration, which (for the exact examination and confutation thereof,) I
will repeat by particular members, one after an other, ever adding a
particular several answer to the same.

The Jesuit.
Concerning the answer to the wrangler, I am even as I was before, uncertain
what were expedient.

The Answer.
To these words I answer first, that the Jesuits nine years in their
hands, and under their malicious censure; they are still at the same point,
where they began. That is to say, they neither have made, neither can they make
any answer to my books.



The Jesuit.
The man desires nothing, but wrangling. And besides, that which I fear most,
is that which I have seen by experience in other his writings: that is,
exceeding and outrageous choler.

The answer.
be done in that matter. Whereupon it follows of necessity, that it is a
matter of great moment, and of no small importance. For otherwise, a man of rare
wisdom, and deep judgment, (such as our Jesuits usually be, especially
those Jesuits, who are elected to be prouincials, and rulers of all others
within a whole Province,) could not but know in much less time, then 8: or 9.
years: what were fit, meet, and expedient to be done, concerning the
answering of my books. And yet, as this great father of wisdom freely
grants, he is still as uncertain as he was before, what answer were best to
be made.

The Jesuit.
Whereby he will be moved to utter, not only vll imperfections which he
knows of our fellows; but also those things, which ought to be most surely
sealed up.

The Answer.
I answer first, that hereby every one may see, that the Jesuits and their
fellows, are full of notorious imperfections, which they fear shall be made
Watson the secular Priest, seems to have spoken sufficiently in his
Quodlibets. My book of Anatomy, will tell them more. Fourthly, that the
Jesuit does unawares,

The Jesuit.
The man being past all grace and shame.

The Answer.
impudently, against their own brethren the secular Priests, men of better
deserts by many degrees then themselves.

The Jesuit.
Nevertheless for this matter, as ye shall all agree. For I doubt not, but so
many, and such, will see what is best.

The Answer.
Lo, they that have consulted, how to answer my books; are not only many in
number, but also of the best judgment and reputation among them. For you hear
his words; (so many and such, will see what is best.) And yet these men, so
many and so worthy, have not in so many years, found out any answer to my
books. But as he truly says, they see what is the best to be done. As if he
should have said; the best is, to pass over the matter with silence, as we
have done heretofore. For his doctrine is sound, grounded upon the Scriptures,
Councels, Fathers, and the practice of the ancient Church: and we are not able
to gainsay the same. It is better to sit still, then to rise up and fall.

The Jesuit.
If it be done, it must be very short, and rather made to describe the man,
then to unfold at large his doctrine. For if it belong, neither the time, nor
commodity of transporting up and down, nor the security of doing it, can be
correspondent. That shall be done on my part, which may be.

The answer.
leasinges, not daring to intermeddle with my doctrine. For ye see, he puts
a caveat, not to unfold my doctrine. But it is the doctrine indeed, that they
should unfold, and not to stand upon the person of the man. But the doctrine
is, Noli me tangere: they dare not deal with it. I say secondly, Farewell
gentle Reader.

FINIS.

